Letters and Papers Henry VIII iv no. 3028 (Brewer 1875), via British History Online:
LEE to [WOLSEY]. As the Emperor's answer was short, went to Almain to complain of it. He said, "We must maintain the authority of our ambassador, and leave something to him." I said, "You give us no answer touching your secret instructions." He said that the Emperor put his whole trust in the King and Wolsey, and that if the latter would serve him all would be right. "But you must beware that you trust not the French king too much; for he mocketh you as he hath done us." On this he plucked out of his bosom a letter received out of France the night before, written by Perot, the orator in France, containing these words: "The French king said to me, `The king of England would have me to take his daughter, and give him Boleyn. Nay, nay! The Cardinal wrote to me, desiring and most instantly beseeching me that, for a continuance of new omity between the king of England and me, I should send my orators into England, and give them mandatum to common and conclude there; and, to color the thing, that I should ask the daughter of England. But I had much liever that the Emperor would send a gentleman hither, that we may common our matters among ourselves; for I would not have it concluded at the king of England's hands. They say in England that I shall come thither, and that all the triumph is prepared for the French king. True it is, for it is for the duke of Richmond, whom they intend to make king of Ireland; and that at length he shall be for the French king, as Scotland is.'" He further said that Francis would not give us a foot of land nor marry the Princess. Some of this he said by word of mouth. He said that Francis was hated by his subjects, and did not dare come to Paris, and that some of his privy chamber were friends of Bourbon. "Yet, for all this, I well perceive that they would in any wise the marriage should go forward between my lady Eleanor and the French king;" and they are sending letters to don Inigo in which Francis calls her "wife," and his mother [Page 1360] "daughter." When we commoned of a wife for the duke of Richmond, he said "that in no wise we may [ leave ] (fn. 3) the daughter of my lady Eleanor, because of the treaty of Madrid;" and he named the daughters of Denmark. He told me it was said that the King desired Francis to send four of his privy chamber to remain with him, and he would send four in their place. Thinks there is no further communication between the two courts. They have prevented all communication between Francis and the Swiss. He denies that any truce has been taken with them and the Italians . News of Vaudemont and Doria. The former is sore hurt. Moncada has drowned three of the galleys. The Viceroy is at Saperano, and has defeated 3,000 of cardinal Trivulcio's people. Russell has broken his leg in going to Venice. Almain told me this and many other things. "He said, `I would my lord Cardinal would still handle don Inachus.'" He professed he was a good Englishman . Valladolid, 8 April. Hol., mainly in cipher, Pp . 3. Ib. f. 89. 2. Decipher of the above by Tuke. 8 April. R. O. 
