'IHE  J.  PAUL  GETTY  MUSEUM  LIBRARY 


PERPETUALLY  PRESERVED 


IN  AND  FOR  THIi  USE  OF 


ECCLESIASTICAL  COURT  OF  WINCHESTER. 


A 


CATALOGUE 

OF  THE 

HARLEIAN  MANUSCRIPTS, 

IN 

T  II  E  BRITISH  M  U  S  E  U  M. 


WITH  INDEXES 

OF  PERSONS,  PLACES,  AND  MATTERS. 


VOL.  II. 


PRINTED  BY  COMMAND 
OF 

HIS  MAJESTY  KING  GEORGE  III. 

IN  PURSUANCE  OF  AN  ADDRESS  OF 
THE  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN. 


1808. 

ovucvit 

Z 

L6i 

ClPxLt  V 

t-i 


I  1  !  1 


CATALOGUS 

LIBRORUM  MANUSCRIPTORUM 

BIBLIOTHECA  1 1 A  R  L  E I A  N  A. 


Num.  1310. 

j\_  FRENCH  Book  in  (mail  fol.  written  onVellum  in  a 
fquare  Text  hand;  wherein  I  find, 

1.  A  Pidure  of  God  the  Father  fitting  on  a  Throne, 

with  a  Scepter  in  his  left  hand,  invironed  with  Cheru- 
bims,  and  Angels  clothed  in  different  habits ;  with  St. 
Michael  armed  in  Armor,  &  carting  down  the  Devils^ 
into  Hell.  At  the  bottom,  are  the  Arms  of  the  Perfon,* 
with  an  Impalement  of  the  fame,  for  whom  the  Book 
feemeth  to  have  been  written ;  each  Shield  being  fuf- 
tained  by  an  Angel  kneeling. *  1 11 

2.  A  Treatife  of  the  feven  capital  Vices,  and  of  their 

bppofite  Virtues.  .  *bld* 

2  Coment  la  Vie  ert  brieve,  et  de  petite  Duree. 

32.  b. 

4,  Comment  la  mauvaife  Vic  atrait  la  mauvaife  Mort. 

34- 

c  Comment  tous  Peches  mortelz  defervent  la  Mort. 

35- 

6.  Comment  la  Bonne  Vie  deffert  la  Bonne  Mort.  37. 

7.  Comment  on  doit  defprifier  la  Vie  prefente.  38.  b. 

8.  Comment  nul  ne  doit  la  Mort  doubter.  39.  b. 

9.  Comment  penfer  k  la  Mort  eft  chofe  moult  prou- 

fitable.  .  *  4i- 

1  o.  Comment  nul  ne  doit  eftre  cuneux  de  fa  Sepul¬ 
ture.  42.  b. 

11.  Comment  on  doit  penfer  au  Jour  du  Jugement. 

44.  b. 

12.  Comment  on  doit  honorer  l’Eglife,  el  l’avoir  en 

grant  Reverence.  _  4^.  b. 

1 3.  Comment  les  Gens  d’Eglife  et  fingulierement 
les  Prelas,  duivent  vivre  chaftement  et  vertueufement. 

48. 

1 4.  Comment  les  Prelas  doivent  leurs  Subjeds  en- 

feigner  &  Gouverner,  et  auxPreud-ommes  de  leurs  Biens 
donner.  49-  b. 

15.  Comment' les  Gens  d’Englife  doivent  prefchier, 

et  dire  la  Verite  de  Foy.  5°-  b- 

16.  Comment  on  doit  eftudier  et  apprendre,  et  par 

efpecial  la  SainfteEfcripture.  52. 

1  7.  Comment  les  Princes  doivent  eftre  piteux  &  mife- 
ricors.  53r 

18.  Comment  les  Princes  doivent  eftre  de  Bonne  Vie, 

et  de  Honnefte  Meurs.  54- 

1 9.  Comment  les  Princes  ne  doivent  point  eftre  Con- 

voiteux  ne  Avaricieux.  _  _  55-  b- 

20.  Comment  les  Princes  doivent  Juftice  maintenir. 

-S7* 

21.  Comment  les  Princes  doivent  eftre  humbles. 

57-  b- 

Cat.Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1310. 

22.  Comment  les  Princes  doivent  eftre  fobres  et 

chaftes.  bo. 

23.  Comment  et  a  quoy  les  Princes  fe  donnent  em- 

ploier.  6 1 .  b. 

24.  Comment  les  Chevaliers  fe  doivent  governer. 

63. 

25.  Comment  les  Riches  ne  fe  doivent  point  glorifier 

en  leurs  Richeffes.  ^  64.  b. 

26.  De  l’Eftat  dePovrete,  comment  il  doit  eftre  agre- 

able.  66. 

27.  De  l’Eftat  de  Viellefte,  comment  ils  doivent  eftre 

vcrtueusc,  et  fages,  et  bons.  67. 

28.  De  l’Eftat  de  Joeuneffe,  et  comment  les  Joeunes 

Gens  fe  doivent  gouverner.  68. 

29.  De  l’Eftat  de  Mariage,  et  comment  onfi  doit  gou- 

vemer.  69. 

30.  Comment  les  Femmes  fe  doivent  gouverner.  7 1 . 

3 1 .  Comment  fe  doit  maintenir  Virginite  &  Pucellage. 

72.  b. 

32.  Comment  fe  doit  garder  fain&ement  l’Eftat  de 

Veuvage.  74. 

33.  Comment  les  Parer.s,  et  per  efpecial  Pere  &  Mere 

doivent  penfer  de  leurs  Enfans.  75.  b. 

34.  Comment  les  Enfans  doivent  Honneur  et  Obeif- 

fance  a  leurs  Parens.  76.  b. 

35.  De  l’Eftat  de  Marchandife.  77.  b. 

36.  Comment  les  Serviteurs  fe  doivent  maintenir  en 

leurs  Services.  79. 

37.  L’Eftat  de  Pelerinage.  80. 

Then  follow  two  other  Trafts,  whereof  the  for¬ 
mer  is, 

38.  Concerning  Confeftion  ;  with  a  Table  of  Sins,  or 

Queftions  to  be  inquired  of  the  Penitent,  ranked  under 
the  heads  of  the  feven  deadly  Sins.  81. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  Traft,  is  a  Picture  of  a 
young  Man  confefling  to  a  Prieft  ;  on  whom  the  Devil 
lays  his  talons,  but  he  is  protected  by  his  Guardian 
Angel. 

39.  Aucuns  notables  Notes  pour  mieulx  entendre 

comment  Confeftion  fe  doit  faire.  84. 

This  feemeth  to  belong  to  the  former  Tra£t. 

The  other  Draft  (which  is  preceded  by  a  Picture  of 
a  Man  lick  in  bed,  attended  by  a  Prieft  &  two  relations, 
or  fervants)  is  intituled, 

40.  La  Science  de  bien  mourir.  86. 

Laftly  come  certain  little  adnotations,  viz. 

41.  Les  x  Commandemetts.  88.  b. 

42.  LesvuVertus;  trois  Divines,  et  quatre  Morales. 

89. 

Q  43.  Les 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num. 


1310-1313. 


43.  Les  vii  Dons  du  Saint  Efprit.  89. 

44.  Les  vii  Beatitudes.  ibid. 

45.  Les  vii  Euvres  de  Mifericordes  corporalles.  ibid. 

46.  Les  vii  Euvres  de  Mifericordes  efpirituelles.  ibid. 

47.  Les  vii  Sacramens.  ibid. 

48.  Les  vii  Ordres.  ibid. 

49.  Les  vii  Douaries  de  Gloire ;  trois  en  FAme,  et 

quatre  en  Corps.  ibid. 

50.  Aucunes  Peines  des  Dampnes.  89.  b. 

I311- 

A  parchment  Book  in  large  4to,  written  in  Law-French ; 
and  on  the  outfide  thus  entituled, 

1.  Les  Statutes  faits  in  temps  Edward  le  iii.  videlicet, 
al  1  ann.  del  fon  Raigne,  ufq;  le  fine  del  38  ann.  1. 

Bcfides  which,  I  alfo  find, 

2.  Judicium  Roger!  de  Mortuo-mari.  77. 

(c  Rot.  Pari,  de  ann.  4  R.R.Edw.  iii.) 

3»  Judicium  Siir.onis  de  Bereford,  ChivalerJ  qi  eftoit 
aidant  &  confeillant  au  dit  Roger  de  Mortimer,  en  toutes 
les  Trefouns,  Felouns,  &  Malvoiftees,  &c.  (e  Rot.  Pari, 
de  ann.  4  R.R.Edw.  iii.)  79. 

4.  De  Reflitudone  Terrarum  in  manibus  Regis  cap- 
tarum.  (vid.  Rot.  Pari.  4Edw.  iii.  N°  8.  9.  &c.)  79.  b. 

5.  De  QuieUcione  Adhefionum.  (vid.  Rot.  Pari.  4. 

Edw.  iii.  N°  7.  &c.)  ibid. 

6.  De  Receptoribus  Cenfus  Regij.  80. 

.7.  Statutum  Hibernie  j  truncatum.  80.  b. 

13  12. 

Codex  tenuis  membranaceus  in  4to,  in  ufum  cujuf- 

dam  Adolefcentis  LiterarumStudiofi,  ut  videtur,  com- 

pilatus  regnantibus  Henrico  1.  Anglorum,  Ludovico 

Francorum,  Regibus;  fimul  cum  Honorio  II.  Papa. 

1 .  In  Rubrica  (pramifla  Adnotatione,  de  tribus  Ead- 
■wardis  Anglo-Saxonum  Regibus,  aliena  ac  recentiore 
manu,  exarata)  infcribitur  prafens  Opufculum. 

2.  Liber  de  tribus  maximis  Circumflantijs  geftorum, 

id  eft,  Perfonis,  Locis,  Temporibus.  i.b. 

Hoc  in  Traclatulo,  continentur  Succeffio  Chronolo- 
gica  Patriarcharum,  Judicum,  Sacerdotum,  Regum  ac 
aliorum  de  qui'.nis  mentio  fit  in  Iiiftoria  tarn  Sacra,  quam 
Prophana  :  verb!  gratia,  Ifraelitarum,  Affyriorum,  Sycio- 
niorum,  iEgyptionun,  Medorum,  Argivorum,  Perfarum 
Ati  enienfium,  Macedonum,  Corinthiorum,  Lydorum, 
Syriorum,  Babylon ite,  Parihorum,  Latinorum,  Roman- 
orum  ;  Recenlio  Librorum  Sacrorum,  Civitatum  Terrte 
Sande,  Rcgionum  Mundi,  celebriorum  Montium,  Flu- 
minum,  Infularum,  atq;  Civitatum  :  Series  Pontificum 
Romunorum,  ubi  ahum  de  Johanna  Papilla  filentium- 
Imperatorum  Romanorum,  Orientis  atq;  Occidents,  Re¬ 
gum  Francorum,  Wandalorum,  Oflro-Gothorum,  Wef- 
tre  -Gothorum,  Gothorum  in  Hifpania,  Du  cum  Nor- 
mannorum,  Ducum  ac  Regum  Longobardorum,  Perfa- 
runi  circa  tempora  Heraclij  Imperatoris,  &c.  adjudicanda 
forte  cuidam  Rogero  de  Waltham. 


An  Italian  Book  in  4to,  wherein  are  written  the  Political 
Treatifes  following, 

1.  Relatione  di  Savoia,  del  Molino.  j. 

2.  Relatione  dello  Stato,  Forze,  et  Governo  del  Sig¬ 

nor  Duca  di  Ferrara,  fatta  dall’  Eccellente  Emi'iano  Mo- 
naleffo,  al  Signor  Duge  et  Signoria  di  Venetia,  i’Aiino 
I578-  ...  48. 

3.  Relatione  di  Fiorenza,  del  Clmo.  GufToni.  1576. 

4.  Relatione  del  Stato  di  Milano. 


Num.  1313— 1316. 

5.  Relatione  del  Regno  di  Napoli  del  Land!.  178. 

6.  Relatione  del  clariffimo  Signor  Lazzaro  Moz- 

zenigo  tomato  da  Guidubaldo  Duca  d’Urbino.  anno 
I57°-  .  232. 

7.  Relatione  del  Prefidentato  di  Romagna,  fatta  a 
Papa  Gregorio  xm.  da  Monfignore  Ghiffilieri.  262. 

8.  Relatione  delloStato,  nel  quale  ritruova  il  Governo 

dell’  Imperio  Turchefco  queft’  anno  1594.  et  della  Caufa 
perche  egli  habbia  volto  l’Armi  al  prefente  nelle  parti  d’ 
Ongaria.  3,8. 

9.  Relatione  di  Spagna  del  clariffimo  Signore  Mi¬ 
chele  Sorciano  Ambalciatore  alRe  Filippo.  358  to44S. 

1  3  r4» 

A  paper  Book  in  4to,  tranferibed  (as  I  fuppofe)  by  my 
Lord’s  command,  from  the  Papers  of  fome  eminent 
Member  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  who  in  the  Par¬ 
liament  A.D.  1 606.  (when  an  Union  was  to  be  made 
of  both  Kingdoms)  was  againft  uniting  with  the  Scots. 
Herein  I  find, 

1.  An  Index,  or  Analytical  Table  of  all  the  Heads 
of  the  fcveral  matters  handled  in  the  following  Treatife 
whereupon  there  are  fundry  Objections  framed  (difpu- 
tably  only)  againfl:  every  feveral  Matter  &  Circumftance 
any  way  fubjed  to  exception. 

3.  Analyfes  of  the  Englilh  &  Scotch  Aas  of  Commit 
fion.  j 

3.  Analyfis  of  the  Inftrument  of  the  Treaty  to  be 

made-  ,  5.  &  6. 

4.  Remarks  upon,  or  Objections  againfl,  the  faid  Act 

of  Commiflion ;  &  the  faid  Inftrument.  ,8. 

5*  Fragments  at  large;  orfeparate  Notes  &  Objections 
againfl  that  propofed Union. 

_  6-JT“"'=>'ms  th.  of  Caution,  that  Engliih 

Coods  Flipped  lor  Scotland  lhall  not  be  abufed  with  a 
Letter  fubferibed  by  thefe  Judges,  Thomas  Fleming 
Robert  Clark,  John  Savill,  «t  George  Smg,  &  dated 
20th November  1604.  upon  this  Occafion.  I40, 

7.  Other  independent  Notes  &  Memorandums,  to  be 
applied  againfl:  the  Union. 

*3I5- 

A  Book  in  fmall  fob  at  the  beginning  thus  entituled, 

1.  TheDifcourfe  of  John  Selden  Efq.  or,  his  fenie 
of  various  matters  of  weight,  &  high  confequence, 
relating  efpecially  to  Religion  &  State;  committed  to 
writing  by  R, chard  Milward,  &  by  him  infcribed  to  Mr 
Selden  s  Executors. 

!.  A  Table  of  the  matters  fpoken  of;  after  the  Dedi. 
cation. 

3.  My  Lord  has  written  (on  the  backfide  of  the  Title) 
a  Note  lhewing  how  this  Work  came  to  be  printed. 

i3i6. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  min.  initio  et  fine  trunca- 
tus,  perinde  atq;  a  madore,  plurimis  in  locis,  lsefus. 
In  eo  contractor  Opus  quoddam  Theologicum,  in  v 
Parteis,  ut  videtur,  diftindum;  quibus  (uti  legitur  in 
Exordio  Particular  iv.)  tradatur,  de  Perfonis  Tribus 
opintui  mahgno  fpecialius  defervientibus,  fcil.  de  Su- 
perbia,  Ira,  et  Invidia,  que  funt  filiar  Diaboli  propin- 
quiores;  &  ec:am  de  Virtutibus  illis  contrarijs,  et  eas 
expugnantibus,  fcil.  Humilitate,  Paciencia,  et  Cari- 
tate.  De  illis  qui  Mundo  miferabili  fpecialius  defer- 
viunt  fcil.  de  Avaricia,  et  Cupid itate  ;  et  de  Virtu¬ 
tibus  fimihterfibi  contrarijs,  fcil.  deContemptu Mundi, 
et  voluntary  Paupertate.  Particula  quim&,  tradatur 
de  Pcemtencia,  Contritione,  et  Confeffione. 


1317.  Ae 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


Num.  1317— 1319. 

I3I7* 

An  old  Book,  written  upon  Paper  in  a  very  ‘large  4to, 
wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  An  Abridgement  of  our  Statute- Laws,  fince  Magna 

Carta,  to  the  latter  end  of  the  Reign  of  King  Henry  vi. 
reduced  under  proper  heads,  and  thofe  entred  in  alpha¬ 
betical  Order.  A  work  that  feems  to  be  done  with  good 
care  &  judgment.  1  • 

2.  Part  of  an  old  Song-.  94-  b. 

3.  Johannis  Steven foni  F.piftola  ad  fratrem  fuum,  Ca- 
pellanum  Magiltri  Willclmi  Broune  Armigeri  95-  b. 

4.  Alphabetical  Table  of  matters  treated  of  in  our 

Statute  Laws.  b. 

5.  Breve  R.Hemici  .  .  .  directum  Willielmo  Eliot 

Clcrico,  cui  poteftatem  dat  recipiendiCognicionem  quam 
Willel-nus  ....  Abbas  S.  Albani  et  ejufdem  loci  Con- 
ver.tus  facere  voluerint  de  quibufdam  Scriptis,  inter  eof- 
dem  Abbatcm  &  Conventum,  ac  Johannem  Broune  con- 
fe£tis;  d€q;  eorundem  in  Cancellaria  fua  Irrotulatione. 
Tefte,  Ac.  5  die  Marcij  anno  regni,  feptimo  :  cum  pre¬ 
dict!  Brevis  Retorna.  9 9-  b» 

6.  Short  Memorandums  of  New  Veffels  brought  into 
fome  Houfehould  :  perhaps  that  of  Dymoke.  100.  b. 

1318. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  in  quo  compleftuntur, 

1.  Traftatus  de  Vitijs  et  Peccatis  in  Communi,  dequi- 

bus  agit  Angelicus  Doftor  Divus  Thomas  de  Aquino, 
in  fua  Secunua  Secundee  a  Ouseftione  7 1 .  ufque  ad  qus- 
ftionem  89.  iuclufive;  et  cum  eo,  ibidem  omnes  ejus 
Expofitor.  s.  1  ■ 

2.  Tiaftatus  de  diviniflimo  ac  venerabili  Euchariftias 

Sacrtme.  to,  de  quo  Angelicus  Magifter  U. Thomas  Aqui¬ 
nas,  tertia  pa  -  to  qua-  73.  et  fequentibus,  ufque  ad  Sj. 
(Scriptus,  A.D.  1657.)  65. 

3.  Tradtatus  Brevis  de  Sacrificio  Milfte.  i4d* 

I3I9- 

A  French  book,  written  upon  Parchment  by  a  French 

hand ;  and  in  the  fecond  page  of  the  firft  fpat  e  Leaf 

bearing  this  more  modern  Title, 

“  Hiitoire  du  Roy  d’Angleterre  Richard  11.  traic- 
tant  particulierement  la  Rebellion  de  fes  Subjects,  et 
Prinfe  de  fa  Perfonne,  &c.  compofee  par  un  Geniilhom- 
me  Franqois  de  Marque,  qui  nut  a  la  Suite  du  diet  Roy, 
avecq  permiffion  du  Roy  de  France.” 

Hors  la  Librairie  de  Monfieur  le  Comte  de  Maine, 
comme  il  appert  folio  ultimo  verfo  de  fa  main  propre. 

Concerning  this  Book,  I  take  leave  farther  to  obferve, 

That  this  Hiftory  is  written,  for  the  moll  part  in 
French  Verfe, ;  beginning  at  the  25th  of  April  1399. 
when  the  Author  was  defired  by  a  Man  of  Quality  to 
accompany  him  into  England  ;  and  ending  upon  the  de¬ 
livering  up  of  the  young  Queen  of  England,  Widow  of 
K.  Richard  11.  to  the  Commiflioners  of  her  Father  the 
French  King. 

1  hat  the  Note  at  the  end  of  the  Book  abovemen- 
toned,  is  this,  “  Ce  Livre  de  la  Prinfe  du  Roy  Richart 
d'Angleterre,  eft  a  Monfeigneur  Charles-Damon,  Conte 
du  Maine,  et  de  Mortaing,  et  Governeur  de  Languedoc. 

Charles. 

That  John  Stow  hath  taken  very  much  from  this 
Author,  even  verbatim  in  a  manner,  without  making 
any  mention  of  him :  and  that  Raphael  Holinglhead 
hath  alfo  borrowed  fome  light  of  him,  for  which  he 
citeth  a  French  Pamphlet,  or  Poem,  in  the  Poffeflion 
of  Doctor  John  Dee  $  which  perhaps,  may  be  this  very 
.  Book. 

That  the  Hiftory  is  illuftrated  with  fixteen  Pictures  : 
wherein  the  perfons,  and  efpccially  the  habits  of  that 


Num.  1319— 1323s 

age  or  time,  are  well  reprefented  :  which  might  have 
been  of  good  ufe  to  Seignr.  Antonio  Vei  rio  in  his  repre- 
fenting  the  triumphant  Entry  of  Edward  the  Black 
Prince  (in  St.  Georges  Hall  at  Windfor  Caftle)  &  have 
prevented  his  arming  &  dreffmg  our  Englilh  People  k  la 
Romaine  ;  which  was  little  lets  abfurd  than  his  repre- 
fenting,  in  the  fame  Picture  (wherein  1  will  now  find  no 
more  faults)  the  faid  Prince  carried  on  the  fhoulders  of 
naked  men,  when  as  Hiftory  faith,  (vid.  Froifart,  Cap. 
1 73.)  “  The  French  Kynge  rode  throughe  Londone  on 
a  whyte  Courfer  well  apparelled,  &  the  Prince  on  a 
lytell  black  Hobbey  by  him. 

I32O. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  minor!,  quci  continetur, 
Polychronicon  Ranulphil'ygdeaMonachi  Ceftrenfis; 
ufq;  ad  mortem  R.  Edwardi  in.  continuatum.  Notandum 
verb,  qutsdam  Polychronici,  cum  n-mnullis  Continua- 
tionis,  folia,  ante  penultimum,  deliderarL 

1321. 

A  parchment -Book  in  jfmall  folio,  written  in  old  French 
V erfe ;  wherein  I  find , 

1.  Le  Roman  de  Roland,  ou  de  Charlemagne*  This 

wants  the  beginning.  1 . 

2.  L’Eftoire  douvaillant  Conte  Aimery;  by  the  Au* 

thor  of  the  former.  3^  b. 

3.  L’Eftoire  dou  vaillant  Conte  Aimeri ;  Et  dit  cou 
mene  200  gualees  de  Sarrazins  vindrent  a  Nai  bonne. 

118. 

This  may  belong  to  the  former,  although  itbefepa- 
rated  from  it. 

4.  L’Eftoire  dou  Conte  A  ymeri ;  &  deuife  coummant 

11  donna  Narbone  a  fon  filleul,  et  ala  en  Elpaigne  four 
Sarrafms  pour  acroiltre  la  Loy  C.hreftiene.  1 34. 

Ihis  is  ftill  the  Hiltory  of  the  lame  man,  Almeric 
Earl  ofNarbonne. 


Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore;  quo  continentur 
manu  cujufdam  Itali  deferipra 

Ariftotelis  Ethica  Latine  per  Leonardum  Aretinum 
tradu&a. 

I323- 

ABookiu  fol.  confifling  of  divers  Tracts,  many  of them 

written  by  different  hands,  bound  up  together  in  the 

Order  following ;  as, 

Kinge  James  his  Speeches  conceminge  the  Affayers 
&  State  ot  the  Kingdome,  for  Supplye  in  his  Ingage* 
ments  in  Warre,  &  lor  the  Deffence  of  the  Kingdome, 
with  fome  other  remaikeablePaffages  of  State,  &c.  1. 

This  may  be  more  particularly  deferibed  ;  thus 

1.  The  Declaracion  of  theLordes  &  Commons  de¬ 

livered  unto  his  Majeftie  the  13th  of  March  163’.  by 
the  Archbiihopp  of  Canterburye,  touching  the  deffence 
of  the  Realme ;  the  fecureinge  of  Ireland ;  the  affift- 
ance  of  the  States  of  the  Unyted  Provinces,  &  other 
his  Majcfties  Frindes  and  Allyes,  for  the  letting  forth  of 
his  Royal  Navye,  and  other  Occurrences,  &c.  2. 

2.  The  Prince’s  Speeche  concerninge  his  Oppynion 
of  the  State  of  Affayers,  &  his  Father’s  Intention,  Ac. 

3.  b. 

3.  The  Kings  Speeche  the  13th  of  March,  concernino-e 

the  fame  Affayres,  &c.  4.  b. 

4.  Another  Aunfvveare  off  his  Majefties,  to  the  fame 

effeft,  &c.  8. 

5.  A  Declaracion  prefented  to  his  Majeftie  touchinge 

Reeufants,  Recufancye,  &  the  Eftablilheinge  of  the  Lav/es 
againlt  them,  with  fome  other  Occurrences,  &c.  11. 

9  Then 


4 


Catalogus  Libforum  MSS. 


Num.  1323- 

Then  follow, 

6.  A  breiffe  Difcours,  coricerninge  the  fir (l  Divilion 
of  England  as  it  is  now  generallye  named  into  Shires, 
•uith  theoriginall  foundacion  A  ffirft  beginninge  of  all 
the  Courts  of  Juftyce  in  England ;  with  the  Juriididtions 
&  Immunities  of  Archbilhopps,  Bifhopps  A  other  Ec- 
clefiaflical  Perfons ;  and  fome  other  Occurrences  of 
•State:  wrytten  by  WilliamByrde  of  Grayes-Inne,Efquyer. 

13. 

7.  The  Coppye  of  a  Lettre  wrytten  by  Queene  Anne 

Bullen  to  Kinge  Henry  the  vm.  found  among  the  Lord 
Cromwells  Papers.  34. 

Herein  Ihe  vindicateth  her  Innocency,  &  defireth  an 
open  Tryall. 

8.  A  Lettre  flounde  amongft  fome  Jefuites  lately  taken 
at  Ciarkenwell,  London  :  diretted  to  the  Father  Rector 
att  Bruxells. 

9.  'I  he  Coppye  off  a  Letter  written  by  Sir  Philip  Sid- 

nye  to  Queene  Elizabeth,  touchinge  hir  Marryage  with 
Mounfieur,  &c.  43. 

10.  Propofitions  delivered  to  his  Majeftie  K.  Charles  1. 

bv  the  Earle  of  Strafford,  for  the  fecureing  of  his  Ma- 
jciiies  Eftates,  &  brideling  of  Parliaments;  &  for  theln- 
creale  of  his  Revenues,  much  more  then  it  is.  57. 

1 1.  Obfervations  conceminge  the  Nobillitye  of  Fjig- 

land,  auncyent  &  moderne,  Ac.  68. 

1  2.  The  Soveraigntie  of  the  Seas  of  England,  proved 
by  Record,  Hiftory,  A  the  Municipall  Lawcs  of  the 
Kingdome  :  Alio,  a  particular  Relation  concerning  the 
indlimable  Riches  A  Commodities  of  the  Britilh  Seas. 
By  Sir  John  Boroughs  Kt.  Keeper  of  the  Records  in  the 
lower  of  London.  93. 

13.  A  briefe  Difcourfe  uppon  the  Commiflion  of 

Bridewell :  written  by  Sir  Frauucis  Bacon,  Knight,  whofe 
Opinion  was,  that  the  Proceedings  in  Bridewell  (London) 
upon  the  Accufation  of  Whores,  taken  by  the  Gover¬ 
nors  of  Brydewell  aforefaid,  arenotfufficient  to  call  any 
Man  to  anfwere,  by  any  Warrant  by  them  made,  with¬ 
out  Indiftment,  or  other  Matter  of  Record,  accordinge 
to  the  ould  Law  of  the  Land.  1 27. 

1 4.  A  breiffe  Difcourfe,  or  a  Deffence,  for  the  Al¬ 
teration  of  England  to  the  Name  of  Greate  Brittayne. 

1.38. 

1  c.  The  Cafe  of  Humphry'  Stafford  Efq.  attaynted 
of  High  Trealun,  in  the  firlt  of  Henry  vii.  144. 

Herein  the  Subject  of  Sanctuaries  is  taken  into 
confideration. 

16.  Ihe  Office  of  meafuring  all  manner  of  Coles, 
Grayne,  Come,  A  Sake ;  laden  or  unladen,  in  or  out 
of  any  Shipp  or  Veffcll ;  in  or  upon,  or  by  the  Sea- 
Rodes,  Sake  &  Frelh  Waters;  and  in  all  places  at  Land, 
by  or  near  the  Sea-Shore,  where  any  Coales,  Grayne, 
Corne,  or  Salte,  fhall  be  found  to  be  carried  or  laden, 
into  or  out  of  any  Shipp,  Veffell,  See.  except  the  Cinque 
Fortes.  .  146. 

'Ihis  is  a  Law- Argument  concerning  the  King’s 
Power  to  grant  the  faid  Office,  with  Fees. 

ij.  A  breitie  Difcours;  or  a  true  Relacion  of  the 
Embaffye  ol  Marfhall  Baffompeire  Lord  of  Barre,  Am- 
bafladour  Extraordinarye  ffrom  his  Chriltyan  Majeftie  of 
Fraunce,  unto  Kinge  Charles  his  Majefty  of  England ; 
conceminge  the  breach  of  certayne  Contra&s  of  the 
Treaty es  of  Peace  A  Amitye.  The  Manner  of  fendinge 
home  of  the  Queenes  C.atholicque  Offyccrs  Sc  Minifters. 
The  particuler  Aunfwers  of  his  Majeftie  thereunto. 
'With  fome  certayne  Occurrences  conceminge  Rochell, 
;md  the  Pallatynate:  and  dyvers  other  moft  remarkeable 
and  important  Paffages  of  State.  Written  by  H.W.  &c. 

18.  A  learned  Treatife  on  Matrimony:  written  bv 
W.B.  (William  Birde?)  Efq.  ,5,/ 


Num.  1323. 

19.  A  Treatife  concerning  the  Praftife  of  the  Court 

of  Wards  A  Liveries;  by  W  R.  Serjeant  at  Lawe,  & 
perhaps  by  others.  189. 

20.  A  Tradt  concerning  the  Prerogatives  of  the  King. 

210. 

2  r .  Part  of  a  Treatife,  which  feemeth  to  have  been 
compiled  by  Sir  Robert  Cotton:  wherein  are  the’e  Chap¬ 
ters  or  Sections.  1.  Of  Princes  Extremityes,  beyond 
the  eafe  of  their  People,  by  reafon  of  Warre.  2.  That 
in  place  of  Spoyle  our  Souldiers  have  retorned  with  ex- 
treame  Beggery.  3.  That  our  Forraigne  Dominions, 
have^  been  to  us  allwayes  a  Chardge,  noe  Beneffitt. 
A-  lhat  the  Clayme  of  France  hath  beene  many  wayes 
difeommodyous.  5.  That  in  our  Tymes,  we  have  lels 
facillity  of  Succeffe.  216.' 

22.  The  Speech  of  George  Abbot  Archbiffiop  of  Can¬ 
terbury  to  the  Kinge,  at  Theobalds,  the  5th  of  March 
1623.  in  the  behalfe  of  both  Iloufes  of  Parliament. 

233. 

_  23.  The  Coppye  of  a  Letter  off  Advyce,  wrytten  by 
Sir  Thomas  Egerton  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great  Seale  of 
England,  to  Roberte  Devereux  Earle  of  Eflex.  Ad- 
vifing  him  to  fubmitt  himfclf  to  the  Queen,  A  thereby 
difappoint  the  Hoprs  of  his  Enemies.  241. 

24.  The  Earle  ol  Effex  his  Aunfwer:  wherein  he 

fheweth  the  Senfe  he  had  ot  his  Sufferings,  but  without 
any  Inclination  to  fubmitt  himfelf.  243.  b. 

25.  The  Earle  of  Eflex  his  Lfe  to  Queene  Elizabeth; 

upon  his  Retirement  from  Court.  246. 

26.  The  Earle  of  Effex  his  Lettre  to  Mr.  Secretaryc 
Davifon  ;  att  his  Retourne  from  Portugall.  247.  b. 

It  bears  date  11th  July  1583.  and  importeth  his 
kind  defile  to  fee  him. 

27.  Another  Lettre  off  his,  to  Mr.' Secretarye  Davifon 

in  Italyc.  dat.  8ih  January,  15  )6.  248. 

The  Title  of  this  Letter  feemeth  to  be  amifs;  the 
Letter  itfelf  containing  kind  A  loving  Advices  to  one  of 
the  young  Gentlemen  Mr.  Davilon’s  fons,  then  on  his 
Travells.  248. 

__  28.  A  Petitionarye  Lettre  from  John  Lillye  to  Queene 
Elizabeth,  as  it  feemeth,  for  the  Office  of  Mafter  of  her 
Revells.  24^ 

29.  Another  Lettre  to  Queene  Elizabeth,  from  John 

Lillye;  who,  after  13  years  attendance  at  Court,  had 
gotten  juft  nothing.  230. 

30.  The  Coppye  of  a  Lettre  wrytten  by  Sir  Henrye 

Wallop,  to  Queene  Elizabeth,  dated  from  Dondalkc, 
the  1  ith  of  Auguft  1583.  25c.  b. 

Herein  he  defireth  to  be  told  by  Mr.  Secretary 
Walfingham  wherein  he  hath  offended  her  Majefty ;  fince 
Report  faid,  flie  had  conceived  fome  hard  Opinon  of  him, 
whereof  he  could  not  find  the  reafon. 

31.  A  Courfe  for  the  banifhinge  of  all  Piratts  from 

the  Coaft  of  Ireland,  without  any  great  Charge  to  his 
Majeftie:  propounded  by  Peregrine  Banifter.  2C3. 

32.  The  Somme  off  his  Majeities  Speech  to  fome  of  his 

Councell,  concerning  the  Prince  (Charles)  his  Marriage 
with  Spain;  and  fome  other  Occurrences:  vizt.  Sir 
John  Digbies  Relation  of  the  Ouverture,  touching  the 
faid  Marriage,  made  by  Spain ;  with  the  Opinion  of  the 
Council  thereupon,  that  enough  was  done,  to  ground  a 
Treaty  upon.  263. 

33.  An  evident  A  cleere  Expofition  of  Philfppians  11. 

10.  by  one  Manfill,  who  was  therefore  called  andquef- 
tioned  before  the  High  Commiflion.  268. 

34.  A  Coppye  off  the  Memoryall  which  (Sir  Waller 
Alton)  the  Ambaffadour  of  the  Kinge  of  Greate  Biit- 
tayne,  gave  his  Catholic  Majefty  the  29th  of  Julij  1624. 

27  3. 

Herein  he  layeth  open  the  Confpiracy  of  the  Mar¬ 
quis  de  Inioza  A  Don  Carlos  Colmane  the  Spanilh  Am- 
8  bafadors. 


Bibliothecas  Harleiamc. 


S 


Nilm.1323,  1324. 

bafladors,  againft  Prince  Charles  &  the  Duke  of  Buck¬ 
ingham  ;  &  in  his  Mailer’s  name,  defireth  the  King  their 
Mailer  to  chaltize  them  according  to  their  demerits. 

3  .  Particulars  of  News,  touching  the  Error  of  the 

Spaniards  in  letting  Prince  Charles  return  home  :  of  the 
Quarrel  between  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  &  the  Earl 
of  Briflol ;  Sc  the  likelyhood  of  breaking  off  the  Match 
between  the  Prince  &  the  Infanta.  Written  at  Madrid, 
30th  December,  1623.  276.  b. 

36.  Sir  Robert  Knollys  his  ProjeCt  concerning  En¬ 
quires:  i.  e.  for  the  King  to  reltrain  fuch  as  are  not  Ef- 
quires  from  affuming  the  Title;  and  to  grant  the  fame  to 
fuch  as  would  delire  it,  at  a  certain  price.  Not  forgetting, 
that  Sir  Robert  would  have  the  drawing  up  of  the  Let¬ 
ters  Patents,  Sc  keeping  of  the  Regiitry,  to  himfell. 

278. 

37.  The  Copie  of  a  Privie  Seale  fent  to  the  Threforer 

&  Chamberlaine  of  th’Exchequer,  commanding  them  to 
pay  certaine  allowances  afligned  unto  two  Eleraulds  (i.  e. 
Robert  Cooke  alias  Claiencieulx,  one  of  the  Kings  of 
Armes,  Sc  Robert  Glover  aliits  Somerfett,  one  of  the 
Heraultes  at  Aims)  that  went  into  France  with  (Henry 
Stanley)  Earle  of Darbie,  who  was  fent  thither  in  an  Am- 
baffage  from  her  Majellie.  Given  28th  January,  ann. 
Regni  27.  279. 

38.  The  Lord  De  la  Warre's  Cafe :  as  to  the  Defcent 

of  the  Barony ;  here  refolved,  in  the  behalf  of  Mary 
Poyninges  daughter  Sc  heir  of  Owen  Weft,  fecond  bro¬ 
ther  (of  the  halfbloud)  to  Thomas  Well  the  lalt  Lord 

La  War  re.  280. 

39.  Mr.  Edward  Nevile’s  Lettre  to  the  Kinges  Majef- 

tie;  praying  that  he  might  be  inverted  in  the  Honour  & 
Title  of  the  Barony  of  Abergavenny,  dat.  26th  April, 
A.D. 1603.  281. 

4  o.  The  Prince  Sc  Duke  of  Buckingham’s  Speeches 

in  Parliament,  24th  February,  >023.  281. 

Herein  their  Proceedings  in  Spain  about  the  Match, 
are  laid  open. 

132+- 

A  modern  Book  in  fmall  fol.  confiding  of  divers  fingle 

Papers  relating  to  Trade,  now  bound  up  together  in 

the  following  Order, 

1 .  Copy  of  a  Reprefentation  of  the  Commiffioners 

for  Trade  Sc  Plantations,  to  the  Honble.  Houle  of  Com¬ 
mons,  dated  13  January  1698-9.  concerning  the  Woollen 
Manufacture  of  this  Kingdom ;  and  of  the  Lumen  Ma¬ 
nufacture  of  Ireland.  1 . 

2.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame.  8. 

3.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame.  14. 

4.  Copy  of  a  Reprefentation  to  the  King,  made  by  the 

Commiffioners  for  Trade  Sc  Plantations  ;  fer  hindring 
the  Exportation  of  Wool!.  Dated  the  30  December 
1696.  &  marked  A.  20. 

5.  Copy  of  a  Reprefentation  to  the  Lords  Juftices, 

made  by  tne  Commifiioners  for  Trade  Sc  Plantations ; 
relating  to  the  Trade  between  England  &  Ireland  ; 
efpecially  the  Linnen  Sc  Woollen  Manufactures.  Dated, 
the  31  Augurt,  1697.  and  marked  B.  22. 

6.  Copy  of  a  Reprefentation  to  the  Lords  Juftices, 

made  by  the  Commiffioners  for  Trade  &  Plantations, 
with  Amendments  to  a  Bill  for  incouragiug  the  Linnen 
&  Hempen  MaufaCtures  in  Ireland.  Dated,  the  x  1  No¬ 
vember  1697.  and  marked  C.  3 2. 

7.  Copy  of  a  Reprefentation  to  the  King,  made  by 

the  Commifiioners  for  Trade  Sc  Plantations,  relating  to 
the  general  State  of  the  Trade  of  this  Kingdom.  Dated 
the  23  November  1697.  and  marked  D.  37. 

8.  Copy  of  a  Reprefentation  to  the  King,  made  by 

the  Commifiioners  for  Trade  and  Plantations  ;  upon  the 
Turkey- Companies  Memorial  about  the  Eaft-India-Com- 
panies  interfering  with  them  in  the  vent  of  the  Woollen 
Manufacture  in  Perfia.  Dated,  the  19  January  1697-8. 
&  marked  E.  31, 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1324—1326. 

9.  Copy  of  a  Reprefentation  to  the  Lords  Juftices 

made  by  the  Commifiioners  for  Trade  &  Plantations,  on 
the  Turkey-Companies  Petition,  that  the  NewEaft-India- 
Company  may  not  be  under  any  pofit  ive  Obligation  of 
exporting  Draperies.  Dated,  the  91I1  Augurt,  1698. 
Sc  marked  F.  53. 

10.  Copy  of  a  Reprefentation  to  the  Lords  Juftices* 

made  by  the  Commifiioners  for  Trade  &  Plantations, 
upon  Two  Bills  lately  tranfmitted  from  I  eland ;  the 
one  laying  a  Duty  upon  Woollen  Manufactures  ex¬ 
ported  ;  and  the  other  incouraging  the  Hemp  &  Flax 
Manufactures.  Dated,  the  11th  October,  1698.  and 
marked  G.  5  3. 

11.  Copy  of  an  ExtraCt  of  the  Council  Books* 

upon  a  Reprefentation  made  by  the  Commifiioners  for 
Trade  Sc  Plantations,  October  the  7th,  1697.  relating 
to  a  Bill  from  Ireland,  for  encouraging  the  Manu¬ 
facture  of  Flax  and  Hemp  in  that  Kingdom.  Dated 
13  OCtober  1698.  and  marked  H.  63. 

12.  Copy  of  a  Reprefentation  to  the  Lords  Juftices, 

made  by  the  Commiffioners  for  Trade  Sc  Plantations, 
upon  an  Order  of  Council  of  the  nth  Iaftant,  re¬ 
lating  to  the  Par  between  the  Engli  h  and  Irifh 
Woollen  Manufactures.  Dated  the  13th  OCtober 
1698.  and  marked  I.  67. 

13.  ExtraCt  out  of  the  Lord  Chief  Juftice  Hale’s  Dif- 

courfe  touching  Provifions  for  the  Poor,  pag.  45.  an¬ 
nexed  to  the  Reprefentation  about  the  Par,  and  enti- 
tuled,  The  ordinary  ProceTs  and  Time  and  Charge  of 
making  a  common  coarfe  Medley-Cloath,  of  our  Glou- 
cefter-fhire  W  ooll,  at  this  day.  70. 

I325- 

A  modem  book  in  fmall  fol.  wherein  is  contained, 

A  irealile  emitulcd.  The  Elements  of  Law,  naturall 
Sc  politique,  by  Thomas  Hobbes  of  Malmefbury,  and 
by  him  dedicated  to  William  Cavendifii  then  Earle  of 
New-caftle,  Governor  of  the  Prince  his  Highnes,  May 
the  9th,  1640. 

I  have  heard,  that  the  greateft  part,  if  not  all 
this  Treatife,  is  contained  in  the  fame  Hobbes’s  Book 
De  Cive. 

1326. 

A  paper  Book  in  fol.  on  the  out-fid e,  thus  entituled, 
though  now  hot  fo  legible, 

A  Survey  1623,  made  of  the  Caftles,  Fortes,  & 
Places,  founde  placed  on  eyther  fyde  of  the  Ryvers 
of  Thames  8c  Medway ;  aad  alfoe  of  the  Caltles, 
Fortes,  with  all  their  Fortifications  alonge  the  Coafte 
of  Kente,  Suffexe,  Hantfhire,  and  fo  onwards  to  the 
South  Coafts,  Wefte,  and  to  the  Lands  End,  includinge 
the  Fortes  of  Comwalle.  By  Sir  Richard  Morylon  Kt. 
Lieutenant  of  his  Majcfties  Ordenans,  Sir  John  Ogle. 
Kt.  Sc  Colonell,  Sir  John  Kay  Surveyor  of  His  Majeilies 
fayd  Ordenaunce,  in  purfuance  of  certaine  InftruClions 
from  the  Lords  of  Highenes  molt  Honorable  Privy  Coun- 
celle,  upon  the  30th  day  of  July:  Beginning  the  ill 
of  Augurt  following,  and  ended  die  14th  of  OCtober 
anno  prediCto. 

Which  may  be  more  particularly  deferibed  in  the 
manner  following  : 

1.  The  InftruClions  abovementioned,  requiring  thofe 
Gentlemen  to  certify  the  Names  of  fuch  Caftles,  See.  as 
are  become  unferviceable  ;  and  as  to  thofe  that  they  ftiall 
fynde  needfull  to  be  mayntavned ;  to  confider  of  their 
Eortificadons,  Ditches,  Sc  other  Workes  ;  their  Artillery, 
Tooles,  &  other  Stores ;  the  Lodgings  therein,  Con¬ 
veniences  Sc  Annoyances ;  their  Eftabliflimeuts,  Officers 
Names,  and  other  remarkables  importing  his  Majeftics 
Sendee.  1 . 

a.  A 


C 


6 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  1326,  1327. 

2.  A  Table  of  the  Fortes,  mentioned  in  this  Book 

(not  complete.)  2.  b. 

In  purfuance  of  thofe  Inftructions  I  find  here  Sur¬ 
veys  of  the  then  prefent  State  of 

3.  Gravefend-Forte. 

4.  Tilberie-Forte. 

5.  Uppnor-Caftle. 

6.  Baye-Sconce. 

7.  Warham-Sconce* 

8.  Sandowne-Caftle. 

9.  Deale-Caftle. 

10.  Walmore-Caftle. 

11.  Dover-Caftle. 

12.  Moa'tes-Bulwark. 

13.  Arclieff-Bulwarke. 

14.  Sandgate-Caftle. 

15.  Camber-Gaftile. 

16.  Sowth-fea-Ca^le. 

1 7.  Portefmouth. 

1 8.  St.  Andrews  Caftle. 

19.  Calfhott- Caftle. 

20.  Cowes-Caftle. 

a  1,  Sandham-Caftle. 

22.  Cowefbrooke-Caftle. 

23.  Yarmouth-Caflle. 

24.  Worfley’s  Towre. 

25.  Carew’s  Mounte. 

26.  Hurft  Caftle. 

27.  Sandfoote,  alias  Waymouth-Caftle. 

2S.  Portland-Caftle. 

.  29.  Plymouth-Forte. 

30.  St.  Nicholas  Ifland. 

31.  Pendonis-Caftle. 

32.  S.  Mawze-Caftle. 

33.  St.  Michaels  Mounte. 

34.  Ccrtayne  Obfervations,  of  the  fame  Gentlemen, 
in  generall  tending  to  his  Majefties  Service.  90.  b. 

Then  follow, 

35.  An  Order  of  Council,  made  the  4th  December 
1623.  (on  which  Day  (the  Commiflioners  delivered  in 
their  Report  touching  their  Survey  of  the  Caftles,  &c. 
abovementioned)  whereby  they  together  with  Sir  Allen 
Apiley  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  were  empowered  & 
authorized,  forthwith  to  proceed  in  the  like  View  &  Exa¬ 
mination  of  the  State  of  1  lis  Majefties  Fortrefle  of  the 
Tower  of  London,  according  to  their  former  Inftruttions. 

93. 

36.  The  Report  made  to  the  Lords  of  the  Council, 

by  the  Lord  Chamberlaine,  the  Earle  of  Arundell,  the 
Lord  Carew,  Mr.  Secretary  Nanton,  Mr.  Chauncelor  of 
the  Exchequer,  &  Sr.  Edward  Cooke,  touching  the 
State  wherein  they  found  the  Tower  of  London.  Dated 
the  4th  of  July  1620.  94. 

37.  A  Survey  taken  of  the  Tower  of  London,  by  the 

Commiflioners  aforelaid,  and  of  all  the  Stores,  &c.  found 
therein,  31  December,  1623,  together  with  the  Inftitu- 
tion  or  Eftablilhment  of  the  fame :  as  alfo  what  hath 
been  done  upon  the  Report  of  4  July  1620,  touching  the 
buildings,  &c.  about  the  Tower.  96.  to  124. 

Turning  up  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find,  in' a 

newer  hand, 

3S.  A  Perticuler  of  the  Names  of  the  Towers  &  Prifon- 
Lodgings  in  I  lis  Majefties  Tower  of  London  ;  taken  out 
of  a  Paper  of  Mr.VillianrFrancklyns,  fometymes  Yeo- 
inan- Warder.  Dat.  16  March,  1641. 

r327‘ 

A  paper  Book  in  fol  bought  of  Mr.  Timothy  Langley  ; 
wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Copie  of  the  Writing  found  about  John  Felton, 
containing  the  Reafon  moving  him  to  murder  the  Duke 
ui  Buckingham,  23  Aug.  1628.  s. 


Num.  1327. 

2.  Docquets  of  Petitions  for  Almes-places  in  the  King’s 

Gift;  with  their  Anfwers.  Decemb.  1624.  2. 

3.  Docquets  of  Petitions  of  fome  infolvent  Perfons, 

defiring  Committees  for  mediating  with  their  Creditors  ; 
and  the  References  orWarrants  given  thereupon,  2 1  De¬ 
cember,  1624.  3. 

Then  follow  other  Docquets  of  Petitions,  exhibited 
to  the  King  in  December  1 624.  with  the  Anfwers  to  the 
fame :  fome  of  thefe  being  more  remarkable  than  the 
reft,  I  lhall  here  mention. 

4.  Complaint  of  Nicholas  Sacker,  that  the  rich 'Inha** 

bitants  of  UfFord  in  Suffolk,  having  wronged  the  Poor 
there ;  had,  out  of  malice,  caufed  him,  &  others,  Wit- 
nefles,  to  be  impreffed  for  Souldiers.  6. 

5.  Petition  of  Raphe  Tuggie  one  of  His  Majefties 

Footmen,  on  whom  (together  with  Sr.  Andrew  Keyth) 
the  King  had  beftowed  the  benefit  of  the  Efcheator. 
of  Yorkshires  Place ;  by  which  they  were  like  to  be 
bubbled  by  one  Atkinfon  a  Yorkfhire  Attorney,  whom 
this  Tuggie  had  entrufted.  7. 

6.  Petition  of  Sr.  Humfrey  May,  Sir  Nicholas  Tuf- 
ton,  Sir  William  Heyreck,  Sir  Arthur  Ingram,  &c.  his 
Majefties  fervants,  for  a  newLeafe  of  the  Sea-Coles.  8.  b. 

7.  Petition  of  the  greater  Number  of  the  Inhabitants  of 
Leeds,  in  Com.  Ebor.  for  flaying  the  Corporation,  which 
the  richer  Men  had  procured  for  their  own  ends.  n. 

8.  Petition  of  Robert  Maxwell,  one  of  his  Majefties 

Servants,  for  the  benefit  of  Fynes  impoled  upon  the 
Efcheators  of  divers  Counties.  ibid. 

9.  Petition  of  John  Bafnet  one  of  his  Majefties  Foote- 
men,  for  Goods  likely  to  fall  to  his  Majeftie  by  Efcheate. 

9.  b. 

10.  Petition  of  Rice  Griffith  one  of  his  Majeftie9 

Footemen,  for  the  benefit  of  an  outlawry.  1  o. 

11.  Petition  of  Nicholas  Goldifburgh  one  of  the  Mef- 

fengers  of  his  Maj  benefit  of 

one  Taber’s  Eftate  when  forfeited  to  his  Majelty.  But 
this  being  a  fatt  morfell,  his  Majefty  referved  it  for 
Maifter  Doctor  Chambers. 

12.  Petition  of  George  Caner  a  poor  blind  Scholar  in 

St.  John’s  College  Cambridge :  whofe  Cafe  the  King 
ordered  to  be  recommended  to  the  Vice-Chancellor  & 
Heads  ;of  Houfes  there,  in  order  to  his  maintenance 
among  them,  as  a  poor  Scholar.  1o. 

13.  Petition  of  the  Inhabitants  of  New-Malton  in 

Com.  Ebor.  praying  to  be  made  a  Corporation  ;  that 
thereby  they  might  be  enabled  to  keep  poor  People  out 
of  their  Town.  j 

14.  Petition  of  Sr.  Anthony  Dcereing,  &  others  of 
that  family,  praying  the  Releafe  of  George  Deereing  a 
MafterofArts  of  Cambridge,  who  had  been  long  m 
Prifon  for  fpeaking  injurious  words  of  the  King  ;  under 
color  of  his  being  then  franticke  &  diffracted.  ibid. 

15.  Petition  of  Sir  Thomas  Philipps  Kt.  who  had  been 

employed  a  Commiftioner,  inter  alios,  in  Ireland ;  but 
had  not  been  paid  with  the  others.  1 1 .  b. 

16..  Petition  of  Henry  Skipwith  Efq.  who  had  been  a 
Captaine  &  Lieutenant-Colonell,  and  now  fallen  into 
great  poverty  ;  praying  for  his  Arrears,  1  2. 

17.  Petition  of  Thomas  Baxter  of  Raynethorpe  in 

Com.  Norff.  concerning  a  wrongfull  Conveyance  of  his 
Lands  to  the  Crown.  j  2.  b. 

1 8.  Petition  of  Mrs.  Brigett  Annefley  one  of  the 

Gentlewomen  attending  the  Perfon  of  the  late  Oueene 
Anne ;  for  the  arrerages  of  a  Penfion  granted  umo  her 
for  her  life,  by  his  Majefty.  x  ’ 

19.  Petition  f  ir  an  Almes-place  in  Weftminfler, 

to  K.  Charles  1  22. April,  1625.  14.  &  vid.  16.  b.  * 

20.  Docquets  of  two  Bills  ;  whereby  the  King  granted 
unto  Sir  Lewis  Trcfham  &  Sir  Thomas  Brudenell  the 

9  Moneys 


u. 
9-b. 
12.  b. 

14. 
15.  b. 
19. 

22.  b. 

16. 
30.  b. 
3a.  b. 
34-  b. 
37-  b- 
39.  b. 
41.  b. 
52*  b. 

54- b. 
57- b- 
59- 
61.  b. 
63.  b. 
66. 
66.  b. 


72.  b. 
75'  b. 
79- 
81. 
85.  b. 
88. 


Moneys  &  Lands  forfeited  by  Edward  Vaux  Lord  Har- 
rowdon,  by  reafon  of  his  Recufancy:  and  alio  pardoneth 
his  Offences,  Trefpaffes,  A  Contempts  by  him  com¬ 
mitted,  A  Forfeitures  by  him  incurred  by  Reafon  of 
his  Recufancy,  A  Con vi&ion  thereupon  22d  Apr.  1625. 

16. 

21.  Mr.  Fifher  his  Catechifme;  made  about  the  year 
1615.  (He  feems  to  have  been  aPreededinarian.)  17. 

22.  Notes  feeming  to  be  taken  out  of  fome  Sermon, 

about  A. D.  1653.  _  23. 

23.  Sir  Francis  Seymour  his  Speech  in  Parliament, 

22Martij  1627.  25. 

This  was  againd  the  billetting  of  Souldiers;  &  Im- 
prifoning  Gentlemen  upon  the  Account  ol  the  Loanes. 

Then  follow  divers  otherSpeeches  in  the  Commons 
Houfe  of  Parliament  before-  the  beginning  of  the  late 
Civil  Wars,  v.  gr. 

24.  Mr.  Grimdon’s  Speech  "(wherein  he  blows  the 

Trumpet  of  Sedition  hard  A  loud.)  27. 

25.  Sir  John  Culpepper,  his  Speech,  upon  the  Sub¬ 
ject  of  public  grievances.  31. 

26.  Sir  Edward  Deeringes  firft  Speech,  concerning 

Religion  ;  &  in  the  behalf  of  Mr.  Wilfon,  a  Minider 
fufpedted  to  be  a  Puritan,  &  therefore  taken  into  cuf- 
tody.  _  _  33- 

27.  Sir  Benjamin  Rudyar’s  Speech,  fetting  forth  the 
fatal  confequences  to  the  Kingdom,  from  the  Advices  of 
evil  Counfellors  about  the  King:  but  defires  that  the  Re¬ 
formation  of  thefe  abufes  &  grievances  may  be  made 
with  as  much  lenitie  &  moderation,  as  the  publick  fafety 
of  the  Kinge  A  Kingdome  can  poflibly  admitt.  34. 

28.  Mr.  Bagfhawe’s  Speech:  He  lays  out  the  publick 

grievances  in  the  mod  bitter  manner:  but  when  he 
comes  to  the  Remedies,  he  faith,  “  what  the  Plafter 
cannot  doe  now,  mud;  be  don  with  Lances  ;  Enfe  red¬ 
dendum,  ne  pars  lincera  trahatur."  73. 

29.  Sir  E.iward  Deeringe  his  fecond  Speech.  39. 

30.  Articles  againd  Thomas  Wentworth  Earle  of  Srra- 

ford,  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland.  40. 

3  r.  A  Meflage  delivered  from  the  Houfe  of  Commons 
by  Mr.Pym,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Upper  Houfe  of  Par¬ 
liament,  concerning  the  Earl  of  Strafford  Lieutenant  of 
Ireland;  i.  e.  to  impeach  him  of  High  Treafon;  with 
the  manner  of  his  being  thereupon  fequedered  from  the 
Houfe,  A  committed  unto  the  Cudody  of  the  Gentleman 
Ulhcr  of  the  Black  Rod.  40.  b. 

32.  Mr.  Py m’s  Speech  to  the  Lords  of  the  Upper 

Houfe  of  Parliament  at  the  prefentinge,  by  him,  of  the 
Articles  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  againd  the  Earle  of 
Strafford.  41- 

33.  The  young  Lord  (George)  Digbie’s  fecond  Speech ; 

ending  with  a  Motion  for  drawing  up  a  Remonftrance  to 
the  King,  fetting  forth  the  public  grievances,  &  the 
Authors  of  them.  43? 

34.  Sum  of  the  Charge  in  Parliament,  againd  Mr. 

Secretary  Windebancke,  10th  Deer.  1640.  44.  b. 

33.  The  Lord  Falkland’.;  Speech?  ;  againd  the  Lord 
Keeper  Finch,  Arch-Bifliop  Laud,  A  the  Earl  of  Straf¬ 
ford  ;  ending  with  a  Motion  to  draw  up  a  Charge  againd 
the  former.  _  _  45- 

36.  Sir  Edward  Deering’s  third  Speech  ;  againd  the 
Canons  of  the  late  Synod,  and  the  Members  thereof 

•  who'  voted  for  them.  4®* 

37.  Sir  John  Wrayes  fird  Speech,  to  fmall  purpofe,  I 

think,  unlefs  it  were  to  fhew  hiriifelf  affeded  to  the 
King’s  fide.  49* 

38.  Sir  John  Wrayes  fecond  Speech:  upon  the  noted 

growth  of  Popery  ;  whereupon  he  grounded  his  Motion, 
that  the  Groves  A  high  places  of  Idolatry  may  be  re¬ 
moved  and  putt  down.  L'  50, 

39.  Sir  John  Holland’s  Speech;  for  fupplying  the 
King’s  neceflities.  For  removing  the  Scotch  Army  eafily, 
if  it"  might  be;  if  not  by  force.  For  applying  remedies 


to  the  grievances  both  in  Church  and  State.  And  in 
all  things  to  proceed' with  that  temper,  modedy  &  due 
moderation,  bed  becoming  the  Dignity  A  Wifdom  of  fo 
great  a  Court.  5l- 

40.  KingCharles  his  Letter  to  the  Parliament  for  Con¬ 
firmation  of  their  Rights.  52. 

41.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  his  Letter  unto  Thomas  Ho¬ 
ward  Earle  of  Arunded.  53. 

Notwithdanding  this  Title,  by  the  body  of  the 
Letter,  it  doth  feem  to  be  written  to  fome  other  perfon. 
The  fubjeft  of  it  is,  his  Voyage  ro  Guiana,  with  his 
Ioffes  &  difappointments  there,  which  he  imputeth  to 
fundry  Accidents,  but  principally  to  the  Conduct  of  K. 
James  1.  who  had  commanded  him  to  give  an  account  of 
the  Countrey,  the  very  River  he  was  to  enter  in  at,  the 
burthen  of  his  Ships,  the  number  of  his  Men  A-  Guns; 
which  being  difeovered  to  the  Spaniih  Ambalfador,  A  by 
him  to  his  Mader,  Orders  were  fent  from  Madrid  to  pre¬ 
vent  his  defign,  before  he  got' out  of  Thames  River. 

42.  Notes  of  Walter  Bilmor  (the  Writer  of  the  greated 

part  of  this  Book)  touching  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  Mr. 
Henvv  Citffe,  Sir  Gelley  Mericke,  A  Robert  Devereux 
Earl  df  Effex.  .  _  55- 

43.  Mr.  Henry  Cuffe’s  Speech  at  his  execution. 

55-  b; 

This  feemeth  to  be  only  fome  Fragments  of  it, 
as  wanting  connexion,  A  the  mention  of  many  particu¬ 
lars  which  he  might  deliver  upon  that  Occafion. 

44.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  his  Speech,  at  his  execution, 

29th  Odtober  1618.  5b- 

45.  The  FIcads  of  thofe  Grievances  which  are  pre¬ 
ferred  againd  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  8th  May  1626. 

,57- 

4C.  Mr.  Gethinge  the  Writing-Mader,  his  Receipt  to 
make  black  Ink.  57/  b* 

47.  Apiioi ifiYvco Political,  gathered  out  of  the  Life  & 

End  of  that  mod  noble  Robert  Devereux  Earle  of  El- 
fex,  not  long  before  his  death;  by  Mr. Henry  Cud’e  his 
Secretary.  58. 

48.  Part  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh’s  Confefiion.  60.  b., 

At  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

49.  Accompts  relating  to  the  Adairs  of  Dame  Jacoba 
Van  Loor,  the  widow  of  Sir  Peter  Van  Loor,  a  Dutch 
Merchant  in  London;  entred  by  the  above-mentioned 
Walter  Bilmor  her  Steward. 

NB.  Whereas  at  fol.  4.  the  Inventory  of  this  Sii 
Peter  Van  Loor  is  faid  to  amount  to  940,007  1.  2s.  1  id. 
Mr.Bembde  (who  was  one  of  his  heirs,  or  defeendants) 
told  me  that  Sum  is  not  rightly  putt  down,  there  bein^ 
a  Cyfer  too  many. 

1328. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  manu  Patricij  Junij  Bibliothe- 
carij  Regij  confcriptus  ;  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Ejufdem  doctiflimi  Viri  Annotationes  in  Libros  Ge- 
nefeos,  Exodi,  Levitici,  A  Capita  14  priora  Numeri; 
quas  cum  Verfione  Graca  t'u  i  Interpretum  juxia  Exem¬ 
plar  Alexandrinum,  ipfe  decreverat  in  lucem  edere  :  qui- 
bus,  Textum  Codicis  Alexandrini  cum  alijs  Exemplari- 
bus,  Impredis  et  MSS.  fonte  item  Ilebraico,  et  Veterum 
Scriptorum  Monumentis,  confert. 

I-Iunc  Traftatum  (nonnullis  famed  in  locis,  parum, 
uti  videtur,  accurate)  typis  evulgavit  in  Appendice  ad 
Biblia  fua  Polyglotta,  i*.  e.  in  Tom.  vi.  vir  de  Biblicis 
Litteris  optime  meritus  D.  Brianus  Waltonus,  haud  ita 
pridem,  Epifcopus  Cedriends. 

Accedunt  etiam,  eadem  manu, 

2.  Exodi  Capita  36,  37,  38  A  39.  juxta  Editionem 

Complutenfem.  49- 

3.  Vocabula  Hebrcea,  et  Egyptiaca  a  70  Interpretibus 

i-etenta.  _ 

4.  Annotationes  in  diverfa  Capita  Levitici.  ibid. 

3.  Adnotationes 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1328—133 

5.  Adnotationes  in  Li  brum  Numeri  ;  ut  videtur,  ine- 

ditre.  0  51.  b. 

6.  Annotationes  inLibrum  Deuteronomij ;  ut  videtur, 

ineditte.  53.  b. 

7.  Annotationes  inLibrum  Exodi.  65. 

8.  Libri  Jofue  Caput  xx.  juxta  Codicem  Alexandri- 

num,  perinde  atq;  Editionem  Mafianam  ;  cum  Scholijs, 
five  annotationibus.  67. 

9.  Syllabus  Locorum  in  quibus  Graca  Pfalmorum 
Verfio  ab  Hebraico  Fonte  difcedit ;  uti  videtur  ineditus. 

68. 

1329. 

A  French  Book  in  fol.  bought  of  me,  wherein  are  con¬ 
tained. 

The  Memoirs  of  the  Marquis  de  Neufville,  Secre¬ 
tary  of  Stare  in  France  ;  in  two  Parts. 

This  Book  is  written  by  a  French  hand;  and  feemelh 
to  be  copied  direilly  from  the  Original. 

I33°- 

A  Book  in  fol.  containing  certain  Law  Tracts,  bound  up 
together  in  the  Order  following, 

t  .  Reports  of  Triads  in  the  Court  of  Star  Chamber, 
from  ann.  40  F.liz.  to  ann.  13  Jac.  1.  1. 

2.  Reports  of  many  Pleas  &  Trials  in  Banco  Regis, 

ann.  2,  3,  6  &  7  Caroli  1.  26. 

In  this  and  the  preceding  Trait,  are  many  remark¬ 
able  &  extraordinary  Cafes ;  which  I  pafs  over  ;  except 
the  Trials  ot  Giles  Broadway  &  Florens  Fitz-patrick 
(fol.  60.  b.)  the  Servants  &  abominable  Accomplices  of 
Mervin  Tc  uchet  Lord  Audley  &  Earl  of  Caftlehaven 
(whofe  Trial  hath  been  formerly  mentioned  in  this  Ca¬ 
talogue)  upon  which,  they  were  both  conviited  and  exe¬ 
cuted. 

3.  Le  Eyre  del  Forreft  de  Wind  for- Nova  com. 

Berk.  tent.  Trinit.  Vacat.  ann.  8  Caroli  1.  devant  Henry 
Countede  Holland  Chiefe  Juflice  in  Eyre  de  touts  Ies 
Forrefls  citra  Trentam,  etTho.Richardfon  Chiefe  Juflice 
de  Engleterre,  et  John  Denham  Mil.  un  de  Barons  del 
Exchequer,  Afliftants  in  Eyre.  80.  b. 

4.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Matters  contained  in  the 

Treatife  above-mentioned  at  N°  2.  84. 

5.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the'Names  of  Litigators,  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  fame  Treatife.  98. 

6.  A  large  Comment  (in  Law-French,  like  as  the 

other  Traits  are)  upon  the  Carta  de  Forefla,  as  confirm¬ 
ed  by  K.Edward  1.  1 0 1 .  to  1 95. 

133Ii 

A  Book  written  in  Law-French,  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  The  Reports  of  many  Trials  in  Weflminfter-Hall, 
&  clfewhere  ;  which  either  refer  to,  or  were  extrailed 
out  of  the  publick  Rolls  of  the  faid  Trials,  being  about 
the  27,  28,  29  &  30th  years  of  the  Reign  of  Queen 
Elizabeth  by  Sir  Edward  Henden,  while  he  was  yet  a 
young  man,  as  it  fhould  feem.  He  came  afterward,  to 
be  a  Serjeant  at  Law,  Sc  one  of  the  Barons  of  the  Ex¬ 
chequer. 

At  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

2.  The  Manner  or  Style  ufed  in  intituling  Bills  into 
the  Exchequer  Chamber,  The  Courte  of  Wardes,  The 
Starre-  Chamber,  Chancery,  Requefls,  &  Duchy-Courts. 

3.  The  Stile  of  the  Chauncery-Court  att Dover,  &c. 

4.  Law-Notes,  of  Pleadings,  See. 


A  Book  in  fol.  confining,  mofily,  of  blank  Paper  ; 
wherein  are  written, 

1.  The  Commiffion  of  K.  Chariest,  of  the  4th  of 
April,  in  the  18th  year  of  his  Reign  (i.  e.  A.D  1642  ) 
whereby  he  conflicted  Algernon  Percv  Earl  of  Noil 


Num.  1332— 1337. 

thumberland,  Robert  Devereux  Earl  of  Effex,  Philip 
Herbert  Earl  of  Pembroke,  Hen  ly  Rich  Earl  of  Holland, 
William  Fiennes  Vifcount  Say  &  Seale,  Edward  Lord 
Kimbolton,  John  Lord  Roberts,  Denzill  Hollis  Efq.  Sir 
Robert  Harley  Kt.  of  the  Bath,  Sir  John  Merick,  Sir 
Walter  Earle,  Sir  Robert  Cooke,  Sir  Robert  Parkehurfl, 
Sir  John  Evelin,  Sir  Henry  Vane junr.  Sir  Richard  Cave 
knights,  &  Robert  Wallopp,  Henry  Marten,  John  Pym, 
Oliver  Cromwell,  Robert  Raignokb  Efqs.  to  be  hisCom- 
miflioners  &  Counfell  refiding  heere  in  England,  for  the 
advifing,  ordering,  &  difpofing  of  all  things  concern¬ 
ing  the  Governement  &:  Defence  of  the  Kingdom  of  Ire¬ 
land  ;  according  to  the  Inftrudlions  and  Diredtions  there¬ 
unto  annexed,  and  to  fuch  other  Inftrudlions  as  they 
fhould  from  time  to  time  receive  from  him,  by  the  Ad¬ 
vice  of  the  Lords  &  Commons  in  Parliament.  1. 

2.  The  Inftrudlions  abovementioned.  2. 

I  fuppofe  the  remaining  part  of  the  Book  was  de- 
figned  to  contain  their  Proceedings  thereupon. 

1 3  3  3  • 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  loofely  written,  and  thus  entituled, 
“  The  Soueraigntic  of  the  Seas  of  England ;  proved 
by  Record,  Hiftorie,  and  the  Municipal!  Lawes  of  the 
Kingdom e:  alfoe,  a  particular  Relation  concerning  the 
ineftimable  Riches  and  Commodities  of  the  Brittiih  Seas: 
by  Sir  John  Borough  Knight,  Keeper  of  the  Records  in 
the  Towef  of  London,  &c. 

1  334* 

Codex  membranaceus  et  fatis  antiquus  in  fol.  min.  quo 
continentur, 

Egefippi  Judtei  de  Excidio  Judseorum  Libri  v.  per 
B-  Ambrofuim  Epifcopum  Mediolanenfem  Latine  verfi. 
■Liber  quintus  tarn  in  initio  quant  in  fine  mutilatur. 

*335- 

A  parchment  Book,  in  fmall  fol.  written  all  in  Law- 
French;  wherein  are  contained, 
c  '■  of  thc  PrinciPal)  matters,  in  the  Statutes 

from  the  Magna  Carta  of  K.Edw.  1.  to  about  the  24th 
year  of  K.Henryvi.  reduced  under  proper  Heads.  1. 

2.  Statuta  Regis  Edwardi  tercij  poft  Conqueftum! 

3.  Statuta  Regis  Ricardi  fecundi. 

4.  Statuta  R.Henrici  quarti.  i,  * 

5.  Statuta  Regis Henrici quinti.  18 c  b 

6.  Statuta  R.Henrici  fexti.  3*  ‘ 

7.  Statuta  de  tribus  annis  prioribus  regni  R. Edwardi 

Quaro.  asi. 

r336- 

An  old  paper-Book  in  fmall  fol.  wrlttcil  all  in  Law- 
French  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  Comment  or  Readings  upon  the  Statute  called 
Wefimonafl.  primum.  Imperfeit  at  the  beginning. 

2.  Like  Readings  upon  the  Statute,  Weftmonait. 
cundum. 

This  Trail  is  imperfeit  in  the  middle. 

3.  Other  Readings  upon  the  fame  Statute.  47. 

4.  Like  Readings  upon  Magna  Carta;  beginning  at 

Cap.  viii.  and  fhort  explications  of  certain  paff.^es  in 
fome  other  Statutes.  I28.  to  “140. 

I337‘ 

A  parchment  Book  in  fol.  written  in  old  Englifh ;  and  at 
the  end  thus  entituled, 

1.  The  Croniclis  of  Englonde  ;  made  &  compiled  by 
notabil  Clerkis,  of  aventuris  of  Kyngis  that  were  in  this 
U*nde,  and howe  they  died.  This  is  the  Chronicle  com- 
9  monly 


Bibliothecae  Harlcianae. 


9 


Num.  1337,  1338. 

monly  called  Brute,  &  Brute  op  England;  and,  in 
this  Copie,  is  deduced  to  the  taking  of  Roan  by  our  K. 
Henry  the  Fifth. 

In  the  vacant  Parchment,  I  find, 

2.  A  medicinal  Receipt;  at  the  beginning  : 

3.  Nomina  illius  Regis  qui  Sanftam  Crucem  venera- 
bitur;  fecundum  14  diverfos  Prophetas.  pag.  antepen. 
definit  in  debgnatione  8vi.  Prophetas. 

4.  When  the  Lonue  of  Albion  lhalle  be  turned  into 

Confufion.  ibid. 

5.  Prophetia  brevicula,  de  trucidatione  m  Regis  (i.e. 

forte  Henrici  iv.  per  Wallenfes.)  ibid. 

6.  Quindecim  Signa  ante  diem  Judicij,  ibid. 

1338. 

Codex  chartaceus  ac  probe  fcriptus,  in  fol.  min.  quo  con- 
tinentur, 

1.  Determinatio  Negativa  Collegij  Do&oruni  Regen- 

tium  alme  Univerfitatis  Aurelianenfis,  fuperbinas  Qutef- 
tiones,  fcil.  1.  Si  Jure  Divino  liceat  Fratri  Reliftam  Fra- 
tris  (quam  Fratriam  vocant)  accipere  Uxorem  ?  2.  Si 
hoc  fit  eo  jure  vetitum,  utrum  Divine  Legis  Prohibitio, 
Pontificali  Difpenfatione  remitti  poffit  ?  aftum  in  facello 
B.  Marias  Boni-nuncij  Aurelianenfis  5  die  menfis  Aprilis 
A.D. 1529.  j . 

Sequuntur  Detenninationes  alias  confimiles,  v.  g. 

2.  Determinatio  Decani  et  Collegij  confultiflime  Fa- 

cultatis  Decretorum  Parifienfis  Univerfitatis.  dat.  in 
Congregatione  eorum  apud  S.  Joannem  Lateranenfem 
P.arifijs,  die  23  menfis  Ma;j,  A.D.  1530.  ibid. 

3.  Determinatio  Rectoris  etDoftorum  Regentium  in 

PontificiA  et  Legum  Difciplina,  ulnwe  UniverfiKuis  An- 
degavenfis.  Actum  in  Aide  p.  Petri  Andpgavenfis,  die 
7  menfis  Maij,  A.D.  1530.  1 .  b. 

4.  Determinatio  Decani  et  Facultatis  Sacre  Theologie 

alme  Univerfitatis  Parifienfis.  Datum  in  Generali  Con¬ 
gregatione  per  Juramentum  celebrata,  apud  S.Mathuri- 
num,  die  2julij,A.D.  '530.  2. 

5.  Determinatio,  cum  Decano,  Theologas  Facultatis 
in  Univerfitate  Bituricenfi.  dat.  10  die  Junij,  A.D.  1530. 

6.  Determinatio  Doctorum  Theologorum  alme  Uni¬ 

verfitatis  Bononienfis.  dat.  in  Ecclefia  Cathcdrali  Bononi- 
enfi  (f.  10  die  Junij  A.D.  1530.)  fub  Divi  Clemenlis  vn. 
Pontificatu.  g,  b. 

7.  Determinatio  Dodforum  Theologorum  alme  Uni¬ 
verfitatis  Paduan  as.  dat.  Paduas,  in  Ecclefia  Heremita- 
rum  Sanfti  Auguftini,  die  primo  J.ulij,  A.D.  1530.  (The 
Original  of  this,  is  in  this  Library  marked  83.  c.  22.)  4.b. 

8.  Determinatio  Alme  Univerfitatis  Tholofane.  dat. 

Tholofe,  Kaiendis  Octobris  A.D.  1530.  6. 

Deinde  fequitur, 

9.  Trafcatus,  in  quo  plane  docetur  fatis  magnas, 
graves,  atq;  Juftas  Rationes  fuilfe,  que  tot  Viros  in 
hanc  Sententiam  adducere  potuerunt.  Cujus  ctiam  Com- 
pilatores  non  folum  Sacre  Scripture,' Sanctorum  Conci- 
liorum,  et  Canonum,  neq;  non  receptiflimorum  Ecclefie 
Dottorum  aucloritates  ;  verum  etiam  Rationis,  et  Nature 
Teflimonium  veluti  Regulam  et  amuffim  quandam  fequi 
profitentur:  et  quatenus  vcl  Scriptura,  vel  Ratio,  vel 
deniqueNatura,  huic  iftorum  Sententie  explicande,  et 
ftatuende  luftragan,  in  medium  alferre.  fol.  6.  b.  ufq;  ad 
fol.  85.  quod  ell  ultimum. 

Ex  ijs  quss  prtemittuntur,  prtefentem  Libelium  C.au- 
fa  Matrimoruj  inter  R.  Henricum  vm.  ac  Dnam  Cathe- 
'rinam,  Arthuri  fratiis  fui  Viduam,  iuifle  compilatum, 
nemo  non  videt :  quinetiam  Locum  de  hoc,  et  alijs  ejuf- 
modi  Libris  e  D.  Gilb.  Burnetti  hodierni  Epifcopi  Sarif- 
burienfis  Hiftoria  de  Ecclefia:  Anglican  as  Reformatione 

(fc.  ad  Vol.  1.  pag.  97.)  heic  duxi  deferibendum. - 

‘  He  (i.e.  K.  Henry  vm.)  refolved  next  to  publifh  to 
•6 7 8 9  the  World  &  to  his  Subjedts,  the  Juftice  of  his  Caufe. 

Cat.  Hare,  Vo,l.  U. 


Num.  1338— 134.6. 

c  Therefore  feme  learned  Men  were  appointed  to  com- 
‘  pare  all  that  had  been  written  on  it;  &  out  of  all  die 
‘  Tranfcripts  of  the  MSS.  of  Fathers  &  Councills,  to 
£  gather  together  whatfoever  did  ftrenghten  it.  Scverall 
‘  of  thefe  MSS.  I  have  feen.  One  is^  in  Mr.  (Richard) 

*  Smith’s  Library,  where  are  the  Quotations  of  ihe 
c  Fathers,  Couneills,  Schoolmen,  tv  Canormi.s  written 
‘  out  at  length  which  I  take  to  be  this  very  Book;  and 
take  leave  to  add  farther  concerning  it,  that  bv  the 
adorning  the  Cover,  with  the  Rofe  5c  Crown.  withFleurs 
de  Lis  thereon  (not  to  mention  the  plainefsof  the  Hand¬ 
writing)  it  fhould  feem  to  have  been  done  for  the  King 
himlelf.  My  Lord  goes  on  and  fays, ‘  There  arethree  other 

*  fuch  MSS.  in  the  Cotton  Library;  of  which,  One 
‘  (Otho.  _c.io1  contains  a  large  Vindication  of  thefe 
‘  Authorities  frem  lbme  Exceptions  made  to  them. 
‘  Another  (ibidem)  is  an  Anfwer  to  the  Bifhop  of  Ro- 
‘  chefier’s  Book  for  the  Queen’s  Caufe.  A  third  (Vf.spas. 
‘  P-  5*)  digefts  the  matter  into  twelve  Articles,— and 
c  thefe  are  there  enlarged  on,  arid  proved.  But  all  thefe,  & 
£  many  more  werefummed  up  in  a  fliort  Book  &  printed 
‘  firft  in  Latine,  then  in  Englifli,  with  the  Dotermina* 
‘  tions  of  the  Univerfities  before  it.’ 

Whether  his  Lordfhip,  by  thefe  printed  Books  mean- 
eth,  that  entituled,  “  Italia:  ac  Galiice  AcademiarumCen- 
furte  de  ducendo  Relictam  Fratris  mortui,  London, 
1330.”  and  another  printed  at  London  1532.  and 
whether  the  prefent  MS.  be  contained  in  them/ or  either 
of  them;  or  only  an  Abflraet  of  it,  (not  having  thole 
Books  ready)  1  cannot  now  enquire. 

It  may  be  alfo  noted,  that  although  the  Determi¬ 
nations  or  Cenfures  abovementioned  are  but  eight  in 
Number »  yet  the  Prologue  to  the  Treatife  immediately 
following  them,  mentioneth  ten  :  for  it  beginneth  thus, 
“  Habes  hie,  cqndide  Lector*  Cenfuras  et  Decreta,  que 
decf.m  IHuftriffime  ac  omnium  quas  babet .Ecclefia  Chrlf- 

tiana  niaxime  cclebres  Academic” - Two  therefore  are 

wanting,  which,  whether  they  might  be  thofe  of  Oxford 
6i  Cambridge,  or  of  other  Foreign  Univerfities,  I  cannot 
npw  tell. 


A  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  written 
!.•  A  Copie  of  the  Leafe  of  the  Poundage  &  Cuftoms, 
made  by  K.  James  1.  to  William  Gavwaje,  Francis  Jones’ 
&  Nicholas  Salter,  Inquires,  for  theTerm  of  three  Years 
froin  the  24th  of  December  which  was  in  the  ninth  year 
of  his  Majellies  reign;  paying  therefore  yearly,  during 
the  Term  of  two  years  only  (his  Majeftie  being  already 
fatisfied  for  the  year  paft)  the  Sum  of  1 36,226k  10s.  2d. 
with  many  other  Covenants  and  Provifoes.  dat.  1 6th 
April,  in  the  1  ith  year  of  his  Reign.  I# 

2.  An  Abftraft  of  his  Majefties  part  of  the  faid  Leafe ; 

as  it  was  fignified  to  Sir  Henry  Hobart  then  Attorney- 
General,  by  the  Lord  Privy  Seale,  &c.  to  be  provided 
for  accordingly.  r  ^ 

3.  Copy  of  the  King’s  Writt  direfted  to  all  Officer’s, 
commanding  them  to  fuller  Ferinours  to  ferch  for  unac- 
cuftomed  Goods,  and  to  be  aiding  to  them  in  their  Search 
for  the  fame:  with  a  Warrant  from  the  Lords  of  the 
Council,  for  their  having  as  many  of  them  as  they  fhould 
defire.  dat.  21  ft  April  1613. 

4.  A  Table  of  certayae  Claufes  &  Covenants  in  the 

Indenture  aforefayd,  ^ 

1  340- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  minori,  ab  Italo  quodara 
Librario  (pulchre,  potius  quam  accurate  feribendi, 
ftudiofo)  deferiptus  in  quo  continentur, 

Joachimi  Calabri,  Fundatoris  ac  primi  AbbatisFlo. 
renfis  Monafterij,  Vaticinia  de  Pondficibus  Romanis,  e 

Libra 


1(5 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1340— 134.2. 

Libro  Apocalypfews,  ut  videtur  haufla  ;  ac  triginta  ve- 
nufti  (Tunis  Tabulis,  ab  egregio  Artifice,  repraffentata. 

in  hzec  Vaticinia  Adnotationes  fcripferunt  Pafcha- 
linus  Regifelmus,  Theophraftus  Paracelfus,  ac  Joannes 
Adrafder,  qua;  apud  Joannetn  Wolfium  exffant,  in  Left.- 
Memorab.  Vol.  1.  Quinetiam,ibidemhabeturTra£tatu- 
lus  Gabrielis  Barij  de  vita  Joachimi  Abbatis  ;  deq;  eo 
Teftimonium  plurimorum  Auttorum.  Inter  quos,  aginen 
ducit  Rogerus  Hovedenus  noftras,  qui  fie  fcripfit,  pag. 
388.  Eodetn  anno  (fc.  1191.)  Richardus  Rex  An¬ 
glia;  audiens  per  communem  fainam,  et  multorum  re- 
htionem,  quod  quidam  Vir  religiofus  erat  in  Calabria, 
didtus  johachim,  Abbas  de  Curacio  de  Ordine  Ciftrenfi 
(leg.  Ciftercienfi)  habens  Spiritum  propheticum,  et  ven- 
tura  populo  pra;dicebat ;  mifit  pro  eo,  et  libenter  audie- 
bat  verba  Prophetite  lllius,  et  Sapientiam,  et  Do&rinam. 
Eruditus  enim  Vir  erat  in  divinis  Scripturis,  et  interpre- 
tabatur  Vifiones  B.  Johannis  Evangelifta;,  quas  ipfe  Jo¬ 
hannes  narrat  in  Apocalypfi,  quam  ipfe  manu  fua  fcrip¬ 
fit.— De  i(to  Antichrifto  dicit  idem  Joachim,  quod  jam 
natus  ell  in  Civitate  Romana,  ct  in  Sede  Apoflolica 
fubiimabitur. - 

Hoc  in  C.odice,  nomina  fingulorum  Paparum,  Ta¬ 
bulis  fuis,  ordine  prajfiguntur  ;  ex.  gr.  in  fumnn'tate  Ta¬ 
bula;  prima;  htec,  deauratis  litteris,  legitur  Infcriptio. 
“  Dominus  Johannes  de  Urfinis  ;  deinde  Nicholaus  111. 
Papa:  eodemq;  modo  ufque  ad  Tabulam  22am.  ubi  his 
verbis  cernitur  Epigraphe,  Dominus  Gabriel  Condolma- 
rio;  deinde  Eugenius  Papa  iv.  ifi  Urbe?  die  feptimo 
Martij  1431*”  Tub  cujus  Pontificatu  hie  Liber  videtur  et 
exaratus,  et  illuminatus.  Infequentes  enim  Pidlurte,  nul- 
lam  prtc  fe  ferunt  Infcriptionem. 

Notandum  denique,  Infcriptiones  fupra-memoratas 
a  Joachimo  fuiffe  nullo  modo  excogitatas,  exinde  pateat, 
quod  ifle  diem  fuum  obierit,  faltem  A. D.  1215.  fi  non 
(ut  nonnulli  affirmaverint)  longe  antea.  Quin  et,  in  Edi- 
tionibus  Regifelmi,  &c.  apud  Joannem  Wolfium,  plane 
defiderantur. 


I34I* 

A  Book  in  fol.  by  the  Author  thus  entituled, 

“  A  Dialogicall  Difcourfe  of  Marine  Affaires  ;  dif- 
tributed  into  fix  Dialogues.” 

1 .  The  Firft,  touchinge  Commanders  in  Cheife. 

2.  The  Seconde,  touchinge  the  Common  Mariner. 

3.  The  Thirde,  touchinge  the  Vi&uallinge  of  Shyps 
&  Fleetes. 

4.  The  Fourthe,  of  the  Wordcs  of  Art  belonginge  to 
Sea-Affayres;  and  the  Names  of  all  the  Partes  &  Pieces 
of  a  Shyppe. 

5.  The  Fifthe,  of  the  bed  Shyps  of  Warre. 

6.  The  Sixthe,  of  the  orderinge  of  Shipps  &  Fleetes 
of  Warre  in  fayleinge,  chafeinges,  fightinges,  border- 
inges.  By  N.  B. 

7.  Before  the  Work;  are  the  Contents  of  each  Dia¬ 
logue  ;  the  technical  Wards  contained  in  the  Fourth, 
being  reduced  into  an  Alphabet. 

r342. 

A  Book  in  fol.  by  the  author,  Henry  Elfynge  Efq.  thus 
entituled, 

1.  “  Modus  tenendi  Parliamentum,  in  twoeBookes.” 

This  is  the  Original  of  the  learned  Author’s  own 
hand ;  begun  (as  it  feems)  in  the  month  of  December 
1624.  at  the  end  whereof  he  hath  this  Note,  “  Here  I 
will  ende  this  eight  &  lad  Chaptre  of  the  firde  Booke 
of  Modus  tenendi  Parliamentum  ;  which  I  collected  for 
myne  own  Indruction  &  Learninge,  with  noe  Intent  to 
publilhe  the  fame  unto  any.” 

3  Maij  1625.  H.Elfynge  Cler.  Pari. 


Num.  1342-1346. 

At  the  end  are,  “  The  Contents  of  the  Seconde 
Booke,’’  with  this  Note,  “  Begunn,  but  God  knowes 
when  I  (hall  finidi  this  Booke.  .  .  .  Sept.  i52,.” 

I  do  not  remember  that  the  printed  Book  contains  any 
more  than  this  fil'd  Part. 


I343- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  min.recente  manu  fciiptus  ;  in 
quo  habentur, 

1.  Formula  Monition  is  Cudodis  Collegij  B.  Maris 
Winton.  in  Oxon.  ad  Cullodem  Collegij  B.M.  Winton. 
propeWinton.  de  tranfmittendis  Schdlaribus  in  locos 
aliorum  furrogandis.  In  folio  ad  initium  libri  rejerianeo. 

2.  Liber  Statutorum  Collegij  B.  Maria;  Winton.  in 
Oxon.  vulgariter  nuncupati  New-College,  quod  fun- 
davit  Willelmus  de  Wicham  Epifcopus  Wintonienfis.  1 . 

3.  Index  Rubricarum  in  praidiclis  WillelmiWichaini, 

Statutis  contentarum.  l4, 

Liber  videtur  feriptus  manu  cujufdam  E.  Y. 
Anno  Dili  1 63 1 . 


A  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  Relation  of  the  Jurney  of  CaJ.z,  or  of  the 

taking  of  that  Place,  by  the  Earl  of  Ell'ex.  Written  by 
Sir  Frauncis  Vere.  , 

2.  A  Relation  of  the  JIand  Jurnev,  the  next  year 
under  the  command  of  the  find  Earl  of  Effex ;  written 
by  Sir  Francis  Vere  ;  who  alfo  gives  an  account  of  his 
obtaining  the  Government  of  the  Brill  ;  together  with 
fome  other  particulars  relating  to  that  great  Earl  of 
Effex. 

3.  A  Relation  of  the  Defeate  of  the  Spaniards  atTurne- 

holt,  written  by  Sir  Frauncis  Vere,  who  blamcth  the 
Relation  given  thereof  by  Sir  Robert  Sydney,  as  written 
with  partiality.  '  1 

4.  A  Relation  of  the  Battaile  of  Newport,  by  Sir 
Frauncis  Vere. 

5.  At  the  end  is  a  loofe  Traft  written  upon  occafion 
of  a  Quarrell  between  Henry  Percy  Earl  of  Northum¬ 
berland,  and  this  Sir  Francis  Vere;  who  being  challentred 
by  the  Earl  judly  refufed  to  fight  in  this  private  Quar¬ 
rel;  by  reafonof  hisferving  his  Prince  in  a  public'cha- 
rafter.  The  known  courage  &  bravery  of  Sir  Francis, 
joyned  to  his  conduft  &  prefence  of  mind,  experienced 
on  very  many  Occafions,  leaves  no  room  for  any  to 
doubt  but  that  was  the  only  reafon  for  his  refufal. 


1 345- 

A  Book  in  fol.  being  (as  it  feemeth)  the  feennd  part  of 
the  Work  of  fontc  Common-Lawyer,  who  had  taken 
much  pains  in  making  Extracts  from  the  Year-Books  . 
1  ms  contaimng, 

1.  Notes  concerning  Fines  levied  per  Baron  &  Feme. 

2.  Extracts  of  the  Year-book  of  K.Henrv  vm!  ni 

irom  ann.  12  to  ann.  27  inclufive.  n-,l 

3.  Extracts  from  the  Year-book  of  K.  Henry  vti! 

282 

4-  Extracts  from  the  Year-book  of  K.  Edward  v! 

5.  Extracts  from  the  Year-book  of  K.  Richard  m. 

6.  Extracts  from  the  Year-book  of  K.  Edward  iv. 

7.  Extraas  from  Mr.Plowden’s  Book  in  Print.41" 

436-  to  529.  b. 

*346. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  by  diiferent  hands,  and  thus  en¬ 
titled, 

1.  “  Itinerarium  Johannis  Lelandi  inc;o;i;m  A.  D 

I  Clo.  in  H<*n_vur 


9 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae* 


1 1 


Num.  1346 _ 134B. 

This  is  an  accurate  Tranfcript  of  thofe  Volumes  of 
Win  Leland’s  Itinerary,  written  by  his  own  hand,  which 
were  given  to  the  Bodleyan  Library  at  Oxford  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Burton  Efq.  of  Lindley  in  Com.  Leiceftr.  and  con- 
t'aineth  not  that  lad  Volume  of  late  years  brought  thither 
by  the  Revd.  Mr  Charles  King  ;  nor  fo me  fragments 
in  the  Cottonian  Library. 

2.  Index  hujus  Voluminis,  compofitus  per  me  Wil- 
lielmum  Dugdale  15th  Julij  Anno  1657.  505. 

This  Alphabetical  Table  of  proper  Names,  is  not 
pf  Sir  William  Dugdale’s  hand-writing. 

1347- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fob  min.  diverfis  manibus  exara- 
tus;  quo  cominentur, 

1.  Laertij  Diogenis  Vitae  atq;  Sententia;  eorum  qui  in 

Philofophia  claruerunt.  Latino  tradu&a;  per  Ambrofium 
Camaldulenfem,  ad  Cofmum  de  Medicis.  1. 

Sequuntur  Latine  (dimidid  cujuflibet  pagince  parte, 
Graeco  textui  lervatd)  Homilise  vi.  viz. 

2.  Homilia  qua;  ab  his  verbis  incipit,  “  Ad  homines 

callidos  verfutofq;  hie  net  Sermo;  et,  ut  a  facris  Lit- 
teris  capiamus  exordium,  ecce  ego  te  contume- 
LIAM  RETORQUEBO.”  2o6. 

3.  Homilia  fecunda,  cujus  Initium,  “  Quoniam  noltra 

Oratione  dilucidavimus  qu  le  melTe  Theeiogum  oporteat ; 
ac  quibus  philofophandum,  et  quando,  et  quantum,  ex- 
pofuimus.”  212. 

4.  Homilia  tertia,  inferipta  DeFilio  :  cujus  Exordi¬ 
um,  “  Qua;  igilur  dicat  quifquam  ad  tantum  eorum  ap- 
paratum  comprimendum,  celeritatemq;  circa  orationem?” 

'  . .  .  333- 

5.  Homilia  quarta,  cujus  verba  priora,  “  Quoniam  tibi 

et  cogitationum  verfutias  diftoxtionefq;  in  Spiritus  Sandti 
virtute  fufficienter  quaflavimus.”  246. 

6.  Homilia  quinra  de  Spiritu  fanfto,  qua;  fic  orditur, 
Sermo  lane  de  Filio  ita  fe  habet  et  sic  lapidantes 

EFFUGIT,  QUUM  PER  EORUM  MEDIUM  PENETRASSET. 

258. 

7.  Homilia  fexta  de  Spiritu  fanfto,  .Tohanni  Chryfoilo- 

mo  adferipta  :  qua;  fic  incipit,  Hefterna  die  fratres  in 
Chrilto  dilecliflimi,  nobis  colendi  Sandti  Spiritus  adven- 
tus,  hymnis  et  laudibus  celebratus eft.  575. b. 

In  fine  haec  legitur  adnotatio,  “  Ex  archetypo  Revdi- 
Patris  D.  Petri  Balbi  Epifcopi,  Joannes  Andreas  Epifco- 
pus  Accienfis  deferipfit,  in  Calf  ro  plebis  dicionis  Peru- 
iinec,  fideliter :  die  9  menfis  Decembris,  1462.”  Hie 
Joannes,  fi  non  Graicus,  faltem  Grace  doctus,  ac  fum- 
mus  Calligraphus,  Graca  qmedefiderabantur  in  prrnce- 
denti  Diogenis  Laertij  Verftone  inferuit,  notulafq;  quam 
plurimas  marginales  adjecit.  Deinde,  Codice  in  manus 
do&iffimi  Cardinalis  Nicolai  Cuiani  adveniente,  is  Laertij 
Verlionem  Ambrofianam  recognovit ;  notifq;  fuis  illuftra- 
vit;  memoriamq;  fui  pofteritati  commendavit.  Epigraphe 
fequenti,  life  efl  Liber  Hofpitalis  Sti.  Nicolai  prope  Cu- 
fam,  quam  propria  fua  manu,  front!  Codicis  praepofuit. 

1348. 

Codex  membranaceus,  per-tenuis,  et  tamen  diverfis  ma¬ 
nibus  feriptus  ;  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Statuta  Will  elm  i  Baftardi  Anglia;  Regis;  fecund  lim 
Exemplar  quod  Annalibus  fuis  inferuit  Rogerus  Hove- 
denus,  in  Anno  x  180.  vid.  Lib.  Imprefs.  pag.342.  b.  1. 

2.  Tabula  rudiffima,  five  Schema;  in  quo  reprafen- 

tatur  Anglia  in  Heptarchiam  divifa.  .  g. 

3.  D:  Heptarchia  Anglo-Saxonum  ;  et  limitibus  fin- 

gulorum  Heptarchia;  Regnorum.  Gallice.  ibid. 

4.  Chroriicon  breviculum  de  Rebus  Anglicis;  ab  Ethel- 

briht  (leg.  F.cgberht)  ufque  ad  regem  Edwardum  terti- 
dm.  (Gallice.)  9.  b.  adiS.b. 


Num.  1349. 

x349- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  qto,  of  the  hand-writing  A  tricks 
ing  of  Mr.  Nicholas  Charles  Lancafter-Herald :  where¬ 
in  are  contained, .  divers  matters  relating  to  the  City 
A  Citizens  of  London,  viz. 

1.  A  Note  (hewing  that  toward  theSub’fidie  granted 
ann.  2  Rich.  11.  the  Mayor  of  London  paid  as  an  Earl, 

&  the  Aldermen  of  London  as  Barons.  In  the  ffrfl  fpare 
Leaf; 

2.  Extract  from  one  of  the  Regilter-books  belong¬ 

ing  to  the  City  of  London;  fhewing,  that  before,  or  at 
the  Funeral  of  K.  Henry  vn.  the  Mayor  of  London  of¬ 
fered  next  after  the  Lord  Chamberlain;  that  the  Aider- 
men  which  had  been  Mayors,  offered  next  to  the  Knights 
of  the  Garter,  and  before  all  the  Knights  for  the  body  ; 
and  the  Aldermen  who  had  not  been  Mayors  next  after 
the  Knights.  _  ibid. 

3.  The  antient  &  modern  Arms  of  the  City  of  Lon¬ 

don,  the  former  being  taken  from  a  window  in  St.Maries 
Church  in  Antwerp,  wherein  ftand  the  effigies  of  King 
Ed\Vard  the  third  with  all  his  children,  and  the  Arms 
of  mod  of  the  Corporate  Townes  of  England  at  that 
time.  Whereby  it  appeareth  that  in  old  times  (contrary 
to  the  opinion  of  John  Stow)  a  capital  L,  and  not  a 
Dagger,  was  born  in  the  Canton.  1. 

4.  Arms  of  the  feveral  Companies  of  Merchants  of 

London.  j.  b. 

5.  Arms  of  the  feveral  Mayors  of  London,  from 

Henry  Fitz-Alwin  the  firft  Mayor,  to  Sir  Henry  Rowe, 
who  was  Lord  Mayor  A. D.  1607.  painted:  with  Ihort 
Notes  of  the  Companies  they  belonged  unto;  of  feme 
of  their  principal  A&ions ;  and  of  the  Places  of  their 
Refidefice  &  Burial!.  3. 

NB.  The  Arms  (A  Names)  of  the  Lord-Mayors  are 
continued  to  Sir  William  Craven,  in  trick  only;  and  their 
Names  end  with  Sir  Sebaftian  Harvey,  A. D.'  1618. 

6.  The  Arms  Sc  Names  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the 

Mercers  Company;  to  A.D.  1608.  55. 

7.  Arms,  &c.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Grocers 

Company;  to  A.D.  1573.  ^ 

8.  Arms,  See.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Drapers 

Company;  to  A.D.  1575.  5 , . 

9.  Arms,  Ac.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Fiffi mongers 

Company;  to  A.D.  1607.  5^ 

1  o.  Arms,  See.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Gouldfmiths 
Company;  to  A.D.  1517.  5-, 

11.  Arms,  &c.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Skynners 

Company;  to  A.D.  1504.  67. 

12.  Arms,  &c.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Merchant- 

Taylors  Company;  to  A.D.  1569.  69. 

13.  Amis,  Ac.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Haber- 

dalhers  Company;  to  A.D.  1568.  71. 

14.  Arms,  &c.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Salters 

Company;  to  A.D.  1443.  ' 

15.  Arms,  Ac.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Ironmongers 

Company;  to  A.D.  1563.  7^. 

x6.  Arms,  Ac.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  the  Vin'tonners 
Company;  to  A.D.  1585.  7 ^ 

17.  Arms,  Ac.  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  theClothworkers 

Company;  to  A.  D.  1589.  75. 

NB.  The  Names  of  the  Sheriffs  free  of  thefe 
Companies  are  deduced  lower  ;  but  without  Arms. 

18.  Arms  of  Hugh  Porte  Sheriff  of  London,  A.D. 

I302-  78. 

19.  Arms  &  Notes  of  the  Burials  of  divers  other 
Sheriffs  of  London,  whofe  Companies  are  not  ce.  t  .*yne. 

•  •  '  7 9. 

20.  Arms  A  like  Notes,  of  divers  Aldermen  of  Lon¬ 
don,  of  different  Companies.  82. 

2 1.  Arms  of  moft  of  the  Sheriffs  of  London,  from 

A.D.  1561.  to  A.D.  16x1.  95. 

22.  'l'able  to  the  Surnames  of  Sheriff,  mentioned  in 

1  this  Book.  j  0gm 

a  3.  Table 


12 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1349-1351- 


23.  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Mayors  mentioned  m 

this  Book.  Xu. 

24.  Verfes  on  Time,  Death,  Mortality,  &c.  perhaps 
written  by  John  Withie  from  fome  Countrey- Church. 


I35°* 

A  Book  in  4to,  haftily  tricked  (as  it  feemeth)  by  John 

Withie;  but  the  Writing,  for  the  moll  part,  done 

by  another  hand.  In  it  I  find, 

1 .  An  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 

mentioned  in  the  Traci  enfuing.  3. 

2.  Arms  of  Kentilh  Families,  taken  from  the  laffc  Vifit- 

ation.  i.  e.  that  of  A.D.  1619.  5.  b. 

Thefe  are  preceded  by  the  Arms  of  the  See,  Cathe¬ 
dral,  &  City  of  Canterbury  ;  the  See  &  City  of  Rochef- 
ter;  the  Town  of  Dover;  &  of  the  Cinque  Ports. 

3.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 

mentioned  in  the  next  Traft.  21. 

4.  Arms  of  Gentlemen  taken  out  of  the  Vifitation  of 

Salop,  made  A.D.  1623.  24. 

5.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 

mentioned  in  the  Traci  following.  32. 

6.  Armes  taken  out  of  the  Vifitation  of  Warwick- 

(hire,  A.D.  1619.  35, 

At  the  end,  are  Tricks  of  the  Seals  of  the  Towns  of 
Warwick,  &  Sutton-Colfield. 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 

mentioned  in  the  laft  Tra£t.  44. 

8.  Arms  of  the  greatefl  part  of  the  Gentry  of  Devon¬ 
shire.  47.  to  56. 

I35I* 

A  Book  in  4to,  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  Alphabet  of  Arms  in  blazon;  with  the  Arms 

alfo,  rudely  tricked  on  both  margins.  t  _ 

2.  Pedegree  of  the  Family  of  Fitz-Gerald.  145.  b. 

3.  Short  Pedegree  of  Darcy.  1 46.  b. 

4.  Defcent  of  Clifford  Earl  of  Cumberland,  from  a 

daughter  of  Beauchamp  Earl  of  Warwick.  147. 

5.  Defcent  of  Manners  Earl  of  Rutland,  from  Roos 

Sc  Beauchamp  Earl  of  Warwick.  ibid. 

6.  Defcent  of  Talbot  Earl  of  Shrewibury.  147.  b. 

7.  Defcent  of  Say.  ibid. 

Then  follow, 

8.  Arms  of  the  Irilh  Nobility  &  Gentry,  both  in 


blazon  &  in  trick. 


148. 


9.  The  Names  of  divers  Gentylmen  of  Devonfhc.,., 
Cornewall,  &  Somerfetfliere;  with  fpaces  left  for  their 
refpeftive  Arms&  Creft;  but  none  of  them  are  tilled  up. 

10.  Arms  of  Lloyd  of  Brecknocklhire,  Pigioi,  °& 

Clowes  of  London.  lb, 

11.  Rudiments  of  Heraldry.  165.  b.  Sc  166.  b." 

12.  Matches  of  Bourghchier  k  Tilney;  with  Efcoche- 
ons  damped  upon  the  Paper,  to  hold  their  Arms.  166. 

13.  Arms  of  Skynner,  Sc  Pointz;  with  Quarterings. 

_  _  166.  b. 

14.  Defcent  of  Crefiy.  jg* 

15.  Mottos  ufed  by  many  Englifh  Families;  by  the 
houfe  of  Naflau ;  &  by  theEmperor  Charles  v.  1 67.  b. 

16.  Arms  of  Thomas  Cowper  Bifhop  of  Winchefter, 

Warrant  of  . to  William 

Waforde  one  of  the  keepers  of  her  Majefties  great  Parke 
at  Eltham  ;  requiring  him  to  deliver  to  Sir  Gilbert  De¬ 
thick  Knight,  alias  Garter,  his  Fee-Dooe  of  that  Seafon. 
flat.  1 2th  November  1578,  ^id 


Nmn.  1352—1354; 

I352- 

A  Book  in  4to,  thin ;  which  feemeth  to  have  been  written 
&  tricked  by  Henry  Parker,  the  Painter.  It  containeth 
t.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of 
,  Worccfter,  as  the  fame  was  taken  A.  D.  1569,  by  Ro¬ 
bert  Cooke  Clarenceux:  withfomefew  continuations.  1. 

Note  the  feveral  Delcents  being  entred  in  alphabe¬ 
tical  Order;  a  Table  was  thought  needlefs. 

2.  Two  Defcents  of  Blont,  or  Blunt.  35.  b. 

3.  Defcent  &  Anns  of  Vernon  of  Hanbury ;  dated 

A.D.  1634.  36.  b. 

1 3  5  3  - 

A  thin  Book  in  4(0,  written  Sc  tricked  by  Mr.  Nicholas 
Charles  Lancaster  Herald;  containing, 

1.  Arms  of  the  Gentlemen  of  Warvvick-fhier,  in 
blazon. 

2.  Arms,  with  Quarterings,  of  the  Warwickfhire 

Gentlemen,  in  trick.  , 

3.  Arms  of  the  Northampton-fhire  Gentlemen  in 
blazon. 

4.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 
mentioned  in  the  Traci,  N°  2.  fol.  ult. 

I354- 

A  paper  Book  in  4to,  treating  of  divers  Heraldical 
matters;  vizt. 

1  -  The  Ordering  Sc  placinge  of  all  Eftates  according  to 

ther  Degrees.  * 

This  is  larger,  Sc  relateth  to  their  demenour  at 
home,  as  well  as  abroad. 

2  The  pkteeinge  of  all  Eftates  of  Men,  according  e 

to  their  Degrees.  0 

This  is  fhorter,  Sc  relateth  only  to  public  Proceffions. 

3.  I  he  placeinge  of  all  Ellatcs  of  Women,  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  Degrees.  _  b 

4.  Eftates  of  the  Bloode  Royale.  6.  b. 

5.  Placeinge  of  Straungers.  ibid. 

6  The  Proceedinge  to  the  Parlement  at  Weftmyn- 

fter  from  the  Pallace  there,  called  Whitehall,  temp.  R. 
Jblizab.  j 

7.  The  placjnge  of  great  Officers  accordinge  to  the 
Acte  of  Parlement  made  ann.  31  Hen.  viu.  8 

8_  The  Number  of  Mourners  (as  affiftants  to  the 
chief  Mourner)  at  Funerals,  accordinge  to  the  degree 
and  eftate  of  the  Defunft. 

9.  Lyveries  for  Noblemen  &  Gentlemen  at  the  En- 
terrements  of  everye  Man,  accordinge  to  hi.sE  flare.  ibid. 

_  10.  The  Order  and  manner  of  Apparel  I  for  create 
Eftates  of  Weomen,  in  tyme  of  Mourringe  ;  made  by 
the  righte  high,  mightie,  Sc  excellente  ITinceffe,  Mar- 
geiett  Counteffeof  Richmondc,  daughtere  Sc  foie  heirc 
to  the  noble  Prince  John  Dukof  Soinerfetr,  and  mother 
to  the  prudente  &  myghtye  Prince  King  Hcnrye  the 
feventh,  in  the  8th  yere  of  his  Reignc.  "  ,  0.  b. 

11.  The  Ordonances,  Statutes,  Sc  Rules  ma  '  •  by 
Johne  Lorde  Tiptofte,  Erie  of  Worcefttr,  Conftab'e  of 
Englande,  by  the  Kinges  commandement,  at  Wyndfore 
the  29th  daye  of  Maye,  ann.  6  Edw.  iy.  to  be  obferved 

&  kept  m  all  manner  Ju/lys  Royall; - refer ving  to 

the  Queene  &  to  the  Ladyes  prelent  the  attribution  '  and 
gyfte  of  the  Prill-,  after  the  manner  Sc  forme  aceul- 
tomed  to  be  attributed,  for  their  Demerites.  13. 

12.  TheSifeof  Banners,  Standardes,  Penons,  Guid- 

homes,  Pencels,  &  Streamers.  j  - 

13.  Of  the  unrolling  of  Banners,  Sc  the  Fees  due  to 

the  Heralds  thereupon.  '  I  y 

14.  The  manner  of  making  of  a  Knighte  Bannerett 

in  the  feelde.  _  jbid. 

r5-  the  different  Rows  of  Ermine  to  be  ufed  in 
Womens  Apparell,  according  to  their  Quality.  18. 

1 1  16.  Pidlureg 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


Num.  1354. 

16.  Pictures  of  a  Duke,  Marquis,  and  Earl,  in  their 
Robes,  with  their  Swords  &  Girdles  about  their  Necks; 
as  alfo  thePiclure  of  an  Earl  in  a  more  antient  Habit.  2 1 . 

17.  In  what  manner  the  Apparellof  ad  Eftatesfhould 

be  powdered  with  Ermyns.  24. 

18.  The  manner  of  Proceedinge  to  the  Funerall  of  a 

Greate  Elfatc.  24.  b. 

19.  The  Proceedinge  on  Horfe-back  to  a  Funerall. 

2  5* 

20  Defcription  of  the  Hearfe,  to  be  ere&ed  for  the 
Funeralls  of  a  Marquis.  26. 

21.  Concerning  the  Offeringe,  at  folemn  Funeralls. 

26.  b. 

22.  Quantities  of  Velvet  to  be  then  ufed.  ibid. 

23.  Defcription  of  two  Mourning  Garments  called  the 

Sloppe,  &  Surcott.  27. 

24.  Things  to  be  prepared  by  the  Paynter  for  the 

Funeralles  of  an  Earle.  ibid. 

25.  Lift  of  the  Englifh  Nobilitic,  as  placed  accordinge 

to  ther  Degrees,  and  after  the  Auncientie  of  ther  Crea¬ 
tions,  A.D.  1577.  28. 

26.  Things  to  be  done  and  prepared  for  the  Funeralls 

of  an  Erie.  29.  b. 

27.  The  manner  of  Proceedinge  at  the  Funeralls  of 

an  Erie  to  the  Churche;  fometymes  on  Horfe,  fome- 
tymes  on  Foote.  30.  b. 

28.  Lyveries  for  noble  Weomen  at  the  Enterrement  of 

any  greate  Eftate.  31.  b. 

29.  Of  the  Difcommodities  that  may  happen  to  an 

Armye  for  lacke  of  Enfignes,  as  Banners,  Standards, 
Penons,  Sc  Guydons;  which  of  neceflitie  mufte  be  had 
in  Battell.  33. 

30.  Fees  due  to  certavne  of  the  Kinges  Servantes  of 

every  newe-dubbed  Bacheler  Knighte.  34. 

31.  De  Gubernatore  ac  principali  Capitaneo  Exerci- 

tus,  Ordinationes.  34.  b. 

32.  The  Office  of  a  Kinge  of  Armes,  with  his  Autho- 

ritie  in  his  Province.  3 b. 

33.  The  Proceedinge  to  the  Funerall  of  a  Knight  in 

London.  37.  b. 

34.  Which  five  Bifliops  precede  the  reft,  in  preceding 

to  Parly mentt.  39. 

35.  ThePrycesof  the  Hatchmentes  prepared  by  the 

Painter.  39.  b. 

36.  Account  of  certain  parcells  of  Painters  Worke 

made  for  the  Funerall  of  K.Edw.  vi.  41. 

37.  Fees  dewe  to  the  Officers  of  Armes  givinge  ther 

Attendance  at  the  Funeralles  of  greate  Eftates.  42. 

38.  Officers  or  Servants,  which  may  be  kept  in  the 

Houfes  of  the  Nobilitie,  &c.  43.  b. 

39.  Allowances  of  Servantes  &  Blackes  at  the  Fune- 

ralle  of  Marye  Queene  of  Scottes  at  Peterborough,  on 
Twefday  the  firft  of  Auguft,  1587.  43. 

40.  The  Ordre  of  the  Buriall  for  Marie  Queene  of 

Scotts,  at  Peterboroughe,  obfervid  the  firft  of  Auguft, 
on  Twefday,  1587.  46. 

41.  The  Difinition  of  an  Efquier,  and  the  feverall 

fortes  of  them,  accordinge  to  the  Guftoins  and  Ufage 
of  England.  30. 

•  42.  The  Proceedinge  to  the  Churche  for  the  Funerall 

of  Sir  William  Cicill  Lord  Burghley  his  mother.  51. 

43,  Picture  of  a  Nobleman  in  his  Robes;  unfinifhed. 

52. 

44.  Painters  Bill  for  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Edward 


Stanhnp,  in  Paulis,  1608. 


52- 


This  Bill  is  of  the  handwriting  of  Sr.  Rich.  St. 
George  Clarenceux;  and  the  greateft  part  of  the  Book 
was  written  by  Rich. Scarlet  the  Painter. 


Num.  1355. 

1 3  5  5  • 

A  thin  Book  iri  4to,  wherein  I  find  relating  to  the  mod 
noble  Order  of  the  Garter, 

t.  The  manner  of  the  Inftallation  of  James  Lord  Maf- 
queffe  Hamelton,  at  Windfor,  one  St.  Georgs  even  1623^ 
with  the  Order  of  the  Solempnifinge  of  St.  George’s 
Feaft  the  22,  23,  &  24.  of  the  fame  Moneth,  at  the  Place 
aforefayed.  (with  marginal  Notes.)  1. 

2  The  Names  of  all  the  Kings,  Princes,  Dukes,  & 
other  Nobles,  that  wears  at  this  time,  (23  April,  1623.) 
Companions  of  this  moft  Noble  Order  of  the  Garter; 
and  in  what  manner  &  hoWe  they  were  placed  in  theire 
Stalls,  with  a  true  Diftincfion  of  all  thofe  that  weare  pre- 
fent  Sc  abfent  at  this  Feaft.  1 3. 

3.  The  Manner  of  the  Scrutiny  for  &  Election  of  Chrif- 
tian  Duke  of  Brunfwicke,  &  William  Earle  of  Salilburie 
to  be  Knights  of  the  Garter,  31ft  December,  1624  14. 

4.  The  Oath  taken  by  Charles  ix.  King  of  France, 

24th  June  1564.  when  the  Lord  Hunfdon  inverted  him 
with  the  Order  of  the  Garter.  1 6. 

5.  Advertifements  to  be  given  by  Garter,  at  the  in- 
veftinge  of  a  Kinge,  with  the  Order;  in  French.  16. 

6.  The  manner  of  carryinge  Sc  deliveringe  of  the 

Garter,  to  Henry  11.  Kinge  of  France,  in  the  tyme  of 
Edw.  the  vi.  (i.  e.  A.D.  1551.)  the  Lord  Marquefi  of 
Northampton  Ambaflador  with  the  Bilfiop  of  Ely,  &  Sir 
Gilbert  Dethick  Garter;  by  whom  this  Difcourfe  was 
written.  1 7. 

7.  A  Certificate  from  the  French  Kinge  (Henry  111.) 

of  his  manner  of  receivinge  the  Order  of  the  Garter, 
From  the  Earl  of  Derby,  dat.  12th  March  1585.  20. 

8.  The  Oath  taken  by  the  French  Kinge  Henry  hi.  at 

his  receiving  the  Order  of  the  Garter.  20.  b. 

9.  The  Manner  of  inverting  the  Emperor  Maximilian 

the  Second  with  the  Order  of  the  Garter,  by  the  Earl 
of  SuflTex,  at  Vienna,  4th  January  1 567.  21. 

10.  A  Certificate  from  the  Earle  of  SuflTex  Embafla- 

dor,  of  the  Emperors  receivinge  the  Order  of  the  Gar¬ 
ter.  21.  b. 

11.  Inftru&ions  given  by  the  King’s  Majeftie  to  the 

Right  Honble.  Lord  William  Howard,  &  Garter  Prin¬ 
cipali  Kinge  of  Armes  concerninge  the  Forme  Sc  Manner 
how  they  (ball  ufe  themfelves  in  the  deliverance  of  the 
Garter,  &  the  whole  Habite,  with  all  things  thereto  be- 
longinge,  to  the  King’s  good  brother  &  nephew  James  v. 
the  Kinge  of  Scotts.  tempore  Hen.  vm.  22. 

12.  Abreife  Difcourfe  of  the  Place  &  Time,  of  Henry 

the  iv.  his  receiving  the  Order  of  the  Garter;  which 
was  delivered  unto  him  on  Saturday  the  9th  qf  C'ftober 
1596.  Gilbert  Earl  of  Shrewfbury  beinge  fent  Atnb^f- 
fador  for  that  purpofe.  Sc  in  the  fame  Comraiflion  was 
Sir  Anthony  Mildmay  then  Ambaflador  Reliant  in  Fi  ance, 
Sc  William  Dethick  Garter.  24. 

13.  Rewards  given  by  the  Earl  of  Salop  in  his  Am- 

baflage  into  France.  25. 

14.  Rewards  given  by  the  French  Kinge.  ibid. 

15.  The  manner  of  fendinge  &  deliveringe  of 'the 

Garter  to  Chriftiem  the  iv.  King  of  Denmark,  A.D. 
1603.  by  the  Earle  of  Rutlande  Lord  AuibaiTador ; 
William  Seagar  Norroy,  in  place  of  Garter;  a-id  Robert 
Naunton  Efq.  Orator;  as  it  is  related  by  the  faid  William 
Segar  Norroy.  26, 

16.  The  manner  of  the  receivinge  of  the  Order  of 

the  Garter,  by  Maurice  Prince  of  Orange  at  tjie  Ha'ge, 
in  January  1612.  2 7. 

1 7.  The  true  Coppye  of  the  Bookeofthe  Statutes  of 
the  Garter,  fent  by  our  Souveraigne  Lord  Kinge  Charles 
to  the  King  of  Sweden.  AnnoDiii  1627.  bearing  this 
Title :  “  LesStatuts  &  Ordonnances  du  tres-noble  Ordre 
de  St.  George  connnuneinent  appelle  la  Jarrettier  jadis 

E  fonde 


Cat.  FJarl.  Vol.  If. 


«4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1355—1358. 

fondc  &  inftitue  k  l'honneur  de  Dieu  ail  Chafteau  de 
Windfore  par  le  vi&orieux  Prince  de  trefnoble  memoire, 
Edward  le  troifienie  de  ce  nom,  Roy  d’Angleterre, 
France,  &c.  en  Fan  de  Grace  1349,  et  de  fon  Reigne 
le  23.  29. 

NB.  The  latter  part  of  this  Book,  vizt.  after  fol.  15. 
Is  all  of  the  handwriting  of  Sr.  Henry  St.  George,  Gar¬ 
ter;  who  was  fon  to  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux, 
&  father  to  the  late  Sr.  Thomas  St.  George,  Garter ;  to 
the  prefent  Sir  Henry  St.  George*  Garter;  &  to  Mr. Ri¬ 
chard  St.  George  in  Ireland,  who  was  fometime  Ulfter 
King  of  Arms  there.  The  Titles  at  the  beginning  8c  end* 
are  of  John  Withie’s  hand. 

1356- 

A  thin  Book  in  4to,  fairly  written  by  the  hand  of  John 
Withie  the  Painter-Stainer,  all  relating  to  the  molt 
Noble  Order  of  the  Garter,  and  containing, 
t.  A  Lift  of  the  firft  Founders  of  the  molt  noble 
Order  of  the  Garter,  as  they  were  appointed  by  K.  Ed¬ 
ward  n  1.  A.D.  1348.  in  the  23d  year  of  his  Reigne.  1. 

2.  The  Statutes  and  Ordynances  of  the  molt  noble 
Order  of  St. George,  named  the  Garter,  reformed,  ex- 
playned,  declared,  &  renewed,  by  the  mod  mightie, 
molt  excellent,  &  molt  puiftant  Prince  Henry  thevni. 

ibid. 

This  Copie  wanteth  the  date;  and  alfo  containeth 
certain  Statutes  made  at  other  Times,  as  well  in  the  fame 
King’s  Reign,  as  afterward. 

3.  Certain  Chapters  (ann.  4.  7.  8.  9.  &  13.EHZ.) 

not  yet  regiftred  into  the  Booke  of  Statutes  of  the  molt 
noble  Order  of  the  Garter.  20.  b. 

*357- 

A  Book  in  fmail  4to,  thus  entituled, 

A  generall  Cathologe  of  all  the  Names  and  Armes 
of  the  Lord  Chauncellors  &  Keepers  of  the  great  Seale 
of  England  from  the  tyme  of  William  the  Conqueror, 
untill  this  prefent  yeare  1 646. 

NB.  This  Volume  or  Book  endeth  with  Henry 
Bourchier  Earle  of  ElTex,  who  died  A.D.  1483.  The 
Arms  were  intended  to  be  painted,  but  here  are  none 
befides  thofe  of  William  Giffard  Bifliop  of  Winchefter. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  4to,  for  the  moft  part  tricked  & 
written  by  Mr.  John  Withie.  It  contains, 

1.  The  Coat  &  Crefts  done  in  the  tyme  of  the  Vifita- 
tion  of  London,  Anno  1633.  &  1634.  That  is  a  Col¬ 
lection  of  the  Arms  &  Crefts  of  the  Gentlemen  dwelling 
within  the  Citie  of  London,  at  the  time  of  the  faid 
Vifitation,  according  to  the  feveral  Wards  thereof;  taken 
by  John  Withie,  according  to  their  feveral  affertions. 

Note,  Mr. Withie  often  putts  down  the  Places  where 
thefe  Gentlemen  dwelt,  with  the  defignation  of  their  Oc¬ 
cupations;  as  alfo  certain  Notes,  relating  to  their  Arms 
or  Crefts,  when  they  had  happened  tolhew  more  to  him 
than  they  could  juftifte  to  the  Officers  of  Arms  then 
making  the  Vifitation. 

2.  Withie’s  Books  being,  after  his  deceafe,  fold  to 

Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Painter  Stainer ;  he  has  entred 
herein  his  own  Arms  &  Creft,  as  one  of  the  Gentlemen 
of  the  Ward  of  Farringdon  without.  68.  b. 

3.  At  the  beginning,  is  a  Lift  of  the  feveral  Wards 
of  the  City  of  London,  referring  to,  fuch  I.caves  of  this 
Book,  where  the  Arms  of  their  Gentry  are  entred. 

4.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 

herein  mentioned.  .  Q .  5 


Num.  1359— 1361. 

1 359* 

A  Book  in  4to,  thus  entituled, 

“  Guiftes  and  Confirmations  of  Coates  &  Creafts 
gathered  together  by  me,  John  Withie  1620.” 

The  Number  of  thefe  being  great,  I  fhall  omit  the 
Names  of  the  Families,  and  fpecifie  only  the  Names  of 
the  Officers  of  Arms  granting  the  fame  :  with  this  Ob- 
fervation,  that  but  few  of  the  Grants  arc  copied  entirely; 
that  the  Arms  are  almoft  all  tricked  by  Withie,  but  the 
Writing  not  all  of  his  hand. 

1.  Grants  by  Thomas  Hawley  Clarenceux;  Sr. Wil¬ 

liam  Dethick  Garter ;  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick,  Norroy  Si 
Garter;  William  Hervey  Clarenceux;  Thomas  Trowt, 
Norroy;  Sir  Thomas  Holme,  Clarenceux;  Robert  Cooke 
Clarenceux;  Roger  Macado  Roy  d’ Armes  de  Clarence- 
ulx;  Chriftopher  Barker,  Garter;  Thomas  Benoit,  Cla- 
renceulx;  Thomas  Wriothefley,  Garter;  William  Flower, 
Norroy;  William  Segar,  Norroy,  afterwards  Garter; 
William  Camden,  Clarenceux;  Richard  Lea,  Claren¬ 
ceux;  William  Hawkeflow,  Clarenceux;  John  Wrex- 
worth,  Gyan,  39  Hen.  vi.  Laurence  Dalton,  Norroy; 
Nicholas  Narbon,  Ulfter;  Richard  St.  George  Norroy* 
afterwards  Clarenceux;  Edmund  Knight,  Norroy;  'Iho- 
mas  Tongue,  Norroy.  Im 

After  thofe  Grants  which  are  jumbled  together, 
and  wherein  Hawley,  the  Dethicks,  Cooke,Flower,  Cam¬ 
den,  8c  Lea  had  the  greateft  fhare ;  follow, 

2.  Divers  Grants  made  by  Laurence  Dalton,  Norroy, 

without  any  interfering  (except  only  of  one  Grant  to 
John  Piclon  Gent.  A.D.  i486,  by  Ihomas  Holme  Cla¬ 
renceux.)  .  44.  b. 

3.  Promifcuous  Grants  of  William  Flower,  Norroy; 
Sr.  Gilbert  Dethick,  Garter;  William  Hervey,  Claren¬ 
ceux  ;  Robert  Cooke,  Clarenceux;  Thomas  Wriothe¬ 
fley,  Garter;  Sir  William  Segar,  Garter;  Thomas  Haw¬ 
ley,  Clarenceux;  but  moftly,  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick. 

53.  &  fo  on,  to  83. 

4.  Arms  granted  &  confirmed  to  Ten  of  the  Compa¬ 
nies  of  London,  by  John  Smart,  Garter;  ThomasHolme, 
Clarenceux;  Thomas  Benoit,  Clarenceux;  RobertCooke* 
Clarenceux;  John  Moore,  Norroy;  Roger  Machado* 
Richmond;  William  Camden.  Clarenceux.  72.  * 

5.  Arms  Si  Creafts  ratified,  confirmed,  given  8c 
graunted,  by  Robert  Cooke,  alias  Clarenceux. 

85.  to  125. 

6.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families  to 
whom  the  aforefaid  Grants  &  Confirmations  were  made. 
At  the  end. 

7.  In  the  firft  page  is  a  fanciful  Efcocheon  wherein 
J. Withie  put  the  Crofs  of  St. George;  at  the  laft,  another 
with  his  own  Arms. 

1360. 

A  Book,  in  4to,  paint.d  and  written  by  Mr  John  Withie 
the  Painter-Stainer.  It  contains, 

1.  The  Arms  Sc  Crefts  of  the  feveral  Baronets  (ac¬ 
cording  to  their  Creation)  from  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon,  to 
Sir  Richard  Greenvill,  who  was  fo  created,  9th  April, 
A.D.  1630.  being  in  order,  the  293.  Baronet. 

2.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  at  the  end. 

1361. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  4to,  rudely  tricked  8c  written  ; 

It  containeth, 

1  •  The  Atchievements  of  moft  of  the  Earls  of  Eng¬ 
land;  the  laft  being  Elay  Earl  ofCarlifle,  with  the  Arms 
quartered  by  divers  of  them. 

2.  Here  are  befides,  the  Badges  antiently  ufed  by 
I  ercy  Earl  of  Northumberland ;  Stanley ;  Somerfet  Earl 
of  Worcefter;  Clifford?  8<  Ratcliff  Earl  of  Suffex. 

1362.  A  Book 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


Nufti.  1354; 

1 6.  Pictures  of  a  Duke,  Marquis,  and  Earl,  in  their 
Rohes,  with  their  Swords  &  Girdles  about  their  Necks; 
as  alfo  thePiclure  of  an  Earl  in  a  more  antient  Habit.  2 1 . 

17.  In  what  manner  the  Apparellof  ad  Eftates  fhould 

be  powdered  with  Ermyns.  24. 

18.  The  manner  of  Proceedinge  to  the  Funeral  1  of  a 

Greate  Elfate.  24.  b. 

19.  The  Proceedinge  on  Horfe-back  to  a  Funerall. 

2  5: 

20  Defcription  of  the  Hearfe,  to  be  erected  for  the 
Funeralls  of  a  Marquis.  26. 

21.  Concerning  the  Offeringe,  at  folemn  Funeralls. 

26.  b. 

22.  Quantities  of  Velvet  to  be  then  ufed.  ibid. 

23.  Defcription  of  two  Mourning  Garments  called  the 

Sloppe,  &  Surcott.  47. 

24.  Things  to  be  prepared  by  the  Paynter  for  the 

Funeralles  of  an  Earle.  ibid. 

25.  Lid:  of  the  Englifh  Nobilitie,  as  placed  accordinge 

to  ther  Degrees,  and  after  the  Auncientie  of  ther  Crea¬ 
tions,  A.D. 1577.  28. 

2 6.  Things  to  be  done  and  prepared  for  the  Funeralls 

of  an  Erie.  29.  b. 

27.  The  manner  of  Proceedinge  at  the  Funeralls  of 

an  Erie  to  the  Churche;  1'ometymes  on  Horfe,  fome- 
tymes  on  Foote.  30.  b. 

28.  Lyveries  for  noble  Weomen  at  the  Enterrement  of 

anygreate  Eftate.  31.  b. 

29.  Of  the  Difcommodities  that  may  happen  to  an 

Armye  for  lacke  of  Enfignes,  as  Banners,  Standards, 
Penons,  Sc  Guydons;  which  of  neceifitie  mufte  be  had 
in  Battell.  33. 

30.  Fees  due  to  certavne  of  the  Kinges  Servantes  of 

every  newe-dubbed  Bacheler  Knighte.  34. 

31.  De  Gubernatore  ac  principali  Capitaneo  Exerci- 

tus,  Ordinationes.  34.  b. 

32.  The  Office  of  a  Kinge  of  Armes,  with  his  Autho¬ 
rise  in  his  Province.  3  b. 

33.  The  Proceedinge  to  the  Funerall  of  a  Knight  in 

London.  37.  b. 

34.  Which  five  Bifliops  precede  the  reft,  in  proceding 

to  Parlymentt.  39. 

35.  ThePrycesof  the  Hatchmentes  prepared  by  the 

Painter.  39.  b. 

36.  Account  of  certain  parcells  of  Painters  Worke 

made  for  the  Funerall  of  K.Edw,  vi.  41. 

37.  Fees  dewe  to  the  Officers  of  Armes  givinge  ther 
Attendance  at  the  Funeralles  of  greate  Eftates.  42. 

38.  Officers  or  Servants,  which  may  be  kept  in  the 

Houfes  of  the  Nobilitie,  &c.  43.  b. 

39.  Allowances  of  Servantes  &  Blackes  at  the  Fune- 

ralle  of  Marye  Queene  of  Scottes  at  Peterborough,  on 
Twefday  the  firft  of  Auguft,  1  587.  43. 

40.  The  Ordre  of  the  Buriall  for  Marie  Queene  of 

Scotts,  at  Peterboroughe,  obfervid  the  firft  of  Auguft, 
on  Twefday,  1587.  46. 

41.  The  Difinition  of  an  Efquier,  and  the  feverall 

fortes  of  them,  accordinge  to  the  Cuftoine  and  Ufage 
of  England.  30. 

•  42.  The  Proceedinge  to  the  Churche  for  the  Funerall 

of  Sir  William  C.icill  Lord  Burghley  his  mother.  51. 

43,  Picture  of  a  Nobleman  in  his  Robes;  unfinifhed. 

52. 

44.  Painters  Bill  for  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Edward 

Stanhnp,  in  Paulis,  1C08.  32.  b. 

This  Bill  is  of  the  handwriting  of  Sr.  Rich.  St. 
George  Clarenceux;  and  the  greateft  part  of  the  Book 
was  written  by  Rich.  Scarlet  the  Painter. 


Cat.  PJarl,  Vol.  If. 


Num.  1355. 

1 3  55  • 

A  thin  Book  in  4to,  wherein  I  find  relating  to  the  mod 
noble  Order  of  the  Garter, 

t.  The  manner  of  the  Inftallation  of  James  Lord  Maf- 
quelTe  Hamelton,  at  Windfor,  one  St.  Georgs  even  1623. 
with  the  Order  of  the  Solempnifinge  of  St.  George’s 
Feaft  the  22,  23,  &  24.  of  the  fame  Moneth,  at  the  Place 
aforefaved.  (with  marginal  Notes.)  1. 

2  The  Names  of  all  the  Kings,  Princes,  Dukes,  & 
other  Nobles,  that  wears  at  this  time,  (23  April,  1623.) 
Companions  of  this  moft  Noble  Order  of  the  Garter ; 
and  in  what  manner  &  hotfe  they  were  placed  in  theire 
Stalls,  with  a  true  Diftinclion  of  all  thofe  that  weare  pre- 
fent  &  abfent  at  this  Feaft.  1 3. 

3.  The  Manner  of  the  Scrutiny  for  &  Election  of  Chxif- 
tian  Duke  of  Brunfwicke,  Sc  William  Earle  of  Salifburie 
to  be  Knights  of  the  Garter,  31ft  December,  1624.  14. 

4.  The  Oath  taken  by  Charles  tx.  King  of  France, 

24th  June  1564.  when  the  Lord  Hunfdon  inverted  him 
with  the  Order  of  the  Garter.  1 6. 

5.  Advertifements  to  be  given  by  Garter,  at  the  in- 
veftinge  of  a  Kinge,  with  the  Order;  in  French.  16, 

6.  The  manner  of  carryinge  Sc  deliveringe  of  the 

Garter,  to  Henry  11.  Kinge  ol  France,  in  the  tyme  of 
Edw.  the  vi.  (i.  e.  A.D.  1551.)  the  I^ord  Marquef-  of 
Northampton  Ambaflador  with  the  Bilhop  of  Ely,  Sc  Sir 
Gilbert  Dethick  Garter;  by  whom  this  Difcourfe  was 
written.  1 7* 

7.  A  Certificate  from  the  French  Kinge  (Henry  hi.) 

of  his  manner  of  receivinge  the  Order  ol  the  Garter, 
From  the  Earl  of  Derby,  dat.  12th  March  1583.  20. 

8.  The  Oath  taken  by  the  French  Kinge  Henry  in.  at 

his  receiving  the  Order  of  the  Garter.  20.  b. 

9.  The  Manner  of  inverting  the  Emperor  Maximilian 

the  Second  with  the  Order  of  the  Garter,  by  the  Earl 
of  Suftex,  at  Vienna,  4th  January  1567.  21. 

to.  A  Certificate  from  the  Earle  of  Suftex  Embafla- 
dor,  of  the  Emperors  receivinge  the  Order  of  the  Gar¬ 
ter.  2 1 .  b. 

1 1.  Inftruftions  given  by  the  King’s  Majeftie  to  the 

Right  Honble.  I..ord  William  Howard,  Sc  Garter  Prin- 
cipall  Kinge  of  Armes  concerninge  the  Forme  Sc  Manner 
how  they  fliall  ufe  themfelves  in  the  deliverance  of  the 
Garter,  &  the  whole  Habite,  with  all  things  thereto  be- 
longinge,  to  the  King’s  good  brother  &  nephew  James  v. 
the  Kinge  of  Scotts.  tempore  Hen.  vm.  22. 

1 2.  A  breife  Difcourfe  of  the  Place  &  Time,  of  Henry 

the  iv.  his  receiving  the  Order  of  the  Garter;  which 
was  delivered  unto  him  on  Saturday  the  gtii  of  C.Tober 
1596.  Gilbert  Earl  of  Shrewlbury  beinge  fent  Ainbaf- 
fador  for  that  purpofe,  Sc  in  the  fame  Commiificn  was 
Sir  Anthony  Mildmay  then  Ambaflador  Reliant  in  France, 
Si  William  Dethick  Garter.  24. 

13.  Rewards  given  by  the  Earl  of  Salop  in  his  Am- 

baflage  into  France.  25. 

14.  Rewards  givqa  by  the  French  Kinge.  ibid. 

15.  The  manner  of  fendinge  Sc  deliveringe  of  the 

Garter  to  Chriftiern  the  iv.  King  of  Denmark,  A.D. 
1603.  by  the  Earle  of  Rutlande  Lord  AmkafTador ; 
William  Seagar  Norroy,  in  place  of  Garter;  a  id  Robert 
Naunton  Efq.  Orator;  as  it  is  related  by  the  faid  William 
Segar  Norroy.  26. 

16.  The  manner  of  the  receivinge  of  the  Order  of 

the  Garter,  by  Maurice  Prince  of  Orange  at  tfie  Hage, 
in  January  1612.  27. 

17.  The  true  Coppye  of  the  Bookeofthe  Statutes  of 
the  Garter,  fent  by  our  Souveraigne  Loid  Kinge  Charles 
to  the  King  of  Sweden,  Anno  Dili  1627,  bearing  tfiis 
Title:  “  LesStatuts&  Ordonnances  du  tres-noble  Ordre 
de  St.  George  communement  appelle  la  Jarrettier  jadis 

E  fonde 


i4 


Catalogus  Librorunl  MSS. 


Num.  1355-1358. 

fonde  &  inftitue  a  l’honneur  de  Dieu  ail  Chafteau  de 
Windfore  par  le  vi£torieux  Prince  de  trefnoble  memoire, 
Edward  le  troifienie  de  ce  nom,  Roy  d’Angleterre, 
France,  &c.  en  Fan  de  Gface  1349,  et  de  fon  Reigne 
le  23.  29. 

NB.  The  latter  part  of  this  Book,  vizt.  after  fol.  15. 
Is  all  of  the  handwriting  of  Sr.  Henry  St.  George,  Gar¬ 
ter;  who  was  fon  to  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux, 
&  father  to  the  late  Sr.  Thomas  St. George,  Garter;  to 
the  prefent  Sir  Henry  St.  George*  Garter;  &  to  Mr. Ri¬ 
chard  St.  George  in  Ireland,  who  was  fometune  Ulfter 
King  of  Arms  there.  The  Titles  at  the  beginning  8c  end; 
are  of  John  Withie’s  hand. 

1 356- 

A  thin  Book  in  4to,  fairly  written  by  the  hand  of  John 
Withie  the  Painrer-Stainer,  all  relating  to  the  moll 
Noble  Order  of  the  Garter,  and  containing, 

1.  A  Lift  of  the  firft  Founders  of  ihe  moft  noble 
Order  of  the  Garter,  as  they  were  appointed  by  K.Ed- 
<vard  in.  A.l).  1348.  in  the  23d  year  of  his  Reigne.  1. 

2.  The  Statutes  and  Ordynances  of  the  moft  noble 
Order  of  St. George,  named  the  Garter,  reformed,  ex- 
playned,  declared,  &  renewed,  by  the  moft  mightie, 
moft  excellent,  &  moft  puiflant  Prince  Henry  thevm. 

ibid. 

This  Copie  wanteth  the  date;  and  alfo  containeth 
certain  Statutes  made  at  other  Times,  as  well  in  the  fame 
King’s  Reign,  as  afterward. 

3.  Certain  Chapters  (ann.  4.  7.  8.  9.  &  13.  Eliz.) 

not  yet  regiftred  into  the  Booke  of  Statutes  of  the  moft 
noble  Order  of  the  Garter.  20.  b. 

1357- 

A  Book  in  fmall  4to,  thus  entituled, 

A  generall  Cathologe  of  all  the  Names  and  Armes 
of  the  Lord  Chauncellors  &  Keepers  of  the  great  Seale 
of  England  from  the  tyme  of  William  the  Conqueror, 
untill  this  prefent  yeare  1 646. 

NB.  This  Volume  or  Book  endeth  with  Henry 
Bourchier  Earle  of  Effex,  who  died  A. I).  1483.  The 
Arms  were  intended  to  be  painted,  but  here  are  none 
befjdes  thofe  of  William  Giffard  Bifliop  of  Winchefter. 

1 358- 

An  Herald ical  Book  in  4to,  for  the  moft  part  tricked  Sc 
written  by  Mr.  John  Withie.  It  contains, 
r.  The  Coat  Sc  Crefts  done  in  the  tyme  of  the  Vifita¬ 
tion  of  London,  Anno  1633.  Sc  1634.  That  is  a  Col¬ 
lection  of  the  Arms  Sc  Crefts  of  the  Gentlemen  dwelling 
within  the  Citie  of  London,  at  the  time  of  the  faid 
Vifitation,  according  to  the  feveral  Wards  thereof;  taken 
by  John  Withie,  according  to  their  feveral  aflertions. 

Note,  Mr.Withie  often  putts  down  the  Places  where 
thefe  Gentlemen  dwelt,  with  the  designation  of  their  Oc¬ 
cupations;  as  alfo  certain  Notes,  relating  to  their  Arms 
or  Crefts,  when  they  had  happened  tolhew  more  to  him 
than  they  could  juftifie  to  the  Officers  of  Arms  then 
making  the  Vifitation. 

2.  Withie’s  Books  being,  after  his  dcceafe,  fold  to 

Mr. John  Saunders  the  Painter  Stainer;  he  has  entred 
herein  his  own  Arms  Sc  Creft,  as  one  of  the  Gentlemen 
of  the  Ward  of  Earringdon  without.  68.  b. 

3.  At  the  beginning,  is  a  Lift  of  the  feveral  Wards 
of  the  City  of  London,  referring  to  fuch  I.eaves  of  this 
Book,  where  the  Arms  of  their  Gent  17  are  entred. 

4.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 

herein  mentioned.  .  Q .  ’ 


Num.  1359— 1361. 

I359* 

A  Book  in  4m,  thus  entituled; 

“  Guiftes  and  Confirmations  of  Coates  &  Crealts, 
gathered  together  by  me,  John  Withie  1620.” 

The  Number  of  thefe  being  great,  I  /hall  omit  the 
Names  of  the  Families,  and  fpecifie  only  the  Names  of 
the  Officers  of  Arms  granting  the  fame  :  with  this  Ob- 
fervation,  that  but  few  of  the  Grants  arc  copied  entirely; 
that  the  Arms  are  a  1  moft  all  tricked  by  Withie,  but  the 
Writing  not  all  of  his  hand. 

Grants  by  Thomas  Hawley  Clarenceux;  Sr. Wil¬ 
liam  Dethick  Garter;  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick,  Norroy  8c 
Garter;  William  Hervey  Clarenceux;  Thomas  Trowt, 
Norroy;  Sir  Thomas  Holme,  Clarenceux;  Robert  Cooke 
Clarenceux ;  Roger  Macado  Roy  d’  Armes  de  Clarence- 
ulx;  Chriftopher  Barker,  Garter;  Thomas  Benoit,  Cla- 
renceulx;  Thomas  Wriothefley,  Garter;  William  Flower 
Norroy;  William  Segar,  Norroy,  afterwards  Garter; 
William  Camden,  Clarenceux;  Richard  Lea,  Claren¬ 
ceux;  William  Hawkeflow,  Clarenceux;  John  Wr ex¬ 
worth,  Gyan,  39  Hen.  vi.  I.aurence  Dalton,  Norroy; 
Nicholas  Narbon,  Ulfter;  Richard  St.  George  Norroy* 
afterwards  Clarenceux;  Edmund  Knight,  Norroy;  'iho- 
mas  Tongue,  Norroy.  '  K 

After  thofe  Grants  which  are  jumbled  together, 
and  wherein  Hawley,  the1  Dethicks,  Cooke,  Flower,  Cam¬ 
den,  8c  Lea  had  the  greateft /hare;  follow, 

2.  Divers  Grants  made  by  Laurence  Dalton,  Norroy, 

without  any  interfering  (except  only  of  one  Grant  to 
John  Pifton  Gent.  A.D.  i486,  by  Thomas  Holme  Cla¬ 
renceux.)  _  44.  b. 

3.  Promifcuous  Grants  of  William  Flower,  Norroy; 
Sr.  Gilbert  Dethick,  Garter;  William  Hervey,  Claren¬ 
ceux  ;  Robert  Cooke,  Clarenceux;  Thomas  Wriothe¬ 
fley,  Garter;  Sir  William  Segar,  Garter;  Thomas  Haw¬ 
ley,  Clarenceux;  but  raoftly,  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick. 

53.  &  fo  on,  to  83. 

.  4-  Arms  granted  &  confirmed  to  Ten  of  the  Compa¬ 
nies  of  London,  by  John  Smart,  Garter;  ThomasHolme, 
Clarenceux;  Thomas  Benoit,  Clarenceux;  RobertCooke* 
Clarenceux;  John  Moore,  Norroy;  Roger  Machado’ 
Richmond;  William  Camden.  Clarenceux.  y2.  * 

5.  Arms  Sc  Creafts  ratified,  confirmed,  given  8c 
graunted,  by  Robert  Cooke,  alias  Clarenceux. 

85.  to  125. 

6.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families  to 
whom  the  aforefaid  Grants  &  Confirmations  were  made. 
At  the  end. 

7-  Ill  the  firft  page  is  a  fanciful  Efcocheon  wherein 
J. Withie  put  the  Crofs  of  St.George;  at  the  laft,  another 
with  his  own  Arms. 

1360. 

A  Book  in  4to,  paintad  and  written  by  Mr.  John  Withie 
the  Painter-Stainer.  It  contains, 

1.  The  Arms  Sc  Crefts  of  the  feveral  Baronets  (ac¬ 
cording  to  their  Creation)  from  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon,  to 
Sir  Richard  Greenvill,  who  was  fo  created,  cjth  April 
A.D.  1630.  being  in  order,  the  293.  Baronet. 

2.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  at  the  end. 

I36I- 

AnHeraldical  Book  in  4to,  rudely  tricked  k  written; 

It  containeth, 

1 .  The  Atchievements  of  moft  of  the  Earls  of  Eng¬ 
land;  the  laft  being  Hay  Earl  of  Carlifle,  with  the  Anns 
quartered  by  divers  of  them. 

2.  Here  are  befides,  tile  Badges  antientlv  ufed  by 
Percy  Lari  ol  Northumberland;  Stanley;  Somerfet  Earl 
of  Worcefter;  Clifford?  &  Ratcliff  Lari  of  Suffex. 

1362.  A  Book 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


Num.  1362—1364^ 

1362. 

ABookin4to,  written  Sc  painted  by  the  hand  of  Jacob 
Chaloner  the  Arms-Painter.  It  containeth. 

The  Arms  of  the  Nobility  of  Ireland,  with  Notes 
touching  their  Creations;  done  A.  D.  1629.  or  about 
that  time.  The  Method  is  fomewhat  fingulaf:  For  after 
the  Earls,  he  putteth  the  Barons,  before  the  Vifcotints. 

!363- 

A  Book  in  4to,  falfely  entitided,  the  Vifitation  of  Nof- 
folk,  made  1563.  by  William  Hervy,  Clarenceux ; 
but  really  containeth,  . 

1.  Part  of  a  Pedegree,  laboured  for  the  Family  ot 

Cavendilh.  (the  3  firft  leaves  wanting.)  4- 

2.  Notes  illustrating  the  Hiftory  of  the  Family  of 

Ogle.  5-  b‘ 

3.  Like  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Carnaby.  6.b; 

4.  Like  Notes  concerning  the  Family  of  Baflet.  7. 

5.  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Aldithley,  or  Aud- 

ley.  8- 

6.  Englifh  Tranllation  of  an  old  Deed  of  William 

Vilers;  on  whofe  Seal,  he  is  reprefented  as  a  Knight  on 
Horfeback  armed  with  Sword  &  Shield,  and  a  Tabard 
over  his  Armor.  8.  b. 

7.  Defcent  of  Derham,  copied  from  Hervey’s  Vifita- 

ti<3n-Book  of  Norfolk.  10- 

8.  Arms  of  divers  old  Families,  with  their  Matches ; 
feeming  to  have  been  found  in  fome  Church  Window. 

1 1. 

9.  Epitaphs  in  Sanderfton-Church  in  Com.  Surr. 

n.b. 

10.  Pedegree  of  Cavendifh  continued  into  the  Family 

of  Talbot,  &  fo  to  Howard  8c  Picrpoint.  1 2. 

11.  Defcent  of  John  Balliol,  k  Robert  Brus  Kings  of 
Scotts,  from  David  Earl  of  Huntingdon  brother  to  Wil¬ 
liam,  A  fon  of  Alexander,  Kings  of  Scotland.  16. 

12.  Lilt  of  fome  of  the  Englilh  Nobility,  temp.Edw.  n. 

(out  of  Cowpers  Hiftory.)  16.  b. 

13.  Defendants  from  the  Lady  Anne  de  Bretagne, 

wife  to  Lewis  xii.  of  France.  18. 

1 4.  Arms  of  the  Norfolk  Gentry  (perhaps  from  Cla¬ 
renceux  Hervey’s  Vifitation,  of  A.D.  1563O  2°‘  44- 

15.  Defcent  k  Arms  of  Cottrell  of  South-Reppes. 

r  39’- 

16.  Arms,  with  the  Defendants  from  the  great  Sir 

Ralph  Sadler.  .  39- b- 

17.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Atkins  of  Norwich.  42. 

18.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Beckham  of  Norfolk.  43. 

19.  More  Arms  of  Norfolk-Families.  (vid.  fupra 

N"  1 4-)  44- 

20.  Armes  of  Towncfe nd,  &  Earle;  added  to  the  for¬ 
mer.  _  48- 

21.  Defcents  and  Arms  of  Jervis,  Kemp,  Baker, 

Norgate,  Northgate,  Topclifte  &  Hill.  48.  b. 

22.  Arms  of  Downes  of  Bodney  in  Com.  Norff. 

52.  b. 

23.  Defcent  of  Parker  of  Honninges  in  Com.  Norff. 

54- 

24.  Pedegree  of  Davy  of  Norfolk,  as  fet  forth  by 
John  Philipott  Somerfet,  A.D.  1636.  inferted  into  this 
Book,  between  fol.  55.  Sc  56. 

25.  Alphabetical  lable  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 
herein  mentioned.  At  the  end. 

1364. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  4to,  written  by  different  hands; 
wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  The  Names  of  the  Marlhalls  of  England  fince  the 

Conqueft,  to  Anno  1577.  I- 

2.  Arms,  given  by  Chriftopher  Barker  ats  Garter, 
Knight,  (with  fome  other  auntient  Armes)  who  died 


Num.  1364. 

the  2d  day  of  Januarie  being  Thurldav,  ike.  A.D.  i<5r. 
copied  out  of  an  old  Booke  fomtyme  William Colbornes 
York-Herald;  and  of  late  tvme  Rafe  Brookes  York- 
Herald,  now  in  the  ciiftodie  of  Sir  Edward  Deringe, 
Knight  k  Barronet.  2. 

Thefe  Arms  are  deferibed  in  French  Blazon  ;  and 
room  is  left  all  along  for  expreffing  the  fame  in  trick. 

3.  Notes  relating  to  the  Families  of  Howard,  Scales, 

&  Bardolf,  taken  in  the  Churche  of  Garboldefham  in 
Com.  Norf.  A.D.  1 607.  65. 

4.  Notes  touching  divers  Earls  Marfhals  of  England, 

extra&ed  from  the  public  Records.  67. 

c.  Arms  of  Malvart,  both  tricked,  &  in  French  Bla¬ 
zon.  '  68. 

Turning  fo  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

6.  Some  Geometrical  Rudiments,  for  Learners.  1. 

7.  A  Tradf  to  which  this  Title  is  prefixed,  “  This 

Monument  brieHy  conteyneth  iundiv  auntient  Remem¬ 
brances  of  Armes,  Genealogies,  and  other  Notes  of 
Gentilitie  belonginge  to  the  worfhipful  Names  and  Fa- 
miles  of  Pigot  or  Picot  ;  that  came  out  of  Normandie 
with  Duke  William,  at  the  Conqueft  ot  England  ;  and 
hath  flourifhed  in  diverle  Provinces  of  this  Kingdome 
even  to  our  age;  being  in  contract  ofTyme  difperfed 
into  multiplicity  of  Houfcs,  advanced  by  younger  Bre¬ 
thren  through  Militarie  Service,  Civil  Defert,  or  Prefer¬ 
ment  of  Marriages  ;  as  both  by  the  varitie  of  their  dif¬ 
ferenced  Markes,  as  alfo  the  fucceeding  Pedegree  ap- 
peereth.  Colleffed  from  the  Records  ot  the  Tower,  with 
other  Regifters  and  Evidences:  Uftly  confirmed  by  the 
Heralds  Bookes  of  Vifitation ;  and  fome  of  our  Com¬ 
mon  Hiftories  or  Chronicle  of  this  Realme.”  3. 

The  Hiftory  of  Pigot  feemeth  to  have  been  drawn 
up,  temp.  F.lizab.  Regina:,  and  perhaps  in  Latin:  this 
Tradt  feemeth  to  be  only  an  Extradf  from  it ;  and  the 
Arms  &  Pidtures  therein  are  done  in  haft. 

8.  Thinne  ats  Botvill,  his  Creft.  20.  b. 

This  Creft  is  a  Rain-Deer,  the  Horns  whereof  are 

here  pretty  truly  tricked.  It  may  be  noted,  that  the 
Horns  of  this  Beaft,  are  feldom  accurately  reprefented 
either  by  Painters,  or  Gravers  ;  an  inftance  of  whofe 
careleffnefs  may  be  this,  The  Right  Honble.  the  Lord 
Vifcount  Weymouth  (ftill  living  A.D.  1712.)  was  Envoy 
Extraordinary  in  Sweden,  A.D.  1667.  where  he  bought 
the  Homs  of  fome  of  thofe  Creatures,  which  were  after¬ 
wards  fett  up  in  the  Hall  of  Long  Leat,  his  Lordfliip’s 
pricipal  Seat :  and  yet  when  I  was  there,  all  his  Lord- 
fhip’s  Plate,  that  I  faw,  with  refpedt  to  the  Horns  in 
his  Lordlhip’s  Creft  8c  Supporters,  was  eroneoufly  en¬ 
graven. 

9.  A  loofe  Paper,  containing  a  Note  touching  the 
Matches  of  the  Daughters  &  Coheires  of  Sr.  Robert 
ltchingham ;  one  of  whom  was  married  to  Worfeley, 
k  after  to  Sr.  Fra.  Walfingham,  by  whom  he  had  a 
daughter  firft  married  to  Sr.  Philip  Sydney,  &  then  to 
the  great  Earl  of  Effex.  Another  was  marriedtoW rough- 
ton,  whofe  daughter  was  wife  to  Sir  John  Thynne  of 
Long-Leat,  whofe  fon  Mr.  Charles  Thynne  wrote  this 
Paper:  inferted  at  fol.  20. 

1  c.  Of  the  Defendants  from  John  Bothvile  of  Strat¬ 
ton  de  Com.  Salop.  furnamed  otherwife  John  le  Thynne, 
2 1  E.  4.  related,  by  marriage,  to  Pigot ;  with  the  Arms 
of  Botvile,  Thynne,  &c.  2 1 . 

Perhaps  this  may  yet  be  a  part  of  the  precedent 
Account  of  the  Family  of  Pigot. 

As  to  the  Note  about  Thynne  ;  authority  feems  to 
be  quoted  in  thefe  words,  “  The  firft  part  of  this  Note 
is  found  in  the  Evidence  of  Stratton  in  Stratton-dale 
aforefaid.”  Perhaps  fuch  Evidence  may  be  in  my  Lord 

Weymouth’s  Evidence-Room  at  Long-Leat:  now  I  re¬ 
member  that  when  I  was  there,  near  3  years  ago,  I  faw 
in  a  fragment  of  fome  Rental,  mention  of  Roger  de  le 

Line, 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


16 


Num.  1364,  1365. 

[nne,  as  holding  a  Tenement  (I  think  called  the  Hethe) 
in  Stretton,  in  Com.  Salop,  ann.  17  R.  Hen.  vn.  which 
Tenement  was  then  faid  to  have  been  ever  fince  that 
time  in  my  Lord’s  Family:  and  I  believe  his  Lordfhip  is 
alfo  Lord  of  that  Mannor 

1 1.  Some  other  Notes  relating  to  Pigot :  perhaps  be¬ 
longing  to  the  Trad  abovementioned.  21.  b. 

1  2.  A  laboured  Pedegree  of  Pigot,  with  Arms;  which 
feems  alfo  to  belong  to  the  fame  Tract.  22. 

I  hen  follow  a  Collection  of  Pedegrees,  namely  of 
Digby,  &  of  other  F.  milies  allied  to  them  ;  which  feem 
to  have  been  copied  from  fome  large  Pedegree,  or  Hif- 
tory  of  that  Family;  they  are, 

13.  ]  ■  degree  of  Digby  of  Tilton,  &c.  deduced  to 
Kenelm  Digby,  A.D.  1636. 

*4-  Pedegree  of  Digby  of  Colefhull,  Baron  of  Gea- 
fhull,  in  Ireland.  34.  b. 

15.  Pedegree  of  Digby  of  Luffenham  inCom.Rut- 

^ancP  36.  b. 

1 6.  Pedegree  of  Digby  of  Oleby  or  Welby  in  Com. 
Rutland  with  the  Defcent  of  Digby  of  London.  37.  b. 

17.  Defcent  of  Digby  of  St. Julian’s  in  Com.Hert- 

ford.  •  39# 

18.  Defcent  of  Digby  of  Cotes.  3Q- b. 

19.  Defcent  of  the  Digbies  of  Batheley  in  Com.Norff. 

&  of  Ravenfton  in  Com.  Leiceflr.  40. 

20.  D-fcent  of  Pakeman  ot  Kirkby.  40.  b. 

21.  Defcer.tsof  Cla.ke  of  Wyfienden,  &  Ellis  alias 
De  la  Laund,  into  whofe  families  Digbies  married. 

22.  Defcent  of  Nele,  into  whofe  family  Digby  mar- 

ned‘  r  42.  b. 

23.  Dei  cent  of  Mullho  of  Goth urft  into  whofe  f  amily 

Digby  married.  4X.  b. 

24.  Defcsnt  of  Nevyll  of  Gothurft,  who  married  the 

heirefs  of  Nowers.  4-.b. 

23.  Defcent  of  Nowers  (de  Nodarijs)  of  Gahurft. 

45. 

26.  Defcent  of  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby,  from  Aldith- 
ley;  laboured. 

27.  Delcent  of  Bamvile,  one  of  whofe  coheirs  Stanley 

married.  49. 

28.  Defcent  of  Latham,  whofe  heirefs  Stanley  mar- 

r*ed<  #  49.  b. 

29.  Defcent  of  Htz-  Alan,  to  the  daughter  of  one  of 

whofe  Coheireffes  (being  alfo  the  heirefs  of  Gowfhill) 
Stanley  married.  ' 

30.  Defcent  of  Albinei,  to  Fitz-Alan.  52.  b.' 

31.  Defcent  of  the  firft  Earls  ot  Chefter.  33.  b. 

32.  Defcent  of  Warren,  Earl  of  Warren  &  Surrey. 

54-  b. 

r365- 

4,°’  another  now  in  the  poffeffion 

of  William  Shires  Piinter-Stainer  of  Southwark;  as 
alfo  by  the  BookNu  1465.  feemeth  to  have  been  writ, 
ten  by  Thomas  Chaloner  Arms-Painter  in  Cheiter. 

It  containeth, 

I!  Arips  (as  it  feems)  Quartered  by  Laurence  Bre- 
terghe  of  Breteghe-holt,  in  Blazon,  in  the  firft  blank 

2.  Arms  (as' it  feems)  of  William  Grafton,  the  former 
owner  of  this  Book;  in  Colors.  In  the  fame  fol.  b. 

Blazonheviz°110W  C°pies  divcrs  fmail  Alphabets  in 

i  i2 3 4d  °?e’  fef m,I?S  t0  have  been  tranferibed  from  fome 
old  Book:  wherein,  befides  the  Arms  of  divers  antient 
Lnghfh  Families;  are  Arms  attributed  to  King  Arthur, 
Godfrey  of  Boloigne,  St.  Alban,  &c.  Im 

4.  Another  feeming  not  to  be  of  any  particular  County 
of  England ;  but  of  fome  Englilh  Families,  with  a 
ipr inkling  of  Inlh  among  them,  22.  ^ 


Num.  1365—1367. 

5.  Another,  not  feeming  to  be  confined  to  any  par¬ 
ticular  County.  '  £ 

6.  Another,  of  the  like  fort,  unconfined.  73. 

7.  Another  fhorter  Alphabet.  j  ,6. 

8.  Another  (till  unconfined  to  any  County.  131. 

9.  Arms  inB  azon,  of  divers  Families  bearing  Piles. 

10.  Arms,  in  Blazon,  of  divers  Families  bearing 

Geronyes.  163 

11.  Arms  in  Blazon  (diftributed  by  way  of  Alphabet) 

of  many  Families  bearing  Barres ;  breaking  oft' in  the 
^etter.f*  ,  165.  b. 

Although  the  Surnames  of  fome  Families  be  errone- 
oufly  written  in  this  Book;  I  neverthelefs  take  it  to  be 
of  good  ule.  1  his  Thomas  Chaloner  was  a  diligent  & 
an. was  DePutie  there  to  Norroy,  &  was  all'o 
UHter  King  of  Arms  in  Ireland.  There  is  much  of  him 
among  Holme’s  books  in  this  Library. 

1366. 

A  Book  in  4to,  written  &  tricked  by  the  hand  of  Richard 
Scarlett  the  Painter -Stainer,  vid.  fol.  18.  b.  'who,  as  I 
have  heard,  was  a  man  eminent  in  his  Profeffion) 
containing,  1 

1.  The  Arms  of  the  City,  Archilhoprick,  &  Metro- 
pohtical  Church  of  Chrift,  in  Canterbury;  with  theArms 
alfo  of  Arch-Bifhop  Whirgift,  &  Dean  Neville.  1. 

2.  Church  Notes;  viz.  Anns,  Badges,  Epitaphs,  In- 
Icnptions,  kc.  found  by  Richard  Scarlet  at  Canterbury, 
A.D.  1/599  in  the  Cathedral  Church  afore  faid,  or  Cha¬ 
pels  thereof;  in  the  Chapter  Hou:e,  Crofts,  &C!oyfters: 
m  the  Arch-bilhop  s  Palace;  in  the  Dean’s  Houfe;  in 
d,vers  parochial  Churches  there;  in  Sir  Thomas  Wood's 
Houle  in  Canterbury,  &c. 

3.  Boole  Notes  of  Rich.  Scarlet;  with  fome  account 
of  certain  old  Books  which  he  had  met  with.  16. 

Among  thefe  are,  ^ 

4.  The  ham  of  Abfolntion,  in  a  Copy  of  an  old  In¬ 
dulgence.  5_ 

5.  Aftiones  GratiarumR.Heimchv.  in  fine  Vitefui- 

verfibus.  -16  b  * 

6.  Verfus  de  Regibus  Chriftianis  hujus  renin  ■  tarn 

ante  qiiarn  poff  Conqueftum.  ;by_ 

7.  1  he  l'ope’s  (Martin  v.)  Bull  to  the  Staple  Mer¬ 
chants,  for  a  portable  Alter ;  ontofanoMMS.  q8.  b. 

8.  1  hat  in  the  fame  yeare,  the  Pope  gave  them  Li 

cence  riiquem  idoneum  et  diferetum  Prdbiterum  elieere 
in  Conreliorem.  ° 

9.  Beginnings  of  divers  Trads  in  the  Pfalter  tranf- 

latcd  by  Richard  Hampole.  4Q> 

10.  Arms,  of  many  French  Gentlemen,  circa  temp. 

R.  Edw.  vi.  (molt  of  their  Names  are  wanting.'  4?„ 

11.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 
mentioned  in  Richard  Scarlett’s  Notes.  At  the  end. 

1367. 

A  Book  in  4to,  wherein  I  find, 

1.  The  litles  of  the  following  Trads  written  by  Mr 

John  Withie.  J 

2.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  mentioned  in  the 

■  Dad  next  enfuing  ;  written  by  Mr.  Withie.  2. 

3.  Arms  of  many  of  the  antient  Noblemen  &  Gentle¬ 
men  ot  Devon fliire;  tricked  by  Mr, Nicholas  Charles 
Lanca1.  - r- Herald  :  for  the  molt  part,  from  Church- Win¬ 
dows  remaining  in  that  County. 

Note;  Mr.  Witby  has  inlerted  h:s  own  Arms  heron 
at  fol.  9. 

4-  Armes  of  the  Leicefterfhire-Gentrv,  tricked  -bv 

the  fame  Mr.  Charles,  in  way  ot  Alphabet.  1 3. 

5-  Alphabetical  'fable  of  Surnames,  written  bv  Mr. 

Wnhie,  Sf  referring  to  the  Trad  enfuing.  '  is. ' 

6.  Anus 


Bibliothecas  Harlciancc. 


Num.  1367,  1368. 

6.  .Arms  of  the  Nobility  &  Gentry  of  Lincoln  (hire, 

tricked  by  Mr.Nich.  Charles.  19. 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  relating  to  the 

next  Trad;  written  by  Mr  Withie.  28. 

8.  Arms  of  the  Lancalhire  Gentry;  tricked  by  the 

fame  Mr.  Charles.  31. 

9.  John  Withie’s  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames 

mentioned  in  the  enfuing  Trad.  38. 

10.  Arms  of  the  Nobility  &  Gentry  of  the  County 

of  Effex;  treked  by  Mr.  Charles.  41. 

11.  John  Withie’s  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames, 

belonging  to  the  enfuing  Trad.  46. 

12.  Arms  of  the  Nobility  He  Gentry  of  the  County  of 

Suffolk;  tricked  by  Mr.  Charles.  49- 

13.  John  Withie’s  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames, 

belonging  to  the  following  Trad.  .  S3. 

14.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Norfolk,  tricked  by  Mr. 

Nich.  Charles.  5b. 

15.  Kentilh  Arms  tricked  bythe  fame  Mr.  Charles,  in 

this  method;  firft  thofe  of  Noblemen;  then  thole  of 
Knights;  afterwards  thofe  of  the  Gentry;  the  lad  being 
reduced  into  an  Alphabet,  there  was  little  occafion  for 
Mr.  Withie  to  make  a  Table  for  them.  64. 

16.  John  Withie’s  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  next* 

Trad.  75. 

1 7.  Arms  of  the  Yorkfhire  Nobility  &  Gentry  tricked 

by  Mr.  Charles  abovementioned;  and  by  him  entituled, 
“  The  Coppy  of  Sr.  William  Fairfax  Booke  of  Artnes 
for  Yorkelhire.”  78. 

This  gives  the  Armcs  of  Families  according  to  the 
Hundreds  wherein  they  rfieded. 

1368. 

A  Book  in  large  Svo,  containing  much  blank  Paper  5 

bu:  defigned  by  Sir  Henry  St.  George  the  elder,  to 

contain  much  of  his  Heraldical  Collections;  what  is 

therein  written  being  of  his  hand.  It  containeth, 

I.  Notes  of  the  time  when  Iv.  Charles  1.  &  his  Sifter 
the  Queen  of  Bohemia  were  born. 

7.  The  Proceedinge  of  the  Funerall  of  Mrs.  Ailing- 
ton.  who  died  the  15th  of  February  16 1 1 .  whofe  Fune¬ 
ral  was  folempniled  tire  26th  of  the  fame  Month,  at  the 
Pari.h-Cinuch  of  St.  Buttolphes  by  Alderlg.ee ;  by 
Samuell  Thomfon  Wyndfor-Herald,  who  lerved  for 
Henry  St.  George  Blewmantell.  1. 

3.  Note  of  Mr.  George  Allington,  his  Wife,  Chil¬ 
dren,  &  Arms.  3. 

4.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Evans  of  London.  4. 

5.  The  Proceeding  of  the  Funerall  of  Mr  William 

Frere,  3 1 ft  of  March  16x2.  at  Alhallowes 'Church  in 
Oxford,  with  the  Names  of  the  Officers  of  Arms  that 
ferved  at  the  fame.  5. 

6.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Frere.  7. 

7.  The  Proceedinge  of  the  Funerall  of  Sr.  George 

Fanner  of  Elton  in  the  County  of  Northampton  Kt.  the 
14th  of  January  1612.  8. 

S.  Note  of  the  Children  of  Sr.  George  Farmer.  1 1. 

9.  The  Procedinge  of  the  Funerall  of  Sr.  Edward 

Seymor  Baronet,  at  Berry  Pomerey  Caftle,  the  27th  of 
May  A.D.  1613.  12. 

10.  Arms  of  the  fame  Sr.  Edward  Seymour,  with  his 

Match,  2c  Defendants.  14. 

I I.  Thel’roceeding  of  the  Funerall  of  the  LadyMoun- 

tague,  wyddow  of  St.  Leonard  Hallydaye  Kt.  the  7th  of 
November  A. D.  1614.  17. 

12.  The  Offringe  at  the  Lady  Hollyday’s  Funerall 
(i.  e.  the  fame  Funeral.) 

13.  The  Proceeding  at  the  Funerall  of  the  Lady  Chi- 
chelter,  late  wife  of  Sir  Robert  Chichefter  Kt.  of  the 
Bath:  onWednefday  the  5th  of  July  1615.  at  Pylton. 

23. 

14.  Note  of  Sir  John  Chichefter’s  .Match,  &  Chil¬ 
dren.  26. 

Cat.  Harl,  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1368— -i  3  7<5  < 

15.  The  Proceedinge  of  the  Funerall  of  Geffrey 

Ellwes  Efq.  Alderman  of  London,  the  14th  of  May 
1616.  27. 

1 6.  The  Manner  to  be  obferved  in  Offringe  at  the 

fame  Funerall.  29. 

1 7.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Ellwes.  30. 

18.  The  ProceOdinge  of  the  Funerall  of  Sr.  Robert 

Oxeilbridge  Kt.  20th  June  1616.  athisHoufe  ofHurf- 
borne-Pryors  in  Com.  Southampt.  3 1 . 

19.  Match,  Children,  &  Arms  of  Sr.  Robert  Oxen- 

bridge.  32.  b. 

20.  The  Proceedinge  of  the  Funerall  of  Gilbert  Tal¬ 

bot  Earl  of  Salop,  at  Sheffield,  on  Mondaye  the  12th  of 
Auguft,  16}  Ci.  35. 

2 1 .  T  he  Manner  of  the  Offringe  at  the  fame  Funerall. 

33. 

22.  The  Proceedinge  of  the  Funerall  of  William  Pert 

of  Effex,  which  was  folempnized  at  his  houfe  at  Mount- 
nefing  in  Effex,  12th  September  1616.  with  his  Arms  & 
Defendants.  40* 

23.  Marks  put  down  at  two  feveral  Tiltings  of  divers 

Noble  Perfonages,  A.D.  1614.  42. 

24.  The  Proceedinge  to  the  Parliament  of  K.  James  1. 

the  5th  of  April  1614.  vizt.  from  his  Palace  of  White¬ 
hall  to  Weftminfter.  44* 

At  the  other  end,  I  find; 

25.  A  Draught  of  the  Dimenfions  of  an  Hearfe  to  be 
fett  up  in  a  Church  ;  by  another  hand. 

1369. 

A  thin  Book  in  4to,  falfely  entituled,  “  The  Vifitation 

of  Leicefterlhire,  taken  1619,  whereas  it  is  no  more 

than, 

1 .  A  Painter’s  Copy  of  the  Arms  of  Leicefterffiire  Fa¬ 
milies,  rudely  tricked  from  that  Vifitation  Book,  with, 

2.  John  vv  iihie  s  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames 
of  the  faid  Families  ;  at  the  end. 

I37°* 

A  Book  in  4to,  opening  longways  like  a  Mufic-book, 
wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  Copie  of  the  Book  of  Arms  of  the  Founders  of” 
Welffi  Families,  in  MS.  66.  A.  27.  thus  entituled,  “  The 

ancient  Defcent  of . &  worthy  Gentlemen 

fpringing  from  Wales ;  and  now  fondry  cf  them  great 
Howfen  of  Honnor  &  Worffiip  in  England.  1. 

2.  The  Names  of  fuch  other  Gentlemen  as  came  into 
Wales,  &  there,  or  in  the  Marches  thereof,  have  Lands 
and  Poffeffions;  where  they  inhabittby  certaine  Defcents 
or  Inheritance;  their  firfl:  Anceflors  being  either  Englifh- 
men,  Danes,  Normans,  or  Iriffi-men;  and  at  this  pre- 
fent,  growne  to  be  great  Houfcsof  Worfhipe  in  Wales. 

80. 

This  TraiT  is  fomewhat  different  from  that  at  the 
end  of  MS.  66.  A.  27.  but  that  containeth  much  more 
than  this. 

Thefe  two  Tracis  were  written  5c  tricked  by  fome 
Painter. 

3.  John  Withie’s  trick  of  the  Arms  of  David  Powell 

of  Penkelly  in  Carnarvanlhire;  loofe.  88. 

4.  At  the  other  end  of  the  Book  is,  “  A  Retorne  of 

Entreys  made  by  me  Thomas  Wootton,  from  the  5th 
of  November  1647.  &  fo  forwards.”  All  relating  to 
drink  delivered  in  l'ome  Towns  near  London.  1. 

5.  Note  of  the  Advancement  of  the  Family  of  Cary 

Earl  of  Dover.  14.  b. 

6.  Notes  of  the  time  when  divers  of  the  Regicides 

were  executed,  A.D.  1660.  ibid. 

7.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Books  of  .  .  .  Painter,  who 

wrote  what  relates  to  Heraldry  in  this  Book.  1 5. 

8.  Arms  of  the  d  owns  of  Warwicke;  Colcheder; 
St.  Albanes  ;  Bedford  ;  &  Halftede  in  Effex.  1 6. 

F  9.  Worke 


L 


Num.  1376—1373. 

9.  Worke  done  att  the  Funerall  of  Efq.  Pembrocke, 
the  23d  of  November  1659.  by  the  fame  Painter.  17. 

1  o.  The  Words  of  a  Song  beginning  thus,  “  I  have 
been  in  Debt,  in  Love,  &  in  Drinke.”  1 8. 

±371- 

A  Book  in  4to,  written  &  painted  by  Scotch  hands  > 
wherein  are  contained, 

1.  The  Achievement  of  K.  James  vi.  with  an  account 

of  his  Birth  &  Parentage.  i.b. 

2.  Achievements  of  the  Scots  Nobility,  in  Colors, 

temp.  James  vi.  with  fome  account  of  their  feveral 
Ages,  Families,  Offices,  &  Eftates.  2.  b. 

3.  Lift  of  the  30  Shires  of  Scotland;  &  of  the  feveral 

Sheriffes  thereof.  67.  b. 

This  i  fucceeded  by  aLift  of  the  Fowre  Stewartreis, 
8t  Thre  Baillerijs  of  Scotland. 

4.  The  Names  of  his  Highnes  Officers  ofEftate,  &  of 

the  Secret  Councelle,  13th  Auguft  i  589.  69. 

5.  Names  of  principal  Clans  in  Scotland.  68.  b. 

6.  Elenchus  Comitum  Scotiae.  (They  are  25  in  Num¬ 
ber,  reckoning  the  King  as  one  of  them.)  69. 

7.  Elenchus  Baronum  Scotize,  being  40  in  Number. 

69.  b. 

1372. 

A  Book  in  4to,  containing  many  of  Mr.  John  Wuhie’s 
Memorandums  ;  vizt. 

1.  Armes  of  many  Families,  about  whofe  Funerals  he 

wras  employed,  beginning  with  the  year  1648.  and  con¬ 
tinuing  many  years  after;  with  Notes  touching  the  time 
when  they  died,  when  Sc  where  they  were  buried  ;  and 
what  work  he  did.  1.  49.  50.  b.  53. 

2.  Mr.  Withie’s  Bill  for  Work  done  toward  the  Fune¬ 
ral  of  Oliver  Cromwell,  x  ft  Nov.  1658.  48. 

3.  Account  of  money  lent  by  Mr.Withie  to  Sir  Ed¬ 
ward  Bysfhe  &  others.  49.  b. 

4.  Medicines  for  the  Ague,  Falling  Sicknefs  or  Con- 

vuliion-Fitts,  &  for  the  Scurvy.  50. 

5.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  mentioned  in  this 

Book.  56. 

6.  To  cure  the  yellow  Jaundies;  aSrich;  &theSpleenc. 

62.  b. 

7.  Whimfical  Medicines  to  prevent  Galling,  Sc  to 
cure  a  Fiftula;  with  two  Other  Medicines  for  an  Ague. 

63.  b. 

8.  To  make  white  Varniffi.  6 4. 


A  Book  in  4to,  painted  &  written  by  Mr.John  Withie. 

It  relates  to  the  then  prefent  Nobility  of  Ireland,  and 

containeth, 

1.  An  Account  of  the  Irifh  Earls,  their  Creations  & 
Arms;  the  laft  being  Pope  Earl  of  Downe,  fo  created 
5th  October  1 628. 

2.  Like  Account  &  Arms  of  the  Irifh  Vifcounts;  end¬ 
ing  with  Fitz-Williams  Vifcount  Fitz- Williams.  4 1 . 

Herein  I  find  inlerted, 

3.  An  original  Letter  of  Anna  Vice-countefs  Balting- 
laffe,  to  Mr.Withie,  giving  Orders  about  her  dear  Lord's 
Funerall.  dat.  23<iAprill,  1666.  after  fol.  66. 

4.  Original  Letter  of  Giles  Campion  the  Painter- 
Stayner,  to  Mr.Withie,  about  the  Earl  of  Ranelagh’s 
Supporters,  before  79. 

5.  Trick  of  the  Atchievements  of  the  Vifcounts  Fan- 
ihawe  &  Brounlter;  in  a  loofe  paper  at  85. 

6.  Like  Account  &  Arms  of  the  Irifh  Barons  ;  end¬ 
ing  with  Mac-Guire  Baron  of  Inefkillon,  who  was  exe¬ 
cuted  at  Tyburne  for  Treafon,  20  Febr.  A.  D.  1644. 

108. 


Num.  1373-1377. 

7.  At  the  end  is  a  Table  to  this  Book,  fhewing  each. 
Noble-man’s  Surname,  Title,  &  time  of  Creation : 
written  by  the  fame  Mr.John  Withie. 

1  3  74- 

A  Book  in  4to,  wherein  are  written,  of  entred, 

1 .  The  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Nor¬ 

thumberland,  in  Blazon.  Collected  from  the  Vifitation 
book  made  thereof,  AD.  1615.  by  Sir  Richard  St. 
George  Norroy,  Sc  in  his  company  Henry  St.  George 
Blew-mantle.  1, 

2.  The  Vizitation  of  Durcfme  by  Sir  R.  Sc  Hen.  St. 

George,  1615.  4, 

This  is  a  wrong  Title;  it  being  only  the  Arms  of 
the  Gentry  in  the  Bifhoprick,  in  Blazon,  as  before,  ibid. 

3-  The  Vifitation  of  Comberland  taken  Anno  Dili 
1615.  likevvife  Weftmerland.  12. 

This  is  alfoonly  a  Colledlion  of  the  Arms  of  the 
Gentlemen  in  thofe  Counties,  in  Blazon,  as  before.  1  a. 

4.  Tricks  of  the  Arms  of  Garnet,  Hilton,  Beck,  & 

Fothergill ;  haftily  done  by  John  Withie.  16. 

After  much  blank  paper,  at  the  end  of  the  book- 
I  find, 

5.  John  'Withie’s  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  re¬ 
ferring  to  this  Book. 

6.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame,  written  on  folio-leaves 
with  this  Title,  “  A  Table  to  Nonhumberla nd,  Com¬ 
berland,  Weftmerland,  &  Durham,  per  Richard  St. 
George  Norroy,  King  of  Armes,  A.D.  1615.  now  re- 
maineing  in  the  hands  of  my  fonne  Auguftine  Withie, 
A.D.  1654.  John  Withie,  1634. 

1 3  7  5  * 

A  thin  Book  in  4to,  on  the  outfide  cntituled,  “  Atciiieve- 
ments  of  Nobles,”  as  containing, 

1.  The  Arms  of  the  F.nglifti  Nobility,  temp  R.Jac.  I. 
&c,  with  their  Quarterings,  in  Blazon:  with  certain 
Notes  touching  their  Mottoes,  Crefts,  &  Supporters.  1. 

2.  Among  them  are  Blazons  of  the  Arms  A  Ouarter- 
ings  of  fome  of  the  greater  Gentry,  as  Sr.  Thomas  Bul- 
leyne  Kt.  67.  Sir  John  Arundell  Kt.  82.  Sr. Anthony 
Wingfield  Kt.  1  oe.  with  thofe  of  SyTyard,  F'itz-Y\ if- 
lyams,  Framingham,  &  Sir  Anthony  Cook. 

3.  Here  are  alfo  like  Defcriptions  of  the  Arms  k 

Crefts  bom  by,  Thomas  Butler  Erie  of  Ormond;  Ma¬ 
thew  Stewart  Erie  of  Lenox;  Sc  Fitz-girald  Erie  JfKvl- 
dare*  .  .  20. 

,4*  Alphabetical  i  able  >  f  the  Surname  of  1  oble  i  a- 
milies  whofe  Arms  are  here  deferibed.  ,  ,  j_ 

5.  Names  of  Colours,  ufed  bv  Pavntcr-Stav  r  ■  in 

their  Work.  ‘  '  i’0 

6.  Bill  of  part  of  the  Charges  of  Sr.  Ilaac  AppuhonE 

Funerall.  A.D.  1608.  124_ 

J3/6- 

A  thin  Book  in  4to,  haftily  copied,  as  it  feemeth,  from 

fome  other  more  beautiful  Book.  It  ronrnms, 

1.  The  Atchievement  of  K.  James  thevith  of ’Scot¬ 
land. 

2.  The  Arms  of  Balliol  King  cf  Scots. 

3.  The  Arms  of  the  King,  of  Si  I  : 

thole  of  their  Queens  ;  from  Robert  Brufe  to  James  v  ?. 
all  rudely  tricked  in  Lozenges  crowned.  ■? . 

4-  Atchievements  of  the  Scotch  Nobility,  as  haftily 
tricked,  as  uncorreclly  written.  i'i.  tQ  9^ 

Note;  many  of  the  Errors  as  to  the  Names  of  Fa¬ 
milies,  are  amended. 

J377- 

A  thin  Book  in  large  8vo,  wherein  are  contained. 

Divers  Emblems  contrived  for  Enfigns  or  Colours 
befitting  the  Parliament's  Army,  in  the  time  o.  t  .e  late 
Civil  Wars.  Done  by  an  Arms-Pmuer. 

1378.  A  B  : 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae; 


19 


Num.  1378— ij8c5. 

1 378* 

A  Book  in  4to,  containing  a  Collection  of  Arms  rudely 
tricked  by  fome  Painter;  being, 

1 .  Arms  promifcuous  ;  among  which  are  fome  differ¬ 
ent  Arms,  born  by  Familes  of  the  fame  Name.  _  1 . 

2.  Arms  of  the  Lincolnlhire  Gentry,  difpofed  in  way 

of  Alphabet.  3j; 

3.  Arms  promifcuous,  a$  before;  with  fome  tew  dif¬ 
ferent,  &  yet  born  by  Families  of  the  fame  Name.  38. 

a  Arms  of  the  Nobility  &  Gentry  of  Gloucefterlhire. 

4  83. 

Here  are  the  Names  of  Families  written  above  many 
blank  Efcocheons. 

5.  Arms  of  Monfteur  Colbert  the  French  Ambaitador 

to  K.  Charles  n.  A. D.  1668.  89. 

6.  Arms  of . the  Dutch  Embaflador 

in  England,  A  D.  1668.  89.  b. 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Gloucefterlhire  Arms 

abovemen tioned.  ,  9°-  b* 

8.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  former  part  of  this  Book: 

incomplete.  93* 

1 379* 

A  Vfto'm-Book  long  and  nairow,  opening  like  a  Mufic- 
book,  wherein  are  contained, 

The  Arms  of  all  the  temporal  Peers  of  England, 
accord i."  to  their  Precedence  in  Parliament  A.D.  1628. 
veil  painted,  as  I  believe,  bv  Mr.  JohnWithie,  (Samion, 
Leonard)  their  Names,  and  the  account  of  their  feverall 
Creations,  are  written  over  againft  them,  by  Mr.  Samp- 
fon  Lennard  Blewmantle. 

1380. 

A  Book  in  8 vo,  opening  long-ways  8.  written  by  the 
hand  of  Edward  Bar  wick  the  Arms-painter  :  con- 
tainimr,  ,  . 

1.  Iinpreffion  on  Wax,  of  the  Arms  of  Chappel  im¬ 
paling  Alhley.  .  ..  A* 

2.  Like  Impreftioti  of  the  Arms  of  Satiderfon.  ibid. 

3.  Receipts  forDentrifrices,  taken  from  Pliny,  i  b. 

4.  A  ridiculous  Charm  againft  Enemies.  2.  b. 

c.  Father  Parfons  Prayer.  4- 

6.  Verfes  made  by  the  Earle  of  Caftle-haven,  a  little 

before  he  was  beheaded.  .  5- 

7.  The  Names  of  the  Twelve  Months,  m  Engliih, 

Greeke,  Latin,  Hebrew,  Arabic,  Siriack,  iEgiptick, 
Turk  Hi,  ./Ethiopian,  Sc  Perfian.  _  7- 

8.  The  Ten  firft  Cardinal  Numbers,  in  the  Language 

of  Madagafcar.  .  9-  b- 

9.  The  Tw.nty-firft  Cardinal  Numbers,  in  Perfian, 

Engliih,  &  Turkilh.  IO- 

10.  The  Ten  firft  Cardinal  Numbers  m  the  Language 

fpoken  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  ,10-  b* 

1 The  Twenty-firft  Cai'dinal  Numbers,  in  the  Ma¬ 
la .  an  Language.  1  u 

'12.  Expofition  of  the  Names  of  the  Hebrew  Letters, 
according  to  Eulebius  &  St.  Hierom.  12, 

13.  A  Table  fhewing  the  Longitude,  Lattitude,  Sc 
point  of  the  Compafs,  wherein  the  chief  Cities  of  the 
World  are  feituated;  with  their  Diftance  from  London, 
the  time  of  the  Sun’s  Rife  there,  and  the  length  of  their 

"i_|.  Imperfect  Draughts  of  a  Hcrfe  to  ftand  in  a 
Church.  j4-b. 

1  c.  The  Proceeding  to  Church  at  the  Funeral  ot  an 

Earle  17. 

"i  6.  Certaine  Notes  taken  out  of  Law-Cafes  ;  &  other 
Authors,  touching  Hcraldical  Matters.  18. 

Thefe  are,  for  the  moft  part,  taken  from  Gerard 
Legh’s  Accidence  of  Armory;  Stamford,  Plowden,  Dyer, 
gee.  and  are  not  to  be  relied  upon. 

4 


Num,  1380—1383. 

ly.  Confirmation  of  the  Arms,  &  Grant  of  a  Creft 
to  John  Hodges  of  Bodway  in  Com.  Wigorn  by  William 
Camden  Clarenceux.  dat.  5th  October,  1610.  24. 

18.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  to  William  Glover  of 
Alhby-Campfy,  by  William  Camden  Clarenceux.  25. 

1 9.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  to  John  Liddyate  of 

Cheft-hail  in  Com.  Stafford,  by  Richard  St.  George, 
Norroy.  dat.  19th  O&ober,  A.D.  1614.  26. 

ao.  Funeral  Certificate  upon  the  Burial  of  Sir  Charles 
Shirley  Baronet;  as  it  was  taken  by  William  Ryley 
Lancafter,  &  Robert  Browne,  B  lew-man  tie ;  and  attefted 
by  Sr.  Robert  Shirley  Bart,  brother  &  heire  to-  the  De- 
fundt.  27. 

Turning  to  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

2 1 .  Impreflions  on  Wax,  of  the  Seals  of  Fane,  Thorn¬ 
hill,  Bury,  &c.  withBury’s  Quaiterings  in  Blazon.  1. 

22.  Imperfect  Draught  of  a  Hearfe,  to  ftand  in  a 

Church.  I  -  b. 

23.  Againft  vomiting  Bloud.  3. 

24.  Verfes  taken  from  fome  Poem,  written  upon  the 

Rebellion  in  the  time  of  K.  C  harles  1.  4.  b. 

25.  Two  Peals  to  be  rung  withBells,  by  young  Change- 

Ringers,  called  a  Four  &  twenty,  a  Sixfcore :  with 
two  Pfahn-Tunes  expreffed  by  Numbers,  fo  as  to  be 
ftruck  upon  Bells.  S'  b- 

26.  Some  few  imperfect  Church-Notes,  fett  down 
with  a  Black  Lead  Pencil. 

138!. 

A  Book  in  8vo,  being  of  the  handy-work  of  Mr.  John 
Withie,  who  defigned  to  enter  therein  a  Lift  of  all 
the  Baronets  from  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon :  but  herein  he 
hath  proceeded  no  further  than  Sir  Thomas  Beaumont 
who  was  the  1 1 2th  Baronet.  Of  thefe  he  hath  herein 
painted  the  Arms  of  the  firft  98  Baronets  ;  he  tricked 
tlie  Arms  of  three  others;  &  omitted  the  reft. 

1382. 

A  Book  in  Svo,  containing  a  Collection  of  Arms,  haftily 
tricked  by  fome  Painter.  They  are, 

1 .  Arms  of  fome  of  the  Chefhire  Gentry  difpofed  in 

way  of  Alphabet.  i. 

2.  Arms  of  the  Kentilh  Gentry,  taken  from  fom« 

Vifitation-book  of  that  County.  1 1 .  b. 

3.  Arms  promifcuous,  taken  from  Patents,  Funeral 
Efcocheons,  or  otherwlfe  as  they  came  to  hand.  21. 

Herein  he  mentioneth  a  l  atent  granted  by  Sir  Ed¬ 
ward  Bvsfhe  2d  July  1651.  but  dated  15th  May  1646. 

4.  Arms  of  the  Lancaihire  Gentry ;  taken  from  fome 

Vifitation-book  of  that  County.  61. 

Thefe  are  alfo  put  down  in  way  of  Alphabet. 

5.  Arms  promifcuous  as  before,  73-.  b. 

6.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 

whofe  Arms  are  extant  herein.  86.  b. 

1383- 

A  Book  in  i2tno,  wherein  I  find, 

1 .  Medicines,  or  Receipts,  to  deftroy  Crows  &  Pid- 

geons;  to  take  Fifh;  againft  the  Plague.  1. 

2.  Queftions  relating  to  Men  &  Women;  with  their 

Anfwers.  3m 

3.  Note  of  the  Time  when  Sir  Philip  Sydney  was 

buried.  .  3-  b- 

4.  Unfiniffied  Draughts  of  Emblematical  Devices,  for 

Enfigns,  in  the  Time  of  the  late  Civil  Wars;  being  both 
for,  &  againft  the  King.  4- 

Some  of  thefe  have  the  Names  &  Arms  of  their 
Owners  expreffed. 

5.  Impreflions  on  Wax  from  the  Seal  of  Captain 

Blount.  55-  b* 

6.  Locus  Seneca:,  de  Muliere  formofa.  ibid. 

1384.  A  Book 


20 


Cataiogils  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1384—1386. 

Num.  1386. 

138+. 

A  Book  in  1 2mo,  wherein  I  find,  entred, 

x.  Achievements  of  feme  of  the  antient  l'.nglifii  No¬ 
bility;  living  in  &  fmee  the  time  of  King  Henry  vm. 
haflily  tricked  by  Mr.  John  Withie.  1. 

2.  Atchievements  of  Butler  Earl  of  Ormond  ;  <k  Fitz¬ 
Gerald  Earl  of  Kildare. 

3.  A-chievements  of  K.  James  vi.  of  Scotland;  k  of 

the  Scots  Nobilitv.  ^ 

1  hefe  are  alfo  haflily  tricked  by  the  fame  John 
Withie. 

4*  Arms  of  the  Irifh  Nobilitv  more  haflily  tricked  by 
the  fame  hand. 

13.  Some  Notes  taken  out  of  Raflal’s  booke;  Tift. 
Intrufion,  Reafonable  Ayde,  Amerciaments,  Treafons. 

14.  Succeffion  of  the  Conflables  of  England,  to  the 
deceafe  of  the  five  Sons  of  Milo  Earl  of  Hereford.  1  n. 

1 5.  A  large  Pedegree  of  Bowrghe  of  Ireland ;  Copcort. 

Burgoyne;  Brockett;  &  of  other  Families  allycd  unL 
them.  With  the  Arms,  all  along.  2o_° 

16.  Pedegree  of  the  noble  Family  of  Stafford;  with 
the  Aims  ;  from  a  Book  belonging  to  the  Family.  23. 

17.  Arms  of  the  Founders  of  Welfli  Families;  as  alfo 

of  Englifh  Families  who  fettled  among  the  Welih  :  few 
of  which  having  the  Names  written  upon  them;  I  re- 
flored  them  all  almofl,  from  the  Book  66.  A.  ^7  where 

i3r5- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  all  relating  to  Somerfetfhire 
Families;  as  containing, 

1.  I.iflof  the  Sheriffs  of  Somerfetfhire,  through  the 
Retgn  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  &  the  17  firfl  years  of  the' 
Retgn  of  K.  James  1.  written  by  Jacob  Chaloner. 

2.  Arms  of  the  Juftices  of  the  Peace  in  Somerfet- 

fhire,  A. , i6c’.  Tricked  by  Jacob  Chaloner.  2. 

3.  Arms  of  the  Somerfetfhire  Gentry,  tricked  by  Mr 

John  Saunders  the  Painter-,' Stayner.  4.  &  5. 

4-  Jacob  Ch-loner’s  Copy  of  the  Vifitation-book  of 
tlie  (  ounty  of  Somerfet,  as  it  was  made  A.D.  1  C73.  by 
Robert  Cooke  Clarenccux ;  with  fome  later  Additions. 

5.  Defcent  &  Arms  ofSamborne ;  dated  A.  D.  1 623. 

6.  Defcent  of  Gorge;  with  the  fame  Date.  jo!b. 

7.  Arms  of  lereyval  of  Weflon;  with  the  Matches. 

S.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Englifh.  ii.b. 

9.  Pedegree  &  Arms  of  Arther  of  Clopton^  with 
Deicents  of  Hyett,  Cadull,  &  Albany.  72. 

xo.  Alphabetical  Fable  of  Surnames;  referring  to 
this  Book,  according  to  the  old  Numeration  of  the 
Leaves. 

they  are  putt  down  in  Colors,  but  in  an  Order  different 
from  this. 

iS  .  Arms  of  the  Earls  of  Chefter  from  Leofric^o 
John  le  Scot. 

19.  Arms  of  Wikes,  de  Com.  Glouceftr. 

20.  Coates  of  rare  Bearinge.  (vid.  infra  N"6j.  &  6S.) 

21.  Arms  of  Calthroppe,  and  of  Families  quartered 
or  impailed  by  the  fame. 

22.  Arms  of  Families  impailing  Calthroppe.  3 j.b. 

23.  Arms  of  Englilli  Noblemen,  c.  temp.  R.Edw.  n. 

24.  Arms  aferibed  to  the  feveral  Kingdoms  of^he 

Heptarchy.  „ 

z  j.  Nomina  IUullrmm  infra  regnum  Anglitc,  temnore 
Edwardi  x.  °  r 

This  containeth  tile  Arms  of  theNobility,  &  of  the 
greater  Gentry  of  that  Time. 

zb.  Different  Arms  of  Flemynge;  with  the  Arms 
quartered  by  Bezome.  ^ 

Then  follow  the  Arms  bom  by  Knight  of  different 
Counties  at  that  time,  under  the  following  Titles  • 

27.  Nomina  Militum  Comitatus  Nodi, it,,  temnore 
Edwardi  primi.  r  ‘c 

eff  A  Note  (i.  e.  the  Arms)  of  certen  &igh 

Rhodes,  or  of  St.John  of  Hierufalem.  „ 

1386, 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol  bought  by  John  Withie,  of 
Mr.  John  Guillim  Pourfuivant  of  Armes,  14th  Maij, 

A  D.  j  6 1  2.  the  Paid  Mr.  Guillim's  Cypher  A  Shield 
of  Arms  being  fairly  tricked  on  the  out  fide  of  the 
parchment  Cover,  it  containeth, 

1.  Places  of  Chaucer,  where  the  Ufage  of  Banners, 

Penons,  &c.  as  in  Chaucer’s,  time,  areabfurdly  applied 
to  perfons  of  the  remotefl  Antiquity.  '  j . 

2.  De  Laconum  Proverbio,  admeta  manu  Fortunam 

efie  implorandam  :  e  Conr.  Lycoflhene.  ibid. 

3.  An  Alphabet  of  fome  of  the  Names  contayned  in 

this  Booke.  „ 

_  4-  Note  of  the  coming  of  K.  Richard  m.  &  Q.  Anne 

his  wife,  to  the  Tower,  4th  July,  1483.  lS 

5.  Lords  created  by  him  the'  next  Day.  ibid! 

6.  Knights  of  the  Bath  made  by  him  the  fame  Night. 

nr  ..  ibid. 

7.  Perfonages  attending  K.  Richard  111.  through  the 
City  of  London  toward  Weflminfler  sth  July  1483  ibid 

8.  Proceeding  of  K.  Richard  in.  &  Q.  Anne,  to  their 
Coronation  mWeftminfter  Abbey,  6th  July  1483.  i6.b. 

6.  Great  Officersmade  by  K.Henry  iv.  upon  his  beincr 
proclaimed  King.  ° 

.  to.  Ordering  of  the  Claims  made  4th  Oflober  t  jno 
in  order  to  feryeatthe  Coronation  of  K.Henry  iv.  ibid. 

11.  Knights  of  the  Bath  made  at  the  Tower  by  K 

Henry  iv.  before  his  Coronation.  ,  g 

12.  Of  the  Divifion  ^Hatred  between  the  two  Houles 

of  Lancalter  &  York  ;  from  Hollingelhead.  ibid. 

10 

29.  Milites  Comitatus  Suffolk.  ^  ' 

30.  Milites  Comitatus  Canrabrigfie. 

31.  Milites  Comitatus  Effex. 

32.  Milites  Comitatus  Hertforde. 

33.  Milites  Comitatus  Bedfordie. 

34.  Milites  Comitatus  Buckingham.  '*2* 

35.  Milites  Comitatus  Oxon.  ^ 

36.  Milites  Comitatus  Cantke. 

37.  Milites  Comitatus  Middlefexe. 

38.  Milites  Comitatus  Berks. 

39.  Milites  Comitatuum  Sowthfexe  L  Sowthereye. 

40.  Milites  Comitatuum  Wiltes  et  Mampfh.  6 

41.  Milites  Comitatuum  Dorcet.  &  SomerfK  c'l' 

42.  Milites  Comitatuum  Devon,  et  Cornub. '  6  c 

43-  Milites  Comitatuum  Darbye  &  Nottingham.  66 

44.  Milites  Comitatus  Lyncoln.  b 

4;-  Milites  Comitatuum  Weftmerl.  &  Lancaflr  6<V 

46.  Milites  Comitatus  Ebor.  ”  ’  ' J’ 

47.  Milites  Comitatus  Leyceflrite. 

48.  Milites  Comitatus  Northampton. &Rurl  .-.,l 

49.  Milites  Comitatus  Warwick  '  ' 

50.  Milites  Comitatus  Glouceflr. 

51.  Milites  Comitatus  Herefordite. 

52.  Milites  Comitatus  Huntingdon.  „  " 

53.  Milites  Comitatus  Wigornite.  vo'h 

54.  Milites  Comitatus  Ceftria:.  g  * 

55.  Milites  Comitatus  Salopian  g0  f* 

56.  Milites  Comitatus  Staffordia;.  8x  ' b" 

57.  Milites  Comitatuum  Northumbr.  &  Cumbr" 

82* 

Then 

Bibliothecas  Harleiante* 


a* 


Num.  1 3 86j  1387* 

Then  follow  certain  other  Trafts,  vizi 

58.  Nomina  etlnfignia  eorum  qui  comitabanturHen- 
ricum  Regem  Anglia  ejus  nominis  Quinturri,  apud  Ob- 
fidionem  Civitatis  Roan,  infra  Regnum  Fran  cite.  83. 

59.  Arms  of  Englifh  Gentlemen;  at  prelent  incer¬ 
tain  to  me,  whether  they  were  at  this  Siege,  or  not. 

86.  b. 

60.  A  little  Collection  of  Arms  Foreign  &  Englilh  : 
tinted  to  be  taken,  “  Ex  Libro  Mri.  Ulherj”  and  leem- 
jng  (as  to  fome  of  them)  of  doubtful  authority.  88.  b. 

61.  Arms  of  the  Offices  of  Clarenc^ux,  Garter,  Nor- 

roy.  &  Ulfter.  90. 

62.  Arms  of  the  Lord  of  the  Hies.  ibid. 

63.  Arms  of  fome  few  E  iglilh  Gentlemen  ;  perhaps 
com  ng  under  the  Title  of  thole  of  rare  Bearing,  ibid. 

64.  Arms  of  the  Kings  of  Scotland,  from  Malcolm 

to  Robert  in.  both  inclulive ;  with  fome  of  their  Im¬ 
palements.  90.  b. 

6  .  Arms,  as  it  may  feettl,  taken  from  the  Pedegree 
of  Hoo.  91.  b. 

66.  Arms  of  the  Italian  Princes.  93. 

67.  Arms  of  the  Nobility  in  the  Low-Countries  (i.  e. 

of  fome  of  the  Chiefeft.)  93.  b. 

68.  Coats  of  rare  Bearing,  (vid.  fupra,  N°  63.  Si  20.) 

94- 

63.  Arms  of  Arondell,  de  Riparijs,  Stourton,  Mon- 
haulte,  &  Argentine.  98. 

70.  Arms  of  the  Gloucefterfliire  Families.  98.  b. 

7 1 .  Arms  of  Knights  created  by  Sir  William  Ruffell 

Kt.  Lord  Deputye  ol  Irelande.  xlt  Sept.  1594.  160. 

All  which  Arms  above-mentioned  in  this  Book, 
from  fol.  27.  are  tricked  in  printed  Elcocheons. 

Then  follow, 

72.  Tranfcripts  &  Extrafts  from  certain  Charters,  re¬ 

lating  to  the  Families  of  Glouceller,  Lafci,  Mortimer, 
Muneiny,  Clifford,  Beauchamp,  Longefpee,  Aldithlega, 
&c.  with  Tricks  of  two  Seals.  101. 

73.  Tenure  of  the  Barony  of  Halton  in  Chelhire. 

io3* 

74.  Argument  of  one  of  the  Officers  of  Arms,  againll 

Sir  Michael  Blounte,  who  endeavored  to  prove  himfelf 
Heyre-male  of  the  Bodye  of  Sir  Walter  firlt  Lorde 
Mountjoy,  from  a  Glaffe  Wyndowe,  &  a  private  Pede¬ 
gree.  104. 

75.  Members  of  a  Man,  born  in  Armory.  105. 

76.  Things  bom  Guttee,  in  Armory.  106. 

77.  Arms,  wherein  are  Lyons  having  fignes  of  Sub-* 

jediion.  107. 

Thefe  Three  laft  Articles  are  but  begun. 

78.  Arms  of  our  Brittone,  Saxon,  Danilh,  &  Norman 

Kinges;  of  Ireland,  of  the  Wellh  Princes  of  Wales,  of 
Normandy,  Guyen,  &  England.  108. 

79.  Apographum  Litterarum  Patentium  Elizabethse 

Regina,  quibus  (poll  Refignationem  Nicholai  Narbone) 
conftituit  Chrillophorum  XJfcher  Ulvefler,  five  Regem 
Armorum  in  Regno  Hybermte.  Telle,  &c.  30  die  Junij, 
anno  regni  30.  109. 

80.  Litterae  Patentes  Willelmi  Harvye  alias  Clarenci- 

eubc.  Principalis  Heraldi  Armorumq;  Regis  quibus  af- 
fignat  Anna  Ricardo  Davis  Epifcopo  Affaphenfi.  dat. 
20  die  Febr.  anno  2  R.  Eliz.  1 10. 

8 1 .  Arms  of  Smythe  of  Herefordlhire.  ibid. 

82.  Style  of  Q.Elizabeth,  to  be  proclaimed  at  a 

Largefs.  1 1  o.  b. 

83.  Places  of  the  Book  of  Efra,  obferved  in  order  to 

fhew  the  ufefulnefs  of  Books  of  Pedegrees.  1 1 1 . 

!387- 

A  Book  in  fol.  done  by  divers  hands,  &  containing,  in 
printed  Efcocheons, 

Part  of  a  good  Ordinary  of  Arms j  with  imperfect 
Tables  before  it. 

Cat.  Harx.  Vol.  II, 


Num.  1388-1391. 

1388. 

An  Hetaldical  Book  in  fol.  made  by  Mr.  John  Withie 
the  Painter-Stainer,  for  the  mod  part,  while  he  was  a 
young  man,  as  I  believe.  It  containeth, 

1.  A  Table  Ihewing  the  method  obferved. 

2.  Alphabetical  Table  ol  the  Surnames  of  Families, 
whofe  Arms  &  Crells  are  herein  exhibited. 

3.  An  Ordinary  of  Crells  well  tricked  from  fome 
other  Book  by  John  Withie,  as  it  feems:  with  fome  Ad¬ 
ditions  of  his  own:  all  done  in  printed  Efcocheon'-. 
By  the  Colors  of  the  Ink,  it  looks  as  if  he  tricked  the 
Arms  &  Crells  firlli  &  afterwards  putt  the  Names  6c 
Colors  to  them» 

1389. 

An  Heraldicai  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands $ 
wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Alphabetical  Tables  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 

mentioned  in  many  other  Books;  fome  or  all  of  which 
may  perhaps  be  now  extant  in  this  Library.  1. 

2.  The  Genealogie  of  the  ancient  &  illultrious  Family 

of  the  Montacutes,  alias  Montagues,  Lords  &  Kings  of 
Man,  Earles  of  Salilbury,  Mancheller,  6c  Sandwiche, 
and  Barons  Mountague  of  Boughton  ;  and  alfo  Nevilles 
Marquefs  Mountacutes;  and  Poole  Lord  Browne,  Lord 
&  Vifcount  Mountacutes.  Collected  Sc  extracted  out  of 
Letters  Patents,  Writts  of  Summons,  Killory,  and  other 
authenticke  Evidences;  and  compofed  by  John  Tillton 
Gent.  Anno  1670.  87. 

I  -take  this  to  be  no  more  than  a  private  ExtraCl 
made  by  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Painter-Stainer,  from 
Tilfton’s  Book;  to  which  he  put  fome  few  Notes  of  his 
own. 

3.  The  auncient  &  right  worlhipful  Defcent  of  Sir 

ITarbottle  Grimllon  of  Bradfeild  in  the  County  of  Effex 
Kt.  &  Baronet;  continued  in  a  lineall  Stemm  from  the 
worlhipful  Sylveller  Grimllon  of  Grimllon  in  the  County 
of  York,  Efq.  who  did  homage  to  William  the  Con¬ 
queror,  &c.  92.  b. 

This,  perhaps,  may  have  been  drawn  up  by  the 
fame  Tilllon;  and  copied  by  Mr.  John  Saunders. 

1 39°* 

A  Book  in  fol.  tricked  &  Written  by  Mr.  John  Saunders 
the  Painter-Stainer ;  it  containeth, 

1.  Arms  &  Defcentsof  Bedfordlhire  Families,  dated, 

A.D.  1582.  &  1583.  1. 

Whether  there  was  any  Vifitation  of  that  County, 
in  either  of  thofe  Years,  I  cannot,  as  yet,  tell  :  however, 
it  may  not  be  amifs  to  obferve,  that  here  are  divers  Ad¬ 
ditions  &  Continuations,  by  Mr.  Saunders. 

2.  Names  of  fome  of  the  Sheriffes  of  Bedfordlhire. 

37« 

3.  Arms  of  the  Bedfordlhi re-Gentry.  41. 

4.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families  j 
at  the  end. 

r39r- 

A  Book  in  fol.  (for  the  greater  part)  written  &  tricked 
by  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Painter-Stainer.  It  con¬ 
taineth, 

1.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifxtation-book  of  Buckingham- 
fhire  as  the  fame  was  taken  A.D.  1 634.  with  many  con- 
fiderable  Continuations  and  Additions. 

Herein  I  take  leave  to  mention  particularly, 

That  although  this  Copie  beginneth  at  fol.  1 2.  it  is 
not  to  be  accounted  as  impCrfeCt ;  becaufe  divers  other 
Copies  begin  with  the  Defcent  of  Parfons,  which  is  here 
at  fol.  14.  b. 

G  Alfo 


a 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1391 — 1393. 

Alfo  that  befides  the  Corporation,  or  Town  Seal  of 
Chipping-Wicombe,  Church  Notes,  Sc  Extracts  from 
Deeds;  and  the  Continuations  aforefaid,  I  find, 

2.  The  Arms  (in  Blazon)  Sc  Epitaph  of  William  Dun- 

^omb  Efq.  taken  from  his  Monument  in  the  Church  of 
Battlefden  in  Com.  Bedford,  as  alfo  the  Arms  Sc  Epitaph 
of  Richard  Saunders,  from  his  Monument  in  the  Church 
of  Wandon  in  Com.  Bucks.  Both  thefe,  with  their  At- 
teftations  tranfcribed  by  Mr.  Robert  Dale  Suffolk  He¬ 
rald.  _  Inter  fol.  38.  &  39. 

3.  Epitaph  of  Mrs.  Elizabeth'  Lane,  who  died  20th 

April,  1655.  poll  62. 

4.  In  the  Defcent  of  Saunders,  at  fol.  85.  b.  (as  alfo 
atfol.  1 24.(  Mr.  Saunders,  hath  taken  notice  of  himfelf; 
and  in  the  former  place  affirmeth  that  he  made  this  Copie, 
A.D. 1648. 

5.  Atteftation  of  the  Defcent  of  Fox  of  Great  Mif- 

fenden,  A.D.  1637.  107. 

6.  Pedcgree  &  Arms  of  Verney;  dated  A.D.  1694. 

I09- 

7.  Church  Notes  relating  to  Verney  ;  and  taken  in 

the  Church  of  Middle  Claydon  in  Comitatu  Bucks,  in 
the  fame  hand  with  the  Pedegree.  1  to. 

8.  Grant  of  Supporters  to  the  Arms  of  Heneage 

Finch  Baron  of  Daventre,  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great 
Seal,  by  Sir  Edward  Walker,  Garter.  140. 

9-  Defcent  Sc  Arms  of  Finch  ;  to  Daniel  the  prefent 
£arl  of  Notingham,  fon  to  the  Lord  above-mentioned. 

141. 

10.  Defcent  of  Bennet  of  Bechampton.  141.  b. 

1 1.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  of  Families  whofe 
Defcents  are  exhibited  in  this  Book.  At  the  end. 

T392- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  before  which  fomebody  hath 

prefixed  the  Title  following,  “  This  is  a  Coppic  of 

Mr.  Robert  Glover’s  greate  Booke  of  Ordinaries.  It 

containeth, 

1.  A  'fable  to  Ihew  where  every  Ordinary  doth  begin. 

2.  A  Table  to  find  every  Name,  (i.  e.  Surname)  and 
its  Armes  in  his  Page. 

3.  Then  followeth  the  main  Treatife  itfelf,  as  in 

this  Copie  it  fhould  feem;  but  I  rather  take  it  to  be  a 
Copie  of  fome  antient  Roll  of  Arms  prefixed  before  it; 
containing  the  Arms  of  many  Britilh  &  Saxon  Kings; 
Roman  Emperors;  Kings  of  England  &  of  other  Nations ; 
of  the  nine  Worthies;  of  many  old  Saints,  &c.  many  of 
which  feeming  utterly  fabulous,  hot  being  difpofed  by 
way  of  Ordinary,  nor  admitted  into  that  valuable  Copie 
Of  Mr.  Glover’s  Ordinary  which  in  this  Library  is  in¬ 
scribed  82.  B.7.  I  therefore  efteem  it  to  be  no  part 
thereof.  j  _ 

4.  The  Ordinary  beginning  with  Eagles  double-headed 

Sc  difplayed;  with  fome  few  Additions  made  by  Mr. 
john  Withie,  ,~ 

5.  Arms  of  the  feveral  Archiepifcopal  Secs  in  Eng¬ 
land;  &  of  Dublin  in  Ireland.  729. 

6.  Arms  of  many  Cities  &  Corporate  Towns  in  En^- 

iand.  72 1. 

7.  Arms  of  Englifh  Abbeys  Sc  Priories,  in  number 

M6-  7o-. 

8.  Arms  of  the  Unrverfity  of  Cambridge,  of  Kind’s 

Sc  Eaton  Colleges.  ’ 

All  the  Arms  of  this  Book,  are  haflilv  tricked  in 
printed  Efcocheons. 


A  Book  in  fol.  confiding  of  particular  Heraldical  Col- 
leaions  of  different  perfons;  being  for  the  mod 
part  Pedegrees ;  bound  up  together  in  the  following 
Order,  6 

A  Colle&ion  of  Pedegrees,  with  this  Title,  “Copia 
ex  Libro  Nicholai  Tubmanni  alias  Lancadr. 


Num.  1393. 

1.  Pedegree  of  BoIlUn  Earl  of  Hereford,  with'  the 

Defcent  of  Braiofe.  4. 

2.  De  aliquibus  Imperatorum  Alemanie,  Adnota- 

tiones.  4.  b. 

3.  Genealogia  Ducum  et  Comitum  Britanne  Armo- 

ricanze.  4.  b. 

4.  Defcent  of  the  Earls  of  Poitiers.  5.  b. 

5.  Defcent  of  the  Dukes  df  Normandy.  ibid. 

6.  Defcent  of  the  Earls  of  Anjou.  ibid. 

7.  Defcents  of  Mortimer,  Plancaginet,  &of  theHoufes. 

of  Valois,  Cadile,.  &  Baviere.  6. 

8.  Defcent  of  the  Royal  Houfe  of  Scotland  ;  &  of 

Douglafs ;  with  this  Note,  “  Looke  Scotorum  Regej 
in  Copia  Tubmanni  alias  Lancadr.  in  Librofi  _  .  J 
which  fheweth  that  the  former  Note  is  not  to  be  under- 
dood  as  if  the  whole  Collediion  was  tranfcribed  from 
Mr.  Tubman.  g,  b. 

9.  Cafa  di  Milano,  or  the  Difcent  of  the  Vifconti, 
Galeazzi,  &  Sforzi;  with  their  alliance  to  divers  Royal 
Families. 

10.  Defcent  of  the  Dukes  of  Cleve  :  of  the  King.:  of 

Portugal,  &  late  Emperors  of  Germany  from  John  of 
Gaunt  &  the  Earls  of  Lancader.  7.  b, 

1 1.  Defcent  of  the  Lord  Welles  from  Sir  John  Beau¬ 
champ. 

1 2.  Matches  &  Iflue  of  the  Children  of  K. Edward  iv. 

with  thofe  of  Henry  vnj.  ibid. 

13.  Genealogia  Regum  Danorum.  ibid. 

14.  Pofteri  Erici  Regis  Suecite.  ibid. 

15.  Defcent  of  K. Henry  vm.  &  Edward  Stanley 

Earl  of  Derby,  from  John  of  Gaunt.  8.  b. 

16.  Defcent  of  K.  Henry  vm.  &  of  John  Bourgchier 

Earl  of  Bath,  from  K. Edward  nr  ibid. 

17.  Defcent  of  K.Henryvm.  the  Baron  of  Grey- 

docke,  the  Lord  Fitz-Hugh,  &  Thomas  Fitz- Alan,  from 
John  of  Gaunt.  jb;c| 

18.  Defcendants  from  Thomas  Holland  Earle  of  Kent 

and  Alice  Fitz-Alan.  ^id  ' 

19.  Defcent  of  K.  Edward  iv.  Henry  Grey  Marquis 

ot  Dorfet,  Henry  Fitz-Alan  Earl  of  Arundell,  &  Edw, 
Stanley  Earl  of  Derby ;  from  Richard  Earl  Ryvcrs  80 
Jaquett  of  St.Poole  Duchefsof  Bedford.  ibid. 

20.  Defcent  of  Henry  K.  vm.  Edward  Stafford  Ear! 

of  Wiltlhire,  George  Talbot  Earl  of  Shrewftmry,  Sc 
Henry  Nevil  Lord  of  Abergavennv,  from  John  of 
Gaunt.  '  jkjj 

21.  Defcent  of  Margaret  Coimteffe  of  Richmond 

K.  H.  7.  8,:  K.  Henry  vm.  &  John  Vere  Earl  of  Oxford, 
from  Richard  Fitz-Alan  Earl  of  Arundell.  ibid. 

22.  Defcent  of  K.  Henry  vm.  Henry  Lord  Stad'ord 
fon  to  Edward  Duke  of  Buckingham,  Sc  Richard  Grey 
Earl  of  Kent ;  from  John  of  Gaunt. 

23.  Defcent  of  George  I  ladings  Earl  of  Huntingdon, 

Thrums  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby,  the  Lady  Elizabeth 
Welles,  &  Edmund  Dela  Pole  Duke  of  Suffolk,  from 
Ralph  Nevile  Earl  of  Wedmoreland  &  Jane  daughter  to 
John  of  Gaunt.  0  • 

24.  Defcent  of  K.  Edward  vi.  &  of  the  Lady  Jaiie 

Gray  with  her  brother  &  filters,  from  Ri  hard  Fi  z- 
Ahn  Earl  of  Arundell  &  Eleanor  fitter  to  Henry  the 
nr  ft  Duke  of  Lancafter.  - 

25.  Defcent  of  Margaret  Countefs  of  Richmond  fro' a 

Edith  daughter  of  John  Stourtonby  Sir  John  Beauchamp, 
one  of  her  hufbands :  of  Francis  Cheney  Efq;  &  of 
William  Lord  Sands  from  Sir  Robert  Shotelbrooke 
another  of  her  hufbands.  ibid.  * 

26.  Defcent  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  &  of  William  Broke 
Lord  Cobham,  from  John  of  Gaunt  :  of  the  fame  Lord 
Cobham  &  Q.  Elizabeth  from  Sir  Robert  Howard  :  as 
alfo  from  Sir  Geffrey  Bulleyn. 

27  A  large  Pedegree,  wherein  are  the  Defcents 'of 
Sr,  John,  Poole,  Clifford,  Grey,  Talbot,  See.  9  b. 

12  28.  Another 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


Num;  1 393 i 

2S.  Another,  with  Dcfcents  of  the  Royal  Family 
from  K.  Edward  1.  of  Mortimer,  Holland,  Nevil,  Grey, 
and  other  Noble  Families.  1  o.  b. 

29.  Another,  with  Defcents  ofSudeley,  Butler,  Nor- 

bury,  Berkeley  of  Wymondham,  HuiTey,  Matravers, 
Howard,  Grey,  &c.  11.  b. 

30.  Defcent  of  Savage,  Wyndfor,  Stanley,  Ferrers, 

See.  12.  b. 

31.  Defcent  of  Howard  Difke  of  Norfolk,  See.  13. 

32.  Defcent  of  Darrell.  ibid. 

33.  Defcent  of  Shakerley.  ibid. 

34.  Defcent  of  Seymour.  13- b. 

35.,  Small  Defcent  ofSpylman,  or  Spellman.  ibid. 

36.  Defcent  of  Pagett.  ibid. 

37.  Defcent  of  Devereux,  Ferrers  of  Chartley,  Sc 

Parre,  1 4* 

28.  Defcent  of  Chcny,  Vaux,  Sc  Conftable,  from 
Fitz-Hugh.  ibid. 

39.  Pedigree,  with  Defcents  of  De  la  Pole,  Berners, 

Vere,  Stafford,  &c.  14-  b. 

40.  Defcent  of  Skipwith  from  St.  Quintin,  Conftable, 

Sc  Nevile,  &c.  15* 

41.  Defcents'of  Sands,  Cheyncv,  Conftable,  Mannors, 

Rods,  &c.  ibid. 

42.  Defcent  of  Ufford.  ibid. 

43.  Defcent  of  Geringe  from  Dyke.  ibid. 

44.  Defcent  of  Barrett  from  Bel houfe.  15.  b. 

45.  Defcent  of  Norrys,  Lovell,  and  efpecially  a  large 

one  of  Wyloughbv.  ibid. 

46.  Defcent  of  Hampden.  ibid. 

47.  Defcent  of  Tyrrell.  ibid. 

48.  Defcent  of  Norrys,  Maylock,  &  Petite.  x6. 

40.  Defcent  of  Percy  Earl  of  Northumberland,  & 

Somerfet  Earl  of  Worcelter,  from  Beauchamp  Earl  of 

Warwick,  Sc  Berkeley  with  a  Hum  Defcent  of  Spencer. 

i6.b. 

ec.  Short  Defcent  of  Willoughby  from  Camoys. 

’  ibid. 

51.  Defcent  of  Broke,  Starkey,  Sc  Maynwaring.  17. 

52.  Defcent  of  Rich  &  North.  ibid. 

53.  Defcent  of  At-clyffe,  Braye,  &  Tychemerfhe. 

1 7"  b* 

154.  Short  Defcent  of  Stapleton.  ibid. 

55.  Defcent  of  Broke  Lord  Cobham,  Catefby,  Bray, 
Ryce,  Hufley,  Norbury,  Craycrofte,  Sc  Belleyne,  See. 

ibid. 

56.  Defcent  of  Radclyf.  18. 

cj.  Defcent  of  Boleyn  ;  Parker  Lord  Morlev,  &  Sr. 

John.  #  J8. 

'  58.  Defcent  of  Moun'ford.  ibid, 

co.  Defcent  of  Fowler  of  Bromhill  in  Com.  Norff. 

ibid. 

60.  Defcent  of  Moubray,  Afteley,  Grey,  Sc  Howard. 

18.  b. 

61.  Defendants  from  the  Lord  Waren  of  Raby.  19. 

62.  Defendants  from  Gyfors.  ibid. 

63.  Pedegreeof  Awdeley,  Broke  Lord  Cobham,  Fitz- 

Williams,  Browne,  Spencer,  Nevile,  Sc  other  Noble 
Families.  1 9-  b. 

64.  Defcent  of  Warren,  Plantagenet,  Fitz-Alan, 

Holland.  20. 

65.  Defcent  of  Veie,  Sergeaux,  Marnev,  Howard, 

Palheley,  Poynings,  Bonham,  Dale,  Tyrrell,  &  Balling- 
bourne.  ibid. 

66.  Defcent  ef  Danvers,  Baldingron,  Fray,  Say, 
Stafforde,  Flemings,  Cardovs,  Gates,  &  Darcy.  20.  b. 

67.  Pedigree  of  r  iiz-vvilliam,  St.  Omer,  Fitz-Gilbert, 
Montford,  Holbeche,  Beav/pre,  Fodringay,  Brudnell, 
Coke,  Cecill,  Bacon,  Hoby,  Hawes,  Nevile,  &c. 

2  .  Sc  20.  b. 

68.  Defcent  pf  Eardolfe,  Butler,  &  Beaumont. 

a  1.  b. 


Num.  1 3 '9 3 . 

69.  Defcent  of  Wartre,  from  Becket^  Fitz-Warin» 

&  Roo.  ibid. 

70.  Defcent  of  Walter.  ibid. 

71.  Defcent  of  Harlefton.  ibid. 

72.  Defcents  of  Capell,  Pawlett,  Zouche,  Sabcotts, 
Fitz-warin,  Arundell,  Carewe,  &  Dynham.  22. 

73.  Defcent  of  Ibgrave,  Lucy,  Langley,  &  Segam. 

ibid. 

74.  Pedegree  of  Hampden,  with  Defcents  of  the  Fa¬ 
milies  thereunto  allied.  '  22.  b. 

75.  Defcent  of  Vaux,  Cheney,  &  Corbet.  23. 

76.  Defcent  of  Lucy  &  Hampton.  23.  b. 

77.  Defcent  of  Leghe,  Salford,  Frowick,  Spilman, 

Martin  &  Denny.  ibid. 

78.  Defcents  of  Lavenham,  More,  Capell,  Gatef- 
bury,  Coton,  Fitz-Herbert,  Jelken,  Elvedon,  &c.  ibid. 

79.  Defcent  of  Crude.  24. 

80.  Defcent  of  Draper.  ibid. 

81.  Defcent  of  Wyat.  ibid. 

82.  Defcent  of  Brudnell,  Bulftrode,  Blacknall, 

Knyfe,  &c.  ibid. 

83.  Defcent  of  Marmyon,  Ludlow,  Frevile,  Dymok, 

Hyde,  Sc  Roche.  ibid. 

84.  Large  Pedigree  of  Wingfelde,  wherein  are 

Defcents  of  Ferrers,  Kirkham,  Malherbe,  Donne, 
Dennys,  Myllington,  Cromwell,  Cary,  Wrotefley, 
Grefley,  Jennett,  Yonge,  Weft,  Cantlowe,  Segrave,  La 
Warre,  Tregofe,  Cornewall,  Mortimer,  Brandon,  De 
la  Pole,  Salifbiiry,  &  other  families.  24.  b. 

85.  Defcent  of  C.hamberlejn.  25.  b. 

86.  Defcent  of  Helperby  &  Walldeffe.  ibid. 

87.  Defendants  from  Throgmerton.  ibid. 

88.  Defcent  of  Weynman ;  with  thofe  of  Strotley, 
GyfFord,  Verney,  Hynd,  Chechelly,  Sc  Deccons.  ibid. 

89.  Defcent  of  Bregnell,  from  Conyers,  Maleverer, 

Wyclyffe,  Cleiby,  Walton,  &  Philipe.  ibid. 

90.  Defcent  of  Amcotts  Sc  Afthorpc.  26. 

9 1 .  Pedegree  of  Haftings,  with  Defcents  of  Families 

allied  unto  it.  ibid. 

92.  Defcent  of  Rygby.  26.  b. 

93.  Defcent  of  Hungat,  Salley,  &  Amcotts.  ibid. 

94.  Defcent  of  Fyncham.  ibid. 

95.  Short  Defcent  of  Harlefton.  ibid. 

96.  Short  Defcent  of  Waringe.  ibid. 

97.  Pedegree  of  Sheffeld  ;  with  Defcents  of  Lownd, 

Delves,  &  Babington.  27. 

98.  Defcent  of  Mordant  from  Latimer.  ibid. 

99.  Defcent  of  Mohun,  Chaucer,  Sc  Bunvalhe.  ibid. 

100.  Pedigree  of  Mannors  Earl  of  Rutland  ;  with 
defcents  of  many  Families  allied  thereunto.  27.  b. 

1 01.  Defcents  of  Mohun,  &  Knevett  ;  as  alfo  of 

many  Families  allied  unto  them,  28.  b. 

102.  Defcent  of  Devereux  from  Bourchier.  29.  b. 

103.  Defcent  of  Sutton  alias  Dudley,  Willoughby, 

Welles,  8rc.  ibid.  &  30. 

104.  Defcent  "of  Ccmpton  from  divers  antient  Fa¬ 
milies.  30. 

10:.  FedegreC  of  Somerfet  Earl  of  Worcefter. 

30.  b. 

c6.  Dcfcents  of  Browne  Vifcount  Montacute  ;  Boyn- 

31* 
3*-b. 
32- 
ibid, 
ibid, 
ibid. 
‘Md.  33. 
33-  b- 


ton,  Scrope,  See. 

107.  Pedegree  of  Berkeley. 

I  c8.  Defcent  of  Ileydon. 

109.  Defcent  of  Poynings. 

I I  o.  Defcent  of  Sturton. 

111.  Pedegree  of  Courtney. 

1 1 2.  Defcent  of  Harrington. 

1 13.  Defcent  of  Drury,  &c  Hethe. 

1 14.  Defcent  of  Vere,  Scales,  Howard,  &c.  (belong¬ 
ing  to  N°ii6t)  ibid. 

115.  Defcent  of  Vere;  deduced  from  Noah,  to 
Alberic  Ver  the  firft  Earl  of  Oxford.  (Inferted.)  34. 

1 1 6.  Pedegree  of  Vere  Earl  of  Oxford.  34. 

1 1 7.  Pedegre 


1 ty.  Pedegree  of  Moubray,  &  Howard  Duke  of  Nor¬ 
folk.  34.  b. 

1 1 8.  De  Willeirao  filio  Ofberni  qui  cum  Willelmo 
Conqueftore  ad  Angliam  appulerit,  deq;  pofterius  ipfius 
ufq;  A.D.  1246.  forte,  e  Chronicis  Monafterij  de  Tin- 
lerne.  35. 

1  19.  De  Succefiione  et  Difcehfione  Dominorum  de 
Mowbray,  port  {Rogerum,  qui  fundavit  Bellandas  et 
let  Novum-burgum*  (producitur  ufq;  ad  A.D.  1 572.) 

35.  b. 

t2o.  Pofteri  Hugoms  Lacy  Conqueftoris  Comitatus 
de  Mydia  in  Hybernia.  37.  b. 

1 2 1 .  Defcent  of  Stanley,  &c.  ibid. 

122.  Pedegree  of  Stanley,  &c.  381 

123.  Defcent  of  Poynings,  &  Bryan.  38.  b. 

124.  Defcent  of  Hampden.  39. 

125.  Two  Defcents  of  Venables.  ibid. 

126.  Pedigree  of  Hafelwood  :  with  Defcents  of  Ho* 

tofte,  Norwyche,  Hivet,  Byllindon,  Murmyon,  and 
others.  39*  b. 

127.  Pedegree  of  Ruffell  ;  with  Defcents  of  De  la 
Towre,  Sabcots,  Semark,  Ouldham,  St.  John,  &c. 

40.  b. 

128.  Pedegree  of  Wyndfon  41. 

129.  Defcent  of  Ecclefton.  ibid. 

13?.  Pedegree  of  Darcy  of  Meyhill ;  with  Defcents 

of  Fitz- Gerald,  Greyftock,  Lumley.  &c.  41.  b. 

All  this  Collection  of  Pedigrees  feem  to  be  copied 
from  the  Works  of  Nicholas  Tubman  Lancafter  Herald, 
&  others :  by  Sir  William  Dethick  Garter,  befides 
which,  the  Arms  of  l  he  refpe&ive  Families  are  exhibited, 
with  fome  proofs  from  Seals  &  antient  Deeds.  Moreover 
divers  Additions  are  made  to  the  faid  Pedigrees,  with’ 
Ved  Ink,  by  the  fame,  or  a  not  unlike  hand. 

Then  follow,  in  other  hands,  of  the  fame  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  Dethick,  but  more  legible  as  better  written, 

1 3 1 .  Defcent  of  Cary  Lord  Hunfdon,  &  of  Talbot 
Earl  of  Shrewfbury,  from  Thomas  Butler  Earl  of  Or- 

•  mond. 

132.  Defcent  of  Pole  &  Fortefcuefrom  Richard  Duke 

of  York:  father  to  K.  Edward  iv.  42.  b. 

At  the  bottom  of  this  Defcent,  are  thefe  Words, 
Exemplificat.  Garter,  principall  Kinge  of  Arms. 

Then  followeth  in  a  different  hand, 

133.  Remembrance  of  the  Names  of  certeyne 

Noble-men,  Knights  and  Efquires,  Gentlemen  &  Cap- 
teynes,  with  King  Henry  vn.  in  his  Warrs  at  Black- 
heathe,  &  in  Scotland,  with  theyr  retynew.  43. 

134.  Account  of  the  Noblemen  &  Gentlemen,  with 
their  feveral  retinews,  muftered  at  Hamptell,  Ann. 
28  Hen.  vm.  before  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  &  the  Lord 


Num.  1393* 

144.  Defcent  of  Q.  Elizabeth  from  Plantagenet,  & 
Mortimer.  ^ 

145-  Defcent  of  Fitz-Hugh,  St.  Quintin,  &  Marmyon  ; 
in  Sr.  Will.  Dethick’s  running  hand.  74.  b. 

146.  Defcent  of  Raff  Lord  Cromwell  from  Ber* 
nack  ;  &  of  Cliftoti  from  Cromwell :  in  Sr.  William 
Dethick’s  plainer  hand.  ^4.  b. 

147*  Defcent  of  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby,  by  the  fame. 


Sands  Lord  Chamberlen. 


43.  c. 


1 35-  Defendants  from  Hugh  Lacy  Lord  of  Methe  in 
Ireland,  temp.  R.  Hen.  11.  44. 

136.  Defcent  of  Bigod  Earl  of  Norfolk,  &c.  written 

by  William  Smith  Rouge-Dragon.  44.  b. 

137.  Short  Defcents  of  Fitz-Piers  (by  the  fame.) 

ibid. 

^138.  Arms  of  Families  quartered  by  William  Lord 
Willoughby  of  Parham,  Sc  his  two  wives.  ibid. 

139.  Defcent  of  Lacy  &  Conftable,  from Nigell  Baron 
of  Halton. 

4  5* 

140.  Defcent  of  the  old  Earls  ofChefter,  &  of  Lacy, 
in  one  of  Sr.  William  Dethick’s  hands,  as  it  feemeth  • 
who  at  the  top,  hath  written,  Copia  Richmondi. 

45.  b. 

141.  Defcent  of  the  old  Earls  of  Hereford;  &  of 
are  Earl  of  Gloucefler. 

142.  Defcent  of  Denfill,  from  Atte  of  Trewen  ;  by 

Sir  William  Dethick,  as  it  feems.  46.  b. 

143-  Defcent  of  Beaujnayfe,  &  Atte  of  Fenton  :  by 
the  fame.  ibid/ 


1U1U. 

148.  Defcent  of  Clyfford,  from  Bromflet,  &  Alton. 

ibid. 

149.  Defcent  of  Mahors  from  Roos.  48. 

150.  Defcent  of  Brus  Lord  of  Gower  &  Brecknock  i 

with  the  matches  of  two  of  his  Coheirs  to  Moubray  & 
Mortimer.  4S.b. 

1 51.  Defendants  from  Ihomas  Beauchamp  the 

younger,  Earl  of  Warwick  :  viz.  Talbot,  Grey,  Dudley 
Jobfon  ;  &  perhaps  Buffet  Sc  Carden.  4.9.  ’ 

152.  Sketches  of  K.  Henry  vii.  &  his  Queen,  with 

the  Defcent  of  their  Children,  Sc  the  Wives  A-  Children 
ofK.  Henry  vm.  49.  b. 

153.  Pedigree  of  Talbot  Earl  of  Shrewfbury,  with 

the  Arms  painted  :  fubferibed,  pag.  55.  b.  by  oneTho. 
Powell:  with  marginal  &  other  Notes  by  another 
hand.  5Q- 

I54*  Defendants  from  K. William  the  Conqueror; 
in  the  running  hand  above  mentioned.  58.  b. 

155.  Defcent  of  the  Lords  Dacres  of  Gillefland,  by 

Sr.  William  Dethick.  eg/ 

156.  Pedegree  of  Conyers,  (with  Additions,  by  the 

fame-)  _  60.  &  60.  b. 

157.  Exacta  et  accurata  Deduflio  Stemmatis  praclaree 

Familia  de  Eure,  ab  antiquis  Northumbrenfis  Comitatus 
Baronibus,  de  Werkw'orthe  &  C.laveringe  ;  Continuata 
Mafculorum  Succefiione  eerie  derivata ;  per  Robn  tum 
Glover,  Somerfet.  A.D.  1584.  b 

This  labour’d  Pedegree  has  the  Arms  all  along  ;  & 
divers  Notes.  6  ’ 

158.  Arms  of  Sir  Edward  Lyttleton,  with  his  Ouar- 

tenngs.  '  *7- 

159.  Defcent  of  Hughfon,  Amadys  &  Dunholt,  from 
Pekke. 

1 60.  Arms  of  Quimbre.  jwy’ 

161.  Defcent  of  Mordant,  &  other  Families  allied 

thereunto.  ^  ^ 

162.  Defendants  from  Burghe.  gg* 

163.  Short  Defcents  of  Burghe,  Bellewe,  &c.  66.  b. 

464.  Defcent  of  Nevile.  g  * 

165.  Arms  of  Anne  Daughter  to  Thomas  of  Wode. 

flock,  as  empaled  by  her  two  hulbands,  Stafford  ■-& 
Bourchier;  with  their  Defeats.  g7/b< 

1 66.  Defcent  of  De  la  Pole,  &c.  gg' 

167.  Defcent  of  Cheney.  r.o  1/ 

168.  Defeat  of  Talbot.  b8  c' 

r  ’i1 * * 4 * 6’;™'®”  ” f  Robert  Devereux,  the  younger, 
Eail  of  Effex  ;  with  Defeats  of  divers  antient  families. 

170.  Like  Pedigree  of  Haflings  Earl  of  Huntingdon. 

171.  Like  Pedegree  of  Radcliffe.  7l?b 

Thefe  Pedegrees  are  of  Sir  William  Dethicfs 

hand. 

172.  Defcent  of  Lovell.  72.  b. 

173.  Defcent  of Gamage. 

174.  Defeat  of  K.  Henry  vu.  &  of  divers  other 
branches  of  the  Houfe  of  Lancaffer. 

175.  Defcent  of  North. 

1 76.  Defcent  of  Haftings  Earl  of  Huntingdon,  from 
Pole,  Plantagenet,  Nevil,  Beauchamp,  Spencer,  & 

177.  Defcent  of  Haftings  from  Herle. 

178.  Pedegree  of  St.John  of  Bledho. 

Thefe  laft  by  Sr.  William  Dethick. 


73- b. 
ibid. 


179.  De/c.nt 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


Num.  1393* 

170.  Defcent  of  North.  74.  b.  Sc  78.  between  which 
pages  fo  :  c  leaves  may  be  wanting. 

180.  Note  touching  the  Def  endants  of  Edmund  of 
Bolinbroke,  fon  to  K.  Henry  111.  7^* 

18 Defcent  of  St.  John.  78.  b. 

182.  Defcendants  from  K.  Henry  in.  78.  c. 

183.  Delcent  ol  Grey  Earl  of  Kent  (this  and  the  for¬ 
mer  liy  SirWilliam  Dethick.)  7^* 

1.  4.  Part  of  a  Pedegree  of  Devereux,  with  Arms. 

79- 

185.  Notes,  towards  a  Pedegree  of  Clifford:  79- 1>. 

186.  De  Gencalogia  Ceolwulphi  Regis,  et  omnium 

Regum  Noit.inhimbrorum  ;  ex  copia  Libri  Duiiel- 
menfis.  _  •  T  e°' 

187.  De  Comitibus  ac  Baronibds  nonnullis  Northan- 

hymbrenfibus.  ^o. 

'188.  Conventio  inter  Ricardum  Pauperem  (Poor) 
Epifcopum  Dunelmenfem,  ex  una  parte;  ac  Priorem  et 
Conventum  Dunelmenfem,  ex  altera ;  circa  eorum 
Liberates  Temporales  &  Spirituales.  Imperf.  81. 

189.  De  Pofteris  Hugonis  Baronisdo  Bulbeck.  82. 

190.  Defcent  of  Nevil  &  Audeley,  from  Plantagenet, 

&  Spencer.  By  Sr.  Will.  Dethick.  82. 

191.  Defcent  of  Howard  from  Mowbray.  ibid. 

192.  Defcent  of  Cary  Lord  Hunfdon.  ibid. 

193.  Defcent  of  Nevil  of  Raby.  82.  d. 

194.  Beginning  of  a  Defcent  of  Arden  of  Warwick- 

ftiire.  ^3- b. 

j  95.  Pedegree  of  Edward  Seymour  Duke  of  Somerlett. 

83. 

196.  Pedegree  of Haftings  Earl  of  Huntingdon;  by 


84.  b 
&  other 
86. 

running 


Sr. Will.  Dethick. 

197.  !E degree  of  Willoughby  of  Erefby, 
nntie.it  Families  ;  continued  to  Bertie. 

This  is  alio  of  Sr.  ‘William  Deihickh 
hand. 

,f.3.  Defcent  of  Lundey,'  by  the  fame  hand. 

86.  b.  &  87.  b. 

190.  Defcent  of  Nevil.  $7. 

2eo  Pedigree  of  Grey;  moftly  as  I  believe,  of  the 
hand  of  SirWilliam  Dethick.  (Tmperf.)  87. 

It  feems  that  one  Laurence  Hollinlhed,  had  drawn 
up  t  Pedegree  of  this  family  ;  what  became  of  it,  I  know 
not,  Lut  his  Dedication  thereof  to  Sir  Gilbert  Dethic 
Garter,  &  to  the  other  Officers  of  Arms,  remains  in 

this.  ?7* 

Then  fallow  of  the  fame  Sr.  William  Dethick  s 
hand  : 

201.  Defcent  of  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby  ;  with  Bran¬ 
don,  &  others.  *"6. 

202.  Pedegree  of  Wingteld.  86.  b. 

203.  Adndtatiunculte  de  Nobilitate  amitter.da.  89. 

204.  Defcent  of  Nevil  Earle  of  Weftmoreland. 

88.  b. 

205.  Lift  of  the  Kings  of  Armorica.  88. 

206.  Defcent  of  the  Kings  &  Princes  of  Wales ;  & 
of  divers  of  our  Saxon  Kings,  to  about  A.D.  984. 

89.  b. 

207.  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Lumley  ;  with  a 

Trick  of  the  Effigies  of  John  Baron  Lumley,  as  the  fame 
was  carved  upon  his  tomb-ftone  in  the  Chappcl  of  Bar- 
nards-Caftle,  before  it  was  removed  to  Chefter  ;  with 
this  marginal  Note  of  Sir  William  Dethick,  ,e  lhe  Pat- 
terne  of  this  I  have  feen  at  Bernard  Caftell.  per  Garter, 
159  ' .  91.  b. 

sc;!.  Pedegree  of  Philip  Eloward  Earl  of  Arundell ; 
with  Defcents  of  Moubray,  Warren,  Fitz-Allen,  &c. 

92. 

209.  Pedegree  of  Edw'ard  Vere  Earl  of  Oxford  ; 
deduced  from  Milo  de  Ver,  who  is  faid  to  have  married 
Berthella  daughter  to  Pipin  King  of  France ; .  with  a 
Defcent  of  our  King  Henry  in.  from  the  fame  K.  Pipin, 
by  his  fon  Carolus  Magnus.  93.  b. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vo l.  II. 


Num.  1 39  3  j  I394* 

21c.  Pedigree  of  Henry  Percy  Earl  of  Northumber 
land,  deduced  from  Charles  the  Great.  05.  b. 

211.  IVdtgree  of  Charles  Nevil,  the  lad  Earl  of  Wefl> 

merland,  of  that  great  Family.  98. 

212.  Pedegree  of  Gilbert  1'albot  Earl  of  Shrewfbury. 

99.  b. 

213.  Pedegree  of  Gray  Earl  of  Kent  ;  impelled  at 

the  end.  101. 

214.  Pedegree  of  Ferdinand  Stanley,  Earl  of  Derby  ; 

imperfect  at  the  beginning.  102. 

2  1  c.  Pedegree  of  Someifet  Earl  of  Worcefter,  to  A.D. 

.j9S  .03. 

216.  Pedegree  of  Mannors  Earl  of  Rutland,  to  A  D. 

1584.  _  104. 

217.  Pedegree  of  Clifford  Earl  of  Cumberland. 

105.  b. 

218.  Pedegree  of  St.  John.  ic8. 

Thefe  1 1  Pedegrees  are  all  laboured  (as  they  term 

it  ;  &  take  in  the  Delcents  of  their  Allies. 

2  if..  Alphabeiical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 
referring  to  the  Defcents  in  this  Book,  from  fol.  4. 
which  is  now  the  firft  ;  to  fol.  41.  inclufive.  (By  another 
hand.)  109. 

.20.  Defcent  of  I’ulk  Lord  Fitz-Warin  :  &  of  his 

wife  the  daughter  of  James  Lord  of  Audley  :  by  Sir 

William  Dethic  Garter  (one  of  the  Volumes  of  whofe 
Collections,  this  Book  appeareth  to  be.)  1 1 6.  b. 

1394- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  Sc  tricked  by  the 
hand  of  Mr.  Nicholas  Charles,  Lancafler  Herald ; 
wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  Trick  of  a  Picture  found  in  an  ould  Booke  of  Rich¬ 
mond,  wherein  K.  William  the  Conqueror  is  reprefenied 
as  giving. a  Charter  unto  Alan  Earl  of  Richmond,  who 
kneels  before  him.  Bcfide  them  are  many  figures 
of  Noble  Perfonages  in  compleat  Havnels,  &  Sure'  'tes 
fhewing  their  leveral  Arms  Here  are  alfo  the  Banners 
of  the  King,  the  Earl,  &  of  diver^ofthc  Earl’s  Attend¬ 
ants.  By  this  Defcription,  the  Reader  will  eafily  guefs 
that  the  Picture  aboveinentioned,  mud  needs  have  been 
made  long  after  the  time  of  the  Conqueror.  And,  as 
I  remember,  one  of  this  Kind  remains  ftill  in  the  Cot¬ 
tonian  Library,  in  the  Book  there  noted  Favstina. 
B.  7. 

2.  The  Words  of  the  Patent  or  Charter  above-men¬ 

tioned,  with  a  Trick  (in  little ;  of  the  Conquerors 
Counter  Seal :  which,  I  fuppofe,  Mr.  Charles  did  not 
find  in  his  ould  Book,  but  rather  took  from  Mr.  Speeds 
Chronicle,  or  fome  original  Seal.  ibid. 

3.  The  Vifitation  of  Yorldhire  taken  by  Robert 
Glover  Somerfet-Herald,  as  Marfhall  to  William  Flower 
Norroy  King  of  Armes:  in  the  yea  res  of  our  Lord  God 
11584  &  1585.  And  fince,  augmented  Sc  encrcafed 

both  with  Armes  &  Delcents  by  me . 

.  .  .  Here,  the  reft  is  blotted  out  iiiduftrioufly. 

In  this  C.opie  ol  the  faid  Vifitation,  Mr.  Charles  ha’h 
imitated  the  hands  of  thofe  Gentlemen,  who  gave  the  iu- 
formation.  Moreover,  I  find  therein. 

4.  Trick  of  the  Great  Seale  of  the  City  of  York. 

2.  Sc  vid.  308. 

This  Great  Seale  is  called  Sicillvm  Secretvm  ; 
which  feems  fomewhat  odd  and  unufual. 

3.  Trick  of  a  Seal  with  this  Epigraphe  Sioii.i.vm 
ClVIVM  EBORACI.  ibid. 

This  may  be  more  antient,  though  not  fo  large  as 
the  former. 

6.  Trick  of  the  Seal  (as  it  feems)  of  the  Metropo- 

litical  Church  of  York.  ibid. 

7.  Tricks  of  the  Arms,  &  Seals  of  Beverley.  3. 

8.  Tricks  of  the  Seals  of  the  Tcwne  of  Hedon,  with¬ 
in  the  Liberty  of  Holdernefs.  32- 

H  9-  Tricks 


6 


Catalogus  Libroram  MSS. 


Nnm.  1394. 

y.  Ti  icks  of  Seals  of  particular  Perfons ;  with  Copies 
•>.'  Extracts  of  many  old  Deeds  :  fparfim. 

to.  1  licks  of  the  Seals  of  the  Towne  of  Ivineflon 
upon  Hull.  ,23i 

it.  Divers  Additions  &  Emendations  made  by  Mr. 
Richard  Gafcoign,  a  Gentleman  &  learned  Antiquary  • 
particularly  at  pagg.  163.  193.  294.  b.  299. 

1  2.  i  neks  of  the  Seale  &  Arms  of  the  town  of  Pon- 
terfacc. 

13  1  ricks  of  the  Seals  of  the  Towne  of  Doncaften 

The  former  part  of  the  Book,  viz.  pag.  i.^to 
P*??-  I,6S-  taketh  in  that  part  of  Yorkfhire  which  was 
Mlired  A.D.  1584.  After  which,  viz.  to  pag.  291.  in- 
clufive,  followeth  that  which  was  vifited  in  the  vear 
*JS5;, 

_  Then  follow  more  Additions  made  by  Mr.  Charle- 
hiring,  J  ’ 

1 4-  Defcents  &  Arms  of  Conftable.  292. 

15  De'cent  &  Arms  of  Horlley. 

16.  Detent  of  Dauby.  fbid.' 

,,  .  Pedlgree  of  Gal'coigne,  amended  by  Mr.  Richard 

Gaicr.-ene  ah-refaid.  2g4_ 

1 8.  Pedigree  of  Clerevaulx ;  with  the  Arms.  296. 

..  .  .  !  .  1  !!  "  (M  of  this  Vifitation-book) 

.  1  ‘CaS  °‘  UlC  Armcs  taken  out  of  Churches  and  Howfes 
in  tne  tyme  of  torkihire  Visitation,  Ann.  Dili  1  584  & 
1505.  being,  J  ^ 

19-  Arms  in  A  (ton- Church.  20Q> 

20.  Arms  in  Shetheld-Church. 

Arms  in  Rotheram- Church.  200  &  201.' 

22.  Arms  in  the  Church  of  Thryber.  ibid.  &  301' 

23-  Arms  m  the  Church  of  Nofcall.  302. 

24.  A.-iiic  in  the  Churche  of  Selby- Abbey,  ibid.' 

23.  eli  :r.s  of  Tho.  Bamburgh  of  Howfham.  ibid. 
20.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Bolton-Percye.  303. 
27.  Arms  in  the  Perfonage  of  the  faid  Bolton-Percye. 

o  a  .  ,  ibid, 

sb.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Newton  upon  Owfe. 

29.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Minfter  of  Yorke.  lt>ld’ 

a  .  „  „  3°4*  307.  309.  &  32?. 

30.  Arms  in  St.  Sampfon’s  Churche  in  Yorke.  30; 

3 1 .  Arms  in  Chrift’s  Churche  in  Yorke.  ibid 

3:.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  St.  Martin's  In  Conneis 

flreete.  .../ 

33*  Arms  in  St.Martm  s  at  Caftle  Garthe  in  Yorke. 

*  •  o  .  ibid. 

34-  Arms  m  St.  Michael’s  Church  at  Peter-Garth. 

35.  Arms  in  the  Howfe  of  Sir  Richard  Maliverer  of 
Ailerton, 

36.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  Ailerton.  ibid, 

37-  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Nun-Monketon.  ibid. 

38.  Arms,  &c.  m  the  Churche  of  Sezay,  or  Seflay. 

•  39-  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Whenby.  ibid! 

40.  Arms,  & c.  in  the  Churche  of  Sheriff-Hoton. 

4'-  Arms,  See.  in  the  Churche  of  Pocklington.  700 
42.  Arms  in  ihe  Towne  Hall  of  Yorke.  ibid 
43-  Arms  in .  .^.  ,* 

44.  Arms  in  the  Churche' of  Efirick,  or  Efcrigg'e. 

4J-  Anns,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  Hemyngbmgh. 

.  .  „  ibid. 

Howdem  “  ^  ChUrChe  °f  HoveiJen  ali“ 

47.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  South-Cave,  ftid! 

48.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  North-Cave-  312. 


Num.  135)4.. 

49.  Anns  upon  3  Eciles  in  the  Steeple  of  the  Chun  !:• 

of  Ellerkcr.  ibid. 

50.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  Alke.  ibid. 

51.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Ellerton.  ibid. 

Si.  Arms  in  the  Houfe  of  Mr.  Aike  of  Aughton. 

,  ...  ibid. 

53.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Lockington.  ibid. 
54-  Aims,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  Eflrington.  314* 
55.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  St.  Maries  in  Beverley. 

.  ,  ibid. 

50.  Arms  in  Beverley-Towne-Hall.  ibid. 

57-  Arms  in  the  Minfter  of  Beverley.  ibid. 

58.  Arms  in  Trinity-Chapell  in  Hull.  ibid. 

59.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Kyliom.  ibid. 

60.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  Sutton  in  Iicldernes. 

61.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  Swyne  inHoldm-nra. 

,  .  ...  ibid. 

62.  Arms,  &c.  m  the  Churche  of  Brandes-Burton  in 

Holdemefie.  1  g 

63.  Arms  in  the  Houfe  of  ....  Balme  of  Kyilum, 

&c-  .  ,  ibid. 

64.  Arms  in  the  Houfe  of  Sr.  Henry  Gates  in  Seamers. 

,  .  .  ,  ibid. 

65.  Arms  in  the  Church  of  Mai  ton.  ibid. 

66.  Amis  in  the  howfe  of  Mr.  Percey  alias  Percehay 

° k  •  a  a  ibid. 

7.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Kyrkbye-Mifperton. 

68.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Helmefley,  or  Hamkke. 

69.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Stokcfley  in  Cleveland! 

.  a  •  .  ibid- 

7°.  Arms,  &c.  m  the  Churche  of  Crathome.  ibid. 

7  ,.  Arm,  m  the  Houre  of  Mr.  Crathome.  ibid 

72  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Thurike.  ibid 

73.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  EtingwolJ.  ibid" 

74.  Arms  m  the  Howfe  of  Mr.  Vavafour  Hafelwood. 

7J-  Arms,  &c.  in  Mr.  Vavafours  Chapel  at  Hafelwood. 

76.  Arms  of  Threlkeld  ofThormunby.  , 20 

77.  Arms  in  the  Church  of  Wadefworth.  ibid' 

78.  sh°rt  Defcent  of  Vavafour ;  with  the  Arms 

granted  to  Anthony  Cavalier,  by  Sir  Thomas  Wriothef 
ley  Garter,  &  Thomas  Benoit  Clarenceux,  e4  Jun.  AD 
I51 4-  m.j 

79-  Arms  in  the  Church  of  Barwick  in  Elmett." 

croft  in  Ymklitie?6  °f  ^  at  L^S' 

Not,' igtaT)  ”  thE  °f  I™' 

82.  Arms  in  the  Howfe  of  Mr.  Thwayts  of  Marflon. 

NotttgW  m  ‘he  Ch“rCh  °f  R°dingt0n’  “  ‘f™’ 

No^i'igtm!  “  ‘he  Ch“rChe  °f  *****  “C™. 

Not.kgtmk&C'  “  ,hC  °f  Ti‘“ymCom. 

86.  Arms  in  the  Mannor-houfe  ofWyverton.  \L'. 

87.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Langar  in  Com.  Nott. 

N08n’  Arms,&c'  in  *c  Churche  of  Wharton  in  Com. 

89.  Arms  in  the  Houfe  of  Mr.  Cranmer  of  Whatton. 


go.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Barrowby  in  Coni’!  Un- 


coin. 


Stamford*™ eS  “  1  Glair<;-Wind™  “  the  Bridge-foo’/of 
*  ibid. 

92.  Arms 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse- 


2.7 


Kum.  1394. 

q-i.  Anns  cf  Mountfort,  Lafingby,  Grimfton,  & 
Metcalfe.  ibid. 

93.  Anns  on  a  Cufliion  in  the  Howfe  of  Mr.  Ingleby 

of  Ripicv.  ibid. 

94.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Grantham  in  Lincoln¬ 
shire.  326. 

95.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  St.  John’s  at  Owfebridge- 

end  in  Yoikc.  ibid. 

96.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Kirkby-Wyfke,  by 

Brakenburgh.  ibid. 

97.  Arms  in  the  Church  of  North-Allerton.  ibid. 

98.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Kirkby  juxta  Fletam. 

ibid. 

99.  Arms',  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  Cathericke,  in 

Richmondftnre.  327. 

100.  Arnv,  See.  iii  the  Churche  of  Leedcs.  ibid. 

10 !»  Anns  in  the  Ca.le  of  Harewood,  in  Com. 

Ebor.  329. 

102.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Church  of  Harewood.  330. 

103.  Arms  in  the  Church  of  Swdlington,  in  Com 

Ebor.  331. 

104.  Arms  in  thevChurch  of  Metheley,  in  Com. 

Ebor.  332, 

105.  Arms  in  the  Chnpcll  of  St.  Giles  in  Pomfrett. 

333- 

ic6.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Church  of  Wakefield  in  Com. 
Hbor.  ibid. 

1 07.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Rotheram  in  Yorklhire. 

334- 

10S.  Anna,  &c.  m  Ecclcfia  de  Thornhill.  ibid. 

109.  Arms,  Ac.  in  the  Churche  of  Elande.  335. 

no.  Arras,  bic.  in  the  Churche  of  Hothersfeild  in 
Com.  Ebor.  ibid. 

111.  Arms,  &c.  in  the  Churche  of  Almondlbery. 

ibid. 

ti  2.  Arms  in  the  Howfe  of  Mr.  Kay  of  Wodefome, 
in  Yorklhire.  3,-6. 

1 13.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Darefeild  in  Com. 

Ebor.  ibid. 

114.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Bamefley.  ibid. 

115.  Anna  in  Ecclefia  de  Mont-Sorell.  ibid. 

Then  follow, 

116.  Confirmation  of  Anns  &  Creft,  to  Thomas 

Drav,  Gent,  by  Lawrence  Dalton,  Norroy.  30  Nov. 
1561.  337. 

1 1 7.  Docquet  ef  the  Grant  of  a  Creft  to  John  Kay 

Gent,  by  Will.  Flower,  Norroy.  7  O&ob.  1564.  ibid. 

118.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  a  Creft  to  Arthur 
Kay,  Gent,  by  Will.  Flower,  Norroy.  22  O&ob.  1564. 

ibid. 

1 19.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  to  John 

Hall,  Cent,  by  Sir  Thomas  Wriothefley  Garter,  &  Tho¬ 
mas  Tong,  Norroy.  dat.  4 November,  1533.  ibid. 

120.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  Arms&  Creft,  to  Henry 
Thompfon,  by  Laur.  Dalton,  N«rroy.  15  April,  1359. 

ibid. 

121.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  a  Creft,  to  John  Lake 
Gent,  by  Will.  Flower,  Norroy.  7  October,  1564. 

33s- 

.  122.  Arms  of  Wentworth  of  Elmfall,  as  graven  & 

enameled  on  Silver.  ibid. 

123.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  a  Creft  unto  Francis 

Haldanbye,  Gent.  &  Robert  Haldanby  his  brother,  by 
Will.  Flower,  Norroy.  dat.  1  Decemb.  1563.  ibid. 

1 24.  Mixt  Arms  of  fome  few  of  the  Yorklhire  Gentry. 

33  9. 

125.  Table  to  the  Names  of  Churches  Sc  Houfes  laft 


above-mentioned. 


34°- 


1 26.  Table  to  the  Names  of  Families  whofe  Arms, 
as  extant  in  Seals  or  Efcocheons,  happen  to  be  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  fame  Church-Notes.  ibid. 


Niim.  1394.,  1395. 

127.  The  Copy  of  Sir  William  Fayrfax  Booke.of 

Armes  of  Yorklhire  ’  amilies.  341. 

128.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 

relating  to  the  Vifitation  of  Yorklhire.  352. 

129.  Another  Ihort  Table,  (this  is  not  of  Mr. 

Charles’s  hand  )  34. 

Then  follow  in  the  hand  of  Mr.  Charles,  collected 
from  ome  Records  in  the  Tower, 

13“.  Defcent  of  John  Wodde.  temp.  Hen.  7.  3^6. 

13 1.  Defcent  of  Newmarche  &  Gaicoigne.  it. id. 
r'  132.  Defcents  of  Salveyne,  Dronsieild  Halleys 
Mauleverer,  Reynold,  &  Aungevin.  temp.  Edw.  iv.  & 
Hen.  vn.  337. 

13  ;.  Like  loofe  Defcents  of  Weft,  Drax,  Thwaytes, 
&  Barton.  Temp.  Rich.  lit.  &  Hen.  vn.  358. 

134.  Like  Defcents  of  Acclom,  Routhe,  Grey  of 
Powes,  Percy,  Ryder,  &  Redmayn.  ijfdem  tempp.  359.  J 

135.  Like  Defcents  of  Stapleton,  Bulmer,  Nevill, 

Pigott,  &  Conyers,  temp.  Henr.  vn.  360. 

136.  Defcents  of  divers  Families  from  Ingaldefthorp, 

&  Bradfton.  361. 

137.  Defcents  of  Wentworth,  Fitz-Hugh,  Gumace, 
Wodrove,  Gower,  8t  Darell.  temp.  Henr.  vn.  362. 

138.  Defcents  of  Conftable,  Ughtred,  Pilkington,  & 

StrangWaies.  3  Henr.  vii.  363. 

1 39.  Defcents  of  Haftings,  Boynton,  Crefcye,  Nor¬ 
ton  &  Percy.  4Henr.  vii.  364. 

1 40.  Defcents  of  River,  Portington,  &  Hopton, 

5  Hen.  vn.  365. 

14 1.  Def  ents  of  Normanvill,  Strangways,  Coniers, 

6  Ryther.  6  Hen.  Vii.  366. 

14:.  Defcents  1  f  Darcy,  Strangways,  Conyers,  Haft¬ 
ings,  Crathorne,  &  Conftable,  6  Hen.  vn.  367. 

143.  Defcent  of  Berkley,  Salley,  &  Brand.  8  Elen.  vn. 

368. 

144.  Defcent  of  Salveyne.  9  Elen.vn.  ibid. 

145.  DTcentsof  Suthill,  Kitz- Williams,  Nevil,  Stave- 

ley,  Sabcote,  Taiiboys,  Waterton,  &  Beckwith,  ann.' 
10  R.  R.  Henrici  vii.  369. 

146.  D.  (cents  of  Thweng,  Wytham,  Wefthorpe, 
Wauton,  Wyvell,  Salveyn,  &  Conftable.  ann.  1 1  & 


12  R.  Henr.  vn. 


37°* 


147.  Defcents  of  Bekherd,  Dawney,  Pikering, 
Bedingfeild,  Conftable,  Rockley,  Pilkington,  et  Thur- 
num  feu  Thornholm.  ann.  13  R.  Henr.  vn.  371. 

148.  Defcents  of  Fitz- Williams,  ann.  13  R.  Hen¬ 
rici  VII.  372. 

149.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 


mentioned  in  thefe  Defcents. 


373 


r  3  95  - 


A  Book  in  fol.  (relating  to  our  Englifii  Nobility)  done 
by  divers  hands  ;  as  containing, 

1.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Nobility  of  England,  temp. 
R.  Caroli  11.  by  John  Saunders. 

2.  Atchievements  of  James  Scott  Duke  of  Mon¬ 
mouth  ;  James  Butler  Duke  of  Ormond ;  Thomas 
Howard  Duke  of  Norfolk  ;  and  George  Monke  Duke 
of  Albemarle,  with  their  feveral  Titles.  The  Arms 
only  of  the  third,  &  of  the  laft  being  omitted. 

3.  Atchievements  of  the  Nobility  of  England,  temp. 

Caroli  1.  1. 

Among  thefe,  moft  of  which  I  take  to  be  done  by 
Jacob  Chaloner,  &  the  reft  by  John  Saunders  :  I  find 

4.  The  Atchievement  of  the  King  of  Denmark,  inter 
foil.  28  &  29. 

5.  Table  to  the  families  whofe  Atchievements  are 

tricked  in  this  Book :  by  divers  hands.  109.  b. 

Then  follow,  by  the  hand  of  John  Saunders, 

6.  Atchievement  &  Titles- of  Arthur  Capell,  Earl  of 

ElTex.  117- 

7.  Atchievementr 


Ntirri.  1395,  1396. 


7.  Atchievement,  See.  of  Arthur  Annefley,  Earl  of 

Anglefey.  it  8. 

8.  Atchievement,  See.  of  Edward  Montagu,  Earl  of 

Sandwich.  118.  b-. 

9.  Atchievement,  See.  of  Sir  Edward  Hyde,  Earl  of 

Clarendon.  119-. 

id.  Atchievement,  Sec.  (not  finiffied)  of  Thomas 
Brudenell,  Earl  of  Cardigan.  1 1 9.  b. 

ir.  Atchievement,  See.  (not  finiffied)  of  Sir  John 
Greenville,  Earl  of  Bath.  120. 

12.  Atchievement,  &e.  of  Charles  Howard,  Earl  of 

Carlifte;  1 20.  b. 

13.  Part  of  the  Atchievement  of  John  Vifcount  Mor¬ 
dant.  12 1. 

14.  The  like  of  Denzill,  Lord  Hollis.  1 2 1 .  b. 

15.  I'he  like  of  Sir  George  Booth,  Lord  de  la  Mer. 


16.  The  like  of  Sir  Frederick  Cornwall  is.  Lord  Corn¬ 
wallis.  122.  b. 

1 7.  Atchievement  of  Sir  Horatio  Townefend,  Lord 

Townefend.  1 23.  b. 

18.  Atchievements  begun  for  the  Lords  Alhley, 

Crew,  Fauconbridge  ;  Si  the  Vifcounts  Hereford  & 

Stafford.  123.  b. 

19.  Atchievement  of  Wentworth  Lord  Wentworth. 

126. 

20.  Atchievements  begun  for  the  Lords  Hunfdon, 

Arundelf,  Charlton,  Lovelace,  Finch-,  Seymour,  & 

Bruce.  _  126.  b. 

21.  Atchievement  of  Newport  Lord  Newport.  130. 

22.  Atchievements  begun,  of  the  Lords  Hatton, 
Loughborough,  Byron,  Vaughan,  &  Smyth.  i3i.b. 

23.  Atchievement  of  the  Lord  Widdrington.  133. 

24vc.Atchrevement  of  the  Lord  Warde;  begun. 

*33- b- 

25.  Arms  &  Supporters  of  the  Lords  Culpepper, 
Lucas,  Berkley,  &  Arlington  ;  with  the  Seal  of  . 

. haftily  tricked  by  John 

Withie  ;  &  inferted  after  fol.  134.  b. 

26.  Atchievement  of  the  Lord  Colpeper.  134. 

27.  Atchievement  of  the  Lord  Aftley  ;  begun. 

134.  b. 

28.  Atchievement  of  the  Lord  Lucas.  135. 

29.  Atchievement  of  Boyle,  Lord  Clifford.  135.  b. 

30.  Atchieiement  of  the  Lord  Watfon,  Baron  of 

Rockingham'.  136. 

31.  Atchievement  of  the  Lord  Langdale  ;  begun. 

136.  b. 

32.  Atchievement  of  Frechevile  Baron  of  Staveley  ; 

begun.  137. 

3.3.  Atchievement  of  the  Lord  Arundel  of  Trerife. 

1 37.  b. 

34.  Arms  &  Supporters  of  Bennet  I.ord  Arlington. 


35.  Arms  &  Supporters  of  the  Lord  Crofts.  138.  b. 


1396. 

A  Book  in  fol.  for  the  molt  part  written  Ss  tricked  by 
the  hand  of  Mr.  John  Withie,  &  by  him  entituled, 
The  Vifitation  of  Shropffieire,  made  &  taken  by 
Robert  Trefwell,  Somerfett ;  Si  Auguftine  Vincent, 
Rouge-Croix  ;  Oflicers  of  Armes,  Marfhalls,  Sc  Depu¬ 
ties  to  William  Camden  Efq;  Clarenceux,  King  of 
Armes,  Anno  1623.  Together  with  the  Vifitation  made 
by  Richard  Lee,  Portcullis,  Marfhall  Sc  Deputie  to  Ro¬ 
bert  Cooke  Clarenceux,  King  of  Armes,  anno  Domini 


^84.  with  other  Collections  (or  Additions)  by  me  John 
Withie. 


Here  it  may  be  noted  that  fhefe  two  Vifitation- 
books  are  rot  to  be  underftood  as  if  the  ore  was  kept 
diftina  from  the  other ;  but  rather  that  the  frefh  Defcents 
taken  A.D.  1623.  do  iupply  the  former  Vifitation  of 
A.D.  15S4. 


Num.  1396,  1397 


That,  this  being  tranferibed  from  the  original  book* 
Mr.  Withie  has  imitated  the  hands  of  thofe  Gentlemen 
who  gave  the  Information  in  ann.  1623.  That  the  above 
mentioned  Officers  being  men  of  Learning  St  Judgement'; 
here  are  Copies  &  Extracts  of  the  private  Evidences  of 
divers  antient  Shropffiire  Families  ;  the  Seals  whereof,  as 
alfo  the  Arms,  all  along,  are  well  tricked  by  Mr.Withie. 
Thai  divers  of  the  Defcents,  are  not  of  Mr.  Withie’s 
hand,  but  are  done  by  Jacob  Chaloner,  Sc  others  em¬ 
ployed  by  him. 

Moreover,  in  this  Book,  I  obferve, 

2.  The  Original  Paper,  containing  the  hands  of  thofe* 
who  during  this  Vifitation  of  A.D.  1623.  did  dil'claira 
the  Titles  of  F.fquires,  Sc  Gentlemen,  at  Ofwaldeftre  ; 
by  fubferibing  to  a  Preamble  written  by  Mr.  Withie,  who 
rode  Painter  at  the  fame  Vifitation.  At  the  beginning. 

3.  Arms  of  fome  of  the  Shropffiire  Gentlemen,  putr 

down  by  way  of  Alphabet.  a.- 

4.  Tricks  of  the  Seales  of  the  Towne  of  Brugenorth. 

18. 

5  Labour’d  Pedegree  of  Bromleigh  or  Bromley,  as 
the  fame  was  attefted  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux,  Sc 
Robert  Glover,  Somerfet.  A.D.  1583.  3 6, 

6.  Some  very  modern  Continuations,  made  perhaps, 

ffiy  Mr.  Robert  Dale  now  Suffolk-Herald,  A  others,  before 
the  Book  came  hither.  41.  43.  251.  432. 

7.  Some  late  Continuations  have  been  made  by  John 
Withie  himfelf ;  a3  at  fol.  160.  b.  after  fol.  190.  b. 


439- 


By  my  Lord’s  command,  Mr.  James  Greene  Blew- 
mantel  Pourfuivant  at  Armes,  did  enter  a  Pedegree  of 
Corbet,  &c.  into  this  Book,  beginning  at  fol.  53.  b.  and 
alfo  put  the  Perfons  Names  in  the  Index. 

8.  Part  of  a  Defcent  of  Harnage,  by  the  hand  of  Mr. 
Richard  Mundy,  is  placed  between  fol.  165.  b.  &  16 6. 

9.  Defcent,  Funeral-  Certificate,  Sc  Arms  of  David 
Lloyd  of  Shrew'ffiury  ;  taken  A.D.  1623.  by  Robert 
Owen  Deputie  to-  the  Hearolds  for  Salop  &  Stafford. 

Inter  foil.  259.8c  260. 

10.  Trick  of  [the  Seale  of  the  Towne  of  Biffiopc- 

Callle.  52.  b. 

11.  An  old  Painting  of  the  Arms  of  Pytt." 

Inter  fol.  313.  b.  &  314. 

12.  Copie  of  the  Proclamation  of  Richard  Lee,  Port¬ 

cullis,  dated  the  12th  of  September  1584.  whereby  he 
declaimed  many  refiding  within  the  Towne  &  Liberties 
of  Salop,  the  Hundred  of  Ofweftry,  the  Towne  &  Liber¬ 
ties  of  Ofweftry,  Chirbury,  Condover,  Pimhill,  Clunne, 
l'oord,  be  Bradford,  as  Ulurpers  of  the  Appellations  ©f 
Efquires  Sc  Gentlemen.  .^7 

*3>  Alphabetical  lable  of  the  Surnames  of  thofe 
Families  whofe  Defcents  are  to  be  found  in  this  Book. 
At  the  end. 


1 39  7* 

An  Herald ical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  wholly  tricked' & 

written  by  the  Hand  of  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Painter- 

Stainer.  It  containeth, 

1.  Alphabetical  T  able  of  Surnames,  referring  to  die 
Arms  &  Pedegrees  in  this  Book,  as  fa  ras  fol.  263. 

2.  Arms  of  the  Corniffi  Gentry,  taken  out  of  tde 

Vifi  rat  ion-book  of  that  County,  made  A.D.  1620.  with 
which  the  Arms  of  very  many  Families  of  other  Counties 
are  indifcretely  mingled.  1. 

3.  Copy  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of 

Surrey,  made  A.D.  1623.  by  Samuel  Thompfon, 
Windfor,  and  Auguftine  Vincent  Rouge-Croix,  for 
William  Camden  Clarenceux.  3S.  b. 

In  this  Copie  I  find, 

4-  Funeral  Certificate  of  Mr.  Henry  Leake  ;  taken  13 
(  ctober  162c.  by  Lifle  Baxter  Deputy  to  the  Office  of 
Armes  for  the  Counties  of  Surrey  &  Sufiex.  39 

7  5.  Motes 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


19 


Num.  1397,  1398. 

5.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parifli-Church  ofMicham.  43. 

6.  Copies  &:  Extracts  of  many  private  Evidences, 
with  Tricks  of  the  Seals :  fparfim. 

7.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parifh  Church  of  Rygate,  60. 

8.  Tricks  of  the  Seals  &  Arms  of  the  Borough  of 

Guilford.  11 9- 

q.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parifh  Church  of  Charlwood. 

161.  b. 

10.  Tricks  of  the  Seals  &  Arms  of  the  Towne  of 

Kingfton  upon  Thames;  as  alfo  of  certain  Armes found 
in  the  Towne-hall  there.  *64. 

11.  Notes  taken  in  Sheere-Church.  170. 

12.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parifh  Church  of  Putney. 

1 83.  b. 

1  •?.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parifh  Church  of  Horley. 

3  i9i.b. 

14.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Richmond,  by 
the  Writer  of  this  Copie,  John  Saunders,  A.  D.  1676. 

ibid. 

1 5.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parifh  Church  of  Newington 

Butts.  ,92> 

16.  Epitaph  of  John  Tredefcant,  inLambeth-Church; 

by  another  hand.  *93-  ^>* 

Then  follow, 

17.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County- 

Palatine  of  Durham,  taken  by  Richard  St.  George  Efq. 
Norroy  ;  and,  in  his  company  Henry  St.  George,  Blew- 
mantle,  A.  D.  1615.  201. 

Herein  I  find, 

18.  A  Note  or  Lift  of  fuch  Perfons  as  were  difcl  aimed 

in  the  time  of  this  Vifitation.  ibid. 

19.  A  Continuation  of  the  Defcent  ofElftob  to  the 
year  1710,  which  that  ingenious  virgin  gentlewoman 
Mrs.  Elizabeth  Elftob  fent  to  me  two  years  ago,  together 
with  fome  account  of  the  Defcent  of  her  mother.  Both 
which  Papers  I  have  inferted  herein  before  fol.  242. 
where  the  Defcent  of  Elftob  as  it  was  taken  at  this 
Vifitation,  is  entred.  I  only,  here  take  leave  farther  to 
obferve,  that  Mrs.  Elftob  is  very  much  improved  both 
in  Writing  &  Drawing,  fince  the  year  1710. 

20.  The  Arms  of  the  ould  Vifitation  of  the  Bifhop- 
rick  of  Durham,  made  A.D.  1575,  by  William  Flower 
Norroy.  That  is,  the  Arms  of  fome  of  the  Families. 

260.  b. 

2t.  Devifesof  divers  Captains,  during  the  late  Civil 
Wars,  painted  on  Enfigns  &  Cornets  or  Standards  : 
being,  for  the  moft  part,  againft  the  King.  264.  b. 

22.  Conceflio  Armorum  Chriftophoro  Stackaus,  per 
Maximilianum  11.  Imp.  Germ.  11  die  Decembr.  A.  D. 

1 578.  32, 

1393. 

An  Hcraldical  Book  in  fol.  done  by  different  hands  5 
wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Pedegrees  of  divers  Effex-Families  :  whereof  fome 

at  leaft,  are  taken  from  the  Vifitation-book  of  that 
County  made  A.D.  1614,  by  John  Raven  Richmond, 
for  William  Camden  Clarenceux.  4. 

2.  Pedegree  of  Fitch,  dated  A.D.  1636.  with  Arms 

entered  by  John  Withie.  25.  b. 

3.  Pedegree  of  Legatt,  as  begun  by  Sir  Richard  St. 

George  Clarenceux,  &  finifhed  by  his  fon  Sir  Henry 
St. George  Norroy,  A.D.  1635.  (The  Arms  tricked  by 
Mr  John  Withie.)  26.  b. 

4.  Defcent  of  Smith,  alias  C.arington.  29. 

Pedegree  of  Davenant,  brought  down  to  A.D. 

1667.  entered  by  Mr.  John  Withie.  37.  b. 

After  many  blank  leaves,  I  find, 

6.  Some  private  Accompts  &  Notes  of  Mr.  John 
Saunders  :  and  then  after  many  more  blank  leaves, 

7.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  preceding  Defcents; 
at  the  end. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II, 


Num.  1399— 1401* 

1399- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  A  C.opie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  Devonlhire,  as 

the  fame  was  taken,  in  &  about  the  year  1564.  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Hervy  Clarenceux;  whofe  words  this  followeth  $ 
the  whole  being  putt  down  by  way  of  Narration,  and 
not  in  Genealogical  Scheme.  *• 

Herein  I  alfo  find  Tricks  of, 

2.  The  Armes  of  the  C.ittie  of  Exeter.  1.  b. 

3.  The  Armes  of  the  Merchant  Taylors  of  Exeter.  2. 

4.  The  Armes  of  the  Corporation  of  the  Smithes, 
Guttlers,  Armorers,  Lorymers,  &  Brafiers  of  Exeter. 

2.  b. 

5.  The  Armes  of  the  Corporation  of  the  Weyvars, 

Tuckers,  &  Sheir-men  of  Exeter.  3. 

6.  The  Arms  of  the  Fellowfhip  of  the  Glovers,  Skin¬ 
ners,  Poynteis,  &  Parchment-makers  of  Exeter.  3.  b. 

7.  The  Arms  of  the  County  of  the  City  of  Exeter.  4. 

8.  The  Arms  of  the  Merchant- Adventurers  of  Exeter. 

4.  b. 

9.  The  Arms  belonging  to  the  Towne  &  Borough  of 

Tottnes.  27- 

10.  The  Arms  belonging  to  the  Towne  &  Boroughe 

of  Piymouthe.  57*  b- 

1 1.  The  Aimes  belonging  to  the  Boroughe  of  Great 

Torrington.  67.  b. 

12.  The  Aimes  belonging  to  the  Towne  &  Boroughe 

of  Bamftable.  71*  b* 

13.  Armes  of  Newcourt,  with  the  Defcent  by  way  of 

Scheme  ;  feeming  to  be  an  Addition.  1 1 3.  b. 

1 4.  Arms  &  Defcent  of  Andrews  ;  in  Scheme  :  by 

the  firft  hand.  116. 

1 5.  Arms  &  Defcent  (in  Scheme)  of  Turner  ;  added 

by  another  hand.  1  *6-  b. 

16.  Alphabetical  Table,  containing  the  Surnames  of 
thofe  Families  whofe  Defcents  were  regiftred  in  this  Vifit¬ 
ation  of  Devonlhire.  At  the  end. 


A  Book  in  fol.  tricked  by  Mr  John  Withie  ;  &  written, 

part  of  it,  by  Him;  much  more  by  Jacob  Chaloner  ; 

&  the  reft  by  others.  It  contained), 

1.  The  Vifitation-book  of  Nottinghamfheire,  made 
by  Sir  Richard  St.  George,  Norroy,  King  of  Armes, 
in  the  year  of  our  Lord  God,  1614.  with  Inlargements, 
by  JohnWithie. 

Remarkables  in  this  Copie,  are, 

2.  Alphabetical  Table,  of  the  Surnames  of  fuch  Fa- 
miles  whofe  Arms  &  Defcents  are  herein  regiftred. 

3.  Arms  of  Knights  living  in  Darbylhire  &  Notting- 

hamlhire,  in  the  tyine  of  K.  Edward  1.  1. 

4.  Trick  of  the  Seale  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of 

Eaft  Radford.  3* 

5.  Tricks  of  the  Seals  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of 

Newarke  upon  Trent.  3-b* 

6.  Tricks  of  the  Arms  &  Seal  of  the  Towne  &  Bo¬ 
rough  of  Nottingham.  4. 

7.  Copies  of  divers  Evidences,  with  Tricks  of  their 
appendants  Seals ;  then  belonging  to  Sir  Henry  Pier- 
point,  19.  George  Lafcelles  of  Eilefton,  23.  William 
St.  Andrew  of  Gotham,  36.  b.  &  feveral  others. 

8.  Lift  of  the  Names  of  thofe  who  were  difclaimed  at 

Nottingham,  23d  Sept.  1614.  94. 

I4OI. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  Cambridgelhire, 
as  the  fame  was  made  &  taken  by  Henry  St.  George 
Richmond,  for  William  Camden  Clarenceux,  A.D. 
16  9. 

I 


14OO. 


Obfexvables 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nuni,  1401— 1404. 

Obfervables  in  this  Copie  (befides  the  omiffion  of 
the  Extracts  from  antient  Evidences,  &c.)  are, 

2.  The  Omiffion  of  the  Arms  of  the  feveral  Families: 
for  what  are  now  done  in  the  book,  are  of  the  hand  of 
John  Saunders,  who  tricked  fome  with  his  Pen;  traced 
out  others  with  his  black  Lead,  &  omitted  the  reft. 

3.  A  Leaf  of  the  original  Vifitation-book,  as  I  take 
it  to  be;  containing  the  Defcents  of  Baron,  k  of  Har¬ 
ris;  fubfcribed  by  John  Baron  k  William  Harris.  89. 

4.  Alphabetical  Table  containing  the  Surnames  of 
rhofe  Families  whofe  Defcents  are  herein  entred.  At 
the  end. 


1402. 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  confifting.  for  the  moft  part,  of 
blank  Paper.  Ii  containeth  only, 

Some  Entrances  of  the  Arms  of  deceafed  Pcrfons, 
about  whofe  Funeralls  Mr.  John  Spicer  was  employed 
as  Painter:  which  Arms,  as  I  fuppofe,  were  tricked  by 
him. 

NB.  This  Mr.  John  Spicer,  bought  Mr.  John  Saun¬ 
ders’s  Books  after  his  death  ;  as  Mr.  Saunders  likewife 
bought  Mr.Withie’s  ;  who  bought  thofe  of  the  t  olec- 
tion  of  Mr.  Edmund  Barwick  the  Painter  Stainer.  Mr. 
Spicer’s  books  were  bought  of  Mr.  Forefight  an  Apothe¬ 
cary,  who  was  his  Executor.  But  although  all  that 
were  in  Mr. Forefight’s  hands  are  now  in  this  Library; 
th::-:  are  wanting  divers  excellent  Books  which  Mr. 
Sp'cer  was  known  to  be  mafter  of;  which  leems  to  be 
occafioned  by  his  lending  them  to  divers;  k  alfo  leaving 
them  behind  him  in  his  different  Countrey  Lodgings, 
which  he  took,  time  after  time,  for  the  fake  of  the  Air 

I4O3. 

A  Book  in  fol.  at  the  beginning  thus  entituled, 

1.  “  A  Book  of  the  Armes,  Creafls,  &  Supporters, 
with  the  fcverall  Quarterings  of  all  the  Nobility  of  Ire¬ 
land,  in  their  feveratl  Ranks:  collected  together  by  me 
John  Withie,  about  A. D.  1630. 

Thefe  Atchievements  are  all  tricked  ;  and  before 
them,  is, 

2.  A  Lift  of  the  Irifh  Nobility;  living  A  D.  1629. 
fliewmg  the  time  of  their  feveral  Creations,  their  Titles, 
Surnames,' &  the  Leaves  o  this  Book,  wherein  their 
Atchievements  are  to  be  found. 

Among  them  are, 

3.  The  Titles  of  Richard  Barry  Earl  of  Barrymore, 
written  k  fubfcribed  by  his  Lordfhip,  at  London,  10th 
Sept.  1645.  before  fol.  9. 

4.  Copie  of  the  Confirmation  of  Arms,  &  Grant  of 
Supporters  to  Charles  Mac  Carthy  Vifcount  Carthy  of 
Mufkrey,  by  Thomas  PreftonUlvefter.  dat.  21ft  Sept. 

1  639.  before  fol.  36. 

5.  Atchievement  of  the  faid  Vifcount  Carthy,  in 
little,  tricked  under  that  of  Jones  Vifcount  Rannelagh. 

36- 


1404. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  painted  &  written  by  fome 
old  induftrious  Painter,  as  it  feems;  being, 

1 .  A  large  Ordinary  of  Arms  in  Colors;  before  which 
are  premifed, 

a.  The  Contends  of  this  Book;  or  the  method  ufed 
in  this  particular  Ordinary. 

3.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 
w  hofe  Arms  are  exhibited  herein. 

4.  Some  few  Additions  have  been  made  to  this  Ordi¬ 
nary,  by  John  W ithie,  John  Saunders,  &c. 


Num.  1405—1407. 

1405. 

A  Book  in  fol.  begun  by  John  Withie;  whofe  defigxi 
feems  to  have  been  to  trick  hafiily  k  privately  herein, 
the  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  England,  from  the  laft 
Vifitation-books.  For  now,  the  Officers  of  Arms  were 
grown  fo  wife  as  to  keep  their  Pedegrees  k  Vifitation- 
books  up  pretty  clofe.  It  containeth, 

1.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Oxford fhire,  from  the 

Vmtation-book  made  A.  D.  1668,  by  Sir  Edw.  Bysfhe, 
Clar*.  j 

2.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Buckinghamffiire,  from 

the  Vifitation-book  thereof,  made  A.  D.  1669,  by  Sir 
Edward  Byfhe  Clarcnceux.  ^  5. 

3*  -Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Bedford  (hire,  from  the 
Vifitation-book  thereof,  madeA.D.  1669,  by  the  fame. 

4.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Hertfordfhire,  from  the 
Vifitation-book  thereof,  made  A.D.  1669,  by  the  fame. 

20. 

5.  Particular  Tables  of  Surnames  of  Families  referring 
to  the  Tra&s  above-mentioned.  At  the  end. 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  k  tricked  (for  the 

moft  part)  by  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Painter-Stainef; 

the  reft,  by  other  hands.  It  containeth, 

1.  A  Copie  of  the  Viutation-book  of  the  County  of 
Sufiex;  as  the  fame  was  taken  A.l).  1633  k  1634,  by 
John  Philipot  Somerfet,  &  George  Owen  York,  Heralds; 
for  Sir  John  Borough  Garter,  &  Sir  Richard  St.  George 
Clarenceux,  who  vifit-  d  jointly. 

I  believe  that  this  Copie  was  made  in  fome  haft; 
not  only  becaufe  of  the  variety  of  hands,  but  by  reafon 
of  tiie  great  want  of  Tranfcripts  of  old  Deeds,  Tricks 
ot  public  &  private  Seals,  with  Church  Notes,  wherc- 
C.°P'edone  by  Mr. Withie  (who  rode  Painter  at 
this  Vifitation)  aboundeth.  However,  befides  fome  Ad¬ 
ditions  k  Continuations,  I  find  herein  fome, 

2.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Staring/  24 

3.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Cuckfield.  2  c  b 

4.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Arundell.  «/2.b. 
c-  5-  L°o(e  Notes  concerning  the  Family  of  Morley, 
Sir  Richard  de  Walleys,  &  Sir  Robert  de  Kendall. 

6.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  .  .  .  V32 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 
at  the  end. 


T4°7* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  I  he  Tables  of  Titles  following:  i.  e.  a  Table 
Ihewing  the  method  followed  in  the  enfuing  Ordinary. 

2.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Fa¬ 
milies  whofe  Arms  are  taken  into  the  following  Ordinary. 

3.  Heraldical  Rudiments ;  taken  out  of  the  Book  of 
Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux. 

4.  Part  of  an  Ordinary  of  Arms;  all  tricked  in 

prmted  Efcocheons.  j 

5;  Arms  of  fome  Britifh  &  Anglo-Saxon  Kings  :  i  e 
aferibed  unto  them.  &  ’ 

6  Arms  of  the  Nobility  of  England,  from  the  Con- 
queit.  Done  from  the  Treatife commonly  aferibed  unto 
Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux;  all  in  printed  Eicocheons,  as 
the  others. 

I  he  Writing  &  Tricking  of  this  Book  is  an  hafty 
Performance:  or  elfe,  as  indifferent  as  if  done  in  hafte. 


1408. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  bv  many 
hands:  but  chiefly  by  John  Ilollingfworth  who  was 
Blew-mantell  Pourfuivant,  ann.  1  Ehz.  Richaid  Scar- 
9  let 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


3* 


Num.  1408. 

let  the  Painter;  Raufe  Brooke  YorkHerault  (of  whom 

here  is  but  little)  above  all,  by  William  Penfon  Lan- 

calter  Herald:  but  perhaps,  before  them,  by  Edmund 

Atkinfon  Somerfett  Herald,  temp.  R.  Edw.  vi.  & 

Mar.  1.  It  containeth, 

1.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  March  of  Newport;  as  attef- 
ted  by  William  Penfon  Lancafter,  A.D.  1633.  At  the 
beginning. 

2.  Arms  of  fome  foreign  Emperors  &  Kings  in  blazon. 

Old.  (vid.  fol.  18.)  1. 

3.  Arms  of  fome  Britifh,  Saxon,  &  Englilh  Kings  ; 
as  alfo  of  the  old  Englilh  Nobility,  in  Blazon.  r.c. 

4.  A  Collection  of  Arms  in  old  Trick,  put  together 

promifcuoufly ;  before  I  enter  upon  which,  perhaps  it 
may  not  be  amifs  to  obferve,  that  at  the  top  “  Edmund 
Atkinfiun”  wrote  his  name  witti  his  Title,  “Somerfett 
Herald  of  Armes,”  under  which  Raufe  Brooke  (who  was 
a  man  of  a  turbulent  envious  &  malicious  temper) 
wrote  theie  words,  “  and  a  verye  foryeone  twoe  which 
words  fome  other  perfou  cenfured  by  writing  underneath 
the  fame,  “  But  Atkinfon  might  have  tought  York  to 
write  true  Orthography,  in  requital  of  fuch  his  difpa- 
rageable  Language.”  5. 

But  to  return  to  this  Collection  of  Arms  ;  in  look¬ 
ing  fomewhat  narrowly  into  the  fame,  1  find  it  to  have 
been  made  &  enlarged  by  divers  hands ;  and  that  many 
of  them  were  found  in  &  about  divers  old  Churches  & 
Houfes,  which  Arms  being  in  all  probability,  broken  to 
pieces  &  gone,  by  this  time  ;  I  will  therefore  put  down 
the  names  of  fuch  Places,  fome  of  whofe  Antiquities 
are  hereby  preferved. 

5.  At  Bedford  in  Polys.  7.  (et  vid.  33.) 

6.  Parenton  Churche.  8  b.  9. 

7.  Maynsffylde.  io.  et  28.  b. 

8.  Cryftis  Churche,  Yorke. 

10.  b.  et  30.  b.  (et  vid.  fol.  29.) 

9.  Saint  Martyn  in  Cony-ftret.  ibid,  et  28. 

10.  Cronys  Churche,  York.  ibid. 

11.  Chtirch  of  Stainrap  by  Raby.  11.  et  29.  b. 

12.  Roderam  Church.  n.b.  &  28. 

1 3 .  Arms  of  many  Families  bearing  a  Chevron  be¬ 

tween  ,  Eltoiles;  put  down  by  Will.  Penfon;  who  having 
fuch  A' ms.  the  Reader  may  imagine  that  here  he  would 
not  1  mitt  his  own.  14.  b.  et  15. 

1  4.  The  end  of  an  old  Alphabet  of  Arms  in-  Blazon  ; 
molt  of  which  is  in  the  Book,  but  miferably  tranfpofed ; 
however,  here  I  fhall  putt  down  where  what  remains 
maybe  found.  16.  45.  51.  56.  b.  58.  71.  80.  84. 
80.  87.  90.  91.  99.  149.  &c. 

15.  In  Raleghe  Churche.  17.  b. 

16.  Arms  found  in  Petworth.  22.  et  29. 

17.  In  the  Haryslhe  Churche  of  Ware.  2;.  b. 

18.  In  Donftable. 

19.  Belfre  Church  in  York. 

20.  Wakfylde-C.hurch. 

21.  Topclyffe  Churche. 

22.  Heraldical  Rudiments. 

23.  Saint  Elyns  in  the  Stangat. 

24.  All-Haloughe  on  the  Pavement  in  Yorke.  34.  b. 

2 t.  A  notable  old  Fragment  containing  the  Arms  & 

Crefts  (which  Crefts  are  omitted  in  Mr.  Nicholas  Charles’s 
Book,  81.  A.2.)  of  many  of  the  Lord  Mayors,  &c.  of 
London,  during  the  Reigns  of  the  Tudors.  But  divers 
of  the  faid  Crclts  are  to  be  found  in  the  fame  Mr.Nich. 
Charles’s  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  London,  made 
by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux,  A.  D.  1582.  (inferibed 
82.  B.  1 1.)  into  which  Vilitation-book  it  fhould  ieem  that 
Clarenceux  Cooke  inferted  the  fame,  from  thefe  indivi¬ 
dual  Papers,  were  the  word  Entered,  with  the  ufual 
mark  -(-  is  frequently  put. 

Here  is  alfo  a  Lift  of  the  faid  Mayors,  with  the  mark 
-f  before  many  of  them.  36,  &c.  39,  &c. 


Num.  1408. 

26.  Unto  the  above-mentioned  Fragment,  Will.  Pen¬ 
fon  hath  made  good  Additions.  38.  b.  &  40.  b. 

27.  The  Arms  of  Marcus  Mayger,  emblafoned  in 

Latin  &  Englifh.  Old.  41. 

Then  follow  by  the  hand  of  Will.  Penfon; 

28.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Gering  of  Winterton,  in 

Com.  Line.  ibid. 

29.  Defcent  of  Halfe.  41.  b. 

30.  Defcent  of  Dennys  of  Orlegh.  ibid. 

31.  Defcent  of  Prideaux  from  Gifford,  &EfTe.  ibid. 

32.  Defcent  of  Byry  from  EfTe.  ibid. 

33.  Defcent  of  Wollacomb.  ibid. 

34.  Defcents  of  Trefham,  Merton,  Chauncy,  Rifiey, 
Hawton,  Bradfhaw,  Clifford,  St.  John,  Pole,  Beauchamp 
of  Powicke,  Beaufort,  &c.  all  allied  together.  42. 

35.  Arms  of  divers  Families  in  older  Trick.  42.  b. 

36.  Arms  of  divers  Families  in  Colors ;  pretty  old* 

4  2 .  et  44.  c. 

37.  Pedegree  of  Fynes  of  Broughton  in  Com.Oxon. 

dat.  1 506.  with  a  Narration  of  the  Reafons  why  the 
Stile  of  Lord  Say,  was  forborn  or  difeontinued  by  Sir 
Edward  Fynes,  &  Sr.  Richard  Fynes  his  fon.  (Will. 
Penfon’s  hand)  44. 

38.  Arms  of  divers  Families  tricked  by  Will.  Penfon; 

among  them,  thofe  of  Mefler  Gillame  Penefton  Sr.  de 
Courteffellez.  4“t.  b. 

39.  Will.  Penfon’s  Note  of  the  Marriage  of  Richard 
Hawkins  Gent,  with  the  daughter  of  Richard  Pinion  of 
Middlefex,  Gent,  with  the  Arms  of  each,  in  Blazon. 

45* 

40.  Docquet  of  the  Indenture  betweene  Sr  John  de 

Montague  &  the  Lady  Sybell  of  Arundell.  dat.  2  2d 
March,  ann.  40  Edw.  in.  47.  b. 

This  is  of  the  handwriting  of  Will.  Penfon  above- 
mentioned;  and  fo  is  all  that  followeth,  untill  1  fhall 
give  notice  of  the  contrary  ;  being  all  intermingled 
with  the  fragments  of  the  Alphabet  mentioned  above 
at  N°  1 5. 

41.  Tranflation  of  a  Charter,  whereby  Rodbert  de 
Stadford  (or  Stafford)  gave  Wortefley  to  the  Monaftery 
ofEvefham,  A.D.  1072.  with  Croffes  before  the  Names 
of  the  Witneffcs,  after  the  Anglo-Saxon  manner.  48. 

42.  Defcent  &  Armes  of  Meres.  49. 

43.  ExtraCt  of  a  Deed,  with  the  Seal  of  William 

Tracy,  dat.  1  Edw.  in.  49.  b. 

44.  Match  of  Richard  Benfon  of  North  Kelfey.  (Noted 
as  I  fuppofe,  by  Will.  Penfon,  by  reafon  of  the  near- 
nefs  of  the  Name  to  his  ;  he  feeming  at  the  time  of  his 
making  thefe  &  other  Collections  to  be  in  fome  doubt 
from  whence  he  had  bell  to  derive  his  Defcent.)  50. 

45.  ExtraCt  of  a  Deed,  with  a  Trick  of  the  Seal  of 

Sir  Richard  Havering,  dat.  3  Edw.  n.  50. 

46.  ExtraCl  of  a  Deed  of  Alan  le  Zouch,  wherein  is 
mention  of  Jordanus  de  Coventre,  dat.  A.D.  1297. 

5°.  b. 

47.  Finalis  Concordia  faCta  in  Curia  R.  Henrici  11. 

apudEboracum,  coram  Jufticiarijs  fuis,  et  alijs  Baronibus, 
&c.  inter  Robertum  le  Vavafour,  et  Jordanum  leBretun 
ac  Walterum  fratrem  ejus,  de  12  bovatis  Terra;  in 
Sutton,  undeBELLUM  fuit  inter  eos  in  Comitatu  Ebora- 
cenfi.  ibid. 

4S.  DifierentArms  borne  by  theName  of  Church.  56. 

49.  Arms  of  Hagat,  &  of  Haket.  ibid. 

50.  ExlraCt  of  a  Deed,  with  a  Frick  of  the  Seal  of 

Thomas  le  Nywe,  dat.  32  Edw.  in.  ibid. 

51.  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Wall;  followed  by 

Walls  Pedegree  &  Arms.  cy. 

52.  Knights  (of  the  Bath?)  made  19th  Octob.  1553. 
ann.  1  Mar.  among  whom  is  Sir  Edmond  Pinfon.  58.  b. 

5?.  Memorandum  of  the  Arms  &  Defcent  of  the 
Lord  Prior  of  Tynmouth,  from  Q.  Catherine  the  widow 
of  K.  Henry  v.  by  a  baftard  daughter  of  Jafper  Duke  of 
Bedford  :  as  alfo  of  the  burial  of  Malcolm  K.  of  Scot¬ 
land, 


32.b.  et  33 
33 

b.  et  vid.  34 


3i  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1408. 

land,  {lain  at  the  Battel  of  Andwikc  by  Robert  Mow¬ 
bray.  &  buried  in  the  Chapter  Houfe  of  the  Monaftery 
of  Tinmouth.  Both  taken  from  the  Vifitation-book 
which  Thomas  Tonge  Norroy  made  of  his  Province, 
A.D.  1530.  nowremaining  in  this  Library  (being  bought 
of  William  Shires)  Sc  infcribed  89.  C.  1.  59. 

54.  Defcent  of  divers  Families  from  Thomas  Chiche- 

ley  of  Higharn  Ferers  &  Agnes  his  wife,  daughter  to 
William  Pynchon  Gent.  59.  b. 

55.  Pedegree  of  Stafford,  with  Arms.  60. 

56.  Another  Pedegree  of  Chicheley,  &  of  Families 
allied  thereunto ;  from  a  Booke  of  Clarenceux  Cooke. 

61.  b. 

57.  Defcent  of  Walpole.  62.  b. 

58.  Defcent  of  Stafford.  63. 

59.  Defcent  of  Vaux  of  Harrowdon ;  out  of  two  feveral 

Bookes  of  Pedigrees  in  the  Office.  63.  b. 

60.  Defcent  of  Uffenham  from  Penfon,  or  rather  Pen- 
fton  ;  from  Hervey’s  Vifitation  of  Wiltfhire.  64. 

61.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Pichard.  64.  b. 

62.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  May,  whofe  grand-daughter 

by  Whittingham,  was  married  to  Penfon.  67. 

63.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Barwick.  65.  b. 

64.  De  fundatione  Domns  Fratrum  Minorum  in  civi- 
tate  Ebor.  Ex  Libro  valde  amiquo  remanente  in  Offi¬ 
cio  Armorum,  et  ftilato,  A  Booke  of  the  French  Warres. 

66. 

65.  Defendants  from  Chicheley,  ut  fupra;  from  a 
Defcent  delivered  to  Mr.  Ezekias  Fogg,  under  the  hands 
&  feales  of  Mr.  Garier  (Sir  William  Dtthick)  &  Mr. 
Clarentieulx  (William  Camden)  25th  O&ober,  1599. 

66.  b. 

66.  Defcent  of  Thornborough  of  Shottefdenin  Com. 

Suthampt.  67. 

67.  Defcent  of  Pulvertoft,  who  had  a  daughter  mar¬ 
ried  unto  Penchebet.  ibid. 

68.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Parker  of  Effex.  67.  b. 

69.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Parker  of  Ratton  in  Suffex. 

ibid. 

70.  Defcent  of  the  Royal  Houfe  of  England  &  Scot¬ 

land,  of  St.John  Vifcount  Grandifon,  Carew,  &  St.John 
of  Bletffio,  from  Margaret  the  daughter  &  heire  of  Sr. 
John  Beauchamp  of  Bletffio.  67.  c. 

71.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Parker  of  London;  from  the 

Vifitation-book  of  London  made,  A.D.  1568.  by  Ro- 
bert'Cooke  Clarenceux.  68. 

72.  Different  Arms  of  Parker  of  Glouceftcrffiire. 

ibid. 

73.  Different  Arms  of  Wefton,  or  Wifton.  ibid. 

74.  Different  Arms  of  Grofvenor.  ibid. 

75.  Arms  of  Partridge,  &  Howell.  ibid. 

76.  Different  Arms  of  Greme.  ibid. 

77.  Defcents  of  Willoughby,  &  Harecourt,  from  Bek 

of  Ereffiy.  68.  b. 

78.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Verney.  69. 

79.  Pedegree  Sc  Arms  of  Townefend.  69.8. 

80.  Defendants  from  Elmham,  Boking,  &  Blage; 

being  all  allied.  70.  b.  &  71. 

81.  Defcent  of  Fox  of  Bvffiam.  71. 

82.  Defcent  &  Creft  emblazoned,  of  Barker  of  Nor¬ 
thumberland.  73. 

83.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Barwick  of  Weft-Grinded  in 

Com.  Suffex.  76. 

84.  Fragment  of  an  Alphabet  of  Arms  in  Blazon  ; 
different  from  that  fo  often  pointed  to,  in  N“  15. 

78.  &no.  116.  118.  120,  &c. 

85.  Defcent  of  Norton.  78.  b. 

86.  Arms  of  certain  aniient  Families  in  Suffolk,  &c. 

in  Blazon.  yg, 

87.  Defcent  of  Beck  Baron  of  Ereffiy,  from  Pinfon 
(he  ffiould  have  wrote  it  Pinceo)  a  noble  Norman  in  the 
time  of  the  Conqueft;  whom  Will.  Penfon  hath  dig¬ 
nified  with  his  own  Arms.  But  (as  it  feeineth)  being  af- 


Nuni.  1408. 

terwards  affiamed  of  this  little  piece  of  Heraidical  Forgery; 
&  perhaps  out  of  a  fenfe,  that  Bek  of  Erelbic  bare 
Arms  far  different  from  his;  inltead  of  blotting  out  his 
own,  he  left  a  marginal  Note  in  the  words  following, 
“  It  is  but  prefumed  that  this  Coate  belonged  to  this 
Pinfon;  for  that  we  finde  noe  certein  proofc  for  it  to  be 
borne  foe  aunciently  by  him.”  79- 

88.  Defcent  of  Choke.  79-  b. 

89.  Will.  Penfon's  own  Pedegree  &  Arms.  83. 

90.  Pedegree  of  Copledike.  83.  b. 

91.  Anfwer  of  the  Officers  of  Arms,  to  the  Lords 

Commiffioners  for  the  Office  of  Earl-Marffiall  of  Eng¬ 
land;  fetting  forth,  upon  occafion  of  the  Funeral  of 
O.  Anne,  their  Claime  &  Right  to  Hearfes,  to  be  had 
in  kinde.  85. 

92.  Pedegree  of  Langton.  85.  b. 

93.  Defcent  of  Gedney.  86. 

Then  follow', 

94.  Different  Arms  of  Morton ;  with  feme  Arms  of 

other  old  Families.  86.  b.  &  88. 

95.  Defcent  of  Penfton.  (by  Will.  Penfon.)  87. 

96.  Defcent  of  Litlcbury,  by  Will.  Penf  n.  87.  b. 

97.  Defcent  of  Woodthorpe,  by  Wiil.  Penfon.  88, 

98.  Arms  of  Six  Lincolnlhire  Families :  painted. 

88.  b. 

99.  Defcent  of  Greffelvng;  by  Will.  Penfon.  ibid. 

100.  Pedegree  of  Onncfby;  by  Will.  Penfon.  89. 

101.  Defcent  of  Ogle,  (by  Vi  ill.  Penfon.)  89.  b. 

102.  Defcent  of  Grandorge,  by  Will.  Penfon.  ibid. 

103.  Defcent  of  Walpole;  by  'Will.  Penfon.  90.  b. 

104.  Defcent  of  Fry  Iky  n;  by  Will.  Penfon.  ibid. 

105.  Defcent  of  Headon  of  Wa'ford  in  Com.  Hert¬ 
ford  ;  by  Will.  Penfun.  95.  b. 

106.  Defcent  of  Awdeley;  by  Will.  Penfon.  96.  b. 

107.  Arms  of  the  antient  Gentry  of  Northumberland 

&  Cumberland  in  old  tricking;  unto  which  William  Pen¬ 
fon  hath  added  his  own.  97. 

108.  Defcent  of  Suthill.  (by  Will,  Penfon.)  98.  b. 

109.  Defcent  of  Wychcott,  by  Will.  Penfon.  ibid. 

110.  Fragmentof  another  Alphabet  of  Arms  in  Blazon; 
different  from  thofe  above-mentioned  at  Nu  15.  &  84. 

100. 

111.  Defcent  of  Langholme;  by  William  Penfon. 

I03-  b- 

1 1 2.  Arms  of  Shropffiire  Knights,  in  Blazon.  104. 

1 13.  Defcent  of  May  of  Melfam.  (by  Will.Penfon  ) 

ibid. 

1 1 4.  Defcent  of  Yerburgh;  by  Will.  Penfon.  104.  b. 

1 15.  A  Lift  of  many  Lords  &  Knights,  living  in  the 
time  of  K.  Henry  vi.  with  their  Arms  emblazoned  ;  feem- 
ing  to  be  the  original  Paper  of  fome  old  Officer  of  Arms. 

105. 

116  Defcent  of  Wal grave  (or  rather  Waldegrave) 
with  their  Arms  quartering  &  impaling  thofe  of  divers 
Families :  by  Will.  Penfon.  109.  b. 

1 1 7.  Fragment  of  an  Alphabet  of  Arms  in  blazon, 
of  the  fame  hand  with  that  above-mentioned  at  N"  84. 

110.  116. 

The  remaining  part  of  the  Book,  confifting  moftly 
of  Defcents  &  Fragments  of  Alphabets  only;  the  former 
being  all  of  Will.  Penfon’s  hand  ;  for  Brevity’s  fake,  I 


{hall  omit  his  Name  for  the  future. 

118.  Defcents  of  Cocker  &  Affiton.  115. 

1 19.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Merchall  of  PekeJynglvth  in 

Com.  Ebor.  ii5-b. 

120.  Different  Arms  of  Pynchbeck.  116. 

121.  Pedegree  of  Arundell,  from  Chideoke,  Fitz- 

pain  Sc  Clifford  :  with  Arms.  1 1 6.  b. 

122.  Defcent  of  Peke  of  Warton.  118.  b. 

123.  Defcent  of  Stoner.  1 19. 

124.  Defcent  of  Purley.  ibid. 

125.  Defcent  8c  Arms  of  Houghton.  no.  b. 

i  26,  Defcent 


6 


Biblio  thecae  H  arleianas,  3  3 


Num.  1408. 


126.  Defcent  of  Baker.  120.  b. 

127.  Defcent  of  Brugh  of  Wolfham  ;  with  the 

Arms  in  Blazon.  ibid. 

128.  Defcent  of  Grave  of  Beconsfield.  121. 

1 29.  Defcent  of  Muffendyne.  121.  b. 

130.  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  St.  Paul.  123.  b. 

13 1 .  Arms  of  Bate  of  Lyn  ;  &  of  Walker.  124.  b. 

132.  Different  Arms  of  Heryng ;  &  the  Arms  of 

Kerle.  126* 

133.  Defcent  of  Afhby  ;  with  Arms.  126.  b. 


134.  Defcendants  from  Beauchamp  of  Elmeley  ;  & 
from  William  Lord  Roos  ;  with  their  Matches.  127.  b. 

135.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Stone  of  Lechlade.  i28.b. 

136.  Defcent  of  Toppes  alias  Lyons,  from  Clement. 

ibid. 

137.  Arms  found  in  Leechlade-Church.  129. 

138.  Pedegree  of  Roche  of  Walkneth.  129.  b. 

139.  Defcent  of  Pever,  &  Loring.  130.  etvid.  132.  b. 

1 40.  Defcent  of  Broughton,  Barnacke,  &  Engayne. 

130.  b.  et  132.  b. 

141.  Defcent  of  Loring  from  Perrot.  131.  b. 

142.  Defcent  of  Chandelor.  ibid. 

143.  Defcent  of  Broughton  from  Stoneham.  132.  b. 

144.  Defcent  of  Broughton  from  Forfter.  ibid. 

145.  Defcent  of  Broughton  from  Stone,  Bemacke, 

&  None.  ibid. 

146.  Defcent  of  Corham.  133.  b. 

147.  Defcent  of  Somayfler,  who  married  a  Penfon  ; 

Coplefton,  See.  from  Fortefcue.  134. 

148.  Arms  of  Swayne,  with  a  Defcent ;  taken  from 
that  of  Woodnet  in  the  Vifitation  of  Devonlhire. 

134.  b. 

149.  Defcent  of  Skeke  from  Beauchamp  &  Kaynes. 

ibid. 

150.  Arms  granted  to  Swayne,  by  John  Rexworth 
(leg.  Wrex  worth)  Guyan,  King  of  Arms,  ann.  39  Hen.  vi. 


j35.  b. 

1 51.  Sir  John  Tufton’s  Anns.  137- 

152.  Defcent  of  Scull.  137.  b. 

j  53.  Defcent  of  Wykes.  ibid. 

154.  Arms  in  Blafon,  of  many  old  Englilh  Knights. 

138. 

155.  Defcent  of  Felton.  140- 

156.  Arms  of  Hutton.  140.  b. 


157.  Extra£t  from  a  falfe  Lift  of  Noblemen  & 
Knights  that  were  in  England  in  the  time  of  K.  Harold, 
remaining  then,  in  the  Office  of  Arms. 

158.  Lift  of  Noblemen  &  Knights  that  were  prefent 

at  the  Tournay  at  the  Towne  of  Dunftabull,  anno  3  E.  3. 
with  their  Anns  einblafoned.  Old.  141. 

1 59.  Defcent  of  Barker,  with  a  Blazon  of  his  Creft. 

142. 

160.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Wichingham.  ibid. 

161.  Defcent  of  Merys.  142.  b. 

162.  ImperfeCt  Lift  of  Noblemen  &  Knights,  that 

were  in  the  Army,  perhaps  of  K.  Edw.  11.  (1  ?)  with 
their  Arms  emblafoned.  (Old)  143. 

1 63.  “  The  Namys  &  Arrays  in  Blazon,  of  the  nowble 

perfons  wiche  were  with  Kyng  Edward  the  Fyrft  at  the 
Sege  of  Carlavaroke  in  Scotlande,  about  the  yere  1 300.’* 
(In  the  fame  hand.)  145-  b- 

164.  Pedegree  &  Arms  of  Thornburgh.  148. 

165.  Defcent  of  Pol whill,  from  Kill igrew.  148.  b. 

166.  Different  Defcents  &  Arms  of  Hilton.  ibid. 

167.  Defcent  of  Lafcells,  with  Notes.  149. 

168.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Blewet.  149.!). 

169.  Defcent  of  Wymbych.  151. 

170.  Pedegree  of  Markam  ;  with  theEfcocheon  re- 
verfed,  &  the  paternal  Arms  blotted  out,  or  omitted. 

152.  b. 

171.  Defcent  of  Pan nell.  153. 

172.  Defcents  of Nedham.  (with  the  Arms.) 

156.  b.  157. 

Gat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1408. 


173.  Defcent  of  Ryley  de  NovaSar.  157.  b. 

174.  Defcent  Sc  Arms  of  Littleton.  158. 

175.  Defcent  of  Cheney  from  Beckering  Sc  Rcmfton ; 

with  a  fmall  defcent  of  Fuliamb.  159. 

176.  Defcent  of  Syngleton.  159.  b. 

1  77.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  White,  alias  Halfe.  160. 

178.  Defcent  of  Conny  of  Bafmgthorp.  161.  b. 

179.  Defcent  of  Bawde.  162. 

180.  Pedegree  of  Tomfon.  162.  b, 

1 8 1 .  Defcent  and  Arms  of  Brus ;  one  of  whofe 
Iliereffes  was  married  to  Bellew,  &  his  to  Stapleton. 

165. 


182.  Defcent  of  Scarefcull ;  whofe  coheireffes  mar¬ 
ried  to  Harecourt  &  Willoughby.  165.  b. 

183.  Defcent  of  Gering.  170. 

184.  Pedegree  of  Sydney ;  wherein  are  Defcents  of 

Battell,  Enfield,  Baard,  Barrington,  Lunsford,  Parker, 
Marney,  &c.  170.  b. 

185.  Pedegree  of  Quadring  &  Barnacke.  171.  b. 

186.  Defcent  of  Upton,  &c.  172.  b. 

187.  Defcent  of  Durward.  177. 

188.  Defcent  of  Walter  of  Broxborne  ;  with  his  Creft 

emblafoned.  177.  b. 

189.  Funeral  Certificate  taken  after  the  deceafe  of 

Sir  John  Pakington  K.  A.D.  1571.  179.  b. 

1 90.  Defcent  of  Bewprey.  1 80. 

j  9  r .  Defcent  of  Hampton.  1 80.  b. 

192.  Defcent  of  Hampton  &  Gowmey.  181. 

1 93.  Defcent  of  Baynam.  1 8 1 .  b. 

194.  Defcent  of  Tirwhit ;  with  the  Arms  of  Oxen- 

bridge  &  Echingham.  183. 

1 95.  Pedegree  of  Barret  with  Defcents  of  Belhoufe, 

Foxcot,  Dynely,  &c.  1 83.  b. 

196.  Certificate  taken  after  the  Funeral  of  Anne  the 

Wife  of  Edmund  Barret,  A.D.  1568.  184. 

197.  Pedegree  of  Barrington.  184.  b. 

198.  Defcent  of  Gibthorpe.  186.  b. 

199.  Defcent  of  Thy  melby.  187. 

200.  Defcent  of  Manby.  187.  b. 

201.  Pedegree  of  Hanby.  190. 

202.  Defcent  of  Jermyn  from  Apfall,  through  divers 

Families  ;  expreffed  narratively.  1 00.  b. 

203.  Pedegree  of  Jernigan  ;  with  Defcents  of  Moyn, 

Fitz-Ofburn,  Jenny,  Ley  Ion,  &c.  191.  b. 

204.  Defcent  of  Savyll  &  Colvyle.  192.  b. 

205.  Certain  old  Rhymes  upon  the  Lord  Stafford’s 

Arms.  198.  b. 

206.  Defcent  of  Brugges.  199. 

207.  Defcent  of  Wymbych.  199.!). 

208.  Defcent  of  Carre  of  Slyford  ;  with  his  Arms  in 

Blazon.  ibid. 

209.  Defcent  of  Carfey  &  Lovell.  202.  b. 

210.  Defcent  of  Tayleboys.  ibid. 

2 1 1.  Short  Defcent  of  Skydmore.  203.  b. 

2\2.  Pedegree  Sc  Arms  of  Chicheley.  204.  b. 

213.  Defcent  of  Warncombe.  206.  b. 

214.  Short  Notes  concerning  the  Family  of  Purflow  $ 

taken  A.D.  1584.  297. 

215.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Purflow.  207.  b. 

216.  Pedigree  of  Purflow,  as  it  was  fubferibed  A.D. 

1584.  by  Richard  Lee,  Portcullis.  209.  b. 

2x7.  Pedegree  of Fitton.  2ii.b. 

2 1 8.  Defcent  of  Skerne  from  Atholl,  &  Hotham  ; 

with  Skerne’s  Armes.  214.  b. 

2 1 9.  Pedegree  of  Somayfter  ;  taken  from  an  old  Book 

jn  the  Office  of  Arms.  2i5-b. 

It  muft  not  be  forgotten,  that  thefe  Defcents  Sc 
Pedegrees  abovementioned,  are  inferted  on  the  blank 
Pages,  or  parts  of  Pages,  belonging  to  the  Alphabets 
of  Arms,  which  run  through  the  Book  ;  and  by  the 
marks  in  the  Margin,  appear  to  be  the  Originalls,  to 
forae  other  Alphabets. 

K  226.  Alpha- 


IT 


1 


34 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1408—1410. 


2  20.  Alphabetical  Table  referring  to  the  old  Collec¬ 
tion  of  Amies  at  the  beginning  of  the  Book  ;  whereof 
the  three  firft  Letters  (A.  B.  &  C.)  being  wanting 
they  are  renewed  by  ’William  Penfon.  220? 

ear.  Notes  touching  the Baptifm and  Funeral  of  Mag¬ 
dalen  the  daughter  of  Henry  Perfe :  who  feems  to  have 
been  the  filter  of  Will.  Penfon.,  Wife.  220.  b. 

222.  Will.  Penfon’s  Table  to  theDefcents  by  him  in- 

ferted  to  m  this  Book.  22g 

223.  Narratio  de  Familia  Darceiorum  ;  ex  veteri 

Scr,pt0‘  232.  b. 

1409. 

A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  large  fol.  feeming  to  be  of  the 
and  of  John  Saunders,  or  of  fome  other  Painter, 
who  intended  to  make  quick  difpatch.  It  containcth. 

.  V  /  11  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames,  contained 
in  the  enfumg  Tract. 

2.  A  Collection  of  Arms  &  Crefls  of  many  Families, 
put  down  promifcuoufly.;  collected  for  the  moft  part 
from  Grants,  the  Dates  whereof  are  here  exprcffed. 
(containeth  x  6  Pages.)  j 

3-  A  much  larger  Colle&ion  of  Coats  &  Crefls ; 
put  down  promifcuoufly;  collected  from  Vifitations, 
Grants,  &c.  , 

4.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  referring  to 
e  pieceding  fraft  ;  but  in  fuch  manner  as  that  a 
Moat  °r  Creit,  efpecially  on  the  fecond  fide  of  the  Leaf 
is  but  with  difficulty  found  thereby. 

formefn0ther  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  :  like  the 

This  Book  is  alfo  fit  to  be  confulted  for  Arms  & 
Clefts  born  by  different  Families  of  the  fame  Surname. 

1410. 

A  Book  in  fol.  the  Leaves  whereof  are  all  of  grey  Paper; 
unto  which  I  have  parted  the  following  Things, 

1 .  rhree  Sculls  painted  upon  fo  many  pieces  of 

white  Taffata  ;  from  fome  Funeral.  ] 

2.  Imperfect  Draught  of  the  Herfe,  fett  up  in  the 

Abbey  (..hurch  of  cftminfter,  upon  the  Funerall  of 
Q.  Elizabeth,  as  it  feems.  K 

.3-  The  Lions  of  the  Arms  of  England,  painted  on 
cnmfon  Silk  ;  on  both  fides.  2 

4.  Another  of  the  fame.  jj^.' 

5.  A  large  Drawing  of  a  Mace ;  made  with  Indian 

lnk‘  2.  b. 

6.  An  Horfe’s  Head  &  Neck,  done  with  Soot ;  fcem- 
mg  to  be  a  Sketch  for  a  Sign  of  the  Nag’s  Head.  3 

7.  An  old  Painting  of  a  Man’s  Head,  from  t’he  life; 

done  upon  Paper.  „  ^ 

8.  Another,  of  fome  other  Man.  4 

9.  A  good  old  Drawing  upon  Paper;  reprefenting  the 

■Hunting  of  a  wild  Bear.  4  ^ 

‘O.  An  Mltdrica1  Drawing;  to  be  viewed  not  upon 
the  Flat,  but  diopttcally  ;  holding  the  narrowed  end 
edgeways  towards  the  Fie,  that  fo  it  may  feem  all  of  a 
breadth,  and  the  feverall  Figures  therein  may  appear  in 
their  due  Proportion  &  Poftures.  . 

41.  Arms  of  certain  noble  &  worihipful  Families': 
punted  &  coloured.  A  fragment.  .  ^ 

1 2  .  Blank  Efcocheons,  with  Helmets  &  Mantles  •  ore 
pared  by  John  Withie  the  Painter  Stayner,  in  ordir  to 
mfert  therein  the  Arms  of  a  Knight,  Ffouire.  or  Gen- 
tleman,  as  occafion  might  require.  5 

-There  being  divers  more  of  thefe,  I  laid  the  reft 
afide. 

13.  Atchievement  of  the  Corporation  of  Tradefmen 
is  Artificers;  incorporated,  A.D.  .  Granted  to 
Juiy  1637,  by  Sr.  John  Borough  Garter.  Painted  on  a 
oheet  or  Paper. 

.“*■  Atchievement  of  the  Lord  Clifford  of  Chudleigh 
as  it  feemeth  ;  painted  on  Paper.  ^  | 


Num.  1410. 

15.  Atchievement  of  Rollefton  of  Rollefton ;  painted 

upon  Paper. •  (with  Quarterings.)  8. 

16.  Arms  of  Boleign,  with  Quarterings  ;  painted 

upon  Paper.  S.  b. 

1 7.  Arms  of  Barrington,  ike.  painted  upon  Paper. 

ibid. 

iS.  Arms  granted  unto  Robert  Home  Bifhop  of 
Wincheftcr ;  painted  upon  Paper.  .  ibid. 

19.  Atchievement  of  Gouldelborough  ;  half  tiicked 

by  John  Withie,  upon  Paper,  for  a  Pattern.  ibid. 

20.  Arms  oi  ]< 

upon  Paper  by  John  Withie.  ibid. 

21.  Arms  of  1  umer  of  I.itde-W ratipg  ;  tricked  unon 

Paper  by  John  Withie.  ibid. 

Arms  Foreign;  with  Augmentations  from  ths 
R°yal  Badges :  1  bree  ShieU  s  in  Colours,  ft 

23.  Arms  of  Williams  of  Wales  ;  in  Colours*  upon 

Paper.  ( 

24.  Arms  of  Hyde  of  Hcrtfordfliire  ;  in  Colour*; 

upon  Paper.  _  ibij/ 

25.  Arms  of  Hampton,  as  quartering  Pogeis  :  painted 

upon  Paper.  Jbid. 

26.  Anns,  in  Colours,  upon  Paper;  granted  to  a 

German  called Diis  Petrus:  his  Surname  not  remem¬ 
bered.  ibid.  - Arms  of  Davies,  quartering  Peacock 

&  Audeley  ;  painted  upon  Paper.  ibid. 

27.  Arms  of  Priott ;  granted  by  Sir  .  .  .  Dethick. 

0  r  •  ibid. 

28.  Arms  of  Lajicafter,  with  Quarterings,  &  a  whinv 

fical  Compartment  (I  will  not  fay  Supporters)  being  two 
Heraldical  Fauichions.  jbid. 

29.  Atchievement  of  the  Paynter-Stayners  Company ; 

upon  a  Sheet  of  Paper  ;  as  a  Pattern'  for  Funeral  Kf. 
cocheons.  0  ^ 

30.  Arms  of  Sir  Edward  Bvslhe,  &  Clare,  empald, 

Greene  within  a  Glory  :  being  a  Pattern.  ,  0.a 

31.  Atchievement  ofCoIeire  of  Stone  in  StaffortMihe- 

being  alfo  a  Pattern.  , 

32.  Arms  of  Dineley  ;  coloured  upon  Vellum 

33  The  Letter  T,  with  a  Sketch  of  a  King  of  Arms 

in  his  habit;  being  a  Pattern  for  the  fame  to  be  putt 
more  pcrfeaiy,  at  the  beginning  of  fome  old  Grants  of 
Al’ms-  ibid. 

34.  Creft  of  Franckelyne,  or  Prcffon  (Leigh  of  Sorc- 
well  m  Hcrtfordfliire)  in  Colors ;  with  an  old  Trick  of 
the  Arms  on  the  other  fide  of  the  Paper. 
e.35*  Creft  of  Sir  Thomas  Day  yes  fometime  Lord 
Mayor  of  London.  jj-j 

Tr  36-  Arms  of  Rooe  impaling  Grefliam ;  as  alfo,  of 
Holiday,  &  Rich,  empaling  Rooe ;  painted  upon  Paper. 

.37-  Creft  of  Whetftone  (of  Woodford  in  Effei 
painted  upon  Blew  Taffata.  ,2 

38.  Arms  of  ...  .  empaling  ....  painted  up.’n 
black  be  white  Taffata;  being  a  Funeral  Efcochcw.:. 


UP  ' 


39.  Atchievement  of  ....  painted 

Vellum.  j  ,  D 

40.  Atchievement  of  Johnfon  of  Norfolk ;  painted 
upon  Vellum. 

41.  Atcheivement  of  Whitchurch  of  Somerfetfllue 

painted  upon  Vellum.  14  b  ' 

42.  Arms  of  Mynde  empaling  Bromfclde  ;  painted 

upon  Vellum.  l  ^ 

43-  Arms  begun  (as  it  feems)  for  Cooke.  Vellum. 

I5-  b. 

44-  Atchievement  of  Hayes  of  Windfor  ;  painted  on 

Vellum.  ^ 

45.  Atchievement  of  Young  ;  painted  upon  Vellum* 

and  fubferibed,  as  it  feemeth,  by  Sir  Edward  Byslhd 
Clarenceux.  16^  b 

46.  Arms  of  Morgan  ;  painted  upon  Vellum.  17, 

47.  Achievement 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


Nam.  1410,  141 1. 

4 7.  Atchievement  of  Morley  of  Ellington ;  partly 

painted  upon  Vellum.  17.  b. 

48.  Atchievemenf  of  Birkin  ;  painted  upon  Vellum. 

18. 

49.  Atchievement  ofNott;  painted  upon  Vellum. 

1 8.  b. 

50.  Atchievement  of  Bovvan  of  Salilbury  ;  granted 

by  Sr.  Edward  Bysflie,  A.D.-1659  >  painted  upon 
Vellum.  ig. 

51.  Atchievement  of  Walker  of  Staffordlhire.  19.  b. 

52.  Atchievement  of  Wykes  of  North-Wyke,  em¬ 
paling  ...  20. 

53.  Arms  of  Dauney,  or  De  Alneto  ;  imperfectly 

painted  upon  Vellum.  20.  b. 

54.  Atchievement  of  Whitelioufe,  empaling  Newton 
alias  Cradocke  of  Glouccfterlhire ;  painted  upon  Vellum. 

2  1 . 

55.  Arms  &  C  reft  of  Beaumont  of  Coleortonj  painted 

upon  Vellum.  21.  b. 

56.  Atcheivement  of  Deane;  lately  painted  upon 

Vellum.  22.  b. 

57.  Atcheivement  of  Blewet,  empaling  Preftwode  ; 

painted  upon  Vellum.  22.  b. 

58.  Copie  of  an  old  Grant,  in  French  ;  whereby  John 

Tochet  Lord  of  Audeley  gave  Authority  unto  John 
Macworth  &  Thomas  Macworth  his  brother  to  ufe 
parcel  of  his  Arms.  Dated,  the  1  day  of  Auguft,  A.D. 
1404.  _  23. 

Here  are  Tricks  of  the  Seal  of  the  faid  Tochet,  Sc 
of  the  Arms  &  Crefl  thus  granted  to  Macworth. 

59.  Original  Grant  (if  I  may  here  ufe  the  word 

Original)  of  William  Camden  Clarenceux,  whereby  he 
intended  to  give  Arms  Sc  Crelt  to  Larky  n  of  Weltmin- 
Iter.  Dat.  28  November,  161 1 .  23.  b. 

The  Seal  is  wanting,  &  the  Subfcriptions  rafed  out : 
fo  that  it.  may  feem  as  if  Larkyn  did  not  pay  for  it. 

I4II. 

A  thin  heraldical  Book  in  large  fol.  wherein  I  find  done 
by  fome  good  hand, 

1.  The  Arms  of  Knyvet,  in  a  pretty  Compartment, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Book  ;  as  if  the  whole  was  done 
for  fome  perfonofthat  Family. 

Then  followeth  a  Collection  of  Pedigrees  Sc  Defcents 
of  many  Noble  Families  ;  moftly,  if  not  all,  allied  unto 
the  Houfe  ofNorfolk,  with  the  Arms  all  along  painted 
by  fame  able  Painter,  &  illuflrated  with  Notes  A  Narra¬ 
tions,  written  with  tolerable  accuracy,  viz. 

2.  Laboured  Pedigree  of  the  Houfe  of  Howard.  1 . 

3.  Defcent  of  Wentworth  of  Gosfield.  7. 

4.  Defcents  of  Boleyn  Earl  of  Wiltfhire  ;  Cary, 

Knollys,  A  Devereux.  ibid. 

5.  Defcent  of  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby.  8. 

6.  Defcent  of  Radcliff  Earl  of  Suffex.  ibid. 

7.  Labour’d  Pedegree  of  the  Houfe  of  Grey.  9. 

Herein  are  alfo  Defcents  of  Zouch,  Deincourt, 

Lovell,  Parker,  Fitz-Hugh,  Fines,  Devereux,  Dudley, 
Sydney,  See. 

8.  Pedegree  of  Vere  Earl  of  Oxford.  13. 

9.  Pedegree  of  the  Houfe  of  Stafford.  1 7. 

10.  Pedegree  of  Mowbray.  19. 

1 1 .  Defcent  of  Berkeley.  2 1 . 

12.  Defcent  of  Albeney  Earl  of  Arundell ;  branched 

eut  into  the  Families  of  Tatefhall,  Driby,  Caley,  Clifton, 
Bernack,  &  Cromwell.  22. 

13.  Pedegree  of  Fitz- Alan  Earl  of  Arundell.  23. 

14.  Pedegree  of  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby,  &c.  25. 

15.  Pedegree  of  the  Houfe  of  Wingfield  ;  being 

branched  into  many  Families.  27. 

16.  Defcent  of  Nevill  Lord  Abergaveny,  8cc.  31. 


Nuni.  1411,  T41 2j 


1 7-  Pedegree  of  the  Houfe.  of  Willoughby  ;  Berty, 
Grevile,  Sc  Verney.  *  33. 

18.  Defcent  of  Browne  of  Bechworth-Caftle ;  Sc  of 

Browne  Vilcount  Montacute.  35. 

19.  Defcent  of  Nevii  Lord  Latimer ;  Percy,  Cecil, 

&c*  ibid. 

20.  Pedegree  of  Warren  Earl  of  Surrey.  37. 

21.  Pedegree  of  Mortimer  Earl  of  March.  38. 

22.  Pedeg  ree  of  Clare  Earls  oi  Gloucefter  Sc  Hertford. 

39. 

123.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Walier,  Sc  Radcliffe.  40. 

24.  Pedegree  of  Marfhall  Earle  of  Pembroke,  &e. 

41. 

23.  Defcent  of  Mefchines  Earl  of  Chefter.  42. 

26.  Defcent  of  Rufiell  of  Strenefham  from  Hodding- 

ton  &  Somery.  43. 

27.  Defcent  of  Berners  from  Vere  of  Addington. 

ibid. 

2".  Pedegree  of  Fitz-Alan  Earl  of  Arundell,  done  by 
Augufline  Vincent  junr.  Sc  inferted  between  pagg.  43. 
Sc  44. 

29.  Defcent  of  the  Saxon  Earls  of  the  Mercians* 

44. 

30.  Defcent  of  Newmarch  ;  of  the  firft  Earls  of  Here¬ 

ford,  with  Notes  touching  Brieniius  de  Infula,  temp. 
R.  Stepliani.  43.  46. 

3 1 .  Defcent  of  Breos  Lord  Abergaveny.  45. 

32.  Defcent  of  Bricwer  Lord  of  Odcombe.  46. 

33.  Defcent  of  Rivers  Earl  of  Devon.  47. 

34*  Defcent  of  Eellomonte,  Earls  of  Leicefler  Sc 

Warwick. 

35.  Pedegree  of  Scales-  49. 

36.  Defcent  of  Cheney,  Peyton,  UfFord,  and  of  a 
Family  named  Howard  from  a  place  fo  called.  ibid. 

37.  Pedegree  of  divers  other  Branches  of  the  Family 
of  Peyton. 

38.  Dclcent  of  the  Lords  Segrave  ;  Plantagenet,  See. 

ending  in  Joana  the  wife  of  William  de  Uft'ord  Earl  of 
Suffolk.  23. 

39.  Defcent  of  Glanville. 

40.  Defcent  of  Blund,  &  de  Valonijs.  55. 

4 1 .  Defcent  of  Beauchamp  of  Bedford.  ibid. 

42.  Defcent  of  Fines  Lord  Dacres  of  the  South  ;  from 
UfFord  Sc  Clavering. 

43.  Defcent  of  Ferrers  of  Groby,  Tannvorth,  Badef- 

ley,  A-  Oufley  ;  Granthorp  of  Greyftock,  Sc  Dacres  of 
Gillefland.  ^7. 

44.  Defcent  of  Norris,  Lovell,  Beaumont,  Bardolf, 

Fitz-Williams,  Cooke,  A  Cecil.  ^gm 

45.  Defcent  of  K.  James  1.  Sc  of  Seymour,  Stanley, 

Sc  Howard  from  Plantagenet.  g  ,  _ 

46.  Pedegree  of  Knyvet.  63,  &  64. 

47.  Defcent  of  Ballet  of  Drayton,  Sc  of  Wickham. 

ibid. 

48.  Large  Pedegree  of  the  Houfe  of  Baffet.  64. 

49.  Pedegree  oi  1  ilney. 

50.  Defcent  of  Tyndall  Sc  Felbrigge.  69. 

51.  A  Table  of  the  Names  of  all  fuch  Families  whole 
Defcents,  eyther  more  or  lefs,  are  mentioned  in  this 


Booke. 


70. 


1412. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  the  former  part  whereof  feem, 
eth  to  be  of  the  hand  of  Ralph  I.angman  Portcullis 

(fo  madeann . 7  whofe  name  alfo  is  extant  at 

the  beginning  thereof.  It  containeth, 

1 .  The  Pedegree  of  John  Grey  Lord  of  Powis  ■  Sc  of 
Sir  Geffrey  Pole  of  Cadwallader  ;  with  Arms.  j. 

2.  Pedegree  of  Heveningham,  Sc  other  Families 

allied  thereunto  ;  with  Arms.  g. 

3.  Pedegree  of  Fitz-Williams,  &  other  Families  ;  with 

Arms.  1 6. 

11  a  .  Defcent 


56  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS* 


Num.  1412. 

4.  Defcent  of  Grene  ;  with  Arms.  2 1 .  b. 

5.  Short  Defcent  of  Courtney,  (with  Arms.)  23. 

6.  Short  Defcent  of  Fortefcue.  24. 

7.  Pedegree  of  Talbot,  &c.  dated  A.D.  1566.  with¬ 
out  Arms.  26. 

8.  Defcent  of  Janfon,  &  Lee ;  with  Arms.  31. 

9.  Pedegree  of  Stafford  ;  without  Arms.  32. 

10.  Pedegree  of  Vere  ;  dated  A.D.  1566.  37. 

11.  Pedegree  of  Percy  ;  dated  A.D.  1566.  (without 

Arms.)  4 1 . 

12.  Defcent  of  Haftings  Earl  of  Pembroke,  &  divers 

other  great  Families  ;  without  Arms.  47. 

13.  Defcent  of  Rivers,  Courtney,  &  Clifford  ;  with¬ 
out  Arms.  50. 

14.  Defcent  of  Paulett ;  without  Arms.  54. 

1 5.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Mounkton ;  dated  A.D. 

1584.  (by  another  hand.)  55. 

Then  follow,  in  the  firft  hand, 

16.  Defendants  from  Dorothie  the  daughter  of 

Sr.  John  Giffard,  by  her  two  Hulbands,  Congreve  and 
Sherley  ;  without  Arms.]  56. 

1 7.  Defcent  of  Grey  Lord  Povvis,  as  attefled  by  the 

Officers  of  Arms,  A  D.  1568.  without  Arms.  57. 

1 8.  Pedegree  of  Greene,  with  the  Arms  painted  ; 
attefled  by  Sr.  Gilbert  Dethick,  Garter,  3  October  1573. 

59* 

19.  Pedegree  of  Calley,  with  the  Arms  painted.  62. 

20.  Pedegree  of  Stapleton  of  Wichell ;  with  Arms. 

63.  b. 

21.  Pedegree  of  Stapleton,  in  ra  Roll  (with  Arms) 

by  another  hand,  &  inferted  after.  63.  b. 

22.  Arms  of  Gregory  of  Coxham  in  Oxfordfliire. 

64. 

23.  Alphabetical  Table  containing  the  Surnames  of 

thnf'e  Families  whofe  Defcents  are  contained  in  that  part 
of  the  book  now  defcribed.  64.  b. 

Then  follow  by  other  hands, 

24.  The  Defcent  of  Temple  ;  with  Arms.  66.  b. 

25.  Defcent  of  Jacob,  with  Arms  ;  dat.  A.D.  1623. 

67.  b. 

26.  Notes  touching  the  foundation  of  Nine  of  the 

Colleges  in  Oxford.  68.  b.  | 

27.  Alphabetical  Table  containing  the  Surnames  of 

thofe  Families  whofe  Defcents  are  regiftred  in  the  next 
enfuing  Treatife.  69. 

28.  Defcent  of  Richardfon  (from  Hitch)  with  the 

Arms  &  Quarterings.  69.  b. 

’  29.  A  good  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  made  for  the 
Countie  of  Oxford  A.D.  1574.  by  Richard  Lee  Port¬ 
cullis,  Marlhall  &  Deputie  to  Robert  Lee  Clarenceux. 

In  this  Copie,  befides  the  Names  of  the  Gentlemen 
fubfcribing  to  their  refpeclive  Informations, 

I  obferve, 

30.  The  Atchievement  of  the  Citty  of  Oxford.  1. 

31.  Arms  of  Cooper,  Sunnibank,  and  Afhcomb  ;  all 

of  Oxfordfhire.  1 .  b. 

32.  Note  touching  the  Benefaction  of  Mr.  Tobias 

Ruflat  to  St.  John’s  College  in  Oxford  ;  inferted  by  Mr. 
John  Saunders.  ibid. 

33.  Common  Seale  of  the  Towne  of  Witney.  5. 

34.  Common  Seale  of  the  Towne  of  Burford.  ibid. 

35.  Arms  (asitfeems)  of  Levynz  ;  as  extant  in  the 

Church  of  Herfham  in  the  County  of  Weftmoreland,  and 
alfo  in  the  Church  of  Lavenfhall.  8.  b. 

Then  follow, 

36.  Pedegree  of  Lunsford  of  Suffex,  with  Arms. 

30.  b. 

37.  Defcent  of  Skipwith.  31.  b. 

38.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Parfons  of  Oxfordfhire  ; 

attefled  by  the  Officers  of  Arms,  28  June  1638.  32. 

39.  Atchievement  of  Fairfax  Baron  of  Camairon. 

3  32- 1. 


Num.  141 2,  1413. 

40.  Atchievements  ;  or  Armes  ;  of  moft  of  the  Irifh 

Nobility,  temp.  R.  Caroli  ix.  tricked  by  Mr.  John 
Saunders,  in  his  better  manner.  33. 

41.  AlphabeticalTable  to  the  Trad  lafl  above-men¬ 
tioned.  52. 

42.  Defcendants  from  Cradock  Vraith-vras ;  Milo 

Earl  of  Hereford  ;  Gwyn  vara  Dyvoa  ;  Rees  ap  Tewder  ; 
K. William  the  Conqueror  ;  &c  Jeltyn  ap  Gurgh  ;  with 

Arms :  feeming  to  be  the  beginning  of  fonie  Pedegree 
copied  by  John  Saunders.  54.  b. 

43.  Pedegree  of  Brome,  as  attefled  by  Sir  William 

Segar  Garter,  13  July,  ann.  2  Car.  1.  copied  by  Mr. 
John  Saunders.  57. 

44.  Arms  of  thofe  Gentlemen  who  were  made  Knights 

of  the  Bath,  at  the  Coronation  of  K.  James  1.  59.  b. 

45.  Arms  of  the  feveral  Companies  in  London. 

6 1 .  b.  6c  59.  b.  at  the  top  &  bottom. 

46.  Arms,  in  blafon  only,  of  the  Chefhire  Gentle¬ 

men  ;  taken  from  the  Vifitation  book  of  that  County 
made  by  Robert  Glover  Somerfet,  Marfhall  unto  Wil- 
Flower  Norroy,  A.D.  1580.  63. 

47.  Crcfts  belonging  to  fome  of  the  aforefaid  Coats  ; 

in  Blazon.  64.  b. 

48.  Arms  of  the  Earls  of  Chefler,  to  Edward  the  foil 

of  K. Henry  in.  in  Blazon.  65. 

49.  Arms  &  Crefl  of  the  City  of  Chefler  ;  in  Blazon. 

ibid. 

50.  Arms  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  ;  &  of  the  Duke 

of  Cornwall  ;  in  Blafon.  ibid. 

51.  Arms  of  the  Barons  of  Chefler;  in  Blazon. 

ibid. 

52.  Arms  of  Sir  John  Vaughan,  with  Quarterings,  as 

fett  forth  at  his  Funeral  A.D  1674.  with  Colltdions 
from  his  Pedegree  (fhewing  to  whom  each  of  the  laid 
Quarterings  belonged)  as  the  fame  was  made  for  Mr. 
Jevan  Vaughan  of  Comvenddion,  by  John  Moythey 
AD.  1615.  65.  b. 

53.  Pedegree  of  Stydman,  derived  from  Calcarba 

Duke  of  Arabia,  forfooth  !  fett  forth  with  Arms  6c  Welfli 
Defcents,  A.D.  1628.  66.  b. 

I4I  3* 

A  Book  in  fol.  fairly  written  in  the  German  or  Switz 
Language ;  and  formerly  belonging  (as  by  the  Arms 
on  the  Cover  it  may  feem)  to  one  of  the  Eledlors  of 
Brandenburgh.  It  treateth  de  reMilitari,  and  in 
all  probability  was  the  fecond  or  third  Volume,  of  a 
Work  written  upon  that  Subject.  What  is  herein 
contained  (as  well  as  a  friend  &  I  could  pick  it  out) 
followeth  here  in  order, 

1 .  1  he  Seventh  Book.  How  all  Three  (Sorts  of) 

Regiments  fhould  be  drawn  out  into  the  Field,  together 
with  all  warlike  Inflruments,  in  good  order.  Alfo  how 
an  Encampment  or  Leaguer  fhould  be  made  &  main¬ 
tained.  j . 

2.  A  large  Pi&ure  (finely  done,  as  all  in  this  Book 

are)  reprefenting  an  Army  encamped.  2.  b. 

3.  Advantages  to  be  taken  in  Marching.  12.  b. 

4.  How  Men  fhould  fix  their  Camp  or  Leaguer ; 

how  they  fhould  fortifie  the  fame,  &  demean  themlclves 
therein.  14.  b. 

5.  Concerning  the  following  Draughts  or  Pi£lures  of 

Encampments;  being  3  in  Number.  17.  b. 

6.  A  particular  Explanation  of  each  of  the  Ten  fol¬ 

lowing  Draughts,  fhewing  how  an  Encampment  maybe 
defended  with  Waggons.  And  how  the  Waggons 
fhould  be  conveyed  in  fingle  Ranks,  or  one  after 
another.  20.  b. 

7.  InflruiElions  fhewing  the  LTfe  of  the  enfuing  Tables 

to  the  Waggon-Fences.  3 1 . 

8.  A  Calculation  of  the  Provifion  of  Vidluals  neceflary 

for  an  Army.  34. 

9.  Circulation 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas, 


37 


Num.  1413* 

p.  Calculation  of  the  Forage  neceffary  for  all  the 
Horfes.  44. 

10.  Several  Tables  with  the  proper  Indru&ions; 
whereby  011c  may  eafily  &  plainly  fee  the  belt  manner  of 
amalliug  together  all  Provifions,  and  of  dilhibuting  the 
fame  again  in  ordeily  manner.  46.  b. 

it.  The  Eighth  Book,  fliewing  how  various  Orders 
or  Dilpofitions  of  Baale  for  tin  Attack,  may  be  made 
with  advantage.  59.  . 

12.  How  ec  with  what  Advantage  the  Enemy  fliould 

be  attacked.  »  60. 

13.  Explication  of  the  Draughts  (12  in  Number) 

whereby  all  good  Bifpofitions  of  Troops  are  to  be  or¬ 
dered.  b8. 

14.  How  to  behave  yourfelf  after  the  Battle  obtained. 

83.  b. 

15.  What  is  to  be  done,  if  you  find  that  the  I  ncmy. 

is  marc  limp  towards  you.  8j.  b. 

ib.  Explanation  of  feveral  Draughts  (42  in  Number) 
fliewing  the  order  of  the  Battel ;  being  all  drawn  up  in 
right  meafure  &  proportion.  50. 

17.  The  Ninth  Book.  Of  laying  fiege  to,  &'dorm-- 
ing  of  Towns  &  Cadies ;  together  with  the  lacking  E 
pl  unci  .-ring  them,  and  what  is  requifite  to  the  keeping 
of  iuch.  1  6. 

ill.  Diaught’of  a To\Vn_befieged  (with  an  Explica¬ 
tion.)  *  137.  b. 

19.  Draught  of  the  befieging  &  donning  of  a  Cable; 
with  a  like  Explication.  147.  b. 

ce.  Articles,  to  be  fworn  unto,  in  Sieges.  157.  b. 

21.  How  to  order  your  Provifions  Sc  Stores 

164.  b. 

22.  How  the  Watches  in  the  Garrifon  mud  be  kept. 

167. 

23.  How  the  Veil  Marelchal  or  General-  fhall  order 

the  Garrifon,  if  the  Enemy-  draws  off.  1 73.  b 

24.  What  mud  be  done,  if  the  Garrifon  cannot  be 

longer  kept.  i  76.  b. 

25.  The  Tenth  Book.  Of  making  War  by  Water; 

with  the  charge  of  equipping  out  Ships  of  divers  Bur¬ 
thens.  Asalfo  Rules  &  Directions  lor  the  Admirals  & 
other  Oncers.  1 8 1 . 

26.  Draught  of  a  Man  of  War.  1 3 1 .  b. 

27.  Draught  of  a  Fleet  of  Ships  difpofed  into  the 

Line -of  Battel.  182.  b. 

28.  Forms  of  Orders  of  Payment  to  be  made  by 
Sea  &  Land;  with  computations  of  the  monthly  Charges. 

184. 

29.  Articles  of  the  foregoing  Payments  by  Sea  & 

Land.  186.  b. 

30.  Directions  for  the  Admirals  &  other  Officers  by 

Sea  Sc  Land.  1 9  1 . 

3 1  •  Of  the  ordinary  Mariners;  &  Criminals.  1 9 1 .  b. 

3  Of  the  bignefs  of  the  36  Ships,  according  to  our 
Calculation.  ig2. 

33.  Of  the  fitting  out  36  fuch  Ships.  193. 

34.  Computations,  relating  to  the  fitting  out  of  Ships 

of  different  Burthens,  or  Rates.  197.  b. 

35.  Draughts  of  three  forts  of  Bridges  of  Boats. 

212. 

36.  Draughts  of  three  Engins  raifing  Water. 

215.  b. 

37.  Draughts  of  many  Tools  &  Infiruments.  218. 

38.  Draughts  of  the  Storming  an  old  Foit  or  Monaf- 

tery.  219.  b. 

39.  Draught  of  fome  Engine  or  Machine.  22  1 .  b. 

40/  Draught  of  a  Cart  fumifhed  with  Scythes ;  to  be 

ufed  in  fighting.  222.  b. 

41.  Draught  of  a  Machine  fending  forth  a  great  Bolt. 

223.  b. 

42.  Two  Draughts  of  Copper-ovens  drawn  on  Wheels. 

224. 

Cat  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1414,  141,$; 

T4!4* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  large  fol.  at  the  beginning  thus 
entituled,  ■ 

ct  The  grc'te  Alphabet  of  Armes,  in  Trick.” 

•Note,  irianv  of  the  Arms,  efpecially  at  the  beginning, 
.have  been  coloured  upon  the  tricking. 

T4I 5-  . 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  for  the  mod  part  written  & 
tricked  by  one  hand;  it  containeth,  . 

1.  The  Bogke  of  Entrances  made  in  the  tyme  of  the 
Viiitationof  Yorke hier;  begone  A.  D.  1584.  and ‘con¬ 
tinued  A.D.  1 5 '5.  by  Robert  Glover  alias  Somerfet  He¬ 
rald  at  Armes,  Mmvfhall  &  Dcputie  to  William  Flovce 
Efq;  alias  Non.oy  Lingo  i-c  Armes,  &  principal  Herald 
of  the  Ead,  Vcd.-E:  Norih  Panes'  o!  the'Realme  of 
England,  from  the  River  of  Trent  Northward. 

In  this  Copie,  befides  many  Tricks  of  private  Seals, 
Entrants  from  Deeds  £  &  fome  Church  Notes ;  l  find, 

2.  Part  of  the  Record  of  Domefdei,  relating  to  York- 
fliire. 

3.  Nomina  Villarum  et  Terrarum  infra  Richemond- 

fchire  qua:  quondam,  ante  Coiu  uedam  Anglia-  fuerunt 
Edwini  Comiris;  et  quas  Willelmus  Rox,  c-uglis  O  n- 
quedor,  dedit  nepoti  fuo  Aiano  Confiti  Britannia:,  in 
tempore  Obfidionis  Villas  Eboraci,  ci’ca  annum  :o  re^n,i 
iui,  diu  ante  condru&ionejn  Cadri  de  Richemoud, 
ficut  cominetur  in  qitex’.am  Libro  in  Thfefi.uraria  Dfis 
Regina:  vocato  Domefday,  Ddcriptionem  totius  Anglis 
contineme.  n.  b. 

.  4.  Certificationes  fafls  de  Feodis  Militum  tempore 
Regis  Henrici  n.  preiextu  mandati  Regis  ejufdem  ;  licut 
habemur  m  Lihrn  Rubep,  in  Scaccario  Wedmonaderij 

refervato,  pro  Eborschirk  4. 

NB.  The  Arms  of  mod  of  thefe  Yorkfhire-Lords 
who  held  in  Capite,  are  here  added.  • 

5.  Nomina  eoruin  qui  Scutagium  ac  Auxilium  per- 

folvebant,  diverfis  temporibus,  ab  anno  fcil.  feptimo  R. 
Henrici  11.  ufq;  ad  aim.  2  R.  Johannis,  pro  terris  ipfo- 
rum  in  Comitatu  Fboraccnfi.  6.  b. 

6.  Milites  et  Barones  Tenentes  de  Rege  in  Capite,  in 
Comitatu  Ebor.  iecunduin  inquifitionem  captain  anno  12 
R.  Johannis. 

7.  Nomina  Baronum  et  Militum,  in  Comfcatu  Ebora- 
cenfi,  colleda  ex  Rotulis  de  Eeodis  Militum,  vel  de 
Scutagio,  folutis  Regi  Ricardo  1.  quemadmodum  haben- 
tur  in  LibroRubeo  penes  Rememoratorem  Regis  in  Scac¬ 
cario  affervato. 

8.  Nomina  eorum  qui  tenent  20  Libratas  Terrs  de 

Rege  in  Capite,  vel  de  illis  qui  funt  infra  statem,  in 
Comitatu  Ebor.  qui  ex  mandato  Regis,  dilhingebantur 
per  Vicecom.  ad  trail;  fret  and  um  ad  Regem  Ilenncum  in. 
in  Vafconiam,  contra  Regem  Cadells,  qui  Imam  Vaf- 
conis  hodiliter  ingreffurus  erat,  pugnaturi :  anno  R.R. 
Hen.  hi.  38.  et  balutis  a  Chrido  12  3.  ibid. 

9.  Nomina  habentium  40  Lii  ratas  Terrs  in  Comitatu 
Ebor.  A.D.  1299.  i.  e.  ann.  28  R.Edw.  1.  ibid. 

ic.  Nomina  Militum,  et  Hominum  ad  arm  a,  A.D. 
1324.  i.e.  ann.  17  R.Edw.  11.  8.  b. 

1 1 .  Arms  &  Seal  of  the  Borough  of  Pontefract. 

26  b. 

12.  Seals  of  the  Towne  of  Doncader.  3  1. 

I  will  not  be  pofitive  as  to  the  hand  who  wrote'this 
Vifitation,  becaufe  it  is  known  that  many  Officers  of 
Arms  wrote  very  like  to  one  another.  But  this  I  will 
affiim,  that  comparing  one  or  two  of  the  Defcents  here¬ 
in,  with  the  Book  81.  B.  10.  written  by  Mr.  Nicholas 
Charles,  I  found  thole  Defcents  to  be  larger  here;  and, 
as  1  thought,  more  correct. 

13.  Arms  of  Johniou  of  the  North,  by  Mr.  John 

Saunders.  46, 

L  14.  Beginning 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  1415. 

14.  Beginning  of  an  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames 

as  mentioned  in  the  preceding  Defcents.  47.  b. 

1 5.  Then  followeth,  Part  of  another  Cople  of  the  lame 
Vi fit  at  ion-book  of  Yorklhire,  written^  (although  more 
haftily,  yet)  by  the  fame  hand,  &  in  fmaller  Leaves. 

48. 

Herein  I  find, 

16.  Two  Seals  of  the  City  of  York.  48.  b. 

17.  Seal  of  the  Metropolitical  Church  of  York.  49. 

iS  Arms  &  Seals  of  the  Town  of  Beverley,  ibid. 

19.  Seal  of  the  Tovvne  of  Headon  in  HoldernelTe. 

54.  b. 

20.  Seals  of  the  Towns  of  Kingfton  upon  Hull. 

80.  b. 

21.  Nomina  et  Anna  illorum  Equitum  de  Comitatu 

ICboracenfi  qui  cum  Edwardo  1.  Rege  ftipendia  mere- 
bant  in  Scotia,  et  alibi.  ExLibro  Gloveri  Somerfettde 
Vifitatione  Com.  Ebor.  1584.  1585.  97. 

In  this  lafi;  Copie  of  the  Yorklhire  Vifitadon,  there 
are  divers  Tricks  of  private  Seals,  Extracts  from  old  In- 
ftruments,  &  Church  Notes. 

'1  hen  followeth  in  another  hand,  as  it  may  feem 
at  the  firft  fight ;  but  really  is  of  the  fame  Man, 

22.  Ihe  Vifitation  of  StaiTord-fheire,  made  by  Robert 
Clover  alias  Somerfett-Harold,  Marlhall  to  William 
Flower  alias Norreye,  Kinge  of  Armes,  Anno  Dili  1583. 

105. 

In  this  Copie,  I  obferVe, 

23.  Notes  {hewing  what  is  to  be  performed  at  a  He- 

rolds  goinge  in  Vifitation.  ibid. 

24.  l'he  Tenor  of  Robert  Glover’s  Proclamation  for 

declaiming  of  divers  perfons  inhabiting  within  the  Hun¬ 
dred  of  Pirehill.  dat.  .  .  .  Auguft  1583.  ibid. 

2  ;.  Mr.  Glover  Somerfett’s  Charge  to  the  Baylifleof 
the  Hundred  of  Cudleftone.  to  fummon  the  Gentry  to 
appeare  before  him  at  Stafford,  in  order  to  the  enregiftring 
iheir  feveral  Arms  &  Defcents,  dat.  .  .  July,  1583. 

105.  b. 

26.  Mr.  Glover  Somerfett’s  Charge  to . 

to  appear  before  George  Talbot  Earl  of  Shrewfbury, 
Earle  Marlhall  of  England,  &  anfwer  to  the  Contempt 
of  his  refilling  to  appear  at  the  Vifitation.  dat.  20  Au¬ 
guft,  A.D.  1  ^83.  165.  b. 

27.  The  Names  of  thofe  that  in  the  ryme  of  this 

Vifitation  oi  StafTordlhire,  have  made  no  proofe  oftheire 
Gentrie,  bearinge  no  Armes,  and  yet  before  tyme  had 
called  cc  written  themfelves  Gentlemen;  and  were  there¬ 
fore  declaimed  in  the  cheife  place  of  the  Hundreds  where 
they  dwell.  A.  D.  1583.  ibid. 

The  laft  of  thefc  is  induftrioufly  blotted  out,  the 
Pofierity  or  Relations  of  him,  being  perhaps  grown 
alhamed  of  that  declaiming.  However,  in  the  book  61. 
Cl.  26.  at  34.  b.  the  Name  reraaineth  plain  enough,  be¬ 
ing  John  Coleman  of  Canke. 

28.  Nomina  Militum,  ut  videtur,  de  Comitatu  Staf¬ 
ford.  temporeRich.11.  vel  Hen.  iv.  106. 

29.  The  Seale  of  the  Towne  of  Lichefeld.  ibid. 

30.  The  Sealle  of  the  Towne  of  Stafford.  ibid. 

31.  The  Sealle  of  the  Burgh  of  New-caltell  under 

Lyme-  <  ibid. 

Here  are  alfo  the  Tricks  of  very  many  private  Seals 
of  Families,  Si  Extracts  from  fome  old  Deeds.  If  the 
whole  book  was  written  by  one  man,  I  Ihould  be  in¬ 
clined  rather  to  think  it  might  be  done  by  Sr.  William 
Dethick,  who  ufed  to  write  the  three  feveral  hands  herein 
ufed;  than  by  any  other. 

32.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  thofe  Fa¬ 
milies  whofe  Defcents  are  inferted  into  this  Vifitation  of 
Sufibrdfhire:  in  a  modem,  &  no  very  Itaunch  hand. 

136.  b. 


Num.  1416,  14174 

1416. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  large  fol.  dedicated  unto  Queen 
Elizabeth,  and  (as  it  feemeth  to  me)  defigned  to  be 
prefented  to  her.  It  is  entituled, 

The  Progenie  of  the  Monarchs  of  the  Englilhmen, 
conteyning  the  Titles  &  Reignes  of  them;  the  Corona¬ 
tions  &  Parentage  of  them  &  their  v/yves;  the  Names, 
Armes,  Nativities,  Manages,  Deceaffes,  Burialles,  &: 
Iffue  of  them,  theire  wyves,  &  theire  children.  159 5. 

This  work  is  divided  into  two  Books,  the  firft  be¬ 
ginning  with  Noah,  Si  fo  proceding  through  the  Saxon 
Line  to  K.  Harold.  The  fecond  begins  with  K,  William 
the  Conqueror,  &  endeth  with  the  Children  of  K.Ed- 
ward  hi. 

The  whole  is  embellifhed  with  Armes,  &  written 
in  a  large  hand.  The  Defign  was  fuch,  as  if  the  Com¬ 
piler  had  confined  himfelf  to  fuch  th:ngs  only  for  which 
iufficient  Authority  was  found ;  he  would  have  faved 
much  pains,  &  thereby  had  time  to  finilh  with  the  Queen 
then  reigning. 

I4I7* 

-^n  old  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  which  feemeth  from 
fol.  1.  to  have  formerly  belonged  to  Sr.  Thomas 
Wry  the  or  Writhefley  (for  fo  the  name  is  written 
herein  at  fol.  55.)  and  afterward  to  John  Cocke  alias 
Lancafter-Herald.  It  containeth, 

1 .  A  Lift  of  the  Noblemen  in  the  time  cf  K.  Henry  vm. 

perhaps  of  his  Privy  Councill.  3. 

2.  An  Alphabet,  made  upon  feveral  leaves  perpendi¬ 
cularly,  in  order  to  the  inferting  therein  a  Table  of  the 
matters  contained  in  this  Book;  but  the  fame  was  not 
done. 

3.  A  Regiftrc  of  Genealogies,  contained  in  fome 

book  of  Pedegrees  then  belonging  to  the  Office  of  Arms, 
&  therein  marked  X  ;  being  not  that  which  in  this  Li¬ 
brary  is  now  inferibed  89.  C.  x.  48. 

This  Regiftre,  or  alphabetical  Table  is  very  imper¬ 
fect  ;  for  it  wanteth  all  from  A  to  S  exclufive. 

4.  Stemma  Grayorum  Dominorum  Powifiae,  e  Cad- 

walladro  deduCtum;  cum  adnotationibus.  57. 

5.  Defcent  of  Thomas  Butler  Eail  of  Ormond  & 

Wiltlhire;  &  of  Sir  William  Paulet  of  Bafing,  from  John 
Lord  Welly s.  ^ 

6.  Defcent  of  Stafford  &  Strangways.  6 . .  b. 

7.  Defcent  of  the  Lord  Darcy.  6 2. 

8.  Defcent  of  the  Lord  Herbert,  &  of  Sir  Ris  Fitz 

Vrian-  62  b. 

9.  Defcent  of  Low,  Butnar,  Grey,  &c.  63. 

10.  Stemma  Regum  Cartelise  et  Legionum  ;  ufq;  ad 

Arthurum Principem  Wallke  produ&um.  63.  b. 

x  1 .  Stemma  Biirkeleyorum,  ab  Hardingo.  65. 

12.  Defcent  of  Burnell.  66. 

13.  Defcent  of  Lovell.  ibid. 

14.  Defcent  of  Moubray.  66.  b. 

15.  Defcent  of  Bland  from  Sir  John  Ncvill  of  Bife- 

broke  in  Com.  Nott.  67. 

16.  Pedegree  of  Fortefcu.  67.  b. 

17.  Defcent  of  Wentworth,  of  Netclfted.  68. 

18.  Defcent  of  Eitzwilliam.  68.  b. 

19.  Defcent  of  Lucy,  Hampton,  &c.  69. 

20.  Pedegree  of  Raclyffe  &  Fitz-Walter.  69.  b. 
ai.  Pedegree  of  Docwra,  with  a  Defcent  of  Hodil- 

fton.  (which  feems  to  be  miftaken  for  70.)  80. 

22.  Defcent  of  Grey  of  Codnor,  Zowche,  &c. 

80. b. 

23.  Defcent  of  Dunftanville  Baron  of  Caftelcombe. 

81. 

24.  Defcent  of  Borwaffie.  81.  b. 

25.  Defcent  of  Hampden.  ibid. 

26.  Defcent  of  Beauchamp  of  Bedford.  82. 

2  27.  Pedegree 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


39 


Num.  1417. 

27.  Pedcgree  of  Nevil  Erlle  of  Weftmoreland ;  like 
the  former  branched  out  into  many  Families.  83. 

28.  Pedegree  of  Sandys,  Sturton,  Cheney.  83. b. 

29.  Defcent  of  Colpeper,  from  Brufe.  84.  b. 

30.  Defcent  of  Haryngton.  ibid. 

31.  Defcent  of  Longefpee,  Earl  of  Sar.  85. 

32.  Defcent  of  Vaux  Sc  Corbet  from  Lucy.  85  b. 

33.  Defcent  of  Waddam,  Hamden,  Barantyne,  Fof 

ter,  Popham,  Carillon,  St.Martyn,  &  Ingham,  from 
Walron.  86. 

34.  Defcent  of  Folter.  86.  b. 

35.  Defcent  of  Wyat  of  Kent.  87. 

36.  Defcent  of  Fortefcue  from  Stoner,  Montagu,  In- 

glethorp,  De  la  Pole,  Sc  Bradflone.  87.  b. 

37.  Defendants  from  Sir  BartholomewBurwalh.  88. 

38.  Pedegree  of  Cavern! iili  &  Gernon.  88.  b. 

39.  Defcent  of  Zowche  from  St.  Maure.  89. 

40.  Defcent  of  Saynt-More.  ibid. 

41.  Defcent  of  IV'aundit  Earl  of  Warwick.  89.  b. 

41.  Defcent  of  Hall  alias  Fitz-William,  Fox,  Meryng, 

&c.  9©. 

43.  Defcent  of  Strangways.  91. 

44.  Pedegree  of  Dutton ;  with  Defcents  of  Holland, 

Molyncux,  Hattjn,  Savage,  billon,  Sowthworthe,  Chol- 
inondeley*  Sec.  9 1 .  b. 

4  .  Defcent  of Marny,  Tyrell,  Vere  Sc  Paflielcy,  from 
Fitz-Alan  Karl  oi  Arundell.  9:.  b, 

46.  Defcent  of  Poynings,  Paulet,  Uvedale,  &c.  from 

SayntJohn.  93. 

Then  follow,  at  fome  diilance, 

47.  Lift  of  fuch  Knights  of  the  Garter  as  died  after 

the  Coronation  of  K.  Henry  vn.  to  the  7th  of  K.Henry 
viii.  102.  b. 

48.  A  Lift  of  the  Lords  Spiritual  &  Temporal,  who 
appeared  at  the  Parliament,  anno  primo  R.Hcnry  vn. 

103.  b. 

49.  I, ill  of  fome  of  the  Barons  prefent  at  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  of  nHenr.  vn.  105-b. 

50.  Defcent  of  Fowler,  Yngelfelde,  Clarke,  &  Ricote. 

108.  b. 

5 1 .  Defcent  of  Jernegane,  from  Fitz-Ofborne.  1  c  9. 

52.  Defcent  of  Baby ngton  from  Dethykc.  109.8. 

53.  Defcent  of  Syngleton.  110. 

54.  Defcent  of  Cogan. '  110.  b. 

55.  Defcent  of  Mathew,  Raglond,  Lewis,  &  Bratton. 

in. 

56.  Defcent  of  Bray  of  Surrey,  from  Halighwell, 

Norbery  and  G  ilbert.  1 1  1 .  b. 

57.  Defcent  of  Tomworth  (alias  Tamworth)  of  Lin¬ 
coln  (hi  re.  112. 

58.  Defcent  of  Stoner  Sc  Brecknoke.  ii2.b. 

^9.  Defcent  of  Stoner,  from  Norbery,  Butler  of  Sude- 

ley,  &  CroilTyer.  113. 

60.  Defcent  of  Danyles  of  Padftow.  in  Com.  Devon. 

ii3-b. 

61.  Defcent  of  Trevanyon,  Sc  Orton  ofTrewro.  1 14. 

62.  Defcent  of  Bray,  Saunds  or  Sandys,  Darby,  Sc 

Beanfon.  114.  b. 

63.  Defcent  of  Yeo.  115. 

64.  Defcent  of  Torelle.  115.  b. 

65.  Defcent  of  Pol Iarde,  Mercwode,  &  Squier.  1 16. 

66.  Defcent  of  Villers  of  Brokyfby  in  Com.  Leyc. 

(written  alfo  Willers,  Sc  Bellers)  Sutton,  Flowby,  & 

Kyrkby.  116.  b. 

67.  Defendants  from  Quadring;  117. 

68.  Defcent  of  Mallingberd  of  Lincolnlhire,  from 

Bernacke  ;  with  Defcents  of  Cromwell,  Tottothe,  Tom- 
worth,  &c.  xiy.b. 

69.  Defcent  of  Hafehvode,  Hewit,  Holt,  &  Norwich, 

(vid.  infra  N“  95.)  1 1 8. 

70.  Pedegree  of  Drury.  n8.b. 

7 1 .  Defcent  of  W alter.  119. 

72.  Defcent  of  Draper.  ibid. 


Num.  1417,  1418. 

73.  Defcent  of  Bilingdon  of  Bed fo rdlhire.  119.  b. 

74.  Deftem  of  Stocwod,  from  Goodyere,  Sc  Stokes 

or  Stokys.  1 20. 

75.  Defcent  of  Percyvall,  Jenyngfon,  Ingelby,  & 

Stillington.  1  ^o.  b. 

76.  Defcent  of  Cunlylfe,  from  Dedyke,  &  Aderton. 

121. 

77.  Defcent  of  Rede  &  Alfege.  121.  b. 

7  I.  Defcent  of  Fitz-William,  alias  Halle  of  Lincoln- 

fhire.  122. 

79.  Defcent  of  Brit,  Myners,  &  Vaughan.  122.  b. 

80.  Defcent  of  Baynam,  Walwen,  &  Greynder.  123. 

81.  Defcent  of  Johns,  Sc  Cradocke,  Sc  Morgan. 

123.  b. 

82.  Defcent  of  Mekilfeld.  124. 

83.  Defcent  of  Thorndon,  Mekylfild,  &  of  Margaret 

Duchefs  of  Norfolk  the  daughter  of  Thomas  of  Brother- 
ton  from  Halys.  1 24. 

84.  Defcent  of  Sowthworthe.  124.  b. 

85.  Defcent  of  Mylle,  from  Rous,  &  Erie.  125. 

86.  Defcent  of  Browne.  125.  b. 

87.  Defcent  ol  Gate,  Baldyngton,  Danvers,  Sec.  1 26. 

88.  Pedegree  of  Hanlard ;  with  a  Defcent  of  La 

More.  126.  b. 

89.  Defcent  of  Baret  from  Belhows.  127. 

90.  Defcent  of  More,  Sc  Wantard.  i2_.  b. 

91.  Defcent  of  Wode,  Stukeley,  &  Alton.  128. 

92.  Defcent  of  Matefdon,  Browne,  &  I  lervy.  I28.b. 

93.  Pedegree  of  Geddyng;  with  a  Defcent  of  Apfall. 

129. 

94.  Defcent  of  Bulftrode  from  Knyffe.  129.  b. 

95.  Defcent  of  Hafehvode,  Hewet,  IToIt,  Sc  Norwich, 

(the  fame  with  that  above-mentioned  atN  69.)  130. 

96.  Defcent  of  Feldyng,  from  Elys,  &  Ruflelie. 

130.  b. 

97.  Defcent  of  Salford. 

98.  Defcent  of  Norton.  131)5, 

99.  Defcent  of  C'ofyn.  j^2. 

100.  Alphabetical  Table  containing  the  Surnames  of 
Families  menrioned  in  the  preceding  Defcents,  account¬ 
ing  fol  108.  which  followeth  the  old  Numeration;  to  be 
fol.  i.  &  fo  on. 

1418. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  manu  (ut  videtur)  Roberti 

Gloveri,  viri  in  Rebus  Heraldicis  verfatiffimi ;  in  quo 

tradatur, 

1 .  De  Regibus  Britannorum.  1 . 

2.  De  Vocatione  et  Adventu  Anglorum.  2. 

3.  Hiftoriola  de  Regibus  ac  Reginis  Anglo-Saxonum, 

nec  non  Anglorum,  ab  Egberto  ufq;  ad  Elizabethamj 
recenfione  Uxorum  acLiberorum,  Epitaphijs,  A.rmorum 
Infignibus  (quotquot  reperiri  poftint,  ficut  et  in  Tradatu- 
lis  infequentibus)  illuftrata.  3.  b. 

4.  De  Regibus  ac  Principibu-  Cambro-Britonum,  ab 
Idwallone,  ufq;  ad  Leoliuum  ultiinum  Venedotia;  Prin- 

cipem.  43.  b. 

5.  De  Ducibus  Cornubia; ;  a  Candore,  ufq;  ad  Regi- 

naldurn  filium  Nothum  R.Henricii.  -5.  5. 

6.  De  Comitibus  ac  Ducibus  Clarenfibus,  a  Ricardo 

Comitis  Cifleberii  filio,  ad  Georgium  fratrem  R.  Ed- 
wardi  iv.  58.  b. 

7.  De  Comitibus  Ceftrias,  ab  Hugone  Lupo,  ufque  ad 

Johannem  Scotuin.  64.  b. 

8.  De  Comitibus  ac  Ducibus  Lancaftrite,  ab  Edmundo 

filio  R.Henrici  hi.  ufque  ad  Henricum  iv.  Regem  An¬ 
glic-  _  69.  b. 

9.  De  Ducibus  Eboracenfibus,  ab  Edmundo  dido  de 

Langley,  ufque  ad  R. Henricum  vm.  73.  b. 

10.  De  Comitibus  Richemondia:,  ab  Alano,  ufque 
ad  Henricum  filium  Nothum  R.Henrici  vm.  81.  b. 

1 1.  De  Comifbus  et  Ducibus  Glouceflria:,  a  Roberto 
filio  Notho  R.Henricii.  ufq;  ad  R.  Richardum  in. 

93.  b. 

12.  De 


4° 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1418,  14191 

12.  De  Ducibus  et  Comitibus  Somerfet.  ufq;  ad  Ed' 

wardum  Seymour  11.  104.  b. 

13.  DeMarchionibusDorcheftrice,  Thoina  Grey,  Patre 

etiilio.  Ji5-b. 

1419. 

A  very  thin  Book  in  large  fol.  given  by  Mr.  Francis 

Aflon  late  Secretary  to  the  Royal  Society,  &  Deputy 

Gentleman  Ulherof  the  Black  Rod.  It  is  entituled, 
“  The  Seconde  Parte  of  the  Inventorye  of  our  Late 
Soveraigne  I  orde  King  Henry  theight,  conteyning  his 
Guardeiobes,  LI. mlholde  Stuffe,  and  other  Implementesj 
made  by  vertue  of  a  Commyflion  undre  the  Greate 
Seale  of  England,  bearing  Date  at  Weftminfter  the  14th 
daye  of  Septembre  in  the  firfle  yere  of  the  Reign  cf  our 
Soveraigne  Lorde  King  Edward  the  Sixte,  directed  to 
the  Lorde  Seynt  John  Great  Mallre  of  the  Kinges  Houf- 
hoide,  Prefident  of  the  Counfaill,  &  Keaper  of  the  Greate 
Seale;  the  Lorde  Ruffell  Keaper  of  the  Privey  Seale; 
the  Erie  of  Warwicke;  and  to  Sir  Walter  Mildmay 
Knight,  or  to  three  or  two  of  theym.  Whiche  Com¬ 
myflion  in  the  Boke  conteyning  the  firfle  Parte  of  the 
faide  Inventorye,  at  lengthe  is  conteyned.  All  whiche 
Goode  ,  Cattalles,  &  Stuffe,  were  examyned  by  the 
Com.nyflioners  at  fundrie  Tymes  and  Seafons,  in  the 
faide  firfle  Yeare  of  the  Kinges  Majeffies  Reign  ;  as  by 
dy  vers  perticuler  and  roughe  Bakes,  uppon  whiche  this 
hole  &  entier  Boke  is  made,  appereth. 

The  Places  wherein  the  abovemendoned  Goods  were 
kept,  as  fpccified  herein  at  fol.  2.  are  thefe, 

1.  The  Guarderobe  of  the  Towre  of  London,  in  the 

Chardge  iv  Keaping  of  Humfrey  Orme.  3. 

2.  lhe  Guarderobe  at  Grenewiche  in  the  Chardge  of 

Thomas  Mayneman.  (f.  Wavneman.)  37. 

3.  Studs  and  Iinplementes  at  Grenewiche,  in  the 

Chardge  of  Dowfing  Keaper  of  the  Eloufe.  54. 

4.  l  he  Guarderobe  at  Wcltminlter,  in  the  Chardge 

of  John  Reede.  63. 

5.  The  Secrete  Guarderobe;  in  the  King’s  owne 
Warderobe  howfe,  in  the  longe  Gallorie  at  Weftminfter. 

91. 

6.  In  the  Secreate  Jewel-howfe,  at  Weflminfler;  for 

the  Furneatuve  thereof.  1 1 1. 

7.  In  the  Study  at  the  heither  ende  of  the  Longe 

Gallorie,  in  Weftminfter.  113. 

8.  Remayneng  in  the  Kynges  Secrete  Studie  called 
the  Chaier-houfe,  for  the  Furnyture  of  the  fame.  1 1 

9.  Stuffe  &  Implumei’.tes  at  Weflminfler,  in  the 

Charge  of  Sir  Anthonye  Dennye  Knighte,  Keeper  of  the 
Howfe.  up. 

10.  Glades  and  other  things  of  Earth  (in  the  Glalle- 

houffe)  at  Weflminfler,  in  the  Charge  of  James  Ruf- 
forthe.  143. 

1 1.  Stuffe  in  the  Study  nexte  the  Kyng’s  olde  Bedde- 

chamber  at  Weftminfter.  131. 

12.  Stuffe  in  th’Olde  Juell-houfe  at  Weftminfter,  in 

the  Chardge  of  Jrfmes  Ruftorthe.  i$g. 

13.  In  the  Lille  Study  called  the  Newe  Librarye,  in 
the  Chardge  of  James  Rufforthe  ;  at  Weftminfter.  186. 

14.  Esthers  at  Weftminfter,  in  the  Chardge  of  James 

Rufforthe.  1g^> 

15.  Clockes  at  Weftminfter ;  in  the  Chardge  of  James 

Rufforthe.  292. 

1 6.  Refufe  Stuffe,  in  the  Chardge  of  James  Rufforthe; 

at  Weftminfter.  I94t 

17.  Inftrumentes  mufical,  at  Weftminfter,  in  the 

Chardge  of  Philipp  van  Wilder.  2oo. 

x8.  The  Guarderobe  at  th’Onorof  Ilampton-Courte 
in  the  Coumie  of  Midd.  in  the  Chardge  of  David  Vin¬ 
cent,  °  206. 

This  Article  includeth  divers  other  Offices  in  Iiamp- 
t)n  Court,  befidcs  that  of  the  Wardrobe. 


Num. 


M  J9- 


19.  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Manour  of  Otclondes  ill 

the  County  of  Surry  :  in  the  Chardge  of  Sir  Anthonye 
Browne  Knight,  Mafter  of  the  Kinges  Horfes,  &  Keeper 
of  the  fame  Houfe.  254. 

20.  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Manor  of  Nonefuche  in 
the  Countie  of  Surrey  in  the  Charge  of  Sir  Thomas 
Gawedene  Knight,  Keper  of  the  Houfe  there.  280. 

21.  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Caftelle  of  Wynfore  in 

the  Countie  of  Barldhire,  in  the  Chardge  of  William 
Tillefley  298. 

22.  Ornamentes  remaynynge  within  the  Kinges  Ho¬ 

nour  and Caftell  of  Windfor:  appointed  for  the  Obfequy 
of  Kinge  Henrye  th’Eight.  3 1 6. 

23.  In  the  Kinges  Library,  See.  at  Windefoure.  317. 

24.  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Manour  of  Woodeftoke 
in  the  Countie  ofOxon.  in  the  Chardge  of  ...  . 

■  •  •  ■  •  318. 

2  -.  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Manour  of  the  More  in 
the  Cuuntie  of  Hertforde,  in  the  Chardge  of  Richarde 
Hybbes.  3,8. 

26.  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Manor  of  Richemonde  in 

the  Countie  of  Surrey e,  in  the  Chardge  of  William 
Griffithe.  343. 

27.  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Manour  of  Bewley  alias 

Nevv-LIall  in  the  Counive  of  Effex;  in  the  Chardge  of 
the  Right  Honorable  William  Marques  of  Northampton 
Keper  of  the  Houfe  ther.  360. 

28.  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Caftell  of  Nottingham  in 

the  Countie  of  Notingham  ;  in  the  Chardge  of  Thomas 
Clyeff.  364. 

_  ~lh  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Houfe  of  Saynte  John’s 
nighe  London;  in  the  Chardge  of  Sr.  Anthonye  Denny 
Knight,  Keper  of  the  houfe  ther.  ’  368. 

3°.  The  Guarderobe  at  the  Mannour  of  Bedington. 
in  the  Countje  of  Surrey;  in  the  Charge  of  Sir  Michael 
Stanhopp  Knight,  Keaper  of  the  fame  Iioufe.  373. 

31.  The  Guarderobe-Stuff  beyng  the  King’s  Majef- 
ties  when  he  was  Prince;  remaynyng  at  Durefham- 
Place  in  the  Suburbes  of  London,  ”  in  the  Charge  of 
.  383. 

32.  The  Guarderobe  attendaunt  at  the  Courte  uppon 

the  Kinges  mofte  Roiall  Perfonne,  where  the  fame,  for 
thetyme,  ihall  happen  to  be  :  in  the  Chardge  of  Hum¬ 
frey  Orme  and  Marmaduke  Warderobe,  Yeomen  of  the 

fame  Office.  ^94, 

33.  The  Guarderobe  of  the  Kynges  Robes,  in  the 

Charge  of  Richarde  Cecill  Efquire,  Yoman  of  the  fame 
Office.  308. 

Then  follow, 

34.  The  Remayne  of  the  King’s  Majefties  Store  of 

Clothes  of  Golde,  Tylfents,  Bawdekynes,  Velvetts,  Sat- 
ten,  with  other  Silke,  Lynen  Clothe,  and  other  necef- 
faries,  in  the  Greate  Warderobe,  the  27th  day  of  Janu¬ 
ary,  the  yere  of  the  Reigne  of  our  Soveraigne  Lorde 
Henry  th’Eight  King  of  England,  &c.  38'".  416. 

_  35-  Parcells  received  of  Sir  Anthonye  Denye  Knight, 
Keper  of  the  King’s  Majefties  Palace  of  Weftminfter ; 
as  appearith  by  one  Indenture,  bering  date  the  9th  of 
July,  in  the  firit  yere  of  the  Reigne  of  our  Soveraigne 
Lorde  Edwarde  the  Sixte,  betwene  the  faid  Sr.  Anthony 
Denye,  and  Sr.  RaufSadlier  Knights,  Mafter  of  his  Ma¬ 
jefties  Greate  Warderobe.  42  5. 

36.  Received  by  the  faid  Sr.  Rauf  Sadlyer,  the  25th 

day  of  Julie,  the  Firft  yere  of  our  Soveraigne  Lorde 
King  Edwarde  the  vi.  of  Nicholas  Briftowe,  theis  Per- 
cells.  Sc c«  429. 

37.  Percells  received  of  the  faide  Nicholas  Briftowe, 

the  lame  day.  430. 

38.  Percells  more,  received  of  the  faide  Nicholas 
Briftowe,  the  fame  day,  by  Sir  Rauf  Sadlyer  Knight, 
Mafter  of  the  Kinges  Majefties  Greate  Warderobe. 

43*- 

9  39.  Percells 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


at 


Num.  14.19. 

39.  Percells  received  of  the  forenamed  Nicholas 
jBriftowe,  by  the  faid  Sr.  Rauf  Sadlyer  Knight,  &c.  the 

1 2  day  of  Auguft,  in  the  firft  yeare  of - K.  Edward 

the  Sixte.  432. 

40.  StufFe  delyvered  to  the  Lady  Mary  her  Grace, 

doughter  to  our  late  Soveraigne  Lorde  K.  Henry  th’ 
Eight,  and  filler  to  our  Soveraigne  Lord  that  nowe  is, 
King  Edwarde  the  Sixte,  towards  the  Furniture  of  her 
Houfe,  after  the  deceafe  of  her  faid  Father ;  whiche 
dothe  remayne  in  the  charge  of  her  Grace’s  Officers, 
at  the  King’s  Majefties  pleafure.  433. 

41.  Stuff  delivered  to  the  Lady  Elizabeth  her  Grace, 

doughter  to  our  late  Soveraigne  Lord  King  Henry 
th’Eight,  and  fufter  to  our  Soveraigne  Lord  that  nowe 
is,  King  Edwarde  the  Sixte,  towardes  the  Furniture  of 
he : ■HiavIc  after  the  deceafe  of  her  faid  Father  :  which 
dotlie  remayne  in  the  charge  of  her  Grace’s  Officers,  at 
the  Kinge's  Majefties  plefure.  439. 

42.  An  Inventorye  of  all  theKinges  Stuffe  remayning 
in  Saynte  James  IIous  nighe  Weftminftrc  in  the  chardge 
and  cuflodie  of  Richard  Coke  one  of  the  Gromes  of  the 
Kinges  Prcvey  Chambre,  and  Keapcr  of  the  faide 
Hous  of  Saynte  James;  anno  2  R.  Edward i  SeJtti. 

444. 

a  3.  A  perticuler  Boke  of  all  fuch  percelles  of  Stuffe 
as  were  tounde  remayning  in  Jundryc  the  Kinges  Ma- 
jeftie.,  Uoufcs,  Studies,  and  Wardrobes  at  Weftminftre 
t.;e  » 2 th  day  of  Novembre  in  the  thirde  yere  of  the 
Re  gne  of  our  Soveravne  Lorde  King  Edwarde  the  Sixte. 
The  Kevcs  of  whiche  Houfes  were  in  the  onlic  kcaping 
of  the  Duke  of  Somerfett,  untill  the  tyme  of  his  appre- 
hention,  being  in  Octobre  the  faide  thirde  yere.  At 
which  tyme  the  fame  Keyes  were  delivered  to  theKinges 
Majefties  rnofl  Honorable  Counfaille,  and  by  their  Coin- 
maundemeut  the  Dores  fealed,  untill  the  liiide  1 2th  day 
of  Novembre.  At  whiche  tyme  by  theyr  appointement. 
Sir  Wyllvam  Herbert  Knight  of  the  Ordre,  and  Mailer 
of  the  Kings  Hordes,  Sir  Edward  Northc  Knight,  one  of 
the  Kingts  moll  Honorable  Counfaille,  and  Sir  Walter 
Mildmay  Knight,  entred  into  the  fame  Houffes,  and 
there  tooke  a  pcrfe&e  Survey  &  Viewe  of  all  fuche 
thinges  as  they  founde  there  remayning  ;  and  the  fame 
Stutle  by  like  Oidre  of  the  Counfaille  the  delivered  to 
th’ar.dcs  of  James  Rufforthe,  to  the  Kinges  Majcdies 
ufe.  448. 

44.  A  Boke  made  the  lafle  of  Oclobre  in  the  4th 
yea;  e  of  Edwarde  the  vi.  conteyningc  all  every  fuche 
h is  Majefties  Plate,  Apparelle,  Clothe  of  Golde,  of 
Siiv.-r,  Tinfells,  Tyffues,  Vellat,  &  other  Silks,  with 
diverfe  and  fundrye  kindcs  of  Stuffe,  Naperve,  and 
Utenfilcs  of  Howffiolde  as  are  delivered  by  Richarde 
Coke,  E.dmunde  Danyell,  8c  John  Danyell  Gent.  Exe¬ 
cutors  of  the  laft  Wilie  &  Teftamente  of  James  Rufforthe 
deceafed,  unto  Sir  Androw  Dudley  Kt.  oone  of  the  chieie 
Gent,  of  his  Majefties  Prevye  Chambre,  and  Keper  of  his 
Graces  Palace  of  Weftminltre  ;  to  be  by  him  fafely  kepte 
to  his  Highnes  ufe.  All  whiche  faide  Plate  and  Goodes 
and  Stuile  did  remayne  in  the  Cuftodie  and  Chardge 
of  the  faide  James  Rufforthe  at  the  tyme  of  his  deathe, 
within  the  Kinges  faide  Pallace  of  Wefiminftre,  to  the 
Kinges  faide  ule  ;  and  ar  now  delivered  to  the  faide  Sir 
Andrew  Dudley  by  the  faide  F.xecutours  to  the  Kinges 
ufe,  by  venue  of  a  Lcttrc  from  the  Lordes  of  the  Kings 
Majelii  ..  rnoft  Honorable  Prevye  Counfaille,  dated  the 
29th  of  Auguft  laft,  di refled  to  Sir  Arthure  Darcye  and 
Sir  Walter  Myldmay  Knights ;  auttorifing  them  to  re- 
paier  to  the  Kings  faide  Pallace,  and  to  fee  the  faide 
Stuffe  and  Goods  delivered  by  the  faid  Executors  to  the 
fo relaid  :  ir  Andrew  Dudley,  like  as  doth  apier  in  two 
Bocks  made  betweene  the  faid  Sir  Andrew  Dudley  and 
the  faid  Executors  ;  whereof  this  prefente  Booke  is  oon, 
fubferibed  entrechaungeably  by  the  fame  Sir  Andrew  and 
Cat.  Barl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1419—1451. 

the  faid  Executors ;  and  alfo  fubferibed  by  the  faid  Si^ 
Arthure  Darcye,  and  Sir  Walter  Mildmay. 

Notwithstanding  what  is  fpecifiedin  the  laft  Article, 
I  can  find  none  of  the  hands  of  anv  of  the  faid  Parties  ii> 
this  Book. 

14^0. 

An  heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  and  tricked,  as  it 

feemeth,  by  Mr.John  Saunders,  &  others  ;  containing, 

1 .  An  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 
whofe  Defcents  or  Arms  are  entered  herein,  at  the 
beginning. 

2.  A  Copie  (taken  in  hafte)  of  the  Vifitation-book 

made  of  the  County  of  York,  A.D.  1584.  &  1585.  by 
Robert  Glover  Somerfet  Herald,  Marihall  to  William 
Flower,  Norroy.  1. 

Herein,  notwithftanding  the  rude  tricking  of  the 
Arms  &  Seals  ;  I  find, 

3.  Part  of  the  Extracts  touching  Yorkfhire,  made 

from  the  Book  of  Doomefday ;  ufually  found  in  the 
Copies  of  this  Vifitation.  3. 

4.  Trick  of  part  of  the  Seal  of  the-Towne  ofHeadon. 

45.  b. 

5.  Seals  of  the  Towne  of  Kingfton  upon  Hull. 

85.  b. 

6.  Ai‘ms  and  Seal  of  the  Towne  of  Pontefrafl:.  176. 

7.  This  Copie  feemeth  to  have  been  made  from  fome 
Book,  wherein  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Norroy  had  in¬ 
ferred  divers  Continuations  and  confiderable  Additions. 

8.  Defcents  &  Arms  extrafled  from  the  Vifitation- 

Book  ot  Yorkfhire  made  A.D.  1665.  by  William  Dug- 
dale,  Norroy.  228.  b. 

9.  Armes  taken  in  Churches  &  Houles  in  Yorklhire 

Vifitation,  Anno  1584.  234. 

10.  Lilt  ot  the  Patents,  cr  Gifts  of  Arms  or  Crefts, 

(hewed  unto  Mr.  Glover  Somerfet-Herald,  during  the 
Vifitation  abovementioned.  247. 

1  1 .  Nomina  et  Anna  illorum  F.quitum  de  Comitatu 
F.boraccnfi,  qui  cum  Edwardo  1.  Rege,  Stipendla  mcere- 
bant  in  Scotia,  et  alibi.  249. 

1421. 

An  heraldical  Book  in  fol.  tricked  &  written  by  the 

hands  of  John  Saunders,  and  of  divers  others. 

It  containeth, 

x.  Trick  of  the  Efcocheons  ufed  at  the  Funeral  of  the 
Lady  Brufe,  19  July  1643. 

2.  A  Colledlion  of.  Arms  of  Nobility  &  Gentry, 

tricked  for  the  mod  part,  promifeuoufiy.  1 . 

Among  thefe,  1  crave  leave  to  mention, 

3.  Arms  of  Fyncham  ;  empaling,  &  empaled  by  thofe 

of  other  Famines.  j.  . 

4.  Arms  of  Hatton  ;  in  the  like  manner.  2. 

5.  Arms  of  Rofcarrock,  empaling  others.  3_b. 

6.  Arms  of  Gouldefburgh,  empaling  others. 

ibid,  (et  vid.  14.  b.) 

7.  Arms  of  Shelton  empaling  others.  4. 

8.  Different  Armes  borne  by  the  name  of  Yong. 

8. 

9.  Arms  of  Moulton  empaling  others.  9.  b. 

10.  Arms  of  Yelverton  ;  empaling,  &  empaled  by 

others.  1  o. 

1  x .  Arms  of  Wingfild ;  in  the  fame  circumftances. 

10.  b. 

12.  Arms  of  Talbot,  or  Montgomery  :  empaling.  Sc 

empaled  by  others.  1 2. 

13.  Arms  of  J’ackington,  empaling  others.  12.  b. 

14.  Arms  of  Philipes,  empaling  others.  ibid. 

15.  Arms  of  Stenings,  empaling  others.  13. 

16.  Arms  ofBolle  ;  empaling,  &  empaled  by  others. 

■  j.b. 

1 7.  Arms  of  Norton;  empaling,  &  empaled  by  others. 

ibid. 

M  1 8.  Arms 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


41 


Nuni.  1421. 

18.  Arms  of  Glover ;  empaling,  &  empaled  by  others* 

14.  b. 

19.  Arms  Of  Gouldelbourgh  ;  empaling,  &  empaled 

by  others,  (vid.  fupra.  N“  6.)  ibid. 

20.  Arms  of  Wyat,  empaling  others.  15.  &  15.  b. 
at.  Arms  of  Wydvile,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

ibid. 

22.  Arms  of  Hawte,  empaling  thofe  of  others,  ibid. 

23.  Arms  of  Jefferay,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

15.  b. 

24.  Arms  of  Freeltone,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

ibid. 

25.  Arms  of  Bode  ;  empaling  &  empaled,  by  thofe 

of  others.  ibid,  et  1 6.  b. 

26.  Arms  of  Strangman,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

ibid,  et  t6.  b. 

27.  Arms  of  Scotte  j  empaling,  and  empaled  by  thofe 

of  others.  16.  b. 

28.  Arms  of  Bodenham,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

17.  &  17.  b. 

29.  Arms  of  Thrognall,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

ibid.  &  1 7.  b. 

3°*  Arms  of  Harington,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

17.  b. 

31*  Arms  of  Cecil  }  empaling  thofe  others.  ibid. 

32.  Arms  of  Roydon,  empaling,  &  empaled  by  thofe 

of  others.  18. 

33.  Arms  of  Twifden ;  empaling,  &  empaled  by 

thofe  of  others.  ibid. 

34*  Arms  borne  by  different  Families  of  the  furname 
of  Norton.  ig. 

Then  followeth,  without  any  formal  diftin&ion, 

35.  A  fhort  Alphabet  of  Arms  in  Trick.  20. 

I  fhall  not  here  particularly  mention  the  different 
Arms  borne  by  thofe  of  the  fame  furname  ;  becaufe,  of 
courfe,  fuch  ought  to  be  looked  for  in  Treatifes  of  this 
kind  ;  but  ra'her  go  on  to 

36.  A  large  Colle&ion  of  promifcuous  Arms  ;  like 

the  firft.  56.  b. 

And  herein,  I  find* 

37.  Arms  of  Winch,  empaling  thofe  of  others.  56.  b. 

38.  Arms  of  Whilfeld,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

57* 

39.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  May. 

57.  b. 

40.  Arms  of  Towthby,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

58. 

41.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Taverner. 

ibid. 

42.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Clcre. 

61. 

43.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Macala. 

ibid. 

44.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Pinckne. 

6r.b. 

45.  Arms  ofTempeft,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

67.  b. 

46.  Arms  of  Mallory,  empaling  thofe  of  others,  ibid. 

47.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Pery.  69. 

48.  Different  Arms  born.,  by  the  name  of  Knight. 

69.  b. 

49.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Coker. 

74- 

50.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Hewes. 

74.  b.  &  75. 

51.  Arms  of  Danett,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

77.  b.  et  78. 

52.  Arms  of  Belknap,  empalihg  thofe  of  others. 

ibid. 

53.  Arms  of  Butler,  empaling  thofe  of  others,  ibid. 

54.  Arms  of  Sudeley,  empaling  thofe  of  others.  78. 

55.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Hampton. 

78.  b. 


Nuin.  1421,  1422* 

56.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Patricke. 

7S.b. 

57.  Arms  of  Dutton,  empaling  thofe  of  others. 

So.  &  88. 

58.  Arms  ofPagenham,  empaling  thofe  of  others, 
ibid,  et  88. 

59.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Parker. 

82.  b. 

60.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Francke. 

83. 

6t.  Different  Arms  borne  by  the  name  of  Newman. 

85.  b. 

62.  Atchievement  of  Somerfet  Earl  of  Worcelter, 

wilh  all  the  Badges  born  by  his  Family.  89. 

63.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 

whole  Armes  are  herein  exhibited.  9c. 

64.  Arms  of  Hampfon  empaled  by  divers.  94. 

65.  Grant  of  a  Creft,  to  Thomas  Barwicke  of  Bright- 

ingfea  in  Com.  Effex ;  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux. 
dat  6  May,  1 592.  94.  b. 

66.  Arms  of  Lockton  of  Lincolnlhire,  with  Ouarter- 

ings.  ibid. 

67.  Directions  to  Painters  making  Hatchments,  ibid. 

1422. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  whofe  belt  part  was  tricked 
and  written  by  Mr.  John  Gough  the  Paynter-Stayner, 
being  not  only  his  Mafter-piece  as  to  the  finenefs, 
beauty,  &  regularity  of  the  Tricking,  but  the  bell 
in  that  kind  that  I  have  feen  either  here  or  elfewhere  : 
and  hath  alfo  been  efteemed  as  the  bell  Book  of 
Tricking  by  divers  both  Heralds  &  Painters,  who  had 
formerly  feen  the  Book,  and  fuppofed  it  to  be  loft  or 
torn  to  pieces.  This  great  beauty  and  finenefs  of  the 
Tricking,  which  ought  to  have  induced  its  fucceflive 
owners  to  have  preferved  it  with  the  more  Care,  is  that 
which  hath  been  chiefly  the  occafion  of  its  Ruin.  For 
being  thought  to  be  the  bell  Work-book  of  its  kind  ; 
it  all  along  lay  in  the  Shop  or  Work-Room,  being  the 
Pattern  from  whence  every  young  Apprentice  learned 
to  draw:  unto  whom,  and  to  the  Mafter’s  children, 
it  was  a  perpetual  Slave  &  Diverfion.  From  hence  it 
hath  happened  that  what  by  their  flabber  &  driveling, 
what  with  their  naftinefs,  fcribeling,  blotting,  tear¬ 
ing,  &  mangling  ;  it  is  but  as  a  Skeleton  to  what  it 
was  ;  or  as  an  heap  of  R  urns,  which  by  the  Remains 
of  Capitals,  Columns,  Arches,  Architraves,  &c.  might 
fliew  the  judicious  beholder,  .hat  in  former  days  the 
Building  had  been  very  regular  &  magnificent. 

It  was  deligned  to  be  a  fort  of  Regifter  of  fuch 
Armes,  as  had  been  granted  by  the  feveral  Kings  ;  ex¬ 
prefling  fome  entirely  which  might  be  thought  more 
remarkable  than  others.  But  lettiag  all  that  pafs  ;  rhia 
Book  now  containeth, 

1.  Atteftation  des  Armes  de  la  Maifon  de  Micault,  par 

Pierre  d’Hozier,  Sieurde  la  Garde, G.entilhomme  Ordinaire 
de  la  Maifon  du  Roy,  Chevallier  de  fon  Ordre  de  St. 
Michiel,  et  un  des  Herautz  d’ Armes  de  fa  Majefte  du 
rJ  iltre  de  Toloze.  Fait,  le  x8  jour^  du  Mois  de  Juin, 
1634.  J  x. 

The  Arms  &  Seal  with  the  Creft  were  finely  tricked  : 
but  having  taken  Wet  (and  perhaps  the  Ink  not  being 
well  gummed,  that  it  might  flow  the  more  eafily  from 
the  Pen)  they  are  now  not  very  vifible.  And  this  is  the 
cafe  (more,  or  lefs)_of  the  Tricks  belonging  to  the  feven 
Grants  next  enfuing. 

2.  Grant  of  Armes,  without  a  Creft,  unto  William 

Swayne ;  by  William  Wrexworth  Guyan  King  of  Armes. 
dat.  29  Jan.  3oHenr.  vi.  1.  b. 

3.  Grant  of  Armes,  unto  William  Crokey  ali&s  John- 

fon  ;  by  Criftofer  Carlyle  Norrey  jrincepall  Herauld  & 
King  of  Armes.  dat.  3  June,  A.D.  1496.  2. 

2.  Confinnatio 


Bibliothecae  Harieianse; 


43 


N\im.  142  2. 

4.  Confirmatio  Armorum  ac  Criflas,  Thonire  Mount- 

ford  S.T  D.  per  Gulielmum  Camdcnum  Clarenceux, 
Regem  Armorum,  dat.  1 8  Febr.  A.I).  1 602.  2.  b. 

5.  Alteration  of  the  Coat  (in  refpedl  of  its  confufion 

in  Blazon)  which  was  granted  unto  Henry  Randes  of 
Holbech,  made  Bp.  of  Rochefter,  Sc  afterwards  of  Lin¬ 
coln  ;  under  the  name  of  Henry  Holbech,  which  name 
he  had  from  the  place  of  his  birth,  according  to  the 
cuftom  of  that  Age  amongft  men  of  Ecclefiaftical  Pro- 
feiTion  :  made  by  William  Camden  Clarenceux,  to  1  ho- 
mas  Randes  a  Juftice  of  the  Peace  in  Lincolnlhire,  fon 
&  heire  to  the  Bifhop.  dat.  10  July,  1599.  3- 

6.  Atteflation  of  the  Pedegree,  Armes,  Se  Crefls,  of 

John  Thomfon  Efq;  31  March,  1574.  3-  b. 

7.  Certificate  of  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux  ;  that  he 

had  regill  red  the  Armes  Se  Crefl  granted  to  Sir  Francis 
Drake,  dat.  20  June,  A.D.  1581.  4. 

In  my  poor  Opinion,  the  Creft:  would  have  been 
more  adroit,  &  agreeable  to  the  Ufage  of  Antiquity,  it 
the  Hand  had  been  a  right  Hand,  8c  the  Arm,  naked,  or 
at  nail  clothed  in  more  antique  fort  ;  forfo  the  Antients 
ufed  to  exprefs  God,  A  bis  Power,  &  Providence :  as 
I  have  feenin  very  many  old  MS.  in  Oxford,  Cambridge, 
He  in  this  City. 

8.  Confirmation  of  2-  feveral  Coats,  with  the  Crefls, 

unto  1  nomas  Penyfton  of  Hawruge  in  the  County  of 
Bu  ks.  by  Robert  Cooke,  Clarenceux.  dat.  8  l'cbr. 
A.D.  1573.  4-  !>■ 

9.  Confirmation  of  Arms,  to  Dorothy  Bewprey  the 

wife  of  Rubert  Bell  of  Bewprey-Hall  in  the  County  of 
Norfoike ;  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarencieulx.  dat.  1 7 
June,  A.D.  1571.  7.  b. 

10.  Grant  of  Arms  Se  Crefl  to  William  Carpenter 

of  Cobham  in  Com.  Surrey,  by  Sir  Edward  Byfshe 
Clarenceux.  dat.  4  March,  A.D.  1163.  8. 

Thefe  two  lad,  are  written  by  another  Hand  ;  and 
want  the  Tricks  of  the  Arms. 

Then  follnweth  the  Collection  of  Arms  granted, 
being  nicked  in  Elcocheons  before  made  for  the  purpofe, 
twelve  in  each  Page  :  beginning  at  pag.  51.  wh.re,  it  is 
to  be  noted,  that  Mr.Gough  did  not  putt  all  the  Arms  in 
his  bed  manner  of  tricking  ;  but  only  fuch  as  he  thought 
fit.  They  are, 

1 1 .  Arms,  or  Crefls,  granted  or  confirmed,  by  Ro¬ 

bert  Cooke  Clarenceux  ;  Thomas  Holme  Clarenceux  ; 
Wrilliam  Harvey  Clarenceux  ;  Laurence  Dalton,  Nor- 
roy  ;  John  Borough,  Norroy  ;  William  Camden  Cla¬ 
renceux  ;  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  5 1 . 

12.  Ten  Coats  granted  to  perfons  of  the  name  of 
Moore,  or  More  ;  whereof  Five  of  them  are  to  the  fame 
man,  one  John  Moore  Dr.  in  Phyfic,  whofe  firft  Arms 
having,  as  he  might  fancy,  no  reputable  Relation  to  his 
name,  nor  to  any  worthy  Deed  of  his  Anceltors  or  hitn- 
felf  (unlefs  they  fhoukl  hint  as  if  they  had  been  Bird- 
catchers)  by  four  fucceffive  alterations,  he  comes  at 
lafl  to  bear  S.  a  plain  Crofs  Argent,  as  being,  forfooth, 
an  old  Chriltian  ;  with  a  Moot 's  head  adorned  with  a 
Chapeau,  Se  Jewells,  for  his  Crefl:,  as  if  defigned  to  be 
undei  flood  of  fome  Saracen,  or  Moor-Commander, 
whom  his  Anceflor  fighting  valiantly  in  defence  of 
Chriflianity,  had  killed  or  taken  in  fingle  Combat.  But 
whatever  fancy  the  Do&Qr  might  get  into  his  head, 
about  his  Family  &  Arms,  of  which,  the  lafl  are 
aferibed  to  one  Sr. William  De  la  More,  whofe  Family 
might  be  extinct  long  fince  ;  the  Heralds,  we  fee,  took 
not  only  his  Money,  but  Care  to  preferve  his  Name  & 
all  the  alterations  he  had  procuied  from  time  to  time. 

53- 

13.  Arms,  &  Crefls,  granted  8c  confirmed  to  many, 
by  Sr. Richard  St.  George,  Sir  William  Segar  ;  William 
Camden.  Robert  Cooke  ;  Sir  William  Dethick  ;  Tho¬ 
mas  Hawley  Clarenceux ;  Rober*.  Glover  Somerfet, 

9 


Num.  1422. 

Marfhall  to  William  Flower  Norroy  ;  Laurence  Dalton, 
Norroy  ;  Thomas  ?  Wriothefley  Garter  ;  Chriltopher 
Barker  Garter  ;  Sir  John  Borough;  Henry  Sr.  George, 
Richmond,  and  Sampfon  Leonard,  B'ew-mantle  ;  Roger 
Machado?  John  Wrythe,  Carter  ;  Thomas  Benoit  Cla¬ 
renceux  :  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick  Garter  ;  William  Flower, 
Norroy  ;  William  Harvey  Clarenceux.  54. 

14:  The  like  granted  or  confirmed,  by  William  Cam¬ 
den  Clarenceux  ;  among  which  are  lbme  few,  by  Sir 
William  Segar  ;  Sir  William  Dethick  ; . 

.  Earl  Marfhall  A.D.  1 609.  61. 

1 5.  The  like,  in  like  manner,  by  William  Camden, 

Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux  ;  William  Harvey  Claren¬ 
ceux  ;  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick  Garter  ;  Sir  William  Dethick  $ 
William  Flower  Norroy.  71. 

16.  Arms  (tnoflly  without  Creftst  given  in  the  time 

of  Henry  v.  and  fince  ;  in  the  Reignes  of  Henry  vi.  Ed¬ 
ward  tv.  Richard  im  Henry  vn.  and  Henry  vm.  And 
were  all  taken  out  of  an  old  Booke,  late  belonginge  to 
Raphe  Broke  Yorke  Herald  ;  now  in  the  Cuftody  of  Sr. 
Edward  Dering  Knight  &:  Baronet  A.D.  1628.  75. 

The  Names  of  the  Officers  of  Arms  particularly 
mentioned  in  this  Traftj  are  but  Sir  Crillofer  Barker ; 
Sir  Thomas  Wriothefley,  &  Thomas  Benoit  Clarenceux  ; 
Thomas  Tonge,  Norroy  ;  for  they  are  almofl  evqry 
where  omitted. 

17.  The  like,  by  William  Camden  Clarenceux. 

108.  1 10.  &  1 18. 

18.  Arms  &  Crefl  of  Satterthwaite,  as  taken  by  Sr. 

Edw.  Bysflie  Clarenceux,  in  the  Vifitation  of  Kent.  In- 
fe.  ted  by  J ohn  Saunders.  1 09. 

iy.  Three  Coats,  &c.  granted  to  King.  1 .0. 

20.  Five  Coats,  &c.  granted  to  Wood.  i  1  7. 

at.  Eight  Coats  &  Crefls  granted  to  Browne.  121. 

22.  More  promifeuous  Coats  8c  Crefls,  granted  by 

William  Camden  Clarenceux.  122. 

23.  Arms  8c  Crefts  of  Paltock,  &  Bamford  ;  as 

granted  by  Sr.William  Segar,  &  Sr.  John  Borough  ; 
inferted  by  another  hand.  129. 

24.  Two  Coats  granted  to  Brooke.  130. 

25.  Three  Coats,  &c.  granted  10  Hill.  131. 

26.  Crefl  granted  to  Davies  of  Middleton  in  Com. 
Salop,  by  Sr.  Richard  St.  George  l  larenceux.  ibid. 

27.  Coats  8c  Crefls  granted  or  confirmed  by  William 

Camden  ;  Robert  Cooke,  Sr.  William  Dethick  ;  Sr. 
William  Segar  ;  William  Flower  Norroy  ;  Laurencs 
Dalton;  Sr.  Richard  St.  George  132. 

28.  Five  Coats,  8cc.  granted  to  Clarke.  134. 

29.  Four  Coats,  8cc.  granted  to  Yong.  1 35. 

30.  Three  Coats,  8ec.  granted  10  Warde.  136. 

31.  Six  Coats,  &c.  granted  to  Baker.  1 37. 

32.  Morgan’s  Goat  &  Creft,  granted,  temp.  Henr. 

vm.  139. 

33.  Four  Coats,  &c.  granted  to  Philippes.  139. 

34.  Coats,  See.  granted  Se  confirmed  by  William 
Flower  ;  Laurence  Dalton  ;  &  Rob.  Cooke.  ibid. 

35.  Two  Coats,  See.  granted  to  Bell.  143, 

36.  Two  Coats,  &c.  granted  to  Warren  &  Warryn. 

*44* 

37.  Four  Coats,  8cc.  granted  to  Jackfon.  145. 

38.  Coat  Se  Crefl  granted  to  Byrde.  146. 

39.  Three  Coats,  8cc.  granted  to  Spencer.  147. 

40.  Coat  Se  Crefl  granted  to  Adams.  148. 

41.  Coat  Sc  Crefl  granted  to  Day.  149. 

42.  Three  Coats,  &c  granted  to  Greene.  i  50. 

43.  Coats  8c  Crefts  granted  or  confirmed  to  divers, 
by  WilliamHawley ;  Robert  Cooke  ;  Sr.  Will  Dethick; 
Sr. Gilbert  Dethick  ;  Richard  Lee  Clarenceux  ;  Sr.  Wil¬ 
liam  Segar  ;  William  Camden  ;  William  Flower  173. 

44.  Three  Coats,  &c.  granted  toFifher,  Se  to  Hawkins 

alias  Fifher.  *7  • 

45.  Coat 


Num.  1422. 


4p-  Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Jenyns.  temp.  Henr.  vm. 

1 77. 

46.  Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Watfon,  temp.  Ilenr. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


1S4. 

185. 

186. 


18S. 

1S9. 

190. 

191. 
J93* 

194. 

ibid. 


}99- 

ibid. 


203. 


4~-  Three  Costs,  &rc.  granted  to  For fter.  181. 

4T  1  hree  Coats,  &c.  granted  to  Gardiner.  182. 

49.  Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Gylys,  temp.  Ken.  vm 

5  ■>.  Two  Coats,  See.  granted  to  Turner. 

51.  Three  Coats,  &c.  granted  to  Wright. 

5~-  Coats  &  Crefts  of  Skinner  5c  Wall. 

53.  Iff  )  Coats,  &c.  granted  to  Price. 

54.  Six  Coats,  &c.  granted  to  Marlhe. 

55.  Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Thornton. 

56.  Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Watt*. 

57.  Two  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  to  Sutton. 

•5  s-  Three  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  to  Rogers. 

59-  Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Re'ygnalds. 

Go.  I  wo  Coats  5c  Crefts  granted  to  Hyde.  jui  j. 

61.  Iwo  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  to  Coxe  &  Cocke. 

62.  Two  Coats  &  Crafts  granted  to  Webbe.  !g6. 

r'  r- '  nted  to  <  ^wen.  19 - 

.  J4-  Four  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  to  Morifon,  Morris, 
ac  Morrice.  • , 

A  T"  n  -  ibid. 

05.  live  Coats  be  Crefts  granted  to  White,  &  Whight. 

6*’  Two  Coals  &  Crefts  granted  to  Powell. 

67.  ft  hree  Coats,  8cc.  granted  to  Barker. 

68.  I  wo  Coats  &  Lrcifs  granted  to  Hunt. 

69  1  wo  Coats  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  Payne. 

7o-  Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Fox. 

71.  Two  Coates  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  Jones.  -40 -3. 

72.  ft  wo  Coats  5c  Crefts  granted  to  Simonds  Sc  Sv  ro¬ 
mans.  *  n  J 

73 ;  Patentes  of  Armes  (i.  e.  Arms  granted  by  Parent's) 
by  Sir  Criftopher  Barker  Knight  ;  who  was  Garter 
I  nncipall  King  of  Armes,  from  the  28th  of  Hen.vm 
unto  the  3  of  Edward  vi.  carefully  coppycd  out  of  an  old 
Book  of  the  faid  Gaiters,  where  they  were  entred  in 
Blazon. 

74-  Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Hart.  2ir'. 

75-  Coat  &  Crelt  granted  to  Williams  of  Telucrowth. 

^  218. 

76.  Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Walter  of  Crawden. 

77-  Coat  |&  Creft  granted  to  Stephen  Vairahan  of 
London,  temp.  Hen.  vm.  °  „ 

tS-  sran!cd' “>  Bennet  of  Lubbenham,  by  Sir 
Chnft.  Barker.  , 

fame'  CoatS’  SraRtcd  to  Chapman  by  the 

80.  Coat  and  Creft,  with  an  Augmentation ;  granted 
to  Acton,  by  the  fame.  221. 

8  1.  Coat  Sc  Creft  granted  to  Johnfon.  222! 

82.  ft  wo  Coats,  See.  granted  to  Lee  &  Ley.  224. 

83.  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  to  Olbournc,  Gill,  & 

(.  hamberlayne.  Bowyer  &  Wheeler.  22c 

Maiftreihree  &  Crefis  Sranted  to  Matters,  & 

Coat  &  Creft  granted  to  Mde  of  Ardtflo.  2  Jo.' 

86.  Iwo  Coats  6c  Cretts  granted  to  Davy  6c  David. 

£°at  %  Crel  granted  to  Prefton.  a1"-1?.’ 

moil  ^  W°  ^°atS  &  Crc^s  granted  to  Hamond  &  Ham- 

.  89.  Four  Coats  &  Cretts  granted  to  Rooe,  Sc  Rowe. 

r>  ,  ibid. 

Inbn‘w°al  ^TCr  '’:l  granted  t0  Burton  of  Yorke  bv 
John  Wrythe  Norroy,  ,  8  Edw.  iv.  ’  ^ 

mComCStakrf°el1  granK<1  “  of  Overholme 


234. 


Num.  1422,  1423; 


92.  Two  Coats  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  Long.  234. 

93.  Three  Coats,  Sec.  granted  to  Allen,  &  Alyti. 

235. 

54-  Arms  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  Michel,  &  Hope. 

95.  Arms  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  Gibbon,  5c  Gybon?7 

238. 

96.  Three  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  to  Harrifon. 

239. 

97.  ft  wo  Coats  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  Cooke.  240. 

98.  Arms  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  divers  Families,  rudely 

done  by  another  hand.  241  &  242. 

99.  Arms  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  Ellys.  242. 

ico.  Iwo  Coats  &  Crefts  •  granted  to  Nicollcs,  Sc 

Nicolfon.  ibid. 

101.  Arms  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  Myller,  5c  Collen. 

102.  Arms  5c  Crefts  granted  to  Grey  of  Gosfieid- 

Hall  in  Com.  SufF.  244 

103.  Four  Coats  5c  Crefts  granted  to  Cole  and  Coles. 

245. 

104.  Iwo  Coats  Sc  Cretts  granted  to  Barrowe,  & 

Foorth.  246. 

105.  Two  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  to  Woodward. 

247. 

106.  Four  Coats,  Sec.  granted  toTaylcr,  Taylor,  Sc 

Tailler.  248. 

icy.  Coat  &  Creft  granted  unto  Bull.  o;o. 

ic8.  Four  Coats,  5c c.  granted  to  Richardfon.  ibid. 

•  -  -  granted  to  &  Mill.  251. 

1 10.  Three  Coats  5c  Crefts  granted  to  Parker.  252. 

111.  Coats  Sc  Crefts  granted  to  Reeve,  Draper  alias 

Farmer,  5c  Farmer-  254. 

112.  Two  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  to  Palmer.  255. 

113.  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  to  Peirfon,  5c  Peirs. 

2 .5  6. 

114.  Coat  &  Creft  granted  tp  Shepheard.  ibid. 

115.  Three  Coats- &  Crefts  granted  to  Hall  5c  Hawle. 

r  1 0.  Coat  5c  Cretts  granted  to  Kirby.  258. 

117.  I  hree  Coats  5c  Cretts  granted  to  Randall  Sc 
Randill. 

1 1 8.  Arms  &  Crefts  promifeucur. ;  granted  by  Robert 

Cooke  Clarcnceux.  259. 

Some  of  thefe  are  only  damaged  by  colouring  :  & 
three  of  them  were  granted  by  Richard  Lee  5c  William 
IJervcy.  Others  want  the  Nanles  of  their  Owners,  & 
the  Dates  of  the  Grants. 

Then  follows  another  letter  Colledion  of  Arms 
tricked  by  Mn  Gough  in  larger  Efcocheons ;  namely 
lour:  (with  their  Cretts  in  a  Page  ;  thefe  Anus,  for  the 
moft  part,  having  the  Quarterings  joined  to  them  :  They 
may  be  called,  3 

1 19.  Anns  (with  Quarterings)  5c  Creft  granted  unto 
divers  families  by  Sir  William  begar,  Sir  William  De¬ 
thick,  Robert  Cooke,  V\  illiam Camden,  Roger  Machado 
William  Flower  ;  Sr.  Richard  St.  George,  William 


wurge,  William 

Wrexworth  Guyan,  Laurence  Dalton,  William  Ilervev, 
Richard  Lee,  Sir  Chriftopher  Barker,  Thomas  Benoit, 


oir  Gilbert  Dethick ;  Sir  Thomas  Wriothefley,  Sir 
Henry  St.  George,  &c.  but  moftly  by  Cooke  5c  Camden, 
r,  463. 

120.  Fragment  of  an  alphabetical  Table,  containing 
the  Names  of  thofe  Families  whofe  Arms  were  entered 
into  this  Book.  ... 


*42  3- 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands,  and  by  Mr. 
Withie  entituled  Scotlands  Nobility  Sc  Gentry 
as  containing,  5 

i.  A  Lift  of  the  Nohilitie  of  Scotland,  as  ranked  by 
Decreet  of  his  Majefties  Councell,  allowed  by  Act  of 

Parlameut, 


MB 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae 


45 


Num.  1423. 

Parlament,  &  proclaimed  by  open  Proclamation  at  the 
Hed-Borroughes  of  his  Majefties  Kingdom,  A-D.  1606. 

4.  The  Time  and  Raien  of  the  antient  Kings  of  Scot¬ 
land.  2. 

3.  A  true  Note  (or  Lift)  of  all  the  Nobilitie  of  Scot¬ 

land  nowe  living,  according  to  theire  Rankes  and  Places : 
in  Anno  Dni  1625.  a.  b. 

4 .  The  Princes  of  Scotland  ;  being  fuch  as  (I  fuppofe) 
were  defcended  of,  or  allied  unto,  the  Blood  Royal. 
(The  Arms  of  fome  of  thefe  are  exprefied.)  3. 

5.  Another  Lift  of  the  Scots  Nobility.  5.  b. 

6.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Scotch  Families  mentioned 

in  fome  of  the  enfuing  Articles.  6. 

7.  Atchievement  of  $r.  David  Lindfay,  Lyon  King  of 

Armes  in  Scotland,  A. D.  1604.  7. 

8.  Arma  Marite  Regina:  Scotia:,  Dotaria:  Francise. 

A.D.  15  59.  ibid. 

9.  The  fame  Queen  Maries  Creft.  ibid. 

10.  The  Standart  of  Scotland.  ibid. 

1  x.  The  Bage  of  Scotland.  ibid. 

12*  Arms&  Creft  of  K.  James  vx.  ibid. 

13.  Arms  of  many  Kings  of  Scotland,  impaling  thofe 

of  their  Queens.  8* 

1 4.  Fees  to  be  paid  for  entering  the  Defcents  &  Arms 

of  the  Gentry,  into  the  Heralds  Books.  12. 

15.  That  all  Englilh  Bifiiopricks,  excepting  thofe 

founded  by  K.  Hen.  van  are  Baronies.  ibid. 

16.  An  Anfwer  made  by  certayne  of  the  Officers  of 

Armes  to  an  Efcocheon  lately  brought  out  of  the  Realme 
of  France,  &  delivered  to  the  faid  Officers  by  the  Duke 
of  Norfolk’s  Grace,  the  13th  of  June  1559.  anno  primo 
Elizabetha:  Regina:.  12. 

17.  Arms  of  Burnell,  &  Millet  in  Blazon.  1  2.  b. 

18.  The  Race  of  the  Kings  of  Scotland,  fince  Mal- 
colme  the  Second  Kenneth  the  Third’s  fonne.  1 1 . 

This  is  a  printed  Paper  of  good  Note,  and  is 
amended  in  fome  Places  by  a  leaden  Pencil. 

19.  Tricks  of  the  Crown  &  Sceptre  of  Scotland. 

12. 

20.  Another  Trick  of  a  Crown  of  Scotland. 

13.  eti4. 

This  feemeth  to  have  been  taken  from  the  Still- 
Life.  13. 

21.  Unfiniflied  Trick  of  the  Scepter  of  Scotland. 

14.  b. 

22.  Arms  of  the  Stewarts  Earls  of  Mar ;  &  of  Men- 

teith  :  &  of  Dowglafs  Earl  of  Angus.  15.  b. 

23.  Arms  of  the  extintf  Nobility  of  Scotland  fins 

Quine  Mariys  tyme.  16. 

'  24.  Atchievement  of  the  Scots  Nobility,  rudely 
tricked;  with  ffiort  Notes  touching  their  feveral  Families; 
like  thofe  in  the  Book  8 1.  A.  24.  1 9. 

25.  Arms  of .  25. 

26.  Impreffion  on  Wax  from  the  Seal  of  Scot  Earl  of 

Bucklugh.  25.  b. 

27.  Arms  of  the  Earl  of  Tulibardin,  in  Blazon. 

25* 

28.  Antiqua  Moraviorum  Infignia.  26. 

29.  Atchievement  of  John  Earl  of  Annandale  ;  rudely 

tricked.  27. 

30.  Atchievements  in  Blazon,  of  divers  of  the  Scots 

Nobility.  28. 

31.  Atchievement  of  Ercfkin  .  .  .  Earl  of  Bu- 

quhan,  in  Trick  ;  &  of  Wax.  29. 

32.  A  Calender  or  Table  for  all  the  Petigres  in  this 

Booke  followinge,  of  the  Scotes  Nobilitye ;  alphabetical 
ordered.  3 1 . 

33.  A  Coppie  of  a  Boock  of  Scotts  Petegries,  taken 
ut  of  Mr. William  Camden  alias  Clarinciux  King  of 

Cat.  Harl  Vol.1L 


Ntim.  1423. 

Armes  ;  now  in  the  pofleffion  of  Sir  Robert  Cotton  Kt* 
Anno  1627.  33. 

This  is  a  confiderable  Treatife  containing  alfo  their 
Arms,  Seals,  &  Notes  ;  end  ng  at  fol.  79. 

34.  Arms  in  Blafon,  of  the  Lord  Maitland.  75. 

This  is  a  fmall  Paper  faftened  in  to  a  vacant  place 

in  the  Book,  as  many  others  are  herein,  efpecially  fol¬ 
lowing  this. 

35.  Arms  of  the  Family  of  Alexander  Earl  of  Ster¬ 
ling,  with  an  Augmentation,  in  Colours  &  in  Trick. 

79- 

36.  Directions  far  painting  the  Arms  of  Gordon  Earl 

of  Huntley,  by  George  Gordon. .  81. 

37.  Defcent  of  Sutherland  ;  written  with  a  Black- 

Lead  Pencil.  83. 

38.  Atchievement  of  Hart.  84. 

39.  Information  about  making  an  Herald  in  Scotland. 

85- 

4c.  Blafon  of  Mr.  Kirk’s  Creft.  86. 

41.  Profapia  Douglaffiorum  ;  cum  Armis,  et  Adnota- 

tionibus  Hiftoricis.  87.  b. 

42.  The  Genealogiaof  the  Douglafes  in  Italy.  95.  b. 

43.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Ramfey ;  by  Mr.  John 

Withie.  96. 

44.  A  true  Not  of  all  the  Nobilitye  of  Scotland 
Livinge  nowe  ;  accordinge  to  theire  Ranckes  and  Places  ; 
with  their  Titles,  Arms,  &  Time  of  Creation.  97. 

45.  A  Defcouers  of  the  King’s  Intertainment  into 

Edenburough,  the  16  day  of  iV'ay,  1617.  10c. 

This  is  little  more  than  an  Account  of  the  Sermons 
preached  before  him  about  that  ti  .e. 

46.  A  Catalog  of  the  Afts  of  the  Parlament  hold  at 

Edenbrough  the  28  June  1(517.  101. 

47.  Lords  of  the  Articles.  ioi.b. 

4?!.  Cearten  Veerfes  written  by  Doctor  Hall  upen  the 

Kings  coming  into  Scotland.  j  02. 

49.  Lift  of  Pourtraits  of  the  Stuarts  in  the  Gallerie  of 

La  Venerie  in  brench.  103. 

50.  Arms  of  fome  of  the  Scots  Nobility,  according*to 

their  feniority.  104. 

51.  Alphabet  of  the  Arms  of  the  Scotch  Gentry,  in 

Blazon.  120. 

Among  thefe,  fome  of  the  Arms  are  alfo  tricked. 

52.  Notes  relating  to  Scotland,  taken  from  Raphael 

Hollingihead’s  Chronicle.  128. 

53.  Lift  of  the  Scotts  Nobility,  taken  28  Dec.  1 577. 

per  Alexander  Hay.  129. 

54.  A  Note  of  the  feverall  Mariges  that  haew  bein 

betwien  the  Douglafes,  and  the  Kings  of  Scotland,  & 
his  Alians.  130. 

55.  A  trew  Defcription  of  the  noble  Race  of  the 

Stewards,  lucfeding  lineally  to  the  Crowne  of  Scotland, 
unto  this  day :  declaring  exattley  what  tyme  they 
begann  to  raigne,  howe  longe  they  reigned,  and  of  what 
Qualities  they  were.  13 1. 

56.  Some  Account  of  the  Chriftening  of  Prince 

Henry,  i9Febr.  1593.  133. 

57.  Pallaces  appertayning  to  the  Kinge.  ibid. 

58.  Caftles  pertayninge  to  the  Kinge.  ibid. 

59.  Lift  of  the  Earles  of  Scotland,  their  Surnames, 

Tytles  of  Honor,  theire  Marageis,  and  Names  of  their 
cheife  Howfes.  ibid. 

60.  Lift  of  the  Archbifhopprickes,  Bufhopprikes,  Ab¬ 
bacies,  Priories,  Nuneries,  formerly  in  Scotland.  134. 

61.  Lift  of  the  Sherddomes,  Stewardries,  Sherilfes, 

Baleries,  Officers  of  State,  &  Barons  of  the  Councell, 
in  Scotland.  ibid. 

62.  The  Nomber  of  Bisfhopes  in  Scotland  ;  as  al.o  of 
the  Univerfiteys,  Dukedomes,  Earldomes  &  Vifcounties. 

J34-  b. 

63.  Certain  Lattin  Tranfcripts,  Confirmations  of 
Homage  dew  to  the  King’s  of  Ingland  by  the  Kings  of 

N  Scotland  j 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1423,  1424. 

Scotland  ;  wherein  divers  of  them  heive  fworn  Falty  to 
them. 

Herein  is  a  Letter  of  Cuthbert  Tunftall  Bifhop  of 
Durham  to  the  Duke  of  Somerfet  &  the  other  Lords  of 
the  Councill,  dated  the  16  Oftober  1548.  touching  the 
Right  of  the  Crown  of  England  to  the  fuperiority  over 
Scotland,  notwithftanding  the  Renunciation  of  K.  Ed¬ 
ward  11.  a  Copie  whereof  he  fendeth  to  them  from  the 
Regifters  of  his  Church. 

64.  The  general  State  of  the  Scottifh  Commonwealth, 

with  the  Caufes  of  there  often  Mutinies,  &  of  their  Dif- 
cordes.  ,39> 

65.  A  Relation  of  certaine  Broyls  betwein  George 

Gordon  firft  Marques  of  bluntly,  and  dyvers  outher 
Lords  of  Scotland.  k 

Then  follow,  4  ' 

Two  Latin  Hiftories  of  the  Gordons  Lords  of 
Huntlie. 

66.  The  firft  is  inferibed  unto  George  Gordon  Earl 
of  Huntley,  per  Johannem  Ferrerium  Pedemontanium, 
dat  30  Martij  A.D.  1545. 

66.  The  other  is  thus  entituled,  «  Vera  Narratio  in- 
gentis  et  Miraculi  plena  Vidforim,  partte  apud  Aumia- 
num,  in  Scotia:  borealibus  parcibus,  a  Georgio  Gordo¬ 
ns  Huntlaso  et  Francifco  Hayo  Errolio  Catholicis  Prin- 
cipibus,  contra  Archibaldum  Cambellum  Argodorum 
Imperatorem,  5  Nonas  Oaobris,  A.D.  1 594.”  ,  - , . 

.  r68*  Achievement  of  Ramfey  Earl  of  Holdemefs  ;  as 
it  leemeth  to  me.  j 

69.  Achievement  of  Fenton  Earl  of  Kelly.  Inferted 
atfol.  158.  J 

1424. 

An  Heraldical  Book  infol.  feeming  to  have  been  written 
&  tricked  by  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Paynter-Stayner, 
while  he  was  yet  a  young  man.  It  relateth  wholly  to 
the  County  Palatine  of  Chefter,  as  containing, 

1.  Arms  of  the  King  of  England  impaling  thofe  of 
the  Earl  of  Chefter ;  under  which  is  a  Trick  of  the 
Great  Sword  of  Chefter,  nor  like  to  that  old  one  in  the 
Cottonian  Library ;  with  the  Arms  of  the  eight  Barons 
of  Chefter  placed  on  the  right  &  left  fides,  fo  as  to  inhke 
a  fort  of  aFrontifpiece  to  the  Book. 

2.  Badge  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  in  a  Glory  ;  with 
his  Arms  &  thofe  of  the  Duchy  of  Cornwal  &  Earldom 

;  of  Chefter,  below.  On  the  backfide  of  the  Frontifpiece. 

.  3*  Brevis  Abftratt.  Cronice  Comitum  Comitatfis  Pala- 
tmi  Ceftrite,  a  perquificione  ejufdemperHugonemLupum 
five  Wulf,  Willelmi  Conqueftoris  nepotem;  cum  fingu- 
lorum  Infignibus.  1 

4-  The  Genealogy  of  the  Earles  of  Chefter. 

5.  Defcent  of  the  Lacies,  &c.  Conftables  of  Chefter. 

n’  from  the  Book  of  Domefday :  touching 

Cefter-fcire.  ;  b 

7.  Recenlia  Terras  Tenemium  in  Com.  Ceftn  e 

Libro  Rubeo  in  Scaccario,  &c.  ^  b 

8.  The  Names  of  all  and  Angular  Knights,  Efquires, 

Gentlemen,  &  Freeholders  in  Com.  Ceftria  A  D 
>5 79.  &  1580.  ’  ' 

9.  A  Copy  of  the  Vifitation  book  of  the  County  of 
Chefter,  as  the  fame  was  taken  A.D.  1580.  by  Robert 
Glover  Somerfet-Herald,  for  William  Flower,  Norrov  ■ 
wherein  the  Pedegrees  are  all  entred  in  alphabetical 
Families  aCC°rillnS  to  the  Surnames  of  the  refpefliye 

In  this  Copy  are  many  Continuations  of  Defcems'  • 
as  alfo  Tucks  of  many  old  private  Seals ;  and  Conies  or 
Extra&s  from  old  Deeds. 

Among  which,  I  find, 

1  o.  Deeds  &  Seals  relating  to  Bromley.  a8.  b 


Num.  1424,  1425. 


1 1.  Collections  from  the  Evidences  of  Sir  Rafe  Ecmr- 
ton  of  Wormehill. 

12.  Colledtions  from  the  Charters  of  Richard  fonof 
Richard  Ligh  of  High-Ligh,  of  the  Weft-Hall,  Efq. 

85.  b. 

13.  A  Deed  in  French  containing  the  Award  of  Sir 

Hugh  de  Calveleghe,  Sir  John  de  Burley,  Sir  John 
Devereux,  Sir  Brian  de  Stapleton,  &  Rauf  dc  Statham 
Efq;  touching  the  Arms  claimed  by  two  Gentlemen  of 
the  name  of  Maffey.  da:.  14  Nov.  2  Rich.  11.  100. 

14.  Determination  of  Thomas  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby, 

&  Conftable  of  England  ;  touching  the  Arms  to  be  born 
by  Sir  Thomas  of  Afhton,  &  Sir  Piers  a  Leigh  ;  dated  on 
Holy-Rode  day  in  May,  the  1  ith  year  of  K.  Hen  vn. 

NB.  That  the  Feaft  of  the  Liventio  S.  Crucis  was 
held  the  3  of  May;  but  the  Exaltatio,  on  the  14  of 
September. 

1 5.  Ex  Cartis  et  Evidences  Johannis  Savage  Militis. 

Among  thefe,  is  a  Tranfcript  of  a  Deed  in  French  ; 
whereby  Margareta  que  fut  la  feme  de  Jeen  Savage  fille 
et  hoir  a  Ihomas  Daniers  Chevalier,  grants  her  Arms 
to  her  fon  John  Savage  &  his  heirs,  for  ever. 

16.  Boners  Pedegree :  or  the  Defcent  of  Edmund 
Boner  Bifhop  of  London,  fett  down  at  large.  134. 

I425- 

A  Book  in  fol.  done  by  divers  hands,  and  relating  to 
the  Nobility  &  Gentry  of  the  Realme  of  Ireland. 
It  containeth, 

1.  A  Kind  of  alphabetical  Table  to  the  next  enfuing 

Treatife.  ° 

2.  Pedegrees  &  Defcents  of  the  Irilh  Nobility.  1. 

1  hat  the  Contents  of  this  Treatife  may  be  better 

underftood,  I  obferve  herein, 

3.  Pedegree,  &c.  of  the  Houfe  of  O  Brian  :  with 

fome  explanatory  Notes.  r 

4-  Lift  of  the  fcveral  Baronies  in  Thoinond  ;  &  of 
trie  Owners  of  them. 

5.  Pedegree,  &c.  of  the  Houfe  of  Mac  Cartie  ;  with 
Notes. 

6.  Defcents  of  O  Sulevan. 

7.  Defcent  of  O  Drifcall. 

S.  Defcents  of  O  Mahon  ;  with  Notes. 

9.  Defcents  of  two  Septs  of  Mac  Swine. 

10.  Defcent  of  Bourke  of  Caitle-Conell. 


39- 

with 

40. 

51- 

5-‘ 


Defcems  of  Roch  of  Ireland 
with  Notes. 

12.  Four  Defcents  of  Barry  of  Ireland,  &a  fifth °of 

Barry  of  De  von  H  lire  :  with  Notes.  a  b. 

13.  Defcent  of  Power  ;  with  Notes.  36.  b. 

14.  Short  Defcent  of  Thorneton  of  Mounfter.  °  Is." 

15.  Defcent  of  Brabazon. 

16.  Defcems  of  the  Houle  of  Fitz-GeraM  • 

Note?.  ’ 

1 7.  Defcent  of  Norris  of  Mallord  in  Mounfter. 

18.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Morrice  ;  with  Notes.  52, 

1 9.  Defcent  of  Cogan  of  Mouufter,  with  Notes. 

20.  Defcent  of  St.  Leger  of  Corke.  52'-4.‘ 

21.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Gibbon  the  White  Knhrht.  cc. 

•  Ae^cent  Bil:4-Gerald  the  Knight  of  the  Valiev, 
with  Notes.  6  b>  & 

23.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Gibbon  of  the  Greate  Wood  ia 
the  County  of  Corke;  being  defeended  from  the 
Geramines,  &  not  from  the  White  Knights  Houfe.  cr. 

24.  Defcent  of  O  Magher.  | 

25.  Defcent  of  Clare  of  Ireland.  ^ 

26.  Defcent  of  Talbot  Earl  of  Waterford  &  Wex- 

rorde,  &c.  r 

60. 

28.  Defcent 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


47 


Num.  1425. 

27.  Defcent  of  Plantaginet  Earle  of  Corke.  61. 

28.  Defcents  of  Tuit  of  the  Barony  of  Marfton  in 

Wefl-Meath.  62. 

29.  Defcent  of  Butler  Earl  of  Ormond  &  Wiltfhire, 

&  of  Boleyn.  64. 

30.  Pedegree  of  George  Carew  Earl  of  Totnefs  from 

Windfor.  65. 

31.  Defcents  of  Courcie,  with  Notes.  68.  b. 

32.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Morrice  Lord  of  Kerry,  &c.  by 

Sir  William  Segar,  Gaiter.  70. 

33.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Patrick  Lord  of  Kerry  ;  with  di¬ 
vers  continuations  by  John  Wilhie.  7 1 . 

34.  Defcent  of  Cogan.  72. 

35.  Defcent  of  Dillon.  73. 

36.  Defcent  of  Bourke  of  Clanwilliam,  I.ord  of  Caf- 

tle-connell ;  with  Notes.  74. 

37.  Pedegree  of  Darcy  of  Ireland,  from  thofe  in  Eng¬ 
land,  up  to  the  Conquefi.  76. 

38  Delcendants  from  Gulielmus  de  Mareys,  or  de 
.  Marifco  :  branching  into  the  Names  of  Tunflall,  Bark- 
holes,  Singleton,  Carleton,  Preflon,  &  Lamplugh.  78. 

39.  Pedegrees  of  the  Iioufe  of  Butler;  with  Notes. 

78.  b. 

40.  Defcent  of  Prelton  Vifcount  of  Gormanflon ; 

with  Notes.  94.  b. 

41.  Five  Defcents  of  fo  many  Septs  of  Plunkett, 

(here  are  fome  Notes.)  96. 

42.  Defcent  of  Fleming  Lord  of  Slaine;  with  Notes. 

101. 

43.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Euftace  Vifcount  of  Baltinglafs, 

with  Notes.  102. 

44.  Defcent  of  O  Carroll  of  Ely  O  Carroll,  with 

Notes.  103. 

45.  Defcent  of  St.  Lawrance  Lord  of  Ilothe  ;  with 

Notes.  104. 

46.  Two  Defcents  of  Nugent,  with  Notes.  105. 

47.  Defcent  of  Colby  of  otrudballie.  107. 

48.  Defcent  of  Cooly  of  Carbry-  108. 

49.  Six  Defcents  of  Kavenagh,  antiently  King  of 

Leinfler.  109. 

50.  Defcent  of  O  Tohill :  with  fome  Notes.  1 1 5. 

5 1 .  Defcent  of  Blunt,  from  thofe  of  Kiderminfler  in 

Worceflerfhire.  116. 

52.  Defcent  of  Loftus  of  Rafemume.  117. 

53.  Defcent  of  Darcy  of  Platten.  118. 

54.  Defcent  of  More  of  Mellyfant.  119. 

55.  Defcent  of  O  More  of  Leux,  with  Notes.  1 19.  b. 

56.  O  Birne  of  the  Ranelagh,  his  Defcent.  iao. 

57.  Defcent  of  Dillon  of  Rivers,  with  Notes.  121.  b. 

58.  Defcent  of  Barnewell  of  Turvy,  with  Notes. 

1 2i.  b. 

59.  Defcent  of  Bedlowe  of  the  Countie  of  Louth. 

123. 

60.  Defcent  of  Mac  Gilpatrick.  124. 

61.  Defcent  of  Herbert  of  Offalie;  from  William 

Herbert  the  iirfl  Earl  of  Pembroke.  1 25. 

62.  Defcent  of  Lacie  of  the  Libertie  of  Methe  :  with 

Notes.  126. 

63.  Defcent  of  Genevill  Lord  of  Trim.  127. 

64.  Defcent  of  Verdon  Lord  of  Loughfody  in  Well- 

meath;  with  fome  Notes.  128. 

65.  Defcent  of  Longfpee.  129. 

66.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Geoffray.  130. 

67.  Defcent  of  Mortimer  Lord  of  Trim.  (i.e.  Mor¬ 
timer  Eat  1  of  March.)  1 3 1 . 

68.  Defcents  of  the  Lords  Morley  of  Rye,  from  Mar- 

lliall.  132. 

69.  Defcent  of  Marrifcall  Lord  of  Leinfler.  133. 

70.  Defcent  of  Bigod  Earl  of  Norfolk,  Lord  of  the 

Libertie  of  Katherlagh.  1  34. 

71.  Defcent  of  Gray  Lord  of  Wexford,  &  Vifcount 

of  Grany  in  Ireland.  135.  . 

72.  Defcent  of  Mailings  Earl  of  Pembrocke,  Lord  of 

the  Libertie  of  Wexford.  136. 


Num.  1425. 

73.  Defcent  of  Clare  Earl  of  Hartforde  &  Glofler, 

Lord  of  the  Libertie  of  Kilkeny.  137. 

74.  Defcent  of  Vefcy  Earl  of  Kildare,  with  Notes. 

137.  b. 

75.  Defcent  of  Ferrers  Earl  of  Ferrers  &  Derby, 

Lord  of  the  Libertie  of  Kildare.  139. 

76.  Defcent  of  Brewfe,  Lorde  of  Brecknock,  Lord 

of  the  1  .ibertie  of  Leax  ;  which  is  now  the  greatefl  part 
of  the  Queenes  Countie.  1 40. 

77.  Defcent  of  Vere  Marquifs  of  Dublin,  &  Duke  of 

Ireland.  14  *• 

78.  ‘edegree  of  Fitz- Gerald  Earl  of  Kildare  &  Def- 

mond ;  with  Notes  ;  &  fome  errors.  1 42. 

79.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Morrice,  with  Notes;  partly  be¬ 
longing  to  the  former  Pedegree.  146. 

80.  Defcent  of  O  Connor  of  Offaly.  147- 

Si.  Pedegree  of  Fleming  Baron  of  Slayne,  &c.  148. 

82.  Defcent  of  Barnewell  Lord  Trimlefton ;  with 

fome  Notes.  150. 

83.  Places  inhabited  by  the  different  Septs  of  the 

Barnewelles,  Dillons,  Flemings,  Geraldines,  &  Fitz- 
Euftaces.  151. 

84.  Three  large  Defcents  of  Bourke,  with  Notes. 

151.  b.  et  vid.  158. 

85.  Defcent  of  Malby.  157. 

86.  Pedegree  of  O  Connor  in  Connaught.  159. 

87.  Pedegree  of  Mac  Dermond.  160. 

88.  Pedegree  of  Birmingham,  with  Notes.  161. 

89.  Pedegree  of  Courfe  Lord  Courfey,  with  Notes. 

164. 

90.  Defcent  of  Roche,  Lord  of  Formoy,  with  Notes. 

163.  b. 

91.  Defcent  of  O  Doyne.  (with  fome  Notes.)  168. 

92.  Defcent  of  O  Rourke,  with  fomeNotes.  169.  b. 

93.  Defcent  of  O  Moyloy,  with  fomeNotes.  170.  b. 

94.  Delccnt  of  Mac  Coghlan,  with  fome  Notes. 

171.  b. 

05.  Defcent  of  Fox,  Lord  of  the  Barony  of  Kil-Cour- 
cy  ;  with  fome  Notes.  172.  b. 

96.  Defcent  of  Mac  Goghegan,  Lord  of  the  Barony 

of  Moy  Caflle;  with  fome  Notes.  173.  b. 

97.  Defcent  of  O  Farroll ;  with  Notes.  174.  b. 

95.  Defcent  of  O  Dempfey  Lord  of  Glanmalyry  ; 

with  fomeNotes.  175.6. 

99.  Pedegree  &  Defcents  of  the  Houfe  of  O  Neale; 

with  Notes.  176.  b. 

100.  Two  Defcents  of  O  Donnell  Earl  of  Tirconnell. 

182. 

101.  Two  Defcents  ofMac  Guire,  Lordof  Fermanagh. 

i  84. 

1 02.  Defcent  of  O  Really  of  the  County  of  Cavan. 

185.  b. 

103.  Defcents  of  Mac  Donnell.  187. 

104.  Two  Defcents  of  Mac  Mahon.  192. 

J05.  Two  Pedegrees  of  Bourke,  or  de  Burgo ;  with 

Notes.  193.  b. 

106.  Notes  to  a  Pedegree  of  Lacy,  which  is  here 

wanting.  19 6.  b. 

'I  hefe  Defcents  above  are  for  the  mofl  part  dated 
A.D.  1 6 1 5  or  1617. 

Then  follow, 

107.  Atchievements  of  fome  of  the  Irifh  Nobility, 
who  were  of  Englifh  defcent,  circa  A.D.  1622.  197. 

108.  A  Cathaloge  of  the  Earls,  Vifcounts,  &  Barons 

of  Ireland;  accordinge  to  their  fevcral  Antiquities;  with 
lome  Notes  &  Armes.  199. 

109.  More  Atchievements  &  Arms  of  Irifh  Nobility; 

who  were,  moflly,  of  Englifh  defcent.  202. 

no.  Arms  of  Irifh  Nobility  &  Gentry  (the  Families, 
moflly,  of  Englifh  original)  taken  out  of  an  Ould 
Parchment  Boock  in  the  Earl  of  Totnes  his  keeping,  in 
ann.  1627,  &  rudely  tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons. 

2x1. 
in.  Arms 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num,  1425—1427. 

lit.  Arras  of  the  ancient  Nobiliti  in  Irland;  tricked 
In  like  fott.  2 1 6. 

u  2.  Another  Roul  of  the  Arms  of  Irifs  Nobbillicy, 
frith  the  cheeff  Gentree,  &  principall  Famelys  of  Noott  ■ 
tricked  in  the  fame  Manner.  2iy. 

1 13.  Arms  of  the  Nobillity  of  Ireland  whofe  Titles  of 

Honor  are  ether  wholy  extinft,  or  by  Hevres  Females 
falen  into  other  Surnames  Sc  Fainyles  fence  ann.  1  Elifa- 
bethcE.  220,  b. 

This  Trad  is  but  begun, 

1 14.  A  Table  to  the  Irifli  Pedegrees  in  my  Lord  Totnes 

bock,  inarkt  by  the  Letter  QQ.  230. 

I  fuppofe  moil  of  thofe  Pedegi-ees  are  entred  into 
this  Book,  &  make  the  firft  Treatife,  to  fol.  197.  As  to 
the  Books  of  George  Carew  Earl  of  Totnefs,  among 
which  were  a  molt  noble  parcel  of  Manufcripts  relating 
to  the  Affairs  of  Ireland,  they  were  fold,  and  the  Mfsl 
bought,  as  1  believe,  by  Archbilhop  Laud.  Some  few 
of  them  he  gave  to  the  Bodleyan  Library  at  Oxford, 
where  they  have  been  often  confulted  by  the  Irifh  No¬ 
bility  &  Gentry.  The  ref!  (which  they  knew  not  where 
to  find )  I  have  feen  in  the  Metropolitical  MS.  Library 
at  Lambeth. 

1426. 

An  imperfed  Heraldical  Book,  done  partly  by  Jacob 
Chaloner  the  Painter,  &  partly  by  others.  It  contain¬ 
ed  or  at  lead,  was  intended  (o  contain, 

1.  The  Achievements  of  the  Englifh  Nobility,  temp. 

Jac.  i.  aut  Car.  1.  with  the  Arms  quartered  by  them  ; 
which  fometimes  amount  to  a  great  Number.  ’ 

2.  1  he  Arms,  Matches,  &  Defcents  of  many  noble 
Perfonages,  written  &  painted  circularly,  and  concen¬ 
tring  in  William  Herbert  Earl  of  Pembroke. 

Inter  pagg.  42.  &  43. 

3.  An  imperfed  Table  at  the  end. 

I427- 

A  Book  in  fol.  for  the"greatef!  part  written  &  tricked 
by  Jacob  Chaloner ;  relating  wholly  to  Dorfetfhire- 
and  containing, 

1.  The  Names  of  the  Juftices  of  the  Peace  in  this 
County,  A.D.  1601. 

2.  Lift  of  the  Sheriffes  of  the  County  of  Dorfet,  from 
1  Hen.  n.  to  17  Jac.  1. 

3.  Pedegrees  &  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County 

of  Dorfet;  whereof  the  firft  is  dated  A.D.  1616  the 
reft  without  date.  Whether  they  are  taken  from  the 
Vifitation-books  made  in  the  years  1565  &  1574,  or 
cither  of  them,  I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  determine 
without  firft  feeing  the  Books  in  the  Library  of  the  Col¬ 
lege  of  Arms.  However  it  be,  I  find  herein  many  Church 
Notes,  as  1 

4.  Arms  in  the  Churche  of  Shirboume.  , 

5.  Ill  the  Pariihe  Churche  of  St.  Gylfes  up  Winbome. 

6.  In  Sir  Henry  Aflieles  howfe,  ’Jjy' 

7.  In  Mr.  Hufle’s  howfe  at  Shapwyke.  16  b' 

8.  In  the  Pariihe  Churche  of  Shapwyke  ibid’ 

9.  Ill  St.  Andrewes  Churche  of  Melbourne.  1 8  b' 
to.  In  the  Crowne  at  Shaftelbourey,  beinge  once  Mr 

lwmehow  s  howfe.  j  ^ 

I I.  In  the  Pariihe  Churche  of  Charmefter.  20' b' 

1  2.  In  Mr. Trenchard’s  howfe  at  Wolveton.  ibid! 

13.  In  the  Pariihe  Churche  of  Eft  Lolforde.  ibid 

14.  In  our  Lady-Churche  of  Brudeporte.  21  b 

IJ.  In  the  Parylhe  Churche  of  Frampton.  22.  b 

16.  In  the  Churche  of  Stynsforde.  e>c  - 

17.  In  the  Churche  of  B . Rea;s  * 

18.  In  Mr.  Hodyes  howfe  at  Pillefdon.  °  £’  b' 

19.  In  the  Pariihe  Churche  of  Canford.  ,0' 

ao.  In  Mr.  Percey’s  howfe  at  Shavteiburye.  32.  b. 


JNum  1427—1429. 

21.  In  the  Paryfhe  Churche  of  Pyddelton.  34.  b. 

22.  In  the  Parylhe  Churche  of  Samford-Dorcas. 

3 7.  b. 

23.  In  the  Mynfter  of  Wynborne.  39.  b. 

24.  In  Mr.  Morgan’s  Howfe  at  South-Maperton. 

41.  b; 

25.  In  Chidyoke  houfe.  42.  b. 

26.  In  the  Church  of  Charmer,  ibid. 

27.  In  Mr.Wadham’s  houfe.  ibid. 

28.  In  Mr.  Lewfton’s  howfe.  43.  b, 

29.  In  the  Parifh-Church  of  Warhanl.  49.  b. 

30.  In  the  Parifh-Church  of  Benifter.  50.  b. 

31.  In  the  Pariff-Church  of  Caller.  51.  b. 

32.  In  Mr.  Cheverell’s  houfe  at  Chauntemorell.  ibid, 

33.  In  Mr.Gray’s  howfe  of  Kingfton-Marwarde.  52. b; 

34.  Arms  of  Coker,  Curant,  &  Turgis,  empaling 

thofe  of  foine  other  Families.  c^.b. 

35.  In  Mr.  Percey’s  howfe  at  Manfton  ?  61.  b. 

36.  In  the  Parylhe  Churches  of  Spechbery  &  Char- 

Ieton-  62.  b, 

37.  Account  of  the  granting  the  Arms  of  Simonds  of 

Dorletlhire  ;  taken  out  of  Mr.  Rice  his  Bookes  of  Suf- 
folke  :  the  reafons  of  whofe  taking  Armes  from  the  Of¬ 
fice,  may  be  eafily  found  by  thofe  who  are  willing  to  ap- 
prife  themfelves  of  the  Hiftory  of  Sir  Simonds  D'Ewes’e 
Family-  .  64.  b. 

38.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  above-mentioned  Pede¬ 
grees  ;  at  the  end. 

1428. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  tricked  &  written  by  Mr. 
John  Withie  the  Painter-Stayner;  wherein  are  con¬ 
tained, 

1.  The  Arms  of  many  noble,  worlhipful,  &  antient 

Families,  with  their  Crefts,  Quarterings,  &  feme  of 
their  Mottoes;  as  alfo  feme  Account  of  divers  of  their 
Defcents  &  Epitaphs,  putt  down  promifcuoufly  ;  four  in 
a  Page,  &  fometimes  lefs.  t 

2.  Lilt  of  the  Lords  created  by  K.  Charles  1.  from  7th 

Apr.  1640,  to  17th  Nov.  1641.  iy 

3.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Families  bearing  the 
Arms  abovementioned.  At  the  end. 

1429. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  divers 
hands;  of  which,  notwithftanding  the  Title  on  the 
outride,  I  lhall  give  the  following  account.  For  it  con¬ 
tained, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Tabic  to  the  enfuing  Vifitation- 

book  ol  Hertfordlhire,  as  it  is  called.  j 

2.  The  Variation  of  the  Countie  of  Hertford,  made 

^  . in  Anno  ...  7. 

This  Title,  I  am  afraid,  is  a  Painter's  Title :  for 
Painters  when  they  fee  a  Book  of  Pedegrees  relating  to 
one  County  alone,  ufually  call  them  Variations,  without 
lurther  examination.  As  for  this,  I  find  three  Dates 
therein,  viz.  ann.  5  Car.i.  A.D.  1631.  and  ann.  1, 
Car  1.  and  yet  the  laft  is  no  Addition  to  the  Vifitation- 
book  of  A.D.  1334.  with  neither  of  which,  nor  that  of 
'57A  “  d«h  agree-  I  (hall  therefore  look  upon  it  only 
as  a  Colleftton  of  the  Arms  &  Defcents  of  the  Gentry 
ot  that  County,  which  Defcents  are  all  putt  down  by 
way  of  Narration.  In  this  Traft,  I  alfo  find, 

3-. A  Catalogue  of  the  Names  of  the  Gentry  yet  re- 
mamtnge  in  this  Countie,  or  that  lately  were  ;  accordintr 
as  their  Anceftors  firft  feated  themfelves  therein.  7. 

4.  Arms  of  fome  of  the  Gentry,  in  Blazon.  14! 
n  5-k  ^r,ras  of  Gravell>  'atm  from  a  Window  in  the 
Pa-lib. Church  of  Gravel!.  2I 

dcr6'  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Titus  >  added  by  John  Saun- 

S  IibSKS  tak™  'n  EC  ef‘a  S' Michai!,is  P™Pe  Villain 

2  6. 

Then 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


49 


Num.  1429. 

Then  follow, 

S.  Defcents  regiftred  in  the  Vifitation-book  of  Staf- 
fordlhire,  made.  A.D.  1 663.  &  A.D  1664.  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Dugdale  Norroy;  inferted  herein  by  JolmSaunders. 
,=8-  33-b.  34b-  37-b-  38. b.  39.  b.  42.  b.  45.  b. 
4S -  b.  49.  b.  50.  b.  51. b.  52. b. 

9.  The  Vifitation  for  the  County  of  Stafford  by  Ro- 

Glover  alias  Somerfet-HeraldMarfliall  to  WilliamFlower 
aiias  Norroy  King  of  Armes,  Anno  1583.  31. 

Notwithftanding  this  Title,  here  are  no  more  than 
fome  Arms,  wiih  the  following  particulars  collected  from 
that  Vifitation,  viz. 

10.  Nomina  Militum  et  Hominum  ad  Arma  in  Com. 

Staff,  anno  17  R.Edwardi  11.  ibid. 

1 1 .  Names  of  the  Perfons  difclaymed  at  the  fame 

Vifitation.  3 1 .  b. 

12.  The  Manner  or  Tenor  of  the  Heralds  Proclama¬ 
tion  for  the  difclaiming  of  ignoble  Perfons ;  and  Admo¬ 
nition  to  forbeare  the  Style  Sc  Titles  of  Efquires  or  Gen¬ 
tlemen,  until  fuch  tyme  as  lawful  Proof  may  be  made 
thereof,  for  the  Dignity  of  Honor  &  Gentrie.  32. 

13.  The  Forme  of  the  Warrant  directed  to  the  High 

Conftable  to  fummon  the  Efquires  &  Gentlemen  inha¬ 
biting  within  his  Hundred  to  appeare  before  the  Deputy, 
orMarfhall.  33. 

14.  The  Forme  of  the  Warrant  of  Summons  againft 

fuch  as  contemptuoufly  refofe  to  appeare  upon  the  for¬ 
mer  Warrant,  to  make  their  further  Appearance  before 
the  Earl-Marfliall.  13.  b. 

15.  Seale  of  the  Towne  &  Burrough  of  Stafford, 

34- 

16.  Seale  of  the  Cittie  of  Litchfield.  ibid. 

17.  Seale  of  the  Towne  &  Burrough  of  Newcaftle 

under  Lyme.  36.  b, 

18.  Arms  of  Afton  of  Tykfall  in  Com.  Staff,  with 

Supporters  ;  inferted  by  John  Saunders.  40.  b. 

19.  Index  Vifitationis  Comitatus  StaflprditE,  Captas 
per  Robertum  Glover  alias  Somerfett,  Nomine  et  Loco 
Gulielmi  Flower  alias  Norroy  Regis  Armorum,  A.D. 

'*S83*  41- 

Then  comes, 

20.  The  Vifitation  of  the  County  of  Northumberland, 
taken  by  Richard  St.  George  Efq.  Norroy  ;  &  in  his 
company  Henry  St.  George  Blewmantle,  A.D.  1615. 

45* 

'1  his  Title  is  to  be  underftood  only  of  the  Arms  of 
the  Northumbrian  Gentry,  herein  put  down  from  the 
Vifitation  book  above-mentioned.  45. 

21.  Defccnt  of  Collingwood  of  Northumberland, 
with  tile  Arms;  inferted  by  John  Saunders.  46.  b.  &c. 

22.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Northumberland  Arms; 
according  to  the  old  Numeration  of  the  Leaves.  49. 

-  23.  Pedegree  (with  all  the  Arms)  of  Thamworth,  or 
Tnmworth,  as  the  fame  was  drawn  up  by  Robert  Cooke 
Clarenceux,  &  attefted  by  Sir  William  Dethick,  William 
Camden,  &  Thomas  Knight.  50. 

24.  Arms  Sc  Crefts  of  divers  Gentlemen,  with  their 

Quarterings  &  Crefts.  57. 

25.  Atchieveme.it  of  Sr.  Robert  Douglafs  Vifcount 

Beilhaven.  62- 

26.  Arms  of  Sr.  Patrick  Curwin  of  Lancafhire,  with 

Supporters,  &  Quarterings.  63. 

27.  Four  Coats  born  by  the  name  of  Leicefler  ;  with 

fome  other  Armes.  64. 

2.S.  Defcent  Sc  Arms  cf  Ladkin ;  approved  by  Sir 
Henry  St.  George  Norroy.  6 5. 

29.  Defcents  &  Arms  of  Bannefter.  66. 

3<».  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Conftable  of  Catfoffein  Com. 
Ebor.  approved  by  Sr. Hen.  St  George,  Norroy.  67. 

Next  fo  loweth, 

31.  The  Vefitation  of  the  County  of  Buckingham,  by 
William  Harvey  Clarenceulx,  A.D.  1566.  68.  et  84. 

Cat.  Harl,  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1429— 1431. 

This  Copie  is  fo  full  of  Additions  &  Continuations, 
that  it  will  be  no  eafy  matter  to  fbew  what  belonged  to 
that  Vifitation,  &  what  not.  I  alfo  find  therein, 

32.  The  Armes  of  Common  Seale  of  the  Borough  of 

Chipping  Wiccomb.  7o.b.  et  8z.b. 

33.  Arms  of  the  Buckinghamfhire  Gentry.  81.  &c. 

34.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  preceding  Traci  of 
Buckinghamfhire,  according  to  the  old  Numbers.  88. 

5.  Note  of  the  Officer?  who  took  the  Vifitation  of 
Hertfordlhire  anno  16^4.  &  1669.  88.  b. 

36.  Copie  of  the  Book  of  the  Vifitation  ofHartford- 
(hire  taken  by  Sir  Henry  St.  George  Kt.  Richmond-He- 
rald,  anno  1634.  being  Deputy  to  Sir  John  Burrough, 
Garter,  Sc  Sr.  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux,  who 
vifited  jointly  ;  entered  herein  by  John  Saunders.  89. 

37.  Delceut  Sc  Arms  of  Read  of  Wigford  in  Effex. 

102. 

38.  Alphabetical  Table  to  this  Vifitation  of  Hertford- 
fhire.  At  the  end. 

After  which,  namely  on  the  infide  of  the  Cover,  is, 

3  ).  The  Arms  of  Chyney  with  Quarterings,  as  en¬ 
graven  on  Silver  in  his  Belt. 

143°. 

An  Ileraldical  Book  infol.  before  which  Mr.  JohnWithie 
hath  written  the  following  Title, 

1.  A  Coppie  of  the  Vifitation  of  Surrie  made  by 
Samuell  Thompfon  Windfor,  and  Auguftine  Vincent, 
Rouge  Croix,  Officers  of  Armes ;  Marffialls  Sc  i  eputies 
to  William  Camden  Efq.  Clarenceux  King  of  Armes, 
A.D.  1623. 

The  book  feemeth  to  be  almoft  all  of  the  hand  of 
the  fame  Auguliine  Vincent;  the  reft,  being  Tricks  of 
lome  of  the  Arms,  with  fome  few  Additions  Sc  Con¬ 
tinuations,  are  of  the  hand  of  the  above-mentioned 
Mr.  John  Withie. 

Herein,  with  fome  few  Copies  or  Extracts  of  Deeds 
Sc  Tricks  of  private  Seals,  I  find, 

2.  Defcent  Sc  Arms  of  Byslhe,  written  &  figned  by, 
Sir  Edward  Byslhe  Clarenceux,  on  aloofe  Paper  faftened’ 
between  fol.  21.  Sc  22.  on  the  other  fide  of  which,  Sir 
Edward  hath  written  the  Defcent  of  Beecher. 

3.  Arms  &  Seals  of  the  Towne  Sc  Borough  of  Gulde- 
fordeor  Guilford. 

4.  Arms  &  Seals  of  the  Towne  of  Kingfton-upon- 

Thames.  , 

5.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Freeman,  dated  A.D.  1 63  j. 
Done  upon  a  loofe  Paper  by  John  Saunders.;  and  in¬ 
ferted  after  fol.  179. 

6.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  thofe  Fa¬ 
milies  whofe  Defcents  are  found  in  this  Book;  made  by 
John  Withie.  At  the  end. 

I43I< 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  wholly  written  & 

tricked  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Painter 

Stainer.  It  containeth, 

1 .  An  Alpabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  fuch  Fa¬ 
milies,  whole  Defcents  are  entered  in  this  Book. 

2.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-Book  of  the  County  of 
L.icefter,  as  the  fame  was  made  Sc  taken  A.D.  1619. 
by  Sampfon  Lennard  Blewmantle,  &  Auguftine  Vincent 
Rouge- Rofe,  for  William  Camden  Clarenceux. 

3.  Tranfcripts  of  lome  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family 

of  Bradgate.  107.  b. 

4.  Copies  of  the  fame  in  long  hand,  by  Sir  William 

Dugdale.  _  108. 

5.  1  he  Genealogie  of  the  Bradgates  of  Litile-Peatling 

in  Lecefterfhire,  drawne  from  Records,  Original  Evi¬ 
dences,  Regifters  of  Churches,  and  other  Authorities, 
by  William  Dugdale  gentleman,  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord 
1658-  no. 

1432.  An 


O 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1432,  1433. 

1+32. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr. 

John  Saunders,  the  Painter-Stainer ;  containing, 

t.  An  Alphabetical  Table  (incomplete)  relating  to 
that  part  of  this  Book  which  treateth  of  Eflex. 

2.  Arms  &  Crefts  of  fome  of  the  Eflex  Gentry  ;  four 
in  a  Page.  j 

3%  Anns  of  the  Nobility  &  Gentry  who  were  in  the 
Commiffion  for  the  Peace,  about  the  latter  end  of  the 
Reign  of  Q.  Elizabeth,  or  the  beginning  of  that  of  K. 
James  1. 

4.  Arms  &  Crefts,  perhaps,  of  another  fett  of  Eflex- 
Juftices.  fa 

m  5-  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Silverlock ;  by  John  Withie, 
with  a  Note  of  his,  9th  March,  1641.  (Inferted)  1 2. 

6.  Defcent  of  Kelfey  of  Eflexj  by  John  Withie,  in¬ 
ferted  at  fol.  1 3. 

7.  A  Colle&ion  ofDel'cents  Si  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of 

Eflex,  feeming  not  to  have  been  copied  from  any  par¬ 
ticular  Y'ilitation-book:  fome  of  them  bearing  the  Dates, 
37H.  6.  1593*  i578»  i6i3>  i6i4j  1612,  1608,  1599, 
1616,  1385,  1589,  1634,  1580,  1619,  1593,  1617, 
158S,  1615,  1637,  1616,  1657.  I4. 

8.  Defctmts  taken  by  George  Owen  alias  Yorke-He- 
rauld,  Sc  Henry  Lilly  Rouge- Rofe  ;  in  the  laft  Vifitation 
made  for  the  County  of  Etfex,  A.D.  1634.  ioq. 

9.  At  the  end  of  this  Trad,  are  fome  additional  De- 
fcents ;  as  alfo, 

1  o.  Copie  of  the  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Crefts, 
unto  Thomas  Gent  Efq.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux! 
dat.  12th  November,  1571.  i6^.b. 

Then  followeth,  the  Numbers  on  the  Leaves  begin¬ 
ning  afreih. 

1 1 .  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of 

Kent,  as  the  fame  was  made  &  taken,  A.D.  1619.  See. 
by  John  Philipot  Rouge-Dragon,  for  William  Camden, 
Clarenceux.  ^ 

Mr.  Saunders  hath  noted,  that  he  began  this  Copie 
the  1  ft  of  October  1 645.  at  9  of  the  Clock  in  the  Night ; 
&  that  he  ended  the  fame  on  Saturday  31ft  January, 

1 645.  Herein  I  find, 

12.  Armes  &  Seale  of  the  Towne  and  Corporation  of 


Gravefend  Sc  Milton. 


7.b. 


13.  Armes  &  Seales  of  the  Dean  &  Chapter  of  the 
Cathedral  Church  of  Chrift  in  Canterbury.  88.  b. 

14.  A  printed  Cut  of  the  Arms  or  Achievement  of 

Sir  Edward  Dering  Baronet,  dated  A.D.  1630.  with  a 
fanciful  Motto  in  milhapen  Saxon  characters  ;  but  bv 
the  hatching  the  Arms  in  order  to  lhew  the  Colours, 
according  to  the  way  found  out  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe, 
I  guefs  that  it  is  not  fo  old.  I10- 

15.  Confirmation  of  Armes  Sc  Grant  of  a  Creft,  to 

Matthew  Mennes  Efq.  by  William  Camden  Clarenceux. 
dat.  ich  July,  1616.  ^ 

16.  Defcent  of  Levefon,  in  the  hand-writing’ of  Sir 
Henry  St.  George  the  elder,  inferted  after  fol.  160. 

1 7.  In  this  Treatife  of  Kent,  are  fome  few  Extracts 
from  Evidences;  with  certain  additional  Dd'cents  and 
Continuations. 

1 8.  Tabula  Vifitationis  Comitatus  Cantij,  At  the  end. 

r4 33- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  divers 
hands  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

.  1.  A  Copie  of  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux  his  Vifita- 
tion-book  of  the  County  of  Hertford,  made  A  D 
J572-  .  ’ 

Ihis  is  of  the  handwriting  of  Thomas  Knight  Chef- 
tcr-Herald;  and  has  fome  Continuations,  by  "he  hand 
of  Sir  John  Verney  Baronet,  Ld.Vifcount  Fermanagh 
viz.  at  fol.  19.  not  to  mention  other  plac.-:  ia  this 
Buck. 


Num.  1433. 

2.  The  fame  Thomas  Knight’s  Copie  of  the  Vifitation- 
book  of  the  County  of  Surrey,  as  the  fame  was  made 
&  taken,  A.D.  1572.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux. 

,  25-  b. 

Herein  I  find, 

3.  The  Arms  of  the  Corporat  Towne  of  Kingfton- 

uppon-Thames.  29. 

4.  Defcent  &  Armes  of  Gainsforde;  added  to  this 

Vifitation.  35.  b. 

5.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Pedegrees  in  the  two 

abovementioned  Vifitations.  36. 

_  6.  Anlwer  of  the  Kings  of  Arms  (Sir  John  Borough, 
Sir  William  le  Neve,  Sc  Sir  Henry  St.  George)  lo  a 
Queftion  touching  precedency  among  Efquires  by  Office. 

37. 

Hereafter  the  Numbers  on  the  Leaves  begin  afreih, 

7.  The  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of  Surrey,  as 
the  fame  was  made  Sc  taken  A.  D.  1623.  by  Samuel 
ThompfonWindfor-Herald,  &  Auguftine  Vincent  Rouge- 
Croix,  for  William  Camden  Clarenceux.  1. 

I  will  not  call  this  Traft  a  Copie,  or  an  Original : 
for  turning  it  over  this  morning  June  13,1712.  I  found 
divers  hands  therein,  which  feemed  to  be  Originals ;  as 
well  as  many  others  which  at  firft  fight  appeared  plain 
Copies.  In  order  therefore  to  come  at  fome  certainty,  I 
took  Boat  immediately  for  the  Heralds  Office,  where  I 
found  two  notable  Books  of  this  Vifitation,  both  written 
by  Auguftine  Vincent,  one  of  which  was  in  moft  places 
fubfcribed  by  the  hands  of  the  Gentlemen  who  gave  the 
Information.  Comparing  this  Book  with  them,  I  found, 
that  of  the  Defcenrs  in  this  Book  which  feemed  to  be 
fubfcribed  &  attefted  by  the  original  hands  of  thofe 
Gentlemen  who  gave  the  Information,  Three  (fol.  66.  b. 
84.)  were  entred  into  their  original  Book,  either  with 
the  fame  original  hands,  or  at  leaft  an  Imitation  of  them 
from  this  Book. 

That  as  to  the  reft  (viz.  at  fol.  67.  b.  73.  7-5. 
75.  b.  76.  b.  78.  b.  82.  89.  91.  96.  97.  97.  b.  98.  b. 
joi.  ioi.b.  102.  102. b.  104.)  either  the  Subfcription* 
were  wanting  in  thofe  Books,  or  in  the  original  Book ; 
or  with  the  Subfcriptions  the  Arms  were  alfo  wanting, 
which  are  extant  in  this  Book  ;  or  elfe  (which  was  the  • 
cafe  that  happened  ofteneft)  there  were  neither  Defcent, 
Arms,  nor  Subfcription.  Which  therefore  made  it  plaine 
to  me,  that  when  Auguftine  Vincent  made  thofe  two 
Books,  one  for  the  Office,  Sc  the  other  for  himfelf, 
even  fo  early,  fome  of  the  original  Papers  were  miflaid; 

&  never  after  came  into  the  Office. 

As  to  the  different  hands  which  wrote  this  Vifitation, 

I  will  not  now  determine  who  wrote  all  the  Defcents,  & 
all  the  Continuations:  but  this  I  may  affirm,  that  the 
Defcent  of  Carique  at  fol. 49.  is  certainly  of  the  hand¬ 
writing  of  Augulline  Vincent,  who  all'o  feemeth  to  me 
to  have  tricked  moft  of  the  Armes  here,  efpeciaily  at 
two  places  after-named.  And  I  believe  that  more  of  his 
hand  may  be  found  herein,  as  at  fol.  150.  and  perhaps 
his  own  Defcent  at  fol.  144.  b.  and  in  other  Places. 

Obfervables  in  this  Vifitation-book,  befides  the  ordi¬ 
nary  Pedegrees  &  Arms,  may  be, 

8.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Carlhalton.  2.  b. 

9.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parifh  Church  of  Riegate. 

19.  b. 

10.  Armes  Sc  Seals  ufed  by  the  Borough  of  Guldeford. 

Tricked  by  Auguftine  Vincent.  74. 

1 1 .  Epitaph  of  Thomas  Pakington  Sword-bearer  to 
Henry  Percy  Earl  of  Northumberland  ;  who  was  flain 
at  the  fecond  Battle  of  St.  Alban’; 

1 2.  Armes  &  Seales  of  the  Towne 
Thames;  tricked  alio,  at  it  feemeth, 

x  1 3.  b. 

13.  ArouJufticiariorum  Comitatus  Surr.  A.D.  1601. 

180. 

Some 


S3. 

of  Kingfton-upon- 
by  Aug.  Vincent. 


Bibliothecae  Marleianae. 


5 1 


Nairn.  14.33 — H36- 

Some  of  thefe  are  omitted. 

14.  Alphabetical  Table  to  this  Vifitation-book  of  Sur¬ 
rey.  184.  b. 

15.  Tenor  of  the  Warrant  of  the  above-mentioned 

Windfor  &  Rouge-Croix  to  the  Conftable  of  .  .  . 
whom  they  commanded  to  fummon  four  Gentlemen  to 
appear  before  Thomas  Howard  Earl  of  Arundell  &  Sur¬ 
rey,  Earl  Marfhal  of  England,  to  anfwcr  for  their 
Contempts  in  making  default  of  Appearance  before  them 
at  this  Vifitation.  186.  b. 

16.  Arms  of  five  Gentlemen  of  the  County  of  Surrey. 

187.  b. 

Note,  much  of  this  Book  was  written  by  Samuel 
Thompfon  above  mentioned  ;  efpccially  about  fol.  46. 
before  &  after. 

T43  4- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  all  written  &  tricked  by  the 
Hand  of  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Painter-Stainer,  who 
at  the  beginning  thereof,  hath  left  written,  the  follow¬ 
ing  'Title, 

1.  Herefordshire,  1619. 

From  thL  Title  the  book  hath  been  look’d  upon  by 
many,  as  a  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  that  County, 
taken  the  fame  Year.  But  to  fpeak  my  opinion,  I  much 
doubt  it ;  not  only  becaufe  of  the  variety  of  the  Hates 
found  at  the  bottom  of  many  of  the  Defcents ;  but 
becaufe  I  could  never  certainly  learn  that  there  was 
any  Heraldical  Vifitation  of  that  County  made  in,  or 
near  the  year  16  9. 

Befides  the  Defcents  &  Arms  of  the  Hereford-fhire 
Nobility  and  Gentry  ; 

I  find  therein, 

2.  An  alphabetical  Table  to  the  fame  ;  at  the  be¬ 


ginning. 

3.  Arms  of  St.  Ethelbert  of  Hereford.  1.  b. 

4.  Arms  of  St.  Owen  of  Herefordffiire.  ibid. 

5.  The  Arms  of  the  See  of  Hereford  ;  i.  e.  thofe  of 

St.  ThomaS  de  Cantelupo.  ibid. 

6.  Arma  Prioratus  Herefordienfis.  ibid. 

7.  Arma  (  ivitatis  Hercfordia:.  ibid. 


8.  Here  are  alfo  fome  few  Proofs  from  private  Evi¬ 
dences,  &  Tricks  of  private  Seals. 

See  more  concerning  this  Book,  lower  ;  at  the 
Book  N*  1442. 

!435- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  at  the  beginning  thus  en- 
tituled  by  Mr.  John  Withie, 

1.  The  Vifitation  of  Weftmerland  per  Rich.  St.George 
Norroy. 

Sir  Richard  St.  George  made  this  Vifitation  A.D. 
1615.  But  this  Book  is  fomewhat  belter  ;  for  here 
are  many  Continuations  of  Defcents,  and  alfo  additional 
Pedegrees  ;  even  from  a  later  Vifitation  of  this  County, 
made  A.D.  163^.  as  it  is  believed. 

2.  It  may  be  noted,  that  the  Pedegrees  in  this  Book, 

are  moftly  of  the  hand-writing  of . but 

thofe  Arms  which  are  found  herein,  were  tricked  by  Mr. 
John  Withie. 

3.  The  fame  John  Withie’s  alphabetical  Table  to  the 
Pedegrees  ;  at  the  end. 

1436. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  different  hands  ; 
wherein  I  find, 

1 .  Certain  Defcents  of  Lincolnfhire  Gentry,  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  Traft  hereafter  mentioned  at  N°  3.  contained 
in  the  Leaves  marked  A.  B.  C.  D.  E. 

a.  Pedegrees  &  Defcents  of  the  Lincolnfhire  Gentry, 
taken  from  the  Vifitation  book  of  that  County  made  by 
Robert  Cooke  then  Chefter-Herald,  A.D.  1562.  for 


Num.  1436,  1437. 

William  Harvey  Clarenceux  ;  they  following  one  another 
in  alphabetical  Order  ;  which  prevented  a  Table  at  the 
end.  1. 

To  thefe  Defcents  there  are  many  Additions. 

3.  Pedegrees  &  Defcents  of  the  Gentry  of  the  fame 
County  ;  copied  by  John  Saunders  from  the  Vifitation- 
book  thereof  made  A.D.  1592.  by  Richard  Lee  Rich- 
mond-Herald,  for  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux  ;  with 
many  more  modern  additions,  inferted  paginatim,  among 
the  Pedigrees  of  A.D.  1562. 

4.  Among  thefe  abovementioned  Defcents,  are  fome 
Proofs  from  Evidences ;  as  alfo,  the  laboured  Pedegree 
of  John  Thamworth  Efq. 

5.  Laboured  Pedegree  of  Dighton.  1 14.  b. 

6.  The  Coates  of  the  feveral  Families  who  have  been 

Earls  of  Lincoln,  of  fuch  Noblemen  who  had  Eftates  in 
Lincolnfhire,  and  of  the  Lincolnfhire-Gentry,  as  they 
were  fett  'forth  in  the  Lord  Bmghleys  Gallery  at  Tibalt 
(1.  Theobalds)  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux,  for  Lin¬ 
colnfhire.  121. 

In  this  Copie  fome  of  the  Arms  are  omitted. 

7.  Notes  or  Proofes  relating  to  the  antient  Family  of 

Buffey  ;  taken  from  fome  old  Book.  123. 

8.  De  Exitu  Giiberti  Nevill  Domini  de  Grimeflhorpe: 

*  124.  b. 

9.  Grant  of  a  Creft  to  Richard  Johnf.m  of  Gainf- 

borough,  by  William  Flower  Norroy.  dat.  7  May, 
1579.  125. 

10.  Alteration  of  a  Grant  of  Armes  to  Thomas 

Revell  Sheriffe  of  the  Towne  of  Galloway  in  Ireland  ;  in 
prefcence  of  the  Mayor  of  the  Place  &  a  Public  Notary, 
2  March  1673-4.  ibid. 

1 1 .  Arms  of  the  Monafteries  of  Sempingham,  &  Al¬ 
vin  gham.  7. 

T4S7-. 

A  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  Many,  if  not  moll  of  the  loofe  Papers  wherein  the 
Defcents  of  the  Lancafhire Gentry  were  taken  &  regi fired 
at  the  Vifitation  of  that  County  A.D.  1613.  by  Richard 
St.  George  Norroy,  and  Henry  St.George  Blewmantle, 
his  Son,  in  his  company.  Which  Gentry  fubferibing 
the  fame,  this  Book  (fo  far  as  it  goes)  is  therefore  the 
Original  Book  of  this  Vifitation. 

Obfervables  touching  this  Book,  may  be 

2.  Befides  what  is  written  &  tricked  by  Sir  Richard 
St.George,  &  his  fon  Sr.. Henry;  here  are  divers 
Pepers  with  Defcents  &  Arms,  inferted  by,  or  at  leaft 
the  Handy-work  of  John  Withie  the  Painter-Stainer. 

3.  '1  he  fame  John  Withie  hath  added  the  Arms  ;  & 
fome  Continuations  to  divers  Defcents. 

4.  Here  are  divers  Copies  &  Extracts  of  private  Deeds, 
Sc  Tricks  of  Seals  ;  made  by  the  Vifitors. 

5.  Some  of  thefe  Defcents  are  not  fubferibed  by  the 
Perfons  who  gave  in  the  Information;  and  fome  want 
the  Word  Entred  or  Ent,  which  Sir  Henry  St.George, 
when  he  made  the  Office-Book  generally  putt  upon  them  : 
It  would  therefore  be  worth  the  while  to  confult  fome 
other  books  of  this  Vifitation,  &  fee  whether  they  have 
been  entred  into  them,  or  remaine  peculiar  to  this. 

6.  An  original  Letter  of  William  Haydoke  to  Richard 

Norrey  Kinge  of  Armes  (i.  e.  Mr.  Richard  St.  George 
here  called  Norroy  only,  according  to  the  antient 
ufage)  written  1 1  September,  during  the  time  of  this 
Vifitation.  1 1 3. 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  thofe  Fa¬ 
milies,  whole  Defcents  are  regiftred  herein. 

8.  At  the  end,  is  faflened  in,  a  loofe  Paper,  printed, 
with  this  Title,  “  A  true  purtraiture  of  fundrie  Coynes 
found  the  8  of  Aprill  &  other  daies  following,  in  the 
yeare  1611,  in  a  certaine  place  called  the  Harkirke 
within  the  Lordfhip  of  Litle  Crofbie  in  the  Pariffi  of 

Sephton 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS- 


Nura.  1437,  I438. 

Sephton,  in  the  Countie  of  Lancafter  :  which  Place 
William  Blundell  of  the  faid  Litle  Crofbie  Efquire 
inclofed  from  the  Refidue  of  the  faid  Harkirke,  for 
the  Buriall  of  fuch  Catholick  Recufantes  deceafing, 
either  of  the  faid  Village,  or  of  the  adjoyning  neigh¬ 
bourhood,  as  Ihoulde  be  denied  Buriall  at  their  Parifh 
Church  of  Sephton. 

In  this  Print  35  Coyins  are  reprefcnted,  whereof 
32  are  Anglo-Saxon,  &  the  other  three  are  Foreign.  But 
notwithftanding  their  Title  of  a  true  portraiture,  I  know 
that  many  of  them  are  incorrectly  engraven  :  the  Prieft 
or  Perfon  who  endeavoured  to  difpofe  them  into  the 
form  of  a  Crofs,  feeming  to  have  more  Superftition 
than  Learning. 


i+3s- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  divers 
hands  *  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  referring  to  the, 
Tract  next  enfuing. 

2.  Docquets  of  Grants  &  Confirmations  of  Arms  & 
C-relts,  unto  many  Families,  by  William  Wrexworth 
Gyon  ;  Thomas  Holme  Norrye  ;  Roger  Machado  Rich¬ 
mond  or  Clarenceux;  Sir  Gilbeit  Dethicke  Garter; 
Sir  William  De  hick  Garter  ;  Sir  Thomas  Wriothefley 
Garter;  .  .  .  Guyon,  A.D.  1334.  Thomas  Holme? 
Clarenceulxe ;  Thomas  Benoit  Clarenceux;  William 
Camden,  Clarenceux  ;  Sir  Chri/topher  Barker,  Garter ; 
Sir  William  Segar,  Garter  ;  Richard  Lee,  Clarenceux  ; 
Richard  St.  George,  Norroy  ;  Thomas  Hawley,  Norroy  ; 
Laurence  Dalton,  Norroy  ;  Edmund  Knight,  Norroy  ; 
William  Flower,  Norroy ;  Sir  Thomas  Holme,  Claren¬ 
ceux  ;  with  Tricks  of  the  Arms,  Crells,&  Atchievemenrs 
of  divers  Families,  &  London-Companies,  without  Names. 

3.  Defcent  of  Mitford  written  narratively.  43. 

4.  Defcent  of  Pordage,  with  Armes.  44.  b. 

5.  Bills  of  Painter’s  Work  done  for  the  Funerals  of 
divers  of  the  Nobility  Sc  Gentry,  by  Edward  Cole. 

..  47'&J3- 

6.  Arms  of  many  Cities  8c  Corporate  Townes  of 

England.  49.  b. 

7.  A  Catalogue  of  all  the  Gentry  in  the  County  of 

Yorke,  together  with  theire  Coate-Armuure  in  Blazon, 
in  Anno  Dorn.  1638.  56.  b. 

8.  Worke  done  by  Henry  Parker  one  of  the  Painter- 

Stainers,  employed  for  the  Funerall  of  his  Highnefle 
Oliver  Lord  Protestor,  A.D.  165S.  74.  b. 

9.  Worke  befpoke,  provided.  Sc  done,  for  the  /land¬ 

ing  Hearfe  at  Well  minfler- Abbey,  to  receive  the  Effigies 
of  his  Highenes  Oliver  Lord  Protestor,  to  adorne  the 
Framc-worke  thereof.  77.  b. 

1  o.  Description  of  the  Hearfe  or  Bed  of  State,  wherein 
lyes  the  Effigies  of  his  Serene  Highnes  Oliver  Lord  Pro- 
teftor.  yg, 

it.  Proportions  of  Taffata,  &c.  ferving  to  make  Ma- 
jefties,  Standards,  Banners,  &c.  82. 

1  2.  Officers  of  Armes  attending  at  the  Proclamation 
of  his  Majefly  Charles  11.  83. 

At  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

13.  Copie  of  a  Letter,  as  it  may  feem,  from  Sir 

William  Le  Neve,  to  Mr.Dyngcley,  a  Servant  to  the 
Qu.  of  Bohemia  ;  accompanying  his  Pedigree,  fent  in 
token  of  gratitude  for  Civilities  received.  j . 

14.  Defcent  of  Clowes  ;  with  Armes.  3. 

1 5.  Defcent  of  Juxon.  3.  b. 

16.  Defcent  of  Philipps.  4. 

17.  Arms  of  Calthorpe  with  Quarterings,  c. 

1 8.  Other  Arms  belpoken  for  Funerals,  of  John 

Withie.  John  Saunders.  6. 

19.  Letter  of  John  Marffiall  to  John  Saunders  ;  about 

furnilhing  things  for  the  Funeral  of  Mrs.  Hamond  of 
Tedington.  dat.  14  Sept.  1674.  g. 


Num.  1438— 1440. 

20.  Tricks  of  the  Arms  of  Juftice  ;  Turner;  Nor- 

manvile.  ii. 

21.  Bills  of  Painter’s  Goods,  &  Worke  ;  relating  to 

John  Saunders  8c  John  Withie,  See.  14. 

1439- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  Sc  tricked  by  the 
hand  of  Sir  Henry  St.  George  the  elder  ;  being, 

1.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of 
Stafford,  as  the  f une  was  made  Sc  taken  An.  Dili,  1614. 
by  Richard  St.  George  Norroy  ;  who  poffibly  might 
have  this  his  Ion  Henry  then  Purfuivant,  by  the  Name 
of  Blewmantle,  then  in  his  Company. 

Herein,  befides  the  Arms  &  Pedigrees,  with  fome 
Proofs  from  private  Evidences ;  I  obferve  as  Remarkables 
of  this  Vifitation  ; 

2.  The  Names  of  the  Juflices  of  the  Peace  within  the 

County  of  Stafi'ord  A.D.  16  < 4.  1. 

3.  The  Names  of  all  the  Knights,  Efquires,  8c  Gen¬ 

tlemen,  within  the  Countie  of  Stafi'ord,  with  there 
feverall  Hundreds,  taken  in  the  Vifitation  made  by 
Richard  St.  George  Norroy  King  of  Arms,  in  Augult 
1614.  2. 

Note:  Many  of  them  are  marked  with  the  word 
Ignobilis. 

4.  Colle&anea  de  Villis  in  Com.  Stafford,  e  quodam 

Libro  qui  intitulatur  Nomina Villarum  de  tempore  nuper 
Regis  Edwardi  11.  in  Scaccario  ;  ex  parte  Rememora- 
toris  Thefaurarij.  6. 

5.  Gencalogia  de  Burton  de  Lindley  in  Com.  Ley- 

ceftr.  et  de  Falde  in  C°m-  Staff  28. 

('.  Grant  of  Armes,  in  French,  to  John  Bruggford 
Efquier,  by  Edward  Duke  of  York,  at  Ilarflew  29  Aug. 
ann.  3  K.  Henr.  v.  32. 

7.  Gmnt  of  Arms  &  Crell,  in  French,  to  Robert  Whit- 

greve,  by  Humfrey  Earl  of  Stafford,  dat.  1 3  Aug.  ann. 
20  R.  Hcnr.  vi.  ibid. 

8.  Three  Leaves ;  whereof  two  are  faftened  between 
pagg-  68.  &  69.  the  other  faftened  between  pagg.  76.  8c 
77.  they  are  all  of  Sir  Richard  St. Georges  hand,  and 
the  Deicents  therein  are  marked  with  the  Word  Ent  red, 
with  this  diffidence,  that  the  two  fir  ft  have  the  word 
Derb.  likewife  added,  fhewing  that  they  were  entred  into 
theVifitation-bookof  the  County  of  Derby,  which  was  made 
by  this  Sir  Richard  St. George’ A.D.  161  •.  Thefe  Leaves 
therefore  (^although  not  attefted  by  Subfcriptions)  are 
to  be  efteemed  as  fragments  of  the  Original  Vifitation- 
books  of  thofe  Counties. 

9.  Here  arc  one  additional  Defcent,  and  fome  few 
Continuations  by  John  Withie. 

1  o.  Alphabetical  Table  referring  to  the  abovemen- 
tioned  Pcdegrees.  At  the  end. 

144°. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands ; 
wherein  I  find, 

1.  Some  Accounts  of  the  Contents  of  it ;  which  will 
anon  be  deferibed  more  particularly. 

2.  Arms  of  England  upon  each  alteration  ;  with  the 

Arms  of  Q.  Elizabeth  hi  the  midft.  1 . 

3.  Arms  of  Britain s,  Romans,  & c.  having  relation 

to  England  :  with  a  whimfical  bearing  for  Prince  Henry, 
or  K.  Charles  1.  while  Prince  of  Wales.  1.  b. 

4.  Arms  of  fome  of  our  Kings  Queens,  putt  down 

for  the  fake  of  their  Supporters,  &  Badges ;  from  K. 
Edward  1.  to  Queen  Elizabeth  ;  together  with  the  Badge 
of  Q.  Anne  Boleyne  her  Mother  ;  the  Arms  of  K.  Ed¬ 
ward  the  Confeffor,  England,  France,  Normandy,  An¬ 
jou,  Sc  G uven,  or  Aquiiain  2. 

5.  The  Badge  of  Henry  Prince  of  Wales ;  with  the 
differences  of  the  Pen  or  Quit  of  the  Eftridges  Feathers 

as 


3 


Bibliothecas  Harleidnae. 


53 


Num.  1440. 

as  belonging  to  the  King,  the  Prince  of  Wales ;  the 
Dukes  of  Lancafter,  8c  the  Beauforts  Dukes  of  Somerfet. 

5.  b. 

6.  Badges  of  K.  Edw.  111.  Rich.  hi.  Henry  vii. 
Henry  viii.  Guycn  ;  Normandy  ,;  Edw.  vi.  Q.  Anne 
Boleyne  ;  the  Prince  of  Wales  ;  8c  Henry  vi. 

inter  5.38c  6. 

7.  Printed  CuttofQ.  Elizabeth’s  Tomb,  where  the 
Arms.  8cc.  are  mu  iked  as  to  their  proper  Colors. 

port:  6. 

8.  Sir  William  Dethick’s  rough  Draught  of  a  Letter 

to  K.  James,  with  divers  Efcocheons  of  Arms,  which  in 
his  Opinion,  that  King  might  properly  bear;  in  refpeft 
of  his  fuccecding  to  the  Crowne  of  England,  dat.  20 
April,  1603,  _  ibid. 

Some  of  thefe  Efcocheons  are  wanting, 

9.  Amies  of  the  Kings  that  have  reigned  within  the 
^Dominions  enjoyed  or  claimed  by  K.  James  1.  ibid. 

Some  of  thefe  are  of  no  authority. 

to.  A  Trad  fetting  forth,  at  large,  the  Precedence  of 
the  Englilh  Nobility,  8c  of  their  Children.  9. 

11.  Touching  the  Creation  of  Barons.  10. 

12.  The  Procedinge  to  the  High  Court  of  Parliament 

ht  Weftminfter,  from  her  Highnes  Q.  Elizabeth's  Royall 
Pallace  of  Whitehall.  10.  b. 

13.  Theplaceinge  of  greate  Officers  according  to  an 
Ad  of  Parliament  made  in  anno  3 1  Henrici  vm.  1 1.  b. 

14.  The  Number  of  Mourners  at  Funeralls  according 

to  the  degree  8c  eftate  of  the  Defund.  ibid. 

1  5.  Liverycs  for  Noble  Men  Sc  Gentilemen  at  the 

Parliament.  ibid. 

1 6.  Officers  8c  Servants  proper  for  each  Degree  of 

Nobilitic,  with  other  ceremonial  matters.  ibid. 

17.  Liveryes  for  Noble  Wemenat  the Intertaynement 

of  any  greate  E  Hate.  1 2 . 

j  8.  The  order  of  all  Eftates  ;  i.  e.  the  Precedence  of 
the  Noblemens  Sons.  ibid. 

19.  Defcription  of  two  Mourning  Garments  for  Ladies, 
viz.  the  Slope,  8c  Surcoate.  12.  b. 

2c.  The  Solemnity  of  the  Funeral  of  Mary  late  Scotifli 
Queene,  8;  Dowager  of  France,  celebrated  in  the  Church 
h  i  Auguft  A.D.  1587.  13. 

1  1  en  follow, 

21.  John  Withies  alphabetical  Table  to  the  enfuing 

Treatife.  1 4* 

22.  Some  Emendations  of  the  enfuing  Treatife.  17. 

23.  A  Catalogue  of  all  the  Nobylyty  of  England  fence 

the  Conquelt  ;  namely,  Dukes,  Marquiles,  Earles, 
Vifcounts,  8c  Barons ;  with  the  noble  Enfignes  of 
Honor  olherwyes  caled  Armes  that  they  bore  in  Fielde, 
tricked  in  the  margin;  Alfo  under  what  Kinges  they 
flourilhed  ;  with  there  prepper  Blues,  and  part  of  their 
collatcrall  Diffents.  Collected  by  that  famous  and  ex¬ 
cellent  Herald  Robert  Cooke,  alias  Clarcntius  Kinge  of 
Armes.  17-  b. 

This  Treatife  is  continued  to  Henry  Lord  Grey  o^ 
Groby,  created  Earl  of  Stamford  anno  3  R.  Caroli  1.  but 
the  A  :s  are  omitted  after  the  Reign  of  Q.  Elizabeth. 

24.  An  incomplete  Table  to  the  foregoing  Treatife. 

55* 

2  c.  The  Manner  8c  Ordre  appointed  for  the  Proceed¬ 
ing  fr.un  the  Queencs  Majefties  Pallas  of  Weftminfter, 
tc  Weltminfter-Churche  and  the  Parliament-PIoufe. 

59* 

■26,  The  Playcing  of  all  Eflates  of  Men,  according  to 
there  Degres,  59.  b. 

27.  The  Placinge  of  all  Eftates  of  Wemen,  according 

to  there  Degres.  ibid. 

28.  E  lates  of  the  Blood- Royall.  ibid. 

29.  i  he  Playcing  of  Strangers.  ibid. 

3..'.  Blood-Royal),  how  far  it  rctcheth,  ibid. 

Cat.  IIakl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  14403  1441. 

3 1 .  The  Names  of  all  the  noble  Men  fins  the  Conqueftj 
according  to  their  Degrees.  60. 

Thefe  end  in  the  Reign  of  Q.  Elizabeth  ;  and  are 
written  over  painted  Efcocheons,  which  were  defigned 
to  contain  Tricks  of  their  Arms. 

1441-  . 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written,  tricked,  &  painted 
by  divers  hands  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  A  Lifte  of  ail  the  Knightes  that  were  made  in  the 

Raigne  of  Kinge  James ;  and  the  Daye  8c  Place  where 
and  whenn  they  were  made.  1  • 

2.  Atteftation  aux  Armes  de  Micault,  par  Pierre 

d’Hozier,  Toloze-Hcrald.  Faite  18  du  mois  de  Juin, 
l’an  1634.  8. 

This  Atteftation  or  Certificate,  8c  the  following 
Grants  (except  the  laft)  are  of  the  hand  of  John 
Saunders. 

3.  Confirmation  of  Arms  8c  Creft,  to  William  Strachy, 
by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  4  July  A.D.  1 587. 

8.  b. 

4.  Grant  of  Arms  8c  Creft  to  Richard  Henfley  Cap¬ 

tain  of  the  Pioneers  at  the  Siege  of  Kinfale,  by  Daniel 
Mollineux,  Ulfter.  Yeoven  the  26  of  April,  A.D. 
1602.  9- 

5.  Grant  of  Arms  Sc  Creft:  unto  William  Poulton  of 
Berwyke  St.  Leonard  in  Com.  Wiltef.  by  Gilbert  De¬ 
thick  Garter,  dat.  27  Auguft  A.D.  1565. 

Here  is  a  Trick  of  Sir  Gilbert’s  effigies  in  the  prin¬ 
cipal  Letter. 

6.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  William  Huett  o£ 

Milbroke  in  Com.  Bedford,  by  Robert  Cooke  Claren¬ 
ceux.  dat.  1  May,  A.D.  1579-  I0- 

7.  Confirmation  of  Armes  8c  grant  of  a  Crefl  unto  Sir 

Lionell  Madtlifon  of  Newcaflle  upon  Tine,  by  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  le  Neve  Norroy.  dat.  5  June  A.D.  1635.  10.  b. 

8.  Confirmation  of  Armes  8c  grant  of  a  Creft  to  Tho¬ 

mas  Wcod  M.D.  of  Suffolke,  by  Robert  Cooke  Claren¬ 
ceux.  dat.  8  Janry.  A.D*  1592.  n.b. 

9.  Confirmation  of  Arms  8c  Grant  of  a  Creft,  to  Tho¬ 

mas  Weoley  of  Campden  in  Com.  Glouceft.  by  Robert 
Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  25  April  1580.  12.  b. 

10.  Grant  of  Armes  8c  Creft  unto  Raph  Hough  of 

London,  by  Edward  Bysflihe  Garter,  dat.  30  March, 
A.D. 1650.  13. 

1 1 .  Grant  of  Armes  &  Crefl  unto  Thomas  Albery 

of  Wokingham  in  Com.  Berks,  by  Robert  Cooke  Cla¬ 
renceux.  dat.  ioNov.  A,D.  1590.  13.  b. 

Then  follow, 

12.  A  Collection  of  the  Arms  of  the  Welfh  Gentry, 
8c  of  divers  Englifh  Families  which  have  fettled  among 
the  Welfh,  being  200  in  number,  muchwhat  the  fame 
with  thofe  in  the  book  66.  A.  27.  but  not  in  the  fame 
order.  That  Copie  is  much  older  than  this,  but  this  is 
better  written  and  much  better  painted  :  moreover  the 
Arms  in  this  Copie  are  all  exprefled  in  Blafon.  14. 

13.  Arms  of  fome  Welfh  Families,  with  their  Crefts  ; 

in  Trick.  39. 

14.  The  Names  of  the  Baronets  of  Ireland,  untill 

Anno  1630.  39*  b. 

1 5.  The  Names  of  the  chiefefl  8c  auntientefl  Names 

8c  Families  in  the  Kingdome  of  Ireland.  ibid. 

16.  Alphabet  of  Arms  of  the  Irilh  Gentry,  in  Trick. 

40. 

Within  this  Traft  I  alfo  find, 

17.  The  Titles  of  the  Irilh  Archbifhops  8c  Bifhops. 

40.  b. 

18.  The  Arms  of  the  Cities  of  Dublin,  Waterford, 

8c  Corke.  ibid. 

19.  Arms,  with  Crefts,  granted  or  confirmed  to  divers 
by  Robert  Cooke’ Clarenceux  ;  Thomas  ....  Cla¬ 
renceux  A.D.  1481.  William  Harvey  Clarenceux;  Lau- 

P  rcnc« 


54 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1441. 

rence  Dalton  Norroy  ;  John  Borough  Norroy  ;  William 
Camden  Clarenceux ;  &  Richard  St.  George  Ciaren- 
ceux  :  tricked  by  John  Saunders.  46. 

20.  Lift  of  Families,  the  Copies  of  whofe  Grants  of 

Arines,  John  Saunders  had  entire.  46.  b. 

21.  John  Saunders  his  alphabetical  Table  containing 
the  Surnames  of  thofe  Families  whofe  Armes  are  ex° 
hibited  in  the  remaining  part  of  the  Book;  and 
referring  unto  the  fame,  by  the  old  Numbers  &  Marks. 

Then  follow  certain  Grants  copied  intirely  by  jE>hn 
Saunders,  being, 

22.  Grant  of  Anns  &  Creft  unto  Sr.  Hugh  Smithfon 
of  Stanwick  in  Com.  Ebor.  Baronet  ;  by  Sr.  Edward 
Walker  Garter,  dat.  20  Novemb.  A.D.  1663.  49.  b, 

23.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  to 

Richard  Machen  of  Whitcomb  in  Com.  Glouceft.  by 
William  Segar  Garter,  dat.  1  June  1611.  50. 

24.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  to  John  Bayly  of  Hod- 

defden  in  Com.  Hertford,  by  Richard  St.  George  Cla¬ 
renceux.  dat.  16  Febr.  A.D.  1634.  50.  b. 

25.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  to 
Rowland  Baugh  of  Twyminge  in  Com.  Glouceftr.  by 
Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  1 1  Nov.  1  574.1  c  1 . 

26.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Cieft  to  Henry  Kearfly  of 

London  ;  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux.  dat. 
a  O&ob.  A.D.  1662.  51.  b. 

27.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  to  William  Warne  of 

Southampton,  by  Edward  Bysfhe  Garter,  dat.  6  Febr 
l657-  52.’ 

28.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft,  to  Benjamin 

Brond  of  Ldwardftone  in  Com.  Suft'.  by  William  Cam- 
den  Clarenceux.  dat.  10  March  1612.  52.  b.  I 

29.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  to  John  Wvchecome  of 

Newbury  in  Com.  Berks,  by  Sir  Chriftopher  Barker  ! 
Garter,  dat.  26  October,  A.D.  1  ^49.  5-1. 

The  Effigies  of  the  laid  Sir  Chriftopher  is  tricked  I 
in  the  principal  Letter. 

3°;  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  to  > 
William  Tirrey  of  London,  Gouldfmith  ;  bv  William  | 
Segar  Garter,  dat.  13  June  1616.  '  53.  b. 

31.  Alteration  of  the  Armes,  with  an  Augmentation 
granted  to  Sir  Edmund  Percie  Kt.  &  LL.D.  bv  Sir  Ed¬ 
ward  Walker  Garter,  dat.  20  March,  A.D.  iCG:. 

54* 

32.  Arms  of  the  Englifii  Biftiopricks,  empaling  thofe 

of  their  refpective  Biiliops,  after  the  Reftoration.  5 5. 

Among  them  I  find  , 

33.  A  Confi  1  mation  of  the  Arms  &  Creft  of  Henry 

Tilfon  Bilhop  of  Elphin,  by  Thomas  Prefton  Ulvefter. 
dat.  24  Sept.  1639.  '  55.  b.  ' 

Ihen  follow, 

34;  C-oats  and  Crefts  granted  or  confirmed  unto  many, 

J’X  John  Borough  >  &  one  more  by  Sir  Thomas 
Wriotheflev  Garter. 

35.  Atteftation  of  the  Defcent  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe 

Knight,  and  ol  his  right  to  quarter  the  Armes  of  divers 
Families,  by  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat 
30  April,  1632.  b/ 

36.  Coats  and  Crefts  granted  or  confirmed  unto  many 
by  Sir  Chriftopher  Barker  Garter;  Sir  Gilbert  Dcthick 
Garter  ;  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux  ;  William  Flower' 
Norroy  ;  William  Harvey,  Clarenceux  ;  but  there  are  fo 
many  by  the  fecond,  that  the  Tract  may  well  be  entituled 

Docquets  of  SirGilbert  Dethick’s  Grants.”  61,  ct  100.  ’ 

37.  Then  follow  Tricks  of  Armes,  &  Docquets  of 
Grants  &  Confirmations  of  Coats  &  Crefts,  unto  very 
many,  by  William  Camden  Clarenceux  ;  Sir  Richard 
Sf-  George  ;  Sir  William  Segar  ;  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick  ; 

Sir  William  Dethick,  Daniel  Molvneux  Ulvefter.  91 

38.  Achievement  of  the  Company  of  Diftilleis  of 

London.  'IP5.  I 


Num.  1441 — 1443. 

39-  Coats  &  Crefts  granted  or  confirmed  by  Williarti 
Camden  Clarenceux.  b. 

Among  thefe  are  fome,  granted  more  lately,  by  Sil* 
Edward  Walker,  Sir  Ldward  Bvsfhe  ;  &  fome  others 
more  antiently  by  Robert  C.ooke,  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick, 
Sir  William  Dethick,  Sir  John  Borough,  Sir  Will,  le 
Heve ;  Sir  Richard  St.  George  ;  William  Ryley  ;  Ro¬ 
be1  t  Brown  Blewmantle ;  Sir  William  Segar  ;  but  more 
of  Sir  Edward  Byslhe  than  of  the  reft. 

40.  Rules  for  Blazon  ;  or  Rudiments  of  Heraldry'. 

41.  Docquets  of  Grants  to  divers :  one  by  Wilfifm 

F  lower  Norroy  ;  the  others  by  Sir  William  Segar 
Garter-  160. 

42.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  James  Heron  of 

Lylmg-Green  in  Com.  Berks,  by  Edward  Bysfhe  Garter, 
dat.  1  June  1652.  '  '  162.  b. 

43-  Arms  of  Morgan ;  Edwardes ;  &  Lenthall. 

163.  b. 

*442. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands  ;  and 
at  the  beginning  entituled  by  John  Withie  Hereford- 
smere,  1586.  concerning  which.  I  fhall  beg  leave  to 
make  one  or  two  fhort  Obfervations,  I  finding  therein, 

1.  Arms  of  many  Herefordftdre  Gentlemen,  haftily 
tricked  ;  being,  for  the  mod  part,  granted  to  them  A.D. 
1634.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 
whofe  Defcents  are  contained  in  thi  •  Book. 

3.  The  Vifitation-book  cf  the  County  of  Hereford, 
of  the  year  1586.  if  any  fuch  was  made  that  Year,  as  I 
cannot  hitherto  certainly  learn  that  there  was.  However 

I  “ ls  PlaJn>  that  divers  Defcents  here  are  brought  down 
;  lower  than  m  the  Vifitation-book  of  Robert  Cooke  Cla- 
renceux,  made  A.D.  1369.  and  if  it  may  not  be  reputed 
a  \  ifitation-book,  it  cannot  be  denied  the  reputation  of 
being  a  Colleftion  of  Pedegrees  of  the  Gentry  of  the 
lame  County,  very  fairly  fett  forth. 

4.  It  appears  that  John  Saunders’s  Book  82.  A.  g. 
above  delcnbed,  is  a  Copic  of  this;  but  withall,  that 
tfic  laid  Copie  hath  fome  additions,  made  afterwards 
unto  it,  which  are- not  to  be  found  here. 

r  S’  !t  appear -th  alfo,  that  this  book  is  a  tranferint 
from  that  of  William  Peafon  in  this  Library,  inferibed 
Bfr  24‘  ^king  ofl  abruptly  in  themidft  of  Blounts 
Defcent,  at  fol.  io4.b.  of  that  Book  :  which  therefore 
could  not  oe  exprefled  intirely,  in  the  book  82  A.  9. 

6.  In  this  Book  there  are  fome  additional  Pedegrees 
&  continuation;:,  inferted  therein  by  John  Withie  & 
others  imee  it  was  copied  from  Mr.  Lancafter  Penfon’s  • 
and  fome  oi  them  fince  it  was  copied  by  John  Saunders. 

7.  As  to  the  Hand  that  wrote  it ;  although  it  be  fome- 
what  like  the  hand  of  Mr.  Penfon,  Am.  Anguftine  Vin¬ 
cent,  Sc  John  Withie  ;  yet  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that 
is  is  not  of  any  of  them  ;  unlefs  it  might  have  been  done 
by  Mr.  Pen  Am,  when  he  was  refolved  to  write  befier 
than  he  commonly  did. 

*443 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  all  written  &  tricked  by  the 
hand  of  Mr.  JohnWithie  the  Paper-Stainer,  who'hath 
given  it  the  Title  following, 

1.  The  Vifitation  of  the  Countie  of  Wilts  made  & 
taken  by  Henry  St.  George  Efq;  Richraond-FIeiald,  and 
bamplon  Lennard  Blew-mantle  ;  Marfhalls  &  Deputies 
to  William  Camden  Efq;  alias  Clarenceux  Kino-  0f 
Armes  of  the  South,  Eaft,  &  Weft  Parts  of  England, 
from  the  River  Trent,  Anno  Dom.  1623.  Together 
with  the  \  ilitation  of  the  faid  Countie,  taken  Anno  Dom. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


55 


Num.  1443—1445. 

1565.  by  William  Hervy  Clarenceux,  with  additions, 

&  continuations. 

!  T'  c  it  mull  be  underftood,  that  the  two  Vifitation- 
books  laid  to  be  contained  in  this  Volume,  are  not  feparate 
c.j  .  the  other;  but  that  the  Vifiof  1623.  is  grafted 

upon  '  Continuation  of  that  made  in  anno  1565. 

a  eryufeful  way  of  writing  Pedegrees  ;  although 
the  acquiring  of  each  feveral  Vifitation-book,  of  every 
County,  is  by  no  means  to  be  Teje&ed.  . 

:  In  this  kook,  befides  the  Defcents  &  Armes,  are 

.c  few  Tricks  of  Seals  &  private  Evidences  ;  and 

3.  The  Armes  5c  Supporters  of  the  Citie  of  New 

Sar.  i . 

4.  Seales  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  Wootton- 

Bafiet.  2. 

5.  Armes  belonging  to  the  Guild  &  Steward  of  the 

Towne  &  Borough  of  Caine.  3. 

6.  Seale  &  Armes  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  Marie- 

borough.  3.  b. 

7.  Armes  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  the  Devifes. 

.  .  4-b- 

8.  Armes  belonging  to  the  Felowlhipe  &c  Corporation 

of  the  Burgeffes  Merchant-Adventurers,  Clothiers, 
Weavers,  Drapers,  &  Taylors,  and  others  ufing  anie 
Art  or  Facultie  within  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  the 

Devifes,  5. 

9.  Common  Seale  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of 

Malmefburie.  6. 

10.  Common  Seale  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of 

Chipenham.  7. 

1 1 .  The  Names  of  thofe  of  that  were  difclaymed  at 

Salifbury  .  .  September,  Anno  1623.  210.  b. 

12.  Wooton -Baflet-Church-Notes,  taken  in  the  yeare 

1 6 16.  by  me  John  Withie.  25G. 

13.  Arms  in  the  Church  of  Chipnam  in  the  County 

of  Wilts,  taken  1616.  by  me  John  Withie.  237. 

14.  Armes,  See.  in  the  Church  of  Czwne  in  the 
County  of  Wilts,  taken  1616.  by  me  John  Withie. 

258. 

1 5.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 
whole  Pedegrees  are  herein  contained.  At  the  end. 

1 4-  -1-4' 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  Arms  of  fome  few  of  the  London-Gentry,  haftily 

tricked.  1 . 

2.  A  good  Number  of  the  Defcents  Sc  Arms  of  the 
London  Gentry,  copied  from  the  Vifitation-book  of  the 
fame  Ci  v  made  A.D.  1634.  by  Sir  Henry  St.George 
Richmond-Herald,  for  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Claren- 
ceux,  and  (as  I  remember)  Sir  John  Borough. 

3.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  abovementioned  Defcents. 
At  the  beginning. 

1445- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  all  written  Sc  tricked  by  the 

hand  of  Mr.  John  Withie  the  Painter-Stainer ;  who 

hath  given  this  Title  to  it, 

1.  The  Vifitation  of  the  Countie  of  Somerfett,  taken 
by  Henry  St.  George  Efq;  Richmond-Herald,  and 
Sampfon  Lennard  Blew-mantle,  Marlhalls  Sc  Deputies  to 
William  Camden  Efq;  Clarenceux,  King  of  Arms,  of 
the  South,  Eaft,  &  Weft  Parts  of  the  Realme  of  Eng¬ 
land,  from  the  River  of  Trent,  Anno  Domini  1613. 
With  th'e  Vifitation  as  made  Anno  Dorn.  1365.  Whether 
the  date  of  the  laft-mentioned  Vifitation,  viz.  1565.  be 
right,  I  now  not :  having  at  prefent,  no  other  knowledge 
of  any  Vifitation  made  of  this  County  in  that  year,  but 
from  hence.  Richard  Mifndys  book.  N°  1559.  maketh 
no  mention  of  any  fuch  ;  yet  it  appears  that  he  was 
diligent  in  getting  the  old  Vifitations,  having  tacked  his 
Defcents  taken  in  A.D.  1623.  to  thofe  taken  by  Raif 


Num.  1445—1447. 

Brooke  in  A.D.  1591.  Sc  alfo  to  thofe  taken  by  Robert 
Cooke  in  ann.  1 573.  which,  perhaps,  may  be  in  the 
Vifitation  that  Mr.  Withie  meant. 

In  this  Book,  befides  fome  few  Continuations, 
Proofs  from  Evidences,  and  Tricks  of  Family-Seals  ; 
I  find, 

2.  Common  Seals  of  the  City  of  Wells.  3. 

3.  Common  Seales  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of 

Bridgewater.  4. 

4-  Common  Seales  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  Ax- 
bridge.  5. 

5.  Common  Seales  &  Arms  of  the  Cittie  of  Bath.  6. 

6.  Church  Notes  taken  at  Taunton.  21.  b. 

7.  The  like  at  Bake  well.  24. 

8.  The  Names  of  thofe  that  ufurped  the  titles  of  Gen¬ 

tlemen  within  the  County  of  Somerfett ;  and  where  dif¬ 
claymed  at  Taunton,  16  Aug.  1623.  187. 

9.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  preceding  Pedegrees. 

272. 

to.  Church-Notes  taken  within  a  few  years  at  Bath  ; 
One  of  the  Epitaphs  being  dated  A.D.  1707.  276.  b. 

1446. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands  ; 
wherein  I  find  contained, 

1 .  An  imperfect  alphabetical  Table  to  the  two  next 

enfuing  Tracis.  3. 

2.  A  Copie,  as  it  Ihould  feem,  of  fome  old  Roll, 

containing  the  Arms  of  many  of  the  Kings  of  this 
Realm,  and  molt  of  the  Princes  of  the  Plantagenet- 
Familv :  concluding  with  the  Arms  of  Richard  of 
Bourdeaux,  before  he  was  King  ;  which  perhaps,  might 
be  added  t  >  the  fame  Roll,  which  otherwife  more 
regularly  ends  with  George  Duke  of  Clarence.  Written 
Sc  tricked  by  the  hand  of  Robert  Glover  Somerfet- 
Herald.  j  - 

3.  Part  of  an  Ordinary  of  Arms  in  Trick  ;  by  the  fame 

Robert  Glover.  2J. 

Within  the  faid  Ordinary,  are 

4.  Ten  Coats  born  by  the  name  of  Hunt  (inferted, 

perhaps  by  the  fame  John  Hunt,  who  hath  left  his  name 
written  at  the  'top  of  pag.  3.)  230. 

5.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Arms  exhibited  in  this 
Book. 

1447' 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  by  Mr.  Nicholas  Charles 

Lancalter,  relating  to  the  Order  of  the  Garter ;  wherein 

are  contained, 

1 .  A  Copye  of  the  Prefidcnt  of  the  moll  Honorable 

Order  of  the  Garter,  for  the  Livery  of  the  faid  Noble 
Ordcv  ;  as  to  Cloth,  Mynever,  &  Garters.  2. 

2.  T  hings  to  be  prepared  for  the  Inftallation  of  a 

Knighte  of  the  Garter.  2.  b. 

3.  Dutyes  i  i.  e.  Fees)  to  be  payd  by  the  Knights  of 

the  Gtlrter  at  there  Inftallation  at  Windfore,  accordinge 
to  their  Eftates.  ibid. 

4.  Dutyes  to  be  payd  by  every  Knight  of  the  Garter, 

at  his  firft  entry.  ibid. 

5.  Dutyes  to  be  payd  for  the  Soules  health  of  every 
Knight  of  the  Garter,  after  theire  Eftate  and  Degree. 

3- 

6.  Charges  belonginge  to  the  Kinges  Leiftenant  at  the 

fcaft  of  Saynt  George.  ibid. 

7.  The  Othe  of  Garter  principall  Kinge  of  Armes,  the 

Scribe  taking  the  fame,  before  the  Sovereigne  and  Com- 
panyons  of  this  moll  noble  Order.  3.  b. 

8.  Certeyne  Dutyes  which  Garter  Kinge  at  Armes  of 

the  Honorable  Order,  ought  truly  to  have  of  the  Sove¬ 
reigne  and  the  reft  of  the  Company  yerelie.  ibid. 

9.  The  Statutes  &  Ordinances  of  the  moft  noble  &: 
honorable  Order  of  Sayht  George,  naitled  the  Garttr, 

reformed. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  14+7,  1448. 

Reformed,  explayned,  declared,  and  alfo  renewed  by 
K.  Henry  vin.  with  two  additional  Statutes.  4. 

1  o.  An  Order  to  be  obferved  &  kepte  by  the  Knights 
of  the  noble  Order  of  the  Garter,  beinge  abfent  from 
the  Royall  Majeftie,  uppon  Saynt  Georges  daye.  9. 

1 1.  A  Letter  by  the  Kinge  to  a  Knight  new  elected. 

9b- 

1 2.  The  Knight’s  Othe  that  is  new  defied.  ibid. 

13.  A  Licence  for  a  Knight  of  the  Garter  in  beinge 

abfent  from  the  Feaft  of  Saynt  George.  ibid. 

14.  The  Order  how  a  Knight  of  the  Garter  is  de¬ 
graded  at  the  Colledge  of  Windefore  ;  exemplified  in 
the  Cafe  of  Edward  Stafford  Duke  of  Buckingham.  10. 

15.  Of  the  Inflitution  of  the  Order  of  the  Garter .5 

with  the  time  &  occafion  thereof.  10.  b. 

1 6.  The  Armes  &  Crefts  of  the  feveral  Sovereigns  & 
Knights  of  the  Garter;  fome  of  them  in  Colours.  11. 

This  Traci  goes  do  wn  to  King  James  the  Firft,  being 
done  by  fome  good  hand,  and  containing  befides,  fome 
Notes  relating  to  divers  of  the  faid  Knights  :  in  liis  Raign 
it  goeth  on  to  Karre  Vifcount  Rochefler,  inftalled  1  3 
May  16 1  x.  whofe  armes,  with  thofe  of  the  two  before 
him,  and  divers  of  the  Titles,  are  plainly  of  the  hand  of 
Mr.  Nicholas  Charles  Lancafter- Herald.  From  thence  it 
is  continued  in  a  worfe  manner,  moftly  by  John  Withie 
to  James  Stuart  Duke  of  York  &  Albanie,  lately  King  by 
the  title  of  James  11. 

17.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  precedent  Arms  of  the 

Knights  of  the  Garter.  75. 

18.  John  Withies  Lift  cf  Knights  of  the  Garter,  from 

Algernon  Percie  Earl  of  Northumberland,  to  Henry  Ben- 
net  Earl  of  Arlington.  78. 

19.  Part  of  Pope  Gelafius  his  Decree  exploding  the 

Hiftory  of  the  Paflion  of  St.  George.  79. 

20.  Lift  of  Authors  who  make  mention  of  him  ;  to 
■which  might  be  added  the  Martyrologium  Romanum  ; 
the  Anglo-Saxon  Menologium  ;  fome  accounts  of  his 
Paftion  in  Greek  in  the  Bodleyan  Library  ;  another  in 
Arabic  ;  and  another  both  in  Coptic  &  Arabic,  all  in 
the  fame  place.  This  Lift  &  the  laft  Article,  feem  to 
be  of  the  hand  of  William  Camden  Clarenceux. 

1448. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  divers 
hands  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  to  the  Defcents  of  the  Nor- 
thumberland-Gentry,  made  by  Sir  Henry  St.  George  the 
elder.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Arines  of  fome  of  the  Gentlemen  of  the  County  of 
Northumberland;  haftily  tricked  by  John  Withie.  1. 

3.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of 
Northumberland,  as  the  fame  was  made  and  taken  A.D. 
1615.  by  Richard  St.  George  Norroy,  and  in  his  Com¬ 
pany  Henry  St.  George  Blew-mantle,  abovementioned. 

Obfervables  in  this  Copie,  may  be, 

4.  Tricks  of  the  Seals  &  Arms  of  the  Towne  of  New- 

Caftle  upon  Tyne.  j  _  ^ 

5.  Seal  of  the  Towne  &  Burroughe  of  Berwicke 

uppon  Tweede.  ^ 

6.  Four  Coats  borne  by  the  name  of  Collingwood. 

inter  13  &  j4. 

7.  The  Defcent  of  Carr  of  Woodhall,  is  of  the  hand 

of  the  fame  Sir  Henry  St.  George.  19.  b 

8.  The  Defcent  of  Lille  of  Fenton,  is  of  the  fame 

band.  27. 

9-  Here  are  very  many  Tranfcripts  of  &  Extrafts  from 
private  Deeds  ;  many  Tricks  of  private  Seals;  with 
feme  continuations*  &  additional  Defcents. 


Num.  1449;  1450. 

r449- 

Aft  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Jacob 

Chaloner  the  Painter-Stainer ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  Anns  of  the  Dukes,  Marquifes,  Earls,  Barons,  & 
antient  Knights  of  the  County  of  Suffolk  :  with  fome  few 
additional  Arms.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Jufticiarij  de  Com.  Suffolcite  A.D.  1601. 

3.  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of  Suf¬ 
folk,  as  the  fame  was  made  &  taken  A.D.  1561.  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Hervey  Clarenceux,  with  large  continuations,  and 
fome  additional  Defcents  and  Arms  :  as  well  by  the 
Hand  of  the  fame  Jacob  Chaloner,  as  of  others.  1. 

Herein  I  alfo  find, 

4.  The  Seal  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  Sudbury. 

37. 

5.  Seal  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  Aldborough. 

44. 

6.  Seal  of  the  Borough  &  Corporation  of  Dunwiche. 

63.  . 

7.  Arms  &  Seal  of  the  Towne  &  Corporation  of 

Southwolde.  fi4.  b. 

8.  Seal  of  the  Corporation  of  the  Towne  of  Orford. 

67.  b. 

9.  Achievement  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  Ipf- 

wichc.  69.  b. 

10.  Divers  Arms  &  Crefts  born  by  the  names  of 

Sm'ythe.  95. 

1 1 .  Pedegree  of  Woodhoufe,  of  John  Saunders’* 

hand.  9g> 

12.  Epitaphs  &  Arms  for  fome  of  the  Bokenhams. 

Inferted  after,  IOI> 

13.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Defcents  in  the  above- 
mentioned  Vifitation-book  of  Suffolk.  At  the  end. 

x  4.  Arms-  of  Hobart,  Sibthorpe,  &  Peck,  See.  In  the 
laft  Page. 


1450. 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  containing  divers  Fragments  of 
divers  hands ;  viz. 

Certain  Pedegrees  formerly  bound  up  together  with 
others,  as  it  feemeth  :  there  now  remaining, 

1.  Pedegree  of  Thorold  of  Morton  in  Com.  Lincoln* 
with  Arms. 

2.  Defcent  of  Hull,  alias  Hill  de  Olvefton  in  Com. 

Glouceftr.  dated  A.D.  1623.  3. 

3.  Pedegree  of  Berkeley,  dated  A.D.  1 634.  with 

many  Proofs,  Arms,  &  Seals.  3.b.  6.  b. 

4*  Defcents  &  Arms  of  Grofvenor  of  Sutton-Colfield 
in  Com.  War.  dat.  A.D.  1619.  c.b. 

5.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Grafton.  g.  h. 

6.  Defcent  of  Cave  of  Leigh-hynton  inComWorceftr. 

7.  Defcent  of  Skinner  of  Ledbury  in  Com.  Herod 

furd-  10.  b. 

8.  Defcent  &  Armes  of  Lilly  of  Broraefgrave.  1 2. 

9.  Defcent  of  Wheeler  of  Drokwich  in  Com.Wigorn. 

10.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  James  Aftley  in  Com. 
Wigorn.  dat.  A.  D.  1634.  written  by  John  Withie. 

1 4. 

Then  follow, 

11.  A  good  Number  of  Armes  promifeuous,  haftily 
tricked  by  John  Withie  ;  and  by  him  intended  to 
be  entred  into  the  new  Booke  of  Certificates.  j  - 

Lrftly, 

.  I2‘  Some  loofe  Sheets  of  paper,  all  fingle  ;  contain¬ 
ing  fome  Account  of  the  Nobility  of  Spaine.  written  (as 
I  fuppofe  by  the  Croffes.  at  the  icp  of  every  Page)  by 
fomePap  .fi;  who  perhaps  might  be  a,  fugitive  there.  " 

4 


An 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae* 


57 


Num.  1451)  1452. 

T45T* 

An  Her.ilJ'cal  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  the 

hand  of  John  Withie  the  Painter-Stainer ;  &  by  him 

thus  cntitulcd, 

r.  “  I  he  Visitation  of  the  Countie  of  Dorfett,  made 
Sc  taken  by  Henry  St.  George  Efq.  Richmond-Herauld, 
and  Sampfon  Lennard  Blew-mantle,  Marflialls  &  Depu¬ 
ties  to  "V  iiliam  Camden  Efq.  Clarenceux,  King  of  Arms, 
&c.  Anno  Dom.  162?.  Together  with  the  Vifitation 
made  A.D.  t  $65.  by  William  Hervey Clarenceux?  upon 
which  the  other  is  grounded. 

In  this  Book  1  find, 

2 .  I  he  Seales  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  Dorchefter. 

3. 

.3*  File  Annes  8:  Seale  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of 
Bridport.  ^ 

4.  The  Seales  of  Weymouth  &  Melcomb-Regis  united 
&  made  one  Towne  by  Aft  of  Parliament ;  anno  1  7 
Eliz. 

5.  The  Armes  &  Common  Seale  of  the  Towne  & 
Borough  of  Poole. 

0.  The  Names  of  thofe  that  were  difclaimed  at  Brid- 
porte,  &  at  Dorchefter,  A.D.  1623.  146.  b. 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Defcents  in  this  Book  ; 
at  the  end. 

_8.  At  the  beginning  is  a  Lift  of  fome  of  the  Dorfot- 
finre  Gentlemen,  who  were  (as  it  feemeth)  in  the  Com- 
million  of  the  Peace  ;  in  a  more  recent  hand. 


A  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  for  the  mod  part,  by 

Mr.  Sampfon  Lennard  Blew-mantle;  wherein  are  con¬ 
tained, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  to  the  Traft,  mentioned  in 

the  fourth  Article.  ! 

2.  Notes  touching  the  noble  Families  owners  of  the 

Caftles,  &c.  in  Kent.  ^ 

3.  Some  Acct.  of  the  Contents  of  this  Book.  4. 

4.  A  Collection  of  the  Arms  of  many  Englifh  & 
other  Families  ;  partly  in  order  alphabetical,  8c°  partly 
without  order. 


4.  b. 


5.  Armes  of  certain  antient  Families,  in  Blazon.  24. 

6.  Arms  borne  by  divers  eminent  Perfonages  of  the 
County  of  Devon ;  fome  of  them  found  in  Churches. 

25. 

7.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Devonfhire,  in  Blazon  ; 

putt  down  alphabetically.  ’ 

8.  Arms  of  Charles,  &  of  Hudfon  ;  both  of  War- 

wickfhire  ;  with  the  Crcft  of  Odingfells.  29. 

9.  Arms  of  the  Leicefterfhire  Gentry,  alphabetically. 

ic.  Arms  of  fome  other  Leicefterfhire  Families.  32! 
ii.  Arms  of  the  Gentlemen  of  the  County  of  Lincoln. 

s  12.  Arms  of  the  Gentlemen  of  the  County  of  Lan- 
•cafter;  mod  of  them  in  way  of  Alphabet.  '  39. 

13.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  EfTex.  45. 

14.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Suffolk. 

hr  Alphabetical  Table  containing  the  Names  of  fome 
of  the  Families  mentioned  in  this  book.  52.  b. 

16.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Norfolk. 

17.  The  beginning  of  an  Alphabet  of  Arms,  for5 the 

County  of  Norfolk  ;  in  Blazon.  -3 

18.  The  Coppie  of  Sir  William  Fairfax’s  Book  of 

Armes  for  Yorkefheire.  .g  ^ 

19.  Arms  &  Creft  of  Beke  of  Artey  in  Com;  Berks. 

63.  b.  * 

20.  Alphabet  of  Arms  in  Blazon,  of  the  Cornilh 

Gentry.  6 

Cat.  Harl.  •  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1452,  1453. 


21.  Arms  with  Crefts,  or  Ouarterings,  of  divers  Faa 

mihes-  65.  b. 

22.  Part  of  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux  his  Treatife. 

concerning  the  Creations  of  the  Nobility  of  England : 
as  it  feemeth ;  but  larger,  in  many  places,  than  fome 
other  Copies  of  the  fame.  g7.  to  gu 

H53* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  for  the  mod  part  tricked  & 
written  by  Nicholas  Charles,  Lancafter-Hcrald;  where¬ 
in  are  contained, 

1.  An  imperfeft  account  of  the  Contents  of  thisBook. 

by  John  Withie  ;  at  the  beginning.  j 

2.  A  Collection  of  Arms  &  Crefts,  granted  or  con¬ 
firmed  by  Robert  Cooke  Ciarenceux.  2. 

Heiein  I  obferve,  befides  fome  explanatory  Notes 

3.  A  lhort  Defcent  of  Marlor.  '  P’ 

4.  A  lhort  Defcent  of  Wardour.  , 

Then  followeth, 

5*  A  ft  raft  of  Ralph  Brooke,  or  Brokefmouth  Yorke 
Herault,  under  this  Title,  “  DyVeric  Guifts  of  Armes 
palled  by  Sir  William  Dethick  when  he  was  Garter;  as 
they  were  informed  to  the  Earle  of  Effex  Earle  Marfhall 
of  England,  by  York  Herald.”  But  Ralph’s  own  Title 
followeth  m  thefe  words ;  «  A  Catalogue  of  a  few 

Armes  &  Crefts  as  hath  byn  given  by  William  Dethick 
now  called  Garter,  with  fome  Note  of  other  hisAbufes 
maynteyned  and  lyked  of  by  fome  his  followers  new- 
elefted  Officers  of  Armes,  which  have  byn  Brokers  for 
the  fame.”  g2 

Herem  hpneft  Ralph  endeavors  to  take  away  Sir 
u  ilham  Dethick’s  reputation;  if  he  had  any  left.  What 
became  of  this  Complaint  I  cannot  yet  tell;  but  Sir  Wil- 

H^IHaSllTedifUtr0f  Ilis  °ffice  of  Garter  (or,  as  the 
Heralds  had  rather  by,  Depofed”)  for  freih  matter. 

6.  Other  Arms  &  Crefts  granted  or  confirmed  by  the 

fame  Sir  William  Dethick.  ; 

Here  alfo  feem  to  be  fome  of  Sir  Gilbert  DethiCk 
Garter;  father  to  the  faid  Sir  William  ;  with  Ralph 
Brookes  Epilogue  or  Conclufion,  written  by  another 

7.  Grant  of  Arms,  &c.  to  the  Company  of  Glovers, 

or  Leather  Sellers  of  London,  by  John  Smart  Garter, 
A.D.  1464, by  John  Moore,  Norroy,  20  May,  19  Edw. 
iv.  and  by  Roger  Machado  Richmond,  7th  Nov  A  D 
1505.  as  they  were  confirmed  at  the  Vifitation  of  Loni 
don  by  Str  Henry  St.  George  Richmond,  A. D.  ,  Sra 
and  by  ins  Ton  Sr. Henry  St.George  Clarenceux,  A.D. 
1687.  written  &  tricked  by  John  Saunders.  tor. 

8.  Arms  &  Crefts  granted  or  confirmed  unto  many 
families,  by  William  Camden  Clarenceux,  Sir  William 
Segar  Garter,  Sir  William  Dethick  Garter,  Sr.  Richard 
St.  George  Norroy,  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux,  Richard 
Lee  Clarenceux;  and  perhaps  by  others;  with  fome 
Notes  by  Mr.  Nicholas  Charles  Lancafter-Hcrald.  127. 

It  feemeth  as  if  Sir  William  Segar  upon  infpeflim; 
this  Traft,  did  not  approve  of  the  making  mention  of 
his  Name  therein;  which  might  occafton  foie  marginal 
Notes,  atpagg.  i28,  ,a9,  ,30,  I3,;  ij6j  ,38, 

9.  Here  is  alfo  a  fhort  Defteht  of  Cooper.  , ... 

10.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Names  of  Families 

whofe  Arms  are  exhibited  in  this  Book,  thus  far.  u,  ’ 

I  hen  followeth,  • 

’  '■  A"othel'  CoIIecftion  of  Arms  of  divers  of  the  No¬ 
bility  &  Gentry,  with  Crefts,  or  Supporters,  or  Mottoes, 

r  ™.s  rSSl  aVm  .7  "  Wch  Arms>  are  a* 

Grants,  all  tricked  promifeuoufly.  •  j  ^ 

Some  of  thefe  Teeming  more  remarkable  than  the 
relt,  1  take  leave  to  mention, 

2 


13.  The 


5« 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1453-,  14.54- 

12.  The  Arms  of  Gilbert  Lord  Talbott  &  Earle  ot 
Shrewfbury  as  they  were  marlhalled  in  his  lad  Pedegree. 

146. 

13-  The  Armes  of  the  Lord  Fitz-Hugh,  with  thofe 
of  his  Wife ;  as  they  were  embroidered  upon  an  old 
Cope.  146.  b. 

14.  The  Armes  of  the  Earle  of  Pembroke,  as  they 

were  marlhalled  for  him  on  St.  Georges  day,  1610.  by 
me  Nich.  Charles  l.ancaller.  *47* 

15.  Arms  of  Hellen  the  daughter  of  George  (or 

Wolfgangus  as  in  Dugd.  Baronage)  Suavenburg,  a  Sue- 
dilh  Nobleman,  wife  to  William  Parre  Marquis  ol  Nor¬ 
thampton.  I47* 

1 6.  Arms  of  Conway  with  Quarterings ;  to  the  fecond 

Coat  whereof,  there  is  no  name  ;  it  being  Wellh,  and 
that  Nation  formerly  had  no  Surnames.  149.  b. 

17.  The  Arms  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scotts  as  Dolphinefs 

of  Ffance,  quartering  thole  of  England  without  dif¬ 
ference.  1 5°- 

1 8.  Arms  &  Crefts  of  four  Families  of  the  name  of 

Darrell.  150.  b. 

19.  Arms  of  Henry  de  la  Tour  Duke  of  Bouillon, 

by  fome  called  Henry  de  la  Marche.  *  5 1  • 

20.  Arms  of  Louys  del  Hofpital  Baron  de  Vitrye. 

151.6. 

21.  Arms  of  Peneftone,  with  Quarterings,  6c  13 

Crelts.  157- 

22.  Arms  of  Sir  Edward  Cary,  with  Quarterings  6c 
ijCrefls. 

2,'.  Arms  of  Sir  Thomas  Knevit  Baron  of  Efcrick, 
with  Supporters,  &  13  Crelts.  158.13. 

24..  Arms  of  Grave  Maurice  Prince  of  Orange,  with 
Quarterings,  6c. 3  Crelts.  ^  *59; 

w.  25.  Achievement  of  the  Lord  Spencer,  impaling  Wil¬ 
loughby;  with  Quarterings,  &  6  Crefts.  160. 

36.  Arms  of  Chetwood,  with  Creft,  Quarterings,  6c 
Supporters.  1 60.  b. 

27.  Atchievement  of  Henry  Howard  Earl  of  Surrey; 

for  which  he  was  attainted.  161. 

28.  Arms  of . with  Quarterings. 

162. 


Then  follow, 

29.  Arms  of  divers  Citizens,  Sherriffes,  6c  Aldermen 
of  London.  463* 

3®.,  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Arms  above-mentioned, 
from  N*  1 1 .  inclufive.  1 64-  b. 

,31.  The  Names  of  all  thofe  that  have  had  Armes 
graunted  unto  them  by  William  Flower  Efq.  alias  Norroy 
king  of  Armes.  fince  the  tyme  of  his  Creation  &  Co¬ 
ronation  ;  which  was  on  Shrovetuefday  the  8th  of  Fe¬ 
bruary  i;6i.  166. 

32.  The  Names  of  thofe  Ferfons  to  whome  William 
Fiower  Kinge  of  Armes  hath  delivered  Patentes  of  Arms, 
iince  the  tyme  that  the  Right  Honourable  George  Earl 
of  Shrewlbury  hath  been  Erie  Marefchall  of  England, 
viz.  ab  anno  1573.  to  this  prefent  1585.  168. 

The  two  laft  Articles  feem  to  be  of  the  hand- writing 
©f  Robert  Glover  Somerfet-Herald. 


*454- 

An  Accompt  Book  in  fol.  placed  in  this  Library  only  to 
preferve  the  latter  part  of  it,  as  containing, 
t.  The  Polling-book  of  the  Accompts  of  Stephen 
Huigons  (vid.  fol.  44.)  Apothecary  of  London,  from  4th 
May  1594.  to  29th  Oclob.  1605.  1. 

2.  A  like  book  of  fome  other  Apothecary',  beginning 

atA.D.  1646.  and  ending  A.  D.  1 661.  62. b. 

Then  follow, 

3.  Some  Papers  relating  to  the  Combination  of  the 
Painter  Stainers  of  London,  who  agreed  .to  work  in  one 
common  Room  as  a  Society,  which  was  to  be’governed 
by  a  Prefident,  Treafurer,  6cc. 


Num.  1454-1457. 

This  Society  was  to  lay  down  fuch  a  fum  of  Money 
at  firlt ;  each  Man  according  to  his  Proportion  ;  they 
were  to  work  each  Man  in  his  turn,  not  in  their  own 
Houfes,  but  in  the  common-working  Room;  what  was 
received  by  any  perfon,  for  work  befpoke  of  him,  was 
to  be  brought  to  the  Treafurer,  whofe  Accompts  were 
audited  Quarterly,  and  a  Dividend  made  of  the  Money 
remaining  in  his  hands.  This  Society  began  about  3d 
March  1686-7.  *53" 

4.  The  Accompt  of  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  firft  Trea¬ 

furer  co  this  new  Society  ;  being  audited  Quarterly,  and 
fairly  cleared  off  at  the  year’s  end.  1 55.  b. 

5.  The  Accompt  of  Jeremiah  Wright.  Painter  Stainer, 
chofen  the'  fecond  Treafurer,  29th  March  1688.  to  O6I0- 
ber  following;  without  any  Quarterly  audit.  175.  b. 

6.  Notes  of  Parcels  of  Goods  of  divers  kind  ;  re¬ 

lating  to  Mr.  Saunders’s  Accompt;  where  (like  as  in  the 
fame  Account)  may  be  found  the  hand-writing  of  divers 
of  thefe  Painters.  181.  b. 


1455- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almofl  wholly  tricked  & 
written  by  Mr.JohnWithie  thePainter-Stainer;  where- 
•  in  are  contained, 

1.  An  imperfect  Table  to  the  enfuing  Treatife. 

2.  A  Colle&ion  of  Arms  &  Crefts,  borne  by  different 
Families  of  the  fame  Surname  ;  or  of  Surnames  fome- 
what  agieeing  in  Sound,  or  Writing  ;  tricked  in  printed 
Efcocheons.  Very  ufeful. 

1456. 

A  large  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  all  done  by  the  hand  of 
Mr.  John  Withie  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

The  Atchievements  of  the  Englifh  Nobility,  living 
about  the  1 6th  year  of  K.  Charles  1.  all  painted  with 
lively  colours. 

I457* 

An  Arms-book  in  large  fol.  all  written  &  tricked  within. 
printedEfcocheons  by  Mr.  John  launders  the  Painter- 
Stainer,  who  (as  I  believe)  caufed  it  to  be  entituled 
on  the  back,  “All  Countys  Armes.”  It  contain¬ 
ed  indeed,  the  Arms  of  the  Nobility  6c  Gentry  of 
moll  of  the  Counties  of  England,  to  each  of  which, 
there  is  a  feparate  Table  at  the  end  (although  one 
general  Table  would  have  done  better)  which  Tables 
being  not  very  eafy  to  find  ;  1  fhall  direct  the  Reader 
to  them,  at  the  lame  time  as  I  mention  the  Counties 
they  refer  to.  Omitting  therefore  the  Table  of  Shires 
at  the  beginning,  I  find  herein, 

1.  Arms  of  the  Cornilh  Gentry,  with  fome  Crefts, 

The  Table  is  at  fol.  3  60.  b.  1 . 

2.  Arms  of  the  Wiitfhire  Gentry ;  with  fome  Crefts. 

The  Table  is  at  fol.  360.  b.  13. 

3.  Arms  of  the  Hertfordfhire  Gentry;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  361.  17. 

4.  Arms  of  the  Staftordfhire  Gentry ;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  361.  b.  20. 

5.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Cumberland;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  362.  &  380.  24.231. 

6.  Arms  of  the  Buckinghamfhire  Gentry  ;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  362.  b.  25.  b. 

7.  Arms  of  the  Dorletfhire  Gentry ;  with  fome  Crefts. 

The  Table  at  363.  32. 

8.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Berkfhire; 
with  fome  Crefts.  The  'fable  at  363.  b.  35.  300.  b. 

9.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Gloucefterlhire ;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  364.  _  37.  b. 

10.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Lincolnlhire ;  with  lome 

Crefts.  The'iable  at  364.  b.  372.  41.  150. 

11.  Arras 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


59 


Num.  1457,  1458. 

ji.  Arms  of  the  Eflex  Gentry  ;  with  fome  Crefts. 
The  Table  at  365.  b. 

12.  Arms  of  the  Kentilh  Gentry  j  with  fome  Crclts. 

The  Table  at  366.  b.  63.  b.  288. 

1 3.  Arms  of  the  Leicefterfhire  Gentry ;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  367.  7 3. 

14.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Worcef- 
ter;  with  fome  Crefts.  The  Table  at  367.  b.  82. 

15.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Surrey; 

with  fome  Crefts.  The  Table  at  368.  85. 

1 6.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  in  the  Bifhoprick  of  Durham ; 

with  fome  Crefts.  The  Table  at  368.  b.  92. 

17.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Sufiex; 

with  fome  Crefts.  The  Table  at  369.  97. 

18.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Bedfordfhire;  with  fome 
Crefts.  The  Tables  at  369.  b.  &  380.  b.  103.  307. 

1 9-  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Norfolk  ‘ 
with  fome  Crefts.  The  Table  31370.  ic6. 

20.  Arms  of  the  Suffolk-Gentry ;  with  fome  Crefts. 

The  Table  at  370.  b.  ! 

21.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  Chefhire ;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  371.  J29. 

~2.  Arms  of  the  Lancalhire  Gentry ;  without  Crefts. 
The  Table  at  372.  b.  «59*  b. 

23.  Arms  of  theHampfhire  Gentry;  with  fome  Crefts, 
The  Table  at  37S.  not  completed.  163  b.  2,7. 

,  24,  Arms  of  the  Yorkihire Gentry;  with  fomeCrelts. 
The  Tables  at  373.  374.377.  164. 

25.  Arms  ot  the  Northumberland  Gentry;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  38c.  '  233. 

26.  Arms  of  the  Northamptordhire  Gentry;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  375.  b.  236.297. 

27.  Arms  of  the  Somerfetfixire-Gentry ;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  376.  241. 

28.  Arms  of  the  Devonlhire  Gentry;  with  fome  Crefts. 

The  Table  at  376.  b.  242. 

29.  Arms  of  the  Warwickfhire  Gentry ;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  377.  254. 

30.  Arms  of  the  Cambridgelhire  Gentry;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  377.  b.  262. 

31.  Arms  of  the  ShroplhireGentry ;  with  fome  Crefts. 

The  Table  at  377.  b.  267. 

32.  Arms  of  the  Hamfhire  Gentry;  with  fome  Crefts. 

The  Table  at  378.  ’  277.  164. 

33.  Arms  of  the  Oxfordfhire  Gentry;  with  fome  Crefts. 

The  Table  at  378.  b.  *  283. 

34.  Arms  of  the  Derbylhire  Gentry;  with  fomeCrelts. 

The  Table  at  379.  "  289. 

35.  Arms  of  the  Nottinghamlhire  Gentry;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  379.  '  2gi. 

36.  Arms  of  the  Hereford  (hire  Gentry ;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  379.  b.  294. 

37.  Arms  of  the  Hunting donlhire  Gentry;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  omitted.  '  31 1.  b. 

38.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  in  MiJdlefex ;  with  fome 

Crefts.  The  Table  at  379.  b.  .:4i 

39.  Arms  of  the  London  Gentry;  with  fome  Crefts. 

The  Table  at  380.  334. 

NB.  The  Arms  of  the  Rutlamffhire  Gentry  are 
omitted ;  and  that  in  divers  of  the  other  Counties  the 
Arms  are  taken  from  more  than  one  Vifitation-book  ; 
not  to  mention  here  the  Arms  of  the  Lincolnfti  ire  Families, 
from  the  Paintings  in  the  Lord  Treafurer’s  Gallery  at 
Theobalds,  which  is  alfo  included  therein. 

1458. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  tricked  &  written  by  ...  . 
. &  containing, 

1.  An  Ordinary  of  Arms  tricked  in  printed  Efcochons. 

2.  Rough  Draught  of  a  Table  to  this  numerous  Col¬ 
lection  of  Arms. 


Num.  1459,  1460. 


1459. 

A  thick  Heraldical  Book  in  fol .  before  fol.  I .  thus  en- 
titulcd; 

1 .  “  This  is  a  true  Coppic  of  a  Booke  of  Armes 
(otherwife  called  a  Booke  of  Ordinaries)  whit  h  was 
tricked  and  written  by  the  hands  of  the  late  worthy  Gen¬ 
tleman  Robert  Glover  Efq.  Somerfet-Herauld  ;  but  put 
into  a  more  ample  &  pluyne  order  &  methode,  and  alfo 
inlargcd  (the  which  you  Ihull  finde  marked  &c  written 
with  Vermillion!  by  mee  John  Withie,  1628.” 

Befides  which,  Mr.  Withie  hath  alfo  written  herein. 

2.  A  Table  (for  expedition)  to  finde  out  every  thing 
of  fpeciall  Note,  conteyned  in  : his  Booke:  that  is,  fhevv- 
ing  the  method  ufed  in  this  Ordinary.  At  the  begin¬ 
ning. 

At  the  end  is  a  Table,  by  Mr.  JohnWithie  thu'  en¬ 
titled,  “  An  alphabeticall  Callender  (readily)  to  finde 
out  every  perticuler  Name  in  his  Page. 

4.  Some  few  Additions  have  been  made  by  Mr.  Saun¬ 
ders  to  this  Ordinary;  which  is  all  along  tricked  in 
printed  Efcocheons. 

It  is  plain  by  the  date,  that  Mr.  Withie  made  this 
excellent  Book  when  he  was  but  a  young  man;  which 
.may  be  the  feafon  why  it  doth  not  contain  all  the  Arms 
found  in  other  Books  that  came  to  his  hands.  1  obferve 
this,  not  by  way  of  detraction  from  his,  or  Mr  Glover’s 
labours,  but  to  encourage  the  Reader,  if  he  cannot  find 
a  defired  Coat  in  this  great  Collection,  not  to  forbear 
confulting  others,  although  they  may  be  in  many  relpeCts 
inferior  to  this. 

1460. 

An  Heraldical  &  Hiftorical  Book  in  fol.  written  by  the 
hand  &  painted  or  illuminated  with  Metals  &  Colors, 
by  the  order  of  a  whimfical  Author,  one  Paine  or 
Fitz-Paine  Filher  ;  who  afterwards  died  in  the  Fleet, 
as  I  have  heard  ;  having  printed  many  Encomiums 
and  Compliments  on  thole  who  had  been  eminent 
for  their  Loyalty  to  King  Charles  I.  This  Book  con- 
taineth, 

1.  lhe  Atchievement  of  an  Emperor  of  FitzrPaine’s 
own  making  ;  with  the  following  Inlcription, 

**  Infignia  tarn  hsereditaria  quam  honoraria  fere- 
mfiimi  praipotentiffitaique  Principis  Olivari  D.  G.  Ang. 
Scot.  Hib.  cum  Dominijs  prope  longiufque  jacentibus, 
Protectoris,  nec  non  Imperatoris  femper  Augufti.” 

2.  As  to  the  Work  itfelf ;  it  beareth  this  Title,  “A 
perfeCt  Regift ry  of  all  the  Collours  (and  Standards)  taken 
from  the  Scotts  at  Prefton  in  the  County  of  Lancafter, 
by  the  then  Lieutenant-Generall  Cromwell,  anno  1648. 
As  alfo,  of  all  the  Collours  both  of  H»rfe  &  Foot,  taken 
from  the  Scorts  at  Dunbarr  in  Scotland,  by  his  then 
Excellency,  the  Lord  Generali  Cromwell,  3d  Sept.  1650. 
And  for  the  perpetuall  Memoriall  of  thole  fignall  Tro¬ 
phies  of  his  Highnefle  Victories  &  Valour  to  fucceeding 
Ages;  carefully  collected  &  compiled  by  FF.  FF.  (f. 
Fitz-Paganum  Filherum,  Fitz-Pagani  filium)  Hiftoriol 
grapher  of  his  Highnefle  Warres  in  Irland  &  Scotland. 

fhefe  Standards  &  Colours  were  in  number  223. 
and  are  all  of  them,  or  fo  much  of  them  as  remained, 
reprefented  in  this  Book,  which  looks  as  if  defigned  for 
the  prefen  t  Book. 

3.  But  before  the  faid  Colours,  is  a  Dedication  to 
Oliver’s  Privy  Councellors,  each  of  whofe  Arms  are  done 
with  proper  Metals  &  Colors,  in  the  following  ftyle,  “Ad 
Olivari  Dei  Grat.  Ang.  Scot.  Hib.  cum  ditionibus  cir- 
cumj.'.ceniibm,  nec  non  infularum  longius  Occidentahum 
peramplilfimi  ProteCtoris,  et  Imperatoris  femper  Au- 
-gufti  Confilia  cooptaus,  Dorn.  Primoribus,  Patrkeq;  fua: 
Luminibus  eminentiflimis :  eruditiflimo  Domino  Dorn. 
Henrico  Laurentio  pra^dicti  Concilij  Proefidi  perquam 
Prudentifiimo — &c. — Fitz-Paganus  Pifcator  bocce  per- 
petuum  Obfervantia:  Monumentuoi. 

9 


1461.  An 


Co  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1461—1463. 

1461. 

A nl Ieraldlcnl  Book  in  fol.  tricked  in  printedEfcocheons, 
&  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Pa  inter- 
Stainer  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  Fragment  of  a  Collection  of  the  different  Arms, 
born  by  different  Families  of  the  fame  name  :  this  was 
defigned  to  be  put  down  in  way  of  Alphabet,  but  pro- 
cedeth  no  farther  than  the  names  of  Ablyn,  Aburton, 
Abewe,  Alford,  Amory,  Alton,  Arundel  1,  &  Adlon. 

2.  A  Collection  of  Armes,  with  fome  Crefts,  of  that 

kind  which- fomc  call  Rebus  alluding  for  the  moft  part, 
to  the  fur-name  of  the  Bearer ;  and  fometimes  to  his 
original,  manners,  or  qualifications.  1. 

3.  A  Collection  of  Arms  &  Crefts,  granted  or  con¬ 

firmed  by  divers  Kings  of  Arms,  unto  many  perfons  & 
families  (J  believe  moft  of  them  were  copied  from  the 
book  8  .  .C.  14.  and  will  therefore  make  no  farther  men¬ 
tion  of  it.)  47. 

4.  A  large  Collection  of  Arms,  with  this  Title, 

“  Worke  begun  &  carried  on  by  a  common  Confent  of 
Arms-Painters,  at  a  publick  Workhoufe,  from  April  the 
4th  1687.  to  the  6th  of  Auguft  1694.  111. 

This  ufeful  Regiftre  fheweth  alfo  riot  only  the  name 
of  the  DefunCt,  &  the  time  when  the  work  was  befpoke 
(which  to  be  fure  was  foon  after  body  &  foul  were 
feparated)  but  the  Quantity  of  work  fo  ordered,  and 
the  name  of  the  Perfon  who  furniftied  the  fame. 

5.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames.  At  the  end. 

1462. 

A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  to  which  Mr.  JohnWithie 
hath  prefixed  this  Title, 

r.  “  The  Names,  Armes,  &  Creafts,  of  all  the  Knights 
.  of  the  Bath,  made  at  the  Coronation  of  King  James, 
1103.  at  the  Creation  of  Charles  Duke  of  York;  at  the 
Ovation  of  Henry  Prince  of  Wales;  at  the  Creation  of 
•  Charles  Prince  of  Wales;  and  at  the  Coronation  of 
King  Charles,  1625.  all  in  their  due  rank  &  place, 
written  &  nicked  (in  Efcocheons  with  Mantles  &  Hel¬ 
mets  all  printed)  by  the  fame  John  Withie.  1. 

Then  follow, 

2.  The  Names  and  Armes  of  thofe  Honorable  Per- 
fons  who  were  created  Knights  of  the  Bath  at  the  Coro- 
.  nation  of  K.  Charles  the  Second,  April  23d  1661.  writ- 
.  ten  k  tricked  in  like  manner  by  Mr.  John  Saunders  and 
others.  23. 

3  At  the  end  is  a  printed  Trad,  with  this  Title, 

.  “  The  manner  of  creating  the  Knights  of  the  antient  & 
honourable  Order  of  the  Bath,  according  to  the  Cuftom 
uled  in  England,  in  time  of  Peace.  With  a  Lift  of  thofe 
honourable  Perfons  who  are  to  be  created  Knights  of 
the  Bath  at  his  Majefties  Coronation,  23d  April,  1661. 
London  1661.  4to.. 

1463. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  wholly  tricked  &  writ¬ 
ten  by  Mr.  Nicholas  Charles  Lancaftcr  Herald  ;  and 
by  Mr.  John  Withie  thus  entituled, 

1.  “  The  Vifitation  of  London,  taken  by  Robert 
Cooke  Clarenceux,  King  of  Armes,  Anno  Dorn.  1568. 
and  fince  augmented  both  with  Defcents  and  Armes.  1 . 

Intermixed  with  this  Vifitation-book,  and  the  addi- 
.  tional  Defcents  and  Arms,  I  find, 

2.  Robert  Cooke's  Atteftation  of  the  Arms  of  Se- 

.  bright  &  his  Ouarterings;  which  he  makes  to  be  here- 
,  ditary  in  England  in  the  time  of  King  Henry  n.  from 
-  the  fight  of  lundry  very  fayre  &  auntient  Deeds,  Char- 
;  ters,  k  Records  of  creditt  &  authority.  •  I4_ 

After  the  laid  additional  Defcents,  or  Continuations 
wherein  I  find  the  hand-writing  of  William  Camden  Cla- 


Nlim.  1463  — 146-. 

renceux,  who  bought  Mr.  Charles’s  books  after  his  de- 
ceafe  ;  I  find  done  by  the  fame  Mr.  Charles, 

3.  Arms  of  divers  Gentlemen  &  Knights,  Inhabitants 

of  London  ;  among  which  are  fevcral  Defcents  by  .  . 
.  .  .  .  and  others.  2 1 9. 

4.  Mr.  Charles  his  alphabetical  Table,  to  the  above- 

mentioned  Vifitation-book.  28 1. 

5.  Another  alphabetical  Table  made  by  Mr.  Charles; 
and  relating  both  to  the  Vifitation  &  to  the  Additions. 

284. 

6.  Alphabet  of  Arms  of  the  London  Gentry,  in  Bla¬ 
zon.  287. 

7.  Lift  of  many  Citizens  of  London  who  were  made 

Knights,  drawn  up  alphabetically  :  with  their  Arms  em¬ 
blazoned.  30 1 . 

8.  Arms  of  divers  of  the  Company  of  Skinners  of 

London,  who  were  Gentlemen  ;  in  Blazon.  307. 

9.  Arms  of  divers  of  the  London  Gentry,  tricked 

promifeuoufly.  309.  &311. 

10.  Another  alphabetical  Table  made  by  Mr.  Charles, 

which  feemeth  not  to  belong  to  this  Book.  312. 

1464* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  all  relating  to  the  Citizens 
of  London,  &  the  City  itfelf;  at  the  beginning  where¬ 
of  I  find  the  following  Note  written,  “  A°  1 634,  this 
Bookewas  taken  by  Mr.  Richard  Price  Arrnes-Painter, 
in  the  time  of  the  Vifitation  of  London,  for  which  I 
gave  him  20  pounds.  Witnefs  my  hand  JohnWithie. 
It  containeth, 

1 .  A  fhort  narration  of  the  antiquity  of  the  City  of 

London,  and  of  the  Government  thereof  by  Portgerefes, 
Sheriffes,  Bayliffes,  kc.  together  with  a  Tranflation  of 
William  the  Conqueror’s  Charter  of  the  Liberties  there¬ 
of.  j 

2.  Arms  of  Henry  Fitz-AIwine  the  firft  Mayor  of 

London  ;  and  of  three  other  old  Mayors.  2 

3.  Concerning  the  antient  Arms  of  London;  and  that 

of  old  time  there  was  an  L  in  the  Canton,  and  not  a 
fword  ;  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  John  Stowe.  2.  b. 

4.  The  Armes  of  St.  George  for  England ;  the  aun- 
tient  Armes  of  London;  &  the  prefent  Atehievementof 
London. 

Then  follow, 

5.  The  Arms  or  Atchievements  of  the  feveral  Com¬ 

panies  of  rhe  City  of  London  ;  with  proper  Notes  touch¬ 
ing  their  Incorporation,  &c.  and  the  Arms  of  fuch  of 
them  as  had  been  Mayors,  Sheriffes,  or  otherways  emi¬ 
nent  Members  of  their  refpeCHve  Companies,  fo  far  as 
they  could  be  found  or  retrieved.  g. 

In  this  Traft,  up  &  down  may  be  found  fomeNotcs 
of  the  hand-writing  of  Sir  Henry  St.  George  i'enr.  Mr. 
John  Withie,  &  others. 

6.  Armes  of  certain  perfons  who  had  been  Sheriffes 
of  London  long  fmee;  but  the  Companies  they  belong¬ 
ed  unto  are  doubtful. 

7.  Armes  of  feveral  Aldermen  of  London  of  diverfe 

Companies.  j ^ 

8.  Alphabetical  lable  to  all  the  Armes  above-men¬ 
tioned.  j 

9-  J°hn  V  ilhie  sLift  of  the  feveral  Companies  of  the 
City  of  London;  &  defignation  of  rhe  places  where 
their  refpective  Halls  flood.  Inferted  at  the  end. 

1465; 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 
r.  An  Ordinary  of  Armes  in  Colours,  with  this  Title, 
“  Coates  &  Crefts,  collected  by  Thomas  Chaloner  of 
Cheftre,  now  at  Dublin  in  Irelande,  Anno  1588.  Au¬ 
guft  22.  of  all  Bearings. 


2.  An 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


Num.  1465—1467. 

2.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 
whofe  Arms  are  exhibited  in  this  Book. 

3.  A  Table  for  the  Coats  in  this  Booke.  That  is, 
{hewing  where  the  feveral  heads  under  which  the  Arms 
are  arranged  ;  may  be  found. 

1466, 

An  Heraklical  Book  in  fol.  written  and  tricked  by  Ed¬ 
ward  Cole  the  Painter-Stainer  ;  who  was  cotempo¬ 
rary  with,  and  wrote  much  like  Mr.  John  Saunders. 
It  containeth, 

1.  A  Tabic  to  the  next  enfuing  Collection. 

2.  Arms  &  Atchisvements  painted  by  this  Edward 

Cole,  or  others  ;  for  funerals  or  other  Occafions,  and 
entered  .herein  for  his  own  ufe.  1. 

3.  Two  Bills  of  Work  done  by  this  Edward  Cole, 

with  a  letter  of  his  at  the  beginning.  16, 

Turning  to  the  other  end  of  the  book,  I  find, 

4.  A  Table  to  the  Arms  at  this  End. 

5.  Arms  of  fome  families,  granted  by  Sir  Edward 

Bysfhe,  &  Sir  Edward  Walker  Garter.  1. 

6.  A  like  Entrance-Book  as  was  at  the  other  end. 

Herein  I  alfofind, 

7.  A  Defcent  of  Gore.  23.  b. 

8.  Defcent  of  Staples.  2$. 

9.  Defcent  of  Shaftoe.  iyj. 

1  o.  Pedegree  of  Creffet  of  Upton-Crcflct ;  with  Arms. 

26. 

11.  Pedegree  of  Gregory  of  Stivichal  near  Coventre. 

27.  b. 

12.  Defcent  of  Vyvyan.  34. 

13.  Defcent  of  I.evett.  37. 

14.  Defcent  of  Huntley  of  Boxwell,  in  Coin.  Glou- 


ceftr. 


1467. 


40. 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  divers 
hands  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  Lift  of  the  Juftices  of  the  Peace  for  the  County 

of  Northampton,  A.D.  1G01.  inferted  in  partitions  over 
printed  Mantles,  Helmets,  &  Efcocheons,  wherein  fome 
of  their  Arms  &  Crefts  are  tricked.  1 . 

2.  Arms  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Northamp¬ 
ton  ;  with  fome  of  their  Crefts  &  Quarterings.  3.  b. 

3.  Defcent  of  Vaux  ofHarrowdon,  by  William  Penfon 
Lancafter  Herald.  Inferted  before  fol.  1 1 . 

4.  Pedegree  (&  Arms)  of  theNorthamptonfhire  Gentry, 
written  by  Jacob  Chaloner  ;  perhaps  from  the  Vifitation- 
book  of  this  County  made  Ann.  Dili  1618  &  1619.  by 
Auguftine  Vincent  Rouge  Rofe,  for  William  Camden 
Clarenceux  ;  with  continuations  by  Richard  Munday  & 
John  Saunders,  &c.  II# 

5.  Arms  &  Defcents  of  fome  North amptonlhire  fami¬ 
lies  ;  by  another  hand.  52.  b. 

6.  Ratification  of  Arms,  with  proper  difference,  to 

Bernard  Garter  of  Brigflock  ;  by  Will.  Segar  Garter, 
dat.  2  July,  10  Jac.  1.  54. 

7.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  A&on.  54.  b. 

8.  Defcents  Sc  Pedegrees  of  many  Northamptonfhire 
Families;  written  narratively,  A.D.  1635  (as  appeareth 
fol.  61.)  but  whether  by  Thomas  Col wel  Gent,  who  is 
mentioned  at  fol.  62.  as  the  Compofer  of  the  Pedegree 
of  Norwich  of  Brampton-Dingley  ;  I  know  not.  55. 

9.  Arms  of  Thorne,  alias  Dome  of  Northamptonfhire. 
Inferted  after  fol.  68. 

10.  Alphabetical  Table,  at  the  end  ;  written  partly 
by  Jacob  Chaloner  j  &  partly  by  others. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vo!.  IL 


Num.  1468,  1469. 

1468. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  done  by  divers  hands ; 
wherein  are  contained, 

r.  John  Saundeis  his  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Sur¬ 
names  of  thole  Families  whofe  Defcents  were  regiftred  in 
the  Vifitation-book  of  Middlefex  prefently  to  be  dcfcribed. 

2.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Families 

mentioned  in  that  part  of  this  book  which  relateth  to 
Lancashire  ;  as  well  of  the  Arms,  &  Matches,  as  of  the 
Delcents.  2. 

This  being  drawn  up  before  the  book  was  bound, 
and  not  anfwering  to  the  prefent  numbers  of  1'ages  or 
Leaves  (not  to  mention  the  Additions  which  are  not 
comprehended  therein)  makes  it  not  of  fo  good  ufe  as 
otherwife  it  might  be. 

3.  Pedegrees  of  the  Lancafhire  Gentrv,  as  jv  i fired 
(narratively)  in  the  Vifitation-book  of  that  County, 
made  A.D.  1367.  by  William  Flower  Norrov.  12. 

Over  each  Defcent  is  a  Blank-Efcocheon,  with 
Mantle  Sc  Helmet  ftamped  or  primed  upon  ihe  paper, 
the  Mantles  being  fo  contrived  as  to  fit  the  Crefts,  which 
with  the  Arms  are  tricked  therein. 

4.  Additional  Defcents  &  Arms  inferted  into  this 
Book  :  and  belonging  10  the  Lancafhire  Gentry  59. 

Thefe  are  all  written  by  way  of  Scheme  ;  lee  more 
at  fol.  8o.  85.  85.  b.  87.  b.'  88.  88.  b.  89.  90.  92.  b. 
93‘  93-  b.  94.  95.  fome  of  the  laft  whereof,  are  by 
the  hands  of  John  Saunders,  Sc  John  Wiihie. 

5.  1  he  Arms  of  the  Lancafhire  Gentry  (including 

thofe  of  the  younger  Branches)  tricked  in  alphabetical 
Order.  ^5. 

Then  followeth  a  Defcent  of  Finch  ;  inferted  at 
fol.  III. 

6.  Mr.  John  Saunders  his  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book 

made  of  the  County  of  Middlefex  A  D.  1662.  by  Yv  illiam 
Ryley  Lancafter-Herald,  and  Henry  Detl.icke  Rougc- 
Croix  for  Sr.  Edward  Bysflie  Clarenceux.  1  1  2. 

7.  Grant  of  an  Augmentation  to  the  Arms  of  Sir 
Samuel  Morland  (alias  Morley)  Kt.  &  Baronet,  by  Sir 
Edward  Walker  Garter,  dat.  2  Aug.  166 1 .  in  French. 

140. 

8.  Grant  of  Armes  Sc  Creft  to  Thomas  Blinkame  of 

Chifelhurft  in  Kent,  by  Sir  Edward  Walker,  Garter, 
dat.  3  March  1663.  ibid. 

9.  Some  Church-Notes  taken  by  Mr.  John  Saunders 

at  Chefwicke  in  the  County  of  Middlefex.  141. 

10.  Abftiadt  of  a  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft,  to 
Edward  Byde  Efq;  of  Lincolnes  Inne,  by  ... 

.  .  .  .  dat.  1  April,  A.D.  1 666-  143. 

11.  Arms  of  Roworth  of  Grays  lime,  as  granted  or 
confirmed  by  Sir  Edward  Walker  Garter,  12  May  1665. 

12.  Lift  of  die  Gentlemen  in  the  County  pf  Middt-1- 
fex  j  written  by  Mr.  John  Saunders. 

1469. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  tricked  &  written  by  Mr; 
John  Saunders  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  ill  contrived  Table  to  the  following  Work.  At 
the  beginning. 

2.  '1  he  Arms  of  many  deceafed  Gentry  of  both  fexes; 
moft  of  whofe  Names,  time  of  Deceafe,  Sec.  with  their 
Matches  and  Quarterings  are  herein  fpecified  ;  from  the 
year  1656^  to  1670.  being  not  onlyoffuch  upon  occafion 
of  whofe  Funerals  Mr.Saunders  was  employed,  but  (as  it 
feemeth)  of  others,  which  he  took  by  Obfervation. 

49  to  122. 

3;  -At  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  are  the  Arms,  &c. 
of  eight  Families  entered  in  like  manner.  3. 


R 


An 


6 1  Catalogus  Libroram  MSS. 


Num.  1470. 

1470. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  confifting  of  divers  dillintt 
&  feparato  Papers  k  Tracts  bound  up  together  ;  and 
on  theout-fnle  entituled  “The  Book  of  Patients ;” 
which  being  all  copied  at  length,  I  {hall  defcribe  them 
particularly  in  the  manner  following. 

1.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  (upon  the  recommenda¬ 

tion  of  Thomas  Earle  of  Suffolke,  &  Edward  Earle  of 
Worceftcr.  two  of  the  Commiffioners  for  the  Office  of 
Earle  Marihall  of  England)  unto  James  Willan  Elq;  of 
Kingftou  upon  Hull  ;  by  Sir  Richard  St.George  Nor- 
roy.  ,  dat.  1  May,  1617.  3* 

2.  Grant  of  a  Crell  unto  Sir  Richard  Braham  Kt.  by 

Sir  Edward  Walker  Garter,  dat.  10  June  1646.  4. 

This  is  tranfcribed  by  Mr.  John  Withie,  and  attefted 
by  him  <k  his  l'on  Auguftin  Withie,  and  with  this  (in 
like  manner  as  with  the  former  Grant)  the  Atchievement 
is  exhibited  in  Colours. 

3.  Confirmation  of  the  Arms  8c  Grant  of  a  Creft  to 
Peter  Farendon  alias  Farnden  of  Sedlefcombe  in  Com. 
SuiTex,  Gentleman,  and  to  Tobyas  his  brother,  by 
Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  28  Febr.  1634. 

5- 

This  is  alfo  atteffed  by  John&c  AugullinWithie  ;  and 
gives  the  Achievement  &  Seal  of  Clarenceux  in  Colours. 

4.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creit  to  Thomas  Kevett  Alder¬ 
man  of  Coventre,  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick  Garter,  dat. 
the  firft  year  of  Ou.  Elizabeth,  A.D.  1 558. 

(vid.  infra  N"  114.)  6. 

The  Achievement  is  depicted  in  the  margin. 

5.  Warrant  of  the  Earls  of  Suffolk  &  Worcefter, 
abovementioned,  to  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Norroy,  to 
confirm  the  Arms  of  Leonard  Willan  Efq;  late  of  King- 
fton  upon  Hull.  dat.  25  April.  1617. 

(vid.  infra,  N°io8.)  10.  b. 

6.  Confirmation  of  the  Armes  k  Grant  of  a  Crell 

••  zen  and  Aider- 

man  of  London,  by  William  Camden  Clarenceux.  dat. 
2  1  Sept.  1605.  1  *• 

Here  are  hafty  Tricks  of  the  Atchievement,  &  of 
Glarenceux’s  Seal  of  Office. 

7.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Crtfl  unto  John  Kelfey  of 
Chelinesford  in  Com.  ElTex,  8c  Henry  his  brother  by 
Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  24  June, 

1634. 

The  Armes  8c  Creff  are  depicted  on  the  margin ; 
&  the  Grant  is  of  the  hand  of  John  Withie. 

8.  Confirmation  of  Armes  differenced,  k  Grant  of  a 
Creft  to  Leonard  Browne  cf  Pinchbeck  in  Holland, 
within  the  County  of  Lincoln,  Gent,  by  Sir  Richard  St. 
George  Clarenceux.  dat.  10  June  1632. 

(vid.  infra,  N*  124.)  13. 
The  Atchievement  is  painted  on  the  Margin. 

9.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  Robert  Gray  Efq; 
Citizen  Sc  Merchant-Taylor  of  London,  (a  perfon  of 
exemplary  Charity)  Sc  to  Thomas  Gray  his  Nephew, 
by  Sir  Rich.  Sr.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  .  .  .  April, 

1635.  (vid.  infra  Nu  145.)  14. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  on  the  Margin. 

10.  Alteration  of  the  Arms  k  Creft  of  Paul  D’Ewes 
of  Stow-Langtoft  in  Com.  Suff'.  by  Sir  Richard  St. 
George  Clarenceux.  dat.  12  June.  A.D.  16:7. 

(vid, infra,  N"  140.)  16. 

This  is  drawn  up  in  Latin  (originally  by  Sir  Simonds 
D’Ewes,  the  f<  >n  o!  Paul  abovementioned)  and  is  adorned 
with  Tricks  ol  the  Armes  of  thofe  whom  Sir  Simonds 
■averred  to  be  his  Anceftors,  as  alfo  which  his  Defcent ; 
and  a  Trick  of  the  Seal  of  Clarenceux. 

1  1.  Grant  of  an  Alteration  to  the  Armes,  &  of  a  Creft 
unto  Auguftin  Vincent,  Rouge-Croix  ;  by  Sir  William 
•tegar  Gat  ter,  William  Camden  Clarsnceux  ;  &  Richard 


Num.  1470. 

St.  George  Norroy.  dat.  1  January,  Anno  Dm  1621. 

*9- 

The  Atchievement  is  tricked  in  the  margin ;  k  the 
De  cent  of  Vincent  adonis  the  top,  k  both  fides  of  the 
Patent. 

12.  Confirmation  of  the  Amies,  &  Grant  of  a  Creft 
unto  George  Lacock  of  Southwell  in  Com.  Notingham, 
by  Richard  St.  GeorgeNorroy.  dat.  20  Novemb.  1613. 

22; 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin.- 

13.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Thomas  Goodall 
of  Earls-Stonham  in  Com.  Stiff'.  Gentleman :  by  William 
Segar  Garter,  dat.  1  Marche  1612. 

(vid.  infra,  N°  150.)  23. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  upon  the  margin. 

14.  Alteration  of  the  Annes,  &  Grant  of  a  Creft, 

unto  George  Thorold  of  Bofton  in  Com.  Lincoln.  Gent; 
by  Sir  Richard  St.George  Clarenceux.  dat.  10  Novem¬ 
ber,  1631.  (vid.  infra,  N°  47.)  24. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin. 

1 5.  Confirmation  of  Arms,  k  Grant  of  a  Creft  unto 
Edmund  Smith  of  Miudlefex  Gentleman  ;  by  William 
Hervey  Ciarencieulx.  dat.  5  May  1561. 

(vid.  infra,  N°  84.)  27. 

The  Arms  &  Creft  are  haftily  tricked  in  the 

I  mais“-  „  . 

,  16.  Grant  of  Supporters  to  the  Arms  of  SirFrarlcis 

Leeke  Knight  £c  Paronet,  created  Baron  Deincourt  ol 
Sutton  in  Com.  Derb.  by  Sir  William  Segar  Garter, 
dat.  1 4  Novemb.  anno  3  R.  Caroli  1. 

(vid.  infra,  N°  23.)  30. 

The  Atchievement  is  imperfectly  tricked  in  the 
margin. 

1  7.  Confirmation  of  Arms,  &  Grant  of  Supporters, 
to  Charles  Mac  Carthy  Vifcount  Garthey  of  Mufkrey, 
by  Thomas  Prefton  Elq;  Ulvefter,  Kinge  of  Armes  of 
Ireland,  dat.  21  Sept.  1639.  32. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin. 

18.  Confirmation  of  Arms  Sc  Creft  to  John  Langley 
Gent.  Citizen  &  Filhmonger  of  London,  by  Sir  Richard 
St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  4  June  1632. 

(vid.  infra,  N°  148.)  33. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin. 

19.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  unto 

Peter  Thorney  of  London  Chirurgeon,  by  William 
Segar,  Garter,  dat.  10  Decemb.  1615.  34. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin  ;  & 
Garter’s  Seal  at  the  end. 

20.  Alteration  of  the  Arms  of  Matthew  Bedell  of 

London  Efq;  fometime  elefted  Alderman  of  the  laid 
Cittie  ;  by  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat. 
20  January,  1632.  (vid.  infra,  N°  36.)  35, 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  Margin. 

21.  Confirmation  of  Arms  k  Creft,  unto  John  Crux 
of  the  Green-houfe  in  Middleton  alias  Milton  in  the 
County  of  Kent,  by  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux. 
Dat.  1  July,  qnn.  feptimo  R.  Caroli  1. 

(vid.  infra,  N°  99,)  40.. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin. 

22.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto  John  Cofyn  Efq; 

Alderman  of  Newcaftle  upon  Tyne,  by  William  Ryley 
Norroy.  dated  12  May  1 647.  41. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  on  the  margin,  &  the 
Grant  tranfcribed  by  Mr.  John  Withie  who  hath  alfo 
attefted  the  fame,  as  did  alfo  Jewell  Withy. 

23.  Grant  of  Supporters  to  the  Arms  of  Sir  Francis 

Leeke  Knight  8c  Baronet,  created  Baron  Deincourt  of 
Sutton  in  Com.  Derb.  by  Sir  William  Segar  Garter,  dat. 
14  Novemb.  anno  3  Regis  Caroli  1.  42. 

24.  Alteration  of  the  Arms  &  Creft  of  William  Cage 
Efq;  one  of  the  Oufter-Banifters  of  Lincolne’s  Inne,  bv 

3  Sir 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas- 


Num.  1470. 

Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  1  Match 
1624.  (vid.  infra,  N’  98.)  43. 

The  Achievement  is  painted  on  the  margin. 

25.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Sir  Henry  Ilenn 

alias  Hene,  of  Wingfield  in  Com.  Berks.  Knight  and 
Baronet,  by  Sir  John  Borough,  Garter,  dat.  28  De¬ 
cember  1642.  (vid.  infra,  N°  126.)  48. 

The  Achievement  is  depi&ed  on  the  margin,  & 
Garter’s  Seal  at  the  end.  The  Patent  was  tranfcribed 
by  Mr.  John  Withie,  &  attefted  by  him  Sc  his  fon  Au- 
guftin  Withie. 

26.  Confirmation  of  the  Arrfies  &  Grant  of  a  Creft, 
unto  William  Wade  of  Bildefton  in  Com.  huff.  Gent,  by 
William  Camden  Clarenceux.  dat.  8  November  1604. 

„  ...  .49* 

The  Achievement  is  painted  in  the  margin. 

27.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Sir  Hugh  Smithfon 

of  Stanwick  in  Com.  Ebor.  late  Citizen  &  Merchant  of 
London,  and  alfo  to  Bernard  his  brother,  by  Sir  Edward 
Walker,  Garter,  dat.  20  Novemb;  1663.  50. 

This  is  written  by  John  Withie  ;  &  the  Coat  & 
Creft  are  painted  in  the  margin. 

28.  Confirmation  of  the  Armes,  and  a  Grant  of  a 

Creft  to  Ralph  Fox  of  High-Holboume  in  Com.  Midd. 
by  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  1  2  June 
A.D.  1634.  52. 

The  Achievement  is  painted  in  the  margin)  &  the 
Seal  of  Clarenceux  at  the  end.  This  Copie  is  alfo  at*, 
tefled  by  Daniel  Fox  Sc  John  Withie. 

29.  Alteration  of  a  Creft  (or  rather  a  Grant  of  a 

new  Creft)  unto  Thomas  Ilayne  of  Fryer-Waddon  in 
Com.  Dorfet.  by  William  Segar  Garter,  dat.  4  Sept. 
1607.  (vid.  infra,  N°  50.)  56. 

The  Grant  is  in  Latin  ;  &c  the  Coat  Sc  Creft  are 
haftily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

30.  Atteftation  of  the  Armes  &  Creft  of  Robert 

Jafonof  Enfield  in  Com.  Middlelex.  by  William  Dethick 
Garter,  (who  fetteth  forth  the  power  of  that  his  Office 
in  large  terms)  dat.  10  March,  1588.  57. 

The  Coat  &  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  Margin. 

31.  Grant  of  Arms  Creft,  unto  William  Bifpham  of 
Bifpham  in  Com.  Lancaft.  by  Richard  St.  George  Nor- 
roy.  dat.  30  June,  1613.  (vid.  infra,  N '  46.)  58. 

The  C-oat  &  C.reft  are  haftily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

32.  Grant  of  Nobility,  i.  e.  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto 
Bernard  Angewyn,  of  the  Duchieof  Guyen,  unto  whom 
the  King  hath  given  certain  Lord  (hips  there,  by  .  . 

.  .  (King  Henry  vi  ?)  dat.  at  hi  .  Palace  of  Weitmin- 
fter,  1 1  March,  and  23  year  of  his  reign.  59. 

The  Patent  is  in  French  ;  Sc  the  Atchievement  is 
painted  in  the  margin. 

33.  Confirmation  of  the  Armes  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  ! 

unto  Samuel  Rowe  of  Macclesfield  in  the  County  of 
Chefter  ;  Gentleman,  one  of  the  Felowes  of  the  Society 
of  Grayes  Inne,  by  William  Ryley,  Norroy.  dat.  20 
March,  1653.  64. 

This  is  tranfcribed  by  John  Withie  ;  &  the  Coat  Sc 
Creft  trick’d  in  the  margin. 

34.  Lift  of  the  Officers  in  Six  Regiments  of  the 

Militia  of  the  City  of  London.  6 5. 

35.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  William  Green  of 

Mitcham  in  Com.  Surrey  Efq;  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe 
Clarenceux.  dat.  6  January,  1663.  66. 

Tranfcribed  by  John  Withie,  who  alfo  haftily 
tricked  the  Coat  Sc  Creft  in  the  margin. 

36.  Alteration  of  the  Armes  Sc  Creft,  for  Matthew 

Bedell  of  London,  by  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Claren¬ 
ceux.  dat.  20  January,  1632.  67. 

This  is  written  by  Sir  Henry  St.  George  Senr.  the 
Coat  &  Creft  are  haftily  tricked  at  the  end. 

37.  Grant  of  an  Augmentation  to  the  Arms  of 
Richard  Newman  of  Fif  head-Magclalen  in  Com.  Dorfet. 


Nuni.  14^70. 

Ffq;  by  Sir  Edward  Walker  Garter,  dat.  2  April) 
1664.  71. 

The  Coat  &  Creft  are  haftily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

38.  Copie  of  the  Latin  Inffrument,  whereby  Edward 

Somerfet  Marquis  rif  Woicefter,  granted  unto  Lewis 
Morgan  of  Grayes  Inne  Efq;  the  Liberty  of  bearing  the 
Portcullis,  his  Creft,  under  the  Coronet  of  a  Marquis, 
in  an  Inefcocheon.  dat.  3  July,  1636.  72. 

At  the  bottom  is  an  hafty  Trick  of  the  Arms  & 
Creft. 

39.  Concefiio  Armorum  Ricardo  Lane  Equiti  Aurato, 

ac  Cuftodi  Magni  Sigilli  Anglia,  per  Carolum  11.  Regent 
Teffe,  See.  apud  Caftrum  Elizabeth,  in  Infula  de  Jerfey, 
8  die  Febr.  A.D.  1649.  73. 

40.  Grant  of  a  Creft  unto  John  Marlhe  of  Marton  in 
Kent,  by  William  Segar,  Garter,  dat.  10  June,  1616. 

74* 

The  Atchicvement  is  painted  in  the  margin  ;  Sc  the 
Patent  attefted  by  John  Withie. 

41.  Armes  of  Gokin,  quartering  thofe  of  Durant 
painted;  with  fome  Notes  of  Mr.  Jo.  Philipott. 

(vid.  infra,  N'1  129.)  73. 

42.  Another  Copie  of  the  Grant  of  Arms  to  Sir 
Richard  Lane,  by  K.  Charles  11. 

(vid.  fupra,  N“  39.)  79. 

43.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  John  Bailyof  Hod- 

def  on  in  Com.  Hertford,  by  Sir  Richard  St.  George 
Clarenceux.  dat.  16  Febri  1634.  80. 

The  Arms  Sc  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin. 

44.  Grant  of  Arms  <x  Creft  unto  Edward  Baldwin  of 
Wiltons  in  the  Parilh  of  Beconsfield  in  Com.  Bucks,  by 
Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux.  dat.  19  Decemb.  1662. 

8 1. 

This  is  written  by  John  Withie ;  who  hath  alfo 
haftily  tricked  the  Armes  Sc  Creft  in  the  margin. 

45.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Robert 

Gavell  ofCobham  in  Com.  Suit.  Gent,  by  Robert  Cooke 
Clarenceux.  dat.  1 2  Aug.  1572.  82. 

_  The  Atchicvement  is  painted  in  the  Margin  ;  the 
Copie  was  written  by  Auguftine  Withie,  who  with  his 
Father,  attefted  it. 

46.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  William  Bifpham 
of  Bifpham  in  the  County  of  Lancafter,  by  Richard  St. 
George,  Norroy.  dat.  30  June,  1613. 

(vid.  fupra,  N*  3 1.)  87. 
The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin. 

_  4 7*  Grant  of  a  Difference  unto  the  Armes,  &  of  a 
Greff,  unto  George  Thorold  in  Com.  Lincoln.  Gent,  by 
Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  10  Nov.  1631. 

(vid.  infra, N’  14.)  88. 

This  Tranfciipt  is  by  John  Withie  ;  who  hath  alfo 
haftily  tricked  the  Armes  Sc  Creft  in  the  margin. 

48.  Confirmation  of  the  Coat  &  C.reft  granted  to 
Thomas  Knight  of  Hooe  in  Com.  Southampton  Efq; 
unto  William  Knighte  of  Abthorpe  in  Com.  Northamp¬ 
ton.  Gent,  by  William  Hervey  Clarenceux.  dat.  24 
March  156.-.  (vid.  infra,  N°  1 13.)  89. 

The  Arms  and  Creft  are  tricked  at  the  top,  Sc  Cla¬ 
renceux  Hervey’s  Seal  at  the  end,  by  John  Withie  ; 
who  with  John  Vincent,  did  arteft  the  fame. 

_  49;  Grant  of  Armes  Sc  Creft  unto  Thomas  Knight  of 
lloo  in  Com.  Southampt.  by  Chriftopher  Barker  Garter, 
dat.  8  April,  1546.  g0m 

rl  he  Arms  &  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin,  and 
Garter  Barker’s  Seal  of  Office  &  of  Arms,  at  the  <fnd. 

50.  Grant  of  a  new  Creft  untoThomas  Hayne  of  Frier- 

Waddon  in  Com.  Dorfet.  Efq;  by  William  Segar,  Gar¬ 
ter.  dat.  4  Sept.  1607.  95.  (vid.  fupra,  N'  29.) 

The  Grant  is  in  Latin  ;  Sc  the  Atchievement  painted 
in  the  margin. 

51.  Atteftation  of  the  Arms  &  Creft  of  Thomas 
Humphrey  of  Dublyn  ;  unto  a  former  Atteftation  or 
Certificate  of  William  Camden  Clarenceux  ;  by  Thomas 

Piefton 


Aer  King  of  Armes  oi  Ireland,  dat.  26 
(vid.  infra,  N°  157.)  96. 

52.  The  Arms  Sc  Crefl  are  painted  in  the  middle  of 
the  Certificate. 

Grant  or  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Crefl:,  unto 
John  Raynoldes  of  Atlebrugh  in  Com.  Norfl’.  Gent,  and 
Henry  his  brother,  by  Rebu  t  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat. 
j  4  October,  1576.  (vid.  infra,  N”  1 29.)  97. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin. 

54  Alteration  of  Arms  &  Crefl:  granted  unto  Tho¬ 
mas  •  ropley  of  Rookels-hall  in  Shelland  in  Com.  Suff. 
by  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  12  May, 
*635-,  .  (vid.  infra,  N°  139.)  93. 

'1  he  Atchievement  is  painted  on  the  margin. 

55.  Abfti«£l  of  a  Grant  of  Arms  &  Crefl,  made  by 

S,  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux,  unto  James  Blackerby 
oi  London,  &  Thomas  Blackerby  of  Shakerland-hall  in 
Com.  Suff.  dat.  10  June  1664.  103. 

This  is  written  by  John  Withie,  who  hath  alfo 
ballily  tricked  tlie  Coat  &  Crefl  on  the  margin. 

56.  Delcent  of  Blackerby,  written  A.D.  1665.  by 

the  fame  John  Withie.  103.  b." 

57.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Crefl  unto  Raphe  Cooke  D.D. 

6  Rector  of  Burftowe  in  Com.  Surr.  by  Sr.  Edward 

Bysfhe  Clarenceux.  dar.  1  2  Aug.  1662.  104. 

I  bis  is  written  &  the  Coat  6c  Crefl  haftily  tricked 
in  the  Margin,  by  John  Withie. 

58.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Crefl,  unto  William  Hamp¬ 
ton  Reftor  of  Blechingley  in  Com.  Surr  by  Sr.Edward 

<  ceux.  dar.  1 5  Aug.  1662.  103. 

This  is  alfo  written,  &  in  like  manner  tricked  by 
John  Withie, 

59.  Grant  of  a  Crefl  and  a  Confirmation  of  Arms, 
granted  unto  John  Parker  of  Sybertifweld  in  Com.  Kane, 
by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  6  May  1688.  106. 

1  ids  is  written  bv  Augulline  Withie,  &  was  exa¬ 
mined  by  his  Father  &  himfelf.  The  Atchievement  is 
painted  in  the  margin,  &  the  Seal  of  Clarenceux  at  the 
end. 

60.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Crefl,  unto  Glover  Denny  of 

Raveningham  in  the  County  of  Norfolk,  by  Sir  Edward 
Bysflie  Clarenceux.  dat.  9  March  1663.  1  10. 

This  was  abbrevk  ted  by  Jonn  Withie,  who  haflily 
tricked  the  Anns  6c  Cred  in  the  margin. 

61.  Delcent  of  Denny,  fett  down  by  John  Withie, 

A.D.  if.64.  1 10. b. 

62.  Deficient  of  Barber,  fett  down  by  John  Withie, 

A.D.  1664.  m.b. 

63.  Grant  of  Arms  Sc  Crefl  unto  Chriflopher  Mer- 

rett  .M.D.  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux.  dat.  13 
July  16  66.  1 1  2. 

1  his  was  abbreviated  by  John  Withie,  who  haflily 
tricked  the  Arms  Sc  Crefl  in  the  margin. 

64.  Grant  of  Armes  6c  Crefl  unto  Henry  Parker  of 

Eryth  Indie  in  Com.  Effex.  Gentilman,  by  Criilofer 
Barker  Garter,  dat.  21  Febr.  1537.  113. 

I  he  I  atent  was  tranferibed  by  Augufline  Withie, 
v  ho  u  ith  his  Father  examined  the  fame,  j  he  Atchieve¬ 
ment  is  painted  on  the  margin  j  6c  the  Seals  of  the  fame 
Gai  ter,  at  the  end. 

65.  J<  hn  W: tide’s  Abftracl  of  the  Grant  of  Arms  & 

Creit,  made  by  -Sir  Edward  Bysflie  Clarenceux  unto  Sir 
1  •  . ert  Nc  v.  ton  of  London,  Baronet,  &c.  dat.  1 4  Febr. 
tmn.  1?  Carotin.  n8. 

The  Arms  Sc  Crefl  are  Haflily  tiicked  in  the 
margin. 

cn>.  John  Withi  s  Abftracl  of  the  Grant  of  Arms  & 
Crefl,  made  unto  Thomas  Bilker  of  Linden  in  Com. 
R  utland.  Gent,  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux.  dat. 

7  Febr..  1 6 64.  \gg. 

The  faid  Arms  Sc  Crefl  are  haflily  tricked  in  the 
m  rgin. 


Num.  1470. 


67.  John  Withies  Tranfcript  of  a  Grant  of  Arms  & 
Crefl  made  unto  John  Lightbourne  of  Manchefter,  in 
Com.  Lancaft.  Efij;  and  to  his  brother  James,  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Dugdale  Norroy.  dat.  30  June  A.D.  1662.  1  20. 

The  Arms  Sc  Crefl  are  haflily  tricked  in  the 
margin. 

68.  John  Withies  Abflraft  of  the  Grant  of  Arms  & 
Cre  1  made  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux  to  Ed¬ 
ward  Mann  of  Ipfwich  in  Com.  Suffolk,  dat.  2  March 

1662.  121. 

The  Arms  Sc  Crefl  are  haflily  tricked  by  the  fame 

John  Withie,  in  the  margin. 

69.  John  Withies  Abflradl  of  the  Grant  of  Arms  & 
Crefl,  made  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux,  unto 
Peter  Hoet  Senr.  Merchant  of  London,  dat.  22  March 

1663.  _  122. 

I  he  Arms  Sc  Crefl  are  haflily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

70.  John  Withies  Abflradt  of  the  Grant  of  Arms  Sc 

Crefl,  made  by  Sir  Edward  Bysflie  Clarenceux,  unto 
Robert  Shoobridge  of  Uckfield  in  Com.  Suffex.  Gent, 
dat.  16  April,  to 62.  126. 

7 1.  John  Withies  Tranfcript  of  the  Grant  of  Arms  Sc 

Crefl  unto  Edmund  Arnold  Efq;  of  Leeflhorpe  in  Com. 
Leicefter,  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux.  dat.  .  . 
December,  A.D.  1663.  127. 

The  Arms  Sc  Crefl  are  haflily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

72.  John  Withies  Abflradl  of  the  Grant  of  Armes  & 

Cred,  made  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux,  unto 
Thomas  Hayes  of  Windfor  in  Com.  Berks,  and  James 
his  Brother,  dat.  13  May,  1 662.  128. 

The  Arms  Sc  Crefl  are  haftily  tricked  in  the 
margin. 

73.  Eike  Abflraft  of  the  Arms  &  Crefl,  made  by 

Sir  Edward  Bysflie  Clarenceux,  unto  Anthony  Knight- 
bridge  of  Chelmsford  in  Com.  Effex.  &  his  brother, 
dat . May  1663.  I2g. 

The  Arms  &  Crefl  are  alfo  haflily  tricked  in  the 
Margin. 

74.  Grant  of  a  Crefl  (with  a  Confirmation  of  the 

Armes;  of  Nicholas  Bennet  Citizen  Sc  Haberdafher  of 
London,  by  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  24th 
June,  1633.  ,30. 

l'he  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin  ;  &  the 
Seal  of  Clarenceux  at  the  end. 

75.  John  Withies  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  Arms  Sc 

Crefl,  made  unto  John  Savin  of  Beakefbourne  in  Com. 
Kane.  M.D.  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux.  dat. 
29  May,  1663.  j  ^2. 

'1  he  Arms  &  Crefl  are  haflily  tricked  in  *  the 
margin. 

76.  John  Withies  Abftraft  of  the  Grant  of  Arms  Sc 
Crct  to  John  Brodway  of  Portflip  in  Com.  Glouceftr. 
by  Sir  Edward  Bysflie  Clarencieulx.  dat.  9  Jan.  1661. 

>35* 

The  Arms  Sc  Crefl  are  haftily  tricked  in  the 
margin. 

77.  John  Withies  Abftracl  of  the  Arms  Sc  Crefl, 
made  by  Sir  Edward  Bysflie  Clarenceux,  unto  John 
Gouning  Alderman  of  Briftol.  dat.  22  Dccemb.  1662. 

136. 

The  Anns  &  Crefl  are  haflily  tricked  in  the 
margin. 

78.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Crefl,  with  a  Diflinftion  ; 
granted  unto  Robert  Harpham  of  Marfleet.  in  Com. 
Ebor.  by  William  Ryley  Norroy.  dat.  9  July  1657. 

1 37 . 

This  is  written,  &  the  Coat  Sc  Crefl  haflily  tricked 
in  the  margin,  by  John  Withie. 

79.  John  Withies  Abftra£t  of  the  Grant  of  Arrris  & 
Civil  made  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Garter,  unto  Thomas 

Hawkey 


5 


Bibliothecae  Harleiaiise. 


6  5 


Num.  1470. 

Hawkey  of  Lanlawren  in  Com.  Com.  Efq.  &c.  dat. 
28th  June  1656.  138. 

The  faid  Arms  St  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin. 

80.  Defcentof  Hawkey,  fett  down  by  John  Withie. 

138.  b. 

81.  John  Withic’s  Abridgerrieiit  of  the  Confirmation 

of  Arms  &  Creft  made  by  William  Ryley  Norroy,  unto 
William  Langton  of  Broughton  in  Com.  Lancaftr.  dat. 
25th  June  1657.  139. 

The  faid  Arms  and  Creft  arc  haflily  tricked  in  the 
margin. 

82.  Confirmation  of  the  Armcs  &  Grant  of  a  Creft 

unto  Edmund  Smith  of  Middellex,  Gent,  by  William 
Hervev  Clarencieux.  dat.  5th  May,  1561.  (vid.  fupra, 
N°  _  140. 

The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  margin; 

8  3.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft,  unto  Thomas 
Hobfon  of  Merington  in  the  Bifhoprick  ofDurefme,  by 
William  Riley  Efq.  Norroy.  dat.  16th  January,  16 -,7. 

This  was  abbreviated,  &  the  Coat  &  Creft  haftily 
tricked  in  the  margin,  by  John  Withie.  14b. 

84.  John  Withie’s  Abridgement  of  the  Confirmation 
of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  William  Gi'ofon  of  Stavelc  y  in 
Com.  Ebor*  by  William  Ryley,  Norroy.  dat.  1 6th  Ja¬ 
nuary,  1655. 

ihe  Coat  &  Creft  are  haflily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

85.  John  Withie’s  Abbridgement  of  a  Confirmation 

of  Arms  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  unto  William  Chohvick 
of  Cholwick  in  Com.  Devon,  by  William  Ryley,  Nor¬ 
roy.  dat.  6th  June  1657.  147. 

1  he  Coat  &  Creft  arc  haftily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

86.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Grant  of  4  Creft,  unto 

Thomas  Pagitt  of  the  Middle  Temple,  London,  fon  and 
heire  of  Richard  Pagitt  of  Crayneforde  in  Corn.  Nor- 
thampt.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dated  the  24th 
day  of  February,  A.D.  1  ^75.  148. 

This  Grant  was  examined  by  John  Withie,  &:  Au- 
guflin  his  fon.  The  Atchievement  is  painted  in  the  mar¬ 
gin,  and  the  Seal  of  Clareijceux  at  the  end. 

87.  John  Wit  hie 's  Abridgement  of  the  Confirmation 

of  Arms  k  Creft  granted  unto  Moore  Fauntleroy  Gent, 
by  Sir  John  Burrough,  Garter,  dat.  Sth  December, 
i633-,  153- 

ihe  Coat  &  Creft  are  haftdy  tricked  in  the  margin. 

88.  Note  touching  the  abovementioned  Moore  Faunt¬ 
leroy,  his  Defcent,  Match,  &c.  1 3  3.  c. 

89.  Confirmation  of  Arms  k  Creft,  granted  unto 

Claude  Micault,  by  Pierre  d’Hozier,  Tholoufe.  dat.  1 8th 
Jufte,  1634.  _  154. 

'  'This  .Patent  is  in  French;  and  hath  Tricks- of  the 
Coat  Creft  in  the  margin;  of  the  Seal  of  11.  l  .mfe 
beneath  ;  &  of  the  Creft  again  at  the  bottom. 

90.  Grant  of  Arms  (without  a  Creft)  unto  William 
Swayne  of  Somerfettfhirc,  by  John  AVrex  worth.  Guy  an 
King  of  Armcs.  dat.  29th  Jan.  ann.  39  Hen.  vt.  154.  b. 

The  Armes  are  tricked  in  the  margin;  there  is  a  lib 
a  rude  Trick  of  the  Seal  of  Guyan,  beneath. 

91.  /Confirmation  of  Armes  8:  Creft  unto  Thomas 
Jacob  of  Wotton-Bafiet  in  Com.  Wilt,  by  Sir  Richard 
St. George  Clarenceux.  dat.  24th  June,  '633.  x  31;. 

1  his  was  traul'cribed  by  John  Withie;  who  omitted 
tricking  the  Atchievement. 

92.  Confirmation  of  the  Arms,  with  marfhalling  of 

the  Quartering^  of  Thomas  Penyfton  Lord  of  Hawruge 
in  Com.  Bucks,  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  Sth 
Febr.  1.573.  x56. 

'Ihe  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

93.  Grant  of  a  Difference  of  Armes,  unto  William 

Crokey  alias  Jonfon  de  Com.  Ebor.  by  Xpofer  Carlyle 
otherwife  called  Norroy.  dat.  4th  June,  1496.  159. 

't  he  Coat  Sc  Creft  arc  tricked  in  the  margin  ;  & 
Carlile’s  Seal  at  the  bottom.. 

Cat.Harl.  Vol.  11. 


Num. 


H7c 


94.  Grant  of  a  Difference  in  the  Coat  &  Creft  of  Thtis 

mas  Mountford  DA  in  Divinity,  by  Williani  Camdeil 
Clarenceux.  dat.  1  Sth  Febr.  1602.  1 59.  b. 

The  Grant  is  in  Latin,  k  the  Arms  with  the  Creft 
tricked  in  the  margin. 

95.  Confirmation  of  the  Armes  k  Grant  of  a  Creft, 

unto  William  Wade  the  fonne  of  William  Wade,  the 
fbnne  of  Robert  •  •  of  Biidefton  in  Com.  Stiff,  by  'Wil¬ 
liam  Camden  Clarenceux.  dat  Sth  Nov.  1604.  161. 

ft  lie  Arms  Sc  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin  by 
John  Withie;  who  alfo  feemed  to'  have  tranferibed  the 
Patent  in  his  running  hand. 

96.  Alteration  of  the  Arms  k  Creft  of  William  Cage, 

one  of  the  Oufter  Barrifters  of  Lir.colnes  Inne,  by  Sir 
Richar-J  St. George  Clarenceux.  dat.  ift  March  1624. 
(vid.  fupra,  N'  24.)  162. 

Ihe  Armes  8c  Ciaft  are  tricked  in  the  margin. 

97.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  John  Crux 
of  the  Green-houfe  in  Middleton  alias  Milton  in  the 
County  of  Kent ,  by  Sr.  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux. 
dat.  ill  July  anno  ieptimo  R.R.  Caroli  1.  (vid.  fupra  N" 

v  I  6. 

The  Coat  k  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin. 

98.  .Alteration  of  the  Arms  of  Thomas  Randes,  the 

Son  of  Henry  Randes  of  Ilolbech  Bifhop  of  Rochefter, 
&  afterwards  of  Lincoln,  by  William  Camden  Claren¬ 
ceux.  dat.  lothJulv,  A.D.  1599.  164. 

1  he  Coat  8:  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin. 

99.  Certificate  of  Regiftring  the  Arms  affigned  by  O. 

Elizabeth  unto  Sir  Francis  Drake;  by  Robert  Cooke  Cla¬ 
renceux.  dat.  2  th  June  A.D.  1581,  164.  b. 

ihe  Coat  &  Creft  are  rudely  tricked  in  the  margin. 

ioc.  Confirmation  of  Arms,  with  Quarterings,  unto 
Dorothy  Beu  prey,  the  wife  of  Robert  Bell  of  Bewprey-* 
hall  in  Com.  NorfF.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat. 
1 9th  June,  1 57  j.  '  165. 

Ihe  l’rick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omirea. 

101.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  William  Carpenter 

of  Cobham  in  Com.  Surr.  Efq.  by  Sir  Edward  By, ihe. 
Clarenceux.  dat.  4th  March  1663.  165.  b. 

The  Armes  &  Creft  are  haftily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

102.  Confirmation  of  Armcs  8:  Grant  of  a  Creft  to 

Edward  Auften  of  Tentetden  in  Kent,  by  William  Cam¬ 
den  Clarenceux.  dat.  iath  April  1603.  166. 

The  Coat  k  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin. 

1  o- .  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Grant  of  a  Trick  unto 
John  Ade  of  Dodington  in  Kent,  by  William  Segai*, 
Garter,  dat.  20th  May,  ann.  11  R.Jac.  1.  169. 

i  he  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

1 04.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  unto 

Edward  Paltock,  of  Kingilon  upon  Thames  in  Com.  Sum 
Gent,  by  William  Scgar,  Garter,  dat.  14th  Febr.  ann. 
9  R.Jac.  1.  170. 

ihe  Prick  of  the  Atchievement  h  Omitted. 

1 05.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  unto 

William  Warde  of  Pilton  in  Com.  Devon,  k  Richard 
his  Brother,  by  William  Segar,  Garter,  dat.  21ft  Julv,- 
l6l4;„  ./  171'.  ’ 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

106.  Warrant  of  the  Earls  of  Suffolk  &  Worcefter, 

two  of  the  Commifiioners  for  executing  ihe  Office  of 
Earl-Marfhall  of  England,  to  confirm  the  Arms  ofLeoJ 
nard  Wiftan  Efq.  late  of  Kingilon  upon  Hull ;  directed 
to  Sir  Richard  Sr. George,  Norfoy.  dat.  25th  April, 
1617.  (vid.  fupra,  N°  4)  1  b. 

107.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  the  above 

mentioned  Leonard  Willan,  by  Sir  Richard  St.  George, 
Clarenceux.  dat.  1  ft  May,  1617.  173. 

1  he  Coat  k  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin,  by 
John  Withie  who  tranferibed  the  Patent. 

108.  Confirmation  of  Arms  Sc  Creft,  un(o  John 
Rovle  of  Leftwich  in  Com.  Ceftr.  Gent,  by  William 

S  Ryley, 


66 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1470- 

Ryley,  Norroy.  dat.  17th  Novemb.  1 654.  (vid.  Infra 
N°  163.)  176. 

Tranfcribed  with  the  Coat  k  Creft  haftily  tricked 
by  John  Withie.  17 6. 

109.  Statutorum  atq;  Ordinationum  illuftriffimi  Or- 
dii  i-  D.  Georgij,  per  R.Henricum  viii.  enarratorimi  ac 
declaratorum,  para  prior.  Prasmittuntur  Prolegomena, 
dr  Libris  Statu1  orum  et  Hiftoriarum  hujufce  prasclariffi- 
mi  Ordinis.  17 7  b. 

1  10.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft,  unto  Thomas  Knighte 
of  Hoo  in  Com.  Southampton,  by  Xpofer,  Garter,  dat. 
8th  April,  154s.  182. 

The  Atchievement  is  tricked  in  the  margin. 

111.  Confirmation  of  the  above  mentioned  Coat  & 

Creft,  unto  William  Knighte  of  Abthorpe  in  Com.  Nor¬ 
thampton,  by  William  Hervev,  Clarenceux.  dat.  24th 
March,  1 5  5.  (vid.  fupra,  N°  48.)  183. 

The  Atchievement  is  tricked  at  the  top. 

1 1 2.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  Thomas  Kevett 
Alderman  of  Coventre,  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick,  Garter, 
dat.  the  ift  of  Eliz.  A.  D.  1 558.  ^vid.  fupra,  N°  4.) 

184. 

The  Coat  &  Creft  are  haftily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

1 13.  A  Note  Ihewing  that  the  above-mentioned  Arms 

k  Creft  of  Kevett  of  Coventre,  were  confirmed  A.  D. 
1583.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  185.  b. 

1 14.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft,  unto  Robert 
Williams  of  Langbie-Caftell  in  Com.  Monmouth,  by 
Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  ioth  March  157 -. 

188. 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

1 1 5  Grant  of  Arms  k  Creft  unto  William  Thomas 
of  Llan-thomas  in  Com.  Brecon.  Gent,  bv  William  Haw¬ 
ley  Clarenceux.  dat.  ill  Febr.  anno  6  R.Edw.  vi.  189. 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

no.  Grant  of  Armes  k  Creft  unto  the  ful  honour¬ 
able  Crafte  and  Fratemite  of  Peyntours  of  the  Citie  of 
London,  by  Thomas  C.larenceu,  othcrwife  called  Tho¬ 
mas  Holme  Knight.  dat.  A.D.  1486.31111.  1  R.R.Hen- 
rici  viii.  190. 

This  is  copied  by  Auguftine  Withie ;  &  hath  the 
Creft  tricked  above  the  vacant  Efcocheon  in  the  margin. 

1 17.  Confirmation  of  the  fame  Arms,  by  Thomas  Be¬ 

noit  Clarencieux.  dat.  1 1  th  Octob.  ann.  22  R.  R.  Hen- 
ricivm.  1 91. 

1 18.  Match  of  Cutbert  Lord  Ogle,  with  his  Arms 

haftily  tricked  by  John  Withie.  194. 

119  Grant  of  an  Augmentation  to  the  Arms  & 
Creft  of  Sir  Reginald  Carnabey  Knight,  out  of  the 
Arms  &  at  the  requeft  of  Henry  Earl  of  Northumber¬ 
land,  by  Thomas  Hawley,  Norroy.  dat.  A.D.  1534. 

195. 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

120.  Confirmation  of  Arms  k  Creft,  unto  Bryan 
Cooke  of  Doncaftcr  in  Com.  Ebor.  by  Henry  St  George 
Norroy.  dat.  27th  Aug.  1635.  (vid.  infra,  N*  149.) 

198. 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

1 1 1 .  Confirmation  of  the  Atchievement,  with  all  alte¬ 
rations  made  in  &  about  the  fame,  unto  Nicholas  Tuf- 
ton  Earl  of  Thanett,  by  Sir  William  Segar,  Garter,  dati 
22d  OGt.  1628.  iqq. 

122.  Confirmation  of  Armes  differenced,  and  Grant 
of  a  Creft  unto  Leonard  Browne  of  Pinchbeck  in  Hol¬ 
land,  within  the  County  of  Lincoln.  Gent,  by  Sir  Ri¬ 
chard  St.  George  Knight,  Clarenceux.  dat.  icth  June, 
1632.  (vid.  fupra,  N"  8.)  200. 

The  Armes  &  Creft  arc  tricked  at  the  bottom  by 
John  Withie  ;  who  alfo  tranfcribed  the  Patent. 

12  3.  Confirmation  of  Amies  Sc  Grant  of  a  Creft  unto 
Thomas  Weolcy  of  Campdcn  in  Com.  Glouc.  by  Robert 
Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  25th  April,  1580.  "  201. 


Num.  1470; 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

1 24.  Certificate  of  Richard  St.  George,  Norroy,  touch¬ 

ing  the  Gentility  of  Stephen  Langfdon  of  Langfdon, 
who  had  declaimed  the  Title  of  a'  Gentleman,  at  the 
time  of  the  Vililation  of  the  County  of  Derby,  A.D. 
1611.  206. 

1 1 5.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Sir  Henry  Henn 
alias  Hene  of  Wingfield  in  Com.Berks.  Knight  &  Ba¬ 
ronet,  by  Sir  John  Borough,  Garter,  dat.  28th  Decemb. 
1642.  (vid.  fupra,  N"  25.)  20 7. 

The  Prick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

126.  Confirmation  of  the  Arms,  &  Grant  of  a  Creft, 
unto  John  Marfiie  of  Marton,  in  Kent,  by  William  Se¬ 
gar,  Garter.  dat.  10th  June  1616.  208. 

The  Accuracy  of  this  C-opie  is  attefted  by  John 
Withie ;  who  feems  to  have  tricked  the  Coat  k  Creft  in 
the  margin. 

I2~.  The  Arms  of  Goking  quartering  Durant;  trick¬ 
ed  above  fome  Notes  of  Mr.  John  Philipot,  relating  there¬ 
unto.  (vid.  fupra  N°  41.)  209. 

125.  Confirmation  of  the  Armes  k  Creft:  of  Anthony 

Knot  Reftor  of  Whitchurch  in  the  County  of  Southamp¬ 
ton,  by  Sir  Richard  St.  George,  Clarenceux.  dat.  15th 
April  1632.  212. 

Tranfcribed  by  John  Withie,  who  hath  alfo  haftily 
tricked  the  Coat  &  Creft  in  the  margin. 

1 2  9.  Confirmation  of  Armes  k  Creft  unto  John  Rav- 
noldes  of  Atlebrugh  in  Com.  Norff.  Gent,  and  Henry 
his  bro filer,  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  14th 
Gift.  1576.  (vid.  fupra,  N“  53  )  213. 

The  Coat  8c  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin  bv  John 
Withie.  ' 

130.  Declaration  of  the  Defcent,  with  alteration  of 

the  Coat  k  Creft,  Sc  marlhalling  the  Quarterings  of 
Samuel  Bifpham  of  Billing  in  Com.  Lancaftr.  Efq.'  dat. 
ift  Decemb.  1640.  216. 

The  Arms  &  Creft  are  haftily  tricked  in  the  margin 
by  John  Withie. 

13 1.  Conceflio Differentiae  ad  Anna,  fimul  cum  Crifta 

Johanni  Bradfliawe  Procamerario  Scaccarij  R.  Jacobi  1. 
per  DnmRicardum  de  Sanfto  Georgio,  Clarenceux  nun¬ 
cupate.  dat.  .  .  Jan.  1624.  220. 

Delineantur  in  margine  Anna,  cum  Timbro,  per 
Joannem  Withie. 

132.  Confirmation  of  Armes  k  Grant  of  a  Creft: 

unto  Nicholas  Mofeley,  Alderman  of  London,  by  Ro¬ 
bert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  17th  Febr.  1 597.  221. 

The  Coat  k  Creft  are  tricked  in  the  margin,  a;:d 
the  Patent  was  collated  by  John  Withie. 

133.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  Richard  Elkin  of 

London,  Gent,  by  Gilbert  Dethick  Garter,  dat.  3th 
March,  anno  4  R.  Edw.  vi.  222. 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

134.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unta  the  full  honour¬ 
able  Crafte  k  Fraternyte  of  the  Grey-Tawyers  of  the 
Cite  ofLondon,  by  Thomas  Clarenceu,  othenvife  callyd 
Thomas  Holme  Knight*  Yeven,  27th  of  Septemb.  anno 
16  R. R.Edw.  iv. 

'1  he  Patent  is  tranfcribed.  Sc  the  Coat  k  Creft  pret¬ 
tily  tricked  in  the  margin,  by  John  Withie. 

135.  Confirmation  of  the  above-mentioned  Armes  & 

Crelfc,  by  Thomas  Benoit  Clarenceux.  dat.  iiihO&o- 
ber,  ann.  22  Hen.  vm.  226.  b. 

This  is  alfo  copied  by  John  Withie,  who  hath  alfo 
tricked  the  Seal  of  Clarenceux ;  and  examined  the  fame 
with  his  fon  Auguftine. 

136.  Grant  of  a  Creft  k  Supporters  to  the  Arms  of 

the  Corporation  of  Skinners  of  London,  by  -  Thomas 
Hawley  alias  Clarencieulx.  dat.  5th  (J&.  ann.  4  R. 
Edw.  vi.  227. 

The  Patent  is  tranfcribed  by  John  Withie,  who  hath 
tricked  the  Atchievement  (except  the  Helmet  wr  atb  & 

mantle) 


Num.  1470.. 

mantle)  in  the  margin;  as  alfo  the  Seals  of  Arms  Sc  of 
Office  of  the  faid  Hawley  Clarenceux,  at  the  bottom. 
Moreover,  he  Sc  his  fan.  Auguftine  collated  this  Copie 
with  the  Original,  and  attelled  he  fame. 

137.  Confirmation  of  the  Armes  with  Quartering, 

and  Grant  of  a  Creft,  unto  John  Curtis  of  London  Gent, 
bv  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  9th  May, 
1632,  2*8 

Tranfcribed,  &  the  Coat  &  Creft  tricked  m  the 
margin,  by  John  Withie- 

138.  Illuftris  et  perantiquae  Familias  de  D’F.wes  in 

Anglia  jam  Equeftris,  a  Familia  Des  Ewes  olim  Dynafta- 
rum  five  Dominorum  Ditionis  de  Keffell  in  Gelria,  ori- 
undm  Stemma.  (vid.  fupra,  N°  1  o.)  2  3 

This  is  dated  A  D.  1644.  and  feemeth  to  have 
been  done  by  the  Order  of  Sir  Simonds  Dewes ;  and 
hath  alfofome  Additions  at  the  end. 

139.  Alteration  of  the  Arms  Sc  Crefl  of  Thomas 

Cropley  of  Rookels-hall  in  Shelland  in  Com.  Suff.  by 
Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  12th  May, 
1635.  i  vid.  fupra,  N"  54.)  _  235. 

The  Patent  feemeth  to  have  been  tranfcribed,  Sc  the 
Armes  Sc  Crefl  haftily  tricked  in  the  margin,  by  Mr. 
John  Withie. 

140.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Crefl  unto  John  Pic- 

ton  de  Com.  Ceflr.  by  Thomas  Clarenceu  (i.  e.  Thomas 
Holme )  dat.  A. D.  i486.  236. 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

141.  Copie  of  an  Inflrument  in  Latin,  whereby  Louis 

Count  d’Egmond,  &c.  promifeth  to  reinflate  Sir  ‘  imonds 
D’F.wes  in  the  Caftle  &  Territory  of  Keffel;  as  foon  as 
he  himfelf,  or  his  heirs  fhould  be  reflored  to  the  Duchy 
of  Geldres  &  County  of  Zutphen.  dated  at  London,  1  Sth 
October,  1642.  237. 

The  Arms  of  the  Count,  and  of  Sir  Simonds,  with 
the  Seal  of  the  faid  Count,  are  tricked  in  the  margin, 
and  at  the  bottom. 

142.  Grant  of  an  Augmentation,  Sc  a  Crefl  unto  Ri¬ 

chard  Godard,  Citizen  &  Alderman  of  London,  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Dethic,  Garter,  &  William  Camden  Clarenceux. 
dat.  15th  Augull,  A.D.  1598.  _  _  241. 

The  Trick  of  the  Atclvevcment  is  omitted. 

143  Grant  of  Arms  &  Crefl  unto  Robert  Gray  Citi¬ 
zen  Sc  Merchant  Taylor  of  London  fa  Man  of  diftin- 
guifhed  charily)  and  to  Thomas  Gray  his  nephew,  by 
Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  .  .  April, 

1635.  (vid.  fupra,  N°  9. )  242. 

144.  Original  Grant  of  Arms  unto  the  Craft  ofBar- 
bory  Sc  Surgery  of  the  Cite  of  London,  by  Clarenfew 
King  of  Armes.  (perhaps  Roger  Legh)  dat.  29th  Sept. 
30  Hen.  vi.  245- 

This  is  written  upon  Parchment,  &  hath  the  Sign 
Manuel  of  the  faid  Clarenceux  yet  remaining  ;  but  his 
Seal  is  gone. 

14;.  Copie  of  the  Inflrument  whereby  Edward  Somer- 
fet  Marquis  of  Worcefler,  granted  Licenfe  unto  Thomas 
Bayly  El'q.  to  bear  the  Portcullis  his  Crefl,  under  the 
Coronet  of  a  Marquis  in  an  Inefcocheon.  dat.  26th 
Febr.  A.D.  1651.  246. 

The  Arms  are  haftily  tricked  at  the  bottom. 

146.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft,  unto  John  Lang¬ 
ley  Citizen  8c  Fifhmonger  of  London,  by  Sr/ Richard 
St. George  Clarenceux.  dat.  4th  June,  1632.  (vid.  fupra, 

NJ  18.)  _  .  *47; 

1  his  is  tranfcribed  by  John  Withie,  who  haftily 
tricked  the  Arms  &  Creft  ac  the  top. 

lr-.  Grant  of  Arms  Sc  Creft  unto  William  Rice  of 
Boemer  in  Com.  Bucks,  by  William  Hawley  Clarence¬ 
ux.  dat.  2d  May,  ann.  2  Sc  3  Phil.  Sc  Mar.  248. 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

148.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Thomas  Goodall 
of  Earle-Stonham  in  Com.  Suff.  Gent,  by  William  Se- 


Num.  14701 

gar  Garter,  dat.  ill  March,  1612.  (vid.  fupra,  N"  13.) 

250. 

Tranfcribed  by  John  Withie,  who  haftily  tricked 
the  Coat  &  Crefl  in  the  margin. 

149.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft,  unto  Bryan 

Cooke  of  Doncafter  in  Com.  Ebor.  Gent,  by  Hen.  St.  . 
George  Norroy.  dat.  27th  Aug.  1635.  (vid.  fupra,  N* 
120.)  252. 

This  is  hailily  tranfcribed  by  John  Withie,  who 
omitted  tricking  the  Atchievement. 

1 50.  Confirmation  of  Arms  Sc  Creft,  unto  Henry 

Parvis  of  Surrey,  Sc  Edward  his  brother,  by  William 
Dethick  Garter  Sc  William  Camden  Clarenceux  ;  which 
faid  Arms  Sc  Creft  were  before  confirmed  by  Sir  Gilbert 
Dethick  Garter,  unto  the  laid  Henry  Parvis  alone,  dat. 
3d  Dec.  1597.  _  t  .  253- 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

1 31.  Grant  of  Armes  Sc  Creft  unto  Robert  Cooke  of 
Mildham  in  Com.  Norff.  Gentleman,  by  Thomas  Haw¬ 
ley  alias Clarencieulx.  dat.  gth  June,  ann.  2  &  3  Phil.  Sc 
Mar.  234. 

The  Trick  of  the  Atchievement  is  omitted-. 

152.  Grant  of  Arms  Sc  Creft  unto  John  Powney  of 
Old  Windfor  in  Com.  Berks.  Gent,  by  Sir  Edvv.Bysihe, 
Clarenceux.  dat.  31ft  May,  1 66?.  257. 

The  Patent  was  tranferibe  1  by  John  Withie,  who 
haftily  tricked  the  Coat  Sc  Creft  in  the  margin. 

1  -3.  Confirmation  of  the  Armes,  ix  Grant  of  a  Crefl 
unto  George  Lay  cock  of  Southwell  in  Com.  Nott.  by 
Richard  Sc.  George  Norroy.  dat.  20th  Nov.  1613. 

238. 

This  is  abbreviated  by  John  Withie,  who  hailily 
tricked  the  Coat  Sc  Creft  in  the  margin. 

154.  Confirmation  of  Armes  Sc  Ouarterings  unto 

Joane  Vincent  the  wife  of  Robert  Mulfho  of  Thingdon  - 
in  Com.  Nortftton  by  William  Dethick  Garter,  dat.  1  oth 
Nov.  1 587.  259. 

The  Atchievement  is  omi'ted  in  the  margin. 

155.  Thomas  Prefton  Ulvcltcr,  King  of  Armes  in  Ire¬ 

land,  his  Atteflation  of  the  Armes  &c  Creft  of  Thomas 
Humphrey  of  Dublin,  as  they  were  before  certified  by 
William  Camden,  Clarenceux.  dat.  26th  January,  1638. 
(vid.  fupra,  N°  51.)  262. 

The  Certificate  is  of  the  hand-writing  of  John 
Withie,  who  alfo  tricked  the  Coat  &  Creft  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  thereof. 

156.  Grant  of  Coat  Sc  Crefl  unto  John  Fennor  of  the 

Mannor  of  Brneweks  in  Com.  Suffex.  Gent,  by  Tho¬ 
mas  Hawley  Clarencicux.  dat.  10th  Novcmb.  ann.  3  Sc  4 
Phil.  Sc  Mar.  263.  . 

The  Athievemcnt  is  omitted. 

157.  Grant  of  Supporters,  Creft,  &  Motto,  to  the 
Arms  of  rhe  Company  of  Scriveners  of  London,  by  Sir 
Richard  St. George  Clarenceux.  dat.  nth  Nov.  1634. 

26  5. 

The  Atchievement  is  tricked  in  the  margin. 

1  3S.  John  Withie’s  Abridgement  of  the  Confirmation 
of  Arms  Sc  Grant  of  a  Crefl  unto  William  Joliye  of 
LeekeinCom.  Staff,  dat.  27th  Aug.  1614.  266.  • 

The  Coat  Sc  Creft  are  haftily  tricked  at  the  bottom. 

159.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Crefl  unto  Robert  Harding 

Alderman  of  London,  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick,  Garter, 
and  William  Flower  Norroy.  267. 

The  Tranfcript  is  not  linifhed ;  and  the  Atchieve¬ 
ment  omitted. 

160.  Grant  of  Coat  &  Creft  unto  Edward  Wiikir.- 

fon  of  Charleton  in  Com.  Kane.  Efq.  Matter  Cook  to 
Qu.  Elizabeth,  by  Will.  Hervy  Clarenceux.  dat.  20th 
April  1359.  _  .  269* 

The  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

1 6 1.  Grant  of  Armes,  with  an  Inefcocheon  of  Pre¬ 
tence,  Sc  a  Creft.,  unto  Seymour  Bowman  of  Sar.  in 


68 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1470—1472* 

Com.  Wiltes  Efq.  by  Sir  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux. 
dat.  i6thFebr.  1669.  271. 

Tranfcribed  by  John  Withie,  who  tricked  the  Coat 
&  Creft  in  the  margin. 

162.  The  fame  Seymour  Bowman’s  Defcent,  written 
by  John  Withie.  272. 

^  163.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  JohnRoyle 
of  Leftwich  in  Com.  Ceilr.  Gent,  by  William  Ryley, 
Norroy.  dat.  17th  Nov.  1654.  (vid.  fupra,  N°  108.) 

...  273- 

The  Atchievement  is  omitted. 

164.  Grant  of  Coat  &  Creft  unte  John  Cock  of  Pry- 

telwell  in  the  Hundred  of  Rochefort,  within  the  County 
of  Eflcx,  and  to  Richard  his  brother,  by  William  De¬ 
thick  Garter,  dat.  1  ft  June,  1587.  274. 

The  Atchievement  is  haltily  tricked  in  the  margin. 

165.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Patents  abovemention- 
ed:  at  the  end. 

I47I  • 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  Teeming  to  have  been  of  the 
collecting  of  fome  Painter;  as  containing, 

1 .  The  Badges  belonging  to  the  Family  of  Cary  Earl 

of  Hunfdon.  1. 

2.  Badges  &  Mottoes  belonging  unto  fome  Families. 

1.  b. 

3.  Badges  aferibed  to  the  Arms  of  the  Kingdom  of 

Ireland,  Princes  of  Wales,  King  of  France,  Earl  of  Chef- 
ter,  Duke  of  Cornwall,  Maud  the  Emprefs,  &  the  Duke 
of  T orke.  1 .  c. 

4.  Badges  aferibed  unto,  or  ufed  by  many  of  our 

Kings,  Queens,  &  Princes.  1 .  d. 

5.  Part  of  a  Defcent  of  Shirley  of  Iffeld  in  Com.  Suf- 

fex.  .  2.  b. 

6.  A  large  Collection  of  the  Arms  of  Families,  with 

many  of  their  Crelts  &  Quarterings,  putt  down  promif- 
cuoufly,  according  as  they  came  to  hand.  2.  b. 

Thefe  Arms  &  Crefts,  See.  extend  to  92.  inclufive, 
and  have  been  corrected  in  fome  places  where  they  were 
amifs. 

7.  Defcent  of  Povey.  92. 

8.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Armes  contained  in  this 

Book;  excepting  fome  few  ftragglers.  93. 

9.  Account  of  the  Defcent  of  William  Smith  a  l'er- 

vant  to  the  Emperor’s  Majeftie  of  Rufhia;  being  fon  to 
John  Smith  one  of  the  Aldermen  of  Stratford  upon  Avon, 
in  Com.  Warr.  and  defiring  that  fuch  Armes  as  belonged 
to  him,  might  be  fent  to  him  in  Rufiia.  q8. 

10.  Differences  proper  to  be  born  by  Sons,  or  Bre¬ 
thren  of  younger  Houfes  ;  at  the  end. 

J47  2* 

A  Book  in  fol.  for  the  moll  part  of  the  hand  of  Mr. 

John  Saunders  the  Painter-Stainer  ;  containing, 

1.  Part  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  Shroplhire,  accord¬ 

ing  as  it  was  made  8c  taken  A.D.  1623.  by  Robert  Tref- 
vell  Somerfet-Herald,  8c  Auguft in  Vincent  Rouge-Croix, 
for  William  Camden  Clarenceux.  j 2. 

This  feemeth  to  have  been  taken  from  JohnWithie’s 
Book  of  this  Vifitation  (which  was  alfo  grounded  upon 
the  Vifitation  book  of  A.  D.  1584.  taken  by  Richard 
Lee  Portcullis  for  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux)  but  not 
immediately;  and,  in  my  opinion,  is  inferior  to  Withies 
Copie,  fo  far  as  it  goes.  However,  if  it  contain  any 
Deicent  which  that  hath  not,  it  is  more  to  be  valued. 

In  this  part,  befides  fome  Extracts  or  Copies  of  old 
Evidences,  &  Tricks  of  private  Seals,  I  find, 

2.  The  Scales  of  the  iowne  of  Brugenorth.  22. 

3.  The  Common  Seale  of  theTowne  of  Bifliops-Caftle. 

4.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames.  66.  b. 


Num.  1472. 

NB.  Mr.  Saunders  intended  to  have  tricked  the 
Arines  of  the  Shroplhire  Gentry  at  the  beginning  of 
this  Book;  and  accordingly  this  Table  referreth  unto 
them,  although  the  Paper  ftill  remaineth  blank. 

5.  Then  follow  fome  few  Defcents,  belonging  to  this 

Vifitation,  which  fhould  have  preceded  the  Table  above- 
mentioned.  68.  b. 

After  much  blank  Paper,  and  toward  the  end  of 
the  Book,  Mr.  Saunders  entered  down  divers  matters 
relating  to  the  City  of  London,  pr  Parifti  of  St.Dunftan’s 
in  the  Weft,  wherein  he  was  an  eminent  Inhabitant. 
Since  when,  fome  other  Papers  have  been  added  unto 
them,  fome  of  which  are  upon  the  matters  following, 

6.  Verfes  Latin  8:  Englifh,  of  fome  poor  Boys,  of¬ 

fered  to  their  Patrons,  8c  to  John  Withie  or  John  Saun¬ 
ders  among  the  reft.  251. 

7.  A  printed  Summons  for  John  Saunders  to  meet 

his  fellow  Commilfioners  for  charitable  Ufes,  for  the 
City  of  London,  dat.  20th  Oft.  1686.  ibid. 

8.  Argument,  that  the  Temple  is  exempt  from  the 

Jurifdiction  of  the  City  of  London.  252. 

9.  John  Withie’s  printed  Order  to  the  Beadle  of  St. 

Andrew’s  Parifti  in  Holbourn,  requiring  him  to  deliver 
into  his  hands,  a  Scrowle  of  all  the  Baronets,  Knights, 
Efquires  8:  Gentlemen,  within  that  Divifion,  for  the  ufe 
of  Sr.  Edward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux.  dat.  14th  Sept. 
1663.  .  _  254. 

10.  Accotnpt  of  Moneys  received  or  dilburfed  for 

the  ufe  of  the  Parifti  of  St.  Andrew’s  Holbourne,  A.D. 
1658.  &  1659.  255. 

x  1 .  Petition  of  Ifabel  Waters  to  be  admitted  into  St. 
Bartholomew’s  Hofpital,  for  cure.  256. 

12.  Printed  Charge  or  Exhortation,  to  thole  who 
are  called  to  be  Governors  of  the  Hofpital  of  Bridewell. 

257. 

13.  Petition  of  Anne  Daft,  praying  that  her  Son  might 

be  taken  into  Chrift’s  Hofpital :  figned  by  divers  of  the 
Parilh  of  St.  Bride.  258. 

14.  Order  of  the  Veftry  of  St.  Clement’s  Danes, 

obliging  the  Parifliioners  to  make  ufe  of  no  other  than 
the  Pari fh-Pall.  dat.  12th  July  1669.  '  259. 

15.  Printed  Abftraft  of  the  Charter  granted  by  K. 

Charles  n.  for  erecting  a  Corporation  for  relief  of  poor 
Widows  &  Children  of  Clergymen;  with  a  Lift  of  the 
Governors,  as  they  were,  8th  November  1683.  261. 

16.  Printed  Table  of  the  accuftomed  Rates  for  Burials, 
for  the  Parifti  of  St.  Dunftan’s  in  the  Weft.  263. 

17.  I  he  Parifti  Officers  Bill  for  the  buryall  of  Mr. 

Mellithes  in  the  Church  of  St.Dunftan’s  in  the  Weft, 
iotli  Novemb.  1682.  264. 

iS.  Lift  of  the  Officers  of  the  faid  Parilh  or  Ward, 
(where  our  John  Saunders,  is  firft  of  the  Commnn- 
Council-Men.)  265. 

19.  Printed  Certificate,  fhewing  that  John  Saunders 

did  qualify  himfelf,  27th  April,  1673.  267. 

20.  John  Saunders’s  Lift  of  the  Names  &  Surnames 

Sc  Qualities  of  thofe  perfons  that  were  Communicants  at 
the  Parilh-C.hurch  of  St.  Dunflan’s  in  the  Weft,  Lon¬ 
don,  by  virtue  of  an  A£t  of  Parliament  Anno  25  Caroli  11. 
Regis  entituled,  “  An  A<ft  for  preventing  Dangers  which 
may  happen  from  Popilh  Recufants.”  269. 

This  beginneth  20th  April  1 673,  Sc  goeth  on  to  8th 
Fcbr.  1 674  inclufively.  Some  of  the  loofe  Papers  where¬ 
in  their  Names  were  firft  taken,  are  inferted  herein. 

21.  A  Voluntary  Contribution  towards  the  making  & 

fetting.  up  an  Organ  in  the  Parilh  Church  of  St.Dun- 
ftan  s  in  ti  e  Welt,  London;  collected  by  Mr.  John 
Saunders  Com.  Councilman,  Edward  Kempe  Church¬ 
wardens.  A.D.  1674.  284. 

J22-  Orders  for  the  Vefiry  of  the  f.me  Church,  about 
diipofing  of  the  Remainder  of  the  Money  colle&ed  for 
the  making  &  fetting  up  their  Organ.  *  2 86 

6  23.  A  long 


Num.  1472 — 1474. 

23.  A  long  winded  Receipt  figned  by  Mr.  Saunders, 

for  two  finall  Sums.  289. 

24.  Order  of  the  Lord-Mayor  of  London  to  the  Aider- 
man  of  the  Ward  of  Faringdon-without,  to  tranfmitt 
unto  Sir  Henry  St.  George  Clarenceux,  aperfeft  Lilt  of 
all  the  Baronets,  Knights,  Efquires,  Gentlemen  or  re¬ 
puted  Gentlemen,  within  the  faid  Ward :  the  faid  Sir 
Henry  being  authorifed  to  make  a  Vifitation  of  the  faid 
City  of  London  &  Precincts  thereof,  dat.  16  December 
1 290. 

2  c.  A  Noat  of  what  Money  is  fubfcribed  towards  th 
late  Loan e  to  his  Royall  Highnes  the  Prince  of  Orange, 
in  the  Parifii  of  St.  Martin’s  Ludgate,  Farindon  Extra. 

29 1  • 

1 47.3  • 

An  Ileraldical  Book  in  fob  written  &  tricked  by  divers 
hands ;  wherein  are  contained. 

1.  Part  of  the  Atchievement  of  the  Towne  of  South¬ 
ampton  ;  tricked  by  John  Withie. 

2.  Arms  of  many  of  the  Hamplhire  Gentry  tricked  in 
printed  Efcocheons,  by  the  fame. 

i  hefe  have  been  lately  inferted  at  the  beginning. 

3.  Delcent  of  Pink  of  Hamplhire,  with  their  Coat  ; 
fett  down  by  John  Withie,  A.D.  1 657.  inferted. 

4.  Alphabetical  1  able  to  the  enfuing  Defcents. 

5.  Arms  of  the  Hamplhire-Gentry  ;  belonging  (except 

the  3  firft  Coats)  to  the  next  Treatife.  1. 

6.  Defcents  of  the  Hamplhire-Gentry,  as  they  were 

regiftred  A.D.  1530.  by  Thomas  Benoit  Clarenceux; 
A.D.  157;.  or  1576.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux  ; 
and  A.D.  1622.  by  John  Philipot  Rouge-Dragon  for 
William  Camden  Clarenceux,  with  many  Additions  & 
Continuations  made  A.D  1634.  3. 

1  his  with  the  Arms  mentioned  N°  5.  appears  to  be 
copied  from  the  Book  compiled  and  written  by  the 
diligent  Mr.  Mundy,  which  is  now  extant  in  this  Library 
at  90.  A.  16.  only  it  maybe  noted  that  fince  this  was 
taken  from  that,  fome  Additions  have  been  made  to  it, 
which  are  not  to  be  found  in  this.  In  like  manner’ 
fome  Continuations,  Explanatory  Notes,  with  the  addi¬ 
tional  Pedigree  of  Bromfield  are  inferted  into  this,  and 
wanting  in  the  other.  Moreover  as  this  appeareth  to 
be  a  Copie  of  Mr.  Mundy ’s  Book  ;  fo,  by  the  -f  made 
with  Black  Lead  over  molt  of  the  Defcents,  with  fome 
other  Notes,  it  is  plain  that  fome  other  Book  hath  been 
made  from  this. 

7.  At  the  end  is  a  Table  containing  the  Names  of 
“1  of  t,K  Families  whofe  Defcents  are  herein  fett  down 
according  to  the  Order  as  they  (land  in  this  Book  -  but 
the  Notation  of  the  Pages  ihew  that  it  referreth  not  to 
this  Book;  nor  to  the  Book  90.  A.  1 6.  It  is  of  the 
handwriting  of  ...  . 

I474* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  for  the  moft  part,  written 
by  the  hand  of  Mr.  John  Withie  the  Painter-Stainer. 

It  containeth, 

1.  A  Bill  of  Fees  due  to  the  King’s  Servants  from  all 
Perfons  that  receive  the  Honour  of  Knighthood. 

2.  The  Fees  of  the  feveral  Offices  for  a  Baronet’s 
Patent  &  Difcharge. 

3.  The  Defcents  (without  Arms)  of  many  Baronets, 

entred  herein,  m  the  year  1602,  1663,  1664,  1668,  & 
1669,  to  which  Mr.  John  Saunders  hath  made  divers 
continuations,  and  additions.  j 

4.  John  Withies  alphabetical  Table,  as  augmented  by 

Mr.  Saunders  ;  toward  the  end.  3 

y  Defcent  of  Could  ham  of  Appleton  in  Norfi’.  dated 
A.D.  1 664.  written  by  Mr.  Withie  at  the  end. 

Cat.  Harl  Vol!  II. 


Num.  14751 — 14771 

H75- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  I  find, 

1.  A  I  able  lhewing  the  Difpofition  of  the  following 
Ordinary  of  Crefts  ;  begun  to  be  made  by  Mr.  John 
Withie,  but  unfiniflied. 

2.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  thofe 
Families  whofe  Crefts  &  Coats  are  entered  in  this 
Book,  written  by  Mr.  John  Saunders  at  the  beginning 

3.  An  Ordinary  of  Crefts,  with  the  Coats  they  belong 

to,  tricked  on  printed  Papers  by  Mr.  John  Withie  ; 
who  hath  left  much  Room  for  Additions  ;  fome  fmall 
part  whereof  hath  been  made  ufe  of  by  Mr.  John  Saun¬ 
ders.  t.b. 

It  may  be  noted  that  this  excellent  &  ufeful  Collec¬ 
tion  is  not  complete ;  as  including  only  the  Ordinaries  of 
Creatures  or  parts  of  them,  which  are  to  be  fuppofed  to 
have  had  life,  or  to  have  been  in  a  ftate  of  growing. 
And  this  Notion  mull  include  the  heraldical  Monfters, 
as  living  Creatures.  Whether  Mr.  Withie  ever  made 
another  Volume  for  Crelts,  compoled  or  confiding  of 
things  inanimate,  I  know  not. 

4.  In  fome  parts  of  this  Book,  are  inferted  a  few 
Leaves  of  an  older  Collection  of  Crefts,  difpofed  metho¬ 
dically  in  way  of  Ordinary,  fome  part  of  which  may 
perhaps  be  of  the  hand  of  Richard  Scarlet  the  Painter- 
Stainer.  One  of  them,  namely  before  fol.  (88.  hath  the 
latter  end  of  fome  Table  made  to  an  heraldical  Book 
by  Thomas  Knight  Chefter  Herald. 

1476. 

A  very  thick  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  all  written 

&  tricked  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  John  Withie  the  Painter- 

Stainer  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  1  able  to  the  Vifitation  of  London  made  in  1634. 

remaining  in  the  Office  ®f  Armes.  • 

2.  Defcents  without  Armes  in  the  Vifitation-book  of 
London  1633,  &  1634.  remaining  in  the  Office  of 
Armes. 

3.  Table  containing  the  Names  of  the  Defcents  en¬ 
tered  in  this  Booke,  being  the  Vifitation  of  London 
made  Anno  1633  &  1634. 

4.  After  the  Tables  above  mentioned,  &  fome  Paper* 

left  blank,  as  I  fuppofe,  in  order  to  the  tricking  thereon 
the  Armes  of  the  London-Gentry,  comes  the  Vifitation- 
book  of  London,  according  as  the  fame  was  made  & 
taken  in  the  Years  1633  &  1634.  by  Sir  Henry  St.' 
George  Clarenceux,  for  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Cla- 
renceux,  &  Sir  John  Burrough  Norroy.  °  2o. 

Some  of  the  Arms  at  the  beginning  are  coloured. 

5.  There  are  alfo  fome  few  Continuations  &  Additions,- 
done  by  the  fame  Mr.  Withie,  Mr.  Saunders,  &c. 

6.  Herein  is  left  as  much  blank  Paper,  as  will  hold 
the  Vifitation  of  London,  taken  A.D.  16G4, 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1  •  I  Coats  6c  Crefts  of  almoft  all  the  Baronets,  (ac¬ 
cording  to  the  feniority  of  their  Creations)  from  Sir 
Nicholas  Bacon,  to  Sir  Roger  Martin,  who  was  created 
28  March  1667.  tricked  and  painted  with  Colors.  1. 

2.  The  Coat  &  Creft  of  Sir  George  Walker,  who  was 
created  a  Baronet  28  January  1679.  tricked,  as  it  leem- 
eth,  by  Mr.  John  Spicer. 

3.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  thofe  Baro¬ 
nets  whofe  Arms  or  Crefts  are  10  be  found  in  this  Book. 
At  the  end. 


7° 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1478. 

1478. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

x.  The  Coats,  Crefts,  &  Supporters  of  _  the  feveral 
Vifcountsof  England,  painted  as  it  feemeth,  in  few  years 
after  the  Return  of  K.  Charles  11.  1  • 

1.  The  Coats,  Crefts,  &  Supporters  of  mod  of  the 
Barons  of  England,  either  painted  or  tricked,  about 

A.D.  1665.]  5- 

Among  thefe,  I  find, 

3.  The  Style  of  George  Berkeley,  Earl  of  Berkeley,  in 
Print  ;  inferted  after  fol.  6. 

4.  The  Style  of  Francis  Lord  Willoughby  of  Parham, 
written  in  Latin  ;  8c  inferted  after  fol.  12. 

Toward  the  end,  I  find  divers  Funeral  Trophies  (as 
the  Heralds  call  them)  befitting  thofe  of  almoft  all  De¬ 
grees,  painted  in  the  following  order  ;  vizt. 

q.  The  Great  Banner,  &  Six  Bannerols,  all  adorned 
with  the  Arrnes  of  Heneage  Finch  Earl  of  Winchelfea, 
empaling  thofe  of  his  third  Lady,  Catherine  the  daughter 
of  Sir  Thomas  Northclyffe  Sc  widow  of  Sir  John  Went¬ 
worth.  41.  b. 

6.  Trophies  prepared  for  the  Funeral  of  Gilbert  Shel¬ 

don  Arch-Bilhop  of  Canterbury,  who  had  before  been 
Bilhop  of  London,  viz.  Eight  Bannerols  with  various 
Empalemcnts ;  the  Mitre,  Croft,  Crofter,  Keys,  &c. 
the  great  Banner  (remarkable  for  its  Chief)  Six  Efco- 
cheons  with  his  Arms  &  Empalements  ;  Sc  laftly,  his 
Atchievement.  42-  h. 

7.  Trophies,  upon  occafion  of  the  Death  or  Funeral 
of  Thomas  Howard  Duke  of  Norfolk,  as  it  feemeth,  he 
died  in  Italy,  A.D.  1678.  being  unmarried.  They  are, 
Eight  Bannerols  without  Impalement  ;  Coronet  upon  a 
Velvet  Cufltion ;  Surcoat  of  Armes,  with  Flelmet, 
Mantle,  8c  Creft  ;  and  a  Great  Banner,  with  a  Chief. 

43.  b. 

8.  Trophies  at  the  Funeral  of  Henry  Pierpoint  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Dorchefter,  being  Six  Bannerols  without  Im¬ 
palement  ;  Sword,  Target,  &  Coronet ;  Surcoat  of 
Armes,  with  Helmet,  Mantle,  8c  Creft  ;  the  Great  Ban¬ 
ner,  with  a  Chief ;  the  Coronet  upon  a  Cufliion. 

44.  b. 

9.  Trophies  provided  as  it  feemeth,  for  the  funeral 

of  Arthur  Annefley  Earl  of  Anglefey  ;  being,  a  Coronet 
on  a  Cufiiion  ;  a  Great  Coronet  ;  a  Standard  with  the 
Arms  of  St.George ;  his  Creft  &  Motto  ;  Six  Bannerols, 
3  without,  Sc  as  many  with  Empaleraent ;  Gantlets  Sc 
Spurs;  Surcoat  of  Armes,  Helmet,  Mantle,  Sc  Creft, 
Sword  &  Buckler  with  a  Coronet  ;  Great  Banner  with  a 
Chief ;  Six  Efcocheons,  without,  Sc  with  Empalements ; 
laftly,  his  Atchievement.  45.  b. 

10.  Trophies,  as  it  feemeth,  for  BaptiftNoel  Vifcount 

C.ampden  ;  being,  a  Great  Coronet ;  Standard  ;  tour 
Bannerols  with  Sc  without  Empalements  ;  Gantlets  Sc 
Spurs  ;  Surcoat  of  Armes  (in  the  Middle  whereof  is  an 
Inefcocheon  of  Pretence)  with  Helmet,  Mantle,  Sc 
Creft  ;  Sword,  Buckler,  &  Coronet ;  Great  Banner, 
with  a  Chief ;  Coronet  upon  a  Culhion.  The  Atchieve¬ 
ment  is  ommitted.  46.  b. 

11.  Trophies  for  ...  .  Grevile  Baron  Brooke  of 

Beauchamps-Court ;  being  a  Coronet  upon  a  Cufhion  ; 
a  Guidhome  with  his  Creft  ;  a  Standard  ;  four  Ban- 
nerolls  with,  &  without  Impalements ;  Spurs  &  Gantlets; 
Surcoat  of  Armes  with  Helmet,  Mantle  &  Creft  ;  Great 
Banner  with  a  Chief ;  Sword  &  Buckler  with  a  Coronet ; 
laftly,  his  Atchievement.  47.  b. 

1 2.  Trophies  for  Brian  Duppa  Bilhop  of  Winchefter ; 
being  a  Great  Banner  ;  for  Bannerols,  wherein  his  own 
Arms  are  impaled  by  thole  of  the  Sees  of  Winchefter, 
Sar.  &  Chichefter  ;  one  Efcocheon ;  Miter,  Sc  Crofter. 

48.  b. 

1  Trophies  for  ....  Backhoufe,  Baronet;  being, 
a  Bannerol  ;  a  Standard  two  Penons ;  with  his  Armes 


Num.  1478 — 1480. 

Sc  Ouarterings  ;  a  Guidhome  ;  Sword  Sc  Target  ;  Sur¬ 
coat  of  Armes  with  Helmet  Mantle  &  Creft ;  Spurs  Sc 
Gantlet.  49*  b* 

14.  Trophies  for . Hynfon  alias  Powel  (of 

which  family,  &  of  the  reafon  of  the  alias)  vid.  82 
C.  4.  fol.  35.  (as  alfo  the  Vifitation-book  of  Middlefex, 
of  A.D.  1664.)  they  are  Two  Penons  ;  two  Efcocheons  ; 
Surcoate  of  Armes,  with  Helmet  Mantle  &  Creft,  and 
an  Atchievement.  5°-  b- 

15.  Tophies  for  ...  .  Vyner  ?  being  a  Standard, 
which  fhould  have  been  made  with  a  Hit  at  the  end  ; 
two  Penons  ;  Surcoat,  with  Flelmet,  Mantle,  &:  Creft. 

51. b. 

16.  Reprefentation  of  the  other  fides  of  the  two  Pe¬ 
nons  laft  mentioned.  52, 

1  479. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 
painted  in  Colours, 

1.  The  Arms,  Garter,  Crown,  &  Supporters  ;  as 

alfo  the  Creft  of  King  Charles  11.  Sovereign  cf  the  molt 
Noble  Order  of  the  Garter.  *• 

2.  The  Armes  of  23  Knights  of  the  Garter,  the  laft 

whereof  are  thofe  of  the  late  Duke  of  Monmouth,  as  I 
guefs  (vid.  N°  1481.  fol.  198.)  All  of  them  have  their 
Garters  8c  Crefts  ;  theKnights  of  Great-Britam  have  their 
Supporters,  as  alfo  hath  his  late  Royal  Highneis  Prince 
George  of  Denmark  ;  but  the  Supporters  of  other 
foreign  Princes  are  omitted,  as  perhaps  being  unknown. 
Some  of  our  Englilh  Knights  have  their  Stiles  written  at 
length  ;  and  many  of  them  have  Efcocheons  of  their 
Armes  with  their  Quarterings,  on  the  other  fide  of  the 
Leaves.  2- 

3.  Armes  of  Charles  Seymour  fonne  Sc  heire  ofFran- 
cis  Lord  Seymour  of  Trowbridg,  with  all  his  Quarter¬ 
ings  ;  tricked  by  Mr.  John  Withie,  and  unfitly  inferted 
at  fol.  26. 

4.  Arms  cf  James  Scott  Duke  of  Monmouth,  as 

Knight  of  the  Garter;  in  Trick.  27. 

5.  Arms  of  die  Dukes,  Marquifes,  &  of  moft  of  the 

Earls  of  England  (the  lalt  being  thofe  of  the  late  Wil¬ 
liam  Earl  of  Craven)  living  about  A. I).  16 65.  who  were 
not  Knights  of  the  Garter  ;  painted,  with  their  Crefts, 
Coronets,  Sc  Supporters.  28. 

Then  follow, 

6.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Peers  of  the  Kingdom  of  Eng¬ 

land,  according  to  their  Birth  8c  Creations:  London 
printed  by  I).  Maxwell,  1660.  (in  Angle  fheet,  with  fome 
written  Continuations.)  59. 

7.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Nobility  of  England,  accord¬ 

ing  to  their  refpettive  Precedencies,  as  it  was  prefented  to 
his  Majefty  by  John  Dugdale  Efq;  Windfor-Herald,  De¬ 
puty  to  Sir  William  Dugdale  Knight  Garter  principal 
King  of  Armes,  on  New-ye'ars-day,  1684.  to  which  is 
added  the  Blazon  of  their  paternal  Coats  of  Armes 
refpedively  ;  and  a  Lift  of  the  prefen t  Bifhops.  Printed 
at  London  A.D.  1685.  on  a  fingle  Sheet  by  the  Ap¬ 
pointment  of  Henry  Howard  Duke  of  Norfolk  Sc  Earl 
Marfliall  of  England.  60. 

14^0. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Alphabetical  'Table  containing  the  Surnames  of 
thofe  Families  whole  Defcents  are  entered  in  the  enfuing 
Treatife. 

2.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  OxfordOiire,  as 
the  fame  was  made  &  taken  A.D.  1634.  by  John  Philipot 
Somerfet-Herald,  Sc  William  Ryley  Blew-mantle,  for 
Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceuy,  8c  Sir  John  Bo¬ 
rough,  Norroy,  who  vifited  jointly. 

In  this  Copie,  excepting  the  Atchievement  of  the 
City  of  Oxford  ;  all  public  Arms  Sc  Seals  are  omitted  ; 
nor  are  there  any  Tranfcripts  of  Evidences,  Tricks  of 
private  Seals,  or  Church-Notes. 

Codex 


Bibliothecae  Harleiante. 


7i 


Num  I48i_i483. 

1481. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  ab  Auguftino  Withio,  ut  vide- 
tur  (cum  patris  fui  Johannis  auxilio)  affabre  Scriptus, 
vividifq;  Coloribus  depiftus.  In  illo  conneftuntur, 

1.  De  Origine,  Antiquitate,  et  Differentijs  Armorum 
five  Infigniorum,  Roberti  Gloveri  aliis  Somerfet,  Fe- 
cialis  Regij,  Obfervationes  aliquot. 

2.  Traftatui  pramittitur,  Cognominum  Familiarum, 
quarum  allegantur,  Arma  fimul  et  exhibentur,  Tabula 
alphabetico  Ordine  digefta. 

3.  Poll;  fol.  89.  inferuntur  folia  nonnulla,  in  quibus 
comparent  Exempla  Differentiarum  jam  olim  per  plures 
Nobiles  geftarum,  aliens  manu  fcripta  et  delineata. 

4.  Stemma  Dominorum  Comitum  Penbrochiae,  Comi- 
tum  de  Clara,  nec  non  Dominorum  de  la  Biffe,  ab  an- 
tiquis  Normannias  Ducibus  deduftum  ;  manu  Johannis 
Withij :  infertum  poll  folium  109. 

1482. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written,  tricked,  &  painted 
by  divers  hands  ;  wherein  I  find, 

1.  The  Arms  of  King  James  vi.  and  of  the  Nobility  of 
Scotland,  done  in  colors  A.D.  1602.  with  fome  Decla¬ 
ration  of  molt  of  their  Births,  PolTeffions,  &  Alliances. 

2.  The  Names  and  Armes  in  colors,  of  the  Earles, 

Vifcounts,  &  Barons  of  Ireland.  13.  b. 

1  hen  followeth  a  Traft  with  this  incoherent  Title, 

3.  A  Colleftion  of  the  Names,  Armes,  &  Matches 

of  the  Nobility  of  England,  whofc  Families  do  at  this 
prefent  1572.  continue,  and  in  what  King’s  time  they 
had  their  Dignities  &  feveral  Styles  of  Honour,  efpecially 
from  the  beginning  of  K.  Id.  8.  K.  E.  6.  Q.  M.  &  Q. 
Eliz.  with  our  molt  gratious  Soveraigne  Lord  K.  James 
of  England  France  &  Ireland  the  Firlt,  &  of  Scotland 
the  Sixt,  Aiio  1604.  16. 

This  Traft  containeth  the  Armes,  &  Crefts  of  many 
of  our  Englilh  Nobility,  with  their  Quarterings,  &  the 
feveral  Families  to  whom  the  Arms  fo  quartered,  did  or 
do  flill  belong :  done  in  Colours  by  the  fame  hand 
with  the  former,  in  Colors. 

4.  The  Arms  of  divers  other  honourable  &  antient 

Englilh  Families,  with  their  Crells,  painted  by  the  fame 
hand  :  but  without  any  Names.  29.  b. 

Turning  up  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find  of 
another  hand, 

5.  Armes  of  the  Gentry  &  Corporate  Towns  of  Wilt- 

Ihire  ;  haftily  tricked,  as  it  feemcth,  from  the  Vifitation- 
book  of  that  County,  made  A.D.  1623.  1. 

6.  Armes  of  the  Cornilh  Gentry,  haftily  tricked,  by 

the  fame  hand,  from  the  Book  of  the  Vifitation  of  Corne- 
wall,  taken  1620.  5. 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Families,  intended  to  refer 

to  the  Cornilh  Armes  ;  but  wanting  the  Numbers  of  the 
folios.  g,  b. 

8.  Armes  of  the  Gentry  of  the  Counties  of  Devon, 

Somerfet,  &  Dorfet,  haftily  tricked  by  the  fame  hand, 
from  the  Vifitation-books  of  thofe  Shires,  made  A.D. 
1620.  1623,  &  1624.  asitfecmeth.  10. 

9.  Arms  of  the  Buckingham-Ihire  Gentry,  taken  from 

the  Vifitation-book  of  that  County  made  A.D.  1634. 
Haftily  tricked  by  the  fame  hand.  1 4. 

In  this  Traft  fome  few  Ihort  Dtfcents  are  alfo 
noted. 

1 483 . 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  for  the  moft  part  writtten  & 
tricked  by  Mr.  John  Saunders  the  Painter-Stainer  • 
wherein  are  contained, 

4  .  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  of  Englilh  Fa¬ 
milies  ;  referring  to  the  Treatife  next  enfuing.  I% 


Num.  1483. 

2.  Arms  &  Crefts  born  by  many  Englilh  Families. 

14- 

This  Traft  is  doubly  paged  on  the  right-hand  Mar¬ 
gin  ;  &  the  abovementioned  Table  referreth  unto  it 
accordingly.  Among  them,  are  divers  Arms  born  by 
different  Families  of  the  fame  Name. 

3.  A  Colleftion  of  different  Armes  (with  fome  Crefts) 
born  by  feveral  Families  of  the  fame  Surname.  50.  b. 

4.  An  original  Letter  of  Mrs.  Grace  Saunders,  wife  ? 
of  Mr.  John  Saunders,  lnferted  at  fol.  61. 

5.  A  Memorandum  of  Mr.  John  Saunders,  intimating 

fome  hard  Ufage  he  had  received  of  Mr.  Elias  Alhmole, 
in  not  requiting  his  pains  taken  in  the  Vifitation  of 
Berkfliire.  A.D.  1664.  &c.  61.  b. 

6.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of 

Berks,  as  the  fame  was  made  &  taken  by  Elias  Alhmole 
Windfor-Herald  A.D.  1664.  ftc.  for  Sir  Edward  Byslhe 
Clarenceux.  62.  b. 

By  the  prefent  Memorandum,  it  flrould  feem  as  if 
Mr.  Saunders  (of  whofe  hand  this  Treatife  is)  rode 
Painter  at  this  Vifitation.  If  it  was  fo,  he  might  have 
done  well  to  have  inferted  the  Extrafts  from  old  Deeds, 
Tricks  of  Seals,  &  Church-Notes,  into  this  Copie, 
wherewith  the  original  Booke  in  the  College  of  Armes 
aboundeth  :  All  things  ol  that  kind  being  omitted  herein 
excepting  two  Notes,  relating  to  fome  of  his  own  Sur¬ 
name.  84.  b. 

7  •  In  this  Treatife  I  find  a  large  Pedegree  of  Back- 

houfe,  written  by . inferted  at 

fol.  68. 

The  remaining  part  of  this  Vifitation-book  is  pre- 
fently  to  be  mentioned,  at  N“  13. 

8.  AlphabeticalTable  of  the  Surnames  of  Families, 
whereof  the  beginning  of  each  Letter  referreth  to  fome 
other  Treatife ;  but  the  latter  part  of  the  fame  Letters 
plainly  referreth  to  Mr.  John  Saunders’s  Copie  of  the 
Vifitation  of  Berklhire,  before  &  alter  mentioned.  86. 

9.  Quartered  Coats  of  many  Families  of  our  Englilh 

Gentry,  with  their  Crefts.  97. 

10.  Paternal  Coats  &  Crefts  of  the  EngliflTVifcounts 

&  Barons,  temp.  Caroli  1.  ’  103. 

1 1.  Arms  &  Crefts  of  K. Charles  11.  the  Dukes,  Mar- 

quifes  &  Earls  of  England.  105. 

1  2.  A  Colleftion  of  Arms  born  by  different  families 
of  the  fame  Surname.  107. 

13.  The  latter  part  of  Mr.  John  Saunders  his  Copie 

of  the  Vifitation-book  ol  Berkfliire,  belonging  to  that 
abovementioned,  at  Nu  6.  u0. 

14.  Armes  of  many  Englilh  Families,  tricked  promif- 

cuoufly,  without  Crefts.  140. 

15..  Another  Colleftion  of  Arms  borne  by  different 
Families  of  the  fame  Surname.  144. 

Then  followeth, 

16.  John  Saunders’s  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of 
the  County  of  Southampton,  as  the  fame  was  made  6c 
taken  A.D.  1575  or  1576.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux. 

167. 

Herein  I  find, 

17.  The  Armes?  Creft,  &  Supporters  of  the  Towne 

of  Southampton.  ibid. 

18.  rl  he  Armes  of  the  City  of  Winchefter.  1 75. 

19.  Some  few  Additions.  209.  b. 

Then  follow, 

20.  Another  Colleftion  of  Arms  borne  by  different 

Families  of  the  fame  Surname.  211. 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  referring  to 


the  laft,  &  other  Trafts. 


219. 


22.  Arms  of  many  of  the  Hamplhire  Gentry,  w;ith 

fome  Crefts.  221. 

23.  The  Armes  belonging  to  the  Gentry  of  Scot¬ 
land  ;  putt  down  byway  of  Alphabet.  223. 

24.  Arms  of  the  German  Eleftors ;  of  fome  few 

German  Nobility  ;  &  ol  fome  Cities  in  Germany  and 
Italy.  236.  b. 

25.  Another 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


7* 


Num.  1483 — 1483. 

25.  Another  Colledtion  of  Armes  belonging  to  dif¬ 
ferent  Families  of  the  fame  Surname.  237. 

26.  Another  alphabetical  Table,  of  little  ufe  as  is 

fecmeth  to  me :  lince  one  good  Table  to  this  Book, 
taking  it  from  beginning  to  end,  would  be  of  much  more 
Convenience.  256, 

1484. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  for  the  molt  part  written  Sc 

tricked  by  Ralfe  Brooke  Yorke  Herald?  wherein  are 

contained, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  to  the  Tra£t  next  erifuing. 

1.  b. 

2.  The  Defcent  &  Armes  of  Skinner  of  Lincolnfhire, 

by  a  more  modern  hand  (Edward  Cole  ?)  3. 

3.  A  Copie  of  the  Vefatation  of  Lincolnefhier,  as  taken 
the  yere  of  our  Lord  God  1562.  by  Robert  Cooke 
Chefter-Herald,  for  William  Hervey  Clarenceux.  3.  b. 

This  Copie  hath  many  Continuations  &  Additions. 

4.  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of 

Derby,  as  the  fame  was  made  Sc  taken  A.D.  1569.  by 
William  Flower  Norroy,  &  in  his  company  Robert 
Glover  Portcullis.  34. 

In  this  Copie  are  fome  Continuations. 

5.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  abovementioned  Vifita- 

tion  of  Derbyfhire.  4c.  b. 

6.  Copie  of  a  Book  of  the  Vicytation  of  Suffolke. 

4 1  • 

Moft  of  theDefcents  in  this  Tra£t  are  A.D.  1585. 
but  whether  that  County  was '  then  vifited,  or  who  took 
the  fame,  I  cannot  as  yet  certainly  learn.  In  this  Traft 
are  alfo  fome  few  Continuations,  and  the  labour’d 
Pedigree  of  Eaffingbourne  is  deduced  to  A.D.  1608. 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  abovementioned  Vifita- 

tion  of  Suffolke.  5 1 . 

8.  The  Vefeitation  of  the  County  ofEffex,  by  William 

Harvy  Efqnire  alias  Clarencieulx  King  of  Armes  ;  begone 
at  Sir  Peter  Meantys  howfe  the  10  day  of  Augult  Anno 
'558-  S1- 

Herein  I  find,  befides  fome  modern  Additions,  by 
Edward  Cole  the  Painter-Stainer  ? 

9.  The  Armes  of  the  Towne  of  Colchefler.  55. 

10.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  abovementioned  Vifita- 

tion-book  of  Effex.  59. 

1 1 .  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-books  of  the  Counties  of 
Kent  &  Suffex ;  perhaps  as  the  fame  were  made  Sc  taken 
A.D.  1574.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  60.  b. 

The  Defcents  of  thefe  Counties  are  jumbled  toge¬ 
ther  ;  Sc  there  are  fome  few  madern  Additions  by  the 
hand  ef . 

12.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  preceding  Tract.  70. 

13.  Defcent  of  Moulfho  from  Nevell  Sc  Nowers  ;  by 

the  firft  hand.  7 1 . 

14.  Arms  of  Mafs  of  London,  A.D.  1634.  72. 

15.  Armes  &  Quarttrings  of  Sir  William  Winter  of 
Glocefterfhire  ;  done,  as  the  former,  perhaps  by  the 
fame  Edward  Cole.  Toward  the  end. 

1 6.  At  the  other  End  of  the  book  are  fome  Family 
Accompts,  written  by  another  hand,  and  of  no  great 
value. 

1485- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  divers 
hands;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft,  with  differences,  unto 
Thomas  Wood  of  Hackney  in  Com.  Midd.  Efq;  by  Sir 
Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  28  June,  A.D. 

1 634.  At  the  Beginning. 

Then  followeth, 

2.  Colle&ion  of  Armes  with  many  of  the  Crefts,  of 

noble  &  worlhipful  Families,  without  Order.  j . 

The  Perfon  who  tricked  thefe  had  a  pretty  fort  of 
a  manner,  by  imitation  of  the  manner  ufed  by  Mr.  John 


Num.  1485,  1486. 

Gough,  Mr.  Richard  Mundy,  &c.  and  was  capable  of 
out-doing  by  far,  what  he  had  done  in  this  Book. 

In  this  Collection  are  put  down  together, 

3.  Four  different  Coats  born  by  the  Names  of  Wike, 

or  Wikes.  9.  &  9.  b. 

4.  Twelve  different  Coats  born  by  the  Names  of  Iio- 

ton,  Hotton,  Huton,  Sc  Hutton.  35.  b. 

5.  Arms  born  by  the  Family  of  Metham,  &  their 

Matches.  59.  b. 

6.  Some  Arms  &  Crefts  tricked  by  Mr.  John  Saun¬ 
ders  ;  but  haflily.  6 1 . 

7.  Arms  impaling,  Sc  empaled  by  Whitfield. 

71.  b.  72.  b.  70.  !'n.  b. 

8.  Eight  different  Coats  born  by  the  Name  «.  :  Moul¬ 
ton.  111.  vid.  1  >2.  b.  1  >8. 

9.  Three  different  Coats  bom  by  the  Name  of  Car¬ 
penter.  iiS.b. 

10.  Arms  of  the  Kentxfh  Gentry,  formerly  in  alpha¬ 
betical  Order  ;  but  tricked  here  in  much  Dil'order. 

1 19.  b. 

1  x.  Arms  of  the  Nobili'y  Sc  Knights  having  Edatcs  in 
Kent ;  temp.  R.  Eliz.  143. 

12.  Arms  impaling,  &  impaled  by  Calthrop,  &  others. 

.  .  .  J54-b. 

13.  Arms  impaling,  &  impaled  by  Stapleton. 

ibid.  8c  175. 

14.  Arms  impaling,  &  impaled  by  Temple.  156. 

15.  Two  different  Coats  born  by  the  Name  ofScriven. 

x  56.  b. 

16.  Arms  of  Mannocke  impaling  thofe  of  divei-s  other 

Families.  158.  b. 

1 7.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Arms  tricked  in  this 

Book.  139. 

i486. 

An  Heral  lical  B  1  k  in  fol.  wh<  rein  I  fii  d  c 

1.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifilai ion-book  of  Worcefterfhire, 

as  the  fame  was  made  and  taken  A.D.  1569.  by  Robert 
Cooke  Clarenceux.  1. 

Mr.  John  Withie  erroneoufly  entituled  this  Part  of 
the  Book,  Worccfterlhire  1571-  induced  thereunto,  as  I 
fuppofe  as  calling  his  Eie  at  the  bottom  oi  Talbots 
Defcent,  fol.  2 1 .  whereas  that  is  not  the  Date  of  the  Vili- 
tation,  but  of  that  Addition.  And  there  are  many  more 
Additions  to  other  Defcents  in  this  Copie. 

There  are  no  Proofs,  and  but  few  Arms  in  this 
Copie  ;  thofe  Arms  that  are  here,  are  almolt  all  in 
Blazon. 

The  Defcents  of  Families  are  entered,  here,  by  way 
of  Alphabet,  and  not  according  to  their  refpcctive  Habi¬ 
tations. 

2.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Defcents,  in  this  Vifita¬ 
tion-book.  of  W orcefter-fhire.  2  2 .  b.. 

Then  followeth, 

3.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of 

Derby,  as  the  fame  was  made  Sc  taken  A.D.  16,1.  by 
Richard  St.  George  Norroy  ;  8c  in  his  company,  Nicho¬ 
las  Charles  Lancaffer-IIerald,  Sc  Henry  Sc.  George 
Rouge-Rofe.  23. 

This  Vifitation  was  grounded  upon  the  old  one 
taken  A.D.  1569.  by  William  Flower  Norroy,  &  Robert 
Glover  Portcullis  ;  and  aboundeth  with  Extracts  & 
Tranfcripts  of  private  Deeds,  Tricks  of  Seals,  private 
&  public  ;  asalfo  with  Church-Notes  ;  among  all  which, 
for  as  much  as  the  Copies  of  his  Vifitation  do  greatly 
differ  from  one  another,  in  order  to  the  Readers  con¬ 
ceiving  a  truer  Idea  of  this,  I  fhall  particularly  mention, 

4.  The  Common  Seale  of  the  Burro  ugh  &  Shire- 

Town  of  Darby.  23. 

5.  The  Common  Seale  of  the  Burrough  Si  Towne  of 

C.hefterfield.  ibid. 

6.  Succeifio  Comitum  Ceftria; ;  cum  ir.fignibus eorum. 

3°* 

5  7.  Notes 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


73 


Nuin.  i486,  1487. 

7.  Notes  taken  in  Swarkeftone-Church,  10  Aug. 

i6ti.  32. 

8.  Armes  in  Sir  John  Harpurs  howfeat  Swarfcombe- 

bridge.  ibid. 

9.  Notes  taken  in  St.  Alkmund’s  Church  in  Derby, 

*3  Aug.  1 61 1.  _  33. 

xo.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  at  Huckna,  commonly 
called  Hanging  Hucknse.  ibid. 

1 1.  Notes  taken  in  the  Chappell  of  the  Curfons,  with¬ 
in  the  Church  of  Ketleftone.  34.  b.  35.  b.  3b. 

12.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Sutton  in  the  Dale. 

47* 

13.  Notes  taken  in  Tiddefwall-Church.  52. 

14.  Notes  taken  in  Lnngefdon-Church.  54. 

13.  Notes  taken  in  Barley-Church,  neere  C'.heflerfeild, 

27  Aug.  16x1.  58.  , 

16.  Arms  in  the  Windowes  at  the  Howfe  at  Barley. 

ibid. 

1487. 

A  thick  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  at  the  beginning  thus 
enlituled, 

1.  The  Vifitation  of  Yorklhire  made  by  Robert 
Clover  Somerfett-Herald,  Marfhall  8c  Dcputie  to  Wil¬ 
liam  Flower  Norroy  King  of  Armes  A.D.  1  584  &  1585. 
Together  with  the  Vifitation  of  the  fame  Countie  made 
by  Richard  St. George  F.fq;  alias  Norroy  King  of  Armes, 
Anno  Dm  161a  And  inlarged  with  the  Vifitation  of 
the  lame  Countie  made  by  Thomas  Tong  alias  Norroy 
King  of  Armes,  in  the  tvme  of  King  Henry  the  vm. 
A.D.  1530.  ali  written  6c  tricked  by  John  Withie,  who 
hath  alio  made  Additions  unto  manv  of  the  Defcents,  &c. 

Obfervables  in  this  valuable  book  befides  the  Vifita- 
tions,  8c  Mr.  Withie’s  Continuations  of  Defcents  above- 
mentioned  ;  may  be, 

2.  Trick  of  Six  Piftures  of  Knights  in  Mail,  with 
Surcoats  of  their  Arms,  &c.  of  a  very  antient  Falhion, 
taken  from  a  Window  in  the  metropolitical  Church  of 
York,  22  Oft.  1640.  by  Mr.  John  Withie.  At  the 
beginning. 

3.  Trick  of  an  old  Tomb  in  the  fame  Church,  of  fuch 
another  antient  Knight,  with  the  Arms  carved  thereon  ; 
done  the  fame  day  by  Mr.  Withie. 

4.  Letter  of  the  Earls  of  Northampton,  Suffolke,  Sc 

Worcefter,  Commifli oners  for  executing  the  Office  of 
Earl-Marlhall  of  England,  direfted  to  the  Knights  & 
Gentlemen  of  the  Counties  of  Nottingham,  Yorlce, 
Bifhoprick  of  Durham,  8c  the  reft  of  the  Counties  from 
Trent,  Northward  ;  requiring  them  to  forward  Richard 
St.  George  Efq;  Norroy,  in  his  Vifitation  of  his  Pro¬ 
vince.  dat.  15th  July,  1612.  6. 

5.  Letter  of  the  fame  Lords  Ccmmiffioners  to  Baron 

Alrham  &  Baron  Bromley  Juftices  of  Affife  of  the  County 
of  Yorke,  See.  requiring  them  to  caufe  Mr.  Norroy’s 
Commiffion  to  be  read  in  the  face  of  the  County,  and 
publique  Notice  thereof  to  be  taken,  as  hath  been  for¬ 
merly  accuftomed  ;  in  order  to  the  fame  Vifitation. 
dat.  15  July,  1612.  ibid. 

6.  Armes  or  Seale  of  the  Town  of  Pontefraft.  8.  b. 

7.  Armes  or  Seale  of  the  Cittie  of  Yorke.  10.  b. 

8.  Lift  of  the  Mayors  &  Bayliffs,  8c  Mayors  &  Sheriffs 
of  the  C.itty  of  Yorke,  from  A.D.  1273.  to  A.D.  1495. 
both  inclusive.  Inferted  before  fol.  1 1 . 

9.  Blank-Paper,  excepting  only  printed  Efcocheons, 

with  fpace  allotted  for  Crefts  8c  Titles  ;  wherein  Mr. 
Withie,  probably  intended  to  trick  the  Arms  8c  Crefts  of 
the  Yorklhire-Gentry.  11. 

10.  Kalendarium  omnium  Jufticiariorum  Pads,  Co- 
ronatorum,  Ballivorum  Libertatum,  et  Wapentagiorum 
ad  Allifas  et  Gaolrc  Deliberationem,  apud  Caftrum  Ebor. 

.  .  die  Augufti,  A.D.  1583.  31. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  If. 


Num.  1487 — 1495, 

1 1 .  Nomina  Libere  Tenentium  infra  Comitatum  Eboik 

A.D.  .584.  32. 

Forms  of  Warrants,  8cc.  ufed  by  Robert  Glover 
Somerfet-Herald  at  his  Vifitation  of  this  Countie,  vizt. 

12.  A  Warant  10  thecheife  Bayliff  of  the  Wapentake 

of . in  the  County  of  Yorke,  to  furo- 

mon  all  Knights,  Efquires,  8c  Gentlemen  within  the 
Wapentake  to  appeare  before  Norroy  Kinge  of  Amies, 
or  his  Marfhall,  cxc.  35.  b. 

1 3.  A  Letter  to  be  feen  togeather  with  the  faid  Warant 

unto  the  faid  Bayliff.  36. 

1 4.  A  Precept  for  appearance  before  the  Earle  Marfhall 

of  England,  vpon  Contempt.  36. 

15.  A  Proclamation  of  fuch  as  are  to  be  denounced 

ignoble,  with  notice  to  the  Shrieff,  Clarkes  of  the  Affizes, 
and  of  the  Peace,  thenceforth  to  forbeare  to  wright  or 
call  them  by  the  Names  or  Titles  of  Efquires  or  Gentle¬ 
men.  36.  b. 

16.  The  Names  and  Armes  in  Blazon,  of  futch 
Knights  &  Gentlemen  of  the  Countie  of  Yorke,  as  ferved 
Kinge  Edward  the  Fiift  in  Scotland,  and  elfewhere. 

37- b- 

17.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Shoredich,  5 

March  1639.  by  John  Withie.  50. 

1  8.  Some  few  Proofs  from  Evidences,  Tricks  of  pri¬ 
vate  Seals,  8cc.  fparfim. 

19.  Arms  of  fome  Yorkfliire  Families;  perhaps 

given  to,  or  born  by  fuch,  whole  Defcent,  or  Relation  to 
others  of  the  fame  Names  might  have  been  fomewhat 
doubtful.  488.  b. 

20.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames ;  referring  to  the 

preceding  Defcents,  8cc.  489. 

NB.  Although  Mr.  Withie,  as  is  mentioned  by  him, 
did  ufe  the  Vifitation  book  of  Thomas  Jong  Norroy  of 
A.D.  1530.  he  took  no  more  from  thence  than  the 
Defcents  &  Arms  of  Families. 

He  hath  alfo  omitted  the  numerous  Church  Notes, 
Sir  Wm.  Fairfaxes  Book  of  Armes  of  the  Yorkfhire- 
Gentry,  found  in  divers  Copies  of  Mr.  Robert  Glover’s 
Vifitation-book  of  this  County. 

1488 - 1495. 

Eight  Vols.  in  folio,  being  a  Journal  or  Minutes  takers 
before  the  C.ommiffioners  (appointed  by  Aft  of  Parlia¬ 
ment  in  the  Reign  of  King  William  and  Queen  Mary 
to  (late  the  Accounts  of  the  Kingdom)  from  the  5  of 
March  1690.  through  their  feveral  Adjournments,  to 
the  24  of  April  1697. 

In  the  fecond  leaf  of  the  firft  Volume  is  the  follow¬ 
ing  entry  (literatim.) 

Memorandum  quod  quinto  die  Martii  anno  Regni 
Domi  Noftri  et  Domime  noftrte  Gulitlmas  et  Maria;  Dei 
Gratia  Angl.  Scot.  Fran,  et  Hyberniie  Regis  et  Regime, 
fidei  Defenl'or.  etc.  apud  Domum  five  hofpitiumfvocat.  le 
Rolles  feituat.  in  Chancery  Lane  in  Paroch.  Sti  Dunftani 
in  occiden.  in  Civitat.  London.  Robertus  Rich  Mil.  et 
Baronctt.  et  Thomas  Clerges  Mil.  duo  Coinmiffioner. 
primo  menconat.  in  quodatn  aftu  Parliamenti  nuper  edit, 
et  pervis  Intitulat.  An  Aft  for  appointing  and  enabling 
Comrors.  to  examine  take  and  ftate  the  public  Accbr  . . 
of  the  Kingdome,  vener.  Coram  per  honorabil.  Hen? 
Powell,  Ar  Magro  five  cullod.  Rotulor.  Cancellor. 
eordern  Regis  et  Regime,  et  tunc  et  itim  perlliter.  et 
uterq;  eor.  perftitet  facrimentum  fuum  corporal e  de  fide- 
lit.  iinpertialis  vere  fe  gerend  in  examination  juxta, 
formam  et  tenor.  Sacramenti  in  eodem  aftu  appuiituar.. 
et  fpecificat.  ex  per  A.aron  J  ingrey. 

l»  Two 


74 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS- 


Num.  1496—1498. 

1496  et  1497. 

Two  large  folios  intirled,Regifter  of  Accounts  and  papers 
brought  in  to  the  Commiffioners  appointed  by  Act  of 
Parliament  to  (late  the  Accounts  of  the  Kingdome. 

1+98. 

A  Bool:  in  fol.  given  by  Sir  Thomas  Iloby  of  Byfham 
in  the  County  of  Hertford,  Baronet. 

The  Cover  of  it  of  crimfon  Velvet,  edged  with  crim- 
fon  Silk  &  Gold-Thread,  and  with  Taffels  of  the  fame 
at  each  corner ;  lined  in  the  infidc  with  crimfon  Damafk. 

Upon  each  fide  of  the  Cover  are  five  Belles,  made 
of  Silver  wrought  &  gilt.  Thofe  -in  the  middle  have 
the  Arms  of  K.  Henry  vir.  with  his  Crown  &  Supporters 
made  of  Silver,  gilt,  coulered,  Sc  enameled  in  their  pro¬ 
per  Places.  In  the  others  at  each  Corner,  are  fo  many 
Portcullices,  being  one  of  his  Badges,  gilded  on  the  Field 
Party  per  Pale  Argent  &  Vert,  made  of  Enamel. 

It  is  to  be  made. faft  by  two  Hafps  which  are  fattened 
to  two  thick  Labels  coming  out  of  the  edge  of  the  Cover 
or,  the  one  fide  of  the  Book,  Sc  put  over  two  fhort  Pins 
of  Silver  gilt  on  the  other  fide.  1'hefe  Hal'ps  are  of 
Silver  gilt,  each  with  the  red  Rofe  of  Lancafter,  partly 
gilt,  Sc  partly  enamelled  of  a  crimfon  Color,  with  a 
Demy-Angel  proceeding  out  of  a  Cloud,  the  top  of 
whofe  Head  is  fattened  to  a  Ring  of  Silver  gilt  as  the 
Angel ;  to  which  are  fatted  two  Strings  of  white  &  green 
Silk  &  of  Silver  &  Gold  Thread  all  platted  together,  in 
older  to  open  &  (hut  the  Book  with  the  more  eafe. 

The  Book  confifteth  Gf  Four  Indenture-  .11  fairly 
Written  on  Velum,  with  many  principal  L^uers  illumi¬ 
nated;  befidcs  thofe  hereafter  to  be  mentioned  :  which 
(aid  Indentures  being  the  Originals,  the  Leases  are  all 
indented  at  the  iopj  Sc  the  Cover  alfo,  conformably  to 
them. 

1 .  The  firft  Page  of  the  firft  Deed,  is  illuminated  in 
this  manner ;  a  Bordure  is  putt  on  all  the  Margins  there¬ 
of:  at  the  top  are  the  Arms  of  K.  Henry  vnT  with  his 
Crown  &  Supporters  painted  011  a  golden  Plan  ;  on  each 
hand  are  the  Portcullices  Sc  Chains  in  a  Plan  of  fine 
New  fpotted  with  Gold.  Below  them  on  each  fide,  are 
Sprigs  of  the  red  Rofe  Tree,  with  like  Portcullices  Sc 
Sprigs  painted  interchangeably,  fo  as  in  the  whole,  to 
render  the  fame  rich  Sc  agreable  to  the  eye. 

2 .  In  the  firft  or  principal  Letter,  which  is  large,  is  a 
Picture  wherein  is  reprefented  King  Henry  vn.  with  his 
Royal  Robes,  Crown  A  Scepter,  fitting  on  his  Throne, 
giving  this  Book  to  John  Iflipp  Abbot  of  Weftminfter, 
who  kneels  before  him,  holding  his  Crofier  in  his  left 
Arm  ;  (Weftminfter  being  a  Mitred  Abbey;)  he  ftretcheth 
out  both  his  hands  to  receive  the  Book  ;  and  is  attended 
by  divers  of  his  Monks,  kneeling  behind  him. 

3-“This  Indenture” fheweth,  that  itwas“  made  between 
the  11100ft  Criften  &  mode  Excellent  Prince  King  Henry 
the  Seventh,  Sc  John  lflippe  Abbot  of  the  Monaftery  of 
Aiynt  Petre  of  Weftminitre,  &  the  Priour  &  Convent  of 
ihefanic  Monaftery,  binding  their  Succeffours.  Dated 
the  1 5th  day  of  July,  the  nynetene  Yere  of  his  inoft 
noble  Rcigne.” 

NB.  This  his  Style  of  raoft  Chriftian,  is  no  new 
tiling;  for  I  can  find  the  fame  given  to  many  of  our 
Rings  fince  the  Conqueft  ;  and  alfo  to  fundry  of  our 
Saxon  Kings  before  the  Conqueror’s  time  This  and  the 
following  Deeds  deciarng  Sc  reciting  many  particular 
Covenants  between  the  Parties  ;  in  order  to  make  them 
better  under ftood,  1  take  leave  to  collett  the  Heads  of 
the  fame,  as  they  are  written  in  the  margins. 

4.  “  -Colletts  to  be  laied  at  every  high  Matte  during 

the  Lif  of  the  Kings  Higheneffe.  r  0 

5.  Pfalmes  &  Oracions  to  be  faid  at  the  Chapiter- 

Mi.!.'  •:  during  the  Kings  lif.  2_ 


Num.  1498, 

6.  “  Colletts  to  be  faied  at  every  High  Matte,  after  the 

King’s  deceafe.  '  3. 

7.  The  Augmentacion  of  Thre  Monkes  above  the 

old  Noumbre.  0.5. 

8.  The  Thre  Chauntery  Monks  to  fing  undre  the 
Lantern-Place  till  the  Chapell  of  our  Lady  be  bylded. 

4.  b. 

9.  Provifion  made  where  the  Herfe  Sc  Aulter  flial  be 

fet,  when  it  dial  fortune  the  fame  for  Caufes  refonable  to 
be  removed  from  the  Lantcrn-place,  and  for  the  bringing 
of  the  fame  thider  agayne.  5. 

10.  I  he  fpecial  Matte  to  be  faied  by  the  three  Chaun¬ 

tery  Monkes  ;  and  the  Houres  appoynted  for  the  faye- 
mg  of  the  fame.  g. 

11.  ( ol loots  to  be  faied  by  the  three  Chauntery 
Monks  at  their  Mattee,  duryhg  the  Kyiu-s  life.  ibid. 

12.  Colletts  to  be  faied  1  by  the  Three  Chauntery 

Monks  for  the  foule  of  Elizabeth  late  Queene  and  WiV 
to  the  Kings  Grace.  g,  |3. 

I3*  Colletts  tube  faied  by  the  Thre  Chauntery  Monks 
for  the  Soules  of  the  Kings  Father,  and  of  other  his 
Aunceftours  &  Progenitours.  7. 

14.  C  olietts  to  be  faied  by  the  Thre  Chaunterv  M.onks 
alter  the  Deceafe  of  the  Kings  Moder. 

15.  Colletts  to  be  laied  by  the  Three  Chauntery 
Monks  after  the  deceafe  of  the  Kings  Iiighn  s.  ibid. 

16.  Colletts  to  he  faied  for  all  Crittci^Suules?.  8. 

17.  Prayers  to  be  faied  by  the  Three  Chaunterie 

Monks  at  the  Lavatory  of  their  Mattes,  during  the  lif  of 
the  Kings  Highneffe,  and  after  his  deceafe.  °  8.  b. 

1  8.  Howe  the  Chauntrie  Monks  fhall  be  named  Sc 
called.  ro> 

10.  The  Othe  of  the  Thre  Chauntrie  Monkes.  ibid. 

20.  1  he  Caufes  for  Remocion  of  any  of  the  laid  Thre 

Chauntery  Monks.  1Qt  b- 

21.  Provifion  made  howe  the  Chaunterie  Malles  fhal 
be  fitted,  in  cafe  any  of  the  faid  1  lire  Chauntry  Monks 
have  lauful  Impediment  by  Seknes  or  otherwife.  1  x. 

22.  The  Tyme  affigned  for  Nominacion  of  a  newe 

Chaunterie  Monke,  after  the  Vacacion  of  any  of  the 
fame  Chauntries.  u.b 

23.  Iri  ovifion  made  for  the  Vacacion  tyme  of  anv 

Chauntrie  if  ther  be  no  Dottours,  ner  Bachelors  of 
Divinitie  Poccupie  the  Rowme.  I2. 

24.  Provifion  made  after  the  decette  of  any  Chauntrie 

Monks,  howe  th’Abbot  fhal  caui'e  a  Scholare  10  take  De- 
gre,  and  within  thre  Moneths  after,  to  put  him  in  the 
Chauntrie.  f  ^ 

25.  The  finding  Sc  Salarie  of  the  Thre  Chauntri’e- 

Monks.  ibjd. 

26.  The  knotting  of  the  Bell  to  every  Chauntrie-Maffe. 

27.  The  Wags  of  the  Knoller  of  the  Bell.  ibid! 

28.  The  Serniones.  1  „  b 

29.  The  Revvarde  of  the  Prechours.  j 

30.  TiePreferement  of  famous  Clerks  for  the  faience 

of  Serniones.  1  , 

3 1 .  The  Bel!  to  be  rongon  to  the  Sermones.  1 4.  b. 

32.  The  Anniverfaries.  ibid. 

33*  The  Abbot,  Priour,  &  the  hool  Convent  to  be 

prelent  at  the  Anniverfaries,  onles  ther  be  a  lauful  Im- 
pedimente.  4 ^ 

34.  1  he  High  Matte  at  the  Anniverfaries  to  be  faied 

by  th  Abbot,  yf  ther  be  any  :  or  ells  by  the  Priour  or 
fom  other  Prelate.  '  j  q 

35.  At  every  fuche  Anniverfarie,  Mattez  of  Requiem 

to  be  faied  by  alle  Sc  fingler  the  Monks  Prefts  of  the  faid 
Monafterie.  Except,  Ac.  16.  b. 

36.  Hie  manner  how  they  ttial  praie  at  the  Anniver¬ 
faries,  as  wel  in  the  Kings  lif,  as  after  his  decette. 

ibid. 

*  37.  “  Colletts 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


-Num.  1498. 

37.  “  Colletts  to  be  faied  at  Placebo  k  Dirige  of  the 

Anniverfarics,  during  the  King?s  life,  for  his  Prolperitc 
of  Body  &  Soule.  17- 

38.  The  Collect  for  the  late  Quene.  ibid. 

39.  The  Collette  for  the  King’s  Fader.  17.  b. 

40.  The  College  to  be  faied  after  the  deceffe  of  the 

King’s  Moder.  ibid. 

41.  The  Collecte  to  be  faied  at  Placebo  k  Dirige  at 

the  Anniverfarics,  after  the  deceffe  of  the  King’s  High- 
nelTe.  '  18. 

4:.  The  Collecte  to  be  faied  for  al  Ciiflen  Sotiles. 

ibid. 

43.  Collects  to  be  faied  by  al  the  Monks,  faieng  Mslies 

of  Requiem,  at  the  daies  of  the  Anniverfarics  during 
the  King’s  iif.  i8.  b. 

44.  Collects  to  be  faied  by  al  the  Monks  faieng  Mafles 
of  Requiem  at  the  daies  of  the  Anniverfarics  for  the 
Soule  of  the  late  Quene,  during  the  King’s  life.  19. 

45.  Colletts  to  be  faied  by  al  the  Monks  faieng 

Malles  of  Requiem  at  the  daies  of  the  Anniverfaries 
for  the  Soule  of  the  King's  Fader  during  the  lif  of  the 
noble  Princes  his  Moder.  19-b. 

46.  Colletts  to  be  faied  by  al  the  Monks  faieng 

Malfes  of  Requiem,  at  tire  daies  of  Anniverfarics,  for 
the  Soules  of  the  King’s  Fader  k  Moder,  after  his  Mo- 
der’s  deceffe.  20. 

47.  Colletts  to  be  faied  by  every  Monke  P.ikng  Made 

of  Requiem,  at  the  dates  of  th’ Anniverfaries  for  the 
Soules  of  the  King,  the  Quene,  and  their  Iffue,  after 
the  deceffe  of  the  King’s  Grace.  20.  b 

4S.  Colletts  to  be  faied  by  every  Monke  faieng  i’.iafTe 
at  the  daies  of  th’ Anniverfaries,  for  al  Criften  Soules. 

ibid. 

49.  The  Pfalter  of  David  to  be  faied  by  all  the  other 

Monks  being  no  Prefts  on  the  daie  of  the  Anniverfarie, 
and  the  daie  following.  21. 

50.  The  Praier  of  the  Converfes  to  be  faied  at  the 

daies  of  the  Anniverfaries.  ibid. 

51.  The  Bells  to  be  rongon  at  every  Anniverfarie. 

ibid. 

52.  Thehundreth  Tapers.  21.  b. 

53.  The  twenty  &  four  Torches.  ibid. 

54.  The  Rewards  to  be  geven  to  the  holders  of  the 

Torches.  22. 

55.  The  Almeffe  to  be  diftributed  to  poor  people  at 

the  daies  of  the  Anniverfaries.  ibid. 

£b.  Perfonags  to  be  prefent,  k  to  effre  at  every  An- 
niverfarie.  22.  b. 

57.  The  Rewards  of  the  Perfonags  being  prefent  k 

offering  at  the  Anniverfaries.  23. 

58.  Howe  the  Rcwardis  of  the  Perfonagis  which  {hud 

offre  at  the  Anniverfaries  fhal  be  difpofed,  if  they  offre 
not  at  the  fame.  23.  b. 

59.  The  Monicion  to  be  yeven  to  the  People  by  the 

Precheours  as  wel  at  Paules  Croffe  as  at  Weftminftre, 
of  the  daie  of  the  Anniverfare,  the  Sondaie  next  befor 
the  fame.  24. 

60.  The  Rewarde  to  be  yeven  to  the  Preckeour  at 

Paules  Croffe,  for  the  making  of  the  Monition  of  the 
Anniverfarie  daie.  25. 

61.  The  wekelye  Obites.  ibid. 

62.  The  ordre  and  manerof  the  obfervaunces  &  cere¬ 
monies  to  be  kept  at  the  wekely  obits.  25. b. 

63.  Colletts  to  be  faied  at  the  wekely  Obits,  as  wel 

for  the  profperous  Dilate  of  the  Kings  Highneffe  during 
his  lif,  as  for  his  Soule,  the  late  Quenes  Soule,  his  Chil¬ 
dren,  Progenitours,  &  Aunceftours  Soules,  after  his  & 
their  deceffe.  26.  b. 

64.  The  Almeffe  to  be  diftributed  at  every  wekely 

Obite.  27. 

65.  The  Refponde,  Pfalme,  k  Colletts  to  be  faied 

about  the  Ilerfe  after  the  High  Maffe  ol  Requiem  at  every 
Anniverfary  Sc  wekely  Obite.  27.  b. 


Num.  1498. 

66.  “  Provifion  when  the  wekely  Obit  c  ft  all  be  ob- 
ferved,if  it  cannot  be  kopte  upon  thedaie  therefor  afligned. 

28. 

67.  The  Beilis  to  be  rongon  at  the  wekely  Obites. 

28.  b. 

68.  A  Monk.'  to  diftribute  the  Almeffe  at  the  An¬ 
niverfaries  &  wekely  Obites.  ibid. 

69.  Howe  the  poor  People  rereyvyng  the  Almeffe  fhal 
pray,  as  wel  in  the  King’s  lif,  as  aftre  his  deceffe.  ibid. 

70  The  Othe  of  the  Monke  making  the  diftribution 
of  Alines.  29. 

71.  Provifion  made  in  cafe  the  Monke  that  fhuld  yeve 
tlie  Almeffe,  deceffe  ;  or  have  any  lauful  Impediment. 

ibid. 

72.  TheDifcharge  of  the  Monks  clifiributing  the  Al- 

mefie,  from  all  other  charges  &  bufeigneffe  during  the 
tyme  of  the  diftribuc’on.  ibid. 

73.  Tiie  Tymes  iy milted  for  the  l: running  of  threlie 

Tapers.  2y.  b. 

74.  The  Renewing  of  the  hundret'n  Tapers.  ibid. 

75.  Foure  Torches  to  brenne  about  the  Herfe  or 

Tombe,  at  every  wekely  Obite.  30. 

76.  The  Renewing  of  the  Twenty  &  foure  .Torches. 

ibid. 

77.  The  Foure  Tapers  of  Waxc  over -&  above  the 

hundrethe  Tapers  to  brenne  perpetuellye  abouts  the 
Herl'e  or  Tombe  !  ■  >h  daie  k  nlghte.  30.  b. 

7::.  The  Ret. .-wing  of  the  foure  Tapers.  31. 

79.  Bo'le?  of  T\nne  for  the  Torches.  ibid. 

80.  The  Rewards  of  the  Monks  being  prefente  at  every 

Anniverfarie.  •  ibid. 

81.  The  Rewarde  of  the  Abbot  at  the  Anniverlariesl 

'  ibid. 

82.  The  Rewarde  of  the  Priour  of  the  Anniverfaries. 

31.13. 

83.  The  Rewards  of  the  Monks  at  the  wekely  Obites* 

ibid.  ‘ 

84.  The  Rewarde  of  the  Abbot  S:  Priour  being  pre¬ 
fent  at  the  wekely  Obite.  ibid. 

85.  The  Pitancc  at  the  Daies  of  the  Anniverfaries. 

3$- 

86.  Provifion  made  againft  fuch  Monks  as  fhal  be  ab- 

fent  from  the  Anniverfaries  or  wekely  Obites  without  a 
raiionable  caufe  ibid.  - 

87.  The  Rewards  of  the  Monks  being  abfent  from 

the  Anniverfaries  or  Oi>itcs,  to  be  devided  amengg  tlie 
other  being  prefente.  32.  b. 

88.  The  Rewarde  of  the  Perfonne  that  fliall  kepe  the 

Lights.  ibid. 

89.  Two  Converfes  to  be  founded  over  &  above  the 

olde  N ombre  of  Converfes.  33. 

90.  Th’  Lxhibicion  of  the  two  Converfes.  33.  b. 

9 1 .  The  Fundacion  of  the  Thre  Monks  Scolars.  ibid.  - 

92.  Howe  the  Thre  Monks  Scolers  fhal  be  called  & 

named.  34. 

93.  The  Caufes  for  the  whichc  th’ Abbot  may  call  any 

of  the  Thre  Scolars  from  the  Univerfitie.  34.  b. 

94.  The  tyme  how  long  any  of  the  Monks  may  be 

abfent  from  the  Univerfirie.  75. 

95.  The  Caufes  of  Remock.n  of  any  of  the  1'hre 

Monks  Scolers  from  the  Univerfitie.  3 5.  b. 

06.  The  Nominacion  of  any  of  the  Thre  Monks 
Scolers  aftur  the  deceffe  or  remocion  of  any  of  theym. 

36- 

97.  The  Gibe  of  the  fixe  Monks  that  dial  elefte  & 

name  the  Thre  Scolers  to  the  Univerfitie.  ibid. 

98.  Th’  Lxhibicion  ol  the  Thre  Monkes  Scolars. 

36.  K 

99.  The  Scolars  to  take  Degre  at  th’  Abbots  Colls. 

37. 

100.  The  Tyme  of  Continuance  of  the  Srolers  in 
the  Univerfitie  ;  aftre  they  be  Bachelors  of  Diviuitie, 

37-> 

ipi,  ihe 


j6 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1498. 

I  o  1 .  “  The  Foren  Obites.  fold. 

102.  The  Chauntry  of  Carmerdene.  35.  b. 

103.  The  Thretene  poor  Men.  40> 

104.  The  Abbots  Charge  for  the  repardon  and  up. 

holding  of  the  Aimes  houfe.  4Q  ^ 

105.  I-Iowe  the  Almes*men  ftall  bee  called  and 
tiamed. 

106.  The  King  to  name  the  Thretene  Almefmen  du- 
ring  his  life. 

107.  The  Nominacion  of  the  Thretene  poor  men 

aftre  the  Kyngs  decefl'e,  and  of  ther  Age.  ibid. 

io3.  The  Freferrement  of  theKinges  olde  Servaunts. 

109.  The  wekely  Sommes  of  Money  deputed  for  the 
fultentacion  of  the  Thretene  poor  men".  ibid. 

I  to.  The  Othe  of  the  Thretene  pore  Men.  42.  b." 
in.  The  Remocion  cif  any  of  the  pore  men  beim. 

avaunced  by  Manage,  Rents,  or  Profits,  to  the  yerelv 
value  of  Foure  Pounds.  „  ; 

I I  2.  Caufes  for  the  Remocion  of  anv  of  the  Thre¬ 
tene  pore  men.  ' 

How  the  Porcion  of  the  Wags  of  any  pore 
Man  foal  be  diftributed  during  the  Vacacion  of  his 
Kowme.  b 

1 14.  A  Monke  to  have  the  Rule  &  Overfight  of  the 
Thretene  pcorMen. 

115.  1  he  Othe  &  yerely  Reward.:  of  the  Monke  that 
IJiall  have  the  overfight  of  the  Thretene  poor  Men. 

116.  The  Thre  Women  to  attende  upon  the  Thre¬ 
tene  poor  Men.  b 

117.  The  Wags  &  Clothing  of  the  Thre  Women. 

118.  The  Fewel  for  the  Thretene  poor  Men.  ibid.' 

1 1 9.  Provifion  made  that  al  the  Ceremonies  and  Ob- 
lervaunces  of  this  Fundacion,  foal  be  kepte  within  the 
Monafterye  of  Weftminllre,  though  it  fortune  the  King’s 
body  to  be  entarred  ellefwhere. 

120.  TheOrdre  of  the  Yeving  of  th’Abbots  Othe.” 

Here  mention  is  made  of  this  Book :  as  alfo  at  fol.  50.' 

121.  <£  Th’Enrollment  of  th’Abbots  Othe,  and  the 
Rewards  to  be  yeven  at  the  making  of  the  fame.  49.  b. 

122.  The  Refpiting  of  th’Abbots  Othe,  by  raifon  cr 

Sekenes  or  Infirmitie.  j^d. 

123.  The  Tyme  prefixed  for  the  yeving  ofth’Abbot 
Othe  nowe  beyng. 

j  24.  The  Priours  Othe.  ft’ 

1 25.  The  Redyng  of  the  AbftraSe  of  this  Indenture 

1 26.  The  Perfonags  to  be  prefente  at  the  reding  o 

the  Ab/lrafte.  ^  f 

127.  The  Rewards  of  the  Perfonags  being  prefent  a 

the  reding  of  the  Abftrafts.  -t<  b> 

128.  1  he  Rewards  of  th’Abbot,  Priour,  and  othe 
Monks  being  prefente  at  the  reding  of  the  Abftrafts 

129.  The  Manerhowe  th’Abbot,  Priour,  ft  Conien 

foall  departe  oute  of  the  Chapitre-houfe,  after  the  Ab 
drafts  redde,  and  the  Praiers  ft  Orifons  then  to  b< 
laied  abouts  the  Herfe  orTombe.  j^jd. 

1 30.  The  Livelood  amortifed  to  th’ Abbey  of  Weftmin 

lire  for  this  Fundacion.”  , 

This E Rate  was, 

131. “  The  Advoufon  of  the  Deanry  of  Saynte  Mar 

tens  le  Graunde  in  the  Citie  of  London  ;  ft  of  all  Cha 
nonnes.  Prebends,  Churches  &  Chapels  of  the  fame  fex 
cepte  the  Prebends  ofNewelonde,  founded  by  Herberte 
and  the  Lands,  &  Tenements,  &  Poffefoons  of  the  fame 
accepted  by  the  Abbat  &  Convent  of  Weftminfter  a 
the  yerely  value  of  266I.  ,3s.  4d.  over  &  befides  al 
yerely  Charges.  ibi(J 


Num.  1498. 

132.  f‘  The  Prebende  of  Tikehille  in  the  Countic  of 
Yorke  ;  the  Perfonage  of  Swafham-merket  in  the  Coun¬ 
tie  of  Norfolke ;  the  Perfonage  of  Stamforde  in  the 
Countie  of  Berkfoire ;  the  Free-Chapel!e  of  Up-Lam- 
bourne  in  the  Countie  of  Berkfoire  ;  the  Free-Chapelle 
in  the  Manour  of  Plesfoe  in  the  Countie  of  EfTexe ;  ft 
the  Free-Chapelle  of  Play  don  befides  Ryee  in  the  Countie 
ofSufiexe;  accepted  in  like  mauner  at  130I.  13  s.  4d. 

53. 

.  'ST  T,le  Prioury  of  Luffelde  (lately  diffolved  ft  come 
mto  the  King  hands)  with  all  the  Manours,  Landes,  & 
tenements,  Rents,  Reverfions, Services,  ft  Advowfons, 
m  the  Counties  of  Norhainpton,  Oxforde,  &  Bukkvng- 
ham,  efpecially  the  Advowfons  of  the  Churches  of  l)od- 
ford  m  the  Counrie  of  Northampton,  ft  of  Thorneburghe 
m  the  Countie  of  Bukkyngham,  accepted  in  like  mau¬ 
ner,  at  the  yerely  value  of  40 1.  5, 

134.  In  redy  money  5150  pounds,  to  purchale  Mai 
nours,  Landes,  ftc.  to  bere  and  fufteyne  perpetually  all 
foch  Charges  before  reherfed,  and  for  a  Rewarde  to  the 
faid  Abbot,  Priour  ft  Convent  &  their  .Succeflbrs,  over 
ft  above  the  fame.  With  which  money  they  had  already 
bought  ft  purchafed  of  George  Neville  of  Burgevenny 
Knight,  the  Manoir  of  Eitwardefl  rfoke,  with  certain 
Lands,  ftc.  in  Southloke,  Whetelev,  Stretton,  South- 
Leverton,  Fenton,  Coton,  Clarebrugh,  Wellum,  Morc- 
gnw,  Evenley,  Wifton  ?-Wodehoufe,  &  Litelbrugh  in 
the  Countie  of  Notyngham ;  and  the  Manours  of  Halton, 
Aukebarowe,  Burton  ?-Stather  the  thirde  parte  of  the 
Manor  of  Belchefelde,  with  certeyn  Loads,  ftc.  in 
Halton,  Aukebarowe,  Burton  ?-Scather,  Wynterton, 
Theilby,  Hailbaleftede,  Burnaby,  Eirbv,  Conylby 
Crefleby,  Emmote,  Bolcheforde  ft  Dymmyngton  in  the 
Countie  of  Lincoln  ;  rated,  in  like  manner,  at  64 1. 


.  o  wim  uie  laiu  money,  ot  Mau¬ 

rice  Berkeley  Lord  Berkeley,  the  Manere  of  Chefter- 
forde  in  the  Countie  of  EfTexe,  and  the  Advowfon  of 
the  C hurche  therein,  rated  in  like  manner,  at  the  yere- 
lie  value  of  661.  13  s.  4d.  befides  the  Wode  fale  of 
the  fame.  _  ^  b 

136.  Alfo  purchafed  with  the  faid  Money  of  John 
Cutte,  the  Maners  of  Pynchepole,  Sc  Bolyngton,  with 
dyvers  Lands  ft  Tenements  in  Claveryng,  Langley  Bir- 
den  W}Lyn,  Maneden,  Ugley,  ft  Fernam  in  the  Coun- 
tie  of  EfTex ;  and  divers  other  Lands  ft  Tenements  in 
Clecheden,  Henham,  &  Elfyngham  in  the  faid  Countie - 
rated  in  Uke  manner  at  the  yerely  Value  of  20 1.  And 
the  Maner  of  Borftalle,  with  dyvers  Lands,  ftc.  in  Plum- 
uede,  I.efnes,  Borflalle,  &  Erithe,  in  the  Countie  of 
Kent :  rated,  in  like  manner  at  the  yerelie  value  of  20I. 


137.  Alfo  purchafed  with  the  faid  Money,  of  William 
Efyngton,  the  Maners  of  Fenne,  ft  Skreyng,  with  dvvers 
Londs,  &c.  in  Fenne,  Skreyng,  BoRon'  Skvrbek/Fry. 
fton  Butterwik,  Berinyngton,  and  Sybfey,  with  th’Ad- 
vowion  of  the  Church  of  Fenne,  in  the  faid  County  of 
Lincoln :  rated  in  like  manner,  at  the  yerely  value  of 

34  *•  '  jjjjj 

138.  Alfo  purchafed  with  the  faid  Money,  of  the  Ab¬ 

bot  &  Convent  of  the  Monaftery  of  Tewkyfbury,  an 
annuelle  Rent  of  26I.  13s.  4d.  oute  of  the  Maner  of 
otanewelle  in  the  Countie  of  Glouceilre.”  55. 

139.  Ihe  Edate  abovementioned  is  reckoned  at  the 
clear  yearly  value,  above  all  Reprifes,  at  668  1.  13  s  ad. 
out  of  which,  what  they  were  to  do  for  the  King,  would 
at  the  mod  cod  them  but  582  :  00  :  8.  yearly  ;  fo  that 
(as  it  was  then  reckoned!  the  Abbat  k  Convent  had  of 
reu  J  V  gltt  8r*.  6s-  yrai'f  over  &  above  all  that 
he  had  charged  them  with  ;  befides  a  Licence  ( without 
bet)  to  appropriate  the  faid  Church  of  Chederforde,  & 
10  pounde  given  unto  them  for  the  other  Charges  of 

that 


that  appropriation :  and  another  Licence  (without  Fee) 
to  appropriate  the  Church  of  Seynt  Bride  in  the  Citie  of 
London,  of  their  own  Patronage.  '  55.  b. 

■  Moreover,  the  King  “  hath  purchafed  great  In¬ 
dulgence  &  pardon  of  oure  Hooley  Fader  the  Pope,  of 
pleyn  Remiflion,  oons  in  the  yere  perpetually,  with 
mcny  oder  meritiorlous  &  holy  thinges  to  the  great 
Com  forte  &  Relief  of  the  fame  Monaftery,  and  of  alle 
( 

by  the  Sallerance  of  Almighty  God  to  remoeve  the  Holy 
Body  of  Kyng  Henry  theSi.xte  from  Wyndefore  to  the 
faiJe  Monaltery.”  57. 

141.  The  King  confirmeth  the  Sanctuary  &  oilier 

Privileges  accultomed  in  the  Deanery  of  St.  Martin  Ie 
Grand;  &  mull  have  an  Anniverfary  there  performed 
for  him  in  the  molt  folemn  manner.  57.  b. 

142.  The  firft  Page  of  the  .fecond  Deed  contained  in 

this  noble  Book,  hath  a  Bordure  like  to  that  of  the  firft. 
The  principal  Letter  is  alfo  illuminated  like  that  in  the 
former ;  excepting  that  behind  Abbat  Blip  &  his  Monks, 
fome  of  the  Almefmen,  or  Bedefmen,  above-mentioned, 
are  here  reprefented  kneeling,  with  their  Beads  in  their 
hands.  59* 

1 43-  This  fecond  Deed,  beareth  the  fame  date  with 
the  former,  and  containeth  the  efpecial  Covenants  made 
.  with  the  King,  by  the  fame  Abbat,  Priour,  &  Convent 
of  Weftminfter,  tor  the  maintenance  of  the  13  poor 
men,  within  the  Precinft  of  their  Monaftery  :  with  all 
the  Ordinances  &  Statutes  touching  the  fame.  ibid. 

144.  I  he  firft  Page  of  the  third  Deed  is  illuminated 

in  the  fame  manner  as  the  two  former ;  excepting  the 
principal  Letter,  wherein  is  a  Reprefentation  of  a  Monk 
ftanding  before  a  Defk  &  reading  the  Abftra&  of  the 
full  Deed,  according  to  the  Directions  therein  contained 
&  exprefii.d,  out  of  this  Book:  a  Judge,  with  other 
Minifies  of  the  Law  aftifting  on  the  light  hand,  and 
Abbat  Blip  with  his  Monks  at  the  left.  76. 

145.  This  third  Deed  is  the  Abftract  mentioned  in 

the  firft  ;  it  beareth  the  fame  date  with  the  others  ;  and 
containeth  all  the  Covenants  fpccified  in  the  firft  ;  which 
therefore  need  not  be  here  repeated.  ibid. 

141..  Here  pro  all'o  the  Penalties  or  Forfeitures,  to 
which  the  faid  Abbat,  Prior  Sc  Convent  did  fubmit  upon 
Breach  of  many  of  the  laid  Covenants. 

147.  litre  are  alfo  fome  other  Covenants  not  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  two  former  :  v.  g. 

A  Foundation  of  twenty  Anniver.'arn  to  be  folemn- 
ly  holden  for  that  King,  his  Queen,  and  Family  ;  for 
which  he  allowed  the  following  Sums  of  money,  to  be 
paid  perpetually. 

148.  “  l'o  1  he  Piiour  &  Convent  of  the  Metropolitan 

Churche  of  Csiite,  in  the  Cite  of  Canterbury,  61.  13  s. 
4d.  9c.  b. 

149.  To  the  Deane  &  Chapitre  of  the  Cathediallc 
Churche  of  Seynt  Paule  hi  London,  61.  i^s.  i4d. 

ibid. 

1  to.  To  the  Priour  &  Convent  of  the  Cathedralle 
■Churche  of  Seynt  Andrewe  of  Rochefter.  3I.  6s.  8d. 

ibid. 

151.  To  the  Abbot  &  Convent  of  the  Monaftery  of 

Seynt  Alban’s,  an  hundreth  Slielyngs.  yi. 

152.  To  the  Abbot  &  Convent  of  the  Monaftery  of 

oure  Lady  of  Abendone,- 61.  13s.  /.d.  ibid. 

153.  To  the  Abbot  Sc  Convent  of  the  Monaftery  of 

Seynt  Auguftyne  without  the  Wallcs.  of  the  Citie  of 
Caunterbury,  an  hundreth  Shelyngs.  ibid. 

154.  To  the  Abbot  &  Convent  of  Seynt  Savioure  of 

Bermondeicy,  3 1.‘  6s.  8d.  ibid. 

155.  'l'o  the  Abbot  &  Convent  of  the  Newe  Abbey  of 

cur  Lady  of  Grace,  befides  the  Towre  of  London,  ^  1. 
■6s.  8 d.  _  ^  ibid. 

156.  To  the  Prioure  Si  Convent  of  the  Churche  of 
Crifte,  within  the  Cite  of  London,  3I.  6s.  8d.  ibid. 

Cat.  IIarx.  Voi..  II. 


157.  To  the  Deane  &  Canons  of  the  College  of  oure 

Lady  &  Saynt  George,  within  the  Caftelle  of  Wynde- 
foure,  61.  13s.  4d.  ibid. 

158.  To  the  Deane  &  Chapitre  of  the  College  of 

oure  Lady  &  Seynt  Stephen  within  the  Kyng’s  Paloys  of 
Weftmynfter,  an  hundreth  Shelyngs.  ibid. 

159.  To  the  Prioure  &  Convent  of  the  Houfe  of  Jhefu 

of  Bedleem  of  Shene,  3  1.  6s.  8d.  ibid. 

1 6c.  To  the  Prioure  &  Convent  of  the  Charter-houfe 
of  London,  3  I.  6s.  8d.  ibid. 

161.  To  the  Warden  &  Convent  of  the  Grey-Freree  . 

of  London,  3I.  6s.  8d.  ibid. 

162.  To  the  Prioure  &  Convent  of  the  Freres  Pre- 

chours  in  London,  3I.  6s.  8  d.  ibid. 

163.  To  the  Priour  &  Convent  of  the  Freres  Carme- 

letts  in  London,  3I.  6s.  8  d.  91.  b. 

164.  To  the  Priour  &  Convent  of  the  Freres  Auguf- 

tines  in  London,  3  1.  6  s.  8  d.  ibid. 

165.  To  the  Abbas  &  Convent  of  the  Monaftery  of 

Syon,  3I.  6  s.  8d.  ibid. 

166.  To  the  Chaunceller,  Maiftres,  &  Scolers  of  the 

Univerfitie  of  Oxonforde,  tenne  pounde.  ibid. 

167.  To  the  Chaunceller,  Vice-chaunceller,  Maiftres 
&  Scolers  of  the  Univerfite  of  Cantebrige,  tenne  pounde. 

ibid. 

1 68.  To  the  Chaunterie  in  the  Houfe  of  the  Grey 

Freres  of  Carmarthen  in  Wales,  eight  pounde  for  per¬ 
petual  Chauntry-MaiTc  daily,  &  perpetualle  Anniverfarie 
there  to  be  kepte  for  the  Soule  of  Edmonde  Erie  of 
Richemont,  whois  body  lieth  their  buried.  ibid. 

169.  The  maner  how  th’ Abbot  &  Convent  flial  de- 

perte  out  of  the  Chapirre-houfe,  aftre  the  Abftracts  be 
redd.  95.  b. 

170.  The  Tranfiation  of  the  Penalties  &  Forfaitures.” 

171.  Then  followeth  the  fourth  Deed  contained  in 

this  Book,  the  firft  Page  vvheTeof,  as  alfo  the  Initial  Let¬ 
ter,  are  illuminated  in  the  fame  manner,  with  thofe  of 
the  firft  Deed.  98. 

172.  “  T  in's  Indenture”  beareth  even  date  with  the  for¬ 

mer  ;  and  the  Covenanters  are  “  K.  Henry  vii.  on  the 
oon  Panic  ;  and  John  Iflippe  Abbat  of  Weftminftre,  with 
the  Prior  be  Convent  of  the  fame  Monaftery,  of  the 
other  Partie  :  &  witnefleth  that  the  faid  Abbot,  Priour, 
Sc  Convent  by  Indentures  Septipartited,  of  the  Date  of 
thele  Prefents,  between  the  faid  King  of  the  oon  Partie, 
William  Archbifhop  of  Caunterbury  of  the  fecond  Partie, 
Richard  Bisfhope  of  Wyncheftre  of  the  thirde  Partie, 
the  faid  Abbot,  Prioure,  &  Convent  of  the  fourthe  Par- 
tie,  the  Dean  Si  Chanons  of  the  Kinges  Free-Chapell 
of  our  Ladie  &Sain£te  Srephen  within  the  King’s  Palace 
of  Weftminftre  of  the  fyfte  Partie,  the  Deane  &  Chapitre 
of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Saincte  Paule  in  the  Citie  of 
London  of  the  fixte  Partie,  and  the  Maire  &  Commyn- 
altie  of  the  Citie  of  London,  of  the  feventh  Partie ;  ftande 
k  been  bounden  in  many  fc-veral  grete  Penalties  & 
Sommes  of  Money  to  be  forfaited  &  paied  as  often  as 
the  faid  Abbot,  Priour  and  Convent,  or  their  Succef- 
fours  flialle  make  Defaulte  in  obfervyng,  &  perfourmyng 
of  any  of  the  Covenaunts,  or  Graunts  conrcigned  & 
fpeciiied  in  the  original  Indenture  conteyning  the  Fun- 
dacion  of  theholie  &  devout  Wille  of  the  faid  Kyng,  to 
be  perpetually  performed,  as  it  is  enclofed  with  this 
Boke.  ibid. 

173.  The  Tenoure  of  the  faid  Indenture  Septipartite  of 
Forfaitours&Penalties,  is  exemplified  atlength,  atfol.99. 

174.  The  Tranfmutadons  of  the  Actions  of,  and  for, 

the  Penalties,  fro  Perfone  to  Perfonne.”  12 1.  b. 

175.  This  noble  Book  is  adorned  with  five  broad 
Seals  of  K.  Henry  the  Seventh,  all  preferved  in  Silver 
Boxes  parcel-Gilt,  adorned  with  the  faid  King’s  Badges 
above-mentioned  ;  and  the  Velvet  cotneih  far  enough 
from  the  Book  to  cover  them.  Such  being  the  fafhion 
of  Covers  to  Books  of  importance,  at.  Si  before  that 
time. 

X  1 76.  But 


1 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1498,  149Q. 

176.  But  forafmuch  as  the  faid  Silver  Boxes  were 
found  to  be  thin,  and  therefore  liable  to  be  bruifed,  and 
to  prefs  hard  upon  the  Seals  within  them  ;  by  my  Lord’s 
Order,  Mr.  John  Kemp  made  the  Box  which  now  hold- 
eth  them  all,  in  fuch  manner,  as  none  of  the  Boxes 
do  any  farther  Damage  to  the  faid  Seals ;  nor  to  one 
another. 

177.  Lsftly  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  although  there  be 
but  four  Deeds  contained  in  the  Book,  there  be  five 
Seals;  every  Deed  having  its  Strings  &  Seal  peculiar  to 
its  felf,  and  the  the  Strings  belonging  to  the  Fifth,  an¬ 
nexing  them  all  together,  as  is  divers  times  mentioned, 
efpecially  at  the  latter  aid. 


1 499* 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  by  Thomas  Tong, 
Norroy,  or  by  fome  other  antient  Officer  of  Arms ; 
wherein  are  contained. 


1 .  Part  of  an  old  Table  of  the  Contents  of  this  Book: 
In  divers  places  at  the  beginning, 

2.  Copic  of  an  old  Roll  of  Arms,  but  without  Names: 
fome  of  the  firft  of  them  are  fictitious. 

3.  The  beginning  of  a  Defcent  of  the  Royal  Family, 
from  William  the  Conqueror  ;  fome  of  them  are  repre- 
fented  in  Garbs  befitting  the  time  of  K.  Henry  vni. 

After  many  blank  leaves,  I  find, 

4.  Defcendants  frem  Edmund  Earl  of  Lancafier,  fon 

of  K.  Henry  111.  from  Thomas  Brotherton,  and  Edmund 
of  Woodeftoke,  fons  of  K.Edwaidi.  19.  b. 

5.  Genealogia  Duminorum  deNevile.  23.  b. 

6.  Defcent  of  Montagu,  k  Mont-hermer ;  with  Arms. 


ibid. 

7.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Alan  Earl  of  Arundel ;  &  of  Hol¬ 
land  Earl  of  Kent.  2  5. 

8.  Defcent  of  Byngham,  with  a  Copie  of  a  Fine,  il- 

luftrating  that  Defcent.  27.  b. 

0.  Defcent  of  Lambert  of  Mayden-Bradley  ;  with  the 
Arms  in  Colors.  29.  b. 

After  divers  other  blank  Leaves,  follow, 

10.  A  Defcent  of  De  la  Beie.  30.  b. 

11.  The  Rcplicacion  of  Thomas  Cofyn,  to  tbeAn- 
fwere  made  to  his  Ti  tle  to  the  Manour  of  Thorntone. 


4°. 

12.  The  Book  of  the  Vifitation  of  the  North  Parrs  of 
England,  as  the  fame  was  made  &  taken  by  Thomas 
Tong  Norroy  ;  being  begun  at  Syr  Brian  Stapulton’s  of 
Nottynghamlhire,  the  7th  daie  of  Auguft,  A.  D.  j  530. 

41.  b. 

This  feemeth  to  be  the  original  Bock ;  or  at  leafl, 
the  Office-book  for  tiiat  Viiita'ion  ;  by  a  Title  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  Sir  William  Dugdale’s  hand- writing  ;  and  by 
divers  particular  matters  contained  in  the  Book,  to  be 
hereafter  mentioned  in  their  order. 

1”  thi  Vififation-book,  befides  the  Defcents  which 
are  deferibed  narratively,  and  the  Arms  of  Families  ;  are 
^'vets  Entrances  touching  the  religious  Houles,  their 
Foundations  tx  Armes,  which  were  not  tranferibed  by 
... .c.  as, 

13.  Of  the  Foundation  8c  Armes  of  the  Abbey  of 

Lyi  ...  hire.  ^ 

14.  Of  the  then  Founder  of  the  Abbey  of  Rufforde 

in  the  fame  County.  jtqd  * 

15.  The  Foundation  of  the  Abbey  of  Worfop,  in  the 

fame  County.  ^ 

So  much  for  Nottinghamfliire  :  Then  begynntth 
the  Wfitation  in  ^  orkefhire  made  by  ThomasTonge  alias 
Norrey,  King  of  Armes  of  the  Northe  Pat  tss.  43. 

10.  Of  the  Founder  of  the  Monaitery  of  Marton  in 
Yorkfliire,  8c  his  Arms.  ^ 

17.  Of  the  Founder  of  the  Monaitery  of  NcwboroiSh 

in  York ih ire  ;  &  its  Anns.  ' 


Num.  1499. 

18.  Of  the  Foundation.  Sc  the  Arms  of  Ryvalle- Ab¬ 
bey  in  Yorkfliire.  4?.  b. 

19.  Armes  of  the  Monaftery  of  Whitby  in  Yorkfliire. 

ibid. 

20.  Of  the  Foundation,  &  the  Arms  of  the  Monaftery 

of  Gyfborow,  in  Y orkfliire.  46.  b. 

2 1 .  The  Armes  of  the  Reverende  Father  in  God, 

Cuthbert  Tunftalle,  Byfliop  of  Dureftne.  48. 

22.  The  Armes  of  the  Monaftery  of  Durham.  48.  b. 

23.  The  Armes  of  Mafter  ....  Frankelyng  Arch¬ 

deacon  of  Durham;  gevyn  to  him  for  recoveryng  the 
Caftell  of  Norham  of  the  Scotts  hands,  by  his  Prowes 
and  Pollicie.  jbjd. 

24.  Of  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Tinmouth  in  Northumberland.  49. 

25.  The  Armes  of  my  Lord  the  Priour  of  Tynmowth, 
whole  name  ys  Gardener.  And  the  faid  Priour  ys  de- 
feendyd  of  the  noble  Quene  Kateryne  wyfe  to  Kyng 
Henry  the  vth,  by  his  mother,  who  was  a  baftard-daugh- 
ter  to  Jafper  Due  of  Bedforde. —  Be  yt  notid,  that  the 
faide  Priour  of  Tymnouthe  hath  geven  unto  me  Norrey 
Kyng  of  Armes  of  the  Northe  Parties,  this  Pedigre  6c 
Armes  of  his  owne  Reporte,  which  he  wolle  aflerme  at 
alle  tymes  to  verify  &  approve  before  the  Kyng  &  his 
Counfaille,  that  this  Pedigre  ys  true,  &  the  Armes  alfo. 

49.  b. 

eA  Of  the Founderfliip  of Eglyftone- Abbey  in  Ryche- 
mont-lhyre.  ^0.  b. 

27.  Of  the  Founderfliip,  with  the  Armes  of  the  Mo¬ 

naftery  of  Saynt  Aggas  (i.  e  St.  Agatha)  in  Rychemont- 
fliire.  ^ _ 

28.  Of  the  Founderfliip  of  the  Monaftery  of  Gervers. 

(i.  e.  Jervaulx,  or  Jervall,  in  Yorkfliire.)  52. 

29.  Touching  the  Foundation  of  the  Monaftery  of 

Coverham.  ^2- 

30.  Of  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Ab¬ 
bey  of  Fountayns  in  Yorkfliire.  -6.  b. 

31.  Of  the  Founderfliip,  with  the  Arms  of  the~Abbey 
of  St.  Mary  of  York. 

32.  Of  the  Founderfliip,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Kirkham  in  Yorkfliire.  58.  b. 

33-  Of  the  Founderfliip,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Byland,  in  Yorkfliire.  59. 

34.  Of  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Monaf¬ 
tery,  of  Selby,  in  Yorkfliire.  59- b. 

35.  Of  the  Founderfliip,  with  the  Arm  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Mahon,  in  Yorkfliire.  61. 

36.  The  Armes  (of  the  Reverend  Father  in  God)  by 

auncyent  difeent,  John  Maxe,  Bisftiop  of  Elphin,  Com- 
mendatorie  of  Welbeke,  &  General  Vifitour  of  the  Or¬ 
der  of  the  Premonftraiits.  63. 

37.  Of  the  Founderfliip,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Welbeke  in  Ngttinghamfhire.  63.  b. 

38.  Of  the  Founderfliip,  with  the  Arms  of  the  IVJo- 
naftery  of  Monke-Brettone,  in  Yorkfliire.  64.  b. 

39.  Of  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  oftheMo.iaf- 
tery  of  Sr.  Ofwald,  (ofNoftell)  in  Yorkfhire.  ibid. 

40.  Of  the  Founderfliip,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Kirkham  in  Yorkfliire.  66.- 

41.  Of  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Salley  in  Yorkfliire.  67.  b. 

42.  Of  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Whalley  in  Lancaftiire.  68. 

43.  Touching  the  Foundation  &  Ereiftion  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Cockerfand  in  Lancafhire.  69. 

44.  Of  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Cartmele,  in  Lancaftiire.  ibid. 

45.  Of  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  Fournes,  in  Lancaftiire.  yg.  b. 

46.  Of  the  Monaftery  of  Calder  in  Cumberland  ;  its 

Foundation  &  Armes.  80. 

47*  Gt  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Mo¬ 
naftery  of  St.  Bsyfle  in  Cumberland.  ibid. 

48.  Of 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


Num.  1499. 

48.  Of  the  Foundation,  with  the  Arms  of  the  Monas¬ 
tery  of  Holme  Coltrane  in  Cumberland.  82. 

40.  Of  the  Foundation  of  the  Priory  of  Carlile. 

82.  b. 

This  Vifitation-book  of  the  Northern  Province,  by 
Thomas  Tong  Norroy  ;  is  followed,  by 

50.  A  Defcent  of  Haywarde,  with  Armes ;  beginning 
from  fol.  109.  b. 

5 1 .  Pedegree  of  Fitz- Williams ;  beginning  from  fol. 
n.j.b. 

52.  Pedegree  of  the  Royal  Familie,  from  K.  William 
the  Conqueror,  to  Queen  Elizabeth  ;  beginning  from 
fol.  117. 

53.  Large  Pedegree  of  Fitz-Williams,  deduced  from 
Robert  Duke  of  Normandye ;  beginning  from  fol. 
123.  b. 

54.  Defcent  of  the  Houfe  of  Cleves,  Sc  Counts  d’Eg- 
lnond  ;  with  Armes  :  beginning  from  fol.  125.  b. 

Then  follow  certain  Heraldical  matters  of  other 
Natures  ;  viz. 

55.  Jura,  Debita  et  Largiiates  appertinentia,  de  antiqua 

Conl'uetudine,  Armorum  Officialibus,  fecundum  morem 
et  confuetudinem  Anglic.  126.  b. 

56.  De  primis  Annualibus  Officialium  Armorum,  et 

Largitatibus,  &c.  127. 

57.  Redditus  quos  habent  Officiales  Armorum  quo- 

libet  anno.  ibid. 

58.  Quando  Officiales  Armorum  font  juffi  extra  reg- 
num,  ut  Oratores,  Legati,  Nuncij,  vel  cum  Ambaffia- 
tsribus,  Oratoribus,  vel  quomodocunque  fit,  Ac.  127. b. 

59.  Quando  Officiales  Armorum  lunt  in  Bello  cum 

Rege.  ibid. 

bo.  Quando  firnt  Officiales  Armorum  in  Bello,  cum 
aliquo  Capitaneo.  _  ibid. 

61.  De  alijs  Juribus  commodis,  appertinentibus  Offi¬ 
cialibus  Armorum,  dum  lunt  in  Bello.  ibid. 

62.  De  Jure  appertinenti  Officialibus  Armorum,  de 

Preiianlibus  in  Campo  trufo  cum  Licijs.  128. 

63.  De  Hafliludijs  et  Tomamentis.  ibid. 

64.  De  Rebellibus.  i28.b. 

65.  De  Funeribus  Debita.  ibid. 

66.  Quando  creantur  Officiales  Armorum.  (hie  defi- 

nitferiptor  abrupte.)  ibid. 

'1  hen  follow, 

67.  Orders  made  in  the  Chapterhoufe  ofWeflmyn- 

fter,  the  1 9th  of  Novcmbre,  the  3  yere  of  Kynge  Henry 
the  vii.  by  alle  the  Ivyngs  of  Armes  and  Herauldys,  for 
theyre  attendance  on  the  Kyngs  good  Grace,  from  thys 
daye  forward.  1 3 1  •  b- 

66.  Lyvery  for  Kyngs  of  Armes,  Iieraulds,  Sc  Pur- 
fevaunts,  at  echc  of  the  Feftes.  132. 

Then  follow  more  Defcents  &  Pedegrees.  viz. 

69.  Defcent  of  the  Lords  Beaumont,  with  Armes ; 
beginning  from  fol.  1 36. 

70.  Defcent  of  Hoo,  put  down  by  way  of  Narration. 

139.  b. 

71.  Defcent  of  Bohun  Earl  of  Hereford,  in  the  fame 

manner,  but  in  the  Latin  Tongue.  141.  b. 

72.  Defcei.t  of  Moubrey  from  Edmund  the  fir  if  Earl 

of  Lancafter.  143.  b. 

73.  Defcent  of  Temped  of  Studeley  in  Com.Ebor. 

with  Arms  painted.  1 44.  b. 

74.  Tranfcripts  of  Recr.rds,  touching  the  Familie  of 

Patelhulle,  and  the  Partition  of  their  Eftate  among  many 
Coheirefles,  ann.  3+Edw.  hi.  180.  b. 

75.  Defcent  of  Dudley  from  Greyc,  Talbot,  8c  Beau¬ 
champ  Earl  of  Warwick,  with  Arms  in  colours;  divers 
of  which  are  very  odd,  and  feem  to  have  been  taken 
from  fomc  old  Window,  perhaps  of  the  Cathedral 
Church  of  Wells.  It  beginneth  from  fol.  183. 

76.  Memoires  touchant  les  Seigneurs  de  la  Zowche. 

185.  b. 

77.  StemmaFamilirede  la  Marche.  1.97.  b. 


Num.  1499. 

78.  Placita  de  Juratis  et  Affifis  coram  Jufliciarijs  Itine- 

rantibus  in  Com.  Hereford,  anno  20  R.  Edw.  1.  fuper 
Manerio  de  Wiiton.  quod  petivit  Rex  verfus  Reginaldum 
de  Grey  &  Matildam  uxorem  ejus.  198.  b. 

79.  The  Title  of  William  Dacre  Knyghte,  Lorde 

Grayltoke  ;  Sc  of  William  Grc-y  Lorde  Grey  of  Wilton, 
Cofyns  Sc  Heires  Generalie  of  Richarde  late  Earl  of 
Kent;  to  all  Caltells,  Lordfhipps,  Manors,  Lands,  Te¬ 
nements,  &  other  Hereditaments,  fpeciliede  &  wretene 
in  a'Sedule  herunto  annexed.  199. 

•  The  Minors  fo  fpecified  in  the  faid  Schedule,  are 
73  in  Number. 

80.  Defcent  Sc  Arms  of  Garnegan.  200.  b. 

8 1 .  Defcent  8c  Arms  of  Saint  Quintyn.  ibid. 

82.  Pedegree  of  Fitz-Ilugh  ;  with  fome  explanatory 

Notes.  20 1 .  b. 

83.  Part  of  the  fictitious  Defcent  of  Catara.  203.  b. 

84.  Pedegree  of  Par,  Fitz-FIugh,  &c.  205. 

85.  A  Defcent,  wherein  is  mention  of  the  Families  of 

Blomottore,  Wyke,  Iiuyfhe,  Hauly,  Colffiill,  Speccote, 
Halap,  Trevenor,  Anondelle,  Stradlinge,  Danvers,  & 
Whitingtone.  206.  b. 

86.  Defcent  of  Marmeon.  207.  b. 

87.  Pedegrees  of  Butler  Earl  of  Ormond.  208.  b. 

88.  Arms  of  Elizabeth  C.ountefs  of  Hereford,  5c 

daughter  to  K. Edward  1.  with  the  Anns  of  divers  noble 
Perfonages  defeended  from  her.  2 1  o.  b. 

89.  Defcent  of  Howard  Duke  of  Norfolk,  &  of  Beau¬ 

champ  of  Abergavenny  from  K.  Henry  in.  with  fome 
Ornaments.  an.b. 

90.  Defcent  of  Colffiill,  Palmer,  &  Oliver;  with  their 

Arme*;  beginning  from  214. 

91.  Defcent  of  C.haworth.  from  C.altofte,  Sc  Brett ; 

with  Armes.  Ex  Informatione.  214.  b. 

92.  Defcent  of  Herbert,  &  Fitz-Vryan  :  beginning 
from  fol.  2 15.  b. 

93.  Short  Defcent. of  the  Lord  Darcy.  216.  b. 

94.  Defcent  of  Tiptofte,  8c  Holand  Earl  of  Kent, 

from  K.Edward  1.  216.  b. 

95.  Defcendants  from  William  Earl  Marffiall,  8c  of 

Pembroke  ;  beginning  at  217.  b. 

96.  Conceffio  Armorum  ac  Criftat,  Waltero  Cham- 

pyon,  per  Gabrielem  Comitem  in  Ortenburg,  Legatum 
ut  videtur  Ccefareum.  dat.  in  Lundino  Civitate  Anglica, 
20  die  Marcij,  A.D.  1527.  218.  b. 

97.  Pars  prior  Diplomatis  Thoms  Wryothefley  Mili- 
tis  et  Garterij,  cum  Thoma  Benoit  Clarentio,  circa  Con- 
firmationem  Armorum  Galfredo  Chamber  faciendam. 

221.  b. 

98.  Labour’ J  Pedegree  cf  Grey,  Fitz-Alan,  &  divers 

other  Noble  Families.  222.  b. 

99.  Defcents  of  Howard,  Talbot,  Stafford,  Audeley, 

&c.  227.  b. 

100.  Pedegree  of  Ratcliffe,  Fitz-Walter,  See.  with 

Armes.  229.  b. 

101.  Armes  of  piany  Noble  Engliffi  Perfonages. 

232.  b. 

1-2.  Defcent  of  Fitz-Morice  Earl  of  Kildare;  with 
marginal  Notes.  Begir.neth  from  234.  b. 

103.  Defcendants  from  Sir  Humfrey  Stafford  with  the 

Silver  Hand  ;  beginneth  at  235.  b. 

1 04.  Defc;  ndants  from  John  Lord  Welles  ;  through 
the  Families  of  Butler  Sc  Boleyne  on  the  one  hand  ;  tc 
Poynings  &  Paullctt  on  the  other;  beginneth  at  fol.  237. 

105.  Defcent  of  Holand,  Charlton,  Grey  Lord 
Powys,  8c  of  Poole,  from  Cad wallider ;  beginning  from 

239.  b. 

106.  Pedegree  of  Fullwar,  with  Arms;  beginning  ac 

241. 

1 07.  Defcent  of  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick  Gaiter ;  begin¬ 
ning  at  2 43* 

108.  The 


So 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  14.99,  1500. 

!  -'*•  ThePetegrey  of  Wentworthe  of  Wentwourthe 
Woodhowfe ;  by  way  of  Narration  ;  &  with  Amies. 

243 

ioq.  Notes,  or  Remembrances  of  what  ihould  1  e 
done  or  provided  for  the  Marriage  of  a  Great  Aftate. 

t  JO.  Parr  ofaTable  to  this  Book;  or  rather  aTaUelo 
ng  •  v  dilation -book  of  his  Province,  above-mentioned 
at  N”ta.  made  by  Thomas  Knight  Cherter-Herald. 

Laftly,  °47‘ b' 

1 1 1.  Part  of  a  Tranfcript  of  the  Book  of  Domefdei 
in  the  Exchequer,  relating  to  Yorkfhire,  written  by  the 
hand  &  attefted  by  Mr.  Scipio  l’Efquire. 

1  500. 

A  Book  in  large  fol.  confiding  of  mifcellaneous  Pede- 

iors.  and  putt  together  here  without  any  manner  of 
Order.  They  are, 

1.  Pedegree  of  Blount.  x 

.  Genealogia  antique  Darellorum  Familife,  per  plu- 
n mas  Agnationes  propagata.  2 

3.  Stemmata  recentiura  antiqua^  Familite  Rudierdie. 
de  K  udierd,  in  Comitatu  Staffordie,  Anno  i  ^97.  cum 
Armis,  Sigillis,  &c.  feriplit  &  delineavit  Will.  Smith  a 
Rubeo  Dracone.  „ 

4-  Defcent  of  Cantelupc,  Haftings,  Beauchamp,  & 
Nevill  Lord  Abergavenny;  with  notes  touching  the 
feveral  Claims  to  that  Barony.  , 

5.  Part  of  a  Defcent  of  Reynell,  bv  Jofeph  Holand; 
llmurated  with  Tricks  of  Arms  &  Seals,  (vid.  infra 

N'2?-')  ....  5/ 

('■  Ampliflima  Mefnil-Warinorum  (vulgo  Manwaring) 
Farnika,  <x  varijs  Stemmatibus  per  Agnationes  longe 
lateq;  propagata,  Armifq;  Gentilitijs  diftintta  ac  feperata, 
&c.  Primurn a  Sampfone  Erdefv.ico  Amiigero  delineata, 
Anno  i  - 92.  nunc  vero  exemplificata,  augmentata,  et 
emendata,  Iabore  Gulielmi  Smith,  alias  Rouge-Dragon 
Anno  Domini  1 602. 

7.  Defcent  of  Holand;  drawn  up  for  Mr.  Jofeph  Ho¬ 
land.  g 

8.  Pedegree  of  Audeley,  Latham,  See.  by  Mr.  Same- 

fon  Lennard,  Blewmantle.  0> 

9.  Ext  eta  et  accurata  deductio  Stemmatis  praselara; 
E.unilias  e’e  Eure,  ab  antiquis  Northumbrenfis  Comita- 
i  iis  Baronibus  de  Werkworth,  et  de  Claveringe,  con- 
tmua  Mafculorum  fuccdfiotie  redd  derivatL  Scripta 
fimul  et  illuminata  per  Guif.  Smith,  Rouge-Dragon. 

10. 

1  o.  Stemma  Familim  de  Burgh ;  mar.u  Sampfonis  Leo- 
nard  nitide  delineatum.  x  , 

1 1.  Two  Defcents  of  Holand ;  the  one  extracted  from 
the  Records  of  the  Tower  of  London  by  Mr.  Thomas 
hi  n  1  jthDeceml 

I  he  other  written  by  Mr.  Jofeph  Holand  himfelf,  with 
references  to  the  faid  Records.  '  I2 

Al-  ;e  Pedegree  of  Sir  Chriftopher  Hatton  Lorf 
Chancellor  ,  w,ui  .'Jdceats  of  the  Pin, |i«  albea  unto 

him.  (fol.  13.  is  torn  out  of  the  Book.)  I4 

13.  Pedegree  of  Clifford  Earl  of  Cumberland-  by 
Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux. 

14.  Defcents  of  divers  noble  Englilh  Families  '  bv 

Mr.  Jofeph  Holand.  (vid.  inf, a.  N  22.)  ’jg  7 

15.  Pedegree  of  Smith;  with  Defcents  of  Poynings 

- 

ri'.  Defendants  from  Edmund  Duke  of  Y0tk  'as 
' 

Mr.  Sampfon  Lennard  Blew-mantle.  , 

17.  Pedegree  of  Penitton  of  Deane  in  Com.  Oxford 
with  Amies;  as  lett  forth,  informer  Pedegrees  and  an’ 
pi  oved  by  Robert  r^joke  Clarenceux.  °  IQP 


Num.  1500. 

18.  Pedegree  of  Howard,  with  Armes.  19.  b. 

19.  Ihe  Genealogie  of  the  Noble  Famely  of  the  fur- 
name  or  Fynes  Barons  Dacre  ;  with  the  feveral  Jaynes  & 
Defcents  of  all  the  inheritable  IJoufes  wherewith  thev 
have  matched  ;  as  alfo  the  Surnames  of  all  fuch  as  for 
“\e  Pa?  are  difeended  from  them  ;  diligently  & 
faithfully  delineated  &  deduced  downe  to  the  perfon  of 
Margret  Lady  Dacre,  and  to  Sir  Henry  Leonard  her 
ronne  be  heire  apparant,  to  fhew  how  they  do  partici¬ 
pate  m  Bloud  with  all  the  Noble  Lynes  in  this  proieft, 
and  how  by  Prerogative  of  their  Births  they  mav  Ouar- 

!Cr  A,bC^Vhe,r  i*rmes’  acco,’ding  to  the  antient  & 
laudable  Cuftom  of  this  Realmc  of  England.  By  Wil¬ 
liam  Smith  Rouge-Dragon.  b  '  „c 

Wb  The/CcCf c  °fsPrinSES  of  Meo  furnamej 
w-  Lhwei’  &  lec°nd  fonne  to  Sutrick  of 

V\  igley  Head  k.nge  of  Diveling  &  the  belt  Part  of  Ir- 
land.  And  how  that  David  Pres  ap  William  of  the 
Lower  Rydcdm,  is  defeended  from  the  fame  Ideo  and 
from  many  other  auncicnt  &  noble  lioufes  of  theBryt- 
tys  Race ;  as  this  Pedegree  mencioneth,  fett  forth  by 
me  I  ho  mas  Jones,  l'inirtied  at  Fountayn-gatte,  the  Eft 
oi  June  1593.  2U 

I  have  heard  that  this  Jones  of  Fountayn-gatte  was 
m  his  tune  a  notable  Forger  of  Welih  Pedegrees 
21  Defcent  of  Pcihali,  Kr.ightley,  Becke,  Sharef- 
null,  &  Ilarcourt  :  with  Armes.  „2 

,  “•  Df™tof  Charles  Blount  Earl  of  Devonted, 

by  Mr.  Jofeph  Eloland.  (vid.  fupra,  N5  14.)  23 

23.  Defcent  of  Haftings,  by  Robert  Cooke  Claren¬ 
ceux. 

Large  Pedegree  of  Boftock  ;  with  Armes,*  by 
William  Smith,  Rouge-dragon.  2^ 

25.  Pedegree  of  Cary,  afterwards  Lord  Himfdon • 

with  Armes.  * 

26.  Pedegree  of  Goodyer.  26.  b. 

knh7nI?efCnent/°f  ,Rryne11,  ?c-  wIth  Armes  by  Mr.’  [o- 
leph  Holand.  (vid.  fupra,  N° 4.) 

28.  Large  Pedegree  of  Bainton,  &c.  by  Mr.  Samnfnn 

Lennard  Blew-mantle.  (Torn.)  28 

29.  The  Pedegre  &  Achevameut  of  Kadwalader 
Gw  ynne  ap  Hugh  ap  Owen  of  Kelmot  in  the  P.  :(h  of 
Lann-Raydor  &  County  of  Montgomerie  ;  drawee  by 
Ries  Cam  of  the  lowne  of  Oftweltrie  in  the  Countie  of 
Salop  Anno  1602.  Together  with  the  Pedegree  of  his 
wife  Jane  daughter  of  John  ap  William. 

Tlieie  large  Defcents  are  copied  by  Mr.  Sampfon Len- 
naril;  ix  have  received  lome  damage  by  Mice. 

30.  Pedegree  of  Grofvenor;  with  Defcmts  of  Sln- 
kerley,  Dutton,  &c. 

Part  of  a  Defcent  of  St.  Leger,  Boleyn,  Butler, 
&c.  feemmg  of  the  hand  of  Sr.  William  Dethick.  30  b 
y-  rrc  p  :,r  jjissti'kfr.lhis  .1.  1 .....  -  ' 

qm  ohm ,  fuerunt  Comites  Derbiaj  ;  p  -iies  Barones  he 
t  .hartley,  et  dc  Groby,  Ex  qnibus,  U1  Iri 
bertus  Comes JEflexkc,  Henricus  Gray  de  Pirgo  Miles 
Hurafredus  Ferrers  de  'i  sm worth  Miles,  et  Henricus 
Ieirers  de  Baddelley  Armiger,  orti  funt  ;  Anno  1590., 
manu  Guil.  Smith.  1 

3.3-  Pedegree  01  Dawe,  by  Mr,  Sampfon  Lennard, 
Blew-mantle.  ^  ’ 

34-  Defcendants  from  Robert  Holand  (the  Anchor 
of  tnat  great  bi  noble  Famuy  of  Holand,  who  was  beheaded 
anu.  2.  Low.  in.)  fett  down  by  Mr.  Jofeph  Holand,  as 
on  a  great  Tree  fpringing  out  of  the  body  of  Robert 
abovementioned.  “ 

n  35c  ,],hc'  9eaeaIog‘e  of  the  Knighilie  Familie  of '’the 
Bamlields  of  Poltemore  ;  A.D.  1617. 

36.  Stemma  Familia:  de  Mortuo-mari.  . 

0fHaVi?yfCentOfI'aC0nfrOn’Harle)'i  'Vith  lhe 
p-  L>efcniisnts  from  Henry  Flantaginct  Earl  of  Lan- 
caJ  er  ;  wi  h  a  Defc;  t  of  Beaumont.  [,_ 

3  *  Here 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


St 


Num.  1 500. 

Here  is  alfo  an  Epitaph  or  two,  on  fome  of  the 
Beaumonts. 

39.  Defcent  of  Davy,  Moyne  or  Monke,  &  Cham- 

pernon.  dat.  A.D.  1628.  by  Mr.  Sampfon  Lennard 
Blevvmantle.  36. 

40.  Large  Pedigree  of  Penifton  &  other  Families. 

37- 

41.  Large  Pedegree  of  the  Family  of  Covert,  &c.  with 

Arms  &  Proofs  ;  by  Mr.  Sampfon  Lennard.  38. 

42.  The  Genealogie  or  Difcent  of  the  Claphams  of 

Beamefley  in  Yorkfhyre,  &c.  and  of  the  Claphams  of 
Helpefton  in  Northampftonfhyre ;  in  Anno  1596.  39. 

43.  Pedegree  of  Wentworth  of  Yorkfhire,  by  Richard 

Gafcoigne  El'q.  40. 

44-  Names  of  the  Englilh  Lords  who  wrote  to  Pope 
Boniface,  about  the  Superiority  over  Scotland,  temp. 
R.  Edw.  1  taken  from  Holinfhead.  40.  b. 

45.  Defcent  of  Holand,  with  fome  Proofs,  written 
by  Mr.  Jofeph  Holand  A.D.  1597.  who  alfo  on  the 
back-fide  hath  left  this  Note,  this  Genealogye  of  Holand 
is  coppyed  out  of  an  Originall  done  in  Mettail  in  the 
Zeare  oi  our  Lord  1589.  which  I  lawe  under  the  handes 
of  Mr.  Garter,  Mr.  Clarentieux,  &  Yorke  Herault,  ex¬ 
emplified  the  tenth  daye  of  September  Anno  1597.  41. 

46.  Pedegree  of  Peyton.  42. 

47.  Pedegree  of  Charles  Blount  Earl  of  Devon  ;  by 

Mr.  Jofeph  Holand.  43. 

48.  Pedegree,  with  Armes,  of  Forfter  of  Ederfton 

in  the  Countie  of  Northumberland,  by  William  Smith 
Rouge-Dragon.  44. 

49.  Pedegree  of  Shawe,  with  Armes  by  Mr.  Samp¬ 
fon  Lennard  Blew-mantle.  45. 

50.  Stemma  Familias  de  Langham,  per  eundem. 

45-  b. 

51.  Pedegree  of  Willoughby,  and  other  Families 

allied  thereunto  ;  by  the  fame.  ibid. 

52.  Pedegree  of  Spenfer.  46. 

53.  Pedegree  of  Holland  or  Holand.  46.  b. 

54.  Pedegree  of  Brereton,  by  Mr.  Sampfon  Lennard, 

Blew-mantle.  47. 

55.  The  Atchievement  of  Mr.  Thomas  Wettcnhall 

of  Eaft-Pecham  in  Com.  Kane.  With  a  Lift  of  the 
Books  given  by  him  to  the  Church  there.  Copied  by 
Mr.  Sampfon  Lennard.  48. 

56.  Defcent  k  Arms  of  Cotgreve.  49. 

57.  The  Dcfcents  of  Frederick  Elettor-Palatine  & 
the  Princefs  Elizabeth  his  Confort,  with  all  the  Arms 
in  Colors.  The  Whole  is  done  upon  two  Trees,  whofe 
bodies  are  united  :  by  William  Smith  Rouge-Dragon. 

50. 

58.  Pedegree  of  Carington  alias  Smith  ;  made  by 
William  Smith  Rouge-dragon  A.D.  1602.  (Torn.) 

50.  b. 

59.  Pedegree  of  Reynell  with  Arms  &  Proofs;  & 

Amendments  of  Mr.  Joleph  Holand.  51. 

60.  Large  Pedegree  cf  Ferrers,  with  Proofs  ;  by 

William  Smith  Rouge-dragon.  32. 

6 1 .  Pedegree  of  Newcomen  ;  with  Defcents  of  Green- 

feld,  &  Stevenfon  ;  &  Arms  by  the  fame.  53. 

62.  Pedegree  of  Parker  of  Norton-Lees  ;  with  Armes. 

53-  b. 

63.  Pedegree  of  Felton  of  Playford  in  Com.  Suff. 
with  Proofs. 

64.  Pedegree  of  Nevil,  with  Proofs  ;  begun  by  Wil¬ 

liam  Smith  Rouge-Dragon,  &  finifhed  by  Mr.Sampfon 
Lennard  Blew-Manrle.  33. 

63.  Defcent  of  Welles  ;  by  Henry  Parker  the  Painter. 

55-  b. 

66.  Defcent  of  many  noble  Englifh  Families  from  K. 

Edward  1.  by  Mr.  Jofeph  Holand.  36  &  37. 

67.  Pedegree  &  Armes  of  Dyve  of  Bedfordfhire,  at- 
tefted  &  fubicribed  by  William  Hervey  Clarenceux. 

57-  b. 


Num.  1500,  1501. 

68.  Defcent  &  Arms  of  Stockdale.  57  e. 

69.  Pedegree  of  Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  dat.  A.D.  160V 

58. 

70.  Pedegree  &  Arms  of  Leigh  of  Cheihire :  by 
William  Smith  Rouge-Dragon  ?  with  Proofs.  59. 

71.  Pedegtee  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  with  Proofs,  by 

Mr.  Jofeph  Holand,  A.D  1601.  60. 

72.  Defcent  of  Frefchvile  of  Staveley  fromMufard  ; 

with  Arms  coloured  A.D.  1596.  63. 

73.  Proofs  illuftrating  the  Defcent  of  the  Family  of 

Cater,  for  the  moft  part  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr. 
Henry  Peacham.  (But  fora'fmuch  as  I  have  heard  that  a 
Pedegree  was  forged  for  this  Family  ;  and  the  Direc¬ 
tions  to  the  Originals  are  but  blind,  I  queftion  whether 
they  are  of  much  Authority.)  64. 

74.  Alphabetical  1  able  containing  the  Surnames  of 
Families  mentioned  in  this  Collection  of  Defcents.  69. 

Then  follow  certain  loofe  Papers,  wherein  I  find, 

75.  A  large  Pedegree  of  Penifton,  with  Defcents  of 

many  noble  Families.  74. 

76.  Pedegree  of  Cary  Lord  Hunfdon.  74.  b. 

77.  Mr.  Sampfon  Lennards  Lift  of  Noblemen  created 
in  the  3  firft  years  of  the  Reign  of  K.  Charles  the  firft. 

75- 

78.  Alphabet  of  Armes  in  Blazon  of  the  Gentry ‘of 

the  County  of  Gloucefter.  76. 

79.  Delcent  &  Armes  of  Ryvett  of  Suffolk,  by  Henry 

Parker,  the  Painter.  79. 

80.  Pedegree  of  Wicherley,  with  Armes  by  the  fame 

Henry  Parker.  80. 

1 50  r. 

A  mufical  Book  in  fol.  all  written  by  the  hand  of  Signor 
Pietro  Reggio  a  famous  Italian  Mafter  living  in  Eng¬ 
land,  in  the  time  of  K.  Charles  11.  It  was  bought  of 
me  ;  and  containeth  the  following  fine  Compofitions, 

1.  Vorei  fcoprirti  un  di,  con  la  piagha  del  Cor;  dei 

Sigr.  Luiggi  Roffi,  i  2  Voci.  '  ! . 

2.  Tu  farai  fempre  il  mio  Bene ;  del  Sigr.  Luiggi 

Roffi;  a  due  Voci.  6 

3.  Pene,  che  volete  da  me;  del  Sigr.  Luiggi  Rofli  j  a 

2,  Soprano  &  Baffo.  ^ 

4.  O  Mifera  Dorinda  !  del  Sigr,  Pietro  Reggio,  a  2, 

Soprano  &  Baffo.  5. 

5.  Spiega,  un  volo  cofi  altero  1’alta  mia  Speme  Vivace, 

del  Sigr.  Luiggi  Rofli,  a  due  Soprano  e  Bafo.  9. 

6.  Tu  giuri  che  e  mio  quel’  Seno ;  del  Sigr.  Luigi 

Roffi,  &  due  Voci.  i0,  5. 

7.  Difenditi  6  Core  ;  del  Sigr.  Luiggi  Rofti.  10. 

8.  Chi  d’Amor  divien  feguace.  13. 

9.  Scufatemi,  non  poffo  di  non  poter  vi  amar.  Can- 

zon  .  I4> 

xo.  Chi  me  Madre  aita  ;  del  Sigr.  Luiggi  Rofti. 

15.  b. 

11.  Sofpiri  ch’ufcite  dal  trifto  mio  Core ;  del  Sigr. 

Giacomo  Chariftimi.  16. 

12.  Sta  in  Tono,  mio  Core.  17. 

13.  Faville  d’Amore  che  l’Altn’  accendete.  Can- 

zonetta.  18.  b. 

1 4.  E  gionto  un  corriero  che  porta  la  nuova.  Can¬ 
zone.  ‘ 

15.  V’intendo,  Occhi,  voi  mi  volete  morto  del  Sigr. 

Giacomo  Chariftimi.  2i. 

1 6.  Senfi  voi  cio  che  Godete  il  finire ;  del  Padre 

Cefti.  _  .  23.  b. 

17.  Tu  mancavai  a  tormentarmi,  crudeliflima  Spe- 

ranza.  b. 

18.  Tradimento,  Amore  e  la  Speranza.  26.  b. 

19.  T’en  pentirai  credi  lo  il  Me;  di  Pietro  Reggio. 

29. 

20.  Luci  belle,  dite  hoitn£  ;  del  Sigr.  Luiggi  Rofli. 

31. 

21.  Riffolvetevi  Penfieri  ;  della  Signora  Barbara 

Strozzi.  31.  b. 

Y  22.  Mio 


Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


23- 

Rofli. 


25- 


22.  Mio  ben,  teco  il  Tormento  piu  dolce  io  troverai. 
Canzona  prima  di  Luiggi  Rofli.  33. 

AH'  ombra  d’una  Speranza  :  del  Sigr.  Luiggi 

31- 

No,  mio  Cor,  non  ti  diffendere.  34.  b. 

Son  fpezzate  le  Catene  ;  del  Sigr.  Cavalli. 

35-  b- 

26.  Chi  mi  credeva  inltabile  ;  del  Sigr.  Luiggi  Rofli. 

36.  b. 

27.  Voraggini  ondofe,  che  al  Mar  traboccate.  Aria 

di  Y'enelia.  33.  b. 

28.  Quand’  hebbi  d’Oro  il  Crin  ;  di  Pietro  Reggio. 

39. 

29.  No,  no  mio  Core,  non  ingolfarti ;  del  Sigr. 

Giacomo  Chariflimi.  40.  b. 

3?.  Non  e  Stabile  la  Fortuna.  42.  b. 

31.  Solitudine  amena  in  Te  disfogo.  44. 

32.  Maledettala  Corte,  e  chi  vi  Sta  ;  del  Sigr.  Fran- 

cefco  Lucio.  46.  b. 

33.  Audite  Sanfti,  audite  Jufti,  audite  fortes  Elefto- 
rum  Animas  ;  del  Sigr.  Giacomo  Cariflimi,  a  tre.  48. 

34.  O  bone  Jefu,  6  fuavis  Amor  ;  del  Sigr.  Cafiati. 

52. 

35-  Gaudia,  Paftores,  optate  Munera  Pacis  ;  del  Sigr. 
Bonifacio  Gratiani.  34.  b. 

3b.  Il  tempo  piii  non  e  che  de  Fantichita  fi  faccia  ftima  ; 


del  Padre  Tiani. 


57  b. 


37.  Che  mi  giova  in  alto  Soglio  pofleder  Teforo  . 

Aria  di  un  Opera.  ^3. 

38.  Armor  flo  mi  querelo  d’Amar  belta  fuperba  ;  del 

Sigr.  Luigi  Rofli.  58.  b. 

39.  Vo  cercando  la  Speranza :  di  Vincenzo  Albrici ; 

59. 

40.  Safli  ch5  hor  qua  trA  le  Rouine  ;  Poefia  del  Ca- 

vaglier  Marini,  Mufica  di  Pietro  Reggio.  61. 

41.  Si  midicefti  ;  e  d’io  quel  dolcifiimo  fi  mandai  nel 

Core;  a  tre  Voci.  63.  b. 

42.  Manda  i  Nobili  allori ;  di  Vincenzo  Albrici. 

66.  b. 

43.  Amor  chi  ti  die  l’Ali ;  Mufichadi  Pietro  Reggio. 

67.  b. 

44.  Ditc  6  Cieli  fe  crudeli  fono  i  fguardi  del  mio  Ben ; 

del  Sigr.  Luiggi  Rofli,  a  2  voci.  69. 

45.  Non  piu  Vilta,  non  piu  Timore  ardifei  mio  Core. 

fDel  Sigr.  Luigg.  Rofli.)  69.  b. 

At  the  end  of  the  Book  is  this  Note,  Scritto  a 
richelta  di  Monfieur  Didier,  in  Londra,  Anno  Domini 
1681.  Pietro  Reggio. 

1502. 

A  Book  in  fol.  well  written  by  divers  Hands  ;  wherein 
are  contained, 

1 .  A  complete  Tranflation  ol  the  Cavaliero  Domenico 
Fontana’s  Book,  entituled  of  the  Tranfportation  of  the 
Vatican  Obelifk  ;  and  of  the  Buildings  of  Pope  Sixtus  v. 
Printed  at  Rome  A.D.  1590. 

None  of  the  printed  Cutts  are  annexed  to  this  Tran¬ 
flation. 

This  is  followed  by  a  French  Book  engraven  on 
Copper-Plates,  and  thus  entituled, 

2.  Reprefentations  Geometrales  de  plufieurs  parties  de 

Bafhments,  faites  par  les  Reigles  de  1’  Architecture 
Antique  ;  et  de  qui  les  Mefures  lent  reduittes  en  Piedz 
Poulces,  &  Lignes,  a  fin  de  s’accommoder  a  la  Maniere 
de  Mefurer  la  plus  en  uzage  parmy  le  Commun  des 
Oeuvriers,  par  A.  Bofle.  A  Paris,  chez  l’Autheur 
A.D. 1659.  3 

This  Traft  is  alfo  tranflated  into  Englifh,  and  the 
Tranflation  is  bound  up  along  with  it,  foliatim. 


i5°3- 

An  old  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  is  contained, 

1.  A  large  Collection  of  Armes,  painted  about  the 
time  of  K.  Edward  vi.  or  the  latter  end  of  his  Father’s 
Reign. 

2.  Although  fome  of  thefe  Armes  be  fabulous,  and 
are  to  be  found  in  other  Books  of  the  fame  Age ;  this 
Collection  is  neverthelefs  very  ufeful,  upon  fundry  Ac¬ 
counts. 

3.  Some  of  thefe  Arms  are  alfo  exprefled  in  Blazon  ; 
fome  are  difpofed  in  way  of  Ordinary  ;  others  according 
to  their  Counties  ;  and  the  molt,  promiicuoufly,  in  no 
method  at  all. 

4.  Among  them  is  a  fprinkling  of  Foreign  Armes,  as 
French,  Scotch,  Irilh,  Wellh,  &c. 

5.  Here  &  there,  occurre  fome  Notes  &  Emendations 
by  fome  modern  Hand. 

6.  At  the  end  is  an  alphabetical  Table  referring  to 
the  abovementioned  Armes  ;  drawn  u  p  by  Henry  Parker 
and  others  of  late  times. 

At  the  beginning,  are  the  Armes  of  Herbert  with 
Quarterings  ;  to  which  Familie  this  Book  once  belonged, 
as  may  appear  by  the  Names  written  upon  the  fame  Page. 

I504, 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  divers 
hands ;  wherein  are  contained,  * 

1 .  The  Vifitation  of  Hartfordelhire,  taken  by  .  . 

.  .  .  Anno  Dili  1579.  1. 

This  is  the  Title  of  the  firfl:  TraCt ;  and  many  of 
the  Deicents  are  fo  dated  ;  but  yet  whether  this  County 
was  then  vifited  I  cannot  fay.  It  was  certainly  vifittd 
ten  years  before  (viz.  A.D.  1569.)  by  Robert  Cooke 
Clarenceux,  as  appeareth  by  the  Book  N"  61 5.  and  it  is 
affirmed  that  it  was  again  vifited  A.D.  :  572.  at  which  the 
fame  Robert  Cocke  continued  to  be  Clarenceux  ;  and  it 
would  have  been  a  burthen  upon  the  Gentry ’of  any 
County  to  be  vifited  three  times  in  ten  years. 

At  the  end  of  this  Tract  which  hath  many  Conti¬ 
nuations  &  Additions,  both  of  the  firlt  Hand,  and  alfo 
of  Mr.  Henry  Parker  the  Painter-Stayner  ;  I  find, 

2.  A  Collection  of  the  Defcents,  with  Tricks  of  the 

Armes,  of  many  eminent  Citizens  of  London  fett 
down  by  the  firfl:  Hand  in  fuch  manner  as  to  look  like 
the  latter  part  of  the  precedent  Tract.  ygm 

Here  are  alfo  fonte  few  Additions  &  Continuations 
of  the  fame  Henry  Parker. 

3.  The  Visitation  of  Hertfordlhire  taken  by  Sir  Henry 

St.  George  Richtnond-Herauld  Anno  1634.  being  De¬ 
puty  to  Sir  John  Borough  Garter  &  Sir  Richard  St. 
George  Clarenceux,  Kings  of  Armes.  130. 

Herein  are  alfo  fome  additions  &  continuations  of 
Henry  Parker  &  others. 

4.  An  alphabetical  fable  to  the  Defcents  contained  in 
this  Book ;  made  by  thofe  who  entered  the  Defcents 
therein.  At  the  end. 

*505- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  is  contained  a  Copie 

of  that  \  iiitation-book  which  was  made  for  the  County- 

Palatine  of  Chelter  A.D.  1580.  by  Robert  Glover 

Somerfet-Herald,  Marflial  and  Deputy  to  William 

Flower  Norroy  his  father  in  law. 

1  his  Copie  was  made  by  that  perfon  who  made  the 
Book  N°  1424.  and  perhaps  from  it.  The  Arms  are 
better  tricked  in  N“  1424.  than  in  this,  which  hath  alfo 
more  faults  than  that. 

There  being  nothing  to  be  faid  by  me  touching  the 
Contents  of  this  Copy,  but  what  hath  been  mentioned  of 
the  other  already  ;  I  (hall  forbear  to  repeat  the  fame 
here  ;  making  only  this  Remark,  that  fince  both  thefe 
Books  were  written,  fome  ew  Additions  have  been 

entred 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


83 


Num.  1505,  1506. 

e.ntred  into  each  of  them,  by  their  refpeftive  Owners, 
unknown  to  one  another ;  which  are  therefore  want¬ 
ing  in  the  one  Copie,  though  inferted  in  the  other. 

I  506. 

A  Book  in  fol.  confiding  of  divers  Tracis  bound  up 
together,  in  the  Order  following, 

1.  The  Amies  of  Brute,  Albanatt,  Camber,  Bellinus, 
Urerpendragon,  Arthur,  Cadwallader,  Egbert,  Swanus 
the  Dane,  Edward  the  Confeffor,  &  William  the  Con¬ 
queror,  Sic.  painted,  or  tricked  perhaps  by  Sylvanus 
Morgan,  the  Painter-Stainer  ;  with  a  written  account  of 
the  fame. 

2.  Short  Notes  touching  the  Creations  k  A£ts  of  the 

Englilh  Nobility  from  the  Conquelt  to  the  beginning  of 
the  Reign  of  Q.  Elizabeth,  >4- 

3.  A  Fragment  of  the  Book  of  Advice  of  the  Emperor 

Charles  v.  to  his  fon  K.  Philip  11.  Tranflated  from  the 
Spanilh  by  HenrylHoward  (afterwards  Earl  of  Northamp¬ 
ton,  &  Lord  Privy  Seal)  and  by  him  dedicated  to  Qu. 
Elizabeth.  _  35* 

4.  Remarque  de  la  Genealogie  de  tres-excellent  Seig¬ 

neur  Henry  de  Bourbon,  Premier  Prince  et  Premier 
Pair  de  France  ;  et  de  quelques  lieroiques  Actions  de 
ies  Anceftres,  depuis  Saindt  Louis  :  par  Frere  Jofeph 
Texeira  Portuguaiz  Confeilleir  du  Roy  Tres-Chreftien, 
Aumonier  k  autrefois  Predicateur  du  Tres-Sereniffime 
Anthoine  Roy  de  Portugal.  .  5 *• 

This  Trail  wanteth  the  firft  T.eaf,  containing  the 
beginning  of  the  Author’s  Dedication. 

5.  Libellus  vocatus  de  Officio  Militarij  feriptus  per 

Baddefworth,  Anno  Dhi  1458.  Tranfcriptus  per  R. 
Gloverum,  alias  Somerfett.  Herald  um  Armor um  fere- 
niffimte  Elizabethte  Anglia;,  Francia:,  et  Hibernke  Re¬ 
ginas,  Anno  Dili  1572.  83. 

Apographum  iltud  (pluribus  in  locis  mancum  atq; 
mutilatum)  videtur  Libri  cujuidam  Johannis  de  Bado- 
Aureo  nuncupati,  quein  Publici  Juris  fecit  D.  Edwardus 
Biffams. 

6.  Part  of  an  old  Ordinary  of  Armes  ;  tricked  rudely, 

k  with  confufion.  124. 

7.  Arms  of  fome  German  (&  other-)  Princes,  Pro¬ 
vinces,  Nobles,  k  Cities.  148- 

8.  A  Copy  of  Mr.  Walter  Mountagucs  Letter  to  his 

Father  :  and  the  Earl  of  Manchefters  Anfwere  to  it,  20th 
November,  1635.  15^* 

This  Walter  was  fecond  fon  to  Henry  Montagu 
Earl  of  Manchefter  :  His  Letter  was  to  acquaint  his 
Father  that  he  had  reconciled  himfelf  to  the  Church  of 
Rome,  without  confulting  him,  &  what  reafons  had 
induced  him  to  do  fo.  The  Earls  Anfwer  is  a  noble 
Piece,  and  Iheweth  him  to  have  been  Mailer  of  great 
Reafon  k  Learning  in  that  Controverfie  ;  and  alfo  a  truly 
loving  Father.  I  know  not  whether  I  may  add,  that  this 
Walter  Montagu  not  being  to  be  brought  back  by  any 
Arguments,  was  made  an  Abbot  in  France. 

9.  1  he  Sentence  pronounced  by . 

againfl  Sir  Robert  Peyton . when  he  was 

expelled  from  the  lloul'e  of  Commons,  as  having,  been 
concerned  in  the  Popilh  Plot.  By  the  Bookbinders 
error,  inferted  at  fol.  157. 

10.  A  Lift  of  Books  formerly  belonging  to  Mr.  Ed¬ 

ward  Barwick  the  Painter-Stainer  :  and  ot  iome  other 
Books  which  Augultin  Withie  had  received  of  his 
father.  162 

11.  Defcent  k  Arms  of  Hutton  of  Goldelborough  in 

Com.  Ebor.  as  alfo  of  Hutton  of  Penrith  in  Cumberland, 
dat.  A.D.  1612.  164. 

1 2.  Copie  of  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Charter,  -whereby  fire 
eredled  the  Free-Men  of  the  Myftery  of  Painters-Steiners 
into  a  Body  Corporate.  Imperfedt  at  the  latter  end. 

165. 


Num.  1506,  1507. 

13.  Copie  of  an  Order  of  the  Privy-Council,  dated 

1 5  July  1 640.  for  preventing  of  falfe  Mullers  in  his  Ma- 
jellies  Army.  176. 

1 4.  Copie  of  part  of  a  dunning  Letter  to  Sir  Richard 

.  .  .  /  .  177. 

!5°  7- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  k  tricked  by  divers 
hands  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Divers  Arms  k  Crells  of  different  Families,  tricked 

promifcuoufly.  1  • 

2.  Among  thefe  is  a  Receipt  for  money  paid  by  Mr. 

Robert  Fiffier  the  Painter-Stainer,  for  writing  this  Book, 
to  one  Thomas  Pitt,  who  was  another  Painter,  as  1  fup- 
pofe.  2. 

3.  The  Blazon  of  Sir  Edward  Thurlandes  Atchieve- 
ment  (i.  e.  of  the  Arms  quartered  by  him.)  2.  b. 

Then  followeth  a  very  large  Collection  of  Extradls, 
Docquets,  &  Titles  of  Grants  k  Confirmations  of  Armes 
k  Crells,  fome  of  which  are  reprefented  in  Trick,  &  the 
others  omitted.  Among  them  all  thefe  that  follow  are 
tranferibed  intirely,  vizt. 

4.  Grant  of  Armes  k  Crell  unto  William  Crookey, 

alias  (Crockhay)  alias  Johnfon,  by  Xpofer  Carlyle  Nor- 
roy.  dat.  4  June,  i486.  3. 

5.  Confirmation  of  Armes  k  Crell  unto  William 
Greene  Gent,  de  Com.  Effex.  by  Roger  Machado  Rich- 
maunt,  otherwife  called  Clarenfew.  dat.  17  July,  ann. 

9  R.  Hen.  vii.  6.  b. 

6.  Grant  of  Armes  k  Crell  unto  Nicholas  Mattock  of 

Hitchin  in  Com.  Hertford,  by  Roger  Machado  Rich- 
mont  Roy  d’ Armes  de  Clarenceux,  as  he  lliled  himfelf. 
dat.  23  July,  ann.  9  Hen.  vii.  7. 

7.  Grant  (in  French)  of  a  Crell,  unto  William 
Coffyn  of  Haddon  in  Com.  Derb.  Efq;.  by  Thomas 
Wryothelley,  Garter,  dat.  24  Aug.  A.D.  1522.  8.b. 

8.  Grant  of  Armes  without  Crell,  unto  William 
S  wayne  de  Com.  Somerfet.  by  John  Wrexworth,  Guyan 
King  of  Armes.  dat.  29  Janu&r.  ann.  39  Hen.  vi. 

10.  b. 

9.  Confirmation  of  Arms  k  Quartering*,  to  Joane  the 
daughter  &  heire  of  Francis  Vincent  of  Thingdon  in 
Com.  Northampton,  then  the  Wife  of  Robert  Mullho 
Efq;  by  William  Dethick  Garter,  dat.  10  Nov.  1587. 

75-  «  3s8- 

10.  Conceffio  Armorum  ac  Timbri  Thomte  Frear 

Armigeropariteratq;  M.D.  per  Gulielmum  Camdeuum. 
dat.  12  dieFebr.  A.D.  1602.  93. 

1 1 .  Alteration  of  the  Armes  of  Thomas  Randes  of 

Lincolnffiire  Efq;  by  William  Camden  Clarenceux. 
dat.  1  o  May,  1 599.  94.  b. 

12.  Grant  of  a  Crell  unto  Thomas  Huls  of  Norbury 

k  Affley  in  Com.  Celtr.  by  William  Flower  Norroy. 
dat.  3  .  .  ann.  8  R.  Elizab.  95. 

13.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Crell  unto  William 

Blunte  of  London  Efq;  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux. 
dat.  16  Nov.  A.D.  1572.  96.  b. 

14.  Certificate  of  the  regillring  in  the  Books  of  the 
Heralds  Office,  the  Arms  k  C.rell  which  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth  granted  unto  Sir  Francis  Drake  ;  by  Robert  Cooke 
Clarenceux,  dat.  20  June,  ann.  23  R.  Eliz.  97. 

15.  Confirmation  of  the  Armes,  A  Grant  of  a  Crell 

unto  William  Wombwell  of  North-field  in  the  County 
of  Kent.  Gent,  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  to 
Sept  1574.  98. 

16.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Grant  of  a  Crell  unto 

Thomas  Andrew,  by  one  ftyling  himfelf  King  of  Armes 
of  the  Dutchy  of  the  Guyan,  Servant  of  Armes.  dated 
A.D.  1334-  ann.  8  Edw.  in.  99. 

I  This  is  followed  by  a  Certificate  which  Raph  Brooke 
caufed  to  be  made  by  certain  perfons  who  affirmed  that 
they  had  feen  the  Original.  But  indeed,  the  tenor  of 

the 


■.,T 


,Ui 


,  1 


84 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nura.  1507. 


the  Inftrument  feemeth  more  proper  to  the  times  above 
an  hundred  Years  after,  than  to  the  early  time  of  1  a 
(vid.  infra,  N°  86.)  ^ 

17.  Confirmatio  Armorum  et  Crifta:,  Thomse  Mount- 

ford  S.  T.  P.  per  Gulielmum  Caradenum  Clarentium. 
dat.  18  die  Febr.  A.D.  1602.  IOO 

18.  Confirmation  of  Arms,  Crefts,  &  Quartering  'to 

Thomas  Pemfton  of  Hawruge in  Com.  Bucks.  Efq.  by 
Robert  Cooke  Clnrenceux.  dat.  8  Febr.  1 373  ,o6 

19.  Confirmation  of  Arms,  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  unto 

Tuppin  Scras  of  Blechington  in  Com.  Suffer.  Gent,  by 
William  Segar,  Garter,  dat.  14  Aug.  1616.  1  1  1. 

so.  Confirmation  of  Amies,  it  Grant  of  a  Creft 
mito  George  Ayelin  alias  Evelyn  of  Codington  in  tfe 
County  of  Surrey  Gent,  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux. 
dat.  3  Aug.  1572. 

si  Confirmation  of  Armes,  &  Grant  of  a  Creft  unto 
John  Harrilon  of  Aldcliffe  in  Com.  Lancallr.  by  William 
SegarGarter.  dat.  to  Sept.  161,6.  ,,5 

ss.  Confirmation  of  Armes,  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  unto 
Richard  Arnold  Citizen  &  Haberdaftier  of  London,  by 
William  Segar  Garter,  dat.  31  Decemb.  ann.  n  R. 

Jac-  '■  its. 

23.  Confirmation  of  Armes,  Quarterings,  &  Creft 

unto  John  Foxtail  of  London  Gent,  by  Robert  Cooke 
Clarenceux.  dat.  29  November  1579.  118. 

24.  Confirmation  of  Armes,  Quarterings,  &  Creft 

unto  Alexander  Fermor  of  Welth  in  the  County  of  Suffex 
Cent,  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  ioNovemb. 
*575-  1I9 

q,25;  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto  Robert 
o  hep  hard  of  Pefmarche  in  the  County  of  SulTex  Efq:  by 
Kobert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  7  May  1 574.  1 2o 

26.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  James  Wood 

ot  otaple-lnne  Gent,  defcended  from  a  Family  of  that 
Jurname  m  the  County  of  Kent,  by  William  Seear 
Garter,  dat.  6  May  1613.  I21 

27.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft,  unto  Robert  Syver 
of  Ilham  in  the  County  of  Northampton  Gent,  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Camden  Clarenceux.  dat.  1 1  Febr.  1614.  367. 

28.  Aliignatio  eorundem  Armorum  ac  Criftm^cum 
differentijs  ac  diftinflionibus  confuetis  Leonardo  Wray 
de^Adwicke  in  Com.  Ebor.  quse  fratri  fuo  Seniori,  i.  e. 
Mo  Chriftofero  Wray  Equiti  Auraio  Capitali  ad  Placita 
coram  Dua  Regina  Jufticiario,  ex  Mandato  fpeciali  Co. 
mitis  Marefcalli  Anglim  fuerunt  aflignata  ;  per  Guiicl- 
mum  Flower  Norroy.  dat.  21  die  Maij,  A.D.  1587. 

7 9;  Aiteftario  Armorum  Johannis  More  Angiff^in 
Palatinatu  Ceftria:  oriundi,  ac  in  Bilbao  nobliflim*  cele. 
berrimaq;  Clvitatc  in  ditione  Cantabria;  five  Bifcaise, 
Regrn  Hifpama*,  modo  commorantis  :  per  Gulielmum 
Flower,  Norroy.  dat.  24  die  Januarij,  A.D.  tjSt. 

30.  Gram  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto  Thomas  Powhfof 
Cranebrooke  in  Com.  Effex.  Efq;  by  William  Hervev 
Clarenceux.  dat.  10th  May,  1559.  ,  ' 

d.3*'  Grant  or  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft,  nito 

Richaid  Blackwall  of  Blackwall  in  Com.  Derb.  bv  Crif. 
tofer  Car  bile  Norrey.  dat.  8  Auguft,  ann.  g  R.  Henr. 

32-  Grant  of  Arms  k  Creft  unto  William  Humphrey 
Gent  Saye-Maifter  to  the  Queens  Majefties  Mints  withta 
the  Tower  ot  London,  by  William  Hervy  Clarencieulx 
dat.  30  June  1562. 

33.  Grant  of  Armes  A-  Creft  unto  John  Fleetwood 

Gent,  of  the  County  of  Lancafter,  by  Criftofer  Barker 
Garter,  dat.  6  Jan.  1338.  „  " 

34.  Grant  vin  French)  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto  Ri- 
chard  Andrewes  of  Synton  in  Worcefterlhire  Efq;  bv  Sir 
Thomas  Wnolhefley,  Garter,  dat.  27  March  1529. 

ibid. 


Num.  1507. 

35.  Confirmation  (in  French)  of  Armes  &  Crell 
unto  Nicholas  Hare  of  Homefeild  in  Suffolk  Gentilman, 
by  Criftofer  Barker  Garter,  dat.  7  December  1537, 

35.  Confirmation  of  Armes  k  Grant  of  a  Creft3umo 
Edward  Watts  of  Blakefley  111  Com.  Northampt.  Efq;  & 
to  his  brother  Mountague  Watts  of  Lincolnes  Inne  Efq; 
by  William  Camden,]  Clarenceux.  dat.  15  February, 

A.D,  1 61 4.  3 

37-  Concefliu  Augmentations  Inlignibus  Gentilitiis 
Johanms  Canaleanta?  Floremini,  unius  ex  Hoftiariis 
Regne  Camera;,  per  R.  Henricum  vni.  dat.  c  Febr 
A.D.  1520.  J 

3SDCl?nJ?rTation  of  &  Grant  of  a  cfe'ft 

unto  Ralf  Carkike  the  fon  of  William  Carkike  of  Ar- 
mmgton  m  Com.  Devon.  Gent,  by  Robert  Cocke  Cla- 
renceux.  dat.  23  Decemb.  1578.  „go 

39.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft,  with  a  Oua’r- 
termg,  unto  William  Woodhall  of  Walton  in  Eflex  Efq- 
by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  dat.  2  June  1592.  ’ 

40.  Alteration  of  the  Armes  of  Hugh  Midleton'of 
London  Go  dfmith,  whom  the  King  had  made  a  Baronet, 
tor  thele  following  reafons  k  confiderations.  i.  For 
bringing  to  the  City  of  London  with  exceffive  Charee  3c 
greater  Difficulty,  a  New  Cutt  or  River  of  freffi  Water 
to  the  great  benefitt  &  ineftknable  prefervation  thereof! 

2.  For  gaming  a  very  great  &  fpacious  Quantity  of 
Land  m  Brading  Haven  m  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  out  of  the 
Bowells  of  the  Sea  ;  and  with  Bankes  &  Pyles  &  moft 
ft  range  defensible  &  chargeable  Mountalnes,  fortifying 
the  lame  againft  the  violence  &  fury  of  the  Waves. 

3.  r  or  finding  out,  with  a  fortunate  &  profperous  Skill* 
exceeding  Indnftry  &  noe  fmall  Charge,  in  the  County 
of  Cardigan,  a  royal  &  rich  Myne,  from  whence  he  hath 
extrafted  many  Silver  Plates  which  have  been  coyned  in 

J?*?1  of  London  for  currant  Money  of  England  • 
Camden  Clarenceux.  dat.  i  November 

4t-  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft,  unto  John  Clocke 

7,  miC°m'  E„fa'  Gem'  bf  WiI1an>  Dethick 

Carter,  dat.  1  June  1587.  g 

42.  Alteration  of  Arms,  and  perhaps  a  Grant  of'. 
Creft  to  William  Holford  of  Welham  in  Com.  Leiceftr 
Efquire,  Richard  Holford  of  Edith-wefton  in  Com 
&  Richard  Holford  of  Wiftow  in  Com.  I.eireft 
by  William  Camden  Clarenceux.  dat.  i  January  1621.' 

mA  Gonfi™a'!on  °f  Coat  &  Creft  unto  Thoms 
Maydwell  of  Gettington  in  Com.  Northampton.  Gent 
and  to  Thoby  &  Richard  his  brothers;  by  William  Cam¬ 
den  Clarenceux.  dat.  3d  December  1 621  ,87 

Fd44'  dCwirmatr°2  °f,A/mes  &  Grant  of  a  Cleft)  umo 
Edward  Biflie  of  Smalefeild  within  the  Parifli  of  Bur- 
ftow  m  the  County  of  Surrey,  by  William  Camden  Cla- 
renceux.  dat.  ift  Odiober  1617. 

45*  Conceffio  Armorum  et  Criftm  Gulielmo  Holly, 
dale,  per  Jotannem  Borough  alias  Norroy  Regem  Ar- 
morum.  dat.  13  die  Febr.  A.D.  1623.  °  389 

46.  Alteration  of  the  Armes  of  Auguftinc  Vincent 
Rouge-Croix,  by  Sir  William  Seger  Gauer  &  William 
Camden  Clarenceux.  dat.  id  January  162,.  3‘0 

47-  Atteftatio  Armorum  ac  Crirtse,  fafla  ThommBe- 
veridge  Arnngero,  Inquifitori  principaU  Civitatis  Cicef- 
tnx,  et  omnium  Urbium,  Portuum,  et  Anfra&uum  Ma¬ 
ns  in  Comitatu  Suifexis  ;  nec  non  Willelmo  fratri  fuo- 
bethae1CardUm  ^  ^Iarentium-  t,at-  anno  37  R.  Eliza- 

48.  Grant  (in  French)  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unn/john 
Barret  of  Hertfordlhire  Efq.  by  Walter  Bellengier  Ire¬ 
land,  King  of  Armes.  dat.  13  July  1465.  6  }92_ 

4 9-  Conceffio 


Bibliothecas  Harleianre. 


SS 


Num.  1507. 

49.  ConcefTio  Augmentations,  ac  SupportatorUm  In- 

fignibus  Gentilitijs  Roberti  Karr  Vicecomitis  Rocheder, 
per  Regem  Jacobum  1.  dat.  8  die  Junij,  anno  Regni 
fui  Anglias  9.  393. 

50.  Confirmation  of  Arms,  &  Grant  of  a  Cred  unto 

John  Davies  the  elder,  of  Midleton  in  the  County  of 
Salop,  by  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux.  dat.  24 
Decemb.  1623.  394. 

5 1 .  Confirmation  of  the  Arms  &  Grant  of  Creft,  unto 

Richard  Taylor  of  Grimlbury  in  the  Parifh  of  Bolne- 
hurft  in  the  County  of  Bedford  Efq;  and  one  of  the  An- 
tients  or  Benchers  of  Lincolnes-Inne  ;  by  Sir  Richard  St. 
George  Clarenceux.  dat.  15  July  1624.  395. 

52.  C.onceflio  Augmentations  Infignibus  Dili  Nicholai 

de  MolinLegati  Veneti  (quempriu:;  in  Equiiem  Auratum 
creaverat)  per  R.  Jacobum  1.  dat.  24  die  Januarij,  anno 
Regni  fui  Anglise,  &c.  3.  397. 

53.  Conceflio  Acceflionis  Infignibus  Dili  Georgij  Gi- 

ufliniani  Legati  ad  ipfum  Veneti  (quern  antea  Equitis 
Aurati  Dignitate  dccoraverat  ;  per  R.  Jacobum  1.  A.D. 
1608.  ibid. 

54.  Apographum  Recordi  de  C.oncefiione  Armorum 

fafta  Arnoldo  de  Borden,  filioq;  fuo  Gromundom  de 
Borden  Civibus  Burdegalenfibus,  perR.  Henricum  vm. 
(i  e.  Rot.  Vafc.  21  TI.  S.  ih.  8.)  398. 

55.  Litterm  Tcftimoniales  Sigifmundi  Bathorij  Tran- 

fylvanke  Ducis,  de  Rebus  ftrenue,  fortiterq;  geltis  per 
quendam  e  Capitaneis  fuis  Joannem  Smithum  Anglum, 
cui  ideo  facultatem  concefferat  tria  Turcica  Capita  pro 
Infignijs  geftandi,  quteipfe  Gladio  fuo  ad  Urbem  Rega- 
lcm  in  fingulari  Pi  relio  vicit  atq;  decollavit.  dat.  9  die 
Decemb.  A.D.  1603.  399. 

5  >.  Grant  of  Artnes  Sc  Creft  unto  William  London 
of  Leighton-Buftard  in  Bedfordlhire,  Gentleman,  by 
Thomas  Hawley  Clarenceux.  dat.  1  March,  1338. 

400. 

57.  Grant  (in  French)  of  Amies  &  Cred,  unto 

Meffire  Louis  Caerlion  Kt.  &  M.D.  by  John  Writhe 
Garticr.  dat.  the  day  of  St.  Sampfon  (i.  e.  of  that  Samp- 
fon  who  was  the  lull  Archbifhop  of  the  Welfii.  &  carried 
over  the  Fall  to  Dole  in  Bretagne ;  whofe  Fellival  is 
celebrated  on  the  28th  July)  A.D.  1491.  401. 

58.  Confirmation  of  Arms  &  Creft,  with  due  Differ¬ 

ence,  unto  Marke  Ogle  of  Eglingham  in  the  County 
of  Northumberland  Gent,  defeended  from  the  Houfe  of 
Mulgravein  thefaid  County  by  Thomas  Hawley,  Norroy. 
dat.  18  Auguft,  ann  26  Hen.  vm.  ibid. 

59.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  Robert  Flynte  of 
the  Citty  of  Norwich  Gentleman,  by  Thomas  Hawley 
Clarenceux.  dat.  1  January,  ann.  3  Edw.  vi.  402. 

60.  Cita-ion  from  a  Chartulary  of  the  Abbey  of  St. 

Mary  of  York  touching  the  Defcent  &  Amies  of  the 
Family  of  Bowes.  403. 

61.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Crefl  unto  Edward  Clarke  of 

the  Manor  of  Kctelbadone  in  the  County  of  Suff.  Gent, 
by  I'homas  Hawley  Clarenceux.  dat.  2  May,  ann.  2  8c 
3  Phil.  &  Mar.  404. 

62.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Crefl  unto  John  Wade  of 

Coventrie,  Gentleman  ;  by  Thomas  Hawley  Clarenceux. 
dat.  20  Febr.  ann.  34  Hen.  vm.  405. 

63.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Creft  unto  John  Wnterhonfe 

of  Hemel-hamfted  in  the  County  of  Hertford  Gent,  by 
Thomas  Ilawley  Clareticeau:';.  dat.  ao  June,  ann. 
Hen.  vm.  406. 

64.  Grant  of  Amies  &  Creft  unto  William  Pagett 

borne  in  the  Citty  of  London,  Gent.  Clarke  of  the  Kings 
Majefties  Privy  Councell,  &  one  of  the  Power  Clarkes 
of  his  Highnes  Signet ;  by  Thomas  Hawley  Clarencculx. 
dat.  1  June,  A.D.  1541.  ibid. 

65.  Grant  of  Armes  &c  Creft  unto  Robert  Cooke  of 
Myldham  in  the  County  of  Norfolk,  Gent,  by  Thomas 
Hawley  Clarenceulx.  dat.  9  June,  ann.  2  &  3  Phil.  & 


Mar. 


Cat.  IIarl.  Vol.  II. 


407. 


Num.  1507. 

( 6.  Grant  of  an  Augmentation  to  the  Armes,  as  alfo 
of  a  Crefl  unto  Sir  William  Denfell  of  Wye  in  the  County 
of  Kent,  Kt.  by  Thomas  Hawley  Clarenceulx.  dat.  1 5 
July,  ann.  2  Reginas  Marke.  408. 

67.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  William  Rice  of 

Bodnia r  in  the  County  of  Buckingham,  Gentleman,  by 
Thomas  Hawley  Clarenceulx.  dat.  2  May,  ann.  3  & 
4  Phil.  &  Mar.  409. 

68.  Grant  of  Arms  &  Crefl  unto  John  Fennor  of  the 

Manor  of  Beneweks  in  the  County  of  Suffex  Gentleman, 
by  Thomas  Hawley  Clarenceulx.  dat.  10  Nov.  ann.  3 
&  4  Phil.  &  Mar.  410. 

69.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Henry  Webb  of 

the  Cittie  of  London  Gent,  one  of  the  Kings  Gentlemen- 
Usfliers,  &  Chiefe.  Porter  of  the  Tower  of  London,  by 
Thomas  Hawley  Clarenceulx.  dat.  10  Sept.  ann.  4 
Edw.  vl.  41 1. 

70.  Grant  of  an  Augmentation  to  the  Armes,  and  of 
anAddition  to  the  Crefl  of  William  Cage  Ffq;  one  cf  the 
Outflcr-Barriflers  of  Lincolnes  Inne  by  Sir  Richard  Sr. 
George,  Clarenceulx.  dat.  1  March  A.D.  1624.  413. 

71.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Crefl  unto  Robert  Cut¬ 
ler  of  Ipfwich  in  the  County  of  Suffolke  Gent,  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Camden  Clarenceulx.  dat.  20  June,  1612.  414. 

7..  Grant  of  A.rmes  &  Crefl  unto  John  Hardinge 
Citizen  and  Merchant-Taylor  of  London,  by  Sir  Gil¬ 
bert  Dethick  Gartier,  Robert  Cooke  t  larenceulx,  &  Wil¬ 
liam  Flower  Norroy.  dat.  30  Auguft,  1568.  415. 

73.  A  Gift  of  a  Coat  of  Armes  (in  Latin)  by  Maxi¬ 

milian  the  Emperor,  to  one  William  Knighte.  dat.  20 
Jul.A.D  1514.  417. 

74.  Confirmation  of  Armes  8c  Creft,  unto  Francis 

Thornedike  of  Burnell  in  the  County  of  Lincolre,  & 
I Iiiibert Thor nedike  his  brother,  by  William  Camden 
Clarenceux.  dat.  20  Nov.  u>  1 6.  418. 

75.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Grant  of  a  Crefl  unto 

Chriflopher  Eflwicke  of  Milton-Grange  in  the  County 
of  Bedford,  Gent,  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick,  Garter,  dat. 
15  Febr.  1579.  419. 

76.  A  Patent  of . UlflcrKing  of  Armes  of 

all  Ireland,  wherein,  upon  the  Account  of  George 
Acres,  fon  of  Robert  Acres,  of  Acres-Hall  in  Lanca- 
fliiie.  Gent,  he  hath  fett  forth  the  Armes  of  Acres  ;  and 
thereunto  adjoyned  Quarterly  an  Armes  (viz.  Wavie  A. 
&  B. )  in  recompence  of  his  good  Service  done,  as  well 
in  Ireland,  as  alfoe  in  France,  Flaunders,  and  other 
Places;  and  from  further  Know  ledge  of  his  good,Service 
done  in  Ireland  under  the  late  Earle  of  Effex,  adjoyned 
unto  the  faid  Armes,  a  Ilealme,  Creaft,  &  Timbre. 
Given  at  Dublin,  16  March,  A.D.  1376.  420. 

77.  Littera;  Patentes  Roberti  Regis  Scotias,  quibus 

pod  duellum  percuffum  inter  Henricum  Harding  An-- 
glicum  Appeliantem,  et  Witlelmum  Seynlowe  Scotuin 
Appeljatum,  fuper  Armis  quibufdam  five  Infignijs 
per  litrumq;  vendicatis,  ac  tempore  Duelli  fine  Dif¬ 
ferentia  geflis :  fe  Arma  prEeditta  ViClori  Henrico 
Harding,  in  folio  fuo  regali,  dipatus  Magnatibus  ac  Do- 
minis  Regni,  perfonaliter,  pro  Tribunali  Sedens,  dediffe 
atq;  adjudicAffe  profitetur.  dat'.  apud  Viliam  de  Perttia 
2  die  ApriHs,  A.D.  1312.  422. 

Ex  Scripcd  perantiquo  et  fide  digno,  Willelmo 
Flower  alias  Norroy  Regi  Armorum,  et  Roberto  Glover 
tunc  Portcullis,  odenfo,  apud  Durham  9  die  Mart.  A.D. 

1 5  75* 

78.  Grant  (in  French)  of  Armes  &  Cred  unto  Wil¬ 
liam  Boughton  of  Lalleford,  in  Com.  Warwick,  by 
Thomas  Wryothedey  Garter,  &  Thomas  Benoit  Claren¬ 
ceux.  dat.  17  Feb.  1516.  (vid.  infra,  N"  84.)  ibid, 

79.  Award  (in  French  of  Hugh  de  Calveley  Kt.  John 
de  Burley  Kt.  John  Devereux  Kt.  Vrian  (i.  e.  Brian)  de 
Stapilton  Kt.  &  Rauffe  de  Statham  Efq;  touching  certain 
Armes  claimed  by  John  dc  Maffey  of  Tatton  Appellant, 
&  John  de  Maffey  of  Pottington  Defendant ;  which 

Z  Armes 


.  ! 


I'll 


Num.  1507. 

Amies  they  adjudge  to  neither  Partie,  but  enjoyn  them 
to  bear  certain  Arms  different  from  each  other,  as  alfo 
from  thole  contended  for.  dated  at  Gioucefter,  14 
Nov.  aim . Rich.  11.  423. 

80.  Litters  Patentes  R.  Jacobi  1.  quibus  fpoft  recita- 

tionem  Armorum  Johanni  Ramfey  Militi,  Domino 
Ramfey  de  Barins,  et  Vicecomiti  Haddington,  propter 
Regis  ipiius  Perfonas  defenfionem  ac  liberationem 
ab  infidijs  Fratrum  Gaurianorum,  per  ipfum  Regem 
concefforum)  eundem  Johanr.em  erigit  in  Dignitates 
Baronis  de  Kingfton  fuper  Thamefim  in  Com.  Surr.  ac 
Comitis  de  Hoiderneffe  ;  co  etiam  favore  atq;  privile- 
gio,  ut  quandocunque  memoria  feliciffime  fue  Ljberacois 
fuper  quintum  diem  Augufti  celebraretur,  predidtus 
Johannes  et  Heredes  fui  mafculi,  in  Solemnitaf.  ejufdem 
dici  performand.  Gladium  coram  Se,  Heredibus  et 
Succefforibus  fuis  ubicunque  cffent,  more  in  ejufmodi 
Solemnitat.  confuct.  portarent,  See.  Tefte,  & c.  22  dei 
Januarij,  ann.  Regni  fui  Anglis,  See.  18.  424. 

8 1 .  Certificate  of  K.  Richard  n.  of  his  having  granted 

certain  Armes  to  John  de  Kingfton,  who  had  been 
chaienged  to  the  performance  of  feme  Feats  of  Armes 
by  a  French  Knight.  This  is  in  French,  Sc  bears  Date 
the  iff  of  Auguft,  &c.  426. 

S2  Exemplum  Recordi  (Pat.  17  R.  2.prt.  1.  m.  15.) 
fuper  Confirmatione  Armorum  Ottoni  de  Mandeulla 
Chivalcr,  qus  patri  fuo  Petro  de  Mandevilla  pridem  con- 
cefferat  Rex  Edwardus  m.  ibid. 

83.  Q.  Elizabeth’s  Warrant  to  the  Officers  of  Armes 

to  place  the  Armes  of  England  with  a  Bordure  Gobone, 
as  an  Augmentation,  in  all  meet  Places,  at  the  Funeral 
of  Frances  Duchefs  of  Suffolk,  together  with  her  proper 
Armes.  dat.  5  Dec.  1560.  428. 

84.  Grant  (in  French)  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto  Wil¬ 

liam  Boughton  of  Little  Lalleford  in  the  County  of  War¬ 
wick,  Eiquire  of  the  Body  to  the  King,  by  Thomas 
Wryothefley  Garter  Sc  Thomas  Benoit  Clarenceux.  dat. 
17  Febr.  1516.  (vid.fupra,  N*  78.)  429. 

With  this  Copie  are  Tricks  of  the  Armes  Sc  Creft, 
as  alfo  of  the  Seals  of  the  two  abovementioned  Offi¬ 
cers  of  Arms,  pretty  handfomely  done. 

8v  Conceffio  Armorum  cum  Crifta,  Johanni  Pryott, 
per  Gilbertum  Dethick  Norroy,  Regem  Armorum.  Dat. 
1  die  Occobris,  anno  1  R.  Edivardi  vi.  43°. 

80.  Guyan’s  Grant  to  Thomas  Andrewes,  abovemen¬ 
tioned  at  N°  16.  which  therefore  I  fhall  not  repeat  here. 

431- 

S7.  Grant  of  Arms  Sc  Creft  unto  Henry  Anderfon 
of  theTowneof  New  Caftle  upon  Tyne,  Gentleman  j 
by  Gilbert  Dethicke  Norroy.  dat.  3  November,  ann. 

1  Edw.  vi.  432. 

88.  Grant  of  Armes  Sc  Creft  unto  Thomas  Myldmay 

ui  Muliham  in  the  County  of  Effex.  Gent,  by  Thomas 
TIawley  Clarenceux.  dat.  15  March  1524.  433. 

I  am  affraid  there  may  be  fome  miftake  in  this  Sc 
•other  Grants  of  Thomas  H.nvley,  whom  1.  find  not  really 
to  have  been  Clarenceux  before  19  May,  28  Hen.  vm. 

89.  Conceffio  Armorum  ac  C-refta;  Mathaeo  Meier, 

per  Gilbertum  Dethicke  Norroy.  dat.  9  November 
1547-  .  434- 

93.  Grant  of  Arms  Sc  Creft  unto  William  Thomas  of 
Llan-'l  homas  in  the  County  of  Brecknock  Gent,  by 
Thomas  Hawley  Clarencieux.  dat.  1  Febr.  ann  5  Ew.  vi. 

435. 

91.  Grant  (in  French)  of  Armes  Sc  Creft,  unto  Ar- 
migill  Wade,  a  native  of  the  Northern  parts  of  Eng¬ 
land,  by  Gilbert  Dethick  Norrey.  dat.  1  Novemb.  1 547. 

436. 

92.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Anthony  Bour- 
chier  of  Bedeiley  in  the  County  of  Gioucefter  Gent,  by 
Thomas  Hawley  Clarenceaux.  dat,  1  Decemb.  ann.  2 
R.  Edw.  vi. 


Num.  1507. 

93.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto  Francis 

Armar  of  Beldford  in  the  County  of  Northumberland 
Gent,  by  Gilbert  Dethick  Norroy.  dat.  10  Decemb. 
ann.  1  R.  Edw.  vi.  438- 

94.  Grant  of  Armes  Sc  Creft  unto  Hugh  Partridge, 

borne  in  the  Northe  Parts,  Gent,  by  Gilbert  Dethick 
Norroy.  dat.  5  Febr.  ann.  2  R.  Edw.  vi.  439. 

95.  Conceffio  Armorum  ac  Criftai,  Valentino  Browne 

de  Tatteridge  in  Com.  Hartford.  Thefaurario,  Hyberniie, 
per  BartholomEeum  Butler,  Ulvefter.  dat.  26  die  Sept, 
ann.  1  Elizab.  44°  • 

96.  Grant  of  Armes,  without  a  Creft,  unto  Roger 

Starkey  of  London,  Mercer  ;  by  Chriftopher  Barker, 
Garter,  dat.  1 7  June,  1543.  441. 

97.  Atteftation  de  Armes  portez  par  ceux  de  la  Mai- 

fon  de  Curlew  ;  par  Gilbert  Dethick,  Norroy.  donnee 
le  26  de  .  .  .  1 548.  442. 

98.  Grant  of  Armes  Sc  Creft  unto  Robert  Trapps 

Gent.  Citizen  Sc  Goldfmith  of  London,  by  William 
Hervey  Clarenceux.  dat.  1  June  1559.  443- 

99.  Grant  of  Armes  Sc  Creft  unto  John  Baker  of 

Morepit  (Morpeth  ?)  in  the  County  of  Northumberland 
Gent,  by  Gilbert  Dethicke  Norroy.  dat.  6  April,  ann. 
2  Edw.  vi.  444- 

100.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Sir  Ralph  Ley- 

cefter  of  the  Mannor  ofTorfte  in  the  County  ofChefter, 
Knight ;  by  Gilbert  Dethicke  Norroy.  dat.  15  May, 
ann.  2  R.  Edw.  vi.  445- 

10 1.  Grant  of  Armes  unto  Joane  Cryfpe  of  North¬ 

ampton,  wife  to  Robert  Trapps  Efq;  Sc  Goldfmith  of 
London,  dat.  20  Nov.  1560.  by  William  Harvey  Cla- 
renceaux.  44^- 

102.  Grant  (in  French)  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto  Alay 

(f.  Alan)  Trowte  native  of  the  County  of  Weftmore- 
land,  by  Thomas  Troute  Norroy.  dat.  8  Nov.  1376. 
ann.  16  R.  Edw.  in.  447. 

This  Patent  labours  under  more  difficulties  than 
the  Errors  of  the  Copilte,  which  are  many  :  To  whom  I 
am  willing  to  impute  the  Antichronifm  of  making  the 
1 6th  Year  of  K.  Edw.  111.  fall  jin  the  year  of  our  Lord 
1376.  For  the  Tenor  or  Form  of  the  Patent  is  the  fame 
with  that  ufed  about  the  times  of  K.  Henry  vm.  Sc  K. 
Edward  vi.  Moreover,  I  cannot  find  that  any  man 
named  Thomas  Troute  was  ever  Norroy.  I  can  produce 
more  Arguments  againft  this  Patent ;  but  think  what  is 
already  faid,  may  fuffice. 

103.  Grant  of  a  Creft  unto  Chriftopher  Alhton  of 
Crofton  in  the  County  of  Lancafhire  Gentleman,  by 
Gilbert  Dethicke  Norroy.  dat.  17  May,  ann.  2  Edw.  vi. 

448. 

104.  Grant  of  Armes  Sc  Creft  unto  William  Gough 
Gentleman,  of  the  County  of  Chefter  ;  by  Sir  Thomas 
Holme  Clarenceaux.  dat.  12  Decemb.  ann.  1 1  Edw.  iv. 

449. 

1 05.  Confirmation  of  Armes  Sc  Grant  of  a  Creft  unto 

Sir  George  Conyers  Knight  by  Gilbert  Dethick  Norroy. 
dat.  x8  May,  ann.  2  Edw.  vi.  450. 

106.  Grant  of  Armes  Sc  Creft  unto  Thomas  Smith  of 
Campden  in  the  County  of  Gioucefter  Efq;  by  Chrifto¬ 
pher  Barker  Garter,  given  at  Bulleine,  4  Sept.  1540. 

45  '• 

107.  Confirmation  of  Armes  Sc  Grant  of  a  Creft  unto 

Robert  Thornehill  of  Walkingham  in  the  County  of  Not¬ 
tingham  Efq;  by  Gilbert  Dethick  Norroy.  dat.  14  June, 
ann.  2  Edw.  vi.  452. 

108.  Grant  of  a  Creft  unto  Robert  Segar  of  the  Ifle 
of  Shepy  within  the  County  of  Kent,  Gent,  by  Sir  Gil¬ 
bert  Dethick  Garter,  dat.  10  June,  ann.  8  Eliz.  453. 

109.  The  Defcent  of  Mr.  Robert  Fiffier  the  Painter- 

Stainer,  formerly  the  owner  of  this  Book,  and  of  all 
the  reft  that  were  bopght  of  William  Shires;  fett  down 
by  his  Qwn  hand.  454. 

Turning 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


Num  1507 — 1 509. 

Turning  the  other  end  of  the  Book  upwards,  I 

find, 

1 10.  A  Colle&ion  of  the  Armes  of  divers  Englifh  No¬ 
bility,  tricked  promifcuoufly,  and  without  any  order. 

1  508. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands,  and  much 
damaged  by  Oil ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  A  large  Expofition  of  the  Decalogue.  1  • 

This  Copie  extendeth  no  farther  than  the  firft  Nine 

Commandments. 

2.  An  Expofition  of  the  Apo Itles  Creed.  1 45- 

This  Trad  endeth  in  the  Explication  of  the  Article 

“  Which  was  conceaved  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  borne  of 
the  Virgin  Mary,”  after  fol.  196; 

I5°9* 

A  Book  in  large  fol.  lately  given  by  Mr.  Anftis,  & 
on  the  outfide  cntituled, 

li  The  Proceedings  of  the  Rt.  Honble  His  Mt'1" 
principal  Commiflioners  for  Prizes,  from  January 
1664.” 

The  many  particulars  contained  in  this  Office-Book, 
not  being  to  be  underflood  from  the  foregoing  general 
Title  ;  and  indeed  the  accounting  for  them  all  being  too 
tedious  &  unnecelfary  ;  I  have  thought  it  beft  to  chufe  the 
middle  way,  &  make  mention  of  fome  ol  them,  vizt. 
thefe  that  follow. 

1 .  An  alphabetical  Table  of  the  matters  regiflred  in 
this  Volume.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Minute  taken  at  the  firft  Meeting  of  the  principal 
Commiflioners  for  Prizes,  January  11.  1664-5.  when 
their  Commiflion  was  read,  and  perfonS  appointed  to 
prepare  Inftruftions  &  a  Draught  of  a  Commiflion,  for 
Officers  to  be  fuborJinate  unto  them. 

3.  His Majefties  Commiflion  to  the  principal  Cotnmif- 

fionersfor  Prizes,  being  Prince  Rupert  Duke  of  Cumber¬ 
land  ;  George  Duke  of  Buckingham  ;  George  Duke  of 
Albemarle,  Mafter  of  the  Hori'es  ;  James  Duke  of  Or¬ 
monde,  Steward  of  the  Houfhokl ;  Henry  Earl  of  St. 
Albans  ;  Edward  Earle  of  Sandwiche  •,  Arthur  Eaile  of 
Anglefey,  John  Earle  of  Lauderdaill ;  John  Lord  Berke¬ 
ley”  Denzill  Lord  Hollis-,  Anthony  Lord  Afhley, 
Chancelor  &  Under-Trealurer  of  the  Exchequer  5  Sir 
•George  Carteret  Kt.  &  Baronet,  Vice-chambei  laine  of 
the  Houfehould ;  Sir  William  Morice,  &  Sir  Henry 
Bennct,  principal  Secretaries  of  State  ;  &  Sir  Edward 
Nicholas  Knight ;  bearing  Telle  the  6th  day  of  January, 
anno  Regni  Caroli  11.  i6to.  _  x- 

4.  His  Majefties  Inftru&ions,  under  this  Title,  “  ln- 

ilruclions  for  Our  principall  Commiflioners  for  Prizes, 
or  to  any  four  or  more  of  them,  in  purfuance  of,  &  for 
better  execution  of  Our  Commiflion  under  Our  Broad 
■Seale  ;  dated  the  6th  day  of  Januaryjn  the  16  Yeare  of 
Our  l^aigne.  _  _  3;. 

5I  A  additional  Inftruftion  for  Our  principall  Commif- 
fioners  for  Prizes,  &c.  dated  the  .  .  day  of  January, 
the  fame  year.  7- 

6.  Another  additional  Inftruclion.  _  ibid.^ 

7.  Lift  of  'the  Sub-Conuniflioncrs  for  Prizes,  nomi¬ 
nated  bv  his  Majefty.  9- 

8.  The  Lilt  of  the  feveral  DiftriQs,  wherein  the  Sub- 

Commiflioncrs  were  to  act.  1 3  • 

9.  Jnftru&ion  to  the  Sub-Commiffioners  of  Prizes,  by 

the  principal  Commiflioners.  1 3- 

10.  The  Store-keepers  1  \ftru£tions.  25. 

u.  Inftructions  for  the  Ware-houfe-Keepcr  of  Ply¬ 
mouth.  27‘ 

j  2.  Inftructions  for  the  Sollicitor  Mr.  Henry  Dethick. 

29- 

13.  Commiffions  unto  divers  of  the  Officer?  afting 
under  the  Commiflion  for  Prizes.  3  >  • 


Num.  1509. 

14.  Minute  wherein  the  principal  Commiflioners  fay 

that  out  of  refpedt  to  the  Clerks  of  the  C.ouncill,  they 
thought  it  convenient  to  eledft  one  of  their  number,  Ro¬ 
bert  Southwell,  to  be  their  Secretary.  18  January 
1664.  54- 

15.  Minute  of  21  Jan.  1664.  requiring  Mr.Williamfon 

to  correfpond  with  fome  Merchants  at  Bilboa  ;  there 
being  a  Report  that  certain  Dutch  Shipps  which  loaded 
Wooll  &  Iron  at  Bilboa,  &  bound  for  Holland,  had  dif- 
mifled  their  Shipps  Company,  who  were  Dutch  men,  & 
manned  their  Ships  with  Bifcayners,  and  alfo  pafled  over 
their  Ships  &  Goods  to  Merchants  of  Bilboa,  on  whole 
accompt  they  were  to  come  to  Holland.  5^; 

16.  Minute  of  23  Jan.  1664.  appointing  the  Commif- 

fioners  of  London  &  the  other  Ports,  to  repair  to  the 
Court  of  Admiralty,  &  there  to  examine  all  the  Papers 
taken  in  Dutch  Veflells ;  and  in  cafe  they  finde  any  Papers 
concerning  matters  of  State,  that  they  felect  them,  isr 
lay  them  apart  to  be  tranfmitted,  clofe  fealed,  unto  the 
principal  Commiflioners.  60. 

17.  Minute  appointing  Mr.  Southwell  Secretary  to  the 
Commiflion,  to  flgne  References  to  the  Court  of  Ad¬ 
miralty. 

18.  Minute  appointing  Mr.  Southwell  to  informe  the 
Lords  of  Bufmefs  by  his  owne  Lcttre.  25  January  1664. 

63- 

19.  Sir  William  Turner  appointed  to  be  of  Councell 
for  the  King  in  the  Admiralty  Court.  27  January,  1664. 

65- 

20.  Stop  to  fome  Proceedings  in  the  Court  of  Ad¬ 
miralty  for  a  time.  6  Febr.  1664.  7^* 

21.  The  Court  of  Admiralty  to  give  Difpatch  to  all 

French  Claimers.  &id. 

22.  Order  to  hinder  one  Captain  Johnfon  &  others 
fromfeizing  Papers,  &cc,in  the  Dutch  Ships.  .  77- 

23.  Sir  Robert  Wifenran  and  others  to  compile  fuch 
a  Body  of  Rules  &  Maritime  Ordenances,  by  which  the 
Judge  of  the  Admiralty  may  be  directed  in  the  adjudica¬ 
tion  of  Prizes  taken  in  theprefent  Warre  with  the  Dutch. 

7  8- 

24.  Mr.  Dethick  to  prepare  a  perfeft  Lift  of  all  fuch 

Prize-Ships,  and  the  Goods  refpeftively  contain,  which 
at  any  time,  have  been  brought  for  Tryall  into  the  Court 
of  the  Admiralty,  fince  the  1 6th  of  December  laft.  1  o 
Febr.  1664.  So. 

2.5.  Order  to  the  Lord  Culpepper  Governor  of  the 
Ifle  of  Wight,  to  examine  into  the  practifcs  of  one  John 
Lifle  of  Cowes  a  pretended  publique  Notary,  who  was 
reported  to  have  iffued  out  ceftaine  Atteftations  by  way 
of  Pafles,  to  fecure  thereby  Hamburghers  &  other  Shipps 
from  the  Seizure  of  his  Majelties  Frigats,  &  if  culpable 
to  punifli  him  1'eVcrely,  13  Febr.  1 664.  83. 

26.  Order  to  Sir  Ed  ward  ManLIl  Bart.  Vice-Admiral 

of  South-Wales,  to  deliver  up  immediately  the  Care  & 
Charge  of  the  Prizes  brought  into  the  Fort  of  Mill'  ■rd- 
Ilaven,  to  his  Majefties  Commiffionc-is  for  the  Port  of 
Briftol  &  its  Diftritl,  of  which  South-W ales  was  part. 
20  Febr.  1664.  9°- 

27.  Order  to  the  Judge  of  the  Admiralty,  to  reput 

Ships  belonging  to  Embden  &  Ameland,  as  belonging 
to  Holland.  22  Febr.  1664.  92- 

28.  Order  to  the  Judge  of  the  Court  of  Admiralty, 

now  to  proceed  upon  the  Hearing  &  Adjudication  ot 
Claimes.  25  Febr.  1664.  9^- 

29.  The  Judge  of  the  Admiralty  to  impower  the  Com- 
miffioners  of  London  to  fwear  Perlons.  28  Febr.  1664. 

101.  &  164. 

30.  A  Letter  of  the  principal  Commiffioners  to  his 
Royal  llighnefsthe  Duke  of  York,  Lord  High  Admiral! 
complaining  of  the  horrid  mifearriages  of  our  Seamen, 
who  fince  his  Majefties  Declaration  lor  their  encourage¬ 
ment,  had  plundered  &  ranfacked  many  Prize-Ships,  as 
well  fuch -as  were  only  taken  upon  Sufpicion  &  belonged 
to  Friends,  as  thofe  that  were  plain  Enemies  :  and  pro- 

b  pofing 


88 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1507. 

pofing  what  to  them  feemed  neceffary  to  be  done  in  this 
Cafe.  1 02. 

3 1 .  Order  requiring  the  Commiflioners  of  Plymouth 

to  caufe  the  Dufy  of  Prifage  &Butlerage  of  Wynes,  to  be 
paid  in  the  accuftomed  manner,  by  all  Shipps  laden  with 
Wyne,  &  brought  into  the  Port  of  Plymouth,  or  any 
other  Port  within  the  Duchy  of  Cornwall,  unto  John 
Martine  Efq;  Deputy-Colle&or  of  that  Duty.  6  March 
1664.  in. 

32.  Minute  about  Capt.  Waltham’s  brother,  fuppofed 

to  be  acceflary  to  the  Efcape  of  four  Dutchmen  out  of 
Prifon :  and  about  a  Method  of  doing  the  Bufineis  of 
this  Commiffion  at  Plymouth.  8  March  1664.  112. 

3  3-  Order  to  fecure  a  Scots  VefTell,  drove  by  ft  refs  of 
Weather  into  New-caftle  ;  it  being  laden  with  Wyne 
from  Holland.  ibid. 

34-  letter  of  the  principal  Commiflioners  to  his  Royal 
Highnefs,  upon  his  Anfwer  to  their  former  Letter  men¬ 
tioned  above  at  N°  30.  14  March  1664.  121. 

35.  Order  that  Prize-Ships  fliould  pay  no  Duty  for 

Light  &  Peerage,  iff  March  1664.  127. 

36.  Letter  from  the  principal  Commiflioners  to  his 

Royal  Ilighnefs  the  Lord  High  Admiral,  about  making 
an  Inventory  of  Cocquets  &  other  Papers  when  found  & 
fent  up  attefted,  &c.  1 28. 

37.  Additional  InftrufHons  &  Di regions  for  SirTho. 

mas  Clifford  Kt.  one  of  the  Commiflioners  for  the  Port 
of  London,  in  relation  to  the  Manage  of  his  Bufmefs 
attending  on  the  Fleete.  23  March  1664.  i44. 

38.  Memorial  presented  to  the  King  of  England  by 

Monfr.  le  C'onite  de  Comenge  Embaffador  Extraordinary 
from  the  King  of  France.  v  l4^. 

Herein  he  infolently  complaineth  of  want  &  failure 
of  Juftice  in  his  Majefly,  and  in  the  Lords  Commiflioners  : 
and  demandeth  the  immediate  Reftitution  of  all  French 
Veflels,  &  others  laden  on  their  accompt  in  Dutch  Bot¬ 
toms.  He  cenfureth  his  Majefties  Declaration  of  War 
againft  the  Dutdi  as  couched  under  captious  &  equivocal 
Termes  &  Expreflions  with  regard  to  the  French  that 
the  French  Ordonnance  Robe  d’Ennemy  confifque  cede 
d’Amy,  hath  been  for  many  Years  aboiifhed  in  France 
as  odious  &  unjuitiliable,  and  therefore  exhorteth  the 
King  to  lay  by  till  thoughts  of  eftablifhing  any  fuch  Law 
&c.  dat.  26  March  1664-5.  155/ 

39.  The  Lords  Commiflioners  Anfwer  to  the  preced¬ 
ing  Memorial.  ,^g_ 

Herein,  like  Men  of  lolid  Wifdom  Sc  Honor,  thev 
eafily  wipe  off  the  Imputations  caff  on  his  Majeftie  & 
themfelves  in  Mr.  Comenge’s  Memorial ;  fhewing  where¬ 
in,  on  divers  occafions  lie  did  forget  himfelf;  that  they 
had  made  an  Order,  whereby  in  the  Court  of  Admiralty, 
the  French  ciaymers  were  prefarable  to  all  others.  That 
the  French  Merchants  this  Yeare,  appeared  to  claime  & 
colour  more  Goods  in  Dutch  Vcffells,  than  they  have 
ever  ventured  m  many  Yeares  before  ;  pretending  that 

V  1SJv;n  thcir  p!oper  Rifclue  &  Accompte  :  foe 
that  the  Dutch  in  one  Yeare  have  forgott  to  be  Mer¬ 
chants,  &  left  their  Shipps  to  the  French  ;  who  have 
ioe  much  engrqffed  Trade,  as  to  be  enforced  to  hire  the 
whole  Dutch  Fleete,  though  upon  the  difadvantage  of 
pay  mg  extraordinary  Duties  in  their  owne  Countrey 
Ihat  t.us  appeared  in  all  the  Prizes  his  Majeftie  had 
u’  th0l.,Sh  the  Shipp  be  condemned,  &  con- 
felled  Dutch,  yet  all  her  Lading  was  alm'oft  univerfally 
pretended  French.  That  as  to  the  French  Law,  Robe 
d  Lnnem.e  confifque  celle  d’Amie,  the  Yeare  164c  ac- 
cordng  to  his  beliefe,  &  1650.  according  to  his  averr- 
ment  was  the  firft  tune  that  ever  it  vti is  difpenced  with  • 
and  tii  not  obteined  without  a  Treaty,  and  afforded 
only  to  the  Du:ch  &  Hanfe-Towns.  That  the  fame  is 
&  has  been  thc  Law  of  England,  by  Act  of  Parliament 


Num.  1507. 

fome  hundreds  of  Years  paft ;  and  is  to  this  day  both 
the  Law  of  Spaine  &  Portugal. 

40.  The  State  of  the  French  Claimes  &  Pretenfions 

in  the  Court  of  Admiralty,  and  of  the  Courts  Proceed¬ 
ing  thereupon,  annexed  by  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to 
the  Anfwer  to  the  French  Memorial.  150. 

Herein  Sir  Robert  Wifeman  his  Majefties  Advocate 
who  drew  it  up  (under  whofe  view  and  obfervation,  all 
thofe  matters  palled)  affirmeth,  that  if  all  the  great 
Quantity  of  Goods  claimed  in  the  Court  of  Admiralty 
by  Hamburghers,  Swedes,  Flemings,  Englifh,  French, 
&c.  were  to  be  divided  into  ten  Parts,  Nyne  of  them 
will  be  found  to  be  French.  And  though  generally  thefe 
foe  pretended  French  Goods  are  all  laden  in  Dutch 
Bottomes,  and  going  to  or  from  Dutch  Ports,  and 
the  Ship  failed  by  Dutch  Mailers  &  Mariners  ;  yett 
conftantly,  both  forward  &  backward,  to  the  afton- 
ifhment  of  all  Men  that  know  the  Dutch  were  the  great 
Traders  at  Sea  before,  the  whole  Lading  is  avowed  in  the 
Court  of  Admiralty  &  fworne  alfo,  to  belong  to  French¬ 
men,  and  to  run  upon  their  Accompt  &  Adventure  onely, 
and  that  noe  Dutch  perfon  had  any  lhare  or  interell 
therein,  &c.  This  bore  date  22  March  1665.  150. 

41.  Order  for  the  Commiflioners  for  fick  &  wounded 

Men,  to  receive  Dutch  Prifoners  at  their  Landing,  & 
take  due  care  of  them.  1 64. 

42.  Order  that  for  the  future  the  Quorum  of  the 
Commiflioners  of  Prizes  for  the  Port  of  London,  fhall 
be  Three,  and  in  extraordinary  Occafions  Two.  173. 

43.  Order  to  releafe  one  Pierce  Savage  a  Frenchman, 
imprefled  into  his  Majefties  Service,  againft  his  confent. 
12  April  1665. 

44.  Order  to  the  Commiflioners  for  fick  &  wounded 
Men  to  fett  at  Liberty  divers  Danes  taken  in  the  Ship 
Reynard,  and  deteined  in  Chelfea  Colledge  as  Dutch 
men.  14  Apr.  1665. 

45;  The  Commiflioners  of  fick  &  wounded  Men  to 
permilt  Prifoners  to  be  fent  to  the  Court  of  Admiralty 
for  Witnefles. 

46.  The  Commiflioners  “of  Prizes  for  London,  with 
the  Refident  of  Denmark,  to  contrive  a  way  to  dif- 
tinguilh  Danilh  Ships  from  Dutch.  19  April  1065. 

206. 

47-  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the  Earl  of 
Sandwiche,  fhewing  the  Rcafons  why  they  had  ordered 
80  Butts  of  Brandy  found  in  the  Ship  Freeland  (between 
the  Decks  as  was  alleaged,  and  confequently  belonging 
to  the  Seamen  who  took  her)  to  be  fold  at  the  rate  of 
2'61ib.  the  Tun,  and  the  Money  to  be  faved  for  them. 
24  April  1665.  '  208. 

48.  Order  to  the  Commiflioners  of  fick  &  wounded 
Men  to  releafe  three  Swedes,  who  fuffering  wreck  on  thc 
Coaft  of  France,  were  faved  by  another  Ship,  fince  taken 
as  Prize  &  brought  into  Portfmouth  j  the  faid  men 
being  claimed  by  the  Swedifh  Refident,  after  they  had 
been  detained  Prifoners  6  Weeks  at  Winchefter.  ait. 

49.  The  Farmers  of  the  Cuftomes  not  to  permit t 
Brandy  to  be  landed  without  Notice  be  given  to  the 
Commiflioners. 

50.  Memorial  of  the  French  Ambaffadors  Extraordi¬ 

nary  Henry  Due  de  Vernevill,  Comenge,  &  Courtin,  to 
the  King;  defiring,  among  other  things,  1.  That  when 
Dutch  Commodities  are  found  aboard  French  Ships, 
that  the  Dutch  Men  &  Goods  fliould  be  only  feized  ; 
and  the  French  Ships,  Men  &  Goods  to  be  let  go.  2. 
That  nothing  but  Armes  &  their  Furniture,  and  other 
things  and  Implements  ferving  to  to  the  ufe  of  War 
lhall  be  deemed  to  be  contraband  Goods :  and  by  no 
means  to  comprehend  under  that  Title,  Corne,  Wyr.e, 
Salt,  or  any  thing  that  appertaines  to  the  nourilhing  or 
fupport  of  Life.  dat.  22d  April  1665.  220. 

51.  Anfwer 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


89 


Num.  1509. 

51.  Anfwer  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  thfe  French 

Memorial,  dated  the  28th  day  of  April  1665.  221. 

52.  Order  to  the  CommiffidnerS  of  Tick  &  wounded 
Men,  to  releafe  certain  Hamburgers  detained  prifoners 
in  Chelfea  Hofpital,  as  Dutchmen,  nth  May,  1665. 

225. 

5  3.  Order  to  the  Court  of  Admiralty  to  proceed  with 
Prizes  taken  by  Privateers,  as  they  doe  with  fuch  as  are 
taken  by  his  Majefties  Ships,  jth  May,  1665.  23.0. 

54.  Order  to  the  Commiffioners  of  the  Port  of  Ply¬ 

mouth  to  enquire  into  the  Truth  of  the  Allegations  of 
the  Corporation  of  that  Place,  who  pretend  Right  to 
certain  fmall  Cuffom.es  and  Duties  upon  Goods  imported 
there,  as  granted  to  them  by  Statute  in  King  Henry  the 
Sixth’s  raign  ;  th:u  they  ever  fince  enjoyed  the  fame  ; 
and  received  like  Duties  of  Prize-Goods  brought  thither 
in  the  time  of  the  late  Dutch  Warre.  ibid. 

55.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Com¬ 

miffioners  at  Portlmouth,  that  whereas  their  Lordffiips 
had  ordered  the  Money  taken  out  of  the  Ship  Hope  of 
Hamborough,  ffiould  be  depofited  in  the  hands  of  the 
Treafurer  of  Prizes  in  that  Port;  and  that  they  had  ne- 
verthelefsput  the  fame  into  the  hands  of  Sir  Philip  Hony- 
wood  one  of  their  own  number,  as  Governor  &  beft  able 
tofecure  it:  diretting  them,  and  particularly  Sir  Philip,  to 
deliver  that  and  all  other  the  King’s  Money  in  their  hands, 
to  the  faid  Treafurer,  forthwith.  8th  May  1665.  235. 

56.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Sir  Philip 

Honywood,  requiring  him  to  deliver  the  Brandy  in  his 
Cufludy  to  the  Merchants  who  had  contracted  (as  will 
be  hereafter  mentioned)  with  his  Majefly  for  allBrandies 
taken  as  Prize,  rath  May  1665.  247. 

57.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Judges 

of  the  Court  of  Admiralty,  requiring  them  to  proceed, 
according  to  his  Majelties  Declaration,  in  declaring  con¬ 
traband  Goods ;  which  their  Lordffiips  take  to  be  all 
forts  of  Naval  Stores,  Warlike  Utenfils,  &  Provifions  for 
fupport  of  Life.  17th  May  1 665.  256. 

58.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Sir  Thomas 

Clifford,  thanking  him  for  his  whole  Conduct  &  Care 
in  taking  18  Prizes,  &  effectually  fecuring  them  &  their 
intire  lading  to  his  Majelties  life.  They  alfo  acquaint 
him  that  his  Majefly  is  willing  that  the  Seamen  ffiall  have 
all  the  Goods  lairly  found  between  the  Decks.  19th 
May  1665.  259. 

<19.  Warrants  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the 
Keepers  of  Newgate  &  of  the  Gate-houfe  ;  to  receive 
into  their  Cuftody  certain  perfons,  who  had  contemptu- 
oully  refufed  to  declare  their  Knowledge  touching  Im- 
bezlcments  of  Prize  Goods  at  Dover.  ibid. 

60.  ‘Inflrudions  to  Sir  Edmund  Pooley  &  Edward 

Seymour  Efq.  two  of  the  Commiffioners  of  the  Port  of 
London,  to  goe  to  Harwich  &  take  charge  of  the  Prizes 
brought  in  there  by  Sir  Thomas  Clifford.  22d  May 
,655.  261. 

61.  Directions  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  theSub- 

Commiffioners  at  Plymouth,  Portfmouth,  &  Dover  in 
order  to  bring  them  into  a  more  certain  Sc  exadl  method 
of  doing  the  bufinefs  entrufted  to  them.  26th  May 
1655.  _  267- 

62.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  Sir  Tho¬ 

mas  Clifford,  approveing  of  what  was  made  ufe  of  out 
of  Prizes,  cautioning  him  to  advife  about  the  Deliveries  ; 
that  foe  his  Majeftie  may  have  an  accompt  of  them  ; 
and  that  he  eftimate  his  Deliveries  after  the  beft  manner 
he  can.  31ft  May  1665.  273. 

63.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Sub- 

Commiffioners  at  Portfmouth  ;  requiring  them  to  purfue 
their  Inftructions ;  to  give  an  accompt  of  what  was  de¬ 
livered  to  the  Navy,  See.  and  of  the  Money  they  received 
for  Freight.  2d  June  1665.  277. 

64.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Store- 
Keeper  of  Prize-Goods  in  the  Port  of  Dover,  apprifing 

Cat.IFaiu,.  Vql,  II. 


Num.  1509. 

him  of  the  incertainty  of  his  Accompts  ;  &  fending  him 
a  Form  to  go  by,  in  a  better  method.  1 2th  June 
1665.  286. 

65.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  their  Sub- 

Commiflioners  in  the  Port  of  Plymouth,  requiring  them 
to  fend  up  their  Returnes  in  an  exaCter  method.  1 2th 
June  1665.  287. 

66.  Directions  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  the 

Store-Keeper  at  Portfmouth,  about  fecuring  the  Prize- 
Goods  for  his  Majelties  ufe,  taking  proper  Inventories 
thereof,  &  fending  up  Duplicates  of  the  fame.  16th 
June  1665.  294. 

67.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  requiring  the 

Commiffioners  at  Plymouth  to  pay  to  the  Corporation  of 
that  Place,  the  fmall  Duties  of  all  Prize-Goods  brought 
in  there,  according  as  they  had  long  enjoyed  the  fame. 
21ft  June  1665.  297. 

68.  Order  of  the  I.ords  Commiffioners,  requiring  Mr. 

Henry  Dethick  their  Solicitor  to  give  continual  Notice 
to  Mr.  Southwell  their  Secretary,  of  all  Ships  to  be  pro¬ 
ceeded  againll  in  the  Court  of  Admiralty.  21ft  June 
1665.  299. 

69.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  36I.  17s. 

4  d.  to  be  paid  unto  Mr.  Southwell,  their  Secretary,  for 
Paper  Sc  other  things  made  ufe  of  by  him  in  the  Prize- 
Office.  23  June  1665.  307. 

70.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Lord 

Affiley  their  Treafurer,  to  pay  unto  Francis  Sandford 
Sixty  Pounds,  as  his  Majelties  Favor,  to  enable  him  to 
buy  300  Reame  of  the  fecond  fort  oflkiper,  at  4s.  the 
Reame.  28th  June  1665.  312.  &  vid.  317. 

71.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  the  Pay¬ 

ment  of55l.  Compoiition-money,  to  Mr.  Thomas  Bro¬ 
derick  Affignee  of  the  Earle  of  Kinowle  Patentee  of  the 
Cuftomes  of  Pott-Alhes,  the  Cuftomes  of  that  Commo¬ 
dity  in  the  Galliot  Floy  amounting  to  fo  much.  30th  June 
i66S.  '  316. 

72.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  the  Pay¬ 

ment  of  n  61.  2  s.  to  Mr.  Southwell,  for  difeharging 
what  hath  been  become  due  to  thofe  employed  by  him 
in  the  bufinefs  of  Prizes ;  viz.  a  Clerk  at  80 1.  per  ann. 
a  Clerk  Accomptant  at  tool,  per  ann.  a  Clerk  Affiltant 
to  both  the  others  at  40 1.  per  ann.  and  a  Door-keeper 
at  30 1.  per  ann.  which  Salaries  are  likewife  ordered  for 
the  future  to  be  paid  by  Quarterly  Payments.  5th  July 
1665.  32  ..  et  vid.  511. 

73.  Order  for  removing  the  Prize-Office  of  London, 

with  all  the  Clerks,  Books,  Papers,  See.  to  Harwich, 
during  the  time  of  the  Plague;  25th  July  1605.  >35. 

74.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Court  of 
Admiralty,  about  Periffiing  Wynes,  how  they  ffiould  be 
dilpofed  ;  and  about  their  Fees  at  Court,  21  Aug.  1665. 

342. 

75.  Articles  of  Agreement  had,  made,  contracted,  & 

agreed,  by  and  between  Robert  Southweil  Efq.  one  of 
the  Clerks  of  his  Majefties  moft  honourable  Privie  Coun- 
cill,  for  &  in  the  behalfe  of  his  Majeftie  ;  in  purfuance 
of  an  Order  made  by  the  Right  Honourable  His  Majef¬ 
ties  Principall  Commiflioners  for  Prizes,  bearing  date 
the  6th  day  of  April  1665.  to  that  effedt,  of  the  one  Part: 
and  Humphry  Taylor,  Robert  C.aftle,  &  Michael  Clap- 
ffiam  of  London,  Merchants,  of  the  other  Part ;  made 
&  concluded  the  7th  day  of  Aprill  aforefaid,  in  the  17th 
yeare  of  his  Majefties  Raigne.  351. 

The  Order  abovementioned,  is  entred  in  pag.  1 75. 

76.  Special  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to 
the  Commiffioners  of  the  Port  of  London,  acquainting 
them  with  the  taking  of  two  Dutch  Eaft  India  Ships,  & 
feveral  other  Merchant-men  of  confiderable  value,  and 
that  the  fame  were  brought  up  to  the  Buoy  a’  Nore. 
They  require  therefore  that  all  poffible  Care  be  ufed 
in  the  prelervation  of  the  fame ;  and  of  all  things  ap¬ 
pertaining  to  them,  &c.  leaft  the  great  account  expec- 

Aa  ted 


<;o 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  i  509. 

ted  of  thefe  Ships,  through  Imbezelment,  fhould  be 
diminifhed,  to  his  Majefties  difappointment.  21  ft  Septr. 
1005-  353.  et  vid.  356.  357. 

77.  l  etter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the  Com¬ 
miflioners  of  the  feveral  Ports,  about  their  monthly  Ac- 
compts.  5th  July  166$. 

78.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the  Com- 

mllTioners  of  Portfmouth,  authorizing  them  to  proceed 
to  die  finiftiing  of  the  C'-ntraft  with  the  Farmers  of  the 
Cuftoms,  tor  all  the  King’s  Prize-Wines  &  Calk.  18th 
Oftobet  1665.  ^59. 

7 9.  Inftruclnns  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the 

Commiflioners  &c  others,  who  are  at  prefent  employed 
10  lake  care  of  the  Eaft  India  6c  other  Prizes,  lately 
brought  in.  2 ift  Oftob.  1665.  360. 

80.  A  Remor.. trance  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to 
his  Majeftie,  wherein  they  vindicate  their  Proceedings 
h  >m  fome  Imputation  laid  upon  them;  fince  the  Dutch 
Laft-Imlia  and  o;h.r  Prize-Ships  had  not  anfwered  ex- 
pectaiion,  as  to  their  Value,  by  reafon  of  the  exorbitant 
imbezzlcnent  of  the  Goods  ;  and  their  Lordlhips  con- 
I: denng  the  great  lofs  accruing  tohisMajeftie,by  giving 
all  the  Goods  between  Decks  k  the  Orlopp  ("being  the 
moft  va1  uable  fort  of  the  Lading)  to  the  Seamen,  asalfo 
t  ie  g.eat  Scandal  thrown  upon  the  Nation  thereby,  fince 
litany  Ships  feized  only  upon  fufpicion,  were  always 
plundered  between  Decks  (if  no  worfe  ufed)  and  being 
afterwards  cleared  as  plainly  belonging  to  Friends,  neither 
the  Goods  taken  away  nor  the  Plunderers  were  to 
be  found.  1  hey  propofe  therefore,  that  now  upon  the 

above-mentionedhorndlmbezzlementSjhisMajeftie  would 

only  give  them  for  the  future  a  fixth  or  a  fifth  Part  <  f 
the  whole  clear  Profit,  whereby  the  Officers  may  be 
obliged  to  preferve  the  Prizes  from  being  plundered,  the 
Seamen  kept  in  better  difeipline,  and  the  Shares  to  the 
Commanders  and  Seamen  better  preferved,  k  more 
equally  divided  ^6i. 

8  1 .  Propofal  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  his  Ma- 
jelty,  that  in  order  to  put  a  flop  to  the  notorious  collu- 
lion  of  Dutch  &  French,  which  lalt  openly  owned  the 
Dutchmens  Goods  to  be  theirs,  whereby  the  Dutch  were 
Supplied,  the  War  prolonged,  and  his  Majefty  impudent¬ 
ly  cheated  ;  that  he  would  offer  unto  the  French  King 
hls  cogent,  that  his  fubjects  the  French  might  carry 
or  double  the  Proportions  of 

\  ne,  Brandy,  and  Salt,  thar  in  any  former  yeare  has 
been  ever  imported  into  thofe  Places.  23d  October 
l665-  o6,. 

Sc.  Propofal  to  his  Majeftie,  by  the  Lords  Commif- 
liojiers,  mat  a  Proclamation  doe  iffue  cut  for  the  better 
difeovtry  at  the  Goods  imbezled  out  of  the  Eaft  India 
Snips  &  oth _t  Prizes.  foid. 

1  ;V  Order  < l  the-  Lords  Commiflioners  about  keeping 
file  -  n^-croodsm  the  Port  of  Dover,  unrill  Mr.Carlifle 
the  Store-keeper  (hall  clear  himfelf  of  the  accufation 
l66cUP°n  hjni  °  imbezzlmS  the  W.  24th  October 

,1,  8l4;  lUt!Cr  ,“f  *j  LorJs  Commiffioners  fio 

...e  Duke  oi  Albemarle,  thanking  his  Grace  for  not 
concilia, ng,  any  thing-  with  the  Eaft  India  Company, 
t-  uenun;  toe  bale  of  the  Goods  in  the  two  Ealt  India 
oSrS'"-’  their  participation.  26th 

85.  the  hail  India  Company's  Firfl  Articles  Iboit 
the  two  Prizes.  26th  Oftob.  1665.  6“ 

I'd.  the  Anfwer  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  for 
Prizes  to  the  laid  Articles.  L  t  r 

87.  Articles  agreed  on  between  his  Grace  Geo'rge 
Bn,.n  Of  Albemarle  and  the  reft  of  his  Majefties  Cont- 
nnflinne.s  of  t  lazes,  of  the  one  Part;  and  the  Governor 
A  Company  of  Merchants  of  London  trading  to  the 
Xaft-audies,  of  tne  other  Part.  31ft  Obtober,  1665. 

37°' 


Num.  1 509. 

.88.  Order  of  (he  Lords  Commiflioners,  to  the  Com¬ 
miflioners  of  the  Port  of  London,  impowering  them  to 
deliver  unto  the  Eaft-India  Company,  the  Goods  re¬ 
maining  in  the  Eaft  India  Prizes,  except  Copper  and 
SaltPetre.  30th  Oft.  1665.  37 

S')-  Letter  of  divers  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to 
the  Duke  of  Albemarle,  about  their  Anfwer  to  the  Firft 
Articles  of  the  Eaft-India  Company ;  k  defiring  his 
Grace  to  fign  the  Agreement  lately  made  with  the  faid 
Company,  upon  the  Foundation  laid  by  his  Grace. 

t-l  ibid. 

90.  The  Second  Articles  prefented  by  the  Eaft  India 
Company. 

91.  Obfervations  made  by  the  Lords  Commiflioners 
of  Prizes,  on  the  fecond  Draught  of  Articles  offered  by 
the  Committee  of  the  Eaft  India  Company,  November  1 

1665 •  373/ 

92.  Letter  of  fome  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the 

Duke  of  Albemarle,  accompanying  the  fecond  Article 
\yith  their  Obfervations  upon  the  fame.  They  alfo  ad- 
vife  his  Grace  to  make  a  full  conclufion  of  the  Bargain 
in  what  Terms  he  fhould  think  fitt,  to  which  they  would 
give  their  Affent  ;  as  being  fomewhat  fufpicious  of  a  De- 
fign  to  bring  the  Affair  into  private  hands,  and  out  of 
the  hands  of  Company,  wherein  they  believe  the  King’s 
beltlecurity  lay.  5th  Nov.  1665.  ibid. 

93-  1-eiter  of  fome  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to 
Sir  George  Carteret,  defiring  him  to  go  on,  with  the 
Duke  of  Albemarle  to  finifh  the  Bargain  with  the  Eaft- 
India  Company,  in  the  beft  manner  he  could,  although 
it  fhould  be  contrary  to  what  they  had  before  advifed. 
For  his  Majefties  Oecafior.s  for  ready  Money  being  pref- 
fing,  he  had  given  full  info  ranees  of  his  approbation  of 
Inch  Bargain,  k  had  therefore  ordered  them  to  brino-  the 
fame  to  a  conclufion.  0 


374. 

44.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the  Com¬ 
miflioners  at  Plymouth  ;  requiring  them  to  reaffume  the 
Sale  of  certain  Goods  which  they  had  before  fold  at  too 
low  a  Rate ;  that  they  fhould  not  deliver  out  any  Goods 
unto  the  Buyers,  until  payment  be  firft  made  ;  that  they 
do  fpeedily  lepd  up  their  Accompts,  in  doing  which 
they  have  been  too  remifs.  1  ft  Nov.  1665.  375 

95.  Commiffion  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  im¬ 

powering  and  authorizing  the  Duke  of  Albemarle  to 
conclude  the  Treaty  with  the  Eaft  India  Company, 
which  they  confent  unto,  ratifie,  k  confirme.  2d  No¬ 
vember  1665.  ^g 

96.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the  Duke 

of  .AlbemaiL,  fhewing  their  Sarisfaftfon  as  to  the  Bar¬ 
gain  he  had  made  with  the  Eaft-India  Companv,  and 
with  the  Notice  he  had  given  them,  that  he  hoped  his 
Majefties  Good,  in  the  Prize  Eaft-India  Ships  might  be 
eltecmed  at  about  2,000  1.  and  they  defire  that  Care 
may  be  taken  in  feparating  the  beft  Goods  from  the 
worier  :  for  the  Seamen  when  they  plundered  and  threw 
about  the  Bales  to  finde  out  the  richeft  Goods,  tore 
many  of  the  Baggs,  and  mixed  many  of  the  Baggs 
one  with  the  other.  14th  Nov.  1665.  383. 

97.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  the  Com¬ 
miflioners  of  Plymouth,  not  to  fell  any  naval  Stores, 
without  previouily  acquainting  the  Commiflioners  of  the 

1  leuN^Vy’  W,lh  Che  Quantities  &  Qualities  of  the  fame, 
xoth  Nov.  i 665.  ,g  . 

98.  Commiffion  for  Mr.  George  Clifford  to  be  Store¬ 

keeper  of  the  Port  of  London,  in  the  room  of  Mr.  George 
Paul  (turned  out  for  Mildemeanors  ?)  2d  November 
1665.  jkj, 

99.  Inftruftions  to  the  Commiflioners  of  Briftol,  about 
their  going  to  Plymouth,  &  joyning  themfelves  to  the 
Commiflioners  there,  in  the  bufinefs  &  dilpofal  of  all 
Prizes  not  yet  difpofed  of.  18th  November  1665. 

387.  et  vid.  389. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


9i 


Num.  1509. 

too.  Order  of  the  Lords  .Commiffioners,  requiring 
that  Mr.  John  Carlisle  Storekeeper  at  Dover,  Ihould  be 
admiued  to  repair  unto  &  attend  his  Employment  ;  he 
having  cleared  himfelfof  the  Imputation  laid  upon  him. 
4th  Dec.  1665.  392. 

101.  Letter  of  fome  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to 

the  Duke  of  Albemarle,  upon  his  Grace’s  dellring  them 
to  appoint  two  Men  to  appraife  the  Goods  de'ivereH  to 
the  Lad  India  Company  out  of  the  two  Prizes.  They 
feem  to  believe  that  they  have  not  authority  to  do  fo,  as 
feeming  to  apprehend  (contrary  to  an  niturance  given 
them  by  Sir  George  Carteret  the  Vice  Chamberlaine) 
that  the  Greate  Seale  is  palled  for  feparating  the  Concern 
of  thole  Prizes  from  'heir  Commillion.  They  therefore 
defire  that  his  Grace  would  direct  the  Company  to  re- 
turne  them  the  Indrument  under  hand  &  feale  defigned 
to  be  left  with  them.  9th  October  1665.  394 

102.  Power  given  to  the  Lord  Afhley  to  treat  with 
Alderman  Edward  Backwcll,  or  others,  &  conclude  a 
Sale  of  the  Silver  found  in  the  two  Ships  called  the 
County  ds  la  Mark  Sc  the  Hartop  van  C  Eve  :  a-  to 
which,  the  Alderman  had  already  hidden  5  s.  ad  per 
oz.  Troy  Weight,  for  that  in  Barres,  St  5  s.  id.  per 
oz.  for  that  in  llyals.  26th  December  <665. 

398.  et vid.  417.  h  51  6. 

103.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiliioners,  to  the  Com- 
miflioners  of  the  feveral  Peru,  requiring  them  to  make 
up  their  Accompts  of  all  Prize  Shi,  s  A  Goods  brought 
into  their  Ports  fincethe  beginning  of  the  Dutch  Warre, 
and  to  perfect  the  fame  before  the  2d  day  of  February 
next  enfuing.  26th  December  1665. 

399  et  vid  414.  416.  468. 

1 04.  Letter  of  the  Lords  C ommiffioners,  to  the  Com¬ 

miffioners  of  London,  about  making  up  their  Accompts; 
and  lelling  of  Goods  reftored  but  not  taken  away  by  the 
Clayniants.  13th  January  i66c-  401. 

105.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  requiring 

Dr.  Leoline  Jenkyns  to  make  a  Report  of  fuch  Fees  as 
may  be  allowed  to  Interpreters  &  Tranflators  in  the 
Court  of  Admiralty.  20th  January  1665.  406. 

106.  Inftrudtions  for  Mr.  John  Shales  appointed  Agent 

of  Prizes  at  Portfmouth  ;  ana  Sir  John  Knight  at  Biiftol. 
i2ih  February  1665.  417. 

107.  Memorandum  of  Mr. Walter  Clavel’s  being  ap¬ 

pointed  by  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  examine  the  Ac¬ 
compts  of  the  Out-Ports,  and  to  reprefent  the  Hate  of 
them  to  their  Lordfhips.  16th  February  1665.  419. 

108.  Order  for  the  Appearance  of  Alderman  Hooker 

of  London,  Alderman  Daihwood  Silkman  in  Cheapfide, 
Mr.  Luthileir  of  London  Merchant,  Mr.  Rocke  of 
Greener,  iche,  Mr.  Sands  of  Walbroke  London,  &  Mr 
Nicholas  Dawes  before  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to 
latrilie  their  Lord  (hips  in  fuch  Particulars,  as  would  be 
demanded. of  them  ;  it  being  informed,  that  feveral  Par¬ 
cels  of  Prize  Goods  belonging  to  his  Majofty,  had  in- 
dirc&ly  come  into  their  Cuftody,  or  had  been  difpofed 
of  by  them.  2 ill  February  1605.  423. 

'09.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  for  feizing 
all  French  Ships  &  Goods  being  found  within  the  Har¬ 
bours,  Ports,  Creeks,  &  Rivers  of  this  Kingdom  ;  his 
IVIajeHy  having  declared  a  Warre  again!!  theFrench  King 
&  his  fubjeds.  23d  Febr.  1065.  4 24. 

1  10.  Indru&ions  to  Sir  Edmund  Pooley,  Mr.  B;owne 
&  Mr.Clifford  about  the  Charitie  and  other  Prizes  at  Yar¬ 
mouth,  &c.  423. 

111.  Mi-.  Robert  Clifton,  &  Mr.  Richard  Bowers  ap¬ 
pointed  by  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  feize  upon  all 
Goods  embezled  from  his  MajediesPrizes,  at  Yarmouth. 
'Harwich,  and  other  places  thereabouts.  26th  Febr.  1665. 

427. 

112.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  requiring 
the  Commiffioners  at  Hull,  to  deliver  to  Mg,  John  Bowers 
ef  Bridlington  (for  acceptable  Service  done  by  him  to 


Num.  1509,  1510. 

fuch  part  of  the  Royall  Navy  as  was  thereabouts  the 
lad  Summer)  the  Galliot  Hoy  called  the  Armes  of  Zea¬ 
land,  or  Wapen  van  Zealand  with  her  Tackle,  Apparel* 
and  Furniture,  as  ot  his  Majefties  Guift.  428. 

1 13.  Opinion  of  the  LordsCommiffioners  touching  th 
Sale  of  the  Goods  found  in  the  two  Dutcti  Laft  India 
Prize-Ships,  to  be  made  by  the  faid  Company  upon  thg 
aoth  March  1665.  430. 

1510 

A  Bqok  in  fol.  given  by  Mr.  Anftis,  and  on  the  outfide 
entituled, 

1.  “  The  Proceedings  of  ihe  Right  Hon1, lc  his  Majedies 
Principal  Commiffioners  for  Prizes,  from  March  1665-6.” 

Here  it  may  be  noted,  that  the  Prize  Office  being 
found  too  chargeable  to  the  King,  it  was  altered  &  fettled 
upon  a  cheaper  Ldabliffiment,  and  many  of  the  Sub- 
Commiffioners  and  inferior  Officers  were  difeharged. 

The  Proceedings  being  many,  I  (Iia.lL  omitt  the  men- 
tioning  of  ordinary  Mat:ers  relating  to  the  condemnation 
of  Ships,  the  appraifing  of  Goods,  the  Sale,  Delivery  & 
Affignment  of  the  fame ;  the  Payment  of  Officers,  & c. 
and  only  fpecif.e  the  particulars  following. 

2.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Matters  contained  in  this 
Book ;  at  the  beginning. 

3  Indruftions  to  Charles  Bennet  Efq.  Deputy  to  the 
Ri.  lit  Honble.  the  Lord  Arlington,  his  Majedies  Comp¬ 
troller  of  Prizes;  Richard  Kingdon  Efq.  Deputy  to  the 
Rt  Honble.  the  Lord  Afhley  his  Majedies  Treufurer  of 
Prizes  ;  Henry  Rumbahl  k  George  Clifford  Efqrs.  his 
Majedies  Storekeepers  of  Prizes  in  the  Port  of  London; 
or  t  any  two  or  more  of  them,  Commiffioners  of 
Prizes  i  r  the  laid  Porr,  whereof  the  laid  Deputie  of 
his  Majeflies  faid  Comptroller,  or  the  faid  Deputy  of 
his  Majedies  Tieafurer  t  >  he  one  :  for  the  better  Execu¬ 
tion  of  the  Powers  to  them  given  as  Sub-Commiffioners 
for  the  Port  of  London.  437. 

(This  book  following  the  I  tft,  as  to  the  Pages.) 

The  like  Inllrufl  ions  were  lent  to  the  Commiffioners 
at  Southampton,  Plymouth,  V  Hull. 

4.  C  'mmiffion  to  the  new  Commiliioners  of  London, 
&  the  Diftric!  thereof,  dat.  id  March  166 443. 

ihe  like  Commiffion  was  iffiicd  to  the  new  Com¬ 
miliioners  at  Southampton,  Plymouth,  Sc  Hull. 

5.  Warrant  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  conftituting 

Sir  Thomas  Clifford  Kt.  a  General  Commiffioner  for 
Piizes  in  iubordination  to  themfelves.  dat.  24th  March 
1665.  ibid. 

6.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  late  Com¬ 
miliioners  for  London,  requiring  them  to  deliver  up  to 
the  new  Commiffioners  fuch  Goods  of  his  Majedi-  s  as 
were  in  their  Cuilody.  They  farther,  give  them  No¬ 
tice,  that  upon  the  finiffiing  of  their  Accompts,  and 
delivering  up  of  their  Charge,  his  M.ijedie  would  declare 
hi.-  Royal  Pleafure  A-  Bounty  in  recompenling  their  great 
paincs  St  trouble,  id  March  16 65. 

444.  et  vid.  450.  462. 

7.  Form  of  the  Letter  fent  by  the  Lords  the  Prin¬ 

cipal  Commiffioners,  to  each  of  the  General  Commif- 
fioners.  ibid. 

8.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Lord 

Culpeper  Governor  of  the  Hie  of  Wight,  requiring  In¬ 
formation  of  the  Enormities  of  Captain  Alexander  Cul¬ 
peper  his  Lordlhip’s  Deputy,  to  a  SweJifh  Ship  in  Dif- 
trefs  and  the  Perfons  in  her.  446. 

9.  Letter  ot  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Lord 

Bulkeley,  concerning  a  French  Ship  put  into  the  Port 
ot  Beaumaris  &  feized  by  his  Lordlh  p  as  Prize.  5th 
March  1665.  453. 

10.  Order  to  the  Storekeepers  of  London,  to  bring 

in  their  Accompts  perfected  to  the  time  of  the  determi¬ 
nation  of  the  Commiffion  of  the  late  Commiffioners  for 
London.  ibid. 

S  The 


92 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1510. 

The  like  fent  to  the  other  Store-keepers. 

11.  Order  to  the  CommiiTioners  for  lick  &  wounded 

Men,  to  receive  fuch  Dutch  &•  French  Prifoners  as  fhall 
be  brought  in,  in  Prizes.  17th  March  1665.  456. 

12.  Report  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  his  Majef- 

ty,  of  their  Opinion,  that  he  might  be  pleafed  by  pub- 
lique  Proclamation  to  prohibit  the  importation  of  all 
Brandy,  Wynes,  &  Vinegar,  and  all  Commodities  of 
the  French  Manufacture,  Lynens  and  Salt  only  excepted. 
20th  March  1665.  * 

1 3.  Letter  of  the  Lords  CommiiTioners  to  Sir  William 
Coventry  Secretary  to  the  Duke  of  York,  Lord  High- 
Admiral,  defiring  him  to  move  his  Royal  Highnefs  to 
iffue  Order  to  all  Officers  k  Commanders  of  his  Ma- 
jelties  Navy  to  take  care  that  all  Prizes  hereafter  feized, 
may  be  brought  to  Cowes  (whither  the  Prize- Office  is 
removed)  inltead  of  Portfmouth,  unlefs  hard  Weather, 
or  other  important  Reafons  hinder.  20th  March  1665. 

4<?3- 

14.  Warrant  of  the  Lords  CommiiTioners  to  John 

Wickham  tneir  Meffenger,  to  releafe  Thomas  Hunt 
taken  into  his  Cuftody,  lor  receiving  certain  Sailes  into 
h:  houfe,  which  had  been  ltollen  out  of  the  Ship  Carolus 
Guiiavus:  the  laid  Hunt  having  reftored  the  Sailes,  & 
humbled  himfelf.  ibid. 

15.  Letter  oi  the  Lords  CommiiTioners  to  Sir  William 

Coventry,  defiring  him  to  move  his  Royal  Highnefs, 
that  the  Officers  k  Commanders  of  Ships  making  Im¬ 
bezelments  of  the  Goods  found  in  other  Ships  taken  as 
Prizes  by  them,  might  be  punilhed.  And  particularly 
that  the  Captain  oi  the  Sorlings  might  be  compelled  to 
repa  r  his  late  Imbezelment  out  of  three  Ships  lately 
taken  by  him,  and  amounting  to  a  Thoufand  Pounds 
in  value.  23d  \  arch  1665.  466. 

16.  Order  of  the  Lords  CommiiTioners  for  feventeen 

Perfons  (mentioned  by  name)  to  appear  perfonally  be¬ 
fore  them;  Information  having  been  given  in,  that  they 
are  concerned  about  Imbezelmen.s  of  Goods  from  his 
Majefties  Prizes.  4 

17.  Order  of  the  Lords  CommiiTioners  to  the  Com- 

miffioners  at  Plymouth,  for  fending  up  their  Book  of 
Inventories;  and  certifying  the  fad  with  relation  to  one 
John  Young  who  had  lupplicated  their  Lordlhips  to  be 
freed  from  a  Contrad  he  had  made  for  a  Quantity  of 
Chryftal  of  I  attar,  wherein  he  faid  he  was  much  over¬ 
men,  both  in  reference  to  the  Parcell  k  Price,  and  al¬ 
ledging  his  Poverty  8c  Inability  to  pay  the  fame,  24th 
“March  1665.  468.  et  482. 

18.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  the  Com- 

miffioners  at  London,  to  adjuft  the  Rights  of  his  Royal 
Highnefs  Lord  High  Admiral,  to  Ships  taken  and  no 
Perlbn  found  in  them,  within  their  Diftrid  ;  Mr.  Conelly 
having  lately  fecured  the  Ship  St.  Peter  of  Middelburgh 
in  that  circumflance.  March  28th  1666.  471. 

19.  Form  of  the  Commiffion  whereby  the  Lords  Com- 

miffi oners  did  conllitute  Sir  Thomas  Morgan  &  Sr.  Ed¬ 
ward  Carteret  Kts.  Benjamin  Henfhaw,  William  Powell, 
&  John  Nicholls  Eiqrs.  to  be  Commiffioners  of  Prizes 
in  the  Wand  of  Jerfey.  31ft  March  1666.  476. 

so.  Memorandum  of  the  like  Commiffion  iffued  to 
Jonathan  Atkins,  William  Selden,  Amice  Andrews,  and 
John  Barcroft  Efqrs.  to  be  Commiffioners  for  the  Wand 
of  Guernsey.  ibid. 

2  1 .  lnltructions  to  the  faid  Commiffioners  of  Jerzev 
Sc  Gurnefey.  1 

2  2.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Sir  William 
Coventry,  defin  ing  him  to  move  his  Royal  Highnefs  (for- 
afmuch  as  his  Majefty  had  reduced  the  Prize-Office  of 
the  Port  of  Dover,  k  brought  it  within  the  Diltrid  of 
that  oi  London)  to  give  Order  to  the  Commanders  of 
the  Navy,  to  deliver  Inch  Ships,  as  they  fhall  for  the 
future  bring  mt0  thofe  Parts,  unto  Mr.  Roffe  at  Deale 
3d  April  1666.  8o  * 


Num.  1510. 

23.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  delivering 
up  to  Alderman  William  Blackett  of  Newcaftle  upon 
I  ine,  I  he  Ship  St.  Francis  of  Bourdeaux  (which  he  had 
claimed,  with  her  Lading,  as  his  proper  Goods)  albeit 
Hie  had  colourable  Bills  of  Lading  for  Hamborough  :  lie 
having  given  Security  to  be  anfwerable  for  her,  in  cafe 
lhe  fhould  happen  to  be  condemned  aS  Prize. 

4^1.  (et47i.)  496.  497. 

24.  Order  to  the  Commiffioners  of  London  to  "call 

before  them  divers  Perfons,  againft  whom  Information 
had  been  given  touching  Imbezelments,  and  to  difeover 
the  Principalis  &  Accefl'ories  thereof,  to  the  end  duePro- 
fecution  might  be  had  againft  them,  in  cafe  they  fhould 
ftand  out  &  not  fairly  bring  in  the  Goods  to  his  Majef¬ 
ties  Stores,  or  the  Value  thereof  into  his  Treafury  of 
Pnzes-  .  ,  482. 

25.  Order  to  Sir  Edmund  Pooley,  &c.  to  infpedt  into 
the  Accompts  &  Vouchers  of  Sir  Thomas  Medowes, 
who  wanted  a  further  Sum  of  198I.  which  he  faid  he 
had  dilburfed  in  fecuring  Sc  preferving  Prize-Ships  at 
Yarmouth  8c  thereabouts;  where,  noiwithftanding  his 
Care,  great  Imbezelments  had  been  made.  That  they 
certifie  what  Care  Sir  Thomas  had  really  taken,  and  upon 
whom  the  faid  Imbezelments  do  molt  refledb  ibid. 

26.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  the  Com¬ 

miiTioners  at  Plymouth  ;  taking  notice  of  their  Negleft, 
in  fending  about  four  Ships  to  the  Commiffioners  at  Lon¬ 
don,  according  to  order,  without  proper  Certificates 
and  other  neceffary  Notices.  5th  Apr.  1666.  484. 

27.  Letter  of  ihe  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Sir  William 

Coventry,  defiring  him  to  move  the  D.  of  York  I.ord 
H’gh  Admiral,  to  iffue  out  his  Orders,  that  Prize  Ships 
ufually  brought  to  Dover,  fliould  be  delivered  to  their 
Agents  m  the  feveral  Ports  :  that  as  few  as  poffible  be 
carryed  into  Guernzey  or  Jerzey  ;  but  that  fuch  as  are 
taken  thereabouts  be  delivered  to  the  Commiffioners 
at  Cowes  and  Southampton.  6th  April  1 666.  4S5. 

28.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Dr.  Leoline 

Jenkins,  requiring  him  to  fitt  once  more  in  the  Court  of 
Admiralty  before  Eafter.  ibjcj_ 

29.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Sir  William 

Coventry,  defiring  him  to  move  his  Royal  Highnefs  the 
Loid  High  Admiral,  to  caule  public  Sc  exemplary  Punilh- 
ment  to  be  infliaed  on  one  Earlfman,  Captain  of  the 
Hawk-Ketch,  for  abufing  two  Perfons  employed  under 
their  Lordlhips,  only  for  demanding  an  Inventory  & 
Poffelhon  of  what  was  alleaged  to  belong  to  the  Ship  St. 
Peter,  a  Prize.  10th  April  1606.  48g. 

30.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Sir  William 

Coventry,  accompanying  certain  Propolals  for  hindring 
the  Embezelment  of  Prize  Goods  k  Ships  which  they 
conceive  very  expedient  to  be  recommended  unto  his 
Royal  Highnefs.  12th  April  1666.  494. 

31.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  late 

Commiffioners  at  Hull,  about  fome  difficulties  in  the 
Accompts  fent  up  by  them.  495. 

32.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  the  Com¬ 

miffioners  at  Plymouth,  giving  them  Direftions  about 
providing  for  Perfons  found  in  Prize-Ships,  k  brought 
m,  although  they  were  neither  French  nor  Dutch.  They 
mention  alfo  fome  defeft  in  the  Returns  made  by  the 
faid  Sub-Commiffioners.  25  April  1666.  497. 

33-  Warant  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  taking  into. 
Cuftody  one  Roger  Browne  who  had  embezeled  a  Calk 
of  Indigo  out  of  one  of  the  Prize-Ships  at  Plymouth ;  and 
for  fummoning  the  Buyer  of  the  fame,  to  appear.  498. 

34.  Warant  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  taking 
four  Perfons  into  Cuftody,  who  took  upon  them  to  land 
Goods  out  of  a  Prize-Ship,  kc.  ibid,  et  vid.  505. 

35-  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  Payment 
of  Money  to  the  late  Commiffioners  of  Portfmouth,  in 
recompenfe  of  their  Service.  5th  May  16 66.  503. 

9  36.  Inftru&ions 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


93 


Num.  1510. 

36.  Inffcructions  to  Edward  Seymour  Efq.  in  order  to 
the  better  Execution  of  the  Authorities  to  him  derived 
by  Ins  general  Commiflion  for  Prize-Affaires,  and  in  his 
attendance  on  the  Fleete  for  his  Majefties  Service. 

504. 

37 •  Warrant  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners,  to  the  Com¬ 
miflioners  of  London  ;  to  fufpend  the  Execution  of  their 
Loidfhip  s  former  Order  for  felling  Goods  by  private 
Contra  <fts.  8th  May,  1666.  5o5. 

3S.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the  Flag- 
Officers  defn  ing  them  to  certifie  what  Quantities  of 
Goods  they  iould,  purfuant  to  the  Privy  Seale  granted 
by  his  Majeftie.  lbth  May,  1666.  515. 

39.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  free  Aider- 

man  Backwell  of  his  Contract  for  the  Silver  found  in  the 
two  Prize-fhips,  fince  it  did  not  prove  to  be  of  that  fine- 
nefs,  according  as  the  Marks  &  Numbers  thereof  do 
ulu  illy  fignifie:  to  fend  the  fame  to  the  Officers  of  the 
Mint,  that  Certificate  might  be  made  of  its  Finenefs  k 
Value  ;  and  that  three  Penny  Weight  of  each  Barre,  & 
one  of  the  fmall  Pieces  of  Silver  found  in  the  Afcenfion 
of  Genoa  at  Plymouth,  befentup  to  the  faid  Alderman 
Backwell,  that  he  might  make  trial  of  the  fame,  in 
order  to  come  to  a  Price.  5x6.  575. 

40.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the  Duke 

01  Albemarle  defiring  him  to  flop  the  fending  of  any 
more  Prize-Ships  to  Guernefey  or  Jerfey.  ibid. 

41.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  Capt.  John 

Carteret,  Capt.  Hugh  Seymour,  &  Capt.  Willoughby 
Jiannam,  about  Oyles  feifed  at  Tangier,  &c.  18th  May, 
1666.  ^7 

42. ^  Warrant  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  conflituting 

Mr.  lhomas  Conflantine  their  Agent  of  Prizes  at  Portf- 
mouth  ibid. 

43.  Commiflion  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  appoint - 

ing  Alderman  Blacker  ofNewcable  upon  Tyne,  to  be 
their  Agent  of  Prizes  there.  28th  May,  1666.  520. 

44.  Inftrudh’ons  for  Alderman  William  Blackett,  the 

better  to  execute  the  Powers  derived  unto  him,  by  virtue 
of  his  Commiflion.  jbjd< 

45.  Warrant  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners,  for  Ely 

Montais  to  be  Storekeeper  of  Prizes  at  Jerfey.  528. 

46.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  Sir  William 

Coventry,  to  hinder  the  fending  of  Prizes  to  Gueme- 
fey  &  Jerley .  where  Imbezelments  and  other  Abufes  have 
been  committed  upon  Shipps  brought  in  thither  by  Com¬ 
manders  of  his  Majefties  Frigats,  particularly  Captaine 
Lmevitl  of  the  Richmond.  ^30.  ct  Yid.  540. 

47.  Order  for  the  Commiflioners  of  Guernefey  to 
fend  the  Prizes  to  Southampton  or  London  ;  and  to  fend 
up  full  Information  touching  the  Embezelments  k  Mif- 
demeanors  committed  ther 

48.  Warrant  for  Mr.  Thomas  Lloyd  to  make  a  Lift 

of  all  Decrees  for  Condemnation  &  Sale,  with  an  Ab- 
fti-aft  of  the  Subftance  of  them,  &  forthwith  to  deliver 
them  unto  the  Lord  Afliley  Treafurer  of  the  Prizes,  his 
Lordftnp  giving  an  Acknowledgement  upon  the  faid  Lift, 
of  his  Receipt  thereof :  his  Lordffiip  having  defired  the 
Originals  themfelves,  thereby  the  better  to  iuftifie  his 
Accompts  k  Receipts.  ib;d> 

49-  9rChr  ior  Mr*  Barker  the  chief  Clerk  at  Portf- 
mouth,  &  Mr.  John  Shales  the  Accomptant  there,  to  de- 
hver  in  their  Vouchers,  for  their  feveral  Accompts  of 
incident  Charges. 

SC.  Warrant  for  Money  to  be  paid  to  the  late  Com- 
milfioners  at  Hull,  in  recompenfe  of  their  fervice  there. 
June  20.  • 

5 1  •  The  like  to  the  late  Commiflioners  at  the  Port  of 
Plymouth.  21ft  June,  1666.  547 

52. -Warrant  for  feizing  three  Chefts  of  Cochineile, 
five  Chefts  of  Indigo,  a  Cheft  of  Silk  called  a  Hard- 
Arie,  two  Jarres  of  Ambergreece,  fourty  Rolls  and  four 
Canifters  of  Spanilh  Tobacco,  which- were  embezeled 
Cat.  Harc.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1516. 

out  of  a  Prize-Ship  and  carried  off  by  Mr.  Dearie  of 
Harwich:  and  alfo  about  thirty  hundred  W tight  of 
Pepper  embezeled  out  of  the  Eaft  India  Prize-Ship  the 
Golden  Phenix,  and  carried  unto  Mr.  Wright  &  Mr. 
Gregories  Merchants  in  London.  23d  June  1666.  551. 

53.  Order  for  Payment  of  200  1.  apeiceunto  the  Lord 
Brounker  &  Sir  John  Mennes  ;  &  of  100  1.  apiece  to 
Charles  Benner  &  Richard  Kingdon  Efqrs.  as  his  Ma¬ 
jefties  Reward  for  their  going  on  board  the  t  wo  Eaft-India 
1 1  tzc-Ships,  Slothany  &  Golden  Phenix,  fecuring  k 
landing  the  Goods  from  the  fame.  29th  June,  1666. 

554- 

54.  Order  for  Payment  of  183k  found  to  be  dif- 

burled  by  Sir  Thomas  Meadowes  upon  the  Accompt  of 
Prizes  ;  and  to  make  up  the  fame  200  1.  as  a  Teftimony 
of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  Approbation  of  his  Services 
to  his  Majefty.  25th  July,  16 66.  5y0. 

55.  Order  for  Sir  Edmund  Pooley,  Cornell  Edmund 

Windham,  k  the  Commiflioners  of  Prizes  for  the  Port 
of  London,  to  inlpeft  a  Quantity  of  Tobacco  of  the 
growth  of  St.  Chriftopher’s,  which  to  the  outward 
View  feemed  good  &  merchantable  ;  but  under,  proved 
rotten  k  corrupt ;  being  fo  made  up  by  the  French  with 
defign  to  deceive  the  Buyer.  Which  Goods  were  bought 
by  divers  Merchants,  fair  Traders,  who  prayed  relief. 
10th  Aug.  1666.  577.  vid.  382. 

56.  Order  for  the  delivery  of  two  Barrells  of  the  beft 

Herrings  brought  in  as  Prize,  now  in  the  River,  to 
Mr.  Bridgman,  for  his  Majefties  own  ufe.  579. 

57.  Like  Order  for  the  delivery  of  two  other  Barrells 

of  the  beft  Herrings  to  Mr.  Arthur  Wynde  for  his  Royal 
Highneffes  own  ufe.  jbid. 

58.  Order  to  the  Commiflioners  of  the  Port  of  Lon- 

don,  to  give  reafons  why  fome  Words  might  not  be 
omitted  111  the  Formes  of  Oaths  to  be  taken  by  Flemings. 
17th  Auguft,  1666.  ; 

59-  °rder  for  the  delivery  of  Half  a  Laft  of  Codfifh 
toMr.  Arthur  Wynde  for  his  Royal  Highneffes  own 

.  n^°‘  ^ePort  °f  die  Lords  Commiflioners,  to  his  Ma- 
jeftie,  of  the  State  of  the  Accompts  of  the  late  Sub-Corn- 
miflioners  at  Plymouth,  to  the  14th  day  of  March  166  c-6. 
(when  New-Coinmiflioners  were  authorized  purfuant  to 
his  Majefties  Inftruaions)  whereby  it  appeared  that  they 
had  been  charged  with  13 1  Ships;  and  with  the  Value 
0t  h  i°s.  5Jd.  befides  a  Quantity  of  Goods 

undilpofed  of,  which  they  had  delivered  up  to  the  New 
Commiflioners.  23d  Aug.  1666.  ,-g, 

61.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  the  Gene- 
rails  at  Sea,  about  protecting  Seamen  lent  for  Prizes. 

.  585.  et  596. 

62.  Order  to  the  Commiflioners  at  Guernezey,  who 
had  fold  Prize-Wines,  contrary  to  their  Inftruaions,  and 
without  the  Orders  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  ;  to  re- 
mitt,  by  folvent  Bills  of  Exchange,  the  dear  Money 
accruing  thereby,  to  the  Lord  Afhley  Treafurer  of  the 
Prizes.  24th  Auguft  1 666. 

63.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners,  to  the  Lord 

Bellaflis,  intreating  his  Lordfhip  to  tranfmitr  an  Accompt 
of  all  Prizes  brought  into  the  Port  of  Tangier,  as  well 
relating  to  his  Lordfhip’s  Dilburfements  as  to  his  Re¬ 
ceipts.  27th  Auguft  1 666.  589.  et  610,  615.  6,5. 

64.  Order  for  the  Commiflioners  of  London  to  de¬ 

liver  to  the  Officers  of  the  Navy  &  Ordnance  fuch  things 
as  are  in  their  Cuftody  fitt  for  theNavy  k  to  fend  Wynes 
totheNavy.  ibid.  591.  5g2.  613.  61 6. 

65.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiflioners  to  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  Coventry,  earneftly  defiring  him  to  move  his  Royal 
Highnefs,  that  exemplary  Punifhment  may  be  inffitted 
on  lome  of  the  Company  of  the  Guernezey  Frigat,  which 
of  late  tooke  a  Prize  called  the  TwoBrothers  of  Rochell, 
being  put  into  the  faid  Prize  to  man  her  for  fome  Port: 
where  a  Prize  Office  is  fettled  ;  did  carry  her  (under 

B  b  colour 


9+ 


Citalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1510, 

colour  of  diftreffc  of  Weather,  but  it  rather  appears  on 
purpofe  the  better  to  manage  their  embezelments)  unto 
the  Haven  of  Milford,  a  Place  of  great  Latitude,  &  fit 
for  fuch  praflifes  ;  where,  with  the  help  of  the  Martin 
Galley,  they  embezeled  &  difpofed  of  mod  part  of  the 
Wynes  &  Brandies ;  rudely  menacing  all  Wayters  & 
others  fent,  or  put  on  board  them.  5 gQ . 

66.  Commiflion  for  Sir  Walter  Moyle  to  be  Store¬ 

keeper  at  Plymouth,  upon  the  removal  of  Mr.  Langford. 
29  Augufl:  1666.  594. 

67.  Wart  ant  of  the  Lords  Commifiioners,  to  the 
Warden  of  the  Fleet  Prifon,  to  bring  before  them  Mr. 
George  Carew,  who  was  charged  by  feveral  Merchants 
ot  London,  with  the  Embezelments  &  Spoil  committed 
by  a  Privateer  under  his  Commiflion,  upon  the  Ship 
Piper  of Lubeck  &  her  Lading,  to  the  value  of  1800I. 

ibid,  et  vid.  598.  602. 

68.  Order  to  the  Commifiioners  of  the  feveral  Ports, 

not  to  imprifon  Seamen  taken  in  Ships  of  his  Majefties 
friends.  Augufl  3 1,  1666.  599. 

69.  Warrant  of  the  Lords  Commifiioners  to  all  his 

Majefties  Officers  Civil  &  Military,  to  be  aiding  &  aflift- 
ing  to  Mr.  Richard  Bowers  in  the’execution  of  the  Com¬ 
miflion  they  had  granted  unto  him  for  the  Seizure  of  all 
Goods  embezeled  out  of  his  Majefties  Prize-Ships.  12th 
Septr.  1666.  600. 

yc.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commifiioners  to  the  Com- 
miflioners  of  London,  to  accept  of  fufficient  Bayle  of 
thofe  Perfons  who  were  committed  for  embezeling  Prize 
Goods.  601. 

7 1 .  Order  of  the  Lords  Commifiioners  to  the  Court 

of  Admiralty,  to  take  fecurity  of  Captain  Terrill  to 
anfwer  Damages  done  to  the  Shipp  Le  Vrou  van  Hulpen. 
14th  Septr.  1666.  603. 

72.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commifiioners,  for  Mr.  Cheek 

his  Majefties  Proftor,  to  attend  the  Coroners  Inqueft 
when  fitting  upon  a  Scotchman  who  had  given  Informa¬ 
tion  againft  divers  upon  the  fubjett  of  Embezelments 
(upon  which  they  were  apprehended,  and  put  into  Pri¬ 
fon)  which  faid  Scotchman  being,  with  another  putt 
Wayter  on  board  the  Ship  Berge,  and  being  well  on  the 
Friday  Night  before,  was,  within  a  day  or  two,  taken 
'up  dead  out  of  the  River.  24th  Sept.  1666.  607. 

73.  Order  for  Philip  Fowler,  who  had  obftinately  re- 

fufed  to  difeover  hisKnowIedge  touching  Embezelments 
to  be  brought  up  from  Plymouth  with  all  convenient 
fpeed,  to  anfwer  his  Mifdemeanors.  29th  September 
1666.  610. 

74.  Order  for  the  bringing  up  of  four  Perfons  from 
Yarmouth,  to  anfwer  their  Embezelments  of  eight  Packs 
of  Wool,  fix  of  which  weighed  2000  weight ;  with 
one  Anchor  &  Sheet  Cable,  worth  at  leaft  30 1.  2d  Oc¬ 
tober  1666. 

75.  Letter,  or  Order  to  the  Commifiioners  at  Ply. 
mouth,  about  Captain  Scott,  who  was  to  be  required  to 
make  Reftitution  of  the  Goods  embezeled  by  him,  on 
pain  of  being  profecuted  for  the  fame.  18th  Oftober 

l66r‘  n  1  c  1  ,  •  •  621.  et  622. 

76.  Order  for  the  bringing  up  of  Six  Perfons  from 
Plymouth  who  had  been  guilty  of  great  Embezelments, 
and  obftinately  refufed  to  reftore  the  Goods  unto  his 


Majefties  Officers.  1 2th  Nov.  1666. 


77.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  500 1.  apiece,  ^mo 
Sir  Thomas  Peyton  &  others,  late  Commifiioners  of 
Prizes  m  the  Port  of  Dover,  as  a  Recompence  of  their 
Services  during^  the  Time  they  continued  in  that  em¬ 


ployment.  1 2th  Nov.  1666. 


629. 


•  7H '  ,nrd  f  t-  ™no™S  <he  Prize-Office  from  Cowes 
rn  the  IOe  of  Wight  ,0  the  Town  of  Southampton, 
which  was  now  reprefented  as  free  from  Infection  L  o 
79.  Inftructions  to  Sir  Robert  Southwell  Kt.  for  the 
better  Execution  of  the  Powers  derived  to  him  by  the 
annexed  Comnnllion.  1 4th  November  1 669.  633 


Num.  1510. 

So.  Commiflion  of  the  principal  Commifiioners,  ap* 
pointing  &  conftituting  Sir  Robert  Southwell  Kt.  to  be 
a  Commiflioner  of  Prizes  at  Portugal.  634. 

81.  Memorandum  of  the  like  Commiflion  &  Inftruc* 

tions,  mutatis  mutandis,  iflued  to  Thomas  Thynne  Efq. 
his  Majefties  Envoye  to  the  Crowne  of  Sweden  ;  dated 
as  above.  ^  ibid. 

This  'Thomas  Thynne  now  Lord  Vifcount  Wey¬ 
mouth,  is  yet  alive,  &  my  good  Lord,  being  aged  73 
years  about  10th  Aug.  1712. 

82.  Order  of  the  Lords  the  principal  Commifiioners, 

fuperfeding  &  revoking  the  Commiflions  &  Inftrudtions 
given  to  the  Sub-Commiflioners  of  Guernefey  &  Jerfev. 
2 1  ft  Nov.  1666.  639; 

83.  Commiflion  conftituting  Walter  Slyngefby  Efq. 

to  be  foie  Agent  of  Prizes  in  the  Iflands  of  Guernefev  & 
Jerfey.  24th  June  1666.  ibid. 

84.  Inftru&ions  to  Walter  Slyngefby  Efq.  for  the 

better  execution  of  the  Powers  derived'  to  him  by  the 

annexed  Commiflion.  jbjd 

85.  Order  to  the  Sub-Commiflioners  at  the  feveral 

Ports,  to  perfeft  their  Accompts  to  the  25th  of  Decem¬ 
ber  next,  &  fo  fend  the  fame  to  their  Lordfliips.  28th 
Nov.  1666.  64r. 

86.  Order  for  the  Officers  of  the  Navy  to  fignifie 

within  14  daies,  whether  any  Prize-Ships  be  fitt  for  to 
be  made  Fire-Ships.  <5.^ 

87.  Order  to  Mr.  Richard  Bowers  of  Harwich,  to 
fend  up  Copies  of  the  Orders  faid  to  be  iflued  by  his 
Majefties  Generals  at  Sea,  which  divers  pretended  to  al* 
ledge  for  their  keeping  &  detaining  certain  Prize-Ships. 

ibid. 

88.  Order  to  the  Eaft  India  Company  to  expofe  again 

to  Sale  divers  Parcels  of  Goods,  late  belonging  to  the 
two  Eaft  India  Prizes,  which  being  bought,  were  not 
taken  away ;  and  to  afford  to  fome  others  common 
Equity  &  Juftice,  with  relation  to  a  Parcel  of  Goods 
bought  &  paid  for  ;  whereof  only  Part  was  taken  away 
the  reft  being  burnt  in  a  Cellar,  in  Cuftody  of  the  faid 
Company.  30th  November  16 66.  649.  et  vid.  682. 

89.  Order  for  the  bringing  up  of  Samuel  Weale 

Gent.  &  William  Smith,  both  of  Truro;  &  Anthony 
Bazetts  Senr.  of  Plymouth  Merchant  ;  who  were  adtive 
&  inftrumental  in  the  embezeling  of  the  whole  Caro-o 
of  Brandy-Wynes  taken  on  board  the  Prize-Ship  Mary 
of  Bourdeaux,  and  lying  at  Falmouth  ;  unlefs  they  did 
forthwith  deliver  up  the  Goods,  &  pay  all  Charges.  6th 
December  1666.  g 

90.  Order  for  60  I.  to  be  given  to  the  Executors  of 

a  Perfon,  who  had  made  Information  of  the  embezeling 
of  fome  of  his  Majefties  Prize-Goods.  65 1 . 

91.  Order  for  Mr.ThomasConftanline  &  Mr.  Bowers 
to  apprehend  one  Adams  who  had  fold  a  whole  Ship’s 
Lading  of  Goods,  under  £  colour  of  an  Order  from  Sir 
Thomas  Allen  as  his  property  ;  which  Order  Sir  Tho¬ 
mas  had  denied,  or  that  he  had  any  Intereft  in  the  Ship 
or  any  Knowledge  of  the  Perfon,  or  fuch  his  Practife  : 
They  were  alfo  ordered  to  make  Seizure  of  the  faid 
Goods  wherever  found.  They  are  alfo  acquainted,  that 
as  for  the  ten  Canifters  of  Mace  which  they  had  men¬ 
tioned  to  have  been  entred  in  the  Cuftome-houfe  in  the 
name  of  Sir  William  Pen;  he  likewife  utterly  denies  to 
have  had  any  Intereft  therein,  unleffe  there  be  fomething 
appearing  under  his  hand  to  evidence  the  Sale  thereof 
unto  Mr.  Deane  of  Harwich  that  pretends  thereunto ; 
which  fa£t  they  were  to  examine.  13th  December  1666! 

653. 

92.  Order  for  the  bringing  up  of  Mr.  John  Harvey 
late  Officer  of  the  Farmers  of  the  Cuftomes  at  Cowes, 
who  had  exhibited  an  Accompt  ot  Shipps  &  Goods  there 
feized  as  Prize,  &  by  him  managed  before  the  Settle¬ 
ment  of  a  Prize-Office  at  Portfmouth ;  wherein  he  dif- 
charged  himfelfe  of  feverall  Summes,  which  he  pre- 
tended  to  have  paid  unto  feveral  perfons,  whole  Aqui- 

tances 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


.95 


Kurhi  1516. 

lances  he  did  not  produce,  to  vouch  the  fame  ;  but  ort 
the  contrary,  they  had  applyed  themfelves  unto  their 
Lordfhips,  complaining  for  want  of  Satisfaction  of  the 
Money  he  foe  alleaged  to  have  paid.  '  664. 

93.  Order  for  referring  the  Examination  of  Captain 

Grant  (accufed  of  Embezelments)  &  his  Defence,  to 
Sir  Edward  Pooley,  Colonel  Wyndham,  &  Dr.  Lionel 
Jenkyns.  ,  ^5- 

94.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Ma- 

giflrates  of  Southampton,  to  which  Place  they  had 
determined  to  remove  the  Prize-Office  from  Cowes : 
exhorting  them  to  wave  their  pretenfions  to  any  Immu¬ 
nities  or  Privileges,  which  might  induce  their  Lordfliips 
to  alter  their  Refolutions  touching  the  Removal  of  the 
faid  Office.  14  Dec.  x  666.  656. 

95.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  Mr.  Am 
at  Plymouth,  who  refufed  to  make  Entry  of  the  Kings 
Goods  in  the  Whale-Ships  there,  otherwife  than  as  foreign 
Sc  fubjeCt  to  double  Duties  ;  which  Cafe  though  often 
flirred  up,  had  been  as  often  over-ruled,  even  with  the 
allowance  of  the  Farmers.  They  therefore  blame  his 
Impertinency  ;  wherein  if  he  ffiall  perfilt,  a  Serjeant  of 
Armes  will  bring  him  up,  to  acknowledge  his  Error. 

ibid. 

96.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Em- 

balfador  of  Sweeden  for  the  Releafe  of  a  great  Dutch 
Fly-boat  laden  with  Corne,  which  (after  a  brifk  Chace, 
even  to  her  being  not  only  deferted,  but  in  part  fired  by 
her  own  Mariners)  was  taken  by  his  Majeflies  Ship 
Pearle  Sc  carried  to  Gottenburgh,  where  the  fame  was 
detained  by  the  Governor.  24  December  1666.  658. 

97.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  Sir  Wil¬ 

liam  Covenrry,  defiring  him  to  move  his  RoyalHighnefs 
to  give  fxri&t  Orders  to  the  Officers  &  Commanders  of 
bis  Majefties  Ships  to  deliver  their  Prizes  infuch  Places, 
&  tofuch  Officers  of  Prizes  as  they  ffiall  firft  come  at. 
And  that  he  would  puniffi  the  Captains  of  two  Fireffiips, 
who  refufed  to  deliver  up  their  Prizes,  under  colour  of 
Orders  to  carry  them  for  London,  or  fome  other  Port  ; 
but  in  Truth,  with  Intent  Sc  Defigne  of  gaining  the  better 
Opportunities  to  embezel  their  Ladings,  &  difpofe  of 
thofe  Embezelments.  4  January  1666-7.  660. 

98.  Order  for  the  delivery  of  Armes  &  Ammunition 

found  in  Prize-Ships  to  the  Officers  of  his  Majefties 
Ordnance.  16  January  1666.  662. 

Many  fuch  Orders  for  delivery  of  Ships,  Armes) 
Boards,  Wynes,  &  other  Goods  Sc  NecTfaries  proper 
for  the  Kings  Offices,  are  fcattered  up  &  down  in  thefe 
Books  ;  which  I  have  forborne  to  mention,  becaufe  it 
is  obvious,  that  the  Government  would  rather  make  ufe 
of  thofe  things  to  be  found  in  Prizes,  rather  than  buy 
the  fame  with  freffi  Charge. 

99.  Warrant  for  bringing  up  Nine  Perfons  living  in 

or  near  Colchefter,  who  were  a&ive  &  inftrumental  in 
the  Embezelment  of  his  Majefties  Prize-Goods,  Sc  dif- 
pofing  of  fuch  Embezelments.  664.  670. 

x  00.  Commiffion  for  John  Seymour  Efq;  to  be  Agent 
for  Prizes  taken  by  the  Fleet  defigned  to  fail  for  the 
Streights.  ibid. 

10 1.  Inftruftions  for  John  Seymour  Efq;  the  better 

to  purfue  the  Authority  derived  unto  him  by  the  annexed 
Commiffion.  665. 

102.  Order  for  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  the  Pay  - 

ment  of  300  1.  a  piece  to  Sir  Thomas  Higgons,  and  to 
Sir  Edward  Villiers  ;  as  of  his  Majefties  gift,  they 
being  Commiffioners  of  Prizes  at  Newcaftle  upon  Tyne. 
31  January  )  666.  66 7. 

103.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  whereby 

they  appoint  the  Salary  of  250  1  per  ann.  to  be  allowed 
to  the  Officers  of  Prizes  at  Tangier  lately  nominated  by 
the  I.ord  Bellaffis,  vizt.  Henry  Norwood  Efq;  1  reafurer, 
John  Bunne  Efq;  Comptroller,  Sc  Henry  Rumbald  Jun. 
Efq;  Store-keeper.  668. 


Num.  1510. 

104.  Order  for  allowing  the  Agents  of  Prizes  m  the 

Out  Ports  for  their  Care  &:  Paines,  20  s.  for  every  Prize- 
Ship  putt  into  their  Cuftody,  not  ekceedin  the  burthen 
of  80  Tonns  ;  &  40  s.  for  every  fuch  being  above  that 
burthen  :  as  alfo  to  the  t)ifcoverers  of  Embezelments, 
one  fourth  pait  (all  Charges-deducted)  of  what  ffiall  be 
brought  into  Stores;  &  fold  by  their  xneanes.  13  Feb¬ 
ruary  1666.  671. 

105.  Order  for  the  delivery  of  a  Ton  or  two  of 
Wynes,  that  ffiall  be  brought  as  Prize  into  Briftol  or 
Milford -Haven,  unto  the  Earl  of  Carbery  Lord-Prcfidcnt 
of  Wales,  for  his  private  ufe,  upon  his  Requeft.  ibid. 

Io6i  Order  that  Notice  be  given  unto  the  principal 
Commiffioners  of  the  Navy,  of  the  Quantity,  Quality  Sc 
Condition  of  all  Naval  Provifions  found  in  Prize-Ships. 

672. 

107.  Order  that  all  Prize-Ships  given  away  by  his  Ma-* 
jeftie  to  private  Perfons,  ffiall  pay  the  incidental  Charges. 

674. 

108.  Orders  for  the  Dilchargeof  divers  Perfons  taken 

into  Cuftody.  15  Febr.  1666.  675. 

109.  Order  to  deliver  to  Sir  Henry  Thompfon  & 

Alderman  Blackett  of  New-Caftle,  Four  Calk  of  Gums 
flopped  at  Hull,  as  being  of  the  fame  kind  with  more 
found  in  the  Prize-Ship  Call  e- Argent ;  uniefs  they  had 
full  Evidence  of  its  being  embezeled.  666. 

no.  Mr.Thomas  Rowfe  nominated  Accomptant  to 
the  Prizes ;  Mr.  Waiter  Clavell  being  diverted  by  his 
own  Occafions  from  attending  the  Service.  676. 

111.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  400  1.  unto  Sir  Jona¬ 

than  Trelawny  Bart,  as  one  of  the  Commiffioners  of 
Prizes  at  Plymouth.  24  February  1666.  678. 

112.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Colonel 
Anthony  Bullar,  who  had  detained  in  the  Ifle  of  Scilly, 
divers  Prizes  &  Parcels  of  Goods  upon  frivolous  pretences, 
although  they  had  been  chimed  by  the  Prize  Officers. 

680.  et  693.  694. 

1 13.  Order  for  feizing  Prize-Goods  embezeled  out  of 

the  Prize-Ships  brought  into  the  Iile  of  Scilly.  1  March, 
1666.  6S2. 

1 1 4.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  concerning 

Wynes  delivered  out  of  Prize-Ships,  to  the  ufe  of  the 
Fleet.  20  March,  1 666.  683. 

1 15.  Order  for  the  Contractors  for  Prize-Brandy,  to 

deliver  up  that  part  of  the  Contract  that  is  under  Sir 
Robert  Southwells  hand,  to  be  cancelled.  684. 

1 16.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Dr.  Leoline 

Jenkyns  ;  requiring  him  to  take  Care  that  a  Commiffion 
do  iffue  under  the  Great  Seale  of  his  Majefties  High 
Court  of  Admiralty  of  England,  unto  Sir  Edward  Wife 
Knight  of  the  Bath  ;  Sir  John  Cary  Sc  Sir  John  Knight 
Kts.  Thomas  Hawke,  Samuel  Langford,  Edward  Rutter, 
Efq;  John  Hunkin,  Edward  Archer,  &  Charles  Wilford 
Gent,  impowering  them  to  inquire  after.  Sc  feize  upon 
all  Goods  that  have  been  embezeled  out  of  any  of  his 
Majefties  Prizes  brought  into  Plymouth,  or  any  other 
Port  or  Place  in  this  Kingdome.  68  5. 

1 17.  Letter  from  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  Mr. 

Edward  Seymour,  fignifying  his  Majeflies  pleafure  that 
he  ffiould  be  removed  from  the  employment  of  a  Generali 
Commiffioner  of  Prizes.  30  March,  1667.  686. 

1 18.  Letter  to  Sir  William  Coventry,  defiring  him 

to  reprefent  unto  his  Royal  Highnefs  the  ill  demeanour 
of  the  Vice-Admirall  at  Cowes,  who  forcibly  detained  a 
Prize-Ship  from  the  Officers  of  Prizes.  ibid. 

119.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Capt.  Cul¬ 

peper  at  Cowes,  who  had  ftoppe'd  the  Ship  laft  men¬ 
tioned  ;  as  it  was  fuppofed,  upon  the  account  of  a  Right 
in  the  Lord  High  Admiral ;  to  lett  him  know,  that  his  Ma¬ 
jefties  Right  was  not  to  be  concluded  by  Ills  Opinion  or 
Apprehenfion,  but  by  a  fairTrial  in  the  Admiralty  ;  and 
therefore  they  defire  him  to  admitt  their  Officers  on  board 
the  Ship,  or  elfe  they  ffiould  have  further  Occafion  to 
complain  of  his  Proceedings,  &c.  688.  696. 

120.  Commiffion 


Catalogus  Libroruai  MSS. 


Num.  1510. 

120.  Commiffion  appointing  .Tames  Hooper  Efq;  to 

be  Agent  for  Prizes,  to  be  taken  by  the  Fleet  defigned 
for  the  Northward.  3  April  1 6G7.  fig  1 . 

1 2 1 .  Inftru&ions  for  James  Hooper  Efq;  the  better  to 

purfue  the  Authority  derived  unto  him  by  the  annexed 
Commiffion.  691.  ct  vid.  695. 

122.  Letter  cf  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  Mr.Tho- 

mas  Thynne,  approving  his  Sale  of  an  old  Danifh  Schcot 
of  about  60  Tonns,  for  40  1.  which  had  been  certified 
by  fome  of  his  Majefties  Captains  to  be  worth  no  more 
than  35  1.  1  9  April  1 667.  ibid,  et  750.  702. 

123.  Order  for  Mr.  Charles  Bennet,  &  Dr.  Jenkyna 

to  examine  the  Bills  of  the  Officers  &  Servants  be- 
longing  to  the  Court  of  Admiralty,  who  all  pretended  a 
Right  to  certain  Fees  due  to  them  for  Ships  &  Goods 
condemned  to  his  Majeftie  as  Prize.  Scj6. 

124.  Letter  to  Sir  William  Coventry,  about  Captain 

Scott  of  the  Victoria,  who  having  taken  a  Prize  in  his 
Voyage  outward  ;  had  difpofed  thereof,  by  Sale,  at  Eif- 
cay,  without  Order.  '  fofo. 

1  25.  Order  for  Captain  Withrington  to  deliver  the 
two  Prizes  at  Berwick  to  Mr.  Threvit.  24  April  1 667. 

697.  699. 

126.  Letters  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Mr.  Tal- 

bott,  about  Prizes  brought  into  Scotland,  and  the  delivery 
ol  them  to  the  Prize-Officers.  698.  et  716. 

127.  Order  lor  700  1.  to  be  paid  to  the  Officers  of 

the  Fait  India  Company  who  took  pains  about  the 
Menagement  of  the  Goods  found  in  the  two  Eaft-India 
Prizes.  jkjj 

128.  State  of  the  Accompts  of  divers  Perfons,  who 

had  bought  Prize-Goods,  which  were  afterwards  burnt 
in  the  Fire  of  London.  8  May  1667.  70 0. 

x  29.  Letter  to  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  who  had  beep7  con- 
cerned  (or  fuppofed  to  have  been  fo)  in  Embezelments 
of  his  Majefties  Prize-Goods.  y02. 

130.  Warant  for  the  bringing  up  of  Three  Perfons 

dwelling  m  Malden,  accufed  of  receiving  Goods  of  a 
considerable  value,  which  were  embezeled  out  of  his 
Majefties  Prizes.  j^icl. 

131.  The  Lords  Commiffioners  Report  to  the  King 
ofWynes  delivered  to  the  Fleete,  amounting  to  73/ 
Tons,  &  half  an  Hogfficad. 

13--.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  87 1.  5  s.  to  Mr. 
Richard  Bowers,  for  his  great  Pains  &  Charges  in  dif¬ 
fering  Embezelments,  &  profecuting  Offenders :  that 
Sum  being  the  third  Part  of  what  was  clearly  gained 
through  his  Difcoveries.  ibid. 

133.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  William 

Lord  Willoughby  of  Parham  Governor-General  of  the 
Caribbee-j (lands,  concerning  a  Dutch  Ship  laden  with 
Ammunition,  brought  into  Barbadoes  as  Prize  which 
was  refufed  by  the  Lieutenant-General  of  the  Ifland,  his 
Lordftnp  s  fon,  to  be  delivered  unto  the  Prize-Officer 
and  putt  into  his  Majefties  Service,  without  delivering  of 
any  Indenture  or  Inventory  to  the  faid  Officer.  8  Mav 
1607.  1 

134.  Order  for  the  Commiffioners  of  Prizesat  Lon- 
don,  to  pay  unto  Prmce  Rupert  36].  ,3  s.  4  d.  being 
two  Thirds  of  a  certain  Sum  accruing  to  his  Maielfy 
by  way  of  Compofmon,  for  Goods  embezeled  out  of 
his  Prizes  :  his  Majelty  haying  granted  all  fuch  Com- 
polmoi'.-moncy  to  the  faid  Prince.  21  May  1667.  70S. 

135.  1  he  Opinion  of  the  Judge,  and  his  Majefties 
May  1667  he  Admiralty,  touching  Ships  reftored.  22 

,  yS-  ?^er,for  the  brln8ing  up  of  Humphry7  Big. 
gleflon  of  Deale,  upon  an  Information  of  Embezelments 
11  June  1667. 

137.  The  Eaft-India  Company  to  make  Allowance's 
where  fome  of  the  Goods  of  die  two  Eaft-India  Prizes 
(old  b)  them,  did  not  prove  anfwerable  to  fair  &  reafon- 

m  tehaC,TPatl™:  a,ld  keedi'y  K  findh  their  Accompts 
ol  that  Sale.  22june  1667. 


Num.  15 1  C. 

,  138.  Inftructions  to  Mr. James  Hooper,  &  Mr.  James 
Tarbett,  about  felling  Prizes  at  Leith.  y2%. 

139.  Letter  ofthe  Lords  Commiftioners  to  Mr.  Hooper 
&  Mr.  Tarbett,  about  fending  up  the  Gold  and  Silver, 
found  in  the  Dutch  Eaft-India  Ship,  brought  in  as  Prize 
to  Leith.  25  June  1  (>67. 

140.  Letter  to  Sir  William  Coventry  about  Abufes 
done  by  feveral  Captains  of  his  Majefties  Ships  :  defiring 
alfo,  that  noe  more  Prizes  be  carried  into  Portfmouth, 
that  may  poffib'y  be  fc-nt  to  Southampton  ;  as  one  mean 
ol  preferving  them  from  Embezelments,  and  gaining 
better  Evidence  for  Condemnation.  26  June  1667.  72  c 

1 4i-  Order  for  Mr.  John  Stracy  &  other  to  make 
Seizure  of  divers  Parcels  of  Goods  emhes.  led  out  of  his 
Ma  jefties  Prize-Ships,  and  kept  in  the  1  lodes  of  Sir 
William  Jennings,  Mr.  Boreman,  &  clfewherein  Green¬ 
wich 1:  giving  notice  unto  the  Parties  pretending  property 
m  the  laid  Goods  ;  that  within  two  Daies  after  fuch 
Notice,  they  appear  before  the  Lords  Commiffioners 
and  make  out  their  Right,  if  any  they  have,  unto  the 
faid  Goods  cr  any  part  of  them,  at  their  perills  2 a 
June  1667.  ;28“y 

142^  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  the  Sub- 
Conn  aiffioners  at  Hull ;  direfling  them  what  method 
to  take,  in  coming  at  eleven  Chefts  of  Silver,  &  four 
Chefts  of  Gold,  faid  to  be  in  a  Dutch  Eaft-India  Ship 
lately  taken  as  Prize,  and  about  to  be  brought  thither  ; 
as  alfo,  about  fecuring  the  lame,  &  fending  it  up  for 
London  ?29. 

1 43.  Requeft  cf  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Lord 

Afiiley,  defiring  him  to  reprefent  unto  his  Majeftie  in 
Council,  that  their  Lordfliips  having  appointed  Humphry 
Weld  Efq;  Governor  of  Portland  to  pay  about  160  1. 
to  certain  poor  People  (here,  for  t  ervice  done  :  &  had 
for  that  &  other  Occafions  putt  100I.  into  his  hands - 
he  had  paid  none  of  the  faid  People,  but  pretended  that 
he  had  dffipofed  of  more  than  the  faid  100  I.  toward  the 
iatisfacuon  of  other  Perfons.  3  July  1667.  7,c 

144.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Earl  of 

Carlifle,  touching  two  Prizes  laden  with  Timber,  which 
his  Lord  (hip  had  taken  into  his  Cuftody,  and  ktpt  thirty 
Men  on  board  them,  when  only  two  were  ufuallv 
allowed.  9  July  1667.  3 

145-  Order  for  Mr.  Hooper  &r  Mr.Tarbett  at  Leith 

in  all  doubtfull  Cafes,  to  follow  the  dire&ions  mven  by 
the  Lord  Ballenden,  the  Lord  Twedail,  &  Mr  James 
Murray-  ibid,  et  7e2; 

146-  Order  for  Sir  Thomas  Clifford  the  late  Com- 

miffioners  for  London,  to  examin  &  fettle  the  Accompts 
of  Mr.  Humphry  Taylor  a  great  buyer  of  the  Kincrs 
Piize-Brandies.  20  July  1667.  7-66 

,  .  J.ePrefentation  of  the  Lords  Commiffion  ere  to 
his  Majeftie,  that  whereas  Humphry  Taylor  and  Com¬ 
pany,  Contractors  for  all  Prize-Brandies  (who  had  fuf- 
fered  much  by  the  non-performance  of  the  ContraA  on 
his  Majefties  fide)  were  to  have  the  ufe  of  Three  Prize- 
Ships  ;  that  they  might  keep  the  fame.  20  July  1667. 

0  _  ,  ibid. 

148.  Order  to  Sir  Thomas  Clifford,  &  the  reft  ofthe 
late  Commiffioners  for  London  to  examine  the  Accompts 
of  Mr.  John  Bond,  as  to  the  incident  Charges  of  Prizes 
under  their  care  in  the  Port  of  London ;  of  which  many 
Sums  were  not  vouched  according  to  his  Inftru&ions. 

149.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  their 

Sub-Commiffioners  at  the  feveral  Ports,  perfuaded  them 
to  lend  the  King  money  at  that  preffing  Juncture.  1 2  Sept 
,667-  7/5/ 

150.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Arlington  &  Afhley,  de¬ 
firing  their  Lordffiips  to  certifie  which  of  their  Prize- 
Officers  &  Servants  may  be  beft  fpared,  in  order  to  fave 
Charge  to  his  Majeftie.  23  September  1667.  758.  768. 

to 1  •  Letter  to  the  Commiflioners  at  the  feveral  Ports 
definng  them  to  conclude  all  their  bufinefs,  &  to  finiffi 
9  their 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


97 


Num.  1510. 

,heir  Accompts  by  the  firft  day  of  the  next  November, 
when  his  Majefties  Charge  of  a  Prize-Office,  and  colife- 
-quently  their  Salary  was  to  ceafe.  _  ‘b“\ 

H  It 2  Order  for  Mr.  Cliflord  to  receive  Moneys  Hand¬ 
ing  out,  and  to  pay  Debts  due  to  feverall  employed  by 
the  late  Commiffioners  of  London.  24  September,  1667. 

759- 

I;,  Sir  Edmund  Pooley  to  be  difcharged  touching 
his  Accompts  ;  he  having  made  up  the  fame  fail  ly,  and 
produced  his  Vouchers,  =8  September  16C7.  7«- 

1  r4.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Mr.  Mat¬ 
thew  Wren,  about  bringing  to  Juftice  Captain  Akerman 
of  the  Sorlings,  &  Captain  Harwood  of  the  Drake,  who 
had  been  guilty  of  great  Embezelments.  c  1  October 
tdi-  ,  769- 

1  r Orders  for  the  Commiffioners  at  Tangier  to 
perfect  their  Accompls,  and  for  Sir  Robert  Southwell  to 
examine  the  fame,  g  November  1667.  774- 

1 Letter  cf  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Sir  Robert 
Holmes,  defiring  an  Accompt  of  the  Prizes  he  tookem 
his  late  Weftern  Expeditions.  7  ;  7- 

157.  Letter  to  the  Lords  Commiffioners  of  the  1  rea- 

furv,  about  the  Eaft-India  Companies  Dilcharge  for  the 
two  Eaft  India  Prizes.  23 -December  1667.  783- 

N.B.  The  date  above-mentioned,  is  of  its  Entry 
into  this  Journal! ;  &  not  of  the  day  when  it  was  written. 
And  by  many  other  Places  it  appeareth,  that  Entries ;  of 
Letters  6c  other  Papers  were  not  made  at  their  due 
times.  .  r 

1 53.  Reprefentation  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for 
the  King,  about  a  Ship  laden  with  Sugars  feized  by  Sir 
Robert  Holmes,  by  virtue  of  a  private  Commilhon; 
being  in  fight  of  his  MajeltiesMen  of  War.  and  detained 
for  his  own  ufe.  16  Tanuary  1667.  785- 

1  -g.  Anfwer  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  the 
Commiffioners  appointed  by  Parliament  for  Eating  the 
Accompls  of  the  Nation  ;  who  had  defired  to  have  the 
v.’oic  Accounts  of  the  Prize-Office  tranfmitted  unto 
them.  2.  January  1667.  786.  790.  802.  81 1.  817. 

821.  827.  829. 

j , ;  Letter  to  Sir  Thomas  Muddiford.  Governor  of 
1;..  ica,  defiring  him  to  fend  an  ample,  accurate,  and 
•.,ii  Accompt  of  all  Prize-Ships  brought  into  that 
Eland.  .  ?87- 

161.  Order  for  the  late,  &  prefent  Commiffioners  of 
London,  &  others,  to  Ell  Prize-Goods  by  private _  Con¬ 
tract.  31  January  1667.  .lbld- 

162-  Letter  to  Mr.  Matthew  Wren,  defiring  him  to 
move  his  Royal  Highnefs  to  move  Captain  Hubbard  to 
give  in  an  Accompt  touching  a  rich  French  Ship  &  a 
Salley  Man  of  Warre  feized  as  Prize  by  fome  of  the 
Ships  under  his  command,  in  their  late  Voyage  to  the 
Streights.  6  February  1667.  789-  79b- 

16-.  Orders  about  referring  the  Confideration  of  the 
Fees  required  in  the  Court  of  Admiralty  to  Dr.  Jenkyns, 
Sir  Robert  Wifeman,  &  others.  7 92-  793- 

164.  Order  for  Sir  Robert  Wifeman  his  Majefties  Ad¬ 

vocate,  to  examine  the  Accompt  of  Fees  due  to  the 
Judges  of  Appeales.  30  May,  1688.  799- 

165.  Order  for  my  Lord  Byrons  Bond,  for  delivering 

Upp  of  two  Ships,  to  be  cancelled  ;  the  Shipps  being 
given  him  by  bis  Majeftie.  10  July  1668.  799- 

166  Warant  for  John  Richard?  to  attend  the  Ac¬ 
counts  of  the  Out-Ports,  fince  Mr. Thomas  Rowfe  (that 
fucceeded  Mr. Walter  Clavel  upon  his  deferting  that  em¬ 
ployment)  had  long  lain  in  rethaint,  upon  an  Arreft.  22 
September  1668.  806.824. 

Report  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  his  Ma- 
iefty  touching  the  Cafe  of  Sir  William  Warren  concern¬ 
ing  the  Ship  Gottenburgh.  26  November,  1668.  807. 

!  r ,  8 .  Report  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  bis  Ma¬ 
yfly,  of  the  Cafe  of  Mr.  Humphry  Taylor,  with  relation 
to  Prize-Goods.  28  November  1668.  809. 

Cat.Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num,  1510,  1511. 

169.  Order  for  the  Commiffioners  of  the  feveral  Ports, 

to  examine  the  Accompts  as  to  incidental  Charges  fent 
from  Leith.  _  8  to. 

170.  Letter  to  the  Lords  Commiffioners  of  the  Trea- 

fury,  about  the  Tangier  Accompt.  ibid. 

1 71.  Order  for  Money  to  be  paid  unto  Mr.  Wil¬ 
liam  Longford,  as  Farmer  of  the  Harbour-Duties  of  Cat- 
water  &  Hamoies,  at  the  rate  of  2  d.  per  ion,  &  2  s. 
per  Ship,  due  to  the  Towne  of  Salt-afh  in  Cornwall  ? 

22  December  1668.  811. 

172.  Letter  to  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury  in  Scotland, 

defiring  them  to  infpect  the  Objections  to  the  Accompts 
of  Prizes  there.  813. 

173.  Letter  to  his  Majefties  Councill  &  Proftor  in  the 
Admiralty,  to  bring  all  things  to  an  IiTue  in  that  Court. 

25  February  1669.  819. 

174.  Report  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  about  the 

St.  Peter  of  Rochell.  27  May,  1669.  827. 

17^.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  touching 
the  Infpe&ion  &  Prefervation  of  all  the  Books  &  Papers 
in  the  Prize-Office,  upon  the  deceafe  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Lloyd.  23  October  1669.  831. 

176.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners,  to  the  Earl 
of  Lauderdaill,  about  Embezelments  from  his  Majefties 
Prize-Ships  in  Scotland.  ibid. 

1  «5 1 1  • 

A  Book  in  fol.  given  by  Mr.  Anftis  ;  without  any  Title 
on  the  outfide,  but  written  by  the  Clerks  of  the  Prize- 
Office  which  wrote  the  two  former  Volumes.  It  con¬ 
tained!  a  Journal  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  principal 
Commiffioners  of  Prizes,  during  the  fecond  Dutch 
War  ;  that  is,  from  the  date  cf  their  Commiffion,  to 
the  13th  day  of  June  1738.  Herein  alfo,  I  mult  beg 
leave  to  obferve  the  following  particulars. 

1.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Matters  ;  at  the  beginning. 

2.  His  Majefties  Commiffion  to  the  Lords,  principal 

Commiffioners  for  Prizes,  being  Prince  Rupert  ;  George 
Duke  of  Buckingham  Mafter  of  the  Horfe  ;  James  Duke 
of  Ormond  ;  Steward  of  the  Houfehould  ;  John  Earle  of 
Lauderdaill;  Hem-- Lord  Arlington  principal  Secretary 
of  State  ;  Anthony  Lord  Afliley,  Chancellor  &  Under- 
Treafurer  of  the  Exchequer ;  Sir  Thomas  Clifford  Kt 
Treafurer  of  the  Houfehould  ;  Sir  John  Trevor  Kt.  one 
of  the  principall  Secretaries  of  State  ;  &  Sir  John  Dun- 
combe  Kt.  one  of  the  Commiffioners  of  the  Treafury. 
Given,  14  March  1671-2.  *• 

3.  His  Majefties  Commiffion  to  Prince  Rupert  ; 

George  Duke  of  Buckingham  ;  John  Duke  of  Lauder- 
daile  ;  James  Duke  of  Ormond  ;  William  Earl  of 
Craven ;  Henry  Earl  of  Arlington  ;  Anthony  Earl  of 
Shaftfbury  ;  Thomas  Lord  Clifford  Baron  of  Chudleigh  ; 
Henry  Coventry  one  of  the  principal  Secretaries  of 
State  ;  Sir  John  Duncombe  Kt.  &  Sir  Thomas  Ofbome 
Baronet,  Treafurer  of  the  Navy  ;  appoindng  them  to 
be  Commiffioners  for  receiving,  hearing,  &  determining 
of  Appeales  from  the  Court  of  Admiralty,  in  the  Cafe  of 
Prizes.  Given  the  ...  .  day  of  Auguft,  in  the  24th 
year  of  this  reign  (i.  e.  1672.)  2. 

4.  His  Majefties  Authority  to  the  noble  &  honorable 
Perfons  mentioned  in  the  laft  Article,  (whom  by  his 
Commiffion  bearing  date  the  26th  of  July  1672,  he 
had  appointed  to  be  his  principal  Commiffioners  for  the 
management  of  Prizes)  to  conftitute  fuch  Perfons  to  be 
their  Sub-Commiffioners  in  the  feveral  Ports  orDiftricts, 
as  he  fhould  think  fitt  to  nominate.  Given,  30  October 

l6l“-His  Majefties  Warant  to  the  Principal  Commif¬ 
fioners,  to  appoint  the  Perfons  therein  named  to  be  their 
Sub-Commiffioners  in  the  feveral  Ports.  Given  14 
March  1671-2.  .  .  .  _  7* 

6.  The  Commiffion  given  by  the  principal  Commil- 
fioners  to  their  Sub-Commiffioners.  dat.  15  March, 

l^71'2‘  (3  c  7.  Inftructions 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


7-  Inftrudtions  given  by  the  principal  Commiflioners, 
to  the  Sub-Commiflioners  of  the  feveral  Ports,  dat. 
March  1671-2.  J 

Commiflion  given  by  the  principal  Commiflioners, 
to  tiie  Store-keepers  at  the  feveral  Ports,  dat. 
March  1672.  jg 

9  Inflructions  given  by  the  principal  Commiflioners, 
to  the  Storekeepers  at  the  feveral  Ports,  dat  April 

167 2‘  ’  17. ? 

10.  Additional  Inftruclions  for  Francis  Lord  Hawley 
one  of  the  Sub-Commiflioners  for  Prizes  in  the  Port  of 
Iondon,  and  the  diftrifts  thereof,  22  March  1C71-2 
«c.  j8>' 

1  1 .  Memorandum,  of  the  like  Inflrufrions  being  given 
to  James  Hamilton  Efq;  &  to  Mr.Thynne.  10. 

12  .  Commiflion  of  the  principal  Commiflioners,  con- 
nituting  Charles  Bennet  Efq;  Comptroller  of  the  Prizc- 
Oflice.  dat.  .  .  March  1671-2.  2o. 

13.  Commiflions  of  the  fame,  conftituting  divers  to 
be  Comptrollers  in  the  Out-Ports.  .  .  April  1672. 

14-  Commiflion  of  the  fame,  conftituting  Mr.  Henry 
Slater  to  be  Surveyour  in  the  Comptroll-Oflice 
Apnl  1672.  ibicjt ' 

15.  Inftrufhons  of  the  principal  Commiflioners,  to  j 
Charles  Bennet  Efq;  Comptroller  of  his  Majefties  Prizes, 
(dat.  26  March  1672.)  J  21 

. 1 6.  Commiflion  of  the  fame,  conftituting  Henry  De- 
thick  Efq;  Sollicitor  for  Prizes.  .  .  April  1672.  22 

17.  InftruQions  given  by  the  fame,  to  the  faid  Mr. 
Dethick.  2  April  1672. 

18.  Hjs  Majefties  Commiflion,  appointing  Richard 
Mounteney  Efq;  Reciver-Generai  for  Prizes,  dat  2 
Apnl  1672. 

19.  Inftruaions  to  Richard  Mounteney  Efq;  his  Ma¬ 
jefties  Receiver-Generall  of  all  Moneys  ’arifing  by  the 
Sale  of  Prize-Shipps  &  Goods,  dat.  .  .  April,  1672. 

zo.  Commiflion,  whereby  the  principal  Commifliontrs 
conllituted  Giles  Litcot  Efq;  Receiver  for  the  Port  of 
London,  dat.  z  April  1672.  2- 

21.  Inftruaions  to  Mr.  Lytcot.  2  April  1672.  ibid.' 

£2.  Commiflion  to  the  feveral  Receivers  in  the  Out- 
Ports.  dat.  1  May  1672.  2g 

23.  Inftruaions  for  the  Receivers  in  the  Out-Ports 

dat.  1  May  1672.  2 

24.  Commiflion  to  the  feveral  Agents,  fubordinateto 

the  Prize-Office.  .  .  4pril  1672.  2g 

25.  Memorandum,  of  a  Warrant  for  Sir  Walter 

W  alker  to  be  of  His  Majefties  Council  in  the  High  Court 
of  Admiralty.  0 

26  Commiflion  for  John  Shales  Efq;  to  be  Chief 
Uerk  &  the  Accomptant  to  the  Sfib-Commiflioners  in 
the  Port  of  London. 

•  V'  rflft  °f  the  other  0fficers  employed  about  Prizes 
m  the  Port  of  London.  ■ 

.  2,8'  Commilftons  conftituting  Suryeyouts  of  thePrizes 
m  the  feveral  Ports. 

up.  Inftruaions  &  Dircaions  to  Sir  Paul  Neile  Kt°& 
Major  Richard  Dutton  Sub-Commiflioners  for  the  Port 
cd  London  &  the  Diftrias  thereof,  &c.  dat.  15  March 

30.  Commiflion  conftitutiug  Thomas  Banks  Efq •  3 Ac- 
comptant  in  the  Comptrollers  Office. 

Office  Li(*  °fthC  °ffiCerS  emploI'ed  in  the  Comptroller 
CC‘  ibid 


1511. 


Then  followeth  the  Journal  of  the  Regiftry-Office 
whereof  Sir  Robert  Southwell  &  Sr.  Jofeph  Williamfoj 
were  Secretaries,  containing  the  Minutes  of  the  Proceed- 

T  nf  ,‘h<i  rL°rdS  thc  Pri"«pa1  Commiflioners  ;  among 
which,  I  obferye  thefe  that  follow.  ® 

3  J.  Order  for  the  Mayor  of  Doyer  to  affift  the  Sub- 

Gommrflioners.  14  March  1671-2. 

t  o°rAr  for  !!?  Cuftomc-Officers  to  deliver  Ships 
to  the  Sub  Commiflioners. 

whih  ?Idr  kT  kTg  Ten  Sl,ips  *T“g  the  River, 
which  lately  belonged  to  Dutch  Proprietors,  and  are 

now  colourably  paft  over  unto  others,  with  intention  to 
defraud  his  Majeftie.  a  April  ,672. 

38.  Order  for  fending  the  Wyncs  remaining  in  the 
Prize-Ship  Landfman  (after  the  deftruaion  &  fmbezel 
™ad6= 'herHnl 10  Majefties  Cellars  at  Whitehall. 

„  3?’  0rdc”°  Pearch  for  Goods  embezeled  out  o/the 
Chnftian  of  Caryn.  1 1  April  1 672. 

T  4Jm°rder  ,f°r  Th?maS  BurSeffe  to  aPPear  before  fheir 
Lordlhips,  about  the  above-mentioned  Embezelment. 


4i-  Orders  &  Letters  to  the  Earl  of  Oxford,  the  Earl 
ot  Bath,  and  the  Sub-Commiflioners  at  Plymouth,  for 
double  calking.  Teeming,  &  bringing  up  of  three  Calk 
?f  5Kp  of  oKht’,.' "'"giung  2/  C.  1  q.  2 1  lb.  taken 
m  the  1  nze  Ship  May-boorn,  under  the  guard  of  12 
Horfemen  &  an  Officer  of  the  Earl  of  Oxfords  Regiment, 
to  the  1  ower  of  London.  °  o  ’ 

42.  Order  for  fecuring  to  his  Majefty  the  Goid  & 
Stiver  found  in  the  Prize-Ship  Peace  of  Rotterdam.  ,2 
•April  1072. 

p.;43'rS-rder  touCaPtail'  Mounrague  to  deliver  loathe 
him  out  of  aDutch'prTze^laSybfint  iimbltr"  ail 

44-  Order  for  Captain  Steel  to  have  a  fourth  pan  of 
the  Lading  of  two  Prizes  taken  by  him  in  a  MnupP0f  hk 
&  Vi£ll,al'ed  fellies  Charge* 

45.  Order  for  thc  Delivery  of  one  Butt  of  Shettv 
Sack  out  of  the  Prize-Slop  Landfman,  to  thc  Serieatn  of 

> 

jSfa  Onrdh„ea„Dc“.tCh  PriZC  Ships’  “  th=  Mu- 

47.  Letter  of  Sir  Robert  Southwell  to  Matthew  Wren 
Efqt  Secretary  to  the  Duke  of  York,  Lord  HfohAd  • 
nnral,  deftring  lum  to  move  his  Royal  Highnels indifem 

ShinT5  o°  prent  ,he  embeztdment  oni  "S 

Shtps;  efpecially  by  the  Commanders  who  took  th"m. 


Lift  of  the  Officers  employed  in  the  Regiftry. 


Office  for  Prizes. 


ri  itik  t?-’  with  Memorandums  touching  the 
Eftablflhment  of  Prize-Offices  at  Kinfale  in  Ireland  1  Lieth 
in  Scotland;  and  at  Barbadoes.  .  .  May,  1672. 

34.  Inftruaions  given  to  the  Sub-comniffioneis  in  the 
places  abovementioned. 

35- 


48.  Order  for  the  Delivery  of  a  Box  c  6d'„ 

have  Cognizance  of  all  A  flairs  tranMedft  ‘the*  Boanl'  - 
htj  being  appointed  ,0  be  Commiflioner  for  his  Rov  j 
Highneffe  and  the  Officers  of  his  Majeftii  p foef  lr 

gt,Vy^giVenthCminL0f“™^ 

52.  Order 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


99 


Num.  1511. 

52.  Order  for  accommodating  Myn  HeerBorreel  the 
tlutch  Embaffador,  being  upon  his  return  with  a  Dutch1, 
Prize -Ship  ;  he  having  given  his  Word  to  the  Earl  of 
Arlington  that  the  fame  fhall  be  returned  in  due  time. 

8j. 

53.  Order  that  fin  purfuance  of  his  Majeflies  Warant) 
all  Prizes  brought  in  by  any  of  the  four  Ships  fett  out 
by  Prince  Rupert,  fhall  be  left  to  the  management  & 
difpofal  of  himfelf  and  his  Officers,  ibid,  et  vid.  1 1 0. 

54.  Order  to  the  Sub  Commiffioners  of  London,  to 
make  fuch  Allowances  to  the  Dutch  Prifoners  brought 
up  to  be  examined  in  the  Admiralty,  over  and 
above  the  former  Allowance  of  5  d.  a  day  to  all  fuch 
perfons  as  they  fhall  judge  reafonable.  21  May  1672. 

92. 

55.  Letter  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  the  Gover¬ 
nor  &  Company  of  Turkey-Merchants,  forbidding  them 
to  demand  any  Duty  from  Cotton-Yarne  taken  in  his 
Majeflies  Prize-Ships,  dat.  21  May  167;. 

56.  Order  for  Prifage  &  Butlerage  of  Wines  at  Ply. 

mouth,  to  be  paid  unto  Sr.  William  Morrice.  24  May 
1672.  97/ 

57.  Order  for  Mr.  Mounteney  the  Receiver  General 

for  Prizes  to  pay  into  the  Exchequer,  all  the  Money  re- 
maining  in  his  Cuftody  (even  Depofitums,  although 
contrary  to  his  Inftru&ions)  and  all  the  Money  he  could 
call  in  ;  his  Majeflies  Occafions  requiring  a  prefent  Sup¬ 
ply.  13  May  1672.  ‘  ioo. 

58.  Sir  Jofeph  Williamfoiis  Letter  to  the  Sub-Com- 

miffioners,  requiring  them  to  fell  all  Prize-Ships  forth¬ 
with,  &  return  up  the  Money  accruing,  to  Mr.  Moun- 
teney-  ibid. 

_  59-  Letter  to  the  Sub-Commiffioners  of  London,  for¬ 
bidding  them  to  intermeddle  about  the  Prizes  brought  in 
by  a  Ship  fitted  out  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  with  a 
private  Commiffion.  ibid.  &  vid.  105.  146.  179. 

60.  Standing  Inftiuction  to  the  Sub-Commiffioners  at 

Plymouth,  that  all  Goods,  Wares,  &  Merchandil'es, 
fold  as  Prize,  do  pay  Duties  110  otherwife  than  as  Goods 
belonging  to  Englilhmen,  and  as  if  imported  in  Englifh 
Bottomes.  14  June  1672.  I02. 

61.  Sir  Jofeph  Williamfon’s  Letter  to  Sir  George 
Downing,  accompanying  certain  Queries  about  exchange 
of  Prifoners. 

Thefe  Queries  feein  to  have  been  cut  off  the  next 

Leaf. 

62.  Warant  for  Mr.  John  Buknam  •  Bokenham  ?) 

to  be  Clerk  Examinant  in  the  Port  of  Plymouth.  18  June 
,6?2-  io5. 

63.  Warant  to  Richard  Mounteney  Efq;  Receiver- 
General  of  Prizes  for  the  payment  of  20000  1.  (out  of 
the  Monyes  arifmg  by  the  Sale  of  his  Majeflies  Prize¬ 
s' Ik  &  Grograin-yarne)  to  Sir  John  Bankes,  in  lieu  of 
the  fame  Sum  advanced  by  him,  for  the  prefent  accom- 
jnodation  of  his  Majeflies  Service.  21  June  1672.  107. 

64.  Commiffion  toNicholas  Reeves  Merchant  inRoter- 
dam,  appointed  to  take  Care  for  the  keeping  Sc  enter¬ 
tainment  of  Englifh  Prifoners  brought  into  Holland  & 
Zealand,  during  their  imprifonment.  23  June  1672. 

108. 

65.  Warant  to  Richard  Mounteney  Efqj  to  pay  unto 
five  Armenian  Merchants,  vizt.  Stefano  Jofeph,  Marcar 
Zador,  David  Atfaban,  Eulkabeck  Fragul,  &  Arachel 
Altungean,  ico  I.  apiece,  as  his  Majeflies  Bounty : 
they  pretending  to  have  had  Goods  on  board  the  Prize! 
Ship  Landfman,  to  the  value  of  about  4000  1.  ibid. 

66.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  fetting  at 

immediate  liberty  all  the  Dutch  Prifoners  of  War,  within 
the  Diflrifts  of  Sir  William  Doyley  Sc  Mr.  John  Evelyn  : 
the  Dutch  having,  at  the  inflance  of  Mr.  Nicholas 
Reeves  his  Majeflies  Agent,  freed  about  220  Englifh 
Prifoners  there.  28  June  1672.  1 10.  &  1 16. 


Num.  151 1. 

67.  Warants  for  the  Payment  of  the  Lords  Commif¬ 

fioners,  and  all  others  concerned  in  Prizes,  their  refpec- 
tive  Salaries.  5  July  1672.  1 1 1.  et  204.  &c. 

68.  Order  for  giving  to  his  Royal  Iiighnefs  the  Duke 

of  York,  a  Guinea  Prize-Ship,  with  her  Aparel,  Furni¬ 
ture,  Si  Lading  ;  in  purfuance  of  his  Majeflies  Warant. 
21  Augufl  1672.  1 18.  et  vid.  201.  214. 

69.  Letter  of  Sir  Jofeph  Williainfon  to  the  Sub-Com- 

miffioner.s  at  Portfmouth,  about  fuing  Mr.  Smith  of  Sar. 
for  not  taking  the  Goods  he  had  bought.  ibid. 

70.  Letter  of  Sir  Jofeph  Williamfon  to  the  Sub-Com- 

miffioners  at  Plymouth  acquainting  them,  that  the  Lords 
Commiffioners  had  ordered  peremptorily,  that  the  Buvers 
of  PrizeTgoods  fiiould  pay  the  Cufloms  for  the  fame,  in 
fuch  manner  as  if  they  had  been  brought  from  Englifh 
Plantations.  ibid. 

yt.  The  Contract  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  with 
Sir  John  Bankes  Bart,  about  the  Silk  &  Grograine 
Yame,  &  Carpets.  1  2  July  1672.  120. 

72.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  to  Mr.  Evelyn, 
or  to  the  Keeper  of  the  Marffialfea,  for  the  delivery  of 
2i  Dutch  Prifoners  to  Mr.  John  D’orvile  of  London, 
Merchant,  who  wanted  Mariners  to  navigate  his  Veffels. 
1  he  faid  Mr.  D’orvile  promifing  either  to  returne  them 
again  to  Prifon,  or  to  caufe  the  like  number  of  Englifh 
Prifoners,  now  in  Holland,  to  be  fett  at  liberty.  16  July 
1672.  j22; 

.  73.  Order  of  the  Lords  Commiffioners  for  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  100  1.  apiece  to  Zadur  Dupiri,  Jofeph  de  Joana, 
Sc  David  Marker  Armenian  Merchants,  who  reprefented 
that  they  had  Goods  on  board  the  Prize-Ship  Landfman, 
to  a  confiderable  value.  19  July  1672.  124. 

74.  Order  for  the  Sub-Commiffioners  of  I,ondon,  to 

fell  the  Sugars  in  the  Naffiau  to  Sir  John  Banks,  by  pri¬ 
vate  Contraft.  1 24.  et  vid.  1 3 1 . 

75.  Warant  for  Mr.  Mounteney  to  pay  Salaries  &  in- 

ci  lental  Charges,  out  of  the  Depofits  n  his  hands. 
29  July,  1672.  125. 

76.  Order,  that  all  Differences  between  his  Majefly 

&  his  Royal  Highnefs  about  Prizes  be  cleared  in  the 
Admiralty.  6  Augufl  1672.  126.  et  vid.  212. 

77.  Order  to  the  Sub-Commiffioners  of  London,  to 
fell  unto  Mr.  William  Warren  of  London,  Merchant,  a 
parcel  of  Spanifh  Wines,  by  private  Contrail,  at  the 
rate  of  41  Shillings  per  Pipe,  above  the  Cuflomes. 

16  Augufl  1672.  1^2. 

78.  Order,  to  the  Commiffioners  for  the  Sick  & 

wounded  Men,  to  releafe  three  Dutch  Prifoners  in  the 
Caflle  of  Dover  ;  fince  thereby  the  piocurement  of  the 
Releafe  (in  effedt)  of  fix  of  his  Majeflies  Subjects  might 
be  made.  27  Augufl  1672.  137. 

79.  Order,  to  the  fame,  for  the  Releafe  of  all  Dutch 

Prifoners  (except  of  fuch  as  his  Majefly  hath  already  re- 
folved,  as  an  extraordinary  Grace,  to  difeharge,  &  fend 
home  at  his  expence)  &  for  the  delivering  up  of  all 
Bonds  taken  for  the  Liberty  of  any  Dutch  Prifoners : 
Mr.  Nicholas  Reeves  having  reprefented,  that  all  Englifh 
Prifoners  in  the  United  Provinces  are  actually  difeharged 
&  fett  at  liberty.  12  September  1672.  i4I. 

80.  Order  for  detaining  in  clofe  Cuftody,  Richard 
Michell,  upon  fufpicion  of  having  received  a  Quantity 
of  Cinamon  embezeled  out  of  one  of  his  Majeflies  Prize- 
Ships,  and  refufing  to  declare  how  he  has  difpofed  of  it. 

17  September  1672.  143.  &  vid.  147. 

81.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  15  1.  to  Rofello  de  Ruffi 
an  Armenian,  in  confideration  of  a  Parcel  of  Gum  Ar- 
moniack  belonging  to  him  on  board  a  Smyrna  Prize-Ship 
which  was  fold  for  the  fame  fum.  24  September  1672. 

148. 

82.  Order  to  Sir  William  Doyley,  &c.  Commiffioners 

for  Tick  and  wounded,  to  return  a  Lift  of  thofe  Souldiers 
who  upon  their  recovery  had  run  away,  to  avoid  going 
on  further  Service.  27  September  1672.  149. 

83.  Order 


loo 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS- 


Num.  15 1 1. 

83.  Order  for  the  payment  of  550  I.  being  in  arrear, 

to  Thomas  Thynne  Efq;  his  Majellies  Envoye  Extraor¬ 
dinary,  &  Sub-Commiilioner  for  Prizes  in  the  Kingdom 
of  Sweden.  5  October  1672.  157. 

Here  are  alfo  Warants  for  Payment  of  all  other 
Salaries. 

84.  Letter  to  the  F.arl  of  Arlington,  defrring  him  to 
move  his  Majeftie,  that  all  Doggers  &  Netts  already 
taken,  or  to  be  taken  as  Prizes,  be  referved  for  the  ule 
of  the  publick  Filhery.  8  October  1672. 

1 61.  et  vid.  188. 

85.  Order  to  the  Sub-Commiflioners  of  London,  to 
proceed  legally  againll  Defaulters  who  had  not  made 
good  their  Contrails  for  Prize-Goods,  ir  October  1672. 

162. 

86.  Letter  to  the  Earl  of  Arlington,  upon  occafionof 

Si'-  Edward  Spragges  refufing  to  deliver  the  Herring- 
Buifes,  Doggers,  &c.  lately  taken  by  him,  to  thePiize- 
Officers.  15  October  1672.  164. 

87.  Order  for  the  Delivery  of  the  Buffes  &  other  Fifh- 
ing-Veffells  fent  in  by  Sir  Edward  Spragges,  to  the  Com- 
miflioners  of  his  Majellies  Navy.  1 2  November  1 672. 

168.  et  vid.  21 1. 

88.  Order  to  the  Commiffioners  of  London,  when¬ 

ever  they  fell  Prize-Goods  for  lefs  than  the  Cuftomes 
due  upon  them  ;  to  pay  the  proceed  thereof  to  the  Col¬ 
lector  of  the  faid  Cultomes,  who  would  putt  it  to  his 
Accompt.  19  November  1672.  173. 

89.  Memorandum,  touching  the  Commiffion  for  Sir 

Edward  Seymor  Bart,  to  be  a  Sub-Commiilioner  for 
Prizes  at  Plymouth,  dat.  26  February  1672.  1X6. 

90.  Warant  for  Hugh  Salilbury  Efq;  Comptroller  of 
Prizes  at  Portfmouth,  to  act  as  a  Sub-Commiilioner 
there,  molt  of  the  Sub-Commiflioners  there  being  Mem¬ 
bers  of  Parliament,  &  attending  there.  27  February  1672. 

187. 

91.  Warant  to  the  Sub-Commiflioner  of  London,  to 
fell  Goods  by  private  Contract.  5  March  1672.  ibid. 

92.  Order  for  Captain  John  Wetwang  to  fend  up  a 

very  particular  Accompt  of  a  Dutch-Prize  Ship  taken 
by  him,  &  carried  to  Gottenburgh  &  there  fold  ;  as  alfo 
a  Bond  of  1 000  1.  which  he  had  taken  as  a  part  of  her 
Produce.  ibid,  et  196. 

93.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  400  1.  to  the  above- 
mentioned  Captain,  as  his  Majellies  gift.  5  March  1672. 

1S8.  et  vid.  203. 

94.  Order  for  Payment  of  100 1.  to  Vartanes  de 

Chelchat  an  Armenian,  which  his  Majefty  had  given  to 
carry  him  into  his  Countrey  ;  in  consideration  of  fome 
Ioffes  he  pretenJed  to  have  fuflained  when  the  Ship 
Landfman  was  taken,  in  the  Smyrna-Engagement.  25 
June  1673.  _  *210. 

95.  Inftruflions  for  the  Sub-Commiflioners  of  Prizes 

in  the  Port  of  London,  and  the  Dill  riels  thereof.  1 5  Au- 
guft  1673.  _  216. 

96*  Letter  to  the  Eaft-India- Company,  recommending 
a  Dutch  Eall  India-Prize  the  Papenbourg,  to  their  good 
management  in  the  Sale  and  difpofition  of  her.  16  Au- 
guft  l673-  217.  &c. 

97.  Order  for  the  delivering  of  all  the  Dutch  Prifoners 

taken  in  the  Eaft  India  Prize-Ships,  to  the  Eaft  India 
Company  ;  in  order  to  obtain  the  Releafe  of  luch  Englifh 
Men  as  were  taken  in  the  Haniball  and  Experiment  in 
the  Eall-Indies.  5  September  1673.  221. 

98.  Order  lor  the  Commiffioners  of  the  Cuftomes,  & 
the  Eaft-India  Company  to  adjuft  Articles  about  the 
management  of  the  Goods  found  in  the  four  Dutch  llaft- 
India  Prizes,  viz.  the  Papenbourgh,  Alphen,  Armes  of 
Camphir,  Sc  Europa.  10  September  1673.  ibid,  et  222. 

99.  Order  for  Captain  Richard  Munden,  to  give  an 
Accompt  of  the  Silks  &  other  rich  Commodities  taken  by 
him  out  of  the  Bread-Rooms  of  the  Alphen,  Europa,  & 
Armes  of  Ter- Veer,  feized  by  him  near  Sta.  Helena, 
upoa  conjecture  that  the  Goods  which  were  flowed  in  the 


Num.  1511. 

faid  Bread-Roomes  were  not  to  be  efteemed  as  CJooJs 
belonging  to  the  Hqulds  ;  whereas  it  was  manifeft,  that 
in  the  Eaft  India-Ships  the  Bread  Room  is  fo  confiderable 
a  part  of  the  Hould,  that  in  the  Papenbourg,  about 
one-fifth  of  the  value  of  the  whole  Shipp,  was  in  Silks 
and  other  rich  Commodities  there  flowed.  1 5  September 
1673.  224. 

100.  Order  for  apprehending  Thomas  Stanford  Com¬ 

mander  of  the  Benjamin  Ketch,  who  at  the  time  of  its 
being  taken  by  the  Enemy,  had  about  3  -.0  pieces  of 
Gold  belonging  to  the  Earl  of  Offory,  wherewith  he 
made  his  Efcape,  without  lofing  the  fame  ;  which  occa- 
fioned  great  Mifchief  to  the  reft  that  were  taken  in  the 
faid  Velfell  ;  he  giving  out  that  they  had  the  Gould 
among  them.  25  September  16-73.  226. 

101.  Order  for  the  Eaft  India  Company  to  relieve  & 

difeharge  the  Dutch  Mariners  taken  in  the  3  laft  Eaft- 
India  Prizes  ;  &  to  detain  the  Officers  (at  their  own 
charge)  until  they  can  draw  fome  affurancc  fiom  Hol¬ 
land,  that  the  Englifti  taken  in  the  Experiment  Sc  Hanibal 
{hall  be  fett  at  liberty.  228. 

ic2.  Order  about  the  Tmall  Plunder  taken  by  the 
Englifti  Seamen  aboard  the  3  Eaft-India  Prizes ;  wirh 
other  matters  relating  to  the  prefervation  of  the  Goods 
in  the  Holds  &  Bread-Roomes.  229. 

103.  Minutes  about  the  Eaft  India-Companies  deliver¬ 

ing  the  greateft  part  of  the  Goods  belonging  to  the  four 
Eaft  India  Prizes,  unto  Mr.  Edward  Nelthorp  Merchant, 
&  his  Partners,  as  by  private  Contradl ;  fuch  being  his 
Majellies  plealure.  16  Odlober  1673.  232.  239,  See. 

104.  Order  for  the  Gold  Oar  unladen,  or  being,  in 
the  Eaft-India  Prizes,  to  be  delivered  unto  William  Chif- 
iinch  Efq.  for  his  Majellies  ufe.  28  October  1673.  243. 

105.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  10,000  1.  unto  Mr. 

Fdward  Nelthorp  &  his  Partners,  in  confideration  & 
full  recompence  of  their  Loffes  &  Sufferings  by  the  late 
Contract  for  the  Goods  of  the  four  Eaft  India  Prizes, 
which  they  freely  &  voluntarily  refigned  to  his  Majeftie. 
29  O&ober  1673.  244. 

106.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  210. 1.  to  Don  Juan 

de  Gadeo  a  Spanifti  Gentleman  taken  in  the  Prize  Ship 
Alphen  ;  as  his  Majellies  gift,  to  fupply  his  neceffincs 
here,  and  to  carry  him  home  into  Spaine.  ibid. 

J07.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  240  b  to  the  late 
Dutch  Governor  &  two  other  Officers  belonging  to  Sta. 
Helena,  as  his  Majellies  gift;  tiiat  they  may  be  dif- 
patched  into  their  own  Countrey.  ibid. 

1 08.  Articles  with  the  Eaft  India  Company  for  felling 

the  four  Eaft  India  Prizes.  ibid. 

109.  Order  for  delivering  the  faid  four  Eaft  India  Ship 

with  their  Apparel  &  Furniture  (but  not  their  Lading) 
to  the  principal  Officers  &  Commiffioners  of  his  Majellies 
Navy,  to  be  employed  in  his  Majellies  Service.  6th  No¬ 
vember  1673.  250. 

1 10.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  50,000  1.  part  ol  the 

firft  Payment  of  the  Money  accruing  by  the  faid  Eaft 
India-Prizes,  into  his  Majellies  Exchequer;  to  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  Ufe  of  the  Navy.  251.  255. 

m.  Order  for  Sir  James  Stansfield  to  aCl  as  tole 
Sub-Commiffi  oner  atLieth;  his  Majeftie  diffi  offing  James 
Hooper  &  JohnCloberryEfqrs.  in  order  to  fave  Chan.es. 

252. 

1 1 2.  Order  to  the  Eaft  India  Company,  for  paying 

in  152,437  1.  1 1  s.  9!  d.  as  their  third  Payment  for  the 
Goods  in  the  four  Eaft  India  Prizes.  1 2lh  November 
1673.  253. 

113.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  174  1.  1  s.  6d.  to 
the  Officers  in  the  Admiralty.  4th  December  1675.  259. 

1 14.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  550  1.  due  to  Sir  Ro¬ 

bert  Southwell ;  and  a  recompence  for  divers  Services 
therein  mentioned.  22d  December  1673.  263. 

1 15.  Report  of  the  Lords  Commiftioners  to  his  Ma¬ 
jeftie,  upon  reference  of  Richard  Mundens  Petition  to 
them  :  tpat  his  Services  in  retaking  the  lft.uid  of  Sta. 

Helena. 


4 


lot 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


Num,  1511,  1512. 

Helena,  &  feizing  of  three  Eaft  India  Prizes  from  the 
Dutch,  might  feem  to  deferve  a  Reward  of  2,5001. 

ibid,  et  vid.  268. 

1 1 6.  Memorandum  of  a  Warrant  for  Payment  of 

600c  1.  it s to  the  Exchequer,  for  the  Ufe  of  the  Navy. 
Toth  January  1673.  271. 

1 17.  Order  for  fummoning  Captain  Piles  (who  ac¬ 
companied  Sr.  Richard  M unden)  to  anfwer  anAccufation 
againft  him,  for  embezzeling  divers  Parcels  of  Goods  out 
of  the  three  Dutch  Eaft-lndia-Prizes.  16th  January 

1673.  273.  et  vid.  250.  294. 

1 1 8.  Certificate  to  the  Lord  Treafurer  of  the  Callico 

&  Pepper  fold  by  the  Eaft  India  Company  for  his  Majef- 
tie;  being,  Callicoes  102,120  Pieces,  Guinea  Clou's 
5120  Pieces,  Pepper  1,260,158^.  lib.  Weight.  27th  Fe¬ 
bruary  1673.  280. 

1 1 9.  Warrant  for  the  Payment  of  20,000  I.  into  his 

Majefties  Exchequer,,  for  the  Ufe  of  the  NaVy.  5th 
March  1673.  281. 

120.  Order  for  the  Eaft-India-Compary  to  deliver 

unto  Mr.  Robert  Woolley  25  Bales  of  Silk,  &  2  Bales  of 
Callicoes,  which  had  been  taken  &  delivered  up  bv  Sir 
Richard  Munden  ;  they  being  fold  to  the  faid  Mr.  Wool- 
ley  for  2 oao  1.  3d  March  1073.  2S2. 

12 1.  Orders  to  the  Sub-Gmmiffioners  of  the  feveral 

Ports,  &  other  Officers  of  Prizes,  to  make  up  their  Ac- 
compts  &  fend  them  in  ;  the  War  with  the  Dutch  being 
ended.  4th  March  1673.  283. 

122.  Letter  to  the  Governor  of  the  Eaft  India  Com¬ 
pany,  about  fending  Perlons  to  take  care  of  the  Dutch 
Prize-Ship,  called  the  Wapen  van  Rotterdam,  Burthen 
600  Lafts,  &  bound  to  the  Eaft  Indies.  26th  March 

285. 

1  2  (.  Order  for  the  Payment  of  220I.  16s  3d.  to  the 
Counters  of  Marlhall,  as  of  his  Maj  fties  gift,  ibid 
1:4.  Order  for  Mr.  Goulfton,  paying  in  220 1.  16  s. 
3d.  to  be  cleared  from  his  bargain  of  Spices,  lft  April 
2674.  2S6. 

1  25.  Direction  for  the  Eaft  India  Company  to  order 
the  Goods  of  the  Prize-Ship  Armes  of  Roterdam  to  be 
fold.  24th  April  1 '74.  2°8.  290.  291.  292.304. 

126.  Order  for  Mr.  Bull  &  Mr.  Stephens  to  deliver 

up  1  5  Bales  of  Silk  fuppofed  to  be  embezeled  out  of  the 
Dutch  Eaft-India  Prize-Ship  Ter-Veer  ;  or  to  fticw  caufe 

for  their  Detention.  6th  May  .  674.  290. 

127.  Letter  to  the  Sub-Corn  mi  ftioners  at  Plymouth, 
reducing  their  Accompts  to  alefs  Sum.  i8ih  September 

1674.  296. 

1 2S.  Order  for  Sir  R.  Bert  Southwell  &  Mr.  Kingdom, 
to  inquire  about  the  old  Prize-Debts  in  order  to  pay  Mr. 
Reve,  Captain  Wetwang  &  the  Officers  Salaries.  2d 
July  1675.  308.  309. 

129.  Letter  to  the  Lord  Vaughan  Governor  of  Jamaica, 

to  fend  forthwith  the  produce  of  244  Negros  :  part  of 
which  had  laid  in  his  hands  a  very  long  time.  3 1ft  Janu- 
1171675.  ■  3>4-  3'«- 

130.  Report  of  the  Lords  Commiffi oners  to  his  Ma- 

jeflie  about  the  Ship  Tortoife ;  the  Trial  whereof  al¬ 
though  properly  belonging  to  the  Jurifdiftion  of  Eng¬ 
land,  his  Maiedic  had  fullered  to  be  made  in  Scotland, 
where  it  had  (tuck  above  four  years,  although  his  Ma- 
jefties  right  was  apparent.  13th  June  1678.  and  often 
before.  (See  the  Table)  318. 

1 3 1.  His  Majefties  Inltru&ions  to  the  principal  Com- 

miffioners,  annexed  to  their  Commiflions.  Given  14th 
March,  in  the  24th  year  of  his  Reign.  320. 

1512. 

Codex  tnembranaceus  in  fol.  ampliori  (quern  una  cum 
illo  qui  fequitur,  Domino  meo  dono  dedit  Alanus  Ba- 
thurft  (nunc  Laro  Bathurft  de  Batlefden)  in  quocon- 
tinentur, 

1 .  Some  Verfes  in  old  Engiiffi  ;  as  alfo  divers  other 
Specimens  ol  the  Hand-writing  &  Ingenuity  of  one 
Gat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num  1512  — 1514* 

Hugh  Fletcher,  who  pretended  to  fet  up  for  a  Teachei? 
of  Learning  &  Writing.  Written  by  him  in  the  Family 
Miffal  of  Mr.  Apfley  (to  which  Family  of  Apfley,  the 
abovementioned  Lord  Baihurft  is  the  heir)  on  purpofe 
to  be  feen.  In  two  fpare  Leaves  at  the  beginning. 

2.  Breviarium  ;  five  Miffide  fecundum  UfumLcclefiaS 
Sar.  Volumen  primuim  3. 

De  Ecclefia  et  Ufu  Sar.  hoc  in  Codice  mentio  fiti 
3  * •  b.  col.  1. — 149.  col.  1 . — 159.  col.  x. 

i5r  3‘ 

Codex  membranaceus  in  foi.  ampliori,  in  quo  con4 
tinentur, 

1.  Lihri  MifTalis  fuperioris,  fecundum  Ufum  Eficlefite 
Sar.  Volumen  alterum. 

Hoc  etiam  in  Codice  habetur  mentio  Ufus  Sar* 
rlec  non  de  Dedicatione  Sar.  Ecclefias  ad  30  diem  Men- 


fis  Septembris.  5. 

2.  (^uinetiam,  aliena  manu  feribuntur  (prteter  Adno- 
tationes  Obituum  diverforum  de  gente  Apfleyorum  in 
Kalendario.) 

3.  Officium  in  Vigilia  Mortuorum.  40. 

4.  Colleda  de  Sco  Patricio  Ybernie  Apoftolo.  74.  b. 

5.  Memoria  de  Sco  Johanne  de  Beveriaco.  165. 

6.  Benedicciones  Corporis  Xpi,  &c.  200. 

I5I4- 

A  Book  in  fol.  writteh  by  the  hand  of  .  .  .  Chud- 


leigh,  Efq.  &  containing  Tranfcripts  of  many  Letters 

&  ivlemorials  of  State-Matters  tranfa£bed  in  the  yearn 

1675.  &  1676.  The  Titles  whereof  follow  in  order. 

Given  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dolben. 

1.  The  Conftable  of  Caftil.e  to  the  Dutch  Ambaflado* 

at  Madrid,  concerning  the  accepting  his  Majefties  Mo-* 
diation,  by  the  Emperor  &  that  Crown.  25th  October 
1675.  ,. 

2.  The  States  Letter  to  his  Majeftie  (K.  Charles  11.) 

accepting  his  MajeltiesMcdi  .tion  for  themielves  and  their 
Allies;  in  French.  15th  November  16  4.  2. 

3.  King  of  France’s  Anfwer  to  theSwedifh  Memorial 
touching,  l  .The  Place  of  Treaty.  2.  A  Temperament  as 
to  the  Releafe  of  Prince  William.  3.  Reitirution  of  the 
Money  feized  at  Cologne.  4  The  giving  Pafleports  to 
all  Parties  concerned.  5.  A  Sufpenfion  of  Armes  till 
the  beginning  of  the  Campagne  ;  in  French.  14th  Ja¬ 
nuary  1675-6 

4.  l’he  States  Refolution,  propofing  Five  Towns  in 

Germany  for  a  Place  of  Treaty  ;  in  French.  23d  Janu- 
ary  1675-6.  7. 

5  States  Refolution  concerning  the  Place  of  Treaty. 
25th  Jan.  1675-6.  in  French.  8. 

6.  Copy  of  his  Majefties  Letter  to  the  King  of  France, 

upon  his  being  accepted  Mediator  by  the  States  &  their 
Ailys,  and  propofing  to  France  the  Town  of  Mceurs  ; 
in  French.  1 8th  January  1674-5.  9. 

7.  Copy  of  his  Majefties  Letter  to  the  States  Generali, 

upon  their  accepting  his  Mediation  for  themfelves  and 
their  Aliys;  and  propofing  a  Ceffation  of  Arms.  19th 
Jan.  1675-6.  in  French.  10. 

8.  The  Emperor's  Anfwer  to  the  Count  d’Oxenfterne. 

1  ft  Febr.  1674-5.  in  Latin.  11. 

9.  Copy  of  the  K.  of  France’s  Letter  to  his  Majefty, 

about  his  not  accepting  Mceurs.  9th  Febr.  1674-5.  in 
French.  14. 

10.  Copy  of  the  Ele£tor  of  Brandenbourg’s  J.etter 

to  his  Majefty,  on  the  fubjeft  of  the  Mediation.  Fe¬ 
bruary  1674-5.  in  Latin.  16. 

1 1.  Copy  of  the  Prince  of  Orange’s  Letter  to  SirWil- 

liam  Temple,  about  the  Place  of  Congrefle.  ^  of  Febr. 
1674-5.  in  French.  17. 

12.  Copy  of  the  States  Letter  to  his  Majefty,  in  An¬ 

fwer  to  his  olFering  to  them  &  their  Aliys,  his  Mediation. 
1  ith  Febr.  1674-5.  in  French.  18. 

Dd  13.  Copy 


102 


Caralcgus  Librorum  MSS. 


ft 


Num.  1 5  r  ^ . 

'3.  Copy  of  the  Emperoars  Letter  to  his  Majefly, 
concerning  the  Liberty  of  Prince  William  of  Furltem- 
berg.  13th  Febr.  1674-5.  in  Latin.  19. 

14.  Copie  du  Menu  lire  de  Mr.  lc  Chevalier  Guillaume 

Temple,  preieiue  aux  Ella  s  Generaux.  21ft  Fevrier 
»6/5-  r  _  a  1. 

15.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Lorrain’s  Letter  to  his 
Majefly,  on  the  fubject  of  his  Mediation.  1 8th  March 

24. 

16.  1  he  States  Refolution,  contavning  a  Plan  of  the 

Coik.ti  .is  of  a  Peace  for  themf  Ives,  and  their  Confe- 
1  •  ■  h  1  .  2  7. 

:  ~  ■  v  ■  |  ter  t  his  Ma- 

jvuy,  on  ti:e  fubjc£t  of  the  Mediation,  ill  Augull  1675. 
in  Latin.  2 9. 

ib'.  Copy  of  his  Majefly’s  Letter  to  the  King  of  Den- 
Tr.t'rk,  upon,  the  lubjeft  of  his  Mediation.  5th  October 
1675.  1-atin.  30. 

1  ■ ; •  Copy  oi  his  Majefty’s  Letter  to  the  King  of  Swe¬ 
den,  upon  the  fubject  of  the  Mediation.  5th  October 
1675.  in  Latin.  31. 

:o.  Copy  of  the  King  of  Denmark’s  Letter  to  his 
Majelty,  upon  the  fuojccl  of  the  Mediation.  23d  Octo¬ 
ber  1 6 •’5.  in  Latin.  02. 

at.  Me  noire  du  Roy  tres-chrctien  pour  le  Depart  de 
fes  Ambafladeurs  Plenipotentiaires  a  Nimegue.  28  No- 
vembre  1675.  33. 

22.  Copy  of  his  Majeflies  Letter  to  the  Elector  of 

Brandenbourg,  offering  him  his  Mediation.  30th  No¬ 
vember  1675.  in  Latin.  36. 

23.  Obfervatio  contra  Memoriam  velNotitiam  Legatis 

Gai.licis  Noviomagum  ituris  datam.  28th  Novcmbris 
l6/5*  .  37. 

24.  Copy  of  the  King  of  France’s  Paffe  for  the 

Marquis  de  Mamjera,  and  the  two  other  Spanilh  Ambaf- 
fadors.  25th  Septembre  1675.  in  French.  46. 

25.  Copy  of  the  States  Fade  for  one  of  the  French 

AmbafTadors,  and  one  of  the  Bilhop  of  Stralbourg’s  De- 
putys.  iGth'Pceember  1675.  in  French.  47. 

t6.  Copy  of  the  King  of  France’s  Paffe  for  the  Duke 
of  Lorraines  Deputvs,  listhDtcembre  1675.  in  French. 

49. 

27.  Copy  of  the  King  of  France’s  Paffe  for  the  Ein- 
perours  Ambafladours,  and  the  Ambafladours  &  Minif- 
tersof  the  reft  of  the  Aliys.  15  Jan.  if  75-6.  in  French. 

50. 

28.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williatnfon’s  Letter  to 
Mr.  Ducker .  7th  January  1675.  in  French.  5r. 

29.  An  Expedient  to  remove  the  Difficulty's  in  the 

Bufineffeof  Prince  William  ofFuritemberg.  Jail.  1675-6. 
in  French.  32. 

3 Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 
Mr.  Skelton,  upon  Mr.  Ducker’s  Negotiation  at  Vienna. 

1 8th  January  1675-6.  34. 

31.  Copy  of  Meffieurs  Colbert  &  d’Avaux’s  Letter 
to  Sir  William  Temple  Sc  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins.  1 9th  Janu¬ 
ary  107.'.  S.N.  in  French.  37. 

3  2.  Copy  of  the  Emperour’s  Letter  to  his  Majefly, 
to.  Jen.  1676.  in  Latin.  38. 

3.v  bJopy  of  Monfr.  dc  Pompones  Letter  to  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  Temple,  upon  the  fubject  of  Paffeports.  Jan. 

1675-6.  (in  French)  *  61. 

3a.  Copy  of  my  Lord  Ambaflador  Jenkins’s  Letter 
t  .  the  Dutch  AmbafTadors,  upon  their  Arrival  before  the 
Town  of  Nimeguen.  15th  Jan.  1675.  S.V.  in  French. 

63. 

35.  Copy  of  my  Lord  Ambaflador  Jenkins's  Letter  to 
Meffrs  Colbert  &  d’Avaux.  18th  January  1675-6.  in 
Ficiich.  64. 

36;  Copy  of  Mr.  Ducker’s  Letter  to  my  Lord  Am- 
baffador  Jenkins.  29th  Jan.  1676.  S.N.  in  French.  66. 

37.  Copy  of  Mr.  Ducker’ s  Letter  to  Mr. Secretary 

Williamf.m.  29th  Jan.  1675-6.  in  French.  68. 

38.  Copy  of  Sir  William  Temple’s  I.ettcr  to  Mr.  de 

Pompone.  30th  Jim.  1676.  in  French.  72. 


Num.  1514. 

39.  Copy  of  the  States  Declaration  why  they  cannot 
intercede  with  theEmperour  in  favour  of  Prince  William 
of  Furftembourg.  3d  February  1675-6.  in  French.  74. 

40.  Copy  of  Prince  William  of  Furftemberg’s  Letter 

to  the  King.  6th  Febr.  1676.  in  French.  77. 

41.  Raifons  fur  deux  Difficultcz  touchant  les  Paffe- 

ports  ;  et  Mr.  le  Prince  Charles  de  Lorraine.  Received, 
9th  Febr.  1675-6.  78. 

42.  Copy  of  Meffieurs  Colbert  &  d’Avaux’s  Letters 

to  my  Lord  Ambaflador  Jenkins.  9th  Febr.  1676.  S.N. 
in  Fiench.  81. 

43-  Copy  of  the  Suedifti  Ambafladours  Paper,  con¬ 
cerning  fome  pretended  faults  in  his  Mailer’s  l’afleports. 
8th  February  1675-6.  in  French.  82. 

44.  Copy  of  iny  Lord  Ambafladour  Jenkins’s  Letter 

to  Meffieurs  Colbert  &  d’Avaux.  22  February  1675-6. 
in  French.  83. 

45.  Copie  delaLettre  tie  Monfr.  Ducker  a  Mr.  Skel¬ 
ton  de  Vienne.  1  Mars.  1676.  85. 

46.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 

Mr.  Skelton.  2  ill  Feb.  1675-6.  89. 

47.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to  Mr. 

Ducker.  21  ft  Febr.  1675-6.  in  French.  91. 

48.  Copy  of  Meffieurs  Colbert  &  d’Avaux’s  Letter  to 

my  Lord  Ambafladour  Jenkins,  icth  March  1677.  S.V. 
in  French.  93. 

49.  Tranflation  of  the  Refolution  of  the  States  Gene¬ 

rali  upon  a  Letter  from  the  Heer  van  Beuninghen  about 
the  Paffeports.  10th  March  1676.  S.  N.  93. 

50.  Refolution  des  Eftats  Generaux,  fur  le  Memoirs 

de  Monfleur  I’Ambaffadeur  Temple,  touchant  les  Paffe¬ 
ports.  10  Mars.  S.  N.  1676.  94. 

5 «  •  Circular  Letter  from  his  Majefly  to  the  Emperor, 
the  King  of  Denmark,  the  King  of  Sweden,  and  the 
Eleftor  of  Brandenbourg.  7th  March  1675-6.  in  Latin. 

96. 

52.  Copie  of  the  King  of  Denmark’s  Letter  to  his 

Majefly,  about  thePaffageof  Letters.  21ft  March  1676. 
in  Latin.  g_ 

53.  Copy  of  the  Eleflor  of  Brandenbourg’s  Letter 
to  his  Majefly,  concerning  the  Expedient.  2 3  March. 

7  April 

1676.  in  Latin.  90, 

54.  Copy  of  the  King  of  Denmark’s  Letter  to  his  Ma- 

jefty,  concerning  the  Expedient.  31ft  March  1676.  in 
Latin.  j  qq_ 

55.  Copy  of  the  Dutch  Ambafladours  Memorial,  re- 
preienting  feveral  Exception's  made  by  the  States  and  the 
Aliys  to  his  Majeflies  Expedient  about  Paffes.  for  the 
Duke  of  Lorraine.  28th  March  1676.  in  French.  101. 

56.  Copy  of  the  Refolution  ol  the  States  Generali, 

upon  my  LordAmbaffador  Temple’s  Memoriall,  offering 
his  Majeflies  Expedient  about  the  Paffeports.  7th  Aprill 
S.  N.  1676.  in  French.  103. 

57.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  de  Meffieurs  Colbert  &  d’ 

Avaux,  a  Mefleigneurs  Jenkins  et  Temple.  -,7T  Avril 
*676.  108. 

58.  Copy  of  the  Danilh  Ambaffadour’s  Memoriall. 

1 6th  April  1 676.  in  French.  109. 

59«  Copy  of  the  King  of  France’s  Paffe  for  the  Lor- 
raine-Deputys,  giving  that  Duke  the  Title  of  Due  & 
Frere.  2d  May  1676.  in  French.  j.n. 

60.  Copy  of  Monfr.  Gioe's  Memoriall.  23d  April 

1676.  in  French.  112. 

61.  Copy  of  the  Dutch  Ambafladours  Memoriall, 
complaining  of  the  Swedes  givingCommiffionsto  Englifh 

againft  the  Dutch.  -3_Api  b.  j  in  French.  114 
3  May  f 

6:.  Order  of  Councill  to  prohibit  taking  Commif- 
flons  againft  Holland  &  Denmark.  26th  April  1676. 

1 1 6. 

63.  Copy  of  Sir  William  Temple’s  Memoriall,  upon 
his  receiving  the  Lorraire-Paffe-ports  in  the  formdefired 
nthMayi6;6.  in  French.  uy, 

64.  Copy 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae 


Num.  1514,  1515* 

64.  Copy  of  my  Lord  Ambafladour  Jenkins’s  Lettei 
to  Mr.  Calvo.  1  ft  May  1676.  S.  V.  in  French.  1 18. 

65.  Copy  of  Mr.  Cairo’s  Letlcr  to  my  Lord  Ambaf- 

adour  Jenkins  in  anfwer  to  the  former.  iflMay  1676. 

S.  V.  (in  French.)  119. 

66.  Copy  of  the  States  Refolution  to  thank  his  Ma- 

jefty  for  procuring  the  Lorrain-Pafieport  in  due  forme, 
and  ordering  the  Exchange  of  that  and  the  other  Pafl'e¬ 
ports.  12th  May  1676.  (in  French.)  120. 

67.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  de  Remerciment  des  Eftats 

Generaux  aux  Roy,  pour  avoir  procure  les  Pafl'eports  du 
Due  de  Lorraine  May  1676.  in  French.  121. 

68.  Memoire  de  Meflieurs  du  Plat-Pais  de  Nimegue, 

a  fon  Excellence  Monfieur  1’ Ambaffadeur  Jenkins,  pre- 
fent '•  le  6th  May  1676.  122. 

69.  Copie  du  Refultat  des  Eftats  Generaux  au  fujet 

de  1’Efchange  des  Pafteports.  iSth  May,  1676.  124. 

7c.  Lifte  des  Pafl’eports  qui  ont  efte  efchangez  a  la 
Uaye  lb  19th  May  1676.  125. 

>.515- 

Another  Volume  of  State  Letters  &  Memorials,  relating 
to  the  Treaty  of  Nimeguen,  Written  by  the  hand  of 
Mr.  Chudleigh,  who  was  prefent  at  that  Treaty  in 
the  quality  of  Secretary,  and  given  with  divers 
others  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dolben.  Herein  are  contained, 

1.  The  fame  Letters,  Momorials,  &c.  which  are 
written  in  the  preceding  Volume,  but  not  altogether  in 
the  fame  Order;  which,  therefore  need  not  be  particu¬ 
larly  mentioned  again.  As  alfo 

2.  Memoire  deMcnfienr  vanBeuninghen,  eiNovemb. 

1674.  (received  thf-i '4  June  1676.)  in  French.  140. 

3.  Copie  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraines  Letter  to  his 

Mejcfty,  24th  Septr.  1675.  (received  1  ith  June  1676.). 
in  French.  141. 

4.  Copy  of  the  Elector  of  Brandenbourg’s  Letter  to 

his  Majefty  ;  accepting  his  Majefty’s  Mediation  between 
him  Sc  Sweden.  27th  Dfecr.  1675.  (received  nth  June, 
1676.1  in  Latin.  142. 

5.  Copy  of  Mr.  Skelton’s  Letter  to  Mr.  Secretary 

Williamfon.  ,5,  Febr.  1675-6.  143. 

6.  Copy  of  Mr.  Skelton’s  Letter  to  Mr.  Secretary 

■Williamfon.  March  1675-6.  144. 

7.  Copy  of  tlic  King  of  Sweden’s  Letter  to  his  Ma- 
j  :fty,  accepting  his  Majeflies  Mediation.  17th  Aprill 

1676.  in  Latin.  146. 

8.  Copy  of  his  Majefty’s  Circular  Letter  to  the  Allvs, 

upon  the  expedient  about  the  Lorraine-Paffeports.  in 
Latin.  148. 

9.  Monfr.  Gioe’s  Memoriall,  ift  May  ...  in 

French.  149. 

10.  Copy  of  the  Pafleport  given  by  the  moft  Chrif- 

tian  King  to  the Lorraine-Minilters.  2d  May  1676.  S.N. 
in  French.  152. 

11.  Lord  Ambaflador  Temple’s  Memoriall  to  the 

States  Generali,  upon  the  Lorraine  Pafl'eports.  1 :  th  May 
1676.  S.N.  in  French.  153. 

12.  The  Conde  de  Pennarandas  Paper  to  Sir  William 
Godplphin  ;  declaring  his  Catholick  Majefty’s  Admit¬ 
tance  of  tire  King’s  Expedient  for  giving  the  Pafleonrts 
to  the  M  Snifters  who  are  to  meet  at  the  Congrefle  from 
the  Princes  in  War.  18th  May  1676.  inSpanilh.  155. 

13.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy  de  Danemarc  au  Roy 
de  la  Grande  Bretagne.  23d  May  1676.  in  Latin.  156. 

14.  Quzeryes  made  by  his  Majefty’s  Ambafladors 
upon  feveral  points  relating  to  their  Condu'ft  at  Nime¬ 
guen;  with  his  Majeflies  Anfwer  ;  as  commanded  to  be 
apoftil’d  at  a  Forreigne  Committee.  4th  June  1676. 

v  158. 

15.  Cop-e  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy  (Charles  11.)  a  l’Em- 

pereur  au  fujet  de  l’Envoy  du  Sieur  Skelton.  (Lettre  de 
Creance.)  6  Juin  1676.  in  Latin.  j6i. 

16.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy  (mefme)  a  l’Em- 

pereitr  concernant  le  Prince  de  Furfteniberg.  6  Juin 
1676.  in  Latin.  8  162. 


Num.  1515. 

17.  Additional  lnftruttions  to  our  trufty  &  wellbe- 

loved  Bevill  Skelton  Efq.  our  Envoye  Extraordinary  to 
the  Emperour.  6th  June  1676.  164. 

18.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 

Mr.  Skelton.  6th  June  1676.  167. 

19.  Copy  of  the  States  Declaration  concerning  the 

Interpretation  of  aClaufe  in  their  Refolution  of  the  j  8th 
of  May.  6th  June  1 676.  in  French;  168. 

20.  Pafleport  de  fa  Majefte  tres-chreticnne  pour  le 
Miniftre  du  Due  de  Neubourg?  2  Juin  1676.  S.N. 

169. 

21.  Copy  of  the  King  of  Sweden’s  Pafle  for  the 
Bifliop  of  Strafbourg.  27th  Jan.  1676.  in  Latin.  170. 

22.  Copie  d’urie  Oraonnance  rendue  par  Meflieurs 

les  Eftats  Generaux,  le  29  Mars  1651.  172. 

23.  Copie  of  the  Duke  oi:  Neubourg’s  Letter ;  with 
the  reafons  of  his  Change.  12th  May  1676.  in  French. 

174. 

24.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Neubourg’s  Letter  to  their 

Excellences,  25th  June  1676.  in  French.  178. 

25.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraines  pretentions  to 

the  Right  of  fending  Ambaftadours  :  given  in  by  wav 
of  Memoriall,  by  M.  Serin  champs,  in  French,  received 
9th  Aug.  1679.  180. 

26.  Elector  of  Brandenbourgs  Pafle  for  the  Bifliop  of 
Strafbourg ’s  Minifter.  16th  June  1676.  in  French. 

.85. 

27.  A  Memoire  of  the  French  Ambaftadours,  touch¬ 
ing  Neutrality  &  Pafl'eports.  22d  June  1676.  in  French. 

1.88. 

28.  A  Memoire  of  the  French  Ambafladour’s,  to  my 

Lord  Ambafladour  Temple,  touching  the  DukeofNeu- 
bourgs Paffeports.  in  French.  22d  June  1676.  189. 

29.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Neubourg’s  Letter  to  his 

Majeflie.  25th  June  1676.  in  French.  190. 

30.  Dutch  Ambafladors  Memoriall,  delivered  to  Sir 
Leoline  Jenkyns,  but  not  yet  to  be  communicated  to 
the  French  Ambafladours.  24th  June  1676.  in  French. 

192. 

31.  Copie  of  his  Majefty’s  Letter  to  the  States  Gene¬ 

rali  ;  to  banifh  three  Scotchmen  convict  of  High  Trea- 
fon.  27th  June  1676.  in  French.  193. 

32.  Reglcmcnt  for  the  Aflembly,  with  an  Apoftiil  ad¬ 
ded  by  the  French.  2d  July  1 676.  in  French.  194. 

33.  Pafleport  du  Due  de  Villa  Hermqfa  pour  le  Miuif- 

tre  de  l’Evefque  de  Strafbourg  Ts_  Juillet  1676.  196. 

34.  Monfieur  van  Karens  Memoriall  touching  ihe 
want  of  treble  Pafl'eports.  1 5th  July  1676.  in  French. 

!97. 

35.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  de  leurs  Excellences,  a  Mon¬ 
fieur  Blafpeil  fk  Julliet  1676.  109. 

36.  Copy  of  their  Excellences  Letter  to  the  Duke  of 

Neubourg.  17th  July  1676.  in  French.  200. 

37.  Copy  of  their  Excellences  Letter  to  Monfieur 

Oxenflerne.  26th  July  1676.  in  French.  202. 

38.  Copy  of  Monfr.  Blafpeils  Letter  to  their  Excel¬ 
lencies.  23d  July  1676.  in  French.  203. 

39.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 
my  Lord  Ambafladour  Temple.  25th  July  1676  2  :  5. 

4-;.  Copy  of  Monfr.  Oxcnftcrnes  Letter  to  their  Ex¬ 
cellences.  30th  July  1676.  in  French.  226. 

41.  Sir  William  Temple’s  Speech  at  his  Audience  be¬ 
fore  the  States.  8th  July  1676.  207. 

42.  Copy  of  Mr.  Skelton  s  Proportion  in  his  firft 

Audience.  {I  July  1676.  in  Latin.  209. 

43.  Copy  of  Mr.  Skelton’s  Propofition  in  his  firft 
Audience.  Received  19th  Auguft  1676.  in  Latin.  211, 

44.  The  Emperour’s  Anfwer  to  Mr.  Skelton’s  Pro¬ 
pofition.  Received  19th  July  1676.  in  Latin.  214. 

45.  Mr.  Skelton’s  Speech  at  his  fecond  Audience  be¬ 
fore  the  Emperour.  Received  23d  July  1676.  in  Latin. 

215. 

46.  Copy  of  the  Emperor’s  Anfwer  to  Mr. Skelton’s 

Propofition  at  his  fecund  Audience.  Received  23d  July 
1676.  in  Latin.  2  *7* 

47.  Copy 


104  Catalogus  Librorura  MSS. 


Num.  1515. 

47.  Copv  of  the  Prince  of  Orange’s  Letter  to  my 
Lord  Ambafladour  Jenkyns.  2d  Augull  1676.  in  French. 

218. 

48.  Copy  of  a  Memoriall  given  to  Mr.  Skelton  at 

Vienna,  touching  their  lending  Plenipotentiaries  to  Nime- 
guen.  3d  Aug.  1676.  in  Latin.  219. 

ag.  Copy  of  the  Emperour’s  Letter  to  his  Majefty 
about  fending  Plenipotentiaries  to  Nimeguen.  3d  Au¬ 
guft  1676.  in  Latin.  221. 

50.  The  Emperour’s  Anfwer  to  Mr.  Skelton  touching 

the  Sequeftration  of  the  Prince  of  Furltemberg,  3d 
Auguft  1676.  in  Latin.  222. 

51.  C  py  of  the  Emperour’s  Letter  to  his  Majeftie, 

touching  Prince  William  of  Furltemberg.  3d  Auguft, 
1676.  (in  Latin.)  224. 

52.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Lunenburg’s  Letter  to  his 

Majefty.  14th  Aug.  1676.  in  Latin.  225. 

53.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 

Mr.  Skelton.  7th  February  1675-6.  229. 

54.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 

Mr.  Skelton.  21ft  March  ;  675-6.  230. 

55.  Duke  of  Lunenbourg’s  Pretenfions  to  the  Title 
of  Ambafladors.  14th  Augult  1676.  in  French.  231. 

56.  Duke  of  Nieubourg’s  Letter  to  my  Lord’s  Am- 

bafiadours.  23d  Augult  1676.  in  French.  234. 

57.  Dutch  Ambafladours  Letter  to  my  Lords  Ambaf- 
fadours  concerning  Pafl'eports.  10th  Augult  1676.  ibid. 

58.  Lille  of  Paileports  dtfired  by  the  Dutch  Ambaf- 
fadours  for  fome  of  their  Allyes.  in  French.  235. 

59.  Swedilh  Ambafladours  Memoriall  about  fome 
things  in  the  Swedilh  Pafieports,  and  the  paflage  of  Let- 
teis  through  Denmark.  44  September  1676.  in  Latin. 

237. 

60.  King  of  Poland’s  Letter  to  the  Duke  of  Lunen- 

bourg.  25th  September  1676.  in  Latin.  239. 

61.  Monfieur  Beverning’s  Letter  to  my  Lord  Am¬ 
bafladour  Jenkins.  26th  Sept.  1676.  in  French.  240. 

62.  The  Refolutions  of  the  States  of  Holland,  1. 
Touching  a  day  to  be  fixed  for  the  opening  of  the  Con- 
grelle.  2 .  Touching  the  Title  of  Ambafladours  to  the 
Minifters  of  the  Allyes.  Received  from  Mr.  Beverning. 

9  th  September  1676.  in  French.  ibid. 

63.  Extract  of  Mr.  Kennedy’s  Letter  from  Bruxelles, 

to  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins.  1  ft  October  1 676.  241. 

64.  My  Lords  Ambafladours  Letter  to  the  Duke  of 
Newbourg.  /7  October  1676.  (in  French.)  242. 

65.  Cologne  Minilters  Memoriall.  1 6th  October  1676. 

in  French.  _  ibid. 

66.  Their  Excellences  Letter  to  the  Duke  of  Villa- 

Hermofa,  for  Pafieports  for  the  Bilhop  of  Marfeilles. 
17th  October  1676.  in  French.  243. 

67.  Duke  of  Villa  Hermofa’s  Letter  to  my  Lords 

Ambafladours.  3d  Nov.  1676.  in  French.  24 3. 

68.  Duke  de  Villa  Hermofa’s  Pafleport  for  the  Bilhop 
of  Marfeilles.  3d  November  1676.  in  French.  ibid. 

69.  Forces  que  les  Aliez,  contre  laFrance  et  la  Suede, 

peuvent  prefentcment  avoir  en  Campagne,  fans  parler 
de  ce  qui  eft  fur  Mer.  244. 

70.  Memoire  des  Pafl'eports  que  les  Ambafladeurs  de 

France  prient  Mellieurs  les  Mediateurs  de  faireexpedier. 
28th  Odtobre  1676.  2^- 

71.  Lift  of  Pafieports  brought  in  by  the  Swedilh  Se¬ 
cretary  ;  in  French.  jbid. 

72.  A  Relation  of  the  King  of  Denmark’s  Proceed¬ 

ings  againft  the  Duke  of  Holftein  &  Gcttorp,  his  own 
Cofen  A  Brother  in  Law  ;  in  a  Letter  from  a  Gentleman 
out  of  Holftein.  24th  September  1675.  246. 

73.  Relation  of  fome  extraordinary  Paflages  in  the 

Eleftion  of  the  Doge  at  Venice,  in  the  year  1676.  or 
Copie  de  la  Depeche  efcrite  a  Monfr.  de  Pompone  le  2g’ 
d’Aouft  1 676,  par  Monfr.  l’Abbe  d’Eftrades  AmbafTa- 
deuraVenife.  2_g 

74.  Extract  of  a  Letter  to  Mr.  Secretary  Coventry 

from  Madrid.  20th  November  1675.  26'. 


Num.  1515. 

75.  Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  William  Godolphin 

to  my  Lord  Chamberlain,  29th  November  1676.  touch¬ 
ing  the  Marquis  de  Villa  Sierra’s  rifeing  into  the  Firft 
Miniftry.  270. 

76.  Extradt  of  a  L.etter  from  Sir  William  Godolphin, 
to  Mr.  Secretary  Coventry.  30th  December  1676. 

273. 

77.  Another  Letter  from  Madrid,  perhaps  from  Sir 

William  Godolphin ;  like  the  three  former,  ail  upon 
the  Revolution  in  the  Miniftry  there.  27th January  1677. 
S-N.  276. 

78.  Memorial  of  the  Swedifh  Embafladors.  „3?  Q&- 

9  Nov. 


1676.  in  Latin. 


285. 


79.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 

Mr.  Skelton.  24th  January  1 675-6.  291. 

80.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 

Mr.  Skelton.  28th  February  1675-6.  294. 

8 1 .  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 

Mr.  Skelton.  19th  May  1676.  2g 6. 

82.  Copy  of  the  King  of  Sweden’s  Paflport  for  the 
Confederates.  1  ith  November  1675.  in  Latin.  298. 

83.  Copy  of  the  States  Generali’s  Pafle  for  my  Lord 
Ambafladour  Jenkins.  1 8th  Auguft  1676.  in  French. 


300. 

84.  Copy  of  the  Magiflrates  of  Hambourg’s  Letter 

to  the  Mediators.  8th  Dec.  1676.  in  Latin.  302. 

85.  Copy  of  the  Letter  of  Mr.  Cafpar  to  the  Media¬ 

tors,  about  the  Title  of  Ambafladours  for  the  Duke  of 
Newbourg's  Minifters  ;  with  Copys  of  Precedents,  in 
FreiIch-  .  .  304. 

86.  Ratificatio  Feeder:':  inter  Francifcum  primuin 

Galliarum  Regem,  et  Gulielmum  Julia:  Ducem,  anno 
1540.  miti.  6_ 

57.  Commiffion  for,  &  Ratification  of  the  Marriage 
between  Henry  vm.  and  Anne  of  Cleves.  in  Latin. 

58.  Copy  of  my  Lord  Ambafladour  Temple’s  Memo- 
nall,  whereby  his  Majefty’s  Expedient  for  the  Lorraine, 
i  afleports  is  propofed.  27th  March  167S.  in  French. 

89.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Hanover’s  Letter  to  his  Ma- 
jelly,  defiringPafles  for  his  Plenipotentiaries  fromFrance 
Spaine,  Denmark,  Sweden,  and  Holland,  ift  June 
1676.  (in  Laun.) 

90.  Copy  of  his  Majefty ’s  Letter  to  the  King  of  Den-  * 

mark,  about  the  Duke  of  Mecklenbourg.  12th  July 
1676.  in  Latin.  „  * 

91.  Copy  of  his  Majefty’s  Letter  to  the  Etnperour, 

about  the  Duke  of  Mecklenbourg.  5th  Auguft  1676 
in  Latin.  £ 

92.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Holftein’s  Letter  to  his 

Majefty,  defiring  PalTes  for  his  Minifters.  14th  July 
1676.  in  French.  2  17  7 

9 3  ‘  Copy  of  the  Elector  of  Bavaria’s  Letter  to  his 
Majefty,  defiring  Pafl'eports  from  the  States  General,  for 
his  Ambafladours.  15th  July,  1676.  S.  V.-  in  Latin. 

94.  The  Emperour’s  Anfwer  to  the  Popes  Nuntio  Ex¬ 
traordinary,  touching  the  Place  of  CongrelTe,  to  Treat 
the  Generali  Peace.  14th  Aug.  1676.  S,  N.  in  Latin. 

.  95-  The  Emperour’s  Anfwer  to  the  Nuntio  Extraor¬ 
dinary,  about  the  fequeftring  of  the  Prince  of  Furftem- 
berg.  14th  Auguft  1676.  S.  N.  in  Latin.  322. 

56.  Proofs  that  the  Minifters  of  the  Hanfe-Towns 
were  ftiled  Ambafladours  by  England  &  France,  A.D. 
1473.  *604.  1655.  received  from  Mr.  Secretary  Wil- 
liamfon.  21ft  Auguft  1679.  324. 

97.  Precedents,  proving  that  Minifters  from  the 
Princes  &  States  of  Germany,  have  been  ftiled  Legati  • 
and  Ambafladours,  by  France,  A.D.  1633.  &  1634. * 

t  ibid. 

Here  are  alfo  fome  other  Precedents  of  the  like  Nature. 

9  98.  Copy 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


i°5 


Num.  1 5  t 5,  1516. 

98.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Mceklenbourgh’s  Guftrows 
Letter  to  his  Majeftv.  29th  Auguit,  1676.  in  French. 

327* 

99.  Copy  of  h;s  Majefty’s  Letter  to  die  Duke  of  Ba¬ 
varia,  about  Partes  for  his  Minifters.  lit  September  1676. 

(in  Latin.)  3* 2^'  . 

1  00.  Copy  of  his  Majefty’s  Letter  to  the  Duke  or 
Hanover,  ill  September  1676.  in  Latin.  329. 

101.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Hanover’s  Letter  to  his 
Majefty.  2d  September  1676.  in  Latin.  330. 

12.  Memorial  of  the  French  Ambafladours  for  Pafte- 
ports  to  the  Bifliop  of  Marfeilles  returning  from  his  Em- 
bally  in  Poland.  2d  Septr  1 G76.  S.  V.  in  French.  332. 

103.  Duke  of  Neubourg’s  Refidcuts  Memoriall  for 
Paffes  for  that  Duke's  Mint  Iters  with  the  Stile  of  A111- 
bailadors.  Received  14th  September  1676.  in  French. 

332 * * * * * *- 

104.  Copy  of  the  States  Pafte  for  the  Bifliop  of  Mar¬ 
feilles  coming  from  Poland.  14th  September  1676.  in 

Dutch.  .  3)3- 

105.  Obje#ions  againft  the  Electors  fending  Ambaf- 
fadors  to  this  Treaty,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Princes  of 
Germany  not  Electors.  Received,  14th  Septr.  1677. 

S.  V.  in  Latin.  354* 

106.  Extra#  d’une  Lettre  eferite  par  M.  Spanheim, 
de  Francfort  du  4 1  Septembre  1  (  76.  a  un  des  Gtneraux 
de  la  Maiefte  Imperiale ;  tor  demoldhing  of  Philipfbourg. 

33s- 

107.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Mecklenbourg’s  Letter  to 
his  Majelty.  23th  Septr.  S.  V.  i6;6.  (in  Latin.)  342. 

108.  Copy  of  Sir  John  Paul’s  Letter  to  my  Lord  Am- 
baftadour  J,  nkin’s,  about  the  Paftage  of  the  Suedifli  Let¬ 
ters.  1  ith  October  1676. 

,09.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Neubourg’s  Letter  to  his 
Majefty,  deliving  his  Minifters  may  have  the '  1  itle  of  Am- 
bafladours.  22d  0#ober  1676.  in  French.  347. 

1 1  o.  Extra#  out  of  the  Gazette  a  la  Main  de  M.  de 
Hayes.’  2  th  O#.  1676.  S.V.  in  Latin.  350. 

in.  Paper  concerning  Paftage  of  Letters  through 
Denmark,  given  by  the  Mediatours  to  the  Swedes.  31ft 
October  16;  6.  in  French.  .  35  ' - 

112.  Bifliop  of  Stralbourg’s  Exceptions  againft  the 
Paffc  from  Brandenbourg  for  his  Minifters.  7th  Novem¬ 
ber  1676.  in  Latin.  354* 

in'  Copy  of  Sir  John  Paul’s  Letter  to  Mr.  Secretary 
’Wjlliamfon,  about  the  Repair  of  the  Danifti  Amballk- 
dors  to  Nimeguen ;  and  the  Paftage  of  the  Swedes  Let¬ 
ter  thro  Denmark,  nth  Oftober  1  676  ibid. 

114.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Williamfon’s  Letter  to 

Sir  John  Paul.  1 7  November  1676.  355- 

1 1 5.  An  Index  or  Table  to  the  feveral  Papers  con¬ 
tained  in  this  Book.  At  the  end. 

x  5 1 6. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Chudleigh, 
and  given  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dolben  ;  containing, 

1.  Don  Bernardo  de  Salinas’s  Memorial  about  his 

Majefty’s  Subjects  going  into  the  French  Service.  Pre- 
lciited  !  °  November  1676.  inSpanifli.  i- 

2.  Anfwer  to  D.  Bernardo  de  Salinas’s  Memorial, 

fubferibed  II.  Coventry.  18th  November  1676.  _  3. 

3.  Myn  Heer  van  Beuningen’s  Memorial  to  his  Ma- 

j  jfty  ;  in  French.  7* 

4.  The  Anfwer  to  M.  VanBeuningen’s  Memorial  Fub¬ 
feribed  J.Williamfon.  1  ith  December,  1676.  in  French. 

r.  Copy  of  his  Majefty’s  Letter  to  the  Emperour, 
about  the  Toll  upon  the  Elbe,  &e.  30th  November 
1676.  in  Latin.  9* 

6.  Copy  of  the  King’s  Letter  to  the  Eleftors  -,  30th 
November  1676.  in  Latin,  _  I0- 

7  An  Extract  taken  out  of  the  publick.Difpatch  of 
the  41b  December  1676.  as  it  was  tranflated  into  French, 

C^T-  Uarl.  Vol.  II, 


Num.  1516. 

and  read  to  Mr.  the  Marefchal  d'Eftrades  by  Sir  Leobne 
Jenkins,  that  the  Marefchal  might  take  in  Writing  what 
he  fh  >u  d  think  fit  of  it ;  as  had  been  agreed  by  my 
Lords  the  Night  before.  1 1  • 

8.  What  Sir  Leoline  Jenkin’s  was  to  fay  to  the  Ma- 

refchall  before  the  Extra#  lliould  be  read  to  him.  in 
French.  13- 

9.  Compliments  fur  l’arrive  des  Anibaffadcurs  dc 

Brandebourg  fait  le  1 4ine  Decembre  1676.  ibid. 

10.  Compliment  to  the  Count  Khii.fky,  in  French* 

ibid. 

11.  Copy  of  Count  Khinfky’s  Letter  to  the  Media- 
tours,  from  Cologne,  g.  Deer.  167''.  in  French.  14. 

1  2.  Copy  of  the  Mediatours  Anfwer  to  Count  Khin- 
fkys  Letter.  7th  December  1676.  in  French.  15* 

13.  Copy  of  the  Duke  de  Villa  Hermofa’s  Pafte  for 

the  Marquis  de  Vitrv,  and  the  Comte  de  Robenac  5th 
December  1676.  in  French.  16. 

14.  Copy  of  the  Prince  of  Orange’s  Letter  to  the 

Dutch  Ambafladours  ;  lending  to  them  the  Curland- 
Trooper.  151I1  December  1676.  in  Dutch.  17. 

15.  Copy  of  Mnnfieur  Somnitz  Letter  to  the  Media- 
tours,  about  the  equal  Treatment  to  him  k  his  Colleague. 

1676.  in  French.  18. 


27  Dec.  _ 

16.  Tranflation  of  his  Imperial  Majefty’s  Refolution 

how  his  Ambaffadors  are  to  trea:  the  Brandenbourg-Am- 
baffad  uirs  at  Nimeguen.  21ft  November  1671.  20. 

17.  R  la  ion  ol  the  Brandenbourg- Ambafladours  of 

the  Treatment  they  had  received,  when  the  Imperial  & 
Swedifli  Ambafladours  gave  them  their  firft  Vifit  at  Of-  • 
nabrug.  Tranflated  ‘  out  of  High-Dutch.  24th  April 
1641;.  _  21* 

18.  Copy  of  a  Paper  delivered  by  Mr,  Secretary 

Williamfon,  to  Mnnfieur  de  Ruvigny,  about  the  Piecc- 
dence  of  the  Mediatours.  30th  December  16-5.  in 
French.  23- 

19.  Copy  of  the  Inftru#ions  to  the  Ambafladours  at 

Cologne,  as  to  their  Government  there,  upon  the  point 
of  Precedency.  7th  May  1673.  24/ 

20.  Extra#  from  the  Ambafladours  I.etter  to  the 
Earl  of  Arlington,  upon  the  fame  point.  June  1673. 

ibid. 

2 1 .  Memorandums  of  the  Styles  ufed  in  Paftes  granted 

to  divers  Minifters.  2 5  et  27- 

22.  Spanifti  Pafte  for  4  Ballots  of  Goods  for  the 
Compte  d’Av.iux.  1 8th  Nov.  i6;6.  in  French,  ibid. 

2j.  Spanifh  Pafte  for  the  Comte  d’Efpance.  19th 
Novr.  1676.  in  French.  2^. 

2  .  Memoire  for  the  Prorogation  of  the  former  Paffe- 
port  :  or,  a  new  one  for  the  Comte  d’Efpance,  brought 
by  Mr.  d’Avaux’s  Secretary.  20th  November  167  ..  ir. 
French. 

25.  Memoire  of  the  Mediatours  about  part  o.  the 
Marqui-  de  los  Balbaces  Equipage  coming  before  him 
from  Vienna.  Given  by  my  Lord  Amhaftidor  Jenkins  to 
the  French  Ambafladours.  2  Jan.  1676-7.  in  French.  27. 

26.  Copy  of  a  French  Pafte  for  Mr.  Elgius  Secretary 

of  Luxembourg.  15  Janvier  1677.  ibid- 

27.  Pafleport  for  the  French  Players  to  goe  to  Mae- 
ftrichf-  Received  13  Jail.  1676-7.  in  Fiench.  28. 

28.  Spanilh  Safegard  for  Mr.  de  Moiaife  of  Stavdot, 

fent  to  my  Lord  Ambafiadour  Jenkins  by  Don  1  edro 
Ronquillo.  2d  February  1670-7.  ,111  French)  29. 

29.  Account  of  the  Safe-garde  given  by  the  Lmperour 

to  Mr.  de  Moiaife.  17th  Febr.  1677.  S.  V.  ibid. 

30.  Letter  from  Pope  Innocent  xi.  to  the  Magiitrates 

of  Lcige.  i®th  Jan.  1676-7.  %?' 

-11,  Memoire  pour  le  Pafteport  du  SieurDo#eurOgier, 
tant  d’Elpagne,  que  de  France,  et  Meflieurs  les  Eftats. 

1  ft  June  1677.  lbid; 

32.  C.opv  of  the  States  Letter  to  his  Majefty  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  the  I-Iungarian  Minifters.  14th  October  167  . 
in  French.  -3 


33.  Copy 


mm  [  i 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  i  si6 


33.  Copy  ofhisMajefty’s  Letter  to  the  States  Generali 
concerning  the  Hungarian  Minifters  ;  in  French.  33. 

34.  Copy  of  the  Hungarian  Minifters  Memoriall  to 
the  King,  nth  November  1672.  in  Latin.  34. 

35.  Lettre  du  Roy  de  la  Grande  Bretagne  aux  E flats 
Gencraux ;  pour  les  engager  de  faire  leur  meilleures 
Offices  aupres  de  '.’Empereur  pour  obtiner  le  Sequeftra- 
tion  du  Prince  de  Furftemberg.  28th  Decembre  1675. 

r  ,  37* 

36.  Extraft  of  Mr.  Skelton’s  Letter,  about  the  Em¬ 

peror’s  fending  his  Ambaffadours  to  Nimeguen.  October 
29th.  S.  V.  1676.  39. 

37.  Copy  of  the  Town  of  Hambourg’s  Letter  to  his 

Majcfty  about  Paffeports  from  France,  for  the  Deputys 
they  intend  to  fend  to  Nimeguen.  3th  December  1676. 
in  Latin.  40. 

38.  A  Way  propofedby  the  Swedes,  for  their  Couriers 

to  pafle  through  Denmark.  15th  January  1676-7.  in 
French.  41. 

39.  Copy  of  his  Majefty’s  Letter  to  the  Elector  Pa- 

latin.  1 6th  December  1675.  in  Latin.  42. 

40.  Copy  of  his  Majefty’s  Letter  to  the  Elettor  Pa¬ 

latin,  written  with  his  own  hand,  18th  December  1675. 
in  Englifh.  43. 

4  r .  Report  of  thofe  that  fixed  Marks  upon  the  Bounds 
of  the  Neutrality.  2d  January  1677.  in  French.  44. 

42.  A£b  of  the  Dutch  Ambaffadours  about  the  Limits 
of  the  Neutrality.  17th  March  1676-7.  in  French.  46. 

43.  P  efolutie  van  de  Staten  Generl.  op  de  Memoriael 

van  de  Heer  Temple,  om  de  Paffeporten.  1  o  Maert  1 676. 
S.N.  I7' 

44.  R efolutie  van  den  Staten  Generl.  op  de  Miffive 

van  de  Heer  Beuninghen,  voor  de  Paffeporten,  &c.  1 0 
Maert  1676.  S.  N.  49. 

45.  Extratt  of  a  Letter  from  Mofcow  touching  Mr. 

John  Hebdon.  20th  February  1677.  in  French.  50. 

46.  Copie  of  Mr.  Van  Beuningham’s Memoriall  touch¬ 
ing  Mr.  Hebdon,  May  T*T  1677.  in  French.  5:. 

47.  Copy  of  the  D.uke  of  Holftein’s  Letter  to  my 
Lord  A mbaffadour  Jenkins.  15th  May  1677.  in  French. 

52. 

48.  Copie  of  the  Duke  of  Holftein’s  Letter  to  my 
Lord  AmbafTadour  Jenkins.  1 2th  February,  in  French. 

53. 

49.  Copy  of  the  Ele&or  Palatins  Letter  to  my  Lords 

the  Mcdiatours.  30th  March  1677.  in  Latin.  54. 

50.  Copy  of  my  Lord  AmbafTadour  Temple’s  Letter 
to  Mr.  Muller.  14th  April  1677.  in  French.  55. 

51.  Copy  of  the  Mediatours  Letter  to  the  Prince 
Elettor  Palatin.  1 6th  Aprill  1677.  in  Latin.  36. 

32.  Copy  of  the  moft  Chriflian  King’s  Letter  to  his 
Majefty.  23d  April  1677.  S.N.  37. 

53.  Copy  of  the  Imperiall  Ambaffadours  Letter  to  the 

Mediatours.  3d  May  167.-.  S.  N.  in  Latin.  59. 

54.  Copy  of  the  Emperour’s  Paffeport  for  the  Lor¬ 

raine  Minifters,  with  the  Style  of  AmbafTadour.  31ft 
March' 1677.  in  Latin.  60.  • 

55.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraines  Letter  to  the 

Mediatours.  5th  May  1977.  (in French.)  62. 

56.  Copy  of  the  Brandenbourg  Ambaffadours  Reply 
to  the  French  Sc  Swedifh  Ambaffadours,  about  the  fecond 

•  Ambaffadours  treatment,  in  French.  63. 

57.  Articles  agreed  on  between  the  Eleftor  Palatin 
and  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  delivered  to  the  Mediatours 
by  Mr.  Spanheim.  26th  Maij  1666.  in  Latin.  65. 

,  .  58*  Gopy  of  Duke  Friderick  of  Saxony  his  Letter  to 
his  Majefty.  24th  November  1676.  in  Latin.  69. 
,59-  Gopy  of  the  Town  of  Hambourg’s  Letter  to  his 
Majefty,  deliring  that  they  may  be  included  in  the  Peace 
and  have  a  Neutrality.  2Sth  November  1676.  in  Latin. 

60.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy  Charles  n.  au  Prince 
frwch™6  de  rurlle‘nbcrS-  6*  November  1675.  in 


Num.  1516. 

6 1 .  Copie  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy  Charles  11.  au  Prince 

Guillaume  de  Furftemberg.  28th  December  1675.  in 
French.  76. 

62.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy  Charles  11.  &  l’Evefque 
de  Strafbourg.  9th  Novembre  1673.  in  French.  77. 

63.  Copie  de  la  Declaration  du  Roy  Charles  11.  k  Mr. 

l’Evefque  de  Strafbourg.  6th  Novembre  1675.  78. 

64.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy,  au  Roy  Tres-chref- 

tien.  7th  Novembre  1675.  79. 

65.  Copy  of  the  Imperiall  Ambaffadours  Letter  to  the 

Mediatours,  about  the  omiffion  of  the  word  “  Invi&if- 
fimus”  to  the  Emperour,  in  Mr.  Chudleigh’s  Commif- 
fion.  5th  June  1677.  S.  N.  in  Latin.  80. 

66.  Copy  of  the  Mediatours  Anfvver  to  the  Imperiall 
Ambaffadours  Letter.  May  30th  1677.  S.  V.  in  Latin. 

81. 

67.  Copy  of  the  Meffage  fent  the  Brandenbourg  Am- 

baffadours,  by  the  Mediatours.  30th  May  1677.  S.V. 
in  French.  82. 

68.  Copy  of  the  Imperiall  Ambalfadours  Letter  to  the 

Mediatours  about  the  word  “  lnvi£biffimus.”  10th  June 
1677.  S.  N.  in  Latin.  ibid. 

69.  Copy  of  Mr.  Smid’s  Letter  to  my  Lord  Temple. 

i8lh  May  1677.  in  French.  83. 

70.  Copy  of  my  Lord  Temple’s  Anfwer  to  Mr. 

Smid  the  Ofnabrug-Refidents Letter,  inFrench.  Received 
18th  May  1 677.  ibid. 

71.  Proteftation  des  Ambaffadeurs  de  France,  contre 

les  Qualitez  prifes  par  le  Prince  Charles,  et  qui  luy  ont 
efte  donnees.  i7Juin  1677.  84. 

72.  Placita  quasdam  illuftriffimorum  et  excellentifli- 

morum  Dominorum  DD.  quoiquot  hie  Neomagi  fub- 
fiftunt,  pro  Pace  Publica  et  Neutralitate  farta  tetU  con- 
fervanda.  3  Julij  1677.  85. 

73.  Copy  of  the  Magiftrates  of  Hambourg’s  fecond 
Letter  to  the  Mediatours.  15th  June  1677.  in  Latin.  88. 

74.  Copy  of  the  Mediators  Letter  to  the  Magiftrates- 

of  Hambourg.  27  June  1677.  in  Latin.  90. 

75.  Copy  of  the  Dutch  Ambaffadours  Memoriall,  to 

have  fome  Dutch  Seamen fet  at  liberty,  who  were  taken, 
in  the  Indies  by  the  French.  6th  July  1677.  S.  N.  in 
French.  g2m 

y6.  Copy  of  the  Dutch  Ambalfadours  Memoriall  for 
the  better  treatment  of  fome  Dutch  Prifoners  taken  at 
Mont-Caffel  by  the  French.  15  July  1677.  S.N.  in 
French.  9^. 

77.  Copy  of  the  Dutch  Ambaffadours  Memoriall 

about  fome  Veffels  &  other  Goods  taken  by  French 
Coafters,  contrary  to  the  Liberty  granted  for  fiffiing. 
13th  July  1677.  S.  N.  in  French.  94. 

78.  Copy  of  the  Emperours  Paffeport  for  the  Bifhop 
of  Strafbourg’s  Minifter.  12th  July  1676.  in  Latin.  96. 

79.  Copy  of  the  Swedifh  Paffeport  for  the  Bifhop 
of  Strafbourg’s  Minifter.  17th  April  1676.  in  Latin. 

98. 

80.  Copy  of  the  Lorraine  Paffeport  for  the  Bifhop 
of  Strafbourg’s  Minifter.  10th  April  1676.  inFrench. 

100. 

81.  Copy  of  the  States  Generalls  Paffeport  for  the 
Bp.  of  Strafbourg’s  Minifter.  19th  Nov.  1676  in  French. 

101. 

82.  Copy  of  the  King  of  Denmarks  Paffeport  for  the 

Bifhop  of  Strafbourgs  Minifter.  15  January  1676.  in 
Latin.  1  o  & 

83.  Copy  of  the  Spanifh  Paffeport  for  the  Bifhop 
of  Strafbourgs  Minifter.  15  July  1676.  in  French.  103. 

84.  My  Lord  AmbafTadour  Jenkin’s  Letter  to  the 

Ele&or-Palatin.  13  July  1677.  in  Latin.  104. 

85.  Copie  pf  the  Kings  Letter  to  the  King  of  Denmark, 

concerning  his  Mediation  between  that  Crown,  and  the 
Duke  of  Holftetn.  2  July  1 677.  in  Latin.  106. 

86.  Copy  of  the  French  Ambaffadours  Reafons,  why 

they  d  d  not  anfwer  the  Duke  of  Lorraines  Proportions. 
In  French.  1  Qg , 

9  87.  Copy 


9 


Bibliothecae  Harleiansei 


107 


Num.  1516. 

87.  Copy  of  the  Prince  Elector  Palatines  Letter 
to  my  Lords  the  Mediators.  16  May  1677.  in^Latin. 

no. 

88.  Copy  of  the  Words  taken  per  difcl;  men,  from 
my  Lord  Ambafladour  Jenkins,  in  the  Aflembly  of  the 
Allyes;  being  the  French  Ambafladours  Anfwer,  upon 
the  Lorraine  Propofitions.  16  July  1 677.  in  French. 

111. 

89.  Copy  of  the  13th  Article  of  a  Treaty  made  be¬ 

tween  France  &  Sweden  by  Baron  Sparre.  dat.  if  Aprill 
1675.  (In  Latin.)  _  II.2*- 

90.  Copy  of  an  Inftrument  wherein  his  Maj  eft  y  gives 

the  Emperour  the  Title  of  Invitftiflimus.  27  January 
1673.  in  Latin.  183. 

9 1 .  Copy  of  my  Lord  Ambafladour  Jenkins’s  Letter 

to  Don  Pedro  Ronquillo,  about  his  Vifit  and  Revifit  to 
the  Imperial  Ambaffadors  before  the  Mediators.  24  July 
1677.  In  French.  114. 

92.  Copy  of  Don  Pedro  Ronquillo’s  Anfwer  to  my 

Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins’s  Letter.  Aprill  3.  1077.  in 
French.  115- 

93.  Copy  of  a  Certificate  given  by  the  Secretary  of  the 

Spaiiifh  Embaflfy,  in  what  manner  the  firft  Vifits  were 
made  between  the  Count  Trautmanfdorf  &  the  Spanifh 
Minifters,  upon  the  arrival  of  the  Laid  Count  at  Mun- 
fter.  4th  Auguft  1677.  (fuperferibed  Don  Francefco  de 
Urbina.)  in  Spanifh.  116. 

94.  Copy  of  a  Certificat  given  by  the  Nuntio’s  Au¬ 

ditor,  of  what  paffed  at  Munfter,  in  the  matter  of  the 
firft  Vifits,  between  the  Imperialifts  &  the  Spanyards  : 
fubferibed  Auguftinus  Pinchiarius.  4th  Auguft  1677.  *n 
Italian.  x  1 7  • 

95.  Copy  of  Mr.  de  los  Balbace’s  Letter  to  the  Nuncio, 

about  his  Vifit  to  the  Imperiall  Ambaffadours.  3d  Au¬ 
guft  '677.  S.  N.  in  Spanifh.  117- 

96.  Tranfcript  of  the  Advices  from  the  Dutch  Minifter 

at  Madrid.  15th  July  1677.  in  French.  118. 

97.  Copy  of  the  Swedifh  Ambaffadors  Doubts  ;  and 

the" Spanifh  Ambaffadors  Anfwers,  in  the  matter  of  No¬ 
tification.  30th  July  1677.  in  French.  120. 

98.  Copy  of  the  Magiftrates  of  Hambourghs  third 

Letter  to  the  Lords  Ambaffadors  Mediators.  24th  July 
16 77*  in  Latin.  i22- 

99.  Copy  of  the  Hungarian  Proteftants  Letter  to  the 
Elector  Palatin’s  Minifter  at  Vienna,  in  Latin.  124. 

100.  Copy  of  an  Extract  out  of  Mr.  Oxenftiernes  Pro- 

tocoll,  touching  Prince  William  of  Furftemberg.  Au¬ 
guft  1 677.  in  Latin.  129- 

1 01.  Copy  of  the  French  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the 

Lorraine  Propofition ;  with  alterations  made  in  it  by 
themfelves.  1  ith  Auguft  1 677.  in  French.  135. 

102.  Copy  of  the  French  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the 

Lorraine-Propofition  ;  as  it  was  to  be  reprefented  to  the 
Allyes.  in  French.  '  36. 

103.  Copy  of  an  Extract  of  the  States  General’s  Re- 

folution.  9th  April  1675.  in  French.  137. 

104.  Propofition  of  a  Dutch  Minifter  (or  Clergyman, 

Peter  de  Ubilde)  to  his  Majefty  about  Pitch  prepared  by 
him  for  the  Advantage  of  Navigation.  22d  Auguft 
1677.  S.  N.  in  Latin.  138. 

105.  Copy  of  the  Ele&or  Palatin’s  Letter  to  my  Lord 

Ambaffador  Jenkins.  7th  Aug.  1677.  139- 

106.  Declaration  de  fon  Alteffe  l’Ele&eur  Palatine 

touchant  fon  Envoy  aux  Traittes  de  Paix  a  Nimegue,  du 
44  de  Mars  1677.  _  I4I* 

107.  Count  Wallenftein's  Memoriall  to  his  Majefty, 

44  June  1677.  .  I42> 

108.  Count  Wallenftein's  Memoriall  defiring  an  An¬ 
fwer  to  his  former.  Abguft  1677.  in  French.  144. 

109.  Anfwer  to  Count  Wallenftein’s  Memoriall ;  fub¬ 

feribed  by  Sir  Jofeph  Williamfon.  9th  Auguft  1677.  in 
French.  J45- 

no-  Copy  of  the  Swedifh  Ambaffadors  Memoriall, 
20th  Auguft  1677.  H7- 


Num.  1516. 

in.  Copy  of  my  Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins’s  Letter 
to  the  Bifhop  of  Gurik,  about  his  performing  the  firft 
Vifits  to  the  Spanifh  Ambaffadors,  before  others.  27th 
Auguft  1677.  S.  V.  in  Latin.  154* 

112.  Copy  of  the  Bifhop  of  Gurik’s  Anfwer  to  my 
Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins.  6th  September  1677.  S.  N. 
in  French.  15  5. 

x  1 3.  Copy  of  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins’s  Letter  to  the  Elec¬ 
tor-Palatine,  in  Anfwer  to  that  of  his  Highnefs.  31ft 
Auguft  1 677.  156. 

114.  Copy  of  Mr.  de  Burgomaynes  Letter  to  Mr. 
Secretary  Coventry.  -,4.  Auguft  1677-  ki  French.  159. 

1 15.  Copy  of  Mr.  Secretary  Coventry’s  Letter  to  Mr. 
de  Burgomayne,  about  our  Ships  being  carryed  into  Of- 
tend  and  confiscated.  6th  Auguft  1677.  in  French. 

160. 

1 16.  Co’py  of  Mr.  Burgomayne’s  Anfwer  to  Mr.  Se¬ 
cretary  Coventry’s  Letter.  19th  Auguft  1677.  161. 

1 1 7.  Monfieur  de  Bourgomaines  Memoriall,  of  the 

T^-th  Auguft  1 677.  in  Spanifh.  162. 

118.  Monfieur  de  Bourgomaines  Memoriall  to  his 
Majefty.  6th  Sept.  1677.  N.  S.  in  Spanifh.  164. 

1 19.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Deuxpont’s  Letter  to  the 
Lords  Ambaffadors  Mediators.  July  44  1677.  in  French. 

j66. 

120.  Copy  of  Mr.  Conig’s  Memoriall,  Counfellour 
to  the  Duke  of  Deuxponts.  4*-  Sept.  1677.  in  Latin. 

167. 

1 2 1.  Copy  of  Mr.  Canon’s  Memoriall  to  my  Lord 
Ambaffador  Jenkins.  9th  September  1 677.  in  French. 

169. 

122.  Copy  of  the  Bifhop  of  Gurgg’s  Letter  to  the 

Nuncio,  about  the  Vifits  that  paffed  between  him  and 
the  Spanifh  Ambaffadors.  6th  September  1677.  in 
Italian.  171* 

123.  Copy  of  Sir  William  Godolphin’s  Memoriall  to 
the  Spanifh  Secretary  of  State,  concerning  Don  Bernardo 
de  Salinas  &  Fonfeca.  19th  Aprill  16 77.  in  Spanifh. 

172. 

124.  The  Spanifh  Secretary’s  Anfwer  to  Sir  William 

Godolphin’s  Paper  concerning  Don  Bernardo  de  Salinas 
&Fonfeca.  21ft  May  1677.  in  Spanifh.  173. 

125.  Sir  William  Godolphin’s  Reply  to  the  Spanifh 

Secretary,  touching  Don  Bernardo  &  Fonfeca.  May 
1677.  in  Spanifh.  *74- 

1 2  6.  The  Secretary  of  State  of  Spaines  Letter  to  Sir 
William  Godolphin  concerning  a  Spanifh  Fregatt  taken 
before  Oftend,  by  one  of  his  Majefty’s  Men  of  War;  and 
about  Bernardo  &  Fonfeca.  nthAuguft  1677.  inSpanifh. 

?75- 

127.  Extra£t  of  Philip  ivths  Will,  not  to  alienate 
the  Low  Countryes.  14th  Sept.  1665.  in  Spanifh.  176. 

128.  Extrad  of  the  States  Refolution  concerning  the 

negotiating  the  Liberty  of  the  Prince  of  Furftemberg  at 
the  Treaty.  19th  Aprill  167  5.  in  French.  177. 

1 29.  Copy  of  the  States  Refolution  concerning  Prince 
William  of  Furftemberg.  19th  Aprill  1675.  in  French. 

178. 

130.  Extraft  of  Letters  from  the  Dutch  Minifter  at 

Copenhagen  to  the  States,  concerning  the  free  Pafl'age 
of  Letters  thro  Denmark,  in  French.  185. 

13  1.  Copy  of  the  Memoriall  of  the  Spanifh  Ambafia- 

dors,  delivered  to  the  Mediators.  2cth  September  1 677. 
in  French.  _  I90, 

132.  Copy  of  a  Paper  taken  by  the  Mediators  from 
Meffrs.  Khinlky,  Hoeg,  &  Beverning,  by  way  of  Dilate, 
24th  September  1677.  in  French  :  With  the  Mediators 
exceptions  to  feveral  parts  of  it,  apoitill’d  in  Englifh. 

193- 

133.  Copy  of  the  Memoriall  of  the  Dutch  Ambalfa- 
dors,  delivered  to  the  Mediators  25th  September  1677. 
in  French. 

1  34.  Rapprefentszione  de  gli  excellentiflimi  Signori 
Ambafliatori  de  Prencipi  Cattolici  fatta  al  Mediators 

Apoftokco 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


i  oS 


Num.  1516. 

Apollolico  il  dl  3  Ottobre  ;  in  Rifpolta  di  quella  ch’egli 
fece  loro  a  Nome  de  gl’cccellentiffimi  Signori  Ambaflia- 
toii  Franchefi  li  23  Aogofto  paffato  :  communicated  to 
the  Mediators,  29th  September  1677.  x97* 

1 : 5.  The  Imperial  Ambafladors  Memoriall,  touching 
the  Bifliop  of  Stralbourg,  in  Italian  :  communicated  to 
the  Mediators,  29th  September  1677.  193. 

136.  Copia  Literarum  Sereniflirai  Eledloris  Palatini, 

ad  Dominos  Legatos  Csefareos  Neomagi,  die  2  ad  Sep- 
tembris  1677.  199. 

137.  Duke  of  Holllein’s  Minifters  Memoriall  to  the 

Mediators  ;  giving  his  Rcafons  why  his  Mailers  Concerns 
are  to  be  brought  into  this  Treaty,  in  Latin.  200. 

138.  Diclamen  of  the  Imperiall  Ambafladors,  touch¬ 

ing  the  Bilhop  of  Stralbourg.  taken  27th  September 
1677.  in  Latin.  202. 

139.  Tranflation  of  the  Treaty  between  the  King  of 

Denmark.  &  the  Fledlor  of  Brandenbourg,  concluded  at 
Copenhagen.  23d  December  1676.  204. 

140.  Anfwer  of  the  French  Ambaffadours  upon  the 

two  Papers  of  the  Allyes,  of  the  22d  &  29th  of  Septem¬ 
ber,  1677.  (in  French.)  211. 

141.  The  French  Ambaffador's  Anfwer  to  the  Allyes, 

of  the  1  Sth  Odtober,  as  it  was  reported  bv  the  Media¬ 
tors  in  the  Aflembly  of  the  Allyes.  20th  Odlober  1677. 
in  French.  212. 

142.  Damlh  Ambaffadours  Memorial  touching  the 

Paffage  of  the  Swedilh  Letters  :  19th  October  1677.  in 
Latin,  21^. 

143-  Fxtradl  out  of  the  Danilh  Ambafladors  Memo¬ 
riall,  as  it  was  communicated  to  Mr.  Oxenltiernc,  by  the 
Mediators.  19th  October  1677.  in  French.  215. 

144.  An  Extract  out  of  Mr.  de  Scgnelay’s  Letter,  de¬ 

livered  to  the  Mediators,  in  lieu  of  a  Mcmoire  touching 
the  Liberty  ofPrifoners  at  Sea.  25th  Odtober  1677.  in 
French.  2  1  6. 

145.  A  Treaty  concluded  by  Meflieurs  Sparre  & 

Pompone,  between  Sweden  &  France.  44  Aprill  1675. 
in  Latin.  217. 

146.  Copy  of  the  Prince  of  Orange's  Letter  to  the 

States,  about  his  Marriage,  in  Dutch.  222. 

1  47.  Dictatum  of  the  Allies,  in  anfwer  to  that  from 
the  French  Ambafladors  of  the  1  Sih  Odtober,  inFrench; 
with  Apoltills  ot  the  Mediators,  in  Englilh.  2dNovern- 
ber  1677.  _  223. 

148.  Copy  of  the  Marquis  of  Baden-Dour-lach’s  Let¬ 
ter  to  his  Majelly,  44  Augult  1 677.  in  Latin.  225. 

149.  Copy  of  the  Mediators  Letter  to  the  Duke  of 

Deuxponts.  44  1677.  xn  French.  227. 

150.  Copy  of  the  French  Ambafladors  Memoriall,  in 

Anfwer  to  the  Memorial  of  the  Allyes.  1  Sth  November 
1677.  in  French.  22$. 

151.  Ordonnance  of  the  mod  Chrillian  King,  where¬ 

by  he  revokes  the  Liberty  of  Filhing  granted  to  the 
States  only,  17th  May  1 677.  inFrench.  231. 

152.  Account  of  the  particulerlnfradlions  that  were  the 
C.auic  for  the  foregoing  Revocation,  in  French.  232. 

•53*  Thc  Pnncefle  Sophia’s  Paper,  for  his  Majelly’s 
favour  to  the  Interefts  of  the  Bilhop  of  Ofnabrug,  att  the 
winding  up  of  the  Peace,  received  the  21ft  November 
1677.  in  French.  2 ^ 

154.  'I  he  Eledlor  of  Cologne’s  Miniflers  Memoriall 
for  his  Majelly's  favour  to  the  Interells  of  that  Eledlor  in 
the  Negotiation  of  the  Peace.  x6th  September  1677. 
inFrench. 

1 55-  Extract  out  of  the  French  Ambafladors  Memo¬ 
riall  (vid.  N"  150.)  as  intended  to  be  communicated  to 
the  Allyes  by  the  Mediators,  in  French.  240. 

1,6.  Additional  Article  drawn  up  by  the  Mediators 
for  the  prevention  of  Diforders  in  the  Aflembly.  26th 
November  1677.  in  Latin.  242> 

157.  Dutch  AmbsffaJors  Memorial  for  the  Continua¬ 
tion  ot  the  Liberty  of  Filhing  granted  by  the  moll  Chrif- 
rian  King  to  the  States  in  May  1677.  inFrench.  243. 


Num.  1516. 

158.  Copy  of  the  Cologne  Miniflers  Memorial  for 
Paffeports.  1  ith  December  1677.  S.N,  in  French.  245. 

159.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Holltein’s  Letter  to  my 

Lord  Ambaflador  Jenkins.  11th  November  1677.  in 
French.  246. 

1 60.  Memorial  in  the  behalfe  of  the  Prince  of  Ligne, 
prefented  my  Lord  Ambaflador  Jenkins.  lgthDecember 

1677.  in  French.  247. 

161.  Copy  of  the  King  of  France’s  Paffe  for  the  De¬ 
puty*  of  the  Fledlor  ol  Cologne.  28th  December  1 677. 

inFrench.  250. 

162.  Copy  of  Mr.  Carrieres  Memoriall  in  behalf  of 

the  Prince  of  Conde.  12  Jan.  1678.  in  French.  251. 

163.  Copy  of  Mr.  Carrieres  Memoriall  in  behalf  of 
the  Duke  of  Anguien.  3  Jan.  1677-8,  in  French.  254. 

164.  Copy  of  the  Speech  of  the  Swedilh  Amb::fla« 

dor  to  the  King  of  Poland  at  Dantzick,  upon  occzjion 
of  fome  Threats  made  him  by  the  Elcdtor  of  Branden¬ 
bourg.  14th  December  1677.  in  Lat  n.  255. 

165.  Copy  of  Mr.  de  Luvoys  Letter  to  the  French 

Ambafladors  touching  the  Ranioin  of  the  Dutch  Prifon- 
ers,  and  a  new  Cartel.  17th  January  1678.  S.N.  in 
French.  258. 

1 66.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Anguiens  Memorial.  3 ill 

January  1678.  inFrench.  259. 

167.  Copy  of  the  Duke  of  Anguien’s  Contradl  of 

Marriage,  in  French.  262. 

168.  TJlament  du  feu  Roy  Jean-Cafimir  de  Pologne. 

in  French.  "  2 63. 

1 69.  Renonciation  de  Madame  la  PrinceUe  Palatine, 

a  la  fuccefiion  et  aux  Legs  du  Roy  Jean-Cafimir  de  Po¬ 
logne.  in  French.  268. 

170.  The  firltProjedt  of  an  Adi,  to  be  given  by  the 
Swedilh  Ambaffidors,  that  the  Letters  they  fend  thro 
Denmark  lhall  onely  be  concerning  the  Negotiation.  Jan. 

1678.  in  Latin.  2yQ, 

171.  I  he  Adi  it  felf,  as  it  was  delivered  to  the  Me¬ 
diators  by  the  Swedilh  Miniflers.  3 1  ft  January  1677-8. 
in  Latin. 

1 72.  The  firft  Projedt  drefled  by  the  Danilh  Ambafla- 
dore  ;  as  apollilled  by  the  Swedes,  in  Latin.  272. 

173.  The  new  I’rojedl,  taking  in  much  of  the  Stvedifh 

Apoftill.  Febr.  1677  8.  >n  Latin.  2>"4. 

171.  A  Contr’  Efcrit  of  4  Articles  that  the  Swedtc? 
demand  to  be  fubferibed  by  the  Danes.  Febr.  1677-8.. 
in  Latin. 

175.  Copy  of  his  Majelly’s  I  etter  to  the  King  of  Den¬ 

mark,  oliering  him  his  Mediation  in  compofing  the  Dif¬ 
ferences  between  him  and  the  Duke  of  Holltein.  2d 
July  1 677.  in  Latin.  2^# 

176.  Copy  of  the  King  of  Denmark’s  Letter  to  his 
Majelly  about  the  affaire  of  the  Duke  of  Holltein.  4th 
Augulli677.  in  Latin. 

1 77.  Copie  et  Tradudtion  de  la  Lettre  eferite  de  1’Fm- 

pereur  k  Monfr.  Meyerfberg  fon  Envoye  a  la  Cour  de 
Dannemarc,  touchant  les  Griefs  du  Dhc  de  Holllein.  2 
Jan.  1678.  2gr> 

178.  Decree  of  the  Councill  Aulique  at  Vienna, 
touching  the  Gluckffadt-Tolls.  8  Mart.  .678.  in  Latin. 

282. 

179.  A  Memoirs  of  Mr,  Crampricht.  20th  January 

1676.  inFrench.  283/ 

180.  Copie  of  Mr  Duckers  Memoriall  touching  his 
Admiffion.  icrh  March  1677-8.  in  French.  284. 

181.  Copy  of  the  Fledlor  Palatin’s  Letter  to  the  Em- 

bafly-  A  March  1677-8.  in  Latin.  094. 

182.  Copy  of  my  Lord  Ambaflador  Jenkins’s  Anfwer 
to  the  Fledlor  Palatin.  4T  March  1667-8.  in  Latin.  295.- 

183.  Copy  of  the  bilhop  of  Bambergs  Letter  to  his 

Plenipotentiary  at  Raiilbonne.  ill  March  1678  in 
French.  296 

184.  Copy  of  the  Comte  de  Naffaw-Sarbrucks”  Let¬ 

ter  to  my  Lord  Ambaflador  Jenkins.  6th  February 
1677-8.  in  Latin,  2g7/ 

J85.  The 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


109 


Num.  1516. 

185.  The  Swedilh  Memoriall  in  the  behalf  of  the 

Duke  of  Holftein.  April  1678.  in  French.  298. 

186.  Copy  of  a  Letter  writ  from  Amfterdain  to  the 
Marefchal  d’Etrades.  10  May  1678.  in  French.  299. 

187.  Memoire  de  MefTieurs  Boreel  &  Dyckvelt  a  Mr. 

Tjiic  de  Villa-IIcrnofa.  8  May  1678.  in  French,  (here- 

•  Itcr  tlie  Pages  in  the  book  are  erroneoufly  numbered.) 

300. 

188.  Reponfe  de  Mr.  le  Due  de  Villa  Hernofa  au  Me¬ 
moire.  9  May  1678.  in  French.  332. 

1  39.  Rapporc  des  Miniftres  des  Alliez  Catholiques  fait 
au  Nonce  du  Pape,  1c  17  May,  fur  la  Declaration  des 
Ambaffadors  de  France,  du  15  May  1678.  333. 

190.  The  Anfwer  of  the  Imperial  Ambaffadors  touch¬ 
ing  the  Prolongation  of  the  Terme,  given  by  themfelves 
by  way  of  Ditlatc.  7  May  1678.  (in  French.)  334. 

19  r.  The  Anfwer  of  the  Imperial  Ambaffadors  touch¬ 

ing  the  fame  thing,  given  in,  in  writing,  9th  May  1678. 
in  Larin.  333. 

192.  The  Anfwer  of  the  Marquis  de  los  Bailees 

touching  the  Prolongation  of  the  Terme,  given  by  Word 
of  Mouth.  9  May  1678.  in  French.  336. 

193.  A  Project  made  by  Mr.  Beverning  of  Anfwer  to 
be  given  to  my  Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins,  by  all  the 
Allyes  en  Corps,  touching  the  Prolonging  of  the  Terme ; 
but  not  approved.  8  May  1678.  in  French.  337. 

194.  Declaration  of  the  l'rench  Ambaffadors  concern¬ 

ing  the  Prolongation  of  the  Terme,  &  the  Rellitution  of 
Leew.  May  1678.  in  Italian.  338. 

j  95.  Copy  of  Meflieurs  Boreel  &  Dickvelt’s  Memoriall 
to  the  Duke  de  Villa  Hermofa.  14  May  1678.  in  French. 

339. 

1 9 6.  Copy  of  the  Duke  de  Villa  Hermofa’ s  Anfwer 
to  the  faid  Memoriall.  May  1678.  in  French.  341. 

197.  Copy  of  my  Lord-Ambaffador  Jenkin’s  Letter  to 

the  Marquis  de  la  Fuente,  about  his  firft  Viffts.  in  French. 
17  May  1678.  342. 

198.  Copy  of  the  Marquis  de  la  Fuente’s  Anfwer  to 
the  foregoing  Letter.  27  May  1678.  S.  N.  in  French. 

34 3- 

199.  Copie  d’une  Lettre  de  M.  Pompone  £  M.  de 

Fcuquieres  Ambaffadeur  de  France  en  Suede  ;  dechiffree 
a  Bruffelles.  1 8  Mars.  1678.  344. 

200.  Anfwer  of  the  Duke  de  Villa  Hermofa  to  a  Mc- 

moriall  of  the  Dutch,  wherein  he  declares  his  Confentto 
the  French  Conditions  of  the  Peace.  3  June  1678.  in 
French.  346. 

201.  Mr.  Hoeg’s  Compliment  to  the  Marquis  de 

Fuente,  and  his  Anfwer  to  the  Marquis’s  Notification,  in 
French.  347. 

202.  Copy  of  the  States  Letter  to  their  Ambaffadors  at 

Nimeguen,  recommending  to  them  the  Intereft  of  the 
Prince  deLigne,  in  a  Guaranty  pafs’d  1609.  in  French. 
24  Mars.  1678.  348. 

20  ,.  Copy  of  a  Letter  from  the  Marefchal  d’Eftrades 

to  Mr.  de  Pompone.  21  June  1678.  in  French.  350. 

204.  Extracts  out  of  Mr.  Blafpeils  Papers,  touching 

the  Army  upon  the  Rhine ;  and  how  it  is  to  be  em¬ 
ployed.  in  French.  352. 

205.  Mr.  Skelton’s  Propofition  to  the  Emperor  touch¬ 
ing  Gluckftadt.  in  Latin.  3  -4. 

206.  Mr.  Skelton’s  Conference  with  Chancellour 
Hocker  about  Prince  William  of  Furftemberg.  8  Mar. 

l677-  ,  .355* 

207.  Letter  of  the  Cologne -Refident  at  the  Hague, 

to  my  Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins  about  the  Excommuni¬ 
cation  of  the  Efchevins  of  Liege,  kc.  7  January  1678.  in 
French.  336. 

208.  State  of  the  Cafe  (touching  the  firft  Vifits)  be¬ 

tween  his  Majefties  Ambaffadors  k  Count  Anthoine  Am¬ 
baffador  from  the  King  of  Denmark.  The  Fad,  with 
the  Queftions  arifing  upon  it,  k  hisMajeftys  Refolulions 
thereupon.  18  November  1677.  ’  -icy. 

Cat.  Haiu..  Vox..  II. 


Num.  1516,  1517. 

209.  Stile  that  Sweden  gives  to  the  Emperor,  in  Latin. 

359- 

210.  A  Fac  Simile  of  the  Reforme  offered  by  the 

Nonce  s  Auditor  to  Mr.  d’Avaux,  upon  the  Memoriall 
of  the  French  Ambaffadors  of  1 8  November  communi¬ 
cated  to  the  Mediators  by  Mr.  d’Avaux,  23  November 
1677.  in  Italian.  339. 

2 1 1 .  The  firft  A£t  of  the  French  Ambaffadors  con¬ 
cerning  the  Neutrality,  delivered  to  Sir  L.  Jenkins  .  . 

January  1676-7  :  fince  retraced,  and  another  given  in 
French.  360. 

2 1 2.  The  Prince  of  Orange’s  Relation  of  the  Battle 

of  Piene.  in  French.  36  r. 

213.  Mr.  Secretary  Coventry’s  I.etter  to  Sir  William 

Godolphin,  about  D.  Bernardo  de  Salinas.  19  March 
1676-7.  S.  V.  364. 

214.  Billet  eferit  par  D. Bernardo  de  Salinas,  &  Mr. 

le  Secretaire  Williamfon,  28  Mars  1677.  367. 

215.  Refponfe  de  Mr.  le  Secretaire  Williamfon,  au 

Billet  de  D.  Bernardo  de  Salinas.  ibid. 

216.  La  Reponfe  du  College-Electoral  touchant  le 

Peage furl’ Elbe;  15  May  1677.  368. 

217.  The  Empreffe  Dowager’s  Suit  to  his  Majefty, 

about  Montferrat  &  Cafal.  in  Latin.  370. 

218.  The  Carholique  Kings  Confent  to  his  Majeftys 

expedient  about  Paffes,  See.  given  to  Sir  William  Godol¬ 
phin  by  the  Count  de  Pennarandn.  18  May  1676.  in. 
Spani/h.  ^yi. 

219.  Lord-Ambaffador  Montague’s  Letter  to  iMr.  Se¬ 

cretary  Coventry  about  renewing  the  Treaty  of  1662.  be¬ 
tween  the  French  &  the  Dutch.  -A  July  1677.  372. 

220.  Extraft  of  a  Letter  of  the  Moft  Chriftian  King, 

to  his  Ambaffador  Mr.  Courtin.  July  1677.  373* 

221.  Projett  of  a  Treaty  between  the  States  k  France, 

in  French.  3^ 

222.  Mr.  Hoeg’s  Letter  to  my  Lord  Ambaffadour 

Jenkins,  lending  him  the  Compliment  he  intended  his 
Secretary  fhould  make  to  Mr.  de  los  Balbaccs.  2  c  Tulv 
1677.  S.  V.  in  French.  ^yy. 

223.  Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins’s  Anfwer  to  Mr. 

Hoeg’s  Letter.  25  July  1 677.  in  French.  379. 

224.  Titles  that  might  be  given  the  feveral  Allyes  in 

their  Powers,  in  forme  ;  thus  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Bevern¬ 
ing,  and  fent  lo  my  Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins  in  his  own 
hand,  in  Latin.  38-,. 

225.  Declaration  de  Guerre  faite  par  le  Roy  de  France, 

au  Roy  de  Danemarc.  28  Auguft  1676.  38  j . 

226.  Le  Compliments  fails  ii  Mr.  le  Marquis  de  los 
Balbaqes,  de  la  part  des  Mediateurs.  13  Juin  1677. 

382. 

227.  Mr.  Skelton’s  Propofal  to  the  Emperour.  7  No¬ 
vember  j  676.  N.  S.  in  Latin.  384. 

228.  The  Emperours  Anfwer  to  Mr.  Skeltons  Pro¬ 
pofal.  20  Nov.  1676.  inLatin.  383. 

229.  An  Index,  or  Ihort  Table  referring  to  the  feveral 

Papers  contained  in  this  Volume.  386. 

1  51  7* 

Another  Volume  of  the  State-Papers  relating  to  the  Treaty 

of  Nimeguen  ;  written,  for  the  moft  part,  by  Mr. 

Chudleigh’s  own  hand,  &  given  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dol- 

ben.  Herein  are  contained, 

1  Precedents  /hewing  that  Mediators  have  been  named 
in  the  Preface  ofTreatyes  by  them  mediated.  1. 

2.  Precedents  /hewing  the  Mediators  have  been  foine- 

times  included  by  an  expreffe  Article,  in  Treatyes  me¬ 
diated  by  them.  5. 

3.  Precedents  /hewing  how  Mediators  have  figned  cer- 

tayn  Treatys  mediated  by  them.  7. 

4.  The  Magiftrates  of  Cologne’s  Letter  to  the  Media¬ 
tors.  25  June  1678.  in  Latin.  10. 

F  f  5.  The 


I  10 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


5.  The  Marefchal  de  Schombergs  Letter  to  the  Ma¬ 

gnates  of  Cologne,  delivered  to  the  Mediators,  together 
with  the  former.  In  French.  ,It 

6.  Letter  from  the  Duke  de  la  Tremoille,  to  his  Ma- 

jefly’s  Ambaffadors-Mediators  at  Nimeguen.  7  lulv 
167 S.  in  Latin.  0  J2  J 

7.  Letter  from  the  Deputys  of  Hambourg  to  Sir  L. 
Jenkins.  July  1678.  in  French. 

8.  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins’s  Anfwer  to  the  preceding 

Letter,  n  July  1678.  in  French.  l3  6 

9.  Memorial  of  Mr.  Blafpiel  to  the  Dutch  Ambaffa- 
dols  ;  upon  occafion  of  the  Memoriall  given  in  by  the 
french  Ambaffadors.  1 1  July.  1678.  O.S.  in  French. 

10.  Copy  of  a  Letter  from  the  Magiftrates  of  Cologne 
to  the  King.  22  July  1678.  in  Latin. 

11.  Memoriall  given  in  by  the  French  Ambaffadors  to 

thole  of  the  States.  iMuly  1678.  2- 

!  \  Letter  to  the  King  from  the  Palatin  of  Veldentz, 
and  the  Comtes  of  Hanau  &  Nalfaw.  17  June  1678.  in 
Latin.  ' 

iV  Memoriall  given  in  to  the  French  by  the  Dutch 
Ambaffador.  4  Aug.  1678.  N.  S.  in  French.  29. 

A  1u'/r'?traa  of  Mr-  Pompone’s  Letter  to  the  French 
Ambaffadors  at  Nimeguen.  28  July  1678.  in  French. 

1 5.  Memoire  donne  par  Mefiieurs  les  Ambaffadeurs^e 
!•  ranee  aceux  de  Mcffieures  les  Effats  Generaux. 

6  Aouft.  1678.  S.  N. 

16.  Ducheffe  of  Luxembourg’s  Procuration  to  Mr.  de 
Villevrart.  2  Auguft  1678  in  French. 

Dedu&ion  °^the  Duke  ofLuxembourgs  Title,  to 
the  Dutchy  of  that  name,  in  French.  L 

18.  Copy  of  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins’s  Anfwer  to' the 
Frencli  LuxembourSs  Letter-  21  Auguft  1678.  in 

19.  Proteftation  of  the  Allyes  againft  the  Treaty 
which  tlie  Dutch  were  going  to  figne  with  the  French 
Atnba-Tadors.  3 .  Auguft  1678.  S.V.  in  French.  48. 

20.  Eleclor-Palatin’s  Letter  to  the  Mediators.  20  Julv 

16/8.  in  French.  J  ; 

21.  Eledfor-Palatin’s  particular  Letter  to  Sir  Leoline 

Jenkins.  29  July  1678.  in  Englilh.  „ 

22.  Projeft  of  the  Treaty  of  Peace,  between  Sweden 
a  n?  :J”e?  m  b)r  the  Swedifh  Ambaffadors.  12 
Auguft  1678.  in  Latin. 

23.  Memoire  des  Ambaffadeurs  de  Suede,  fur  l’Eva- 

cuauon  des  Places.  (27  Juiliet  1678.)  rq 

24.  Letter  of  the  Dutch  Ambaffadors,  to  the  Ambaf- 
fadors  of  France;  dehring  an  Efclaireciffement  of  the 
in  French0  6  °f  their  ”lreaty  ot  Peace.  1 7  Auguft,  1678. 

AnfWert°  ,he 

26.  Aft  figned  by  the  French  Sc  Spanilh  Ambaffadors 
whereby  they  referee  the  Points  in  Difference  betwej 
,h,  ”  tbe  Arbitration  of  the  States-Generail.  i ,  Sept 
1078.  m  I'rench. 

Fr Ar,tide  °f  Ratification  between 

P^aS^’/SrU.^  ,3,hAr“de 

.heliamroteri^^l^f,^ 

of  Ardcles  for  thc  ( CEir“f 

3°.  Anhver  given  by  the  French  Ambaffadors  to  the 
precedtng  Pro'ea.  c 6  Sept.  ,678.  in  French  fi, 

31.  Letter  from  Mr.  Wickfort  to  the  Marefchal  d'Ff 

T  S<?P‘Cmber  1  S?S-  ”  Trench.  „ 

32.  Mr  Schutz  his  Letter  to  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins  •  lo 
prove  hts  having  been  at  Nimeguen  without  any  cL’rac 
ter^uil  hts  return  from  the  Ha^ue.  25  September 

74- 


ixuin.  1517. 

33.  Duke  of  Luxembotirgh’s  Letter  to  Sir  Leoline 
Jenkins.  4  Oftober  1678.  in  French.  76. 

34*  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins’s  Anfwer  to  the  Duke  of 
Luxembourg.  30  Sept.  1678.  in  French.  77 

35-  Mr.  Hoeg’s  Anfwer  to  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins’s  Pro¬ 
ject,  for  the  Ceffation.  27  February  1678.  S.V  in 
I'rench.  ‘  „ 

36.  Mr.  Blafpiel ’s  Anfwer  upon  Sir  Leoline  Jenkinses 

1 1  oject,  for  the  Ceflation.  27  September  1678.  in 
French.  So 

37.  Anfwer  of  the  Imperial  Ambaffadors  upon  Sir 

Leoline  Jenkins’s  Projeft  for  the  Ceffation  ;  delivered  in 
26  September  .678.  and  apoftill’d  by  the  French  Am! 
bafladors  the  4  Oftober  1 678.  in  Latin.  8 2 

38.  Propofitions  of  the  Swedifh  Ambaffadors  relating 
to  the  Ceflation.  28  September  1 678.  in  French.  88 

.39.  'I  he  Danifh  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  upon  the  Con 
ditions  of  Sweden.  1  Oftober  1 678.  in  French.  90. 

4°.  Mr.Iioegh’s  Declaration  touching  theLiberty  to  be 
allow  d  for  the  Swedes  Letters  &  Couriers.  Given  bv 
dictate  1  October  1678.  in  French.  q2 / 

41.  Mr.  Blafpiel’s  Anfwer  upon  the  Conditions  of 
Sweden  touching  the  Places  in  Pomerania.  1  Oftober 
1678.  in  French. 

42.  The  Contre-Claufe  of  the  Imperialifts,  de  Starivis 

Militum.  1  Oftober  1678.  in  Latin.  Q . 

43-  Letter  from  Mr.  Wickfort  to  the  Marefchal  d’Ef. 

trades,  1  Oftober  1 678.  in  French.  q- 

44-  RefponftoDD.  Legatorum  Cmfareorum  ad  Con- 

8  0°aob“j  ‘  D°-  Leg“iS 
«■  The  Second  Article  of  the  Ceffation  as  the9Im- 
penaluts  propofe  it  ;  with  fome  amendments  to  it  varv- 

M*” th?  tbe  French  had  asreed  t0,  &c. 

8  October  1678.  in  Latin. 

46.  Extraft  of  a  Letter  from  theSwedlft  Minifte?7att 

Tans,  intercepted  by  the  Eleftor  of  Bradenbourg  com 
mumcated  by  Mr.  Blafpiel  to  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins®  7  Oc¬ 
tober  1 678.  in  French.  ' 

47.  1'lie  Anfwer  of  the  French  Ambaffadors  to^he 
Fropofal  of  the  Imperialifts.  ,3  Oftob.  1678.  in  French. 

48.  Letter  of  Mr.  dePompone  to  the  Marefchal  d’Ef 

trades.  5  September  1678.  in  French.  IOl 

49-  Letter  of  Mr.  de  Wickfort  to  the  Marefchal  d’Ef- 
trades.  1  November  1678.  in  French. 

50.  The  Imperial  Ambaffadors  Memoriall.  HOflrober 

1078.  in  Latin. 

JI.  French  Ambaffadors  Memorial,  In  anfwer  to°the 
preceding  one.  20  Oclober  S.V.  in  French.  Ia6 
J2.  Mr.  le  Prefident  Canon’s  Memorial.  „  OftoCr 
1038.  in  rrench.  “  g 

,41:  SMN.'ei„PF£renec“  ^  MCm°ria'  4 
54-  Mr.  Blafpiels  Memorial  for  the  Inclufion  of°?he 
Dutchy  of  Cleve.  at  Oftober  .673.  S.  N.  in  French! 

jj.  The  Swedilh  Ambaffadors  Memoriall  of  the  "it  1 
Oftober  1678.  in  Latin.  “  31 

56.  Lettre  de  Mr.  de  Luvois  a  Mr.  le  Marefchal  d'Ef- 
trades.  20  Novembre  1 678. 

Aib'ffP!°":'la4i0nn.de  M°nfie“r  lc  Nonce-  doin&aux 
ItaTian^  d6UrS  ^  FraUCe#  2  Novembre  i6yS.  S.  N.  in 

58.  Lettre  de  Monfieurde  Calvo,  a  Mr.  le  Marefchal 


d  “•"“■wt,  muiuicur  ue  t_,ai 

d  Eftrades.  23  Novembre  1 678.  j ,  ^ 

^ir  Le°ljne  Jenkins’s  Letter  to  Mr.  Hoegh,  about 
the  Paffage  of  theSwedifli  Letters  &c  Couriers.  26  Oclo 
ber  1 678.  in  French.  ^ 

dels!;  ^i'  Blafpids  J1™0™1.!  P“rg“g  himfelf  of  all 
French  g  10  the  Ccffaoc,n-  20  Oftober  1678.  i„ 

1 2  I . 

6r.  Mr. 


3 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


j  1 1 


Num.  1517- 

(^f.  Mr.  Blafpiels  Memoriall  in  Anfwer  to  one  from 
the  Swedes.  4  Novemb.  1678.  in  Latin.  127. 

62.  Memoiiali  of  his  Eleftoral  Highnefs  Palatin. 

tj  November  1678.  134. 

63.  The  Propofition  of  the  Imperialifts  to  the  French. 

3  November  i6y8.  in  Latin.  136. 

64.  Reafons  why  the  Deputys  of  his  Electoral  High- 

hefs-Palatin,  fhould  be  admitted  to  the  Meeting  at  Wif- 
femberg  A  Oftober  1678.  in  French.  137. 

65.  Letter  from  the  Cantons  of  Swifferland  to  his 

Majefty.  20  March  1678.  in  Latin.  141. 

66.  His  Majefty  s  Anfwer  to  the  foregoing  Letter.  28 

July  1678.  in  Latin.  *  I42. 

67.  Letter  from  the  Adminiftrator  of  Wirtemberg  to 

his  Majefty.  4  Aug.  1678.  in  Latin.  143. 

68.  Letter  from  the  Prince  of  Salm  to  his  Majefty. 

12  July  1678.  in  French.  144. 

69.  Queries,  if  the  King  be  concerned  in  the  Difference 

between  the  Duke  of  Holltein,  &  the  King  of  Denmark. 
18  Auguft  1678.  I4^. 

70.  The  Kings  Guaranty  to  the  Duke  of  Holfte'in. 

23  February  1 665.  in  Latin.  1 46. 

71.  His  Majeftys  Aft  for  comprehending  the  Duke  of 
Holftein  in  the  Treaty  of  Breda.  29  July  1667.  in  Latin. 

148. 

72.  Difpute  with  Count  Anthoine,  about  tht  firft 

Vifits.  11  Auguft  1678.  149. 

73.  Letter  from  the  Citty  ofHambourg  to  his  Majefty. 

22  July  1678.  in  Latin.  1 50. 

74.  Letter  from  the  Eleftor  of  Bradenbourg  to  his 

Majefty.  15  Auguft  1678.  in  Latin.  152. 

75.  Danifti  Envoyc’s  Memoriall  to  his  Majefty.  29  Au¬ 
guft  1678.  in  French.  133. 

76.  Monfr.  Spanheims  Memoriall,  to  his  Majefty. 

6  September  1 678.  in  French.  1 5 5. 

77.  The  Kings  Anfwer  to  the  Eleftor  of  Brandenburg’s 

Letter.  Sept.  1 678.  in  Latin.  136. 

78.  AniwertoMr.  Lindenow’s  Memoriall.  9  Septem¬ 
ber  1678.  in  French.  137. 

79.  Anfwer  to  Mr.  Spanheim’s  Memoriall.  9  Septem¬ 
ber  1678.  in  French.  1 38. 

80.  The  King’s  Letter  to  the  Eleftor  of  Brandenbourg 
in  favour  of  Mr.  Kaus.  29  June  1678.  in  Latin.  1 39. 

8 1 .  French  Tranllate  of  the  Eleftor  of  Brandenbour<r’s 

Letter  to  the  Emperor.  24  November  1678.  160. 

82.  Grievances  upou  the  Trade  of  the  Englifh  in 

Sweden.  In  French,  apoftill’d  in  Englifh.  10  Septem¬ 
ber  1678.  162. 

83.  Letter  of  Mr.  Pom  pone  to  the  Marefchal  d'Ef- 

trades.  30  December  1678.  in  French.  163. 

^  84.  Mr.  d’Aguerrc  to  the  Marefchal  d’Eftrades.  13 
February  1678-9.  S.  N.  in  French.  ibid. 

85.  Eleftor  of  Colognes  Declaration  againft  the  28th 
Article  of  the  Emperors  Peece  with  France,  relating  to 
the  Dutchy  of  Bullion.  9  February  1678-9.  in  Latin. 

164. 

86.  Declaration  of  the  Dean  &  Chapter  of  Liege 

againft  the  28th  Article  of  the  Emperors  Peace  with 
France,  concerning  the  Dutchy  of  Bovillon.  9  February 
1678-9.  in  Latin.  ,6^, 

87.  Propofition  of  an  Armiftice  made  by  the  Aliys  to 

the  Ambaffadors  of  France  &  Sweden.  22  February 
1678-9.  S.  V.  in  Latin.  igg, 

88. The  Kings  Letter  to  the  Comtes  ofNaffau  &  Hanau, 

and  to  the  Prince  of  Veldentz,  in  anfwer  to  one  from 
them.  30  September  1678.  in  Latin.  167. 

89.  Extrafts  of  fome  Letters  fent  to  the  Marefchal 

d’Eftrades.  in  French.  168. 

90.  Mr.  Blafpeils  Memoriall  given  to  the  Spanyards 

by  the  Dutch  Ambaffadors.  16  February  1678-9.  in 
French.  169. 

9  r .  Letter  from  Mr.  Smid  the  Ofnabrug  Miniffer  at 
the  Hague,  to  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins.  20  March  1679.  S.N. 
in  French.  I7I. 


Num.  1517; 

92.  Prppofition  made  from  the  Imperial  ills  to  the 

french,  in  the  Matter  of  Lorrain.  12  April  1679.  S.  N. 
in  Latin.  172 

93.  La  Garantie  de  Brandenbourg,  pour  le  Palfage 

de*  Trouppe*  de  Conigmark  A  Oftober  1678.  1 73. 

94-  Le  Paffeport  de  Dannemark  pour  le  Paffage  des 
Trouppes  de  Coningfmark.  6  Novr.  1678.  174. 

95.  Lettre  de  Mr.  d’Auguerres  au  Marefchal  d’Ef¬ 
trades.  Tsr  d’Avril  1679.  j  76. 

96.  Lettre  de  Mr.  Calvo  au  Marefchal  d’Eftrades.  ie 

13  d’Avnl  1679.  ibid. 

97.  Memoriall  received  from  the  French  Ambaffadors, 

that  their  King  will  ftand  no  longer  than  the  laft  of  De¬ 
cember  to  the  April!  Conditions.  22  November  1678.  in 
French.  , 

.  98-  Mr-  Blafpeils  Anfwer  for  the  French,  about  Co- 
ningfmarks  Paffage  into  Sweden;  and  the  Prifoners 
made  at  Bornholm.  10  Aprill  if  79.  in  Latin.  179. 

99.  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins's  Letter  to  the  P^nfioner.  29 

March  1679.  S.  V.  in  French.  180. 

100.  Ihe  States  Refolution  on  Sir  Leotine  Jenkins’s 
Return  to  Nfmeguen.  1  April,  1679.  in  Dutch.  18 1. 

101.  A  lranflate  of  the  preceding  Refolution.  in 

French.  jo, 

102.  Memoriall  of  the  Baron  Platen  touching  the  Of- 

nabrug-Diocefe.  28  March  1 679.  in  Latin.  °  183. 

103.  A  Proteftation  made  by  the  Suedifh  Ambaffadors 

of  their  diligence  in  procuring  the  King  their  Maftcrs  Ra¬ 
tification  for  the  Treaty  with  the  Emperor.  4  April  67a. 
in  Latin.  jg'* 

104.  Mr.  Bafpeils  Reafons  why  the  Eleftor  of  Bran¬ 

denbourg  his  Mafter,  ought  to  remain  in  poffeffon  of 
Pomerania.  20  Aprill  1679.  in  Latin.  189. 

105.  Mr.  Hoeg’s  Declaration  about  the  Free-Paffige 

of  Letters  &  Couriers  between  the  King  of  Sweuen  & 
his  Ambaffadors  at  Nimeguen.  12  April  1679.  S.  V  in 
Latin.  *2 

1 06.  The  Emperors  Ratification  of  his  Treaty  with 

France.  29  March  1 679.  in  Latin.  193. 

107.  My  Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins’s  firft  Memoriall 

to  the  States.  -A  March  1679.  in  French.  193. 

108.  Refolution  des  Fltats  fur  le  Memoire  de  Mr. 

l’Ambaffadeur Jenkins.  i6Marsi6;9.  169.* 

109.  Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins  his  Memoriall.  23 

March  1 679.  in  French.  , 

110.  Refdution  of  the  States,  25  March  167c.  upon 
my  Lord  Ambaffador,  Memoriall  of  the  fame  date  in 

Frmch- „  .  ,  -98. 

iij.  A  particular  Account  of  what  paffed  about  the 
Exchange  of  the  Ratifications  between  the  Imperialifts, 
French,  &  Suedes.  A  Aprill  1679.  in  French.  199. 

112.  Tranflation  (into  French)  of  the  Conclufum  of 

the  Empire,  which  ferves  inftead  of  their  Ratification  2  2 
March  1C79.  so,. 

1 1 3.  King  of  France’s  Ratification  of  his  Treaty  with 
the  Emperor,  20  February  1679.  in  French.  204. 

1 14.  King  of  Swedens  Ratification  of  his  Treaty  with 

the  Emperor.  3  .  .  .  .  1679.  in  Latin.  206. 

1 15.  Bifhop  of  Munfter’s  Ratification  of  his  Treaty 

with  France.  15  April  1679.  in  French.  2c8. 

1 1 6.  A  Proteftation  of  the  Imperiall  Ambaffadors 
touching  the  Article  in  the  Contre-Projeft,  relating  to 
the  Free-Townes,  and  the  immediate  Nobleffe  of  Alfatia; 

3  February  1679.  S.  N.  in  Latin.  2.;9> 

1 1 7.  A  Declaration  of  the  Imperiall  Ambaffadors, 

touching  the  3  Article  of  the  Swedifh  Treaty,  and  die 
Dukes  of  Mecklenbourg,  and  the  City  of  Bremen.  5  Feb¬ 
ruary  1679.  S.  N.  in  Latin.  2IO> 

1 1 8.  Proteftation  of  the  Ambaffadors  of  Denmark  "& 

Brandenbourg,  againft  the  Imperial  Ambaffadors  for 
making  a  feparate  Peace  with  Sueden.  25  January  1 678-9.- 
S*  M .  in  Latin.  2 1 1 .  213 

1 1 9.  A  Proteftation  of  the  Ofnabrug  &  Zell-Minifters; 

25  January  1678-9.  in  Latin.  2( 3. 

1 2©.  Article 


Ill 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS- 


Num.  1517. 

r  20.  Articles  agreed  upon  at  Sante  for  the  Prolonga- 
of  the  Ceffation.  3  May  1679.  in  French.  217. 

121.  Aft  of  the  French  Ambaffadors  tfor  the  Prolon- 

garion  of  the  Cellation  with  Denmark.  5  May  1679  in 
French.  220. 

122.  Aft  of  the  Danifh  Ambaffador,  for  prolonging 

the  Ceffation  with  France.  26  Aprill  1679.  S.  V.  (in 
Latin.)  221. 

123.  Mr.  de  Villeeurad’s  Subftitution  to  Mr.  Bazin. 

6  Auguft  1678.  in  French.  222. 

124.  Mr.  Bazin’s  Proteftarfon,  as  Subftitute  to  the 
Procurator  of  theDucheffe  of  Luxembourg.  17  Auguft 

1678.  in  French  224. 

125.  Commiffion  given  by  the  Emperor  to  his  Am- 
fadors  at  Nimeguen,  for  adjufting  all  matters  relating 
to  the  Execution  of  the  Treaty  with  France.  13  April 

1679.  in  Latin.  226. 

»2 6.  The  King  of  France  his  Commiffion  to  his  Am¬ 
baffadors  at  Nimeguen,  for  adjufting  all  matters  relating 
to  the  Execution  of  the  Treaty  with  the  Emperor.  15 
March  1679.  in  French.  228. 

127.  The  Eleftor  of  Saxony  his  Letter  to  the  moft 

Chriftian  King  about  prolonging  the  Ceffauon  in  the 
North.  4  May  1679.  in  Latin.  230. 

1 28.  Copy  of  the  Marquis  de  Segnelay's  Letter  to  Mr. 
Colbert,  about  two  Brandcnbourg  Privateeers,  arm’d, 
for  the  American  Iflands.  8  May  1679.  S.  N.  in  French. 

232. 

129.  An  Agreement  between  Meffieurs  Colbert  & 
Blafpeil,  touching  two  Privateers  armed  with  aBraden- 
bourg-Commiffion.  T4T  May  1670.  in  French.  233. 

I3°.  L’lnfcripdon  de  1’ Arc  Triumphal,  dreffe  avant 
lc  Poets  de  St.  Antoine  k  Paris.  234. 

1 3  r .  A  Letter  of  Mr.  de  Feuquieres,  inviting  the  King 
of  Denmark  to  fend  a  Plenipotentiary  to  treat  the  Peace 
in  Schonen.  1  May  1679.  in  French.  235. 

132.  La  Seconde  Lettre  de  Mr.  de  Feuquieres  Am- 
baffadeur  de  France  en  Suede,  aMonfr.  le  Grand  Chan- 
celier  de  Dannemarc.  25  May  1679.  S.  N.  in  French. 

236. 

X33.  Order  of  the  Council  at  Whitehall,  touching  the 
Audiences  of  foraign  Minifters.  1 1  May  1670.  237. 

>3 4-  Letter  of  his  eleftoral  Highnefs  Palatin,  to  Sir 
Leoline  Jenkins.  17  May  1679.  in  Latin.  239. 

I35-  Memorial  1  of  his  eleftoral  Highnefs-Palatin.  in 
Latin.  240, 

136.  Extrait  de  la  Conclufion  de  l’Empire ;  faite  a 

Ratifbonne  le  29  Maij  1679.  243. 

137.  A  Letter  from  his  Eleftoral  Highnefs-Palatin  to 
Sir  Leoline  Jenkins.  20  May  1679.  in  Latin.  245. 

138.  Copia  Literarum  Eleftoris  Palatini  ad  Sacram 

Czdaream  Majeftatem,  ex  idiomate  Germanico  in  Lati- 
num  tranflatum.  2  .  Maij  1679.  S.V.  246. 

139.  Certificate  which  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg  d'e- 
fired  might  be  fignedby  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins,  in  French. 

248. 

140.  Copie  of  Mr.  de  Louvois  his  Letter  to  Mr.Col- 

bert,  touching  the  F rench  repoffeffing  their  Quarters  in 
the  Empire.  26  May  1679.  in  French.  249. 

14 1.  Extraft  of  another  Letter  from  Mr.  de  Luvois  to 
Mr.  Colbert.  28  May  1679.  S.  N.  in  French.  250. 

142.  The  Anfwer  of  the  Imperiall  Ambaffadors!  to  the 

Propofition  for  renewing  the  Conferences.  26  May  1 670 
in  French.  1  /s'- 

I43-  Refponfio  Excellentiffima:  Legationis  Caffarete 
ad  Inftantias  apud  eamfaftas  nomine  fereniffimi  Eleftoris 
Palatini.  26  May  1679.  2_2 

.  I44-  The  Lift  of  Places  to  be  reftored  by  the  French 
m  vertue  of  their  Peace  with  the  Empire.  Received  2 
June  1679.  in  Latin.  2 

145-  Extraft  of  the  Holland-Refidents  Letter,  about 
the  Rum  of  the  Canal  upon  the  Ifle  of  Anout.  7  June 
1697.  m  French. 


257. 


Num.  1517. 

146.  Count  Oxenftiern’s  Memoriall  touching  the 
Arreft  layd  upon  his  Money.  15  June  1679.  in  Latin. 

258. 

14 7-  Letter  of  Mr.  Cuftis  Merchant  of  Roterdam  to 
Sir  Leoline  Jenkins.  23  June  1679.  259. 

148.  Draught  of  the  Petition  of  the  Englilh  Merchants 

att  Roterdam.  261. 

149.  Baron  de  Wachtmeifter’s  Memoriall  to  his  Ma- 

jefty.  28  May  1679.  in  French.  262. 

150.  Anfwer  to  the  preceding  Memoriall.  2  June  1679. 

in  French.  26  ■> 

151.  Mr.  Oxenftiern’s  Narrative  of  what  pasft  about 

the  arrefting'  of  a  Bill  of  Exchange  payable  to  him  in 
this  Towne.  19  June  1679.  in  Latin.  264. 

152.  Circumftances  aggravating  the  Offence  of  the 

Efchevins  of  this  Towne,  in  arrefting  the  Bill  of  Exchange 
that  was  payable  to  Count  Oxenftierne.  19  June  1676. 
in  Latin.  2g7 

*53*  The  forme  of  Words  in  which  the  Deputies  of 
the  Magiftrates  of  this  Towne  excufed  themfelves  to  Mr. 
le  Count  Oxenftiern  for  the  Arreft  layd  upon  his  Bill  of 
Exchange.  22  Jun.  1679.  in  French.  268. 

154.  The  moft  Chriftian  Kings  Aft  for  the  including 

the  Duke  of  Hanover  in  the  Treaty  of  Niineghen  30 
Aprill  1679.  in  French.  269. 

1 55.  Treaty  of  Peace  concluded  at  St.  Germans  the 
i§  June  1679.  between  France,  Sweden,  and  the  Eleftor 
of  Brandenbourg .  in  French,  (with  the  feparate  Articles.) 

270. 

156.  A  Lift  of  his  Imperiall  Majtfties  Allyes  that  he 

would  have  comprehended  in  his  Treaty  with  France.  27 
June  1679.  in  Latin.  28i. 

157.  Mr.  Blafpeil’s  Proteftation,  about  limiting  &  ex¬ 

plaining  the  Eleftor  of  Brandenbourgs  Ratification  of  the 
feparate  Article  in  his  Treaty  with  France.  12  July  1670 
m  Latin.  '  ^ 

15L  A  Projeft  of  an  Aft  for  comprehending  the  Aliys 
of  Sweden  in  the  Treaty  with  the  Empire.  9  [uly  1670 
in  Latin.  *  J  3  2g' 

159.  A  Projeft  of  a  feparate  Aft  for  comprehending 

the  Grand  Duke  of  Mufcovy  in  the  Treaty  of  Sweden 
with  the  Empire.  9  July  1679.  in  Latin.  283. 

Turning  to  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find,  ° 

160.  Mr.  Stradman’s  Animadverfions  upon  the  Re¬ 

marques  of  the  Swedifh  Ambalfadors.  4  December  1678. 
m  Latin.  ' 

161.  Raifons  pour  lequelles  la  Suede  ne  pourroit  pas 

admettre  laClaufe,  “  Nifi  quatenus  amorequietis  publics 
commum  confenfu  ea  mutanda  videbhur:”  laquelleClaufe 
eft  contenue  dans  le  Contre-Projeft  des  Imperiaux.  1  c 
Dec  embre  1678.  ^ 

•  I62'.  The  RePliclue  of  the  Imperiall  Ambalfadors, 
with  the  Duphque  of  the  Ambaffadors  of  France.  17 
December  1678.  in  French.  (,/ 

163.  The  French  Ambaffadors  fecond  Projeft  of  the 
Preface  to  the  Ireaty.  19  December  1678.  in  French. 

164.  A  Projeft  of  the  French  Ambaffadors  comprizing 
the  four  firft  Articles  of  the  Imperial  Contre-Projeft  iu 

one  Article.  1 9  December  1 578.  in  French. 

165  A  Tranflate  of  the  fecond  Projeft  of  the  French 
Amballadors  for  a  Preface,  with  fome  ampliations,  iq 
December  1678.  in  Latin.  ’ 

166.  The  Imperiall  Ambaffadors  Tranflate  of  the 

French  Projeft  for  comprizing  of  the  four  firft  Articles  of 
the  Imperiall  Contre-Projeft  in  one  Article.  20  December 
1678.  in  Latin.  ,c> 

167.  Reafons  why  the  Empire  as  well  as  the  Emperor, 

mould  be  named  a  Pars  pacifcens  in  the  Treaty  with 
Sweden  21  December  1678.  in  French.  ,  r> 

1 68.  Mr.  Duckers  Aft.  23  December  1C7 8.  in  French. 

169.  An  Article  received  from  the  Ambaflidor^of 
trance,  to  be  fubftftuted  in  the  Place  oftbeafi  Article  of 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


113 


Num,  1517,  1518. 

the  Imperial  Contre-Projeft.  2 7  December  1678  Apof- 
tilled  by  the  Imperialifts.  in  Latin.  *5* 

170.  Projeftum  Pacis  Sueco-Brandcnburgicze,  a  parte 

fuse  Serenitatis  Eleftoralis  exhibitum.  30  December 
1678.  *7- 

17 1.  Projeft  of  a  Secret  Article  drawn  up  by  the  Am- 

bafTadors  of  France,  in  order  to  be  fubftituted  to  the  26 
Article  of  the  Imperial  Contre-Projeft.  31  December 
1678.  in  French.  2  r  • 

172.  The  Ultimatum  of  the  Ambaffadors  of  France, 
by  way  of  fecret  Article.  1  January  1678-9.  in  French. 

173.  Article  touchant  le  Lantgrave  de  Heffan-Hom- 

bourg.  2  Jar-uar.  1678-9.  in  Latin.  23- 

174.  The  Remarques  of  the  Swedifh  Ambaffadors, 
upon  the  Imperial  Anfwersi  4  January  1678-9.  in  Latin. 

ibid. 

175.  Two  Articles  delivered  in  by  the  Swedifh  Am- 

baffadors  ;  the  one,  touching  Religion  :  the  other  touch¬ 
ing  the  Reftitution  of  thofe  that  ought  to  be  reftortd  by 
the  Treaty  of  Munfter.  in  Latin.  26. 

176.  Conditions  upon  which  the  French  are  to  pofftffe 

the  Pofles  in  Liege-land  :  to  be  incorporated  in  the  26 
Article  of  the  Imperial  Projeft,  as  it  is  now  formed  into 
an  Ultimatum.  6  January  1  78  9.  in  Latin,  apoitilled  in 
French.  2  7* 

177.  The  Ultimatum  of  the  Imperial  Ambaffadors, 

to  be  lubltituted  to  their  26th  Article.  6  January.  1678-9. 
in  Latin  (altered  the  next  day)  28. 

178.  The  Preface  offer’d  by  the  French  Ambaffadors, 

to  the  26  Article  or  Ultimatum  ;  in  lieu  of  the  Imperial 
Preface.  7  January  1678-9.  inErench.  ibid. 

179.  A  Memoriall  of  the  Suedifh  Ambaffadors,  touch¬ 
ing  their  Correfpondence.  7  January  1678-9.  in  Latin. 

,  3°- 

1S0.  Divers  Articles  as  they  were  given  in  by  the  Im¬ 
perialifts,  and  as  they  were  altered  by  the  French  Ambaf- 
fadors.  in  Latin.  9  January  1678-9.  31. 

1518. 

Another  Volume  belonging  to  the  former  ;  relating  to 
the  Treaty  of  Nimeguen,  written  by  the  hand  of  V!r. 
Chudleigh,  &  given  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dolben.  It  con- 
taineth, 

1.  His  Majefties  Commiflion  to  the  Lord  Berkeley, 

Sir  William  Temple,  &  Sir  Leo  ine  Jenkins,  appointing 
them  to  be  his  Ambaffadors  for  the  Mediation  of  a 
general  Peace  at  Nimeguen.  13  Deceit. ber  1675.  in 
Latin.  t- 

2.  His  Majefties  Commiflion  to  Mr.  Laurence  Hyde, 

adding  him  to  his  other  Ambaffadors  at  Nimeguen.  28 
December  676.  in  Latin.  _  3. 

3.  The  Emperors  Plein-Pouvoir  to  Compte  Khinfky 

alone,  till  the  arrivall  of  his  other  Ambaffadors.  24  July 
1676.  in  Latin.  5. 

4.  The  Emperors  Plein-Pouvoir  to  Monfr.  Stratman. 

20  November  1676  in  Latin.  6. 

5.  The  King  of  Spains  Plein-Pouvoir  to  the  Marquis 

de  los  Balbaces.  5  January  1676.  inSpanifh.  7. 

6.  The  King  of  Dcnmarks  Plein-Pouvoir  to  the  Sieur 

Hoeg.  n  July  1676.  in  Latin.  9. 

’  7.  The  Stares  Generals  Plein-Pouvoir  to  their  Am¬ 
baffadors  the  Sieurs  Beverningk,  Odyk,  &  Van-Haren. 
4  January  1 1  66.  in  French.  1  o. 

8.  The  Eleftor  of  Brandenbourg’s  Plein-Pouvoir  to 

his  Ambaffadors  Meffieurs  Somnitz  &  Bafpeil.  :6  June 
1676.  in  Latin.  12. 

9.  The  French  Kings  Plein-Pouvoir  to  the  Due  de 
Vitry,  Melfieurs  Colbert  &  d’Avaux.  23  December  1675. 
in  French. 

10.  The  Marefchal  d’Etrades  Subftitution  in  the  place 
of  the  Duke  de  Vitry.  17th  May  1676.  in  French.  15. 

1 1 .  The  King  of  Sweden’s  Plein-Pouvoir  to  his  Am- 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1518. 

baffadors  the  Count  Oxenftierne  &  Monfr.  Olivekrans. 

12  April  1676.  in  Latin.  I7* 

12.  The  French  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the  Objec¬ 
tions  made  by  the  Dutch  againft  their  Powers,  in  French. 

\9' 

13.  The  Swedilh  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the  Objec¬ 
tions  made  by  the  Dutch  againft;  their  Powers,  in  Latin. 

22. 

14.  Projeft  of  the  Mediators,  of  an  Aft  obligatory  to 
procure  Powers,  &c.  23  December  1676.  in  French, 

24. 

1  5.  Projeft  of  a  common  Power,  drawn  up  by  the 
Mediators  December  1676.  in  French.  25. 

16.  Minute  of  an  Aft  obligatory  for  procuring  new 

Powers,  &c.  and  entring  into  matter.  December  1676. 
in  French.  2 6* 

17.  Forme  of  a  Plein-Pouvoir,  brought  by  Mr.  Olive¬ 
krans.  1 7  December  1676.  in  French.  27. 

18.  Copy  of  a  Power  fent  in  by  the  French  Ambaffa¬ 
dors.  23  December  1676.  in  French.  28. 

19.  Projeft  de  Plein-Pouvoir  reforme  par  Meffrs.  les 
Mediateurs  ;  et  reduit  felon  le  Stile  de  France.  .  29. 

20.  Preamble  of  a  Plein-Pouvoir  for  all  the  Parties,  in 

French.  _  3°- 

21.  Projeftum  Dominorum  Mediatorum.  Delivered 

by  the  Suedes,  and  apoitilled.  in  Latin.  31. 

22.  Afte  Obligatory  as  reformed  by  the  Allyes  :  with 

Apoftilles.  in  Latin.  23- 

23.  Aft  Obligatory,  delivered  to  the  Partyes.  16  Jan¬ 
uary  1676-7.  in  Latin.  t  _  34- 

24.  Afte  de  non  prejudicier,  in  matter  of  Titles 
affumed  or  omitted.  4  February  1676-7.  in  Latin.  35. 

2-:.  The  Emperors  new  Plein-pouvoir  to  his  Ambaflas 
dors  ;  for  to  treat  with  Fiance-  24  July  1676.  in  Latin. 

36- 

26.  The  Emperors  new  Plein-pouvoir,  to  treat  with 

Sweden.  24  July  1676.  in  Latin.  38. 

27.  A  Spanifh  new  Plein  pouvoir,  to  treat  with  France. 

3  September  167  inSpanifh.  40. 

28.  Danifh  Plein-pouvoir  to  treat  with  France.  10 

June  1 676.  (in  I,  U in.)  42* 

29.  1  leftor  of  Biandenbourgs  new  Plein-pouvoir,  to 

treat  with  France.  6  June  167O.  in  Latin.  44. 

30.  The  States  General!*  new  Plein-pouvoir,  to  treat 

with  France.  4  Jan.  1676  in  French.  46. 

31.  The  French  new  Plein-pouvoir  to  treat  with  the 
Emperor,  &c.  23  December  1675.  in  French.  48. 

32.  Swedifh  Ambaffadors  Refervatory  Aft.  4 February 

1676-7  in  Latin.  5°- 

33.  King  of  Denmark’s  Plein  Pouvoir  to  Mr.  Petkum. 

24  April  1 677.  in  Latin.  51. 

34.  The  Imperial  Ambaffadors  Letter  to  the  Mediators, 

with  their  Propofitions  for  France  &  Sweden  enclofed. 
3  March  16^7.  in  Latin.  53. 

35.  The  Emperors  Propofitions  for  France  Sc  Sweden. 

3  March  1677.  in  Latin.  54. 

36.  The  Spanifh  Ambaffadors  Letters  to  the  Mediators, 

with  his  Mafters  Propofitions  enclofed.  3  March  1677. 
in  Spanifh.  _  5^- 

37.  The  Propofitions  of  Spaine  for  Sweden,  in  Spanifh 

&  in  Latin.  5  March  6-7.  60. 

38.  The  Danes  Propofitions  for  France  &  Sweden. 

3  March  N.  S.  1677.  in  Latin.  62. 

3  The  States  Gencralls  Propofitions  for  France. 
3  March  1  77.  in  French.  67. 

40.  The  Demand  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  in  French. 

68. 

41.  The  States  Generalls  Propofitions  for  Sweden. 

3  March  1677.  in  Latin.  71. 

42. Eleftor  of  Brandenbourg’s  Propofition  for  France. 

3  March  1677.  in  Latin.  "2. 

43.  Eleftor  of  Brandenbourgs  Propofition  for  Sweden. 

3  March  1677.  in  Latin.  73- 

G  g  44-  French 


ii4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nura.  1518. 

44-  Freneh  Propofitions  for  the  Emperor.  3  March 
1677.  in  French. 

45.  French  Propofitions  for  Spayne.  3  March  1 677 
in  French.  Sr 

.  46.  French  Propofitions  for  Denmark.  3  March  1677. 
m  French.  '' 

47.  French  Propofitions  for  the  States-Generall. 
3  March  1677.  in  French. 

48.  French  Propofitions  for  Brandenbourg;.  3  March 

1077.  in  French.  °  70 

49.  Svvedens  Propofitions  for  the  Emperor.  21  Feb- 

ruary  1677.  in  Latin.  go_ 

50.  Swedens  Propofition  for  Spayne.  21  February 

1677.  (in  Latin.)  '  g3/ 

51.  Swedens  Propofition  for  Denmark  21  February 

1677.  in  Latin.  g  1 

52.  Swedens  Propofition  for  the  States  General.  21 

February  1 677.  in  Latin.  g 

53.  Swedens  Propofitions  for  Brandenbourg  21  Feb¬ 
ruary  1 677.  in  Latin. 

54.  Mr.  Muller  the  Lunenbourg-Minifiers  Letter  to 

the  Mediators.  28  March  16-7.  in  French.  88. 

55.  Duke  of  Lunenbourgs  Mandat  to  Mr.  Muller. 

18  March  1677.  in  Latin.  g „ 

56.  Lunenbourgs  Propofition  for  France  &  Sweden 
in  Latin. 

57.  Mr.  Huneken  (Minifler  to  theDuke  of  Hanover) 
nis  Letter  to  the  Mediators.  17  May  1677.  S  V  in 
Latin. 

58.  Mr.  Huneken’s  Power.  4  May  1677.  in  Latin!’ 

59.  Duke  of  Hanover's  Propofitions.  17  May  1677 

S.  V.  in  Latin.  ;  /r 

60.  Biihop  of  Ofnabrug’s  Mandat  to  Mr.  Schmidt  his 
Kefident  att  the  Hague.  17  Maij  1677.  in  Latin.  96. 

61.  Bifhop  of  Ofnabrug’s  Demands,  in  Latin.  97. 

ба.  Mr.  (Thomas)  Chudleigh’s  Atteftation,  of  the 

two  preceding  Papers  being  duly  exhibited  to  tile  Media¬ 
tors.  l4May  1677.  in  Latin.  -g 

63.  Dutch  Ambaffador's  Projeft  of  a  Reglement  of 

Commerce  with  France,  in  French.  '  „ 

64.  The  Preface  to  the  Project  of  a  Reglement  of 

Commerce  between  the  States  General  &  Sweden,  a  fulv 

1677.  ’ 

65.  The  Emperors  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the  Pro 

pofitionsof  France.  3  May  1677.  in  Latin.  I2, 

бб.  The  Emperors  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the  Pro 
petitions  of  Sweden.  3  May  1677.  in  Latin.  125. 

67.  Spanifh  Ambafladors  Anfwer  to  the  Propofitions 

of  France.  18  May  1677,  in  Spanifh.  I2„ 

68.  Spanifh  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the  Propofitions 
of  Sweden.  18  May  1677.  in  Spanifh. 

69.  Danifh  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the  Propofitions  of 

France.  6  May  1677.  in  Latin.  t,2 

70  Danifli  Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the  Propofitions 
of  Sweden.  6  May  1667.  in  Latin. 

71.  Brandenbourg-Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the  Pro 
pofitionsof  France.  3  May  1 677.  in  Latin 

72.  Brandenbourg-Ambaffadors  Anfwer  to  the  Pro 
pofitions  of  Sweden.  3  May  1 677.  in  Latin  ,  ,6 

73’  r‘  o'  Ambafladors  Anfwer  to  the  Propofi- 

onsof  all  the  Allies,  in  French.  ,  ,g 

74.  The  Swedes  Anfwer  to  the  Propofitions  of  all’ the 

Allyes.  in  French. 

75.  The  Duke  of  Lorraines  Plein-pouvoir  to  the*  J&. 
fident^  Canon  &  Mr.  Serinchamps.  5  May  1677.  in 

76.  The  Duke  of  Lorraines  Propofition  for  Fraee 

communicated  to  the  French  Ambaffadors  20  lanuarj 
1677.  but  refus  d.  in  French.  12^ 

77.  The  Duke  of  Lorraines  Letter  to  the  Mediators 

19  Febiuary  1677.  in  French.  , 

78.  The  Lorraine-Propofition,  in  the  forme  requifite 

2  Augult  1677.  m  French.  144* 


Num.  1518. 

79-  The  Bifhop  of  Straibourgs  Plein-pouvoir  to 
s  D^Iier‘  *°  JanVary  1  677-  in  Latin.  143. 

80.  I  he  Bifhop  of  Strafbourg’s  new  Power  to  Mr. 
Ducker,  in  better  forme.  30  January  1O77.  in  Latin. 

Sr.  Bifhop  of  Straibourgs  Propofition.  September 
1677.  m  Latin.  ,4^ 

tti8i2’  IIolfteins  Plein-pouvoir,  to  Meffrs. 

cken  &  Wedderkop.  15  O&ober  1677.  in  I,atin. 

83.  Duke  of  Holfteins  Pretenfions  againft  Denmark. 

28  December  1677.  in  Latin.  1 ,, 

84.  Mr.  Befielns  Memorial  to  the  Mediators.  1  7 "De¬ 
cember  1677.  in  Latin.  f 

85-  CoPy  of  the  Duke  of  Mecklenbourg-Swerins  Pre¬ 
tenfions.  13  December  x  677.  in  Latin.  ,  -~ 

,„m'  The  Duke  of  Mecklenbourg-Swerins  Credentialls 
to  Mr.  Beffeln.  1 6 November  1677.  in  Latin  1 

87.  The  Duke  of  Mecklenbourg-Swerins  Letter  to 

my  Lord  Ambaffador  Jenkins.  1  December  ,t--  in 
Latin.  4;  111 

88.  Mr.  Beffelns  Memoriall  to  the  Mediators!  V. 

February  1678.  N.  S.  (in  Latin.)  lG,  S 

89.  Conditions  aux  quelles  le  Roy  Tres-Chreitim 
vent  bien  faire  laPai.v.  Received,  3  April  16'S  16- 

90.  Copy  of  the  Allyes  Anfwer  to  the  French  Deck- 
ration;  given  to  the  Nuncio.  6  April  1678.  in  Italian. 

91.  1  he  Bifhop  of  Ofnnbrugs  Power  to  the  Barotfde 

Ilaten.  23  June  1677.  in  Latin.  , 6 

92.  Lettre  dn  Roy  Tres-Chreflien  aux  Eflats  Gene- 

raux.  18  May  1678.  7 

93.  Lettre  du  Roy  Tres-Chreflien  aux  Eflats  Gene- 
raux.  1  Jum  1678.  S.  N. 

94-  Memoire  du  R„y  Tres-ChrefHen  aux  Eflats  Ge- 
neraux.  1  Juin  1678. 

95-  The  fmperialifls  Memoriall  given  in  to  the  Dmch 
Ambaffadors.  i  June  1S78.  S. N.  in  Latin. 

,,  9®'  Ambaffadors  Memorial  given  in  m 

the  Dutch  Ambafladors.  2  June  1673.  S.  V.  in  French. 

97.  The  Brandenbourg  Ambaffadore  Memoriall  given 

^to  the  Dutch  Ambaffadors,  2  June  S.V.  ,678.“ 
M®8,'  V  r  Simile  of  rt‘e  Proiea  “  Plein-pouvoir  for 

tt/JL  Teh  al,erati0”s  de,1rd ”5 

99-  Monfr.  Hoeg's  Declaration  to  the  Dutch  Ambaf¬ 
fadors,  in  the  Affembly  of  the  Allyes,  io  June  x678.  in 


too.  Declaration  of  Mr.  Blafpiel  ,0  the  Dutch' Am¬ 
bafladors  m  the  Affembly  of  the  Allves  ,0  June  ,6,g 
in  rrenen.  ■  ^  ’ 

‘“‘.Declaration  of  the  Bifhop  of  Gurck  to  the  Dmch 
Ambaffadors,  m  the  Affembly  of  the  Allyes,  ,0  Tune 
1070.  m  french.  J 

l02'  T)ttcr  .from  P'l!-  Duke  of  Lorraine  to  the  States 
30  May  1678.  in  French. 

■  03.  Letter  from  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins  to  Mr.  Monta- 
JunVis  8nS’  “P°“  the Duke  of  Lorraines  Intereils.  18 

n  The  Prefident  Canon's  Memoriall  for  ,hftn- 
ftrudhon  of  Mr.  Montague.  24  June  1678.  in  French. 

103.  I.ettre  des  Eflats  Generauxau  Roy  Tres-ChfeV 
fen.  ,2  Juin  1678.  S.  V.  in  French.  3  ‘ 

106.  King  of  Frances  Letter  to  the  States.  30  June 
16,8.  in  French.  ao6 

to;.  Duke  de  Luxembourg's  Letter  to  the  Envove  of 
the  States  att  Bruxelles.  June  1678.  in  French.  208 
to8.  Extrait  d’une  Lettre  eferite  a  Mr.  de  Rarillon 
Ambafladeur  du  Roy  en  Angleterre,  par  Meffrs.  les  Am 
baffadeurs  Plenipotentiaires  a  Nimeguc.  Je  29  Juin  x6-8. 

210. 

109.  The 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse, 


IIS 


Nuin  1518. 

109.  The  States  Letter  to  the  Duke  of  Luxemberg. 
22  June  1 678.  in  French.  213. 

no.  Prince  of  Hanalt’s  Memorial.  June  1678.  in 
French.  214. 

111.  Monfr.  Bulow’s  Memorial.  21  June  1678.  in 

French.  215. 

1 1 2.  Memoria'l  in  behalf  of  the  Bilhop  of  Ofnabrug. 

I  June  1678.  in  French.  217. 

1 13.  Mr.  Spanheim’s  Memorial!,  for  the  Eleftor 

Palatin.  31  May  1678.  in  French.  218. 

1 1 4.  Monfieur  Spanheim’s  Memoriall  10  June  1678. 

in  French.  219. 

1  15.  MefTfs.  Likens  &  Du  Crofs’s  Memorial,  for  the 
Duke  of  Ilolftein.  30  May  1678.  in  French.  220. 

116.  Particulars  of  the  Dammages  that  the  Duke  of 

HoHtein  hath  f'uftain’d  from  1675  to  j6'8.  dated  20 
May  1678.  in  French*  222. 

117.  Memoriall  of  the  Marquis  de  St.  Thomas.  11 

June  1678.  in  French.  224. 

1 1 8.  Letter  of  Mr.  Soame  to  Mr.  Secretary  Coventry. 

II  June  1678  22^_ 

1 19-  Monfr.  Bregett’s  Memoriall  to  the  King.  June 
1678.  in  French.  22q 

120.  Monfr.  Bregett’s  Memoriall  to  Mr.  Secretary 

Williamfon.  June  1678.  in  French.  228. 

121.  Monfr.  Olivekrant’s  Memoriall  to  the  King. 

June  1678.  in  French.  229. 

122.  Prince  de  Ligne’s  Memoriall  to  the  King,  in 

Irench.  231. 

123.  Letter  of  the  Marquis  Burgomaniero  to  Mr.  Se¬ 
cretary  Coventry,  10  June  I678.  in  French.  233. 

1 24.  Lift  of  Places  belonging  to  the  Prince  de  Ligne, 

within  the  French  Conquefts.  234.  ' 

125.  The  Plein  Pouvoir  of  the  Deputys  of  the  Hanfe 
Towns.  September  1678.  in  Latin. 

126.  His  Majefty’s  Commiffion  for  Sir  Leoline  Jen¬ 

kins  to  aft  alone  in  the  Mediation.  20  Febr.  1678-9. 
(in  1  atin.J  236 

127.  The  Duke  de  Bouillon’s  Letter  to  his  Majefty. 

September  1678.  in  French.  238. 

1:8.  The  Bifhop  of  Strafburg’s  Letter  to  his  Majeftv, 
concerning  the  Principality  of  Stavelot.  September  1 678’ 
in  French.  ' 

129.  Memorial  of  the  Envoy  c  of  the  Dukes  of  Lunen- 

bourg.  September  1678.  in  French.  2,, 

130.  Memoriall  of  the  Duke  of  Nieubourg’s  Euvov. 
November  1678. 

1 3 1.  A  Letter  from  the  Town  of  Bremen  to  his  Ma¬ 
jefty.  21  September  1678.  in  Latin.  243. 

132.  Defideria  Civitatis  Bremenfis.  248 ! 

133.  Letter  from  the  Town  of  Stralbourg  to  his 

Majefty.  October  1 678.  in  Latin.  249. 

134.  The  Duke  of  Newbourg’s  Letter  to  his  Majefty. 

29  November  1  •  78.  in  French.  2  -  _ 

135.  The  Elector-Palatin’s  Letter  to  His  Majefty. 

14  December  167 i.  in  Latin.  2^^\ 

136.  Petition  of  the  Hamborough-Company,  to  his 
Majefty,  in  behalf  of  that  City.  January  1678-9.  256. 

137.  Projeft  of  a  Treaty  offered  by  the  States  Generali  • 
between  the  Emperor  &  France ;  the  Emperor  &  Sweden  • 

&  France  &  Spain.  1 2  December  1678.  2  97.  ’ 

\3&‘  King  of  Spain’s  Plein-pouvoir  to  the  Marquis 
de  la  Fuentes.  6  March  1679.  in  Spanilh.  265. 

139.  Projeft  of  a  Treaty  of  Commerce  between  Sweden 

&  tht  States  Generali ;  both  as  it  was  given  in  by  the 
Dutch,  and  altered  by  the  Swedes.  Novemb.  &  De- 
cemb.  1678.  in  Latin.  2gg_ 

140.  The  Swedifli  Ambafladors  Projeft  of  a  Treaty  of 
Commerce  with  the  Dutch.  13  December  1678.  289. 

141-  The  Article  of  Free-Ships  Free-Goods,  in  the 
Provihonal  Treaty  (of  A.D.  1675)  betweene  Sweden 
&  Holland,  n  December  1678.  (in  Latin.)  gn. 

142.  Project  of  the  States  Treaty  with  France,  as  it 
was  agreed  on,  about  10  June  1678.  in  French,  (with 
Apoftills.)  ^ 


Num.  i  1 8 — i$2i. 

143.  A  feparate  Article  relating  to  the  Prince  of 

Orange,  in  French.  317. 

144.  Projeft  of  a  Treaty  of  Peace  between  Sweden  & 

the  States-Generall ;  received  from  the  Swedilh  Ambaf- 
fadors,  20  Oftober  1678  in  Latin.  318. 

145.  An  Article  of  Neutrality  in  the  Treaty  of  1640. 
between  Sweden  &  the  States  Generali,  in  Latin.  323. 

146.  A  feparate  Article  that  the  Swedifli  Ambafladors 

are  willing  to  confent  to,  for  the  fatisfaftion  of  thofe  that 
have  been  difpoyled  at  Sea  by  Capers.  20  November 
1678.  in  Latin.  324. 

147.  AMemoriall  touching  the  Pretentions  of  Sweden, 

in  point  of  Commerce,  for  their  Treaty  with  Holland. 
21  November  1678.  in  French.  325. 

148.  The  Sixth  &  Ninth  Articles  of  the  Treaty  of 
1667.  between  Sweden  and  the  States  General,  in  Latin. 

327- 

1 49.  The  Third  &  Fourth  Articles  of  the  Treaty  of 
1673.  between  Sweden  &  Holland,  in  Latin.  328. 

1 50.  A  Deduction  of  the  Diligences  of  the  Swedifli 
Ambaffadors  Jn  order  to  bring  the  Treaty  (efpecially  that 
of  Commerce)  to  a  Conclufion,  with  the  Ambaffadors  of 
the  States  Generali.  9  December  1678.  in  French. 

.  ,  .  33°- 

1 5 1.  The  Sixth  &  Seventh  Article  touching  Com¬ 

merce,  projected  by  the  Dutch  Ambafladors  ;  &  apoftill’d 
by  the  Ambafladors  of  Sweden,  in  Latin.  334. 

132.  Inftruftions  given  by  the  Ambafladors  of  Sweden 

upon  the  Dift'erence  between  them  &  thofe  of  the  States 
General! ;  about  the  Peace  and  the  Commerce.  1  April 
1679.  in  French.  337* 

133.  Ariiculus  Septimus  in  Traftatu  Commerciorum 

Sueco-Belgico.  9  June  1679.  341. 

1 54.  The  Aft  defigned  for  abolifhing  the  Monopolv- 
Companys  in  Sweden.  9  June  1679.  in  Latin.  345. 

I5IQ. 

Another  Book  in  fol.  belonging  to  the  former,  being 
written  by  the  Hand  of  Mr.Thomas  Chudleigh,  & 
given  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dolben.  It  containeth, 

Tranfcripts  of  the  Letters  written  by  the  Englifli 
Ambafladors-Plenipotentiaries  at  Nimeguen,  efpecially  of 
Sir  Leoline  Jenkins  (who  was  faid  to  be  the  Perfon  who 
bare  the  greateft  fliare  of  the  weight  of  Buftnefs)  unto 
Sir  Jofeph  Williamfon,  who  was  then  principal  Secretary 
of  State,  from  6  July  1676.  to  19  July  1677.  both 
inclufive. 

1520. 

Another  Book  in  fol.  being  the  Second  Volume  of  the 
Regiftry  of  Letters  ;  all  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Chudleigh,  &  given  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dolben. 

It  containeth, 

Tranfcripts  of  the  Letters  fent  by  the  Englifh  Pleni¬ 
potentiaries  at  Nimeguen,  to  Mr.  Henry  Coventry  &  Sir 
Jofeph  Williamfon,  principal  Secretaries  of  State ;  but 
more  efpecially  unto  the  latter:  from  23  July  1677.  to 
3  Oftober  1678.  both  inclufive.  They  are  almoft  all  of 
them  fubferibed  fingly  by  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins  :  the  few 
that  remain  having  the  names  alfo  of  Mr.  Laurence 
Hyde,  or  of  Sir  William  Temple. 

1521. 

Another  Book  in  fol.  being  the  Third  Volume  of  the 
Regiftre  of  Letters  ;  all  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Chudleigh,  &  given,  together  with  the  others, 
by  Sir  Gilbert  Dolben.  It  contains, 

Tranfcripts  of  the  Letters  fent  from  Nimeguen  by 
Sir  Leoline  Jenkins  alone,  unto  Sir  Jofeph  Williamfon 
firft,  and  afterwards  to  his  fucceflor  ?  the  Earl  of  Sun¬ 
derland,  from  7  Oftober  1678.  to  the  4th  of  Auguft 
1679.  both  inclufive. 


Another 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


n6 


Num.  1522 — 1524. 


Another  Book  in  fol.  being  the  Fourth  Volume  of  the 

Regiftre  of  Letters  ;  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr. 

Thomas  Chudleigh,  &  given  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dolben. 

It  containeth, 

Tranfcripts  of  Letters  written  between  Nimeguen  Sc 
White-hall,  between  Sir  Jofeph  Williamfon  the  Kings 
principal  Secretary  of  State,  Sc  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins,  Sc 
Sir  William  Temple  feperately  :  with  the  Letters  of  Sir 
Leoline  to  Sir  Jofeph  ;  which,  at  the  laft,  are  aifo  fub- 
crbe  d  by  Sir  William. 

They  begin  23  December  1675.  and  end  with  the 
26th  July  1676. 

1 52  3* 

Another  Book  in  fol  being  the  5th  Volume  of  the  Re¬ 
giftre  of  Letters ;  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Thomas 

Chudleigh,  and  (with  the  Nine  other  preceding 

Volumes)  given  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dolben.  It  containeth, 

1.  Tranfcripts  of  Letters  written  by  Sir  Jofeph  Wil¬ 
liamfon  principal  Secretary  of  State,  to  Sir  William 
Temple  &  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins  above  mentioned,  from 
4  January  1675-6.  to4Febr.  1678-9. 

Among  which,  I  alfo  find  Copies  of 

2.  The  Kings  Letter  to  the  Emperor,  about  the  Duke 

of  Mechlenburg,  5  Auguft  1676.  in  Latin.  10 1. 

3.  Sir  William  Temple’s  Letter  to  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins, 

upon  the  Difficulties  made  by  the  Count  Khinlky  upon 
the  firft  vifits.  13  January  1677.  N.  S.  *162. 

4.  Lord  Ambaffador  Montagues  Letter  to  Mr.  Secre¬ 
tary  Coventry.  4  July  1677.  20 7. 

5.  Extrait  d’une  Lettre  du  Roy  Tres-Chretien,  a 

Monfr.  l’Ambafladeur  Courtin,  touchant  1’ Affaire  du 
Due  de  Lorraine.  July  1677.  209. 

6.  Difp'atches  from  Mr.  Secretary  Coventry.  31  Au¬ 
guft  1677.  216.  etvid.  219.  306.  309. 

7.  Queftion  put  by  the  Kings  Commiffioners,  to  the 

Ambaftador  Sc  Envoy  of  the  States.  3  May  1678.  in 
French.  287. 

8.  Anfwer  of  the  Ambaftador  Sc  Envoy-Extraordinary 

of  Holland,  to  the  Kings  Commiffioners.  4  May  1678. 
in  French.  288. 

9.  Memoriall  of  the  Ambaftador  Sc  Envoyc-Extraor- 

dinary  of  Holland,  to  His  Majefty.  3  May  1678.  in 
French.  294. 

10.  His  Majeftys  additional  Inftru&ion  touching  the 

Pretenfions  of  feverall  Princes.  7  July  1678.  315. 

1 1 .  Lift  of  Papers  of  fuch  Princes  as  have  applyed 

themfelves  to  his  Majefty  for  his  Offices,  Sc  whofe  Cafes 
are  recommended  to  the  Ambafiadors  at  Nimeguen.  by 
the  additional  In  ft  ruftion  above-mentioned.  316. 

1  2.  The  Kings  Letter  of  Revocation  to  Sir  Leoline 
Jenkins.  4  February  1678-9.  350. 

13.  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Sunderland,  principal  Secre¬ 
tary  of  State,  in  the  room  of  Sir  Jofeph  Williamfon,  to 
Sir  Leoline  Jenkins :  acquainting  him  with  the  Kings 
Pleafure,  that  he  ftiould  haften  to  the  Hague,  and  not 
quit  the  Mediation,  notwithftanding  the  abovementioned 
Letter  Revocatory.  1 1  February  1678-9.  251. 

1524- 

Codex  membranaceus  et  prob6  feriptus,  in  fol.  in  quo 
continebantur, 

Epiftolte  D. Pauli  cum  Gloffis  perpetuis  ex  Operibus 
SS.  Patrum  cum'  Graecorum  turn'  Latinorum  (e  Chry- 
foftomo  fcilicet,  Origine,  Hefychio,  Auguftino,  Ambro- 
fio,  Hieronymo,  Gregorio  1.  Fulgantio,  Hillario,  Pri- 
mafio,  Haymone,  Remigio,  Berengario,  Lonfranco, 
&c.)  maximam  partem,  defumptis. 

Codice  et  capite  et  calce  mutilato,  inunc  Incipit, 
Rom.  1.  2.  abrupte  etiam  definit  in  Hebr.  xi.  1  ;.  Mar- 
ginibus,  faepiufcule  cernuntur  Adnotationes  uUn a  manu 
exaratae,  7 


Num.  1525 — 1527. 


15*5* 

A  thin  Book  in  large  fob  bought  of  me  ;  and  entituled. 

An  Iiarmonie  of  the  Bible,  with  adiligente  Regiftre 
of  the  Times ;  by  Hugh  Broughton. 

This  is  the  original  (I  have  lately  procured  a  Print 
of  Hugh’s  Effigies  ;  did  fallen  it  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Book.) 

1526  Sc  1527. 

Two  Velum-Books  in  fol.  which  being  formerly  bound 
up  together  in  one  Volume,  fhall  now  be  confidered 
by  me,  as  fuch. 

The  firft  of  thefe  confifteth  of  28  Leaves  :  the 
latter  beginneth  with  fol.  29.  Sc  endeth  with  fol.  178. 

That,  relating  only  to  the  two  Books  of  the  Macca¬ 
bees  ;  this  is  to  the  New  Teftament. 

The  New  Teftament  is  taken  as  Four  Trafts,  namely 
the  Gofpels  as  one  Harmony  ;  the  Acts  of  the  Apoftles ; 
the  Epiftles  ;  and  the  Apocalypfe. 

The  Method  obferved  in  thefe  Books,  in  this.  Firft 
to  begin  with  a  Text  of  the  Scripture,  according  to  the 
vulgar  Latin  ;  and  over  againft  it,  to  reprefent  the  fub- 
jecl  thereof  in  Painting,  in  a  pretty  large  Circle.  Under¬ 
neath  the  faid  Text  of  Scripture,  is  put  down  in  I.atin, 
the  meaning  of  the  fame,  according  to  the  Senfe  Sc 
Judgment  of  the  Author,  who  generally  draweth  the 
feveral  Texts  to  Ihew  Sc  declare  the  Benefits  accruing  to 
fuch  who  live  a  good  Life,  and  the  Punifhments  attend¬ 
ing  a  bad  one :  and  he  efpecially  Sc  frequently  inveigheth 
againft  thofc  evil  Prelates  &  Clergymen,  who  negledting 
&  forfaking  the  Work  of  God  (having  obtained  their 
Dignities  by  corrupt  means)  continued,  out  of  Ambition, 
to  make  their  Court  to  great  Men,  and  at  length  aban¬ 
doned  themfelves  to  Pride,  Covetoulnefs,  Luxury,  and 
all  manner  of  worldly  vanities.  Thefe  Explications  are 
alfo  reprefented  in  Circles  under  the  other  ;  all  colum- 
natim.  So  that  on  each  Page  there  is  four  Columns, 
one  of  Writing  a  Text  Sc  its  Allegory  lower;  then  four 
Circles  exhibiting  the  fame  b'-'  way  of  Illumination  :  then 
another  like  Column  of  Writing ;  and  laftly  another 
Column  of  four  like  Circles  ;  which  with  proper  illumi¬ 
nated  Ornaments  fill  the  Page. 

From  thefe  Pictures,  many  good  Notices  Sc  Hints  may 
be  had,  touching  the  Habits  of  Princes,  Clergy,  &  laftly, 
meaner  Men  &  Women  ;  Machines,  Inftruments  of  W ar, 
mufical.  Sc  domeftic,  See.  as  alfo  for  the  explaining  divers 
Ufages  Sc  Cuftoms,  facred  &  civil.  Among  which,  one 
I  will  here  take  notice  of,  touching  the  variation  of  the 
more  modern  Popery  from  the  more  antient.  E 'ery 
body,  almoft,  knoweth  that  in  the  Primers,  Breviaries, 
Miflals,  fecundum  Ufum  Sar.  &c.  one  of  the  ways  of 
reprefenting  the  ever-blefied  Trinity,  is  by  a  Body  with 
a  Head  confiding  of  three  faces.  Now  in  this  Book, 
Antichrift  is  reprefented  after  that  manner,  as  may  be 
feen  at  fol.  26.  95.  152-  153.  Here  it  may  be  remem- 
bred,  that  the  Numbers  are  written  on  the  Blank  fide  of 
each  Leaf. 

This  Book  (taking  both  Volumes  for  one  Book) 
feemeth  to  have  been  made  in  France,  about  500  Years 
ago  ;  and  is  painted  &  gilded  aftar  the  bc.ft  m,.nner  ufed 
in  that  time.  Here  &  there,  alfo.  are  feme  direflions, 
in  a  French  Hand  of  that  time,  Sc  in  the  French  Lan¬ 
guage,  for  the  Workmen  to  alter  foine  things  done 
amifs. 

Among  the  faults  ;  the  Shield  fol.  137.  exhibiting  a 
Plain-Crofs  Vert,  on aField  Gules,  is  not  noted;  although 
it  hath  been  found  guilty  offaife  Heraldry,  by  an  eminent 
Officer  of  Armes  to  whom  I  lately  (hewed  it  ;  there 
being  Color  upon  Color,  which  their  Rules  will  not 
allow.  But,  in  my  Opinion,  the  Book-painter  was  not. 
to  blame,  his  Work  being  cider  t'l.ri,  1  believe,  ti: 
Herald.-:  can  prove  their  R  of  LI  waning  to  be; 
and  whei  L  is  1 

Moreover, 


Bibliothecas  Harleiatm 


“7 


Num.  1527,  1528. 

Moreover,  other  Arms,  more  antieat,  labor  under  the 
fame  defeat,  if  it  was  any ;  as,  the  antient  Arms  faid 
to  have  belonged  to  the  Kingdom  of  France,  vizt.  Three 
Toads  Sable  ;  on  a  Field  Vert ;  which  is  Color  upon 
Color.  I  need  not  add,  that  the  Arms  born  by  God¬ 
frey  of  Bullen  after  his  being  King  of  Jerufalem,  were 
Metal  upon  Metal,  &  yet  allowed  as  good. 

This  Book  without  doubt,  was  formerly  one  Vo¬ 
lume,  of  that  glorioufly  illuminated  Biblical  Manufcript, 
the  firft  Volume  of  which,  beginning  with  Genefis,  & 
ending  with  Job,  was  given  unto  the  Bodleyan  Library 
by  Sir  Chriftopher  Heydon  the  elder,  where  ic  fliil  re- 
maineth  marked  Arch.  A.  154. 

1528. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  nitida  fatis  et  Hifpanica 
manu,  ante  plures  centenos  Annos  Hebraice  fcriptus; 
in  quo  legendus  cerniter  ,T  nHH  1DD  fepher  berith 
Jah,  Liber  foederis  Domini,  five  NlpQ  Biblia:  Li- 
bri  Teftamenti  Veteris  integri ;  una  cum  alijsnonnul- 
lis,  fuo  Ordine  infra  recenfendis.  fc. 

1.  Variantes  Codicum  Occidentalium  et  Orientalium, 

i.  e.  Palceftinorum  atq;  Babyloniorum,  qutE  fepiulcule 
audiunt  “Ttytfp  Ben  Afher,  et  'bnDJ  Ben  Naphthali, 
illuminatis  folijs  exaratte,  quorum  quidem  Dodtorum 
Nomina  produce  fcripta  fuerunt  Rabbi  Aharon  filius 
Rabbi  Mofis  de  Tribu  Afher ;  et  Rabbi  Jacob  ben  Nap- 
thali ;  qui  fimul  floruerunt  circa  annum  D.  N.  J.  C. 
1034.  1.  et  8.  b. 

2.  Syllabus  Parafhoth  et  ITaphtaroth  five  Sedfionum, 
fecundum  quas  Judtei  Ledtionem  Sabbatinam,  fingulis 
Annis  folent  abfolvere  :  aliens,  fed  prob.i,  manu.  4.  b. 

3.  Vafium  ac  Utenfilium  Sacrorum  Iconifmi  a  Judteo 
Illuminatore,  lplendide  cffigiati. 

Deinde  fequitur  Textus  Sacer  pundlis  Vocalibus 
munitus;  tribufq;  Columnis,  ut  aiunt,  unaquaque  pa- 
gina  quam  accurate  fcriptus  ;  fummis,  infimis,  ac  inter- 
dum  latcralibus  oris,  Notis  Maforeticis  ornatus ;  ne  di¬ 
cam  de  Parva  Mafora,  feu  de  Keri  et  Ketib,  quam  in 
interioribus  marginibus  paffim  eft  viderc. 

Notandum,  Libros  Biblicos  nequaquain  eo  quoChrif- 
tianorum  Codices  Giteci  ac  Latini,  ordine  defcribi ;  fed 
omnino  fecundum  morem  Judaicum,  it  D.  Hieronymo 
in  Prologo  fuo  Galeato,  fufe  explicatum. 

Agmen  igitur  ducunt  Quinque  Libri  Moyfis,  qui 
unico  Vocabulo  nuncupantur  rn|n  Lex. 

4.  lYJyiTD  Berefith ;  Genefis,  1 1 . 

5.  DW  Hi?K’l  Veele  femoth ;  Exodus.  36.  col.  2. 

6.  N'lp’l  Veicra  ;  Leviticus.  58.  b.  col.  3. 

7.  “Q“H  Vaiedabber  ;  Numeri.  72.  b.  col.  3. 

8.  DH^in  Elle  haddebarim;  Deuteronomium. 

93.  b.  col.  2. 

Libros  Legis  excipiunt  Libri  Prophetici,  qui  apud  Ju- 
dasos  fecundum  tenent  locum.  Ij  funt, 

9.  Visin’  Jehofuah.  1 13.  col.  2. 

10.  D'DDIjy  Sophetim  ;  Judicum. 

ii-  btflDty  Samuel,  (i.  e.  Samuelis  Libri  11.) 

140.  col.  3. 

12.  lJOVd  Melachim;  Regum  i.  e.  qui  apud  nos  di- 
cuntur  Libri  Regum  Tertius  et  Quartus.)  172. 

13-  IPlTSy’  Jefahiahu;  Jefaite.  205.  b.  col.  3 

14.  inVJV  Irmeiahu;  Jeremiee.  228.  b.  col.  a 

15.  ^NptiT  Jechezchel;  Ezechielis.  259.  b.  col.  2 

16.  Hofeah.  286.  b.  col.  3 

1 7.  biiV  Joel.  290.  col.  2 

18..  DlOi?  Hamos.  291.  b.  col.  1 

J9-  Hobadiah.  294.  col.  3 

20.  PUV  Jonah.  294.  b.  col.  3 

21.  nD’D  Michah.  295.  b.  col.  1 

22.  Dim  Nachum.  297.  b.  col.  3 

23.  plp^n  Chabakkuk.  298.  b.  col.  2 

24-  mDjf  Tzephaniah.  299.  b.  col.  j 

25.  ’JH  Chaggai.  300.  b.  col.  2 

Cat.  Haul.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1528,  1529. 


2 6.  HHDi  Zechariah.  361.  b.  col.  1* 

27.  Malachi.  305.  b.  col.  3. 

Tertium  in  Codicibus  jfiiblicis  Hebraice  fcriptis  lo¬ 
cum  poflident  Hagiographa,  fc. 

28.  nn  Ruth.  (Nonnulli  Ruth  &  Cinoth,  inter  Ha¬ 

giographa  fcriptitent,  et  hos  Libros  in  fuo  putent  numero 
fupputandoc.  Hieron.  Prol.  Gal.)  307.  col.  2. 

29.  D’Vnn  Sepher  Tehillim,  Liber  Laudum ; 

i.  e.  Pfalmorum.  308.  b.  col.  2. 

30.  2VK  Jiob.  336.  col.  1. 

31*  ’’b&D  Mifle  ;  Parabola:.  346.  b.  col.  1. 

Tres  Libri  fuperiores,  bi-columnatim  folummodo 
defcribuntur. 

32.  n^Hp  Coheleth  ;  Ecclefiaftes.  355.  b.  col.  r. 

33.  Dn»pn  Tti>  Sir  Hafirim  ;  Cant i cum  Cantico* 

rum.  359.  col.  2. 

34.  mil’p  Kinoth,  Threni  ;  five  rO'N,  Quomodo  : 

Lameatationes  Jeremia:.  360.  b.  col.  3. 

35.  Wn  Daniel.  363.  col.  1. 

36.  “1DDN*  n1?’!-  Mcghillath  Either ;  Volumen 

Either.  371.  col.  3. 

37.  Hezra.  _  .  ^  375.  b.  col.  1. 

38.  fTOfU  Nechemiah  (feu  Libri  Eftherte  pars  pof- 

terior.)  381.  col.  1.  lin.  4. 

39-  D’S’H  ’HI  Dibre  Haiamim,  Verba  Dierum ;  Pa- 
ralipomenwn  Libri  1.  et  11.  388.  b. 

40.  AbfolutoTexto  Sacro,  qutEdam  ex  induftria  abra- 
duntur ;  im&  vero  margine  cernitur  ha:c  Adnotatio, 

“  1 535.  die  12  Decembris  Exaininat.  perD.  Jacobum 
Giraldum  Commilfarium  Apoftolicuin.  Et  infra,  Ctefar 

Bulholfus  CuriteEpifcopalis  Bononienfis . 

contuli.  .  .  .  D.  Commilf.  Nozr.  manu  propria.” 

41.  Quas  fcripta  fuere  paging  fequenti,  confimili 
furore  ac  fuperltitione,  abraduntur  omnia. 

42.  riTTODnn  “T1D  Regula  Haphtararuin  five  Ledtio- 

num  Propheticarum,  quos  fingulis  Parafliis  (de  quibus 
fupra  ad  num.  2.)  refpondent.  423. 

(Here  beginneth  the  Account  of  Mr.  Comyns’s  Books) 

1529- 

An  Ileraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands  ; 
wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  fhort  Table  to  the  enluing  Defcents,  faftened  to 
the  Infide  of  the  Cover. 

2.  Pedegree  of  Villiers  Duke  of  Buckingham  ;  in- 

ferted  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  or  Munday.  1. 

Then  followeth  a  Colledtion  of  tlie  Pcdegrees  of  £ 
the  Englifh  Nobility,  made  about  A.  D.  1598.  (and 
grounded  upon  that  Baronagium  Anglias  extant  at  N° 
806.  in  this  Library)  being  tranfcribed  &  enlarged  by 
the  hand  of  . 

3.  Defcent  of  Pawlet  Marquis  of  Winchefter,  en¬ 

larged  by  Mr.  Richard  Munday  the  Painter  Stainer,  Mr. 
. &  Mr.  Robert  Dale  now  Suffolk  He¬ 
rald.  2. 

4.  Defcent  of  Howard  Earl  of  A  rondel  1 ;  much  en¬ 
larged  by  Mr.  Munday.  2.  b. 

5.  Defcent  of  Veare  Earl  of  Oxford.  5.  b. 

6.  Defcent  of  Percy  Earl  of  Northumberland.  7.  b. 

7.  Defcent  of  Talbot  Earl  of  Shrewfbury.  9.  b. 

8.  Defcent  of  Gray  Earl  of  Kent ;  with  fome  Addi¬ 
tions  by  Mr.  Munday.  1 1.  b. 

9.  Defcent  of  Stanley  Earl  of  Darby  j  with  fome 

Additions  by  Mr.  Munday.  13. 

1  c.  Defcent  of  Somerfett  Earl  of  Worcefter ;  with 
Additions  by  Mr.  Munday.  1 5.  b. 

1 1 .  Defcent  of  Manners  Earl  of  Rutland  ;  with  Ad¬ 
ditions  by  Mr.  Munday,  &c.  17.  b. 

12.  Defcent  of  Clifford  Earl  of  Comberland.  19.  b. 

13.  Defcentof  Ratcliff  Earl  of  SufRx.  22. 

14.  Defcent  of  Haftings  Earl  of  Huntingdon  ;  with 

Additions  by  Mr.  Munday,  &c.  23.  b. 

Hh  i  5.  Defcent: 


rxS 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num. 


529. 


Ad'itio°tnM°fMZCa“erEarl  0fBathe  ;  ™h 

mth'fomeAM?  EarI  of  Southampton, 

mm  tome  Additions  by  Mr.  Munday,  &c.  27  b  ’ 

°f  B£dforf= 

°fp“>  ^ 
di.i,o9nsbyeMrn.Mfu^yarEarI  °{Hmford’^- 

Defcent  of  Devereux  Far?  nf  T’/t  •  > 
lions  by  Mr.  Munday  EffHt ;  'v,th  Addi- 

hamtbyM;.  Mmid°aryDefCCnt  EarI  of  Not“S- 

Adtldo“5VfMX&VfC°“M  “”■«“*  th 

by^rDMuSly°.f  »  Aed 

.  *5.  Defcent  of  Neyile  Lord  Aburgayeny  entered 

Ced't  Mr!' M™Iy  £  ““•*  D^b~ 

’LJ™ha  Lord  Aud^>  ^4ed  'a 
fome  Additions  by  Mi^Munday  ^worthfrvuh 

LOTd  “f  w  r 

Ad^trMfMxyeLordBarkeley ; 

3°.  Defcent  of  Parker  Lord  Morley.  S'  u 

by\lr.  Mund'ay°  F)nCS  L°rd  DaCrcs ;  with  Additions 

Coi&uDa£Vf  Br°°kL“rd.C?btol.;  X  f7e 

33-  Short  Defcent  of  Stafford  Lord  Stafford.  6<  b’ 

34-  Defcent  of  Grey  Lord  of  Wilton.  67.  b". 

M  Defcent  of  Scroope  Lord  of  Boulton,  bv  Mr 
Munday  ;  with  large  Additions  by  Mr.  Dale.  69  b  ’ 
day.5"  PideSreeof  Sutton  Lord  Dudley  ;  by  Mr.  Mun¬ 
day.7'  Defcent  of  Lumley  LordLumley;  by  MnMun- 
MundaFedeSree  °f  St°m0n  Lord  Stourtoni  by  Mr. 
Miniday eRent  °f  B‘°Unt  W  “"»**«>  by3' Mr. 
Mu4n°da°£fCent  °f  Dmy  Lmi  °f  S  Mr. 

day.'"  r’efce:lt  of  Sandes  Lord  Sandes;  by  MrMtfun- 
Mutday*™  °f  Va“X  Lord  oE  Haredon ;  by'Mr. 
MSayer“nt0f  Wynd<br  L”d  Wyndfor;  by^Mr. 

day45’  Defcent  of  Bourgh  Lord  Bourgh ;  by  Mr!  Mom 
^46.  Defcent  of  Mordant  Lord  Mordant ;  by  MnMon- 

Monday  *Cnt  °f  Cr°mWe11  L°rd  Cr°™dl »  by  Mr. 

48.  Defcent  of  Eure  Lord  Eure;  by  Mr.  Monday 


Num.  1529,  1530. 

day  2'  ‘Def'Cent  °f  She^elJ  ^ord  Sheffeld  ;  by  Mr.  Mon* 
51-  Defcent  of  Paget  Lord  Pagett ;  by  Mr.  Monday. 

Mn  Monday1*  ^  MOm*  °f  the  S°“h  \}t 

55-  Defcent  of  North  Lord  North;  by'Mr.  Monday. 
Mr5  M??™*  °f  Br“SeS  Lord  Shando!s  (Chaudos®  by 

t a  1 00.  b. 

57-  -Ucicentof  Cary  Lord  Hunfdin  ;  by  Mr.  Monday. 

Mo5ndajDefCem  °f  thC  L°rd  St  J°hnof  Blcttro;'by  Mr. 
Monday5***1™*  °*  SacEv!le  Lord  of  buckliurfl ;  by  Mr. 

di®0'  Defcent  of  Well  Lord  La  Ware;  by  Mr.  Mon. 

«i.  Defcent  of  Cicill  Earle  of  Exeter;  &  yicount 
Wimbleton ;  by  Mr.  Monday.  1  -  ™b 

Rictrd  MmSay  ^P*01*  ^  ^  *  by  Mr. 
d  d3-  Defcent  of  Chenyc  Lord  Cheney  ;  by  Mr.  Mon- 

da®4.  Defcent  of  Norrcys  Lord  Norms  ;  by  Mr.  Mon. 

65.  Defcent  of  Haward  Lord  Walden  (now  Earteif 
Suffolk)  by  Mr.  Monday.  Ic^  ^ 

6S.  Large  Pedegree  of  Knevett ;  by  Mr.  Munday. 

67-  Pedegree  of  Cavendilh ;  by  Mr. Monday.  1°?.  £ 
day  8'  1  bdegree  of  Denny  Lord  Denny  ;  by  Mr.  Mon. 

M„6„9dav.edeSrC£  °f  Perp°iM  EarI  °P  Ringfton ;  'by* Mr. 

Monday'*™*  °fB£ni  L°rd  TOII°“gbby;  by». 

M„7„IdayedCSree0fD0rn,erE^rf  Ca'™>;  by  Mr. 

Munday  £*CCnt  “f  Ba^  Vifcount  Bayning;'^. 

MS  Drfc?”  < ,Ee  Lord  Dac  e  of  the  North  •  » 
Munday-  with  an  Addition  of  Mr.  Dale.  i-’o  b  * 

74-  Defcent  of  Aftley  Lord  Aitley  ;’  by  Mr.  .  ' 

Turning  to  the  other  end  of  the  Book  ;  I  h„j  b‘ 

75-  The  Upholders  (or  Undertakers)  Bill  for’tIl, 
FuneraU  of  toe  Honble.  John  Egerton If,,  ’a.ftjut 


Monday £&"c.n*  °f  ^  W1'a“'‘ 1  by9Mr. 

50.  Defcent  of  Riche  Lord  Riche ;  by  Mr.  Monday 

bySMr.  MX"  lhC  L°rd  Wi"0Ughby  °f 

95- 


I53°- 

AnrSfrdiCal  BTkD‘"  fo1’  "-"“m  &  tricked  by  Mr 
Giles  Campion  the  Painter  Stainer  (into  whole  hands 
the  Books  of  Mr.  Richard  Monday  came  ■  Xh 
alter  the  deceafe  of  the  faid  Mr/  Canmion,  “ 
bought  by  Mr.  Comyns)  wherein  arc  contained 

«A£*SSEHS£  -*s» 

bom  by  thofe  ff  flatSl1"  *h£  d'ff£r£nt  ^ 
3-.  Ihe  Vtfitation  of  Bcrkftire  ;  or,  Mr.  Campion's 

Cope  of  that  Vifnation-book  which  was  made  of  this 

ward  Bysfce  Cl"  "'°le  findror-HaraId.  Sir  Ed- 

i66ffa  7  “  C  fr°m  ‘hc-vear  ll564-  “  A.D. 

This  Copic  comprehendeth  only  the  Defccnts  2e 

Armes,  fcc.  without  any  Churcli  Notes. 


1331.  An 


Bibliothecas  Harleiante, 


119 


brum.  1331—1.533, 

I53r- 

An  .Heraldical  Book  Jn  fo!.  almoft  wholly  written  & 

tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Munday  the  Painter-Stainer  ; 

wherein  are  contained, 

x.  Aihort  Account  of  this  prefent  Book.  At  the  be- 
ginning. 

2.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  thofe  Fa¬ 
milies,  whofe  Defcents  are  entered  herein. 

3-  Arms  of  the  old  Bedfordlhire  Gentry,  haftily 
tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons.  j 

4.  The  Vifitation  of  Bedffordfhire  made  in  Anno 
I566.  per  William  Hervey  Clarencieux  (molt  of  the 
Defcents  being  continued  &  enlarged  by  fome  others  of 
the  lame  Familyes,  and  by  laboured  Pedegrees.  2. 

5.  A  Collection  of  the  Defcents  &  Arms  of  divers 
Mund  Bcdfordfllire  Familics  >  truly  tranfciibed  by  Mr. 

6.  Some  few  Additions,  taken  (as  it  feemeth)  from 

the  Vifitation-book  of  A.D.  1634.  by  Mr.  Campion,  and 
others.  r 

This  Book  (as  Mr.  Mundy  noteth)  he  lent  to 
George  Owen  Yorke-Herald,  &  Henery  Lilly  Roune- 
Roie,  when  they  went  the  Vifitation  of  this  County  in 
Anno  1634.  1 

Other  Obfervables  herein,  maybe 

7.  Church  Notes  taken  in  Woubome-Church. 

■  8.  Church  Notes  taken  in  Luton-Church. 

9.  Church  Notes  taken  in  Bletfo-Church. 

A”ne,s  granted  to  one  Richard  Lavinder. 
William  Dethick  York-Herald.  1580. 


9- 

*5- 

24. 

by 

r43- 


1  5c 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almost  intirely  written  & 
tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  the  Painter-Stainer, 
who  hath  prefixed  the  following  Title  thereunto. 

1.  The  Vifitation  of  Bark/hire  made  by  William  Har¬ 

vey  Clarenceulx  in  Anno  1566.  continued  and  enlarged 
with  the  Vifitation  of  the  fame  County  made  by  Henery 
Chitting  Chefter-Herald,  and  John  Phillipott  Somerfett 
Herald,  Deputyes  to  William  Camden  Clarenceulx  in 
Anno  1623.  j 

2.  Some  more  Defcents  &  Armes  of  Berklhire  Fami¬ 
lies  ;  added  by  Mr.  Mundy,  &c.  1  -  , 

.3-  Armes  of  four  old  Berklhire  Families,  haftily 
tricked  m  printed  Efcocheons. 

4.  Some  of  the  Proofs  from  old  Deeds,  fuftaining  the 
Pedegree  of  the  Family  of  Latton ;  entered  into  this 
Book  by  William  Latton  of  Gray’s  Inne  Efq.  brother 
rftok °LyLm°n0[ . In  the  County 

.  ,.  Note  fhis  Latton  hath  made  fome  Additions 
in  divers  other  places  of  this  Book;  and  hath  alfo  ftamped 
Impreffions  ©f  the  Armes  of  Latton,  from  two  feveral 
deals. 

,  -5'  An  alphabetical  Table  containing  the  Surnames  of 
Lole  Families,  whofe  Pedegrees  are  to  be  found  in  this 
Book.  At  the  beginning. 

*533- 

\n  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  all  written  &  tricked 
^aIld  °f.Mr.  Richard  Mundy;  containing, 

•  V  of  the  County  of  Buckingham 

nade  by  William  Harvey  Clarenceulx,  A.D.  1576. 

,  QM,lDate  »s  altered  by  another  hand,  to  icy;: 
vhen  William  Harvey  was  dead,  &  Robert  Cooke  was 
Jarenceux.  However,  I  find  that  in  that  year,  or  in 
57t  tfhls  C°unty  was  vifited  by  Richard  Lee  Portcullis 
or  the  faid  Robert  Cooke.) 

2  Continued  and  enlarged  with  the  Vifitation  made 
\rn"n°  n  h  John  Phi!liPott  Somerfett  Herald,  and 
Villiam  Ryley  Blew-mantell,  Purcevant  of  Armes. 


NTum.  1533,  1^34* 

ft,  Mundy  g°es  on  thus,  in  the  Title,  «  Noate 

mat  this  Booke  I  lent  them  when  they  went  this  latter 
lfitation ;  and  they  have  enlarged  &  continued  many 
ot  the  Defcents  as  may  appeare  by  ther  ovvne  Hands  in 
this  Booke. 

Herein  I  alfo  find, 

.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames ;  at  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

^  5-  Armes  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  Bucking- 

6.  Armes  of  the  Towne  &  Borough  of  Chipping- 
Wycombe. 

7;  Armes  of  fome  of  the  Buckinghamlhire  Gentry, 
haftily  tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons.  115. 

8.  Noates  taken  in  Iver-Church,  nth  July  1634. 

125.  b. 

9.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Bectfnsfield.  148. 

10.  Noates  taken  in  the  Church,  &  in  the  Hall-houfe 

of  Goatehurft,  July  1634.  187.  b. 

11.  A  Note  or  Lift  of  thofe  that  wcare  difclaimed  at 

the  new  Vifitation  made  A.D.  1634.  195. 

12.  T.  he  Names  of  fuch  as  are  to  give  Satisfaction 

at  London.  ^ 

13.  Additional  Pedegree  of  BuckinghatrtfhireFamilies! 
putt  by  Mr.  Mundy,  after  the  Vifitations.  197.  b. 

Note  that  the  Defcents  of  Long,  Cotton,  &  Fox, 
at  fob  208.  b.  &c.  are  to  be  deemed  as  part  of  the  Vifit¬ 
ation  ot  1634. 

14.  Armes  of  Dormer  Sc  Matches;  with  a  Defcent 
&  Arms  of  1  yrell,  entered  by  a  ftrange  hand.  211  b. 

Befides  the  Additions  of  Mr.  Philpat  &  Will.  Ryley 
above-mentioned  ;  here  are  divers  9  tilers  by, 

15.  Mr.  Mundy  the  Collector  'pf  this  Book  ;  at 

ioi  b.  102.  130.  163.  171.  b.  173.  b.  182.  b.  i8t. 
190.  b.  192.  J 

16.  William  Latton  of  Grayes  Inne  Efq.  at  12.  b. 

17.  Mr.  Robert  Dale,  now  Suftolk-Herald  Extra,  at 

43-b.  68.  99. ? b.  101.  b  163.  165.  182.  b. 


15S4- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fob  written  &  tricked  by  Mr. 
Richard  Mundy;  containing, 

1 .  An  alphabetical  1  able  of  Surnames,  referring  to 
the  following  Pedegrees.  At  the  beginning. 

.  2.  The  Vifitation  of  the  County  of  Cambridge,  made 
in  Anno  1575 •  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceulx.  j. 

3.  Continued  &  enlarged  with  the  Vifitation  of  the 
fame  County  made  by  Henery  St.  George  Richmond- 
Herald,  Marlhall  &  Deputy  to  William  Camden  Cla¬ 
renceulx,  in  Anno  1619. 

Other  Obfervables  in  this  Book,  may  be, 

4-  Atchievement  of  the  Towne  and  Borough  of  Cam¬ 
bridge.  ( 

5.  Les  Armes  des  ProfefTors  del  Univerfite  de  Cam- 

brydg ;  as  purchafed  by  Dr.  Lorkin.  ibid. 

6.  Some  Proofs  from  Evidences  &  Seals  touching  the 

Family  of  Col  vile.  Il  ^ 

7.  The  Creft  of  Creeke,  prettily  painted.  1 1  b. 

8.  The  Armes  &  Creft  of  Millefcent,  painted.  1 1 8.  b. 

9.  Arms  of  fome  few  Camoridge-Shire  Gentry,  trick¬ 
ed  in  printed  Efcocheons.  12g. 

As  to  the  Additions  Sc  Continuations, 

1  o.  Mr.  Munday  writeth  in  the  T  itles  that  he  hath 
added  many  Defcents  to  the  former  Vifitations. 

1 1.  In  like  manner  he  hath  made  Additions  to  par¬ 

ticular  Defcents;  as  20.  b.  21.  26.  b.  -0.  4,  b 
55-  b.  58.  b.  85.  b.  &c.  •*'  * 

12.  So  hath  Mr.  Robert  Dale  Suffolk-Herald  Extra¬ 
ordinary;  4.  15.  b.  See.  24.  b.  30.  64. 

o  3-  And  fo  have  others ;  as  at  3.  b.  6.  6.  b.  2  c.  b. 

4  •  4<-  i4*.b,&c.  5 


535.  An 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


i 


2,0 


Num.  1535-1537. 

1535- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written,  tricked,  k  coloured 

(as  it  feemeth)  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Jacob  Chaloner 

the  Armes-Painter  ;  wherein  are  containd, 

1.  ThePedegree  of  Harewell,  with  Armes.  1. 

2.  Armes  of  the  old  Earls  of  Chefter  ;  viz.  of  Hugh 

Lupus,  &c.  to  John  le  Scot,  in  Colours.  2.  b. 

3.  Julliciarij  Comitatus  Ceftrenlis,  Anno  1601.  3. 

4.  Arms  of  the  feveral  Juftices  of  Chefter,  from  Ge¬ 

rardus  filius  Walteri  in  the  time  of  Hugh  Lupus,  to  Sir 
James  Whitlock  A.D,  i62o.  for  the  moll  part  in  Co¬ 
lours.  4*  b. 

Thefe  are  very  imperfect,  &  Leaves  tranfpofed. 

An  imperfect  Alphabet  of  the  Arms  of  the  Chefliire 
Gentry  ;  in  Colours.  7* 

6.  An  imperfect  Collection,  defigned  for  the  Armes 
of  Chefliire  Families,  in  Trick  only  ;  to  be  putt  down 
in  alphabetical  order.  2  9* 

Hitherto  (excepting  fol.  I.)  the  Armes  are  all  lett 
forth  in  printed  Efcocheons. 

Then  followeth, 

y.  A  Copy  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County-Pa¬ 
latine  of  Chefter,  as  the  fame  was  made  and  taken  by 
Richard  St.  George  Norroy,  &  in  his  Company  Mr. 
Henry  St.  George  Rouge-Role.  A. D.  1612.  &  16x3. 

35- 

Obfervables  in  this  particular  Copie,  may  be, 

8.  Some  Notes  touching  the  Succeflion  of  the  old 
Earls  of  Chefter,  with  their  Genealogies  &  Defcents. 

ibid. 

g.  Proofs  from  Evidences  &  Seals,  touching  the  De- 
feent  &  Arms  of  many  Families. 

10.  Divers  Defccnu,  inti  rely  added  by  Mr.  Richard 
Munday  ;  not  to  mention  the  many  Additions  &  Con¬ 
tinuations  made  to  Pedegrees,  both  by  him  &  others. 

1 1 .  An  Account  of  the  Lands  given  to  Adam  Dutton, 
bv  John  Conftable  ol  Chefter  with  Alice  his  daughter; 
as  aifo  of  the  Lands  given  by  the  fame  Adam  among 
his  Servants.  At  the  end. 

NB.  The  Armes  &  Crefts  entered  in  the  Yifitation, 
are,  generally  painted. 

This  very  good  Book,  hath  not  only  fuSFered  much 
through  the  hilly  of  fome,  &  defigns  of  others  who 
have  cutt  of  many  Armes  from  it ;  but  alfo  through 
the  carelefTnefs  of  the  binder,  whole  Plough  hath  taken 
away  parts  of  Defcents  &  Armes,  in  the  margins  thereof. 


A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by 
Mr.  Richard. M  indy  ;  containing, 

1 .  His  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County 
of  Cumberland,  as  it  was  made  &  taken  by  Richard  St. 
George  Norroy,  A.  D.  16.5. 

2.  Wherein,  are  alfo  inferted  fome  whole  Defcents; 
befides  many  Additions  &  Continuation  of  Pedegrees, 
by  the  fame  Mr.  Mundy. 

3.  Armes  of  the  Gentry  of  this  County  haftily  tricked 

in  printed  Efcocheons,  by  the  fame.  27. 

4.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  referring  to  the 
above-mentioned  Defcents  &  Armes.  At  the  beginning. 

1537- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  Sc  tricked  by  Mr. 
Richard  Mundy;  containing, 
x.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  pointing  to 
the  enfuing  Arms  &  Defcents. 

2.  Armes  of  fome  of  the  Derbyfhire-Gentry  ;  haftily 

tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons.  1 . 

3.  A  Copie  of  the  Vilitation-bookof  the  County  of 
Derby,  as  the  fame  was  made  Sc  taken  A.D.  16:1.  by 


Num.  1 537 — 1539- 

Richard  St.  George  Efq.  Norroy  ;  &  in  his  company 
Nicholas  Charles  Lancafter-Herald,  &  Henry  St.  George 
Rouge-Rofe. 

4.  To  thefe  Defcents  (which  are  grounded  upon  the 
former  Vifitation  of  A.  D.  1 569.)  are  many  Additions 
and  Continuations,  made  by  Mr.  Mundy,  Mr.  Dale, 
&c.  more  efpecially  by  the  former. 

5.  The  Proofs  from  Deeds  and  Scales,  are  here  but 
few. 

6.  Here  are  fome  Church-Notes,  taken  in  Tiddefwall- 
Church.  n.  In  the  Abbey  of  Walden.  23.  b.  And 
in  the  Moneflery  of  the  Fryers  at  Morleys.  1 14.  b. 

7.  Lifts  of  the  Gentlemen  in  the  Hundreds  of  Scaref- 

dale  &  High  Peake ;  as  alfo  of  the  Ufurpers  of  the 
Title  of  Gentlemen  in  the  faid  Hundreds.  12a. 

1538. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  wholly  written  and 
tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  ;  containing, 

1.  An  alphabeticalTable  of  Surnames,  referring  to 
the  following  Armes  &  Defcents.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Armes  of  the  Dcvonftiire  Gentry  ;  haftily  tricked 
in  printed  Efcocheons. 

3.  A  large  Collection  of  the  Defcents  of  the  Devon- 
fhire-Gentry,  made  by  Mr.  Mundy  cut  of  the  Vifitation 
books  of  this  County  made  by  William  Ilervey,  & 
Robert  Cooke  ;  as  alfo  from  that  of  A.  D.  1620.  Some 
of  which  Defcents,  are  from  other  Authorities,  brought 
down  as  low  as  the  Reign  of  K.  Charles  1.  even  to  A.D. 
1637. 

4.  To  thefe  Defcents  divers  Additions  have  been  made 
by  Mr.  Mundy  himfelf ;  Mr.  Robert  Dale  Suffolk-He- 
rald  ;  Mr.  Giles  Campion  the  P^inter-Stainer,  &c. 

5.  Some  additional  Pedegrees  of  Devonfhire-families  : 

by  another  hand.  304 

6.  A  Note  of  all  fuch  as  have  ufurped  the  Names  & 

Titles  of  Gentlemen,  without  Authority,  and  were  dif- 
claimed  at  Salilbury  in  the  County  of  Wilts,  in  Septem¬ 
ber,  1623.  3°9-  b. 

7.  Lift  of  thofe  who  were  declaimed  in  the  County 

of  Dorfet,  in  September  1623.  ibid. 

8.  Lift  of  thofe  who  were  declaimed  in  the  County 

of  Somerfet,  in  Auguft  1623.  (being  larger  than  that 
in  Mr.  John  Withie’s  Book,  N"  14+5.)  310. 

9.  Defcent  of  Peter  of  Bowhay,  written  in  the  laft 
Page,  with  a  Black  Lead  Pen. 

1539- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  wholly  written  and 
tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  ;  containing, 

1 .  The  Arms  of  Latton  ;  with  a  Lift  of  the  feveral 
Families  of  that  Name;  fet  down  by  William  Latton 
Efq.  of  Grayes  lnne. 

2.  Mr.  Richard  Mundy ’s  Title  or  Account  of  this 
his  Book. 

3.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  referring  to  the 
following  Defcents. 

4.  The  Pedegrees  contained  in  the  Vifitation  Book  of 
the  County  of  Dorfet,  fet  down  by  Robert  Cooke  Cla- 

|  renceux,  A.D.  1574-  molt  of  which  are  continued  from 
the  Vifitation  book  of.  1623.  and  fome  few,  much 
j  lower.  _  1* 

Here  are  fome  few  Proofs  from  Evidences  ;  &  fmall 
I  Additions  by  others.  _ _ 

5.  'The  remaining  Defcents  taken  at  the  V  ifitation  of 
this  County  A.  D.  1623.  by  Henry  St.  George  Richmond 

i  Herald,  &  Sampfon  Lennard  Blew-Mantell,  Deputies 
,  unto  William  Camden  Clarenceulx,  and  copied  by  Mr. 

|  Mundy,  from  the  original  Bookes.  78. 

NB.  '1  hefe  Defcents  do  not  follow  the  Order  of  the 
j  Book  N"  1 166.  (which  is  the  Original)  as  it  is  now  bound 
1  up  ;  nor  doth  it  exhibit  the  Corporation-Seales  there  to 
->  be 


Bibliothecae  Harleianee. 


Num.  1539-1541. 

be  found  ;  and  yet  in  divers  of  the  Pedegrees,  the  Ge¬ 
nealogies  are  herein  carried  up  higher  by  feveral  Gene¬ 
rations. 

6.  Defcents  &  Armes  of  fome  Dorfetfhire  Families, 
Emitted  in  both  the  Vifitation-books  abovementioned. 

185. 

NB  The  Arms  of  Swaine  are  attefted  by  John  Plnli- 
7»ot  Somerfet;  &,  with  the  Defcent,  ratified  &  confirmed 
by  Sir  John  Burrough  Garter.  202.  b. 

154O. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  wholly  written  & 
tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Munday  ;  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  dire&ing  to 
the  enfuing  Armes  &  Defcents.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Armes  of  fome  of  the  Gentry  inhabiting  within 

the  County  Palatine  of  Durham,  haltily  tricked  in  printed 
Efcocheons.  &  vid.  158. 

3.  The  Vifitation  of  the  County-Palatyne  of  Durham, 
taken  bv  William  Flower  Efq.  alias  Norroy,  King  of 
Armes  of  the  Eafl,  Weft,  &  North  Parts  of  England, 
from  the  River  Trent  Northward,  and  in  Ills  company 
Robert  Glover  alias  Portcullis  Purfyvant  of  Armes, 
in  the  year e  of  our  Lord  1575*  Which  Vifitation  is 
continued  &'  enlarged  with 

4.  The  Vifitation  of  the  fame  County,  taken  by  Ri¬ 

chard  St.  George  Efq.  alias  Norroy.  King  v  of  the 
i  one  Province  ;  and  in  his  Company  Henery  St.  George 
alias  Blewmantell,  Purfivant  of  Armes  in  the  yere  of 
our  Lord  God  16 1 5.  _  7- 

5.  Divers  of  the  Defcents  are  enlarged,  or  continued 
much  lower  than  the  year  1615.  by  Mr.  Mundy  him- 
fclf,  Mr.  Robert  Dale,  William  I.atton  Efq.  &c. 

6.  ,Herc  are  alfo  fome  entire  Defcents,  not  regiftered 

in  the  two  above-mentioned  Vifitations,  inferted  by  Mr. 
Mundy  &  others,  at  l^°* 

Here  are  no  Tricks  of  public  Armes  or  Seals;  and 
but  few  Proofs  from  private  Seals  &  Evidences. 

7.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Eglefclifl'.  35. 

8.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Cheftor.  36. 

9.  A  Noate  of  fuch  Perfons  as  were  difelaymed  in 

the  Vifitation  made  Anno  1615.  1 43  • 

15+1- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  entirely  written  St 

tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  ;  and  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  directing  the 
Searcher  to  the  following  Armes  Sc  Pedegrees.  At  the 
beginning. 

■i.  Armes  of  many  of  the  Effex-Gentry ;  haflily  trick¬ 
ed  in  printed  Efcocheons.  1  • 

3.  A  large  Collection  of  the  Defcents  of  the  Eflex- 
Families,  made  by  Mr.  Mundy,  from  the  Vifitation  of 
this  County  made  A.  D.  1583.  by  Robert  Cooke  Cla- 
rtneeux;  from  the  Vi (i ration-book  made  A.  D.  1614. 
by  John  Raven  Richmond-Herald,  for  William  Camden 
Clarenceux  ;  and  from  another,  made  A. D.  1634.  by 
George  Owen  York-Herald,  and  Henry  Lilly  Rouge- 
Rofe  (who  was  a  Painter-Stainer  by  trade)  for  Sir  Ri¬ 
chard  Sr.  George  Clarencieux  is:  Sir  John  Borough 
Norroy  ;  who  by  Agreement,  vilited  jointly  in  each 


others  Province.  7* 

4.  Divers  of  thefe  Defcents  are  enlarged,  and  con¬ 
tinued  by  Mr.  Mundy,  Mr.  Robert  Dale,  &c. 

Here  are  alfo, 

5.  Notes  taken  in  South  Okendcn  Cluircli.  5  1. 

0.  In  Rykeling-C.hut»:h.  ibid. 

7.  In  Dagenham-Chuich.  5 1 .  b. 

8.  In  Orfett-Church.  52. 

9.  In  Tilliiigham-Church.  ibid. 

1  •  In  the  Chapell  at  Littell  Ilford.  ibid. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol,  II. 


1 2 1 


Num.  1541— 1543. 

it.  In Harwich-Church.  ’  ibid. 

12.  In  Maiilden-Church,  called  All-Saints.  52.  b. 

13.  In  Arkefden-Church.  ibid. 

14.  In  Barking-Church.  53. 

15.  In  St.  Gyles  Church  in  Colchefter.  53.  b. 

16.  In  St.  Peter’s  Church  in  Colchefter.  ibid. 

17.  In  Weft-Ham-Church.  54. 

18.  In  Witham-Church,  alias  St.  Nicholas.  54.  b. 

1 9.  The  Defcent  of  Stanley  of  Roydon-Hall,  is  en¬ 
larged  &  continued  by  Mr.  Dale,  from  the  Information 
of  Sir  Edward  Sherburne,  who  hath  alfo  attefted  &  fub- 
feribed  the  fame,  with  his  own  hand,  at  205.  b. 

1542. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  wholly  written  & 

tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  ;  &  containing, 

1.  The  Vifitation  of  the  County  of  Effex,  made  by 
George  Owen  York-Herald,  &  Henery  Lilly  Rouge- 
Rofe,  in  Anno  1634.  for  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Cla¬ 
renceux,  &  Sir  John  Borough  Norroy  ;  who  by  Agree¬ 
ment  vifited  jointly  in  each  others  Province.  Coppyed 
by  the  Original  1. 

This  Mr.  Mundy  ftyled  the  Vifitation  ;  although  it 
be  little  better  than  a  Collection  of  the  Defcents  &  Armes 
from  the  Vifitation-book  abovementioned.  F01  he  omit¬ 
ted  almoft  all  the  Church-Notes  ;  Proofes  from  private 
Evidences  &  Seales  ;  public  Armes  &  Seales  of  Corpo¬ 
rations,  with  the  Lilts  of  their  refpeCtive  Officers  ;  & 
the  Subfcriptions  of  thofe  who  gave  the  Information  to 
the  Vifitors.  However,  this  is  pretty  well  recom- 
penfed  by, 

2.  Many  Additions  made  by  Mr.  Mundy  both  in 
red  &  black  Ink. 

3.  Some  few  Notes  of  Mr.  Latton,  Mr.  Dale,  &c. 

4.  Armes  of  Coo  of  Walden;  in  Trick.  236.  b. 

5.  Pedegree  of  Peres  ;  with  Armes.  237. 

6.  Pedegree  of  Browne,  attefted  by  John  Philipot 

Somerfet-Herald.  238.  b. 

7.  Note  taken  in  the  Church  of  Horkefley.  1 7 1 .  b. 

8.  Note  taken  from  Giglefweke  Church-Window,  in 

Com.  Ebor.  178.  b. 

9.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Sur-Names.  At  the 
beginning. 

1  54-3* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  the  far  greater  part  whereof 

is  written  &  tricked  by  the  hand  of  Mr.|Richard  Mun¬ 
dy  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  directing  to 
the  following  Armes  &  Defcents.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Vifitation  of  the  County  of  Glofter  made  by 
Robert  Cooke  alias  ClarenceulxKing  of  Armes,  in  anno 
1 583  ?  continued  &  enlarged  with  the  Vifitation  of  the 
fame  County,  made  by  Henery  Chitting  Chefter,  and 
John  Phillipott  Somerfett  Heralds ;  Deputyes  to  Wil¬ 
liam  Camden  Clarenceux,  in  Anno  1623.  with  many 
other  Defcents  tranfeript.  per  R.  Mundy. 

3.  Mr.  Mundy  goeth  on  with  the  Title,  thus :  “  This 
Books  I  lent  Mr.  Somerfett  when  he  went  the  laft  Vifita¬ 
tion  (above-mentioned)  and  many  of  the  Defcents  weare 
then  enlarged  by  him,  as  apereth  under  his  owne  hand. 

4.  Here  are  likewife  divers  additional  Notes  &  En¬ 
largements,  by  Mr.  Mundy,  Mr.  Latton,  Mr.  Dale,  & 
others. 

5.  Arms  of  the  Gloucefterfliire  Gentry,  haflily  tricked 

in  printed  Efcocheons.  49-  &  ^8. 

6.  Here  are  alfo  preferved  fome  fewProofs  from  private 
Seals  &  Deeds. 

7.  Some  few  Defcents  Sc  Armes  added  lately,  at  the 

end.  *99* 


Ii 


1544.  An 


122 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nura.  1544,  1545. 

1544. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  for  the  mod  part  written  & 
tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  ;  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  directing  to 
the  enfuing  Defcents  k  Armes.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Vifitation  of  Hamplhire,  made  by  Thomas 
Benoit  Clarenceulx  in  Anno  1530. 

3.  Enlarged  with  the  Vifitation  of  the  fame  County 
made  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceulx,  A.  D.  1575. 

4.  Both  which  are  continued  with  the  Vifitation  made 
by  John  Ph  illipot  Somerfett  in  Anno  1622.  Moll  part 
then  don,  and  finifhed  in  Anno  1 634. 

Obfervables  in  this  Book  may  be, 

5.  Amies  of  many  of  the  Id  amplhire-  Gentry,  in 

Trick.  1. 

6.  Many  Additons  &  Enlargements  made  to  the  De¬ 
fcents,  by  Mr.  Mundy  the  Collator  thereof ;  as  alfo, 
by  Mr.  Latton  of  Grayc-s  Inne,  &  Mr.  Dale  Suffolk-He- 
rald  (both  whom  have  diligently  perufed  Mr.  Mundy’s 
Books)  and  by  others  whofe  hands  I  do  not  as  yet  know. 

7.  Here  is  a  Pedegree  of  Fyfher  of  Chilton  Condo ver, 
faid  to  be  made,  regiftred,  k  allowed,  and  is  alfo  fub- 
feribed  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux,  10th  May  A.D. 

1 573.  according  to  the  true  Evidences  k  Charters  of 
John  Fyfher  Efq.  wherein  he  is  made  to  be  the  Heir  of 
Walter  de  Merton,  and  of  feveral  other  Families,  whofe 
Armes  he  quartered,  with  two  or  three  Quotations,  about 
that  great  Man.  But  Mr.  Munday  hath  fett  down  the 
Armes  of  the  faid  Walter  de  Merton,  as  they  remained 
in  his  College  at  Oxford  (which  are  plainly  different 
from  thofe  in  the  Quarterings)  and  the  Note  following, 
“  This  John  Fyfher  was  dilclaymed  Anno  1575.  But 
fince,  thes  Petegree  was  fett  out  ffor  him  by  Clar.  Cooke. 

58. 

8.  At  the  Defcent  of  Fafliin,  Mr.  Mundy  wrote  this 
Note,  “  Hee  payd  the  Fee  of  20s.  and  promifed  to 
make  Proffe  of  his  Armes  at  Michelmas-Terme  ;  but  he 
was  difelaymed  the  4th  of  June  1 576. 

Qu.  Whether  Mr.  Clarenceux  Cooke  gave  the  Man 
his  20  s.  back  again  ? 

9.  Pedegree  and  Armes  of  Holt  of  Portfmeuth,  col¬ 
lected  and  attefted  by  Mr.  Phillipott.  221.  b. 

10.  Pedegree  k  Armes  of  White  of  Dorchefter,  as 

attefted  by  Wiliam  Ryley  Lancafter.  223.  b. 

r545- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr' 
Richard  Mundy  ;  and  containing, 

1 .  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Sur-names,  directing  to 
the  enfuing  Pedegrecs.  At  the  Beginning. 

2.  Mr.  Mundy’s  Copie  of  the  Viiitation-book  of  the 

County  of  Hereford,  as  the  fame  was  made  &  taken 
A.D.  1569.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  1. 

Herein  I  obferve, 

3.  The  Arms  of  the  City  of  Hereford.  ibid. 

4.  That  many  of  the  Defcents  are  enlarged  k  con¬ 
tinued  by  Mr.  Mundy. 

5.  A  Stamp  of  the  Seal  of  Latton,  amended  by  Mr. 
Latton  of  Graves  lnne,  with  a  Note  of  his  Hand.' 

5.  b. 

The  Vifitation  is  followed  by, 

6.  A  Collection  of  the  Pedegreesof  divers  Hereford- 
fhire  Families,  not  entered  into  the  Vifitations  of  this 
County;  made  as  Opportunities  happened  by  Mr. 
Mundy. 

Among  thefel  find, 

7.  Some  Extracts  of  Deeds,  &  Tricks  of  old  Seals 

belonging  to  the  Family  of  De  la  Bere.  62. 

8.  Armes  of  the  Hereford- (hi re-Gentry;  haftilv  trick¬ 
ed  in  printed  Efcocheons.  '  78, 


Nura.'  1545—1548. 

9.  The  Pedegree  of  Harley,  from  about  the  time  of 

the  Conqueft,  to  Sir  Edward  Hawley,  Father  to  my 
moft  honoured  Lord  Robert  Harley,  Earl  of  Oxford  & 
Earl  Mortimer,  Baron  of  Wigmore,  Lord  High  Trea- 
furer  of  Great  Britain,  the  Collector  of  this  noble  Li¬ 
brary.  96.  b. 

In  this  Pedegree,  befides  the  Armes,  &  fome  of 
the  Quarterings  ;  are  divers  Proofes  from  antient  Evi¬ 
dences  (although  not  fo  antient  as  what  I  have  feen  elfe- 
where)  with  'l  ricks  of  old  Seals  belonging  to  this  an¬ 
tient  &  noble  Family  :  with  others  of  the  like  Tort  illus¬ 
trating  the  Defcent  of  Brampton,  whofe  eldeft  daughter 
&  co-heirefs  was  married  to  Sir  Robert  Harley,  te.np. 
R.  Edw.  1. 

10.  Defendants  from  Sir  Thomas  Cornwall  of  Be- 

rington  ;  with  Arms  ;  by  another  hand.  125. 

11.  Stamps  of  two  Seals  of  the  Family  of  Latton; 
beneath  which,  I  have  faftened  a  Trick  of  another 
which  I  found  loofe  in  a  Book  which  Mr.  Latton  of 
Grayes  Inne  had  perufed.  At  the  end. 

>546- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr 
Richard  Mundy  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  directing  to 
the  following  Defcents  k  Armes.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Names  of  all  maner  of  Perfons  refident  with¬ 

in  Hertfordfiiire,  that  may  defpend  10  1.  by  yea  re  & 
above;  from  a  Record  of  Edward  iv.  or  Richard  in. 
tyme.  ( _ 

3.  Pedegrees  k  Arms  of  divers  HertfordfhireFamilies, 

collected  by  Mr.  Mundy.  b. 

4.  Mr.  Munday’s  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the 

County  of  Hertford,  as  the  fame  was  made  by  Robert 
Cooke  Clarenceux,  A.D.  1 572.  (wherein  he  omitted 
not  the  Names  of  the  Subfcribers)  Iq> 

Here  I  find, 

5.  Notes  taken  in  Much-Haddon-Church.  23.  c-;.  b. 

6.  Many  of  the  Defcents  in  this  Vifitation,  have  been 
very  much  enlarged  or  continued  by  Mr.  Mun.H . 

7.  A  large  (  olleciion  of  the  Armes  &  I’ed,  grecs  of 
other  Hertfordfhire-familics,  made  by  the  laid  Mr. 
Mundy. 

Herein  I  alfo  find, 

8.  A  Note  taken  in  A  ldenham- Church.  87.  b. 

9.  Armes  of  divers  Hertfordfhire  Gentry.  1  16. 

10.  Some  few  Additions  ;  made  here  &  there  by 
Mr.  Robert  Dale,  Suffolk-Herald. 

I547* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr. 
Mundy  ;  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  referring  to 
the  Defcents.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Vifitation  of  the  County  of  Hertforde,  made 
taken  in  Anno  16^4.  by  Sir  Henerv  St.  George  Kt. 

alias  Richmond-Herald  ofArmes ;  deputed  bySiivRichard 
St.  George  Kt.  alias  Clarenceux,  King  of  Armes,  and 
Sir  John  Borough  Kf.  alias  Norroy  King  of  Armes  ; 
truly  tranferibed  by  the  Originall  ;  per  me  R.  Mundy. 

3.  Herein  are  but  few  Auditions  or  Continuations. 
The  moft  material,  are  of  the  hand  of  Mr.  Dale,  at 
6  b.  &  7. 

1548. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr* 
Richard  Mundy;  containing, 

1  -  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Sur-names ;  referring 
to  the  enfuing  Arpies  k  Pedegrees. 

2.  Arms  of  many  Kentifh  Families,  haftily  tricked 
in  printed  Efcocheons :  in  way  of  Alphabet. 

3.  Copy 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


I23 


Num.  154-8 — 1550. 

__  3-  Copy  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  the  County  of 
Kent;  as  the  fame  was  made  &  taken  A.D.  1619, 
1620,  &  1621.  by  John  Philipot  Rouge-Dragon,  for 
William  Camden  Clarenceux. 

4.  Herein,  1  find  many  enlargements,  made  by  Mr. 
Mundy,  •&  by  Mr.  Robert  Dale  ;  but  moftly  by  the 
former. 

5.  Armes  of  Randall,  Boyfe,  Richaut,  &  Walter 
cf  Kent  ;  haflily  tricked  by  another  hand.  172. 

I5+9- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  (for  the 
fargreateft  part;  by  Mr.  Mundy  ;  &  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  referring  to 
the  following  Armes  Sc  Defcents.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Armes  of  many  of  the  Lancafln're  Gentry"; 
haflily  tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons ;  in  alphabetical 
method,  fol.  A. 

3.  The  Villitation  of  Lanckelhire  made  in  Anno 

1567-  by  William  Flower,  Norroy.  1. 

The  Defcents  are  herein  entered  in  Order  alpha¬ 
betical  ;  and  have  received  very  great  enlargements  & 
cominuations,  by  Mr.  Mundy,  Mr.  Dale.  &  Mr.  Lat- 
ton. 

Here  are  alfo  fome  Proofs  from  private  Evidences. 

4.  A  Colleftion  of  the  Defcents  of  Lancalhire  Fa¬ 

milies,  made  chiefly  from  the  Vifitation-book  of  that 
County,  as  taken  A.D.  1613.  ty  Mr.  Richard  St. 
George  Norroy,  &  in  his  company  Henry  St.  George, 
Blew-mantle.  io8, 

Herein  I  find, 

5.  Divers  Additions  and  Continuations  by  the  hands 
abovementioned  ;  and  alfo  by  others. 

6.  A  Note  taken  in  Holland-Church.  ibid. 

7.  A  Note  touching  the  Divorce  of  Thomas  Ire¬ 
land’s  Wife  from  her  hulband  ;  &  marriage  to  Wil¬ 
liam  Lightwood,  unto  whom  fhe  had  been  contradled, 


T55°. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fob  written  &  tricked,  moftly 
by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  ;  &  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  guiding  to 
the. fol  lowing  Arms  &  Defcents  ;  at  the  beginning.  ' 

2.  Copie  of  the  Defcents  &  Arms  regiftred  by  Ro¬ 

bert  Cooke  Chefter-Herald,  Deputy  unto  William  Her- 
vey  Clarenceux,  A.D.  1562.  at  his  Vifitation  of  the 
County  of  Linculn.  Im 

Hereunto  are  many  Enlargements  Sc  Continuations, 
made  by  the  acceflion  of . 

3.  The  Defcents  taken  a:  the  Vifitation  of  the  fame 
County  A.D.  1592.  by  Richard  Lee  Richmond-He- 
rald,  for  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux  ;  at  which  Vifita¬ 
tion,  Richard  Scarlet  rode  Painter ;  and  took  the  Church 
Notes,  which  he  entered  into  a  Book  mentioned  at 

4.  1  he  above-mentioned  Defcents  have  received  great 
Additions  from  Mr.  Mundy,  Mr.  Latton,  Mr.  Dale,  Sc 
others  ;  efpecially  from  the  firft. 

Other  obfervables  may  be, 

5.  Mr.  Mundy’s  Note  touching  a  Defccnt  Sc  Armes 

forged  for  the  Family  of  Germg,  by  .  .  .  Da¬ 

kins,  whom  I  have  otherwife  found  to  have  driven  a 
great  Trade  in  fuch  Forgeries.  j 

6.  A  Note  taken  in  St.  Swithin’s  Church  in  the 

Subberbs  of  Lincon.  -g 

7.  A  Memorandum  of  Mr.  Mundy’s,  wherein7  the 

reputation  of  the  Lincolnfhire  Gentle-women  is  handled 
wiih  more  than  ordinary  feverity.  p-.  {>. 

8.  Arms  of  many  Lincolnfhire,-FamiIie6 :  haflily 

tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons.  ip2.  &  22,/ 


Num.  1550—1552. 

9.  The  Names  of  those  that  were  difclaimed  in  the 
Viflitation  of  this  County  in  Anno  1592  ?  according 
to  a  Noate  of  Richard  Lea,  under  his  own  hand. 

243. 

10.  Some  few  additional  Armes  Sc  Defcents,  entered 

by  a  ftrange  hand.  24g# 


155I* 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  wholly  written  Sc 
tricked  by  Mr.  Mundy ;  who  hath  by  way  of  title 
given  the  following  account  of  it : 

1.  “In  this  Booke  is  Colleftions  of  Defcents  Sc 
Arms  of  the  Gentry  in  Midlefex,  whereof  was  no 
Viflitation-Generall  of  the  fame  County  beffore  that 
made  A.D.  1634.  by  Sir  Henery  St.  George  Richmond 
Herald,  Deputy  to  his  father  Sir  Richard  St.  George 
then  Clarenceulx  ;  except  7  Defcents  which  are  entered 
in  the  old  Viflitation  of  Hertfordfhire  :  all  the  reft 
are  the  Colleftions  of  me  Richard  Mundy. 

Moft  of  the  other  Defcents  are  of  the  Gently  in 
the  fame  County,  which  were  living  in  Anno  1593. 
as  is  exprefied  in  the  fame :  as  may  alfo  appere  in 
Mr.  Norden’s  Booke,  entituled  ‘  Speculum  Brittanie,’ 
being  a  defeription  of  the  fame  County.” 

By  this  Title  &  View  of  the  Book,  I  (at  prefent) 
underhand,  that  the  Defcents  regiftred  at  the  Vifitation 
of  A.D.  1634.  are  to  be  found  herein. 

Here  are  *alfo. 

2.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Sur-names  ;  at  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

3-  Armes  of  many  of  the  Middlefex- Gentry,  haflily 

tricked  within  primed  Efcocheons.  41. 

4-  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  St.  Leonard’* 
Bromley  nere  Stratfford-Bow,  the  icth  Auguft  1632. 


5.  Notes  taken  in  Stratfford-Bow-Church,  the  fume 

day-  92.  b. 

6.  A  Note  taken  in  the  Church  of  Ryton  uppon 

Dunfmore  in  Com.  War.  25th  Feb.  1613.  131. 

7.  Grant  of  a^  Creft  unto  George  Lemitaire  of  the 

Cittie  of  Weftminfler,  Efq.  by  William  Segar  Garter, 
bat.  14th  June  ann.  14  Jac.  1.  ^5.  b. 

S.  Some  few  additional  Armes  Sc  Defcents,  putt 
down  by  a  ftrange  hand. 


I55  2. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  all  written  Sc  tricked 
by  Mr.  Mundy  ;  who  gave  it  this  Title, 

1.  “  The  Vifitation  of  Norffolk,  made  &  taken  by 
William  Harvey  Clarencieux  King  of  Armes  Anno 
!54 5 6 7 83- 

2.  Enlarged  with  another  Vifitation  made  by  Robert 
Cooke  Clarenceux,  A.D.  1 589  ? 

3.  And  alfo,  by  the  Vifitation  made  by  John  Raven 
Richmond  Herald,  A.D.  1613.  for  William  Camden 
Clarenceux.  tranfeript.  per  R.  Mundy  Anno  1620. 

4.  Unto  which  Mr.  Mundy  hath  added  many  frefh 
Delcents  ;  and  continued  divers  of  the  others  down 
much  lower. 

Here  are  alfo, 

5.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  at  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

6.  Armes  of  many  of  the  Norfolk-Gentry,  haflily 

tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons.  1. 

7.  Note^  taken  in  the  Church  of  Hunftcn.  31. 

8.  Armes  of  the  Towne  of  Kyngs  Lynne.  61.  b. 

9.  Memorandum,  touching  an  Augmentation,  given 

(together  with  the  Order  of  Barbary)  unto  Peter  Read 
of  Gymmyngham,  by  the  Emperor  Charles v.  A.D. 
*535-  '  _  142. 

10.  Memorandum,  touching  the  antiquity  of  the 

Family  of  Waldegrave  of  Northamptonfhire.  253. 


iZ4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  I552-IS5S- 

tr.  Notes  taken  in  Buers  Church  ffor  Waldegrave. 

253.  h. 

j  2.  Notes  taken  in  St.  All-hallowes  Church  in  Sud¬ 
bury  ;  relating  to  the  fame  Family.  254.. 

13.  Some  Enlargements,  &  Additions  made  by  vari¬ 
ous  hands.  280,  &c. 

14.  Arms  &  Creft  of  Harman  of  Suffolke.  283.  b. 

1553* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  .fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr. 
Mundy  ;  wherein  are  contained, 
j .  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames:  at  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

2.  The  Viflitation  of  the  County  of  Northampton  ; 
made  in  Anno  1566  ?  by  William  Hervey  Clarenceulx 
King  of  Armes  :  continued  and  enlarged  with 

3.  The  Viflitation  of  the  fame  County  made  by  Au- 
guftine  Vincent  ltoug-Rofe,  Purcevant  of  Armes,  in 
Anno  1619.  copied  by  the  Originall  remayning  in 
the  Office  of  Armes.  With 

4.  Many  other  Defcents  of  the  fame  County,  coppied 
out  of  Mr.  Vincent’s  owne  Book. 

Note  alfo,  that, 

5.  Many  of  the  Defcents  have  received  confiderable 
enlargements  &  continuations,  by  the  fame  Mr.  Mun¬ 
dy,  Mr.  Latton,  k  others  ;  especially  by  Mr.  Mundy.. 

'  (5.  Here  are  alfo  fome  few  Proofs,  from  private  Evi¬ 
dences.  And, 

7.  A  Note  taken  in  Banbury- Church.  . .  19. 

8.  Armes  of  fome  Northamptonfhire-Families. 

64.  b.  k  88.  et  269. 

9.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Clopton.  190. 

10.  Notes  taken  in  Mr.  Dudley's  Houfe  at  Clopton. 

ibid. 

1554- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr. 
Mundy  ;  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames:  at  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

2.  The  Viflitation  of  the  County  of  Northumberland ; 
made  k  taken  by  William  Flower  Norroy,  and  in  his 
company  Robert  Glover,  Portcullis,  his  Marihall, 
A.D.  15-5.  Continued  k  enlarged  with 

3.  The  Viflitation  of  the  fame  County,  made  & 
taken  by  Richard  St.  George  Efq.  Norroy,  and  in  hi* 
company  Henery  St.  George  Blewmantell,  A.D.  1615. 

4.  Befides  lome  Pedegrees  at  the  end,  which  I 
take  to  be  additional  ;  here  are  fome  enlargements  8c 
continuations  by  Mr.  Mundy,  Mr.  Robert  Dale,  & 
others. 

Here  are  alfo, 

c.  Conceflio  Timbri  ac  Supportatorum  Burgenfibus 
villa:  Novi-Caftri  fuper  Tinam,  per  Gulielmum  Flower 
Norroy.  dat.  16  die  Augufti  A.  D.  1575*  ante  1. 

6.  Trick  of  the  Armes  of  Newcaftle  upon  Tine.  1. 

7.  Notes  taken  in  Alnwick-Church.  6.  b. 

8.  Notes  taken  in  New-caftle  Church.  7-b. 

9.  Some  few  Proofs  illuftrating  the  Defcents  of  par¬ 
ticular  Families 

10.  Arms  of  fome  of  the  Nonhumberland-G entry  j 

haftily  tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons.  134. 

1 555- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  8c  tricked,  for  the 
mod  part  by  Mr.  Mundy  ;  containing, 

1 .  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  ;  at  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

2.  The  Viflitation  of  the  County  of  Nottingham  ; 
made  k  taken  by  William  Flower  alias  Norroy,  King  of 
Armes,  Anno  1 596 :  continued,  &  enlarged  with 


Num.1555-1557. 

3.  The  Viflitation  of  the  fame  County,  made  by 
Richard  St  George  Norroy,  Anno  1614. 

4.  With  many  other  Defcents  of  the  fame  County  : 
not  to  mention  many  Continuations  by  Mr.  Mundy, 
&c. 

In  this  very  good  book,  I  alfo  find, 

5.  Tricks  of  the  Armes  &  Common-Seal  of  the 

Towne  &  Borough  of  Nottingham.  *• 

6.  Seals  (with  Armes)  of  the  Towne  k  Borough  of 
Newark  upon  Trent. 

7.  Seal  of  the  Towne  k  Borough  of  Eaft-Rad- 
fford. 

8.  Notes  fome  few,  taken  in  Great  Markham  Church. 


9.  Divers  Proofs  from  private  Evidences  k  Seals 
illuftrating  the  Defcents  of  divers  Families  ;  efpecially 
the  noble  Family  of  Pierpoint.  As  to  which,  here  are 
many  Charters  tranferibed  by  another  hand. 

Tricks  of  the  Seals  as  they  were  then  preferved  ; 
and  extrafts  “  Ex  Regiftro  Evidentiarum  Henrici  Per- 
point  Militis.”  (which  I  take  to  be  the  book  in  this  Li¬ 
brary  inferibed  N°  1749.)  39*  b* 

xo.  Here  are  alfo  like  proofs,  touching  the  Families 
of  Lafceles,  Molbray,  &  Bellers.  .  43- b- 

11.  The  like  touching  the  Families  of  Quinci,  k  de 

Sto.  Andrea.  ^3- 

12.  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Burnell,  taken 
in  Wynkbume-Church  in  IS'cttinghamfhire,  and  St.  Bo- 
tholph’s  Church  without  Alderfgate,  London.  83. 

1  3.  Arms  of  the  Knights  of  Darby  k  Nottingham- 
fhires,  in  the  time  of  King  Edward  the  ffirft,  154. 

14.  Defcent  of  Sutton,' taken  out  of  an  old  Booke 

of  Evidences  kept  in  the  Abbey  of  Meux  ;  and  after¬ 
ward,  by  Mr.  Eftofte.  A.D.  156 5.  167.  b. 

1 5.  Arms  of  Lacock,  &  Plumbtree  ;  tricked  by  a 

more  modern  hand.  169.  b. 

I556- 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr.  Richard 
Mundy,  A.D.  1634-  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  j  at  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

2.  Arms  of  the  Oxfordfhire-Gentry,  haftily  tricked 
in  printed  Efcocheons. 

3.  Pedegrees  regiftred  at  the  Vifitation  of  the  County 
of  OxenfFord  by  Richard  I.ee  Portcullis,  Marihall  &c 
Deputye  to  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceulx  King  of  Armes, 
in  Anno  1574. 

4.  Many  of  thefe  Pedegrees  are  continued  down 
much  lower,  by  Mr.  Mundy,  &c. 

5.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Herfliam  in  Com. 

Weftmerland.  . ,  2^* 

6.  Defcents  of  other  Oxfordfhire  Families,  not  ex¬ 
tant  in  any  Vifitation-book.  7^- 

7.  This  Collection  of  Defcents  endeth  at  fol  80.  and 
hath  received  divers  enlargements  &  continuations,  by 
Mr.  Mundy  &  Mr.  Latton. 

8.  Copies  of  fome  Proofs  illuftrating  the  Defcents 
of  Latton  ;  written  by  William  Latton  of  Grayes  Inns 
Efq.  at  1 90.  where  is  alfo  a  Stamp  of  one  of  the 
Seals  (lately  made,  after  the  old  manner  for  the  Fa¬ 
mily)  of  Latton  :  as  others  of  them  are  damped  here 
k  there,  in  this  &  others  of  Mr.  Mundy’s  books. 


1557- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  8c  tricked  by  Mr. 
Richard  Mundy ;  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  j  at  the  be- 

gmmng^e  v.ffitatjon  of  the  County  of  Oxford,  made 
by  John  Phillipott  Somerfett-Herald,  &  William  Ryley 
Blew-Mantell,  Purfevant  of  Armes  in  Anno  1 634.  for 
for  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux,  k  Sir  John  Bo¬ 
rough  Norroy  :  who  vifited  jointly. 


Herein 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


125 


Num.  155  7 — 1 559- 

Herein  I  find, 

3.  The  Armes,  Crefl,  &  Supporters,  of  the  Citty  of 

Oxford.  .  ,  *  V 

4.  Many  Enlargements  &  Continuations  made  to  Uel- 
cents  with  red  ink,  by  Mr.  Mundy,  &  with  ordinary 
Ink  by  Mr.  Latton,  &c. 

5.  Certificate  of  the  Defcent  of  Wickham  of  Abing¬ 
don  in  Com.  Berks,  from  Wickhams  of  Svvacliffe. 

5ib. 

6.  A  Trick  of  the  Armes  of  fome  Bilhop  of  Oxford. 

109  b. 

Qu.  Whether  of  Dr.  Bancroft,  who  was  Bilhop 
thereof  at  the  time  of  this  Vifitation. 

7.  Lift  of  the  Perfons  difclaimed  at  Oxford,  the  .  . 
day  of  September,  1634. 

8.  Account  of  the  Proceedings  with  many  of  the 

Gentry,  or  reputed  Gentry,  who  refufed  to  appear,  or 
could  not  make  out  their  Right  to  Armes,  See.  at  this 
Vifitation.  _  IIT* 

9.  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Bury  of  Culraham 

in  Com  Oxon.  fixed  upon.  1 1 4- 

1558. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr. 
Richard  Mundy,  and  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  at  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

2.  Mr.  Mundy’s  Copie  of  the  Vifitation  Book  made 

for  the  County  of  Rutland  A.D.  1618,  by  Auguftin 
Vincent  Rouge- Rofe,  Marlhall  &  Deputy  unto  William 
Camden  Clarenceux-  1- 

Herein  I  find, 

3.  Divers  Proofs  from  private  Evidences,  illuftrating 
the  Defcents  of  the  feveral  Families. 

4.  Enlargements  Sc  Continuations  of  many  of  theDef- 
cents  by  the  fame  Mr.  Mundy. 

5.  A  Colle&ion  of  other  Defcents  of  Rutlandflure 
Families,  not  extant  in  the  Vifitation  Book  of  A.D.  1618. 

35  b- 

Among  which  are  tricked  promifeuoufly, 

6.  The  Armes  of  many  of  the  Gentry  refiding  within 

this  fmall  County.  3  3.  45-  46-  4 7-  49- 

Thefe  lad  have  no  Defcents  belonging  to  them. 

1559- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr. 
Richard  Mundy,  &  containing, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  Somer- 
fetfhire  Families.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Vilfitation  of  the  County  of  Somerfet,  made 
by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux,  in  anno  1573. 

To  which  is  added, 

3.  The  Vilfitation  of  the  fame  County,  made  by  Rafe 
Brooke,  alias  Roug-Croix,  in  anno  1591  :  coppied  by  his 
owne  Booke  remaining  in  the  hands  of  Sir  William 
Neave  Clarenceux,  1635. 

Both  which  are  continued  &  enlarged  with 

4.  The  Vilfitation  made  by  Henery  St.  George  Rich- 
mend  Herald,  and  Sampfon  Leonard  Blew  Mantell,  in 
anno  623,  being  Deputyes  to  William  Camden  Claren- 
ceulx  ;  copied  by  the  originall  Books  taken  in  the  fayd 
Vifitation,  whereto  every  one  that  entred,  fett  to  ther 
hands. 

In  turning  over  this  excellent  Book,  I  find, 
c,.  Extracts  from  private  Evidences,  illuftrating  the 
Defcents  of  many  Families. 

6.  Very  many  Enlargements  Sc  Continuations  of  the 
Pedegrees,  made  chiefly  by  Mr.  Mundy  (as  well  with 
black  Ink  as  with  red)  and  by  other  hands  ;  as  alfo,  fome 
few  Notations  by  Mr.  Latton  &  Mr.  Dale. 

7.  Divers  additional  Defcents,  not  regiftered  at  any 
of  the  above  mentioned  Vilitations ;  among  which,  I 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1559,  1560. 

reckon  that  of  my  Lord  Treafurer’s  truly  antient  &  no¬ 
ble  Family,  to  be  found  at  fol.  86  b.  (vid.  etiam  3.  b.) 

8.  The  Names  of  them  that  weare  difclamed  in  the 
Vilfitation  made  by  Rafte  Brook  alias  Roug-Croix.  A.D 

1591-  .  .  25-;i’ 

Then  follow,  the  Noates  taken  in  the  Vilfitation  ci 
Somerfetlhire,  A.D.  1591.  vizt. 

9.  In  Dunftar  Church.  235. 

10.  In  Chard  Church.  ibid. 

11.  At  Mr.  Phillips,  at  Mountague.  ibid. 

1 2.  In  Long  Alham  Church*  ibid. 

13.  In  Eft-Coker  Church.  ibid. 

14.  In  Frame  Church.  ibid,  et  235  b. 

15.  In  Welles  Church.  235. 

To  which  may  be  added, 

1 6.  Notes  taken  in  Mr.  Preftons  Houfe  at  Crickett- 

Thomas.  7^* 

17.  In  Bakewell  Church.  244  b. 

18.  Armes  of  divers  of  the  Somerfetlhire  Gentry  ; 

haftily  tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons.  360. 

1 56°. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  Mr. 
Richard  Mundy,. and  containing, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  referring  to 
the  enfuing  Defcents,  at  the  beginning. 

A  Collection  of  the  Defcents  of  the  Suffolk  Gentry, 
made  (as  it  feemeth)  from 

2.  The  Vifitation  of  this  County,  as  it  was  taken  A.D. 
1561.  by  William  Hervey  Clarenceux. 

Augmented  with, 

3.  The  Vifitation  of  the  fame  County,  taken  in  like 
manner  A.D.  1577,  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux,  beth 
which  are  alfo  continued  by, 

4.  The  Vifitation  of  the  fame  County,  taken  A.D. 
1612  &  1613,  by  John  Raven  Richmond  Herald,  Mar¬ 
lhall  Sc  Deputy  to  William  Camden  Clarenceux. 

Befides  which  I  find  herein, 

5.  Very  many  Enlargements  &  Continuations  by  the 
hand  of  Mr.  Mundy,  with  fome  others  by  Mr.  Robert 
Dale,  Mr.  Latton,  &c.  (of  which  laft,  there  is  a  Note  in 
the  laft  page.) 

6.  And  it  is  very  likely,  that  fome  of  the  Defcents 
herein  entred,  may  not  have  been  regiftred  in  any  of 
the  above  mentioned  Vifitations,  but  rather  intirely  ad¬ 
ditional. 

Other  obfervables  in  this  valuable  Book  may  be, 

7.  The  Armes  belonging  aundantlye  to  the  Towne  & 

Borough  of  Ipfwich.  !• 

8.  The  common  Seale  apertavning  to  the  Corporation 

of  the  Town  of  Orft'ord.  ibid. 

9.  The  old  &  auntiant  Seale  of  the  Borough  Sc  Cor¬ 
poration  of  Dunwich.  ibid. 

10.  The  Armes  &  Creft  belonging  to  the  Towne  & 

Corporation  of  Sowthold.  1.  b. 

1 1 .  The  common  Seale  ufed  by  the  Bayliffes  of  Sowth- 

old.  ,ibid-  . 

12.  The  common  Seal  of  the  Baylyffs  Sc  Burgiffes  of 

Adelborough.  ibid* 

13.  The  Armes  &  Creft  of  the  Towne  Sc  Borough  cf 

Sudbery.  .  ,2, 

14.  The  Towne-Seale  of  Sudbery.  ibid. 

15.  The  Armes  &  Creft  of  St.  Edmunds-bury.  ibid. 

16.  Some  few  Proofs  from  private  Evidences,  illuf¬ 
trating  the  Defcents  of  divers  families. 

17.  Armes  of  fome  of  the  Suffolk  Families  ;  without 
Defcents,  fol.  181.  Sc  fol.  i88.b.  &  fol.  348  b. 

18.  Defcent  &  Armes  of  Porter;  inferced  by  Mr. 

Dale;  from  the  Vifitation  of  Suffolk  made  by  Sir  In¬ 
ward  Bysfhe  Clarenceux,  A.D.  1664.  350,i 


Kk 


1561.  An 


Ii6 


Catalog  us  Lihrorum  MSS. 


Num,  1561,  1562. 

1561. 

An  Heraldi  •  1  Book  in  fol.  Written  k  Tricked  by  Mr. 
Rich  i  d  Mundy,  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  referring  to 
the  Armes  k  Descents  which  follow, 

2.  Armes  of  the  Gentry  refiding  within  the  County  of 
Surrey  ;  haftily  tricked  within  printed  Efcocheons. 

3  .  Pedegrees  regiftered  at  the  Vifitation  of  the  Countv 
of  Surrey,  A.D.  1530.  by  Thomas  Benoit  Clarenceux, 
which  have  alio  the  Fees  paid  then  by  the  Gentry,  there¬ 
unto  annexed. 

4.  This  is  continued  by. 

The  Defcents  regiftered  A.D.  1572.  at  the  Vifitation 
of  this  County  of  Surrey,  by  Robert  Cook  Clarenceux  ; 
whereunto  are  added,  the  Subfcriptions  of  thofe  who 
gave  the  Information. 

Both  thefe  are  alfo  continued  by, 

5.  The  Vifitation  of  the  fame  County,  made  in  anno 
J623  by  Samuel  Thompfonn  als  Windfore  Herald,  k 
Auguftine  Vincent  Rouge-Croix,  Marlhalls  &  Dcputyes 
to  William  Camden  Clarenceux. 

Here  are  like  wife  added, 

6.  Divers  Enlargements  k  Continuations,  by  Mr. 
Munday,  Mr.  Robert  Dale,  and  others. 

7.  Many  additional  Defcents,  not  regiftered  at  the 
preceding  Vifitations  ;  entered  by  Mr.  Mundy. 

Other  Obfervables  in  this  Book,  may  be  thefe, 

8.  Armes  of  the  Corporate  Towne  ofKingftone  uppon 

Thames,  „ , 

9.  Some  Proofs  illuftrating  feveral  Defcents ;  fcattered 
up  and  down. 

10.  Notes  taken  in  Eplham  Church,  15  Auguft  1634. 

„6. 

11.  Notes  taken  in  Ewell  Church;  the  fame  day. 

46.  b. 

12.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parifh  Church  of  Rigate, 

6  April  1623.  IOS.  ’ 

13.  Defcent  of  Latton  of  Surrey,  with  Armes  & 

Quarterings  ;  putt  down  by  William  Latton  of  Grayes 
InneEfq.  26  s-. 

14.  Richard  Mundy’s  Lift  of  Defcents  of  Surrey  aded 
in  other  Countys.  At  the  end. 

1  562. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fob  written  &  tricked  by  Mr. 
Richard  Mundy  ;  containing, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  ;  referring  to 
the  following  Armes  &  Defcents. 

2.  Armes  of  the  Gentry  of  the  County  of  SufTex, 
haftily  tricked  (by  way  of  Alphabet)  within  printed  Ef¬ 
cocheons. 

3.  Viffitation  of  the  County  of  Sufiex,  made  (as  fome 
thinkel  in  anno  1  530,  by  Thomas  Benoit  Clarenceux. 

Continued  and  enlarged  with, 

4.  The  \  ilfitation  of  the  fame  County  made  in  annis 
1633  &  1634,  by  John  Phillipott  Somerfet  Herald,  & 
George  Owen  Yorke  Herald;  for  Sir  John  Borough 
Garter,  &  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Clarenceux. 

5.  With  many  Enlargements  k  Continuations  (with 

Red,  as  well  as  Blank  Ink)  by  Mr.  Mundv  chiefly  k  bv 
Mr  Dale.  '  J  1 


6.  Many  additional  Defcents,  not  regiftered  in  the 
above-meutioned  Vifitations  ;  entred  by  Mr.  Mundy. 

Other  Obfervables  may  be, 

7.  Notes  taken  in  Arundcll  Church.  cg_ 

8.  Some  Proofs  from  private  Evidences  Sc  Seals  • 
illuftrating  divers  Defcents. 

9.  Note  taken  in  Cuckfield  Church  I4~ 

10.  Diveis  Armes  &  Defcents  added  bv  more  recen 

hands.  3oa# 


Num.  1563 — 1565. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  Sc  tricked  by  Kir. 
Mundy,  containing, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  directing  to 
the  Armes  &  Defcents.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Armes  of  many  Warwickfhire  Families;  haftily 

tricked  in  printed  Efcocheons,  t . 

3.  The  Villitation  of  the  County  of  Warwick,  made 
in  anno  1563,  by  Robert  Cooke  Chefter  Herald,  for 
William  Hervey  Clarenceux.  fol.  3.  continued  Sc  en¬ 
larged  with, 

4.  Another  Viffitation  of  the  fame  County,  made  in 
anno  1619,  by  Sampfon  Leonard  Blew-Mantell,  and 
Auguftyn  Vincent  .Rouge- Rule,  Officer  of  Armes,  & 
Deputyes  to  William  Camden  Clarenceux. 

Herein  I  alfo  find, 

5.  Many  confiderable  Enlargements  5:  Continuations, 
by  Mr.  Mundy,  Mr.  Latton,  Mr.  D.ie,  St  others ;  more 
elpecially  by  the  former. 

6.  Note  taken  in  the  Chapell  of  Ullenhall  in  the  Parifh 
of  Wotten  Wauen. 

7.  Some  Defcents  entred  by  Mr.  Mundy,  which  lean 

to  be  additional.  '  214. 

156+. 

A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  and  tricked  by 
Mr.  Richard  Mundy,  containing, 

1.  A  Colle&ion  of  the  Defcents  of  divers  Worfliipful 
Families  refiding  within  the  Barony  of  Kendal  in  the 
Church  of  Weltnurland  ;  made  bv  Mr.  Mundy  about 

A.D.  1638.  K 

Herein  is  nothing,  in  a  manner  of  the  bottom  of 
Weftmerland  (which  is  the  chief  part  of  the  Countye) 
excepting  Mufgraves  A  Lowthers  Pedegrees,  and  fome 
Coates  of  Armes. 

2.  Thefe  Armes  are  only  fome  few,  haftily  tricked  in 

printed  Efcocheons.  '  2, 

3-  There  is  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  at  die 
beginning. 

1565. 

A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained. 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  dire£tin°-  to 
the  Defcents  &  Armes. 

2.  A  Copie  of  the  Vifitation  Book  of  the  County  of 
Wiltes,  as  the  fame  was  taken  (by  way  of  Narration) 
A.D.  1565,  by  William  Hervey  Clarenceux. 

3.  Hereunto  confiderable  Enlargements  k  Continua¬ 
tions  have  been  made  ;  as  alfo  additional  Pedegrees, 
Armes  Sc  Notes,  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy,  William  Lat¬ 
ton  Efq.  &  Mr.  Robert  Dale,  &c. 

Moreover,  in  this  Copie,  I  find, 

4.  1  he  Armes  k  Supporters  of  the  Citty  of  New 

Sar.  j . 

5.  The  Armes  anntiently  belonging  to  the  Town  of 

Marleberge  or  Marleboroughe,  1 6.  b. 

6.  The  Armes  belonging  to  the  Towne  k  Boroughe 

of  Marleboroughe.  x 

7.  The  Armes  belonging  to  the  Town  k  Borough  of 

the  Devyces.  38.  5. 

8.  The  Armes  belonging  to  the  Felofhip  k  Corpo¬ 

ration  of  the  BurgefTes  &  Marchants,  Adventurers,  Clo¬ 
thiers,  &  Weavers,  Drapers,  &  Taylors,  and  others 
ufing  any  facultie  or  Art  within  the  Towne  k  Borough 
of  the  Devyces.  ^ 

9.  The  Armes  belonging  to  the  Guild  k  Stewards  of 

the  Towne  A  Borough  of  Caine.  ^ 2 . 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


1 27 


Num.  1566,  1567. 

1566. 

n  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  almoft  wholly  written  & 
tricked  by  Mr.  Mundy,  containing, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames,  guiding  the 
Reader  to  the  following  Armes  &  Defcents. 

2.  The  Viffitation  of  the  County  of  Worcefter,  made 
in  anno  1 569,  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux,  continued 
and  enlarged  with, 

3.  Many  additional  Pedegrees  entered  by  Mr.  Mundy, 
with  other  Additions  &  Enlargements  by  Mr.  Robert 
Dale,  &  by  Mr.  Latton,  & c.  who  all  feem  to  have  ufed 
the  Vifitation  Book  of  this  County,  made  A.D.  1634. 
and  to  have  written  much  herein  from  thence. 

I  likewife  find  herein, 

4.  Armes  of  many  of  the  Worcefterfhire  Gentry, 

haftily  tricked  within  printed  Efcocheons.  167. 

5.  Notes  taken  in  Dordall  Church,  &  in  Worcefter 

Cathedral.  186. 

6.  Some  few  Armes  tricked  by  another  hand.  193. 

*567- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands, 
wherein  I  find  contained, 

7.  Some  fcattered  Notes  of  Raphe  Brooke  or  Brokef- 
mouth,  York  Herald,  whofe  Booke  this  was)  1. 

2.  Notes  of  Raphl  Brooke  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Ralegh,  collected  from  their  Evidences.  1.  b. 

3.  I  he  Writ  of  K.  Edward  ir.  commanding  the 
Sheriffe  of  Gloucellerfhire  to  certifie  into  the  Exchequer, 
the  Names  of  the  feveral  Hundreds,  Cities,  Boroughs, 
&  Villas  within  his  Baillywick,  as  alfo  of  the  Lords  or 
Owners  of  the  fame  ;  bearing  tefle,  &c.  5  Mart,  anno 
Regni  gno.  together  with  the  Return  made  thereupon. 
Tranfcribed  ex  Libro  nuper  Prioratus  de  Lanthon. 

3- 

4.  Commiflio  dni  Regis  pro  6s.  8d.  folvcnd.  ctno 
Regi,  de  qualibet  petfona  in  Com.  Glouceflr.  pro  fin- 
gulis2olib.  quas  habet  ibidem,  ann.  1 3  Henr.  iv.  unit 
cum  Nominibus  perfolventium.  Ex  Libro  de  Lanthon. 

9- 

5.  Arme3  of  the  Gloucellerfhire  Gentry,  tricked  by 

Raphe  Brooke.  1 1 . 

6.  Raphe  Brookes  Copie  of  the  Vifitation  Booke  of 

the  County  of  Devon,  as  the  fame  was  taken  A.D.  1562, 
&c.  by  William  Hervey  Clarenceux,  all  written  narra¬ 
tively,  and  without  Armes.  20. 

Qu.  If  this  Copie  be  intire, 

7.  Armes  of  the  Devonfhire  Gentry,  tricked  all  to¬ 

gether  by  Raphe  Brooke  ;  and  which  feem  to  have  been 
regiflered  at  the  fame  Vifitation.  33. 

Among  thefe,  I  find, 

8.  The  Atchievement  of  the  City  of  Exeter,  traced 

only  with  black-lead.  ibid. 

9.  Atchievement  appertaining  to  the  Fellofhipe  of  the 

Marchants  Auventurors  of  the  Cytie  of  Exeter  and 
Countie  therof.  28  b. 

10.  Armes  belonging  to  the  Towne  of  Plymoth. 

46. 

11.  Armes  pertaininge  to  the  Towne  and  Boroughe 

of  Great  Torington.  50. 

1 2.  Some  few  other  Armes,  added  by  other  hands. 

61. 

13.  Some  Notes  of  Raphe  Brooke,  relating  moltly  to 

his  private  Affairs.  \62. 

14.  Other  Notes  of  the  fame  Ralph  Brooke,  wherein 

he  taxeth  John  Hooker  alias  Vowell,  of  the  City  of  Exe¬ 
ter  Efq.  with  deviling,  giving,  &  fetting  up  Armes  with- 
owte  Au&orytie,  ibid. 

1 5.  Defcent  &  Armes  of  Spunvay,  by  the  fame  Raphe 

Brooke.  63. 

16.  Raphe  Brookes  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames, 

directing  to  the  Armes  of  the  Devcnlhirc  Gentry  (above 
mentioned,  at  no.  7.)  66.  ■ 


Num.  1567 — 1570. 

17.  Short  Defcent  of  Dabernon  from  Gifford,  by 

Raphe  Brooke.  C6.  b, 

18.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Gloucellerlhire  Gentry 

(above  mentioned,  at  no.  3.)  67.  a.,  et  b.  &  68.  b. 

19.  Alphabetical  I  able  to  the  Vifitation  of  Devonlhire 

(above  mentioned,  at  no.  6.)  67.  b.  et  68. 

20.  Alphabetical  Table  referring  to  the  Ames  of  the 

Gloucefter  Gentry  (above  mentioned,  at  no.  <;.)  69. 

21.  Fulke  Buttons  anfwer  in  the  Court  of  Wards  & 
Liveries,  Term.  Trin.  ann.  5  Caroli  1.  touching  the 
Manner  of  Killemancote  in  the  County  of  Leicelter. 

69  b. 

1568. 

A  Velum  Book  in  fol.  written  in  old  Englilh,  containing, 
The  Chronicle  called  Brute  of  England,  concluding 
with  the  Siege  of  Roan,  which  was  furrendered  anno  6  R. 
Henr.  v.  This  feems  to  be  mollly,  a  Tranflation  from 
the  Chronicle  in  French  (no.  20a.)  which  Sr.  Simonds 
D’ewes  called  Frudtus  Temporum. 

This  Book  agreeth  very  well  with  that,  in  this  Li¬ 
brary,  marked  no.  24.  excepting  the  Prologues,  which 
are  here  wanting. 

This  Copie  is  alfo  more  remarkably  illuminated  than 
moll  of  the  others  that  I  have  feen. 

In  making  fome  comparifon  between  this  Book  &  that 
inferibed  no.  266.  I  find  that  to  have  been  fuch  a  Chro¬ 
nicle  as  this,  although  that  be  brought  down  lower,  and 
containeth  more  matter  than  this,  in  the  later  times. 
But  it  feemeth  a  little  extraordinary  to  me,  that  Sir 
Simonds  D’Ewes  fhould  (as  he  hath  done  with  his  own 
hands)  take  his  old  Book,  and  cutt  off  the  firftleafor 
leaves ;  rafe  oil'  the  3  firfl  lines  in  another  place  wherein 
were  the  conclufion  of  a  former  Chapter,  &  the  Title  of 
the  next ;  write  thereon  a  new  Title  for  the  Book ; 
that  he  fhould  rafe  off  the  remaining  Numbers  of  the 
Chapters,  &  fett  new  Numbers  thereon,  fuccellively  fol¬ 
lowing  what  he  had  thus  made  the  firfl  Chapter ;  that 
he  fhould  do  the  fame  by  the  Numbers  of  the  leaves  • 
that  he  fhould  rafe  out  the  firfl  Words  of  the  firfl  Chap¬ 
ter  now  remaining  (except  the  principal  Letter)  and 
write  other  Words  in  the  room  thereof,  and  that  he 
fhould,  to  crown  the  matter,  prefix  a  new  Frontifpiece 
or  Title  of  his  own  Invention  thereunto,  to  make  the 
World  believe  that  this  was  not  to  be  deemed  a  book  of 
that  Kind  that  it  proveth  to  be. 

Q.  Whether  it  be  fair  for  any  Gentleman  to  do 
thefe  things  by  an  old  Hiflory,  although  the  Book  be  his 
own  Property. 

1569. 

A  Paper  Book  in  fol.  and  another  Copie  of  the  fame 
(in  this  Library  inferibed  No.  1225.)  thus  entituled, 
The  Parfons  Law  ;  colle&ed  out  of  the  whole  body 
of  the  Law,  &  late  Reports. 

IS7°- 

An  heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  &  tricked  by  divers 
Hands  ;  more  efpecially  by  Mr.  Nicholas  Charles,  and 
Mr.  Richard  Mundy  ;  wherein  I  find, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames;  direfting 
to  the  Arms  &  Defcents  following.  At  the  beginning. 

Then  followeth. 

2.  A  very  good  Copy  of  the  Vifitation  Book  of  the 
County  of  Stafford  ;  as  the  fame  was  made  &  taken 
A.D.  1583.  by  Robert  Glover  Somerfet-Herald,  for 
William  Flower  Norroy. 

Hereby  I  find, 

3.  Forme  of  Mr.  Somerfet’s  Warant,  to  appear  before 
the  Earl-Marfhal,  upon  Contempt. 


4.  Lift 


1 28 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1 57°>  15  71* 

4.  Lift  of  thofe  Ufurpers  of  Gentility,  who  were  dif- 
claimed  A.U.  1583.  during  this  Vifitation.  ibid. 

5.  Arma  Nobilium  de  Comitatu  Stafforde  ;  ex  Libro 

anriquo  in  Officio  Armorum.  1. 

c.  I  he  doubtful  Armes  of  Staffordfhire.  2.  b. 

7.  N  ines  of  fome  of  the  antient  Staffordfhire-Gentry  ; 

with  fome  few  of  their  Armes.  3.  b.  &  6.  b. 

8.  Nomina  e.  Arma  Nobilium  etEquitum  Auratorum 

in  Com.  Stafford,  qui  cum  Edwardo  1.  Rege  Supendia 
merchant  in  Scotia,  et  alibi.  4-  b. 

All  the  Armes  above-mentioned,  are  haftily  tricked 
within  printed  Efcocheons. 

9.  Trick  of  the  Common  Seale  of  the  Towne  of 

SiaffcrJ.  7- 

1  o.  The  Armes  of  the  Seay  of  the  Bifhopp  of  Lich- 
feild.  7-b. 

ix.  The  Common  Seal  of  the  City  of  Lichfield. 

ibid. 

12.  The  Armes  of  the  Citty  of  Lichefeild.  ibid. 

13.  The  Common  Seale  of  the  Borough  &  Towne  of 

Newcaftell  under  Lyme.  8. 

Scattered  among  the  Defcents,  there  are, 

14.  Very  many  Enlargements  &  Continuations,  by 
Mr  Richard  Mundy  &  others. 

1  .  Very  many  Tranfcripts  of,  &  Extrafts  from  pri¬ 
vate  Evidences;  with  very  many  Tricks  of  private  Seals. 

16.  Some  Notes  written  by  William  Latton  Efq;  with 
S’arnps  of  two  of  his  Familie-Seals ;  which,  after  all, 

I  cannot  but  think  to  be  modern.  43.  b.  &  75.  b. 

17.  A  Note  inferted  by  me,  touching  the  tearing  part 
of  the  Dcfcent  of  Unwyn  out  of  this  Book,  and  likewife 
out  of  another  Book  in  the  Office  of  Armes.  70. 

18.  Arms  &  Crefts  of  divers  particular  Staffordfhire 

Families.  80.  b.  81. 

1 9.  Some  Defcents  entred  by  Mr.  Mundy,  which 
were  either  not  at  all  regiftred  at  the  Vifitation  of  this 
County  A.D.  1383.  or  at  leaft  not  in  fo  ample  a  manner. 

I57I* 

An  heraldical  Book  in  fob  for  the  mod  part  written  Sc 
tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  ;  containing, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  Sur-Names,  directing  to 
the  Armes  &  Defcents  following. 

2.  Extracts  from  Domefdei-book,  relating  to  the 
County  of  York. 

3.  Armes  &  Creft  of  John  Tumor  of  Kirke-Leatham 
in  Com.  Ebor.  Efq;  as  entred  in  the  Vifitation  of  this 
County  A.D  1 66b.  by  William  Dugdale  Norroy. 

4.  Some  Leaves  marked  with  printed  Efcocheons,  in¬ 
tended  to  contain  the  Armes  of  the  Yorkfhire  Gentry  ; 
but  none  are  tricked  therein,  fiive  only  thofe  of  Hoppy. 

Then  followeth  at  a  Diftance, 

5.  Richard  Mundy ’s  Copy  of  the  Defcents  regiflred 
at  the  Vifitation  of  this  County  A.  D.  1584.  &  1  •; 85. 
by  Mr.  Robert  Glover  Somerfet-Herald,  Marfhall  & 
Deputy  unto  his  father  in  law,  William  Flower 
Norroy. 

Herein  I  find, 

6.  Two  Seals  of  the  City  of  York,  the  largeft  of 
which  is  (tiled  SIGILLVM  SECRE  TVM. 

7.  The  Seal,  as  it  may  feem,  of  the  Metropolitical 

Church  of  York.  ibid. 

8.  The  Armes  2c  Seals  belonging  to  the  Towne  of 
Beverley. 

9.  The  Seal  belonging  to  the  Borough  of  Headon, 

See. 

10.  The  Armes  &  Seal  belonging  to  the  Towne  of 
Kingfton  upon  Hull. 

i  1.  The  Armes  &  Seal  of  the  Towne  of  Pontefrad. 

12.  J  he  Seals  belonging  to  the  Towne  of  Doncalter. 

13.  Many  Tranfcripts  of  &  Extracts  from  private 
Evidences ;  &  tricks  of  private  Seals,  illuft'-ating  the 
Defcents  2c  Armes  of  Families* 


Num.  1571 — 1573. 

14.  Very  confiderableEnlargemcnts,  and  perhaps  intire 
additional  Pedegrees,  added  hereunto  by  Mr.  Mundy, 
from  the  Vilitation-book  of  this  County  made  A.D.  1 575. 
by  William  Flower  Norroy  :  which  Vifi:ation-book,  as  I 
have  been  informed,  is  not  now  to  be  found  in  theLi- 
brary  belonging  to  the  College  of  Armes. 

15.  Very  many  Continuations  of  Defcents,  made 
principally  by  Mr.  Mundy  ;  as  alfo  other  Continuations 
by  Mr.  Latton,  Mr.  Dale,  and  others,  lparlim.  (vid.  fol. 
'5-  b*) 

16.  Among  the  private  Evidences,  I  take  leave  to 
mention  particularly  that  tranferibed  in  fol.  1 4.  Sc  re¬ 
lating  to  the  Family  of  Rerefby ;  which,  1  hope,  hath 
Hill  the  Poffeflion  of  others  of  better  Authoiity  to  fup- 
port  it s  Antiquity. 

17.  Seven  Defcents  (viz.  of  Swyft,  Skelton,  Eagles- 

ftld,  Efcot,  Danyell,  Aflakeby  Sc  Thorpe)  Paid  by  Mr. 
Mundy,  to  be  taken  out  of  an  old  Vifitation  of  York-- 
(hire,  made  by  William  Harvey  alias  Norroy,  in  the 
Raigne  of  King  Henery  the  vmth.  Which  Booke  was 
fomtimes  in  the  Cuitody  of  Raphe  Brooke  Efq;  Yorke- 
Herald.  224. 

Here  feemeth  to  be  fome  Mi  (lake  in  this  Account ; 
for  I  cannot  find  that  William  Harvey  was  Norroy  be¬ 
fore  Edw.  vi.  or  that  he  ever  made  any  Vifitation  of  the 
Northern  Province. 

1  8.  Additional  Arines  &  Defcents,  entered  into  this 
Book  Jay  fome  Painter.  240. 

1  572’ 

A  Book  in  fol.  and  containing  a  large  Treatife,  begin¬ 
ning  from  pag.  1.  and  yet  wanteth  the  firft  Chapter. 

The  Titles  of  the  other  Chapters  are, 

2.  That  late  Forraigne  Writers  may  eafilie  bee 
Millaken  in  the  Antiquity  of  the  Lawes  of  England. 

3.  That  our  owne  Countrey  Writers,  not  being  law¬ 

yers,  are  very  ignorant  in  matters  of  the  Common  Law; 
and  confequently,  theire  Writings  concerning  the  fame, 
not  to  be  credited.  51. 

4.  That  our  owne  Countrey  Writers  are  fitter,  and 

better  able  to  deferibe  our  Adions  and  Lawes  than  For- 
raigners,  &c.  195. 

5.  'That  fometimes  the  deniers  of  the  Antiquity  of  the 

Common  Law-,  affirm  that  to  have  bin  ufed  in  the  Com¬ 
mon  Law  in  the  time  of  the  Conqueror,  -which  began 
long  after  the  Conqueft,  which  is  inflanced  in  the  firft 
inftitution  of  Juftices  of  Peace,  &c.  273. 

6.  Of  the  Antiquity  Sc  Lawfulneffe  of  Wardes. 

3-M- 

7.  Authors  refuted  that  hold,  the  Court  uf  Common 

Pleas,  firft  erected  in  9"  Ed.  in.  That  Glanvill  the 
Chiefe  Juftice  of  England,  wrote  the  Treatife  of  the 
Common  Law.  And  that  the  Chiefe  Juftice  of  England 
and  the  Chiefe  Juftice  of  the  Kinges  Bench  were  all  one 
Officer.  421. 

8. 

9.  The  adverfe  Reafons  produced  and  anfwered,  that 
the  Common  Law  was  here  dtablifhed  by  William  the 
Conqueror.  525.  to  735. 

By  this  turning  over  the  Book,  I  am  fomewhat  apt 
to  believe,  that  this  may  be  a  Volume  of  the  excellent 
Work  of  Sir  Roger  Owen,  concerning  the  Antiquitv, 
Amplenefs,  &  Excellency  of  the  Common  Law  of 
England. 

( It  is  fo  ;  and  the  MS.  3  C.  1 3  ?  fupplyeth  the  firft. 
Chapter,  wanting  herein  :  as  this  Book  feemeth  to  fupply 
that  and  the  other  two  Volumes  with  four  Chapters  ; 
they  wanting  all  from  the  7th  Chapter  to  the  15th). 

1573- 

A  Book  in  fol.  combining  all  Warrants  on  the  Officers 

of  the  Cuftomes  (with  lome  Bills;  horn  the  2d  Day 

of 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


129 


Nuro.  1573,  1574- 

of  April  1668.  to  the  17th  Day  of  Auguft  1669.  both 
inclusive. 

At  the  end  is  an  alphabetical  Table. 

1574- 

A  Book  in  fol.  containing  part  of  the  Collections  of  fome 
eminent  Student  or  Practitioner  of  our  Common  Laws  > 
before  which  I  find  prefixed, 

r.  A  fhort  Table  to  the  Titles  of  thofe  Collections 
which  (according  to  the  new  Numbers)  begin  at  fol.  23. 

2.  Divers  material  Collections  from  the  Records  & 

Rolls  of  Parliament ;  being  Petitions  Sc  Pleas,  temp.  R. 
R.  F.dw.  1.  &  11.  .  2" 

3.  Obfervations  upon  many  old  Statutes  ;  wherein  the 

Differences  between  the  Records  &  the  printed  Books 
are  noted.  1 2* 

Thefe  begin  with  ann.  15  Edw.  in.  and  conclude 
with  ann.  21  Hen.  vi. 

4.  Collections  from  divers  Laws  Sc  other  Authorities, 

tending  to  prove  or  fhew,  that  the  Laity  (efpecially  the 
Commons  of  England)  ought  not  to  meddle  with  Eccle- 
fiallical  matters.  2 1 .  b. 

5.  Homagium  faCtum  Edw.  1.  Regi  Angliae,  per  Ab- 

bates  Sc  Frio  res  Scotie ;  with  reference  to  other  Records 
evincing  the  Subjection  of  Scotland  to  the  Crown  of 
England.  2  2m 

Then  follow  many  mifcellaneous  Extracts  from,  &• 
Obfervations  made  upon  our  public  Records,  digefted 
under  the  following  Heads  or  Titles : 

6.  Ireland. 

7.  ViCtualls  for  Warre. 

8.  Advoufons. 

9.  Wrecke. 

10.  Admiralty  Sc  Navy,  See.  for  Warr. 

1 1 .  ProteCtio  Regalis. 

12.  ProteCtor. 

13.  Ufery  &  Jewes. 

14.  Navy  &  Shipps  for  Trafficque. 

1 5.  Peers  and  Noble-men. 

16.  Subfedies,  Contributions,  Taxations. 

1 7.  Legues  and  Confederates. 

18.  Queen  of  England. 

19.  Elchequer  and  Treafurer  therof. 

20.  Defence,  Invafion,  and  Sea-colle. 

21.  Scotia. 

22.  Marriage  of  Ladies. 

23.  Dowers  of  Ladies. 

24.  Confiliarij  Regis. 

25.  Roy,  et  l'on  Prerogative. 

26.  Rellituticn  lo  Blood. 

27.  Medici  Regis. 

28.  Breach  of  Peace,  Affaults,  Riotts. 

29.  Records,  et  Remover  d’eux. 

30.  Utlagati,  et  ForisfaCt. 

31.  Tallage. 

32.  Cinque  Ports. 

33.  Debitores  Regis. 

34.  Milites. 

35.  Efcaetores. 

36.  Embaffadouis. 

37.  Homicide. 

38.  Refumptions  of  Pattents,  Licenfes,  & c. 

39.  Accufations  of  Offences. 

40.  Bellum,  Et  Expeditio  Bellica. 

41.  Arma,  et  Belli  Apparatus. 

42.  Latrones,  Felones,  Sc  Felonum  Evafio, 
capium,  &c. 

43.  Marfhal  of  England. 

44.  Hofpitium  Regis,  et  ValeCti  ejus. 

45.  Capellani  Regis. 

46.  Scandala  Magnatum. 

47.  Alchimy. 

Cat-  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


23- 

ibid. 

23.  b. 
ibid. 

24. 

24.  b. 
25- 

2 5.  b. 

26. 

26.  b. 

27. 

27.  b. 

28. 
ibid. 

28.  b. 


ibid. 
30.  b. 
ibid. 
32 


32 


b. 

ibid. 


Num.  1574,  I57S- 

48.  Coroners. 

49.  Clericus  Coronas. 

50.  Precationes  pro  Rege;  gratiarum 

Victoria. 

5 1 .  Lex  Communis  Anglie. 

52.  Contempts. 

53.  Mullers  Sc  Souldiers. 

54.  Chauncery. 

55.  Parliament. 

56.  Tenentes  in  Capite. 

57.  Wardes. 

58.  Surrender  &  Seifin. 

159.  Officiarij  Belli. 

60.  Caftra  &  Turres. 

61.  Forgery. 

62.  Extortion,  &  Bribery. 

63.  Duellum. 

64.  Money. 

65.  Prince  of  Wales. 

66.  Negotiation,  See.  Fraunce. 

67.  Scotland. 

68.  Fraunce. 

69.  Scotia. 

70.  Impofitions. 

Laltly,  after  many  blank  Leaves,  I 

7 1 .  The  Remonftrance  for  the  Houfe 
to  K.  Charles  1. 


39.  b. 
ibid. 

ACtiones  pro 
ibid. 

40. 

40.  b. 
ibid. 

41. 

41.  b. 

42.  b. 
ibid. 

43. 
ibid. 

43-  b. 
ibid; 

44. 

44.  b. 
ibid. 

45- 

45.  b. 
ibid. 

46. 

46.  b. 
47- 

find, 

of  Commons, 
48. 


ibid. 

.  33* 
ibid, 
ibid. 
33*  b. 

34- 
ibid. 

34-  b- 
ibid. 

35- 
ibid. 

36. 

37- 

37' 

five  Ef- 
38. 

38.  b. 

ibid. 

.39- 

ibid. 

ibid. 


1 5  7  5  - 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  in  the  Law  French,  and  con¬ 
taining  Reports  of  Pleadings  in  Weftminfter  Hall, 
during  the  Reigns  of  Queen  Elizabeth  &  K.  James  1, 
which  not  being  orderly  entred,  I  lhall  tranferibe  the 
Titles  of  them,  as  followeth, 

1.  Com.  Banc.  Termino  Mich.  An°.  37-  &  38.  Eliz. 

1 595-  *: 

2.  De  Termino  Pafch.  Anno  Regni  Elizab.  38.  in 

Communi  Banco.  1596.  _  _  *5^ 

3.  De  Termino  Trinitat.  Anno  Regni  Eliz.  38.  in 

Communi  Banco.  17.  b. 

4.  De  Termino  Mich.  Anno  38  &  39  Eliz.  in  Com¬ 
muni  Banco.  ,  2°* 

5.  Dc  Termino  Pafch.  Anno  Regni  Regine  Eliz  39. 

in  Communi  Banco.  1598.  _  27.  b. 

6.  De  Termino  Trinitat.  Anno  Regni  Eliz.  39.  in 

Communi  Banco.  1597-  31*. 

7.  Del  Termino  Mich.  Anno  39  &  4°-  Regni 

Regime  Eliz.  in  Banco  Communi.  _  _  33* 

8.  De  Termino  Pafch.  Anno  Regni  Regine  Eliz.  40. 

1598.  in  Communi  Banco.  4p*  b. 

9.  De  Termino  Trin.  Anno  Regni  Regime  Eliz. 40. 

1598.  in  Communi  Banco.  _  46.b. 

10.  De  Anno  Regni  Regina:  Elizab.  40  et  41.  Ter¬ 
mino  Mich.  Communi  Banco.  47-  b* 

11.  De  Termino  Hillar.  Anno  Regni  Regina: 

Elizab.  41.  in  Banco  Communi.  5r-b. 

12.  De  Termino  Pafch.  Anno  Regni  Regina: 

Elizab.  41.  in  Communi  Banco. 

1 3.  Pafch.  43  Eliz. ; 

1 4.  Pafcha:  90  Jac. 

1 5.  Pafche  3“  Jacobi ;  Bank  le  Roye. 

16.  Mich.  3C  Jacobi  ;  Banke  le  Roy. 

17.  Pafche  40  Jacobi ;  Banke  le  Roy. 

18.  Mich.  40  Jacobi  Regis. 

19.  Termino  Hillar.  6  Jacobi. 

20.  Mich.  9  Jac. 

21.  Hill.  9  Jac. 

22.  Pafch.  90  Jacobi. 

23.  Trin.  9  Jacobi;  Comon  Banke.  -j — 

24.  De  Term.  Pafch.  Anno  10  Jacobi  Regis,  in  Com. 

muni  Banco.  9  *• 

Mich.  1  o  Ja.  99*  ?. 


56.  b. 

61. 
62.  b. 
64.  b. 
ibid. 
.65- 
ibid. 
66. 
75* 
79- 
81.  b. 
85.  b. 


25' 

26.  Pafch.  1 1  Ja. 


n 


1 03.  b. 
27.  Tri-- 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


1-50 


Num.  15  75,  1576. 

27.  Tri.  11  Ja.  108. b. 

28.  Termino  Mich.  1 1  Jacobi  Regis.  no. 

29.  Term.  Hill.  1 1°  Jacobi  Regis.  119.  b. 

30.  De  Termino  Pafchas,  Anno  1 2  Jacobi  Regis. 

i23.b. 

31.  De  Termino  Michaelis,  Anno  12  Jacobi  Regis. 

140.  b. 

Thefe  &  fuch  like  Reports  are  ufeful,  not  only  to 
Students  in  our  Common  Laws,  but  to  Hiftorians,  An- 
tiquaries,  &  Heralds;  who  from  thefe  Books,  may 
gather  many  noble  materialls  for  illuilrating  the  Hillories 
of  Places  &  Families. 

I5j6' 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  Hands,  and  contain¬ 
ing  a  large  Collection  of  mifcellaneous  Matters, 
entered  therein  in  the  following  diforder. 

At  the  beginning, 

1 .  Part  of  a  Law-Cafe,  arifing  from  the  Will  of  Jhon 
Sydenham. 

2  A  Moral  Sonnet  upon  true  Happinefs  :  by  Sir 
Walter  Raleigh.  1 

.  3.'-  An  imPerfe&  ^dex  of  what  things  are  contained 
in  this  Booke. 

Then  cometh  on  the  main  Collection,  began  ?  in 
Decern.  1616.  r 

1.  A  Law  rraCt  upon  the  SubjeCt  of  Accompt.  1. 

2.  Certain  Refolutions,  or  Axioms,  concerninge  Pro¬ 
clamations.  26  OClobris  1610.  27. 

3.  The  difference  between  a  Rowte  &  a  Riot.  28.’ 

4-  Concerning  the  feveral  Crimes  triable  in  the  Star- 

Chamber. 

5.  Sententias  e  diverfis  Autoribus  excerptse.  32. 

6.  Axiomata  Juridicalia.  37. 

7.  Notes  of  Mr.  Attomie . about 

Deer-ffealinge  ;  in  Camera  Stellata,  23  OCtobris.  137. 

S.  Speech  of  King  James  1.  upon  his  coming  into  the 
Starre-Chamber,  in  order  to  fitc  as  Judge  upon  the  Trial 
of  one  who  had  fought  a  Duell.  i40. 

?•  Another  Speech  of  the  fame  King,  made  after  that 
Triall,  before  he  gave  the  Sentence.  I42. 

1  o.  Notes  of  the  Lord-Keeper  Bacon’s  Speech  to  Sir 
William  Jones  in  Chauncery  ;  when  he  was  fent  to  be 
Cheife  Juftice  of  Ireland.  j  ^ , 

11.  Notes  of  my  Lord-Keepers  Speech,  in  Starre- 

Chamber*  10  of  July  1617.  to  the  Judges.  1 53. 

1 2.  A  Speech  made  to  Serjeant  Sir  Henry  Montague, 
when  he  was  made  Cheife  Juftice  of  the  Kings  Bench. 
16  November  1616. 

13.  Sir  Henry  Mountague’s  Speech,  in  anfwer  to  the 

other-  .  i59. 

14.  Certaine  Deliberations  concerning  the  Judicial 
Procedures  intended ;  when  the  Lord  Keeper  . 

had  the  Seale  putt  into  his  hand;  with  his  Majefties 
Charge  i 6 

15.  Letter  (accompanying  a  Book)  fent,  perhaps,  to 

the  Lord-Keeper  (Chancellor)  Bacon.  \  6g. 

^e  L°rd  Chauncellors  Speech  in  the  Starre- 
Chamber,  13  Febr.  1617.  I7, 

1 7.  Notes  of  Sir  Walter  Rawleigh’s  Speech.  '  20 
Novemb.  1618. 

This  was  juft  before  his  execution  ;  of  which  alfo 
there  is  a  fhort  Relation. 

18.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh’s  Letter  to  the  King.  170. 

19.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh’s  Letter  to  his  Wife.  180. 

20.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh’s  Letter  to  Sir  Robert  Carre. 

21.  Ordinances  made  by  the  Lord  ChaunceUour 

*  ’  •  ‘  ‘  (  the  better  and  more  regular  Admini- 

Itration  of  Juftice  in  the  Chauncery  to  bee  duly  obferved  • 
favinge  the  Prerogative  to  the  Courte.  1  g4>  ’ 

22.  Addiconall  Rules  of  better  governing  of  the 
•  Courts  of  Chauncery,  and  the  G reate  Seale.  a 00. 


Num.  1576. 

23.  Notes  of  my  Lord  Chancellors  Speech  in  Chaun¬ 

cery,  to  Mr.  Whitlock,  29  Junij  1620.  when  he  was 
to  receave  his  Oath  as  Serjant,  at  Chauncery  Barre  : 
and  to  be  fent  Cheife  Juftice  of  Chefter.  206. 

24.  The  humble  Petition  of  Robert  Dallington  & 

Endimion  Porter,  to  the  King;  Praying,  him,  for  the 
Keaions  thereunto  annexed,  to  creCt  an  Office  in  Chan¬ 
cery  for  keeping  of  the  Records  of  Bilies,  &c.  and  to 
beltow  the  fame  upon  them.  2I2 

25.  Marco  Spinola’s  Oration  to  his  Army,  when  he 

brake  his  Bridge  of  Boates,  beinge  paflld  over  the 
Rh>me  near  the  Confins  of  the  Pallatinate.  2 1  a. 

r  ,  ^rt^les  of  Agrement,  by  the  Mediation  of  the 
Lords  the  Princes  the  EleCtour  of  Ments,  &  Lodowick 
the  Landgrave  of  Haffia  ;  handled  &  concluded  betwixt 
the  Lord  Marquifs  Spinola  Captaine-Generall  of  the 
Army  of  the  Emperors  Majeftie  in  the  Palatinate,  and 
the  Lord  Joachim-Erneft  of  Brandenbergh,  Generali  of 
the  Annie  of  the  Evangelique  Union  ;  as  well  for  them- 
lelves,  as  other  Princes  &  States  united,  on  the  other 
Partie.  ACted  at  Ments,  1 2  April,  1621.  216. 

27.  The  Lord-Chancellor  Bacons  Letter  of  Submif- 

fionto  the  Houfe  of  Lords.  22  April  1621.  218. 

28.  Order  in  Chancery,  that  everye  Man  may  have 
a  Sub-pena,  without  any  Bill  firfte  exhibited.  222. 

29.  The  Fees  of  the  Ordinarie  Proces  of  the  Courte 

of  Chancery  ?  2 

30.  The  Speech  of  Dr.  John  Williams  Dean  of  Weft, 
minfter,  22  September  1621.  being  the  firft  day  of  the 
ferine ;  upon  the  fubjeCt  of  his  being  made  Lord- 

Keeper\  *33- 

31.  Account  of  the  Method  of  Proceedings  in  Chan¬ 
cery  ;  &  of  the  Colts  thereof.  244 

32.  Ordinances^  provided  in  Eafter-Terme,  Ann. 

38  Eliz.  by  Sir  Thomas  Egerton  Lord-Keeper  of  the 
Ureat  Seale  of  England,  for  the  remedy  of  fundrv 
Abufes  in  the  Court  of  Chauncery.  '  246/ 

33;  Opinion  of  Council,  upon  a  Defendants  (brought 
up  with  Procefs)  being  arrefted  by  the  Plaintiffe.  22 
May  1626. 

34-  A  Declaration  of  the  Commons  Houfe  of  Par- 
hament,  made  4  June  1621.  to  Hand  by  the  King,  with 
regard  to  the  Palitinale  Affair.  2-3_ 

35.  Extrads  out  of  the  Colts  Book  in  Chancery.  ’ 

36.  Reafons  concerning  the  decay  of  Trade,1 ^col- 
leded  out  oi  the  Obfervations  and  infallible  Rules  of 
the  Merchants  of  belt  experience  and  judgement.  262. 

37.  An  Anfwer  to  the  former  Reafons.  26C. 

38.  The  Prophecy  of  Merrey  or  Merlin,  found  in 
fiolt-Houfe,  in  a  Wall,  written  in  WeKh  in  Gold  Let¬ 
ters;  and  tranllated  by  Otvin  Lloyd,  &  brought  by 
John  de  Kerby  Lord  of  Holt.  Englilhed  ?  by  Thomas 

e-  ,  267. 

39-  Agreement  of  the  Six  Clerks  of  Chancery,  about 
the  better  carrying  on  their  Public  Buftnefs  ;  made,  11 
December  1621.  2_j 

40.  Lampoon  upon  the  Ladies,  in  the  time  of  K. 

Charles  it’s  time  :  fewed  to  272.  273. 

41.  A  new  Ballad  called  the  Prifoners  at  St.  James. 

42.  The  Sence  of  the  Houfe;  or,  the  Opinion^of 

fome  Lords  and  Commons  concerning  the  Londoners 
Petition  for  Peace.  This  Lampoon  was  printed  at  Ox- 
foul  by  Leonard  Lichfield  Printer  to  the  Univerficy 
1643-  and  is  faftened  to  275,  276. 

43.  My  Lady  Dentons  Medecine  to  cure  an  Ague. 

This  Lady  Denton,  I  fuppofe,  was  Wife  to  ^Mr. 

Paul  D’Ewes,  one  of  the  Six  Clerkesin  Chancery,  who 
nught  give  the  fame  to  Robert  Henley  Efq.  one  of  his 
Collegucs,  the  man  who  made  the  greatelt  part  of  this 
Mifcellaneous  Collection. 

44.  Extract 


Bibliothecas  Harleiante, 


r5r 


Num.  1576. 

44.  Extra  ft  from  the  laft  Will -of  Lancelot  Andrews 

Bilhop  of  Winchefter.  280". 

45.  The  Preamble  of  the  Will  of  Sir  Henry  Wotton 

Brovoft  of  Eton  College.  281. 

•  46.  Obfervations  upon  the  then  Methods  of  Proceed¬ 
ings  in  Chancery.  282. 

47.  Richard  Norton’s  Petition  to  Thomas  Lord  Co¬ 

ventry,  Lord  Keeper ;  with  the  Reference,  &  Report 
thereupon.  285. 

48.  Notes  of  the  King’s  Speech  in  the  Higher  Houfe 

of  Parliament,  26  Junij  1628.  286. 

49.  The  Speaker  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  Speech 

to  his  Majefty  K.  Charles  1.  ibid. 

50.  The  Petition  of  Conyers  Darcy,  &c.  to  the  Lord 
Keeper  Coventry,  praying  that  they  might  be  permitted 
to  anfvver  William  Pennyman  one  of  the  Six  Clerks,  in 
an  Aftion  of  Trelpafs  upon  the  Cafe,  by  their  Bail,  and 
not  in  their  own  perfons,  they  living  8  fcore  Miles  off. 

288. 

5 1 .  Mr.  William  Pennyman’s  Anfwer  to  the  faid  Pe¬ 
tition.  _  289. 

52.  Petition  of  Richard  Richards  Clerke,  &c.  to  the 
Lord  Keeper  Coventry,  with  the  Proceedings  thereupon. 

290. 

53.  My  Lord  Coventry  Lord  Keeper,  his  Speech  14 

Oftob.  1628.  at  the  Swearing  of  Sir  Richard  Weft  Lord 
Trealurer,  he  being  formerly  Chancellor  of  the  Exche¬ 
quer-  292. 

54-  Report  of  particular  Cafes  happening  in  Chancery, 
of  diverle  Yeares.  296.  etvid.  322.  &c. 

55.  A  railing  foolifh  Letter  to  Robin  Dunftable,  who 
feemeth  to  have  been  a  Puritanical  &  Hot-headed  Miller, 
who  had  turned  Author  upon  points  of  Theologie. 

315. 

56.  Ordinances  made  by  Sr.  William  Cordell  Kt. 

Mafter  of  the  Rolls  of  the  Queen’s  High  Court  of  Chan¬ 
cery,  the  25th  day  of  December  x 574.  for  the  well  or¬ 
dering  of  her  Highnes  Records  remayninge  within  the 
Rolls  ;  and  the  good  guiding  of  fuch  Clarks  as  lhall  have 
acceffe  to  the  fame.  318. 

57.  That  the  Councell  at  Yorke  have  noe  Authoritie 
to  ltay  Proceedings  in  the  Chancery  ;  or  in  any  fuperior 
Court  at  Weftminfter.  6  Feb.  ann.  4oEliz.  257. 

5S.  That  the  Court  of  Wardes  hath  not  Authoritie  to 
flay  Proceedings  in  the  Chancery.  22  Oftobr.  ann.  3  & 
4  Phil.  &  Mar.  3  59. 

59;  Perdonatio  fpecialis  pro  Diio  Thoma  Wolfeyo 
Cardinal?  Ebor.  per  R.  Henricum  vm.  Imperf.  363. 

60.  The  Patent  for  incorporating  the  Six  Clerks  & 
three  Petty  Bag  Clerks,  for  the  inrolling  of  all  Deeds, 
ann.  t6Eliz.  371. 

•  61.  The  Complaint  of  Thomas  Bond  Efq.  againfl 

Thomas  Heliard.  381 ;. 

I  his  Heliard  had  procured  a  Patent  for  digging  for 
Salt  Pet  re,  in  any  Man’s  Houfe  ;  and  ufed  it  with  great 
Jnfolence  &  Malice  to  particular  Perfons ;  for  which,  he, 
h;s  Wife,  and  others  his  Agents,  were  fued  in  the  Star- 
Chamber  about  A.D.  1630. 

62.  De  Cancellation?  Litterarum  Patentium  R.  Ja¬ 
cobi  1.  quibus  fuit  conftitutus  Robertus  Lee  in  Genera- 
lem  Recepiorem  Dili  Regis  in  Comitatu  Oxon.  389. 

63.  Projeft  of  the  remedying  divers  Abufes  commit¬ 
ted  in  Chancery,  by  the  Officers  thereof. 

392.  et  yid.  407. 

64.  A  Note  of  fuch  Things  as  are  fitt  to  be  reformed 
in  the  Prothortotaries  Office  of  the  King’s  Bench.  405. 

65.  Ordinances  made  by  Thomas  Lord  Coventry 

Lord  Keeper  of  the  Greate  Seale,  with  the  advife  Sc  af¬ 
fiance  of  Sir  Julius  Cefar  Kt.  Mafter  of  the  Rolles,  in 
the  Terme  of  St.Michaell,  in  the  1  ifh  yeare  of  K.Charles, 
for  the  Redrcfle  of  fundry  Errors,  Defaults,  &  Abufes, 
in  the  Highe  Courte  of  Chauncery.  41 1. 

66.  i  he  Lord  Keeper  Coventry  his  Speech,  or  Deli- 
verie  of  his  Charge,  as  he  received  it  from  his  Majeftie  ; 


Num.  1576. 

to  all  the  Judges  of  Affyfe  j  by  the  Rule  of  Starre-Cham- 
ber,  in  June,  A.D.  1635.  425. 

67.  Sir  Walter  Rawleigh’s  Letter  to  his  Majeftie,  be¬ 
fore  his  firft  Tryal.  434.  &  vid.  440. 

68.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh’s  Letter  to  Sir  Ralphs  Wint- 
wood  Secretary ;  concerning  his  Attempts  in  Guiana. 

435. 

69.  His  Apology  for  his  laft  Aftion  att  Guiana,  29 

Oftober  1618.  437. 

70.  The  Award  of  the  Execution  of  Sir  Walter  Ra¬ 

leigh  made  at  the  King’s  Bench  Barre,  28th  Oftober 
1618.  439. 

71.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh’s  Letter  to  the  Kinge  after  his 

Condemnation.  441. 

72.  The  Effeft  of  the  firft  Arguement  of  Sir  Thomas 

Egerton  the  King’s  Solicitor-General  in  mayntaining  the 
Juril'diftion  of  the  Council  of  the  Marches,  over  the 
4  Shires.  442. 

73.  The  Effeft  of  that  which  was  fpoken  by  Serjeant 

Hutton  &  Serjeant  Harris,  in  Anfwere  to  the  former  Ar¬ 
gument,  and  for  the  excludinge  of  the  Jurifdiftion  of  the 
Marlhes  in  the  fowre  Shires.  4  46. 

74.  The  Replye  of  the  King’s  Sollicitour  unto  the 

Arguments  of  the  two  Serjeants.  448. 

75.  Concerning  wrongful  Imprifonment  pf  the  Sub- 

jea.  503. 

76.  A  breffe  Difcovery  of  the  Nature  of  Dreames ; 

/hewing  how  far  the  .reafonable  Soule  extreifes  hir  Fa- 
cultyes  &  Operations  in  the  Tyme  of  Sleeps  :  and 
prooving,  that  in  Sleepe  there  can  bee  no  reil'onable  & 
methodical  Speeche.  506. 

77.  A  Panegyric  upon  K.Henrythe  Fourth  of  France ; 

made  during  his  Life  time.  512. 

78.  A  Letter  from  Sir  1  llamas  Roe,  theEngliffi  Am- 

baifador  at  the  Court  of  the  Great  Mogol.  514. 

79.  A  Letter  of  Robert  Devereux  Earle  of  Effex,  to 

Queene  Elizabeth,  upon  his  Command  to  goe  for  Ire¬ 
land.  517. 

80.  A  Letter  of  the  Lord  Norrice  to  the  King’s  Ma¬ 

jeftie  ;  after  he  had  flaine  one  of  the  Lord  Willoughbyes 
Servants.  ibid. 

8 1 .  A  Letter  delivered  to  his  Majeftie  at  the  Coun¬ 

cell  fable,  from  the  Commons  affembled  in  Parliament 
in  the  firft  Year  of  his  Raigne.  518. 

82.  His  Majefties  Anfwere.  ibid. 

83.  Touching  Examination  of  the  Credit  of  Wit- 

neffes  in  Chancery.  522. 

84.  In  what  Cafes  the  Chancery  releiveth  Procedings 

in  l’Exchequer.  26  Jan.  ann.  8  Car.  1.  525. 

85.  Extraft  from  the  Journal  of  the  Houfe  of  Lords, 

touching  the  Privilege  of  Peers  from  Arrefts  &  Attach¬ 
ments  arifing  from  any  Caufe  of  Civ  ill  Aftion.  1 2  Janu 
ary  1645.  529. 

86.  Some  Law  Cafes,  as  happening  in  Chancery,  ibid. 

87.  Modus  tenendi  Parliamentum.  538. 

88.  A  Note  touching  a  Leiger-book  of  the  Abbey  of 
Bury  in  Suffolk,  formerly  in  the  hands  of  .Sr.  Eijward 
Coke,  wherein  mention  was  made  of  a  Parliament  held 
in  the  firft  Year  of  the  Reign  of  King  Canutus.  574. 

89.  Adnotatio  de  Parliamento  tenendo.  ibid. 

90.  Proceedings  in  the  Cafe  of  Richard  Cavendiftie, 
unto  whom  her  Majefty  had  granted  the  making  & 
writing  of  all  Superfed.  upon  Exigent,  iffuing  our  of 
the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  ann.  29  Elizabeth.  548. 

91.  Some  Collections  of  the  Courfe  of  Procedinge 

in  Englifti  Suites  in  Chancerie.  Imperf.  554. 

92.  Syllabus  Liberorum  Regi  Bohemias  Friderico, 

Principi  Eleftori  Palatino,  cx  Elizabetha  Regina  nato- 
rum.  Manu  Germanic^.  ibid. 

93.  Noftes  Templarias ;  or,  a  breife  Chronicle  of 

the  Darke  Reigne  of  the  bright  Prince  of  Burning  Love. 
Subfcribed  by  Benjamin  Rudier.  Imperf.  556. 

94.  Hiftory  of  the  Commotion  in  Norfolk,  A.  D. 

1549.  by  Nicholas  Sotherton  564. 

95-  A 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


131 


Num.  1576. 

qq.  A  Difcourfe  of  Clement  the  vm.  now  Pope  ;  of 
his  Kindred,  of  his  Adions,  of  his  Government,  of  his 
Revenues,  &  Forces,  of  his  Intelligences,  &  Intereft 
with  the  Chriftian  Princes,  his  Cardinals,  and  which  of 
them  is  likely  to  fucceed  him.  A.l).  1600.  5S2. 

This  Tract  ?  with  a  Lift  of  the  Cardinals  living  A.  D. 
1599.  were  tranfcribed  or  tranflated  from  Antonio  Pe- 
trainellario,  by  John  Hinfon. 

96.  A  Relation  of  fuch  Occurrences  as  hapned  in 
the  Conclave,  wherein  was  chofen  the  prefent  Pope  Ur¬ 
ban  the  vm.  the  fixt  of  Auguft  1623.  60b. 

This?  with  the  Names  of  fuch  Cardinalls  as  were 
living  at  the  Death  of  Gregory  thexv.  were  tranfcribed 
by  John  Hinfon. 

07.  The  Infanta  Donna  Maria’s  Character  &  De- 
fcription,  by  Sir  Toby  Mathew.  Dated  from  Madrid, 


June  28th,  1623. 


9S.  A  Letter  written  by  one  Signior  Madre  from 
Millain  to  "Venice,  and  from  thence  lent  to  the  Venetian 
Ambaffador  here  &  by  him  prefented  to  the  King  & 
Queen,  about  the  Pranks  plaid  in  Milan,  by  a^i  infernal 


Spirit  who  ftyled  himfelf  Prince  Mammon,  Prince  of 

624. 


1 5  Legions. 


99. °Letter  of  Bilhop  Williams  to  Charles  1.  upon  his 

delivering  up  the  Great  Seal.  ^26. 

100.  l  he  Duke  of  Lenox’s  Speech  to  Charles  1.  upon 

the  Queftion,  “  Whether  it  was  neceffary  to  make  War 
with  Scotland.”  , 

101.  Sir  Harbottle  Grymftone’s  Speech  in  Parliament 

before  its  Diffolution.  ^3°’ 

The  Purport  of  it  is,  for  the  Reftauration  ot  K. 
Charles  11.  ,  r  - 

102.  The  Refolution  of  all  the  Judges,  by  Force  ot 
his  Majeltics  Letters  concerning  the  Stanneryes  of  De¬ 
von  &  Cornwall,  upon  the  hearing  ot  Counfell  learned 
on  both  Tides,  at  feveral  Days  ;  and  what  could  be  al- 
ledged  &  fhewed  on  either  Party,  and  upon  View  & 
Hearing  of  the  former  Proceedings  in  the  Court  of  Stan- 
nerys,  both  before  &  fince  a  certeyne  fuppofed  Aft  of 
Parliament,  made  concerning  the  Stannerys  in  the  5" 
Edw.  in.  26th  November  1608.  at  Serjeants  Inne. 

624. 

103.  Explication  of  the  firft  Article  of  the  former 
Refolution,  made  by  the  Judges  at  Serjeants  Inne,  14 

626. 


November  16.7. 


Num.  1576 — 1578. 


.  A  Mufic-Ledure  in  the  Aft  at  Oxon,  by  Mr. 
Weft  of  Chrift-Church,  Anno  1640.  628. 

105.  Latin  Letter  of  William  Laud  Arch-biflrop  of 
Canterbury,  to  the  Univcrfity  of  Oxford,  accompanying 
one  of  his  Donations  of  Manufcripts  to  the  Bodleyan 
Library,  dat.  6  Nov.  1640.  640. 

10  .  Account  of  the  Vastly  rich  Clothes  ol  the 
Duke  of  Buckingham,  the  Number  of  his  Servants,  & 
of  the  Noble  Pcrlbnages  in  his  Train,  when  he  went  to 
Paris,  A.D.  1625.  to  bring  over  Queen  Henrietta-Ma- 
ria.  642. 

*07.  Speech  of  K.  Charles  11.  to  theHoufe  of  Com¬ 
mons,  about  augmenting  his  Revenue.  646. 

ic8.  Articles  of  High  Treafon  and  other  hey  nous 
Mifdemeahours  againft  Edward  Earle  of  Clarendon  Lord 
Chancellour  o'f  England.  652. 

109.  His  Majefties  McfTage  to  the  Houfe  of  Com¬ 
mons,  concerning  Sir  Richard  1  emple,  16th  June  1663. 

656. 

1 10.  Elegy  upon  the  Death  of  Sir  Bcvil  ?  Granville. 

658. 

111.  Tombeau  (i.  e.  Epitaph)  de  Monfr.  le  Due  de 

Montmorency.  66  2. 

1 1 2.  Tumulus  Scombergij.  ibid. 

1 1 3.  The  Lord  Claypoles  Reafons  for  throwing  out 

the  Decimation-Bill.  664. 

1 1 4.  The  Account  given  of  his  Majefties  Revenue, 

to  the  Houfe,  by  Sir  Philip  Warwick.  666. 


li£.  Letter  of  Mr . to  the  Earl  of 

. his  Father  ;  giving  his  Reafons  for  turn¬ 
ing  Papift.  Dated  from  Paris,  21  November  1635. 

670. 

1 16.  A  Letter  from  an  Alderman  of  Newcaftle,  {hew¬ 
ing  in  part  the  Grievances  there  8th  September  1640. 

677. 

1 17.  Relation  of  the  Violences  of  the  Scotts  in  Nor¬ 

thumberland,  &  in  the  Bifhoprick  of  Durham.  Dated 
from  Yorke,  19th  September  1640.  679. 

118.  A  Diflwafion  of  Q.  Elizabeth  from  the  Con- 

clufion  of  Peace  with  the  Low-Countries  and  the  Spa¬ 
niard.  A.D.  1587.  680. 

119.  A  Difcourfe  touchinge  the  State  of  the  United 

Provinces  in  the  Low-Countries.  686. 

120.  Letter  of  Baron  Jochim  Erneftus  von  Sintzen- 

dorif,  to  Captain  Henry  Bell  in  London  ;  dated  from 
Frankfort,  1 2  December  162  1.  602. 

If  this  be  a  true  Letter  ;  it  gave  early  notice  of  the 
Defigns  of  the  Houfe  of  Auftria  againft  the  Dutch,  and 
the  whole  Proteftant  Intereft. 

1 2 1.  Of  Confidence  &  the  Cafes  thereof.  698. 

122.  Libri  in  Typography  Regia Parifijs  excufi.  7 02. 

123.  A  perfed  Survey  of  the  whole  Bilhopprick  of 

Sar.  7°3- 

This  is  a  Valuation  of  the  Revenues  accruing  to 
the  Bifhop  of  Sar. 

1 24.  A  Letter  from  the  Lord  of  Corke,  to  the  Lord 

of  Newbourgh  Chancellour  of  his  Majefties  Exchequer 
in  Ireland  :  containing  moft  woeful  matter  upon  the 
Irilh  Rebellion  &  Maffacre.  7°4- 

125.  Obfervations,  or  Colledions,  from  a  French 

Hiftory  ;  or  Iliftory  of  France.  708. 

126.  A  lamentable  Petition  exhibited  in  the  Names  of 

the  afflided  Chriftians  in  the  Eaft-parts  (viz.  of  Bohe¬ 
mia,  Hungarie,  Polonia,  &  Helvetia)  to  the  Chriftian 
Kingdomes  in  the  Weft.  719. 

127.  Title  of  Edward  Popham  Efq;  to  the  polfef- 
fion  of  certain  Manors  leafed  out  for  80  Years,  by 
William  Benfon  Deane  of  Weftminller,  6  Jun.  2  Edw.  vi. 

722. 

128.  A  Medecine  for  the  Stone.  721. 


1577- 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  all  written  &  tricked  with¬ 
in  printed  Efcocehons, .  by  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  the 

Painter-Stainer  :  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  the  fe¬ 
veral  Perfons  and  Families,  whofe  Armes  or  Crefts,  are 
to  be  found  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Exemplar  veriffimum  vetuili  cujufdatn  Libri  char- 

tacei  Armorum,  olim  fpedantis  d  home  Jenyns  Generofo  j 
cum  plurimis  additionibus.  *• 

3.  A  large  Collodion  of  Armes  (put  together  almoft 

proinifcuoufly)  wherein  are  found  very  many  belonging 
to  Yorklhire  Families ;  asalfo  to  Citizens  <x  Magiftrates 
of  London.  33-  b* 

4.  A  Colledion  of  one  hundred  feveral  Coates  borne 

by  the  Name  of  Moore,  or  by  fome  few  other  Names 
very  like  it.  II5,t)* 

NB.  This  containeth  a  great  Colledion,  fince  20 
Efcocheons  are  (lamped  upon  each  Page. 


IS78- 


A  Book  in  fol.  bought  of  Mrs.  Whitlock,  and  confid¬ 
ing  of  divers  Englifh  Trads  bound  up  together  in  the 
Order  following.  __  r  f 

1.  The  Remonftrance  of  the  Commons  Houle  ot 

Parliament,  to  K.  James  1.  .  r‘ 

2.  Mr. William  Hackwells?  Argument  in  Parliament, 

againft  Impofitions.  8  Jac.  1.  td.  b. 

3  3- 


3.  Of  Iilands  arifeing  in  the  Sea ;  and  of  the  Salt 

Shoare.  compared  with  the  Frelh.  124. 

4.  The  Argument  of  Sir  John  Davis  in  Defence  of 

Impofitions  ;  dedicated  (0  the  King.  136. 

5.  Remonftrance  delivered  to  his  Majeftie  in  Wri- 

tinge,  after  the  Inhibition  given  by  him  to  the  Lower 
Houfe  of  Parliament,  as  well  by  word  of  Mouth,  as 
by  Letters, not  to  proceede  in  the  examining  of  his  Right 
to  impofe  without  Affent  of  Parliament.  163. 

6.  A  Petition  to  the  King,  by  the  Houfe  of  Com¬ 

mons,  in  purfuance  of  their  Determination  (after  a 
thorough  Debate )  that  he  had  no  Right  to  impofe,  with¬ 
out  Affent  of  Parliament.  1 80.  b. 

7.  Arguments  prooveing  the  Kings  Majeflies  Pro¬ 

priety  in  the  Sea-Lands  &  Salt  Shoares  thereof.  And 
that  noe  Subject  can  lawfully  hould  any  Part  thereof, 
but  by  the  King’s  Graunt.  182. 

This  feemeth  to  belong  to  the  next  Treatife.  vid. 
fol.  200. 

Then  follow,  certain  Cafes  concerning  the  Commif- 
fion  of  Sewers,  viz. 

8.  The  Law  of  Wreck,  or  Wreck  of  the  Sea.  201. 

9.  Of  the  Inundation  of  the  Sea,  and  the  flowing  of 

Waters.  205. 

10.  Cafes  upon  the  Commiflion  of  Sewers,  and  the 

Jurifdittion  thereof.  208.  b. 

it.  Certaine  Notable  Obfervations.  2  2i.b. 

12.  The  Argument  of  Judge  Crooke  in  the  Exche¬ 

quer  Chamber,  before  all  the  Judges  of  England,  touch¬ 
ing  the  Shipp-money.  14th  April  1638.  224. 

13.  The  Argument  of  Judge  Jones,  about  Ship-mo¬ 

ney,  made  in  the  Exchequer-Chamber.  28  Aprilis, 
1638.  _  249. 

1 4.  The  Argument  of  Judge  Hutton,  upon  the  fame 

fubjeft,  made  in  the  Exchequer-Chamber.  28  Aprilis, 
1638.  270. 

15.  The  Cafe  of  the  Cittie  of  London,  concerning 

Prifage.  2  8  8. 

1 6.  Sir  Dudley  Diggs  his  Introduction,  uppon  the 

Conference  with  the  Lords  ;  concerning  the  Libertie  Sc 
Freedome  of  the  I’erfons  of  the  Subjects,  and  the  Pro- 
pertie  of  theire  Goodes.  313. 

17.  An  Argument  made  by  the  Houfe  of  Commons 

Commaunde,  at  theire  firft  Conference  with  the  Lords, 
concerning  the  Libertie  of  the  Perfon  of  every  Free¬ 
man,  by  Mr.  EJ ward  Littleton.  314.  b. 

18.  A  fecond  Argument  on  the  fame  Subject,  by  Mr. 

John  Selden.  3t3. 

19.  The  Argument  of  Sir  Edward  Coke,  on  the 

fame  Subjeft.  -27. 

20.  Cafes  of  High-Treafon,  Felony,  Premunire,  Ab¬ 
juration,  -Sc  Exile;  with  the  feverall  Trialls,  Punilhments 
6c  Proceedings  therein.  Togeather  with  the  King’s  Pre¬ 
rogative.  1.  In  Parliament.  2.  In  Matters  of  Money. 

3.  In  Warr  Sc  Peace.  4.  In  Matters  of  Trade  &  Traf- 


fique.  5.  On  the  Perfons  of  his  Subjects. 
Sir  Francis  Bacon. 


Written  by 
329- 


21.  A  Treatife  of  learned  Obfervations,  of  Matters 


Ecclefialtical. 


.344- 


22.  The  Lord  Keeper  Coventrie  his  Speech,  or  De- 

liverie  of  his  Charge,  as  he  receaved  it  from  his  Majeftie 
to  all  the  Judges  of  Affyfe,  by  the  Rule  of  Starr-Cham¬ 
ber,  '  in  June  A.  D.  16^5.  367. 

23.  Difcourfe  upon  the  Manner  of  Paflinge  of  Bills 

in  Parliament.  380. 

24.  The  Generali  A£t  of  Aflembly  houlden  at  Eden- 

borough,  the  1 2th  day  of  Augufl  1639.  for  abolifhinge 
of  Epilcopacie,  and  all  Innovations  lately  intruded  in 
theKirkeof  Scotland.  -iqg, 

>  2 5.  The  Bifhop  of  Dunkell  (Mr.  Alexander  Lindfey) 
his  Recantation,  inrolled  in  this  Aflembly.  404. 

26.  T  he  Bifhop  of  Orkney  (Mr.  George  Graham)  his 
Recantation  regilfred  in  the  faid  Aflembly.  406. 

Cat.  Harl,  VoL.  11. 


27.  A  Breviate  concerninge  the  Memorable  Statutes 
Sc  Conditions  of  his  Majeflies  Courts  of  Records,  kept 
in  and  about  London  &  Weftminfter,  appertayninge  to 
the  Lawes  of  England.  408. 


A  Book  in  fol.  bought  c-f  Mrs.  Whitlock ;  wherein 

are  contained  many  Trails  &  Papers  written  by 

various  hand*.  They  are, 

1.  A  Letter  of  Proteftation  fent  by  John  Valken- 

bourg  Dire&our-Gcnerall  of  the  North  Coaft  of 
Africa,  &  the  Ifles  of  Ste.Thome,  in  the  Name  Sc  on 
the  Behalfe  of  the  States  Generali,  Sc  of  their  authorized 
Weftlndia  Company:  to  Francis  Selvin  Agent  for 
the  Royal  Englifh  Company  tradeing  to  the  Coafts  of 
Africa,  complaining  of  Encroachments  from  the 
Englifh,  Sc  threatening  them  with  War  in  cafe  they  did 
not  fpeedily  remove.  1. 

2.  Conditions  of  a  Leafe  to  be  granted  by  An¬ 

thony  Henley  of  Bramfhili  in  the  County  cf  Southamp¬ 
ton  Efq;  (who  formerly  owned  this  Book  as  it 
feemeth.)  3. 

3.  Certaine  Obfervations,  that  are  not  worthy  of 
the  Title  of  Hiltory,  •}  that  hapned  to  England  fince 
the  yeare  of  our  Lord  15158.  and  before.  3.  b. 

The  Author  of  this  Traft  feemeth  to  have  been 
a  Roman  Catholic. 

4.  Some  Particulars  of  the  Raigne  of  Queene 

Elizabeth.  6.  b. 

5.  The  Favors  England  have  done  to  Holland  ; 
&  the  Obligation  they  have  to  this  Crowne.  1 6.  b. 

6.  'I  he  State  of  Holland  from  the  beginning  ;  the 

Continuance  ,  and  w'hat  is  like  to  prove  in  the 
end.  20. 

7.  Collections  gathered  out  of  a  Book  written  by 

by  Sir  Roger  Williams,  &  printed  A.D.  16 1 8.  21. 

8.  Whether  Holland  doc  Injury  to  their  Prince  : 

Yea,  or  Noe?  28. 

9.  The  Defperatenes  Holland  was  put  unto.  21.  b. 

10.  The  difference  of  Tyme  (of  the  Times)  be* 

twixt  the  beggining  of  Queene  Elizabeth’s  Raign  and 
the  latter  end.  36.  b. 

11.  The  Speech  or  Propofal  of  Pietro PeckioKt.  Chan¬ 

cellor  of  Brabant,  for  the  States  of  the  United 
Netherlands  to  fubmit  themfelves  &  the  Countrey  to 
the  Arch-Duke  as  unto  their  proper  Head.  23  March, 
1621.  3  9. 

12.  Anfwer  of  the  States  General  to  the  faid  Propo. 

fal ;  importing  a  preremptory  Refufal.  dated,  25 
March,  1621.  40. 

13.  The  Articles  of  Agreement  concluded  betweene 

the  Duke  ....  and  the  States  of  the  Low- 
Countries,  after  the  Accident  of  Andwarp.  41. 

14.  The  Prince  of  Oranges  Advice,  exhibited  to 

the  States,  touching  the  ordereing  of  the  Affaires  of  the 
Eftate  of  the  Lowe-Countries.  •  42. 

1  5.  The  Advice  of  an  Italian,  exhibited  to  the  Eftate 
of  Andwarpe,  for  the  Redreffe  of  the  Lowe-Countrie. 

4  7* 

1 6.  The  Articles  of  Peace  concluded  betweene  the  two 
mighty  Kings  of  England  &  S paine  ;  A.D.  1604.  50. 

17. '  The  Inftruccions  of  thofe  things  which  the 

Prince  of  Condve  defireth  for  to  be  declared  unto 
the  Kings  Majeftie  by  Monfr.  de  Villefeafon  his  Secre¬ 
tary  ;  whom  he  fent  prefently  to  the  Courte,  after  his 
comming  to  La  Fere  in  Picardie,  a  Towne  of  the 
auntient  Inheritance  of  Vandome,  thereby  appertaining 
to  the  King  of  Navarre.  13000.1579.  52.  b. 

18.  The  Prince  of  Condies  Letter  to  thevKing  after  his 

coming  to  La  Fere.  55. 

19.  Letter  of  Sir  William  Bofwell,  to  Sir  Edward 

Barret  Kt.  his  Majeflies  Ambaffador  to  the  French  King. 
29  May  1625.  56. 

M  m  20.  Inftruftions 


134 


t 


Catalcgus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1579. 

2®.  Inftru&ions  for  Sir  John  Bennett  Kt.  one  of  the 
Mailers  of  our  Chancerie,  to  bee  employed  by  us, 
in  qualitie  of  our  Ambaflador  to  the  Arch-Duke  Albert 
of  Auftria.  59. 

21  My  Lord  of  Salilburycs  (Robert  Cecil)  Letter 
to  Sir  George  Carew,  May  1609.  about  a  Proclamation 
againft  the  Fifhing  of  Strangers.  6 1 . 

22.  My  Lord  of  Salifburyes  Letter  to  Sir  George 

Carew,  about  Tyrones  Paffage  through  France,  and 
the  Treaty  in  the  Low-Countries,  dat.  12th  Novem¬ 
ber,  1607.  62.  b. 

23.  Inftruftions  for  Edward  Earle  of  Hertford,  ap¬ 

pointed  to  go  in  Ambaflage  for  Us,  to  our  deare  Bre¬ 
thren  and  Cozens,  the  Arch. Duke  Albert  &  Labell  of 
Auftria.  65. 

24.  Letter  from  the  Lord  Northe,  to  the  Lords  of 

the  Counfell,  dated  nth  December  1374.  touching  the 
French  Ambafladors  untrue  Reporte  of  him,  that  att  his 
late  beeing  in  France  hee  folicited  not  the  Caufes  of 
theEnglilh  Merchants  to  the  King.  68. 

25.  A  Difcourfe  of  Germany.  69. 

26.  Inftrudtions  to  Patrick  Ma(ter  of  Gray  Comenda- 
tour  of  Dumferling  ;  &  Sir  Robert  Melvill  of  Murdo- 
carvine  Knight,  Our  Treafurer  Deputye,  Our  Ambaf- 
l'adors,  directed  by  Us,  with  Advife  of  our  Eftates,  to 
the  Queene  of  England.  17th  December  1586. 

27.  Letter  of  Sir  I  homas  Roe,  to  Sir  Edward  Ba- 

rett  the  Englifh  Ambaflador  at  Paris,  dat.  from  Halchis 
near  Conftantinople,  igthSeptr.  1625.  77. 

28.  Reafons  to  prove  that  it  is  not  the  Eaft-India- 
Trade  which  doth  confume  the  Gold  &  Silver  Coyne, 
or  other  Treafure  of  this  Kingdome  :  but  rather,  that 
it  is  an  excellent  Meanes  greatly  to  increafe  the  fame. 

.  .  .  79* 

29.  Diatribe  de  F.loquentia  Veterum.  80.  b. 

30.  Certaine  Cafes  of  Confcience,  in  reference  to 

the  late  Proteftation  ;  defired  to  be  refolved,  concern¬ 
ing  thofe  Preparations  of  Warre,  by  the  King  one  the 
one  fide,  and  the  Tw  o  Houfes  of  Parliament  on  th’other 
fide.  8 1 . 

3 1 .  The  general  Pleads  of  Things  in  the  Office  of 
his  Majcfties  Papers  &  Records  for  Bufinefs  of  State  & 
Counfell,  eftablifhed  at  Whitehall :  digefted  by  Sir 
Thomas  Wilfon,  for  the  Service  of  the  Lord  Barrett. 

83. 

32.  A  breefe  Inftruction  for  a  Traviler;  collected 

out  of  fundry  Authors.  86. 

33.  Information  of  Grimbald  Pauncefote,  to  his  Ma- 
jefties  Commiflioners  for  the  Bufinelfe  of  Recufants. 

96.  b. 

34.  Inftruiftions  of  K.  Charles  1.  to  be  obferved  by 

his  Commiflioners  for  Sale  &  Demyfinge  of  his  Lands  ; 
by  Virtue  of  his  Commiflion  bearing  Date  23dOO:ober, 
ann.  2  Car.  1.  97. 

3.v  King’s  Commiflion  touching  Recufants,  for 
demyfing  iheire  Lands  :  bearing  Tefte  1 1  October,  ann. 
kegni  4-  98.  b. 

36.  The  Inftructions  for  the  Commiflion  for  Rccu- 
fants.  ioo. 

37-  The  Will  (nuncupative)  of  Emanuel  Scrope 
Earl  of  Sunderland.  26  May  16^0.  ioi.b. 

38.  Notes  touching  the  Action  between  Edward  Bar¬ 
rett  Efq.  Demandant  &  John  Marquis  of  Winton,  with 
Henry  Smyth  Gent.  Tenants,  touching  Lands  in  Wol- 
verton  &  Kingfclere  in  Com.  Southampt.  A.  D.  1 576. 

103. 

39.  Noates  out  of  Sir  Plenry  Nevills  Difpatches.  ann. 

41  Eiiz.  105. 

40.  Anfwer  of  fome  Peer  upon  a  Quarrel  with  the 

Duke  of  Norfolk,  during  the  Reign  of  Oueen  Eliza¬ 
beth.  ~  ,o6- 

In  that  Reign  there  was  no  other  Dukebefides  Tho¬ 
mas  Howard  abovementioned.  As  to  the  other  he 
feemeth  to  deferibe  hirafelf  by  his  birth,  dignity,  8c 


Num.  157c. 

eftate,  ill  this  his  refolute  Anfwer  ;  efpecialiy  when  he 
faid  his  Actions  were  like  his  Pofic,  or  Motto,  “  Ever 
Juft  and  Loyall.”  Now  the  M.  tto  of  Robert  Dudley 
Earl  of  Leicelter,  was  c*  Droiet.  et.  Loyal.”  as  appear¬ 
ed  by  the  Book,  inferibed  N°  332.  at  fol.  32. 

41.  Declaration  des  Henry  Riche  Baron  Kenfington, 

Counte  d’Hollande,  et  Dudley  Carleton  Chevalier,  Am- 
bafiadeurs  Extraordiha'res  du  Rov  de  la  Grande  Bre- 
taigne  vers  le  Roy  Tres-Chretien,  touchant  la  Demo¬ 
lition  du  Fort  Louys  devant  la  Rochelle.  1 1  Fevr.  1609. 
(1626  r)  106.  b. 

42.  Lettre  des  mefmes  Monfrs.  les  Ambafladeurs  du 

Roy  de  la  Grande  Bretagne,  a  Meflieurs  de  la  Rochelle, 
1 1  Fevrier  1626.  107. 

43.  Lettre  de  LaVigueur,  a  fonCamorade  La  Ruviie. 

Ic7*  b- 

44.  Syllogirmus,  OrbiS  Terrarum  Pr.acticus  : 

cujus  Propofitionem  majorem  pofucre  PrincipesEuroprei, 
Pace  inter  fe  fancita  Monafterij  Ol'nabrugi'  anno  1648. 
ftabilita  vero  Noribergas  Anno  I'^c.  Minorein  autein 
pol'uit  Innocentius  x.  Papa  Romanus  anno  1651.  et  con- 
tinuando  formavit  Succeflor  cjus  Alexander  vii.  anno 
1 655.  et  lequentibus.  Hamburgi  apud  Gervafium  Jo- 
annidis,  1 66  3:  108. 

45.  The  Earl  of  Briftol’s  firft  Speech,  in  the  Houle 
of  Lords,  upon  the  Roman  Catholiques  Petition.  114. 

46.  The  Earl  of  Briftol’s  Speech,  as  to  the  Oathes 

of  Supremacy  &  Allegiance.  114.  b. 

47.  Articles  of  Peace  agreed  on  betweer.e  His  Ma* 

jefty  of  Greatt  Britainc,  and  the  States  of  Holland,  A.D. 
<667.  1 21. 

48.  A  Lift  of  his  Majefties  Shipps  under  the  Atlmi- 
rall,  with  their  Rates,  Commanders,  Men  and  Guns, 
in  the  feveral  Squadrons  and  Divilions.  14th  May  1666. 

^  .  123.  b. 

49.  Four  I.etters  written  from  Venice  by  Sir  Henry 

Wotton  to  Sir  Edward  Barret,  A.D.  1616.  125.  b. 

50.  The  Petition  of  Edward  Hyde  Earl  of  Clarendon, 

to  the  Lords  in  Parliament,  A.  D.  1  367.  128. 

51.  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  Philip  ?  iv.  King  of  Spain, 

A.D.  1665.  130.  b. 

52.  A  Lift  of  the  Debts  of  young  Sir  George  Trench- 
ard,  confefled  by  him  in  his  Sicknefs,  25th  June 
16x0.  and  of  the  Care  taken  for  difeharging  the  fame. 

132. 

53.  Defence  of  the  Six  Clerks  in  Chancery,  againft 

the  Charge  of  Extortion  laid  againft  them  in  the  be¬ 
half  of  the  King.  temp.  Car.  1.  134. 

54.  Part  of  the  Speech  of  the  Earl  of  Briftoll  to  the 

Houfe  of  Commons,  about  the  Meflage  he  was  faid  to 
have  carried  from  Sir  Richard  Temple  to  K.  Charles  11  ? 
(vid.  infraN°82.)  135. 

55.  A  Libell,  made  by  way  of  a  Speech  of  K. 

Charles  11.  to  the  Parliament.  136. 

56.  Letter  of  James  Duke  of  Ormond  Lord  Lieute¬ 

nant  of  Ireland,  &  the  Privy  Council  there,  upon  the 
Cafe  of  the  Marquis  of  Antrim.  31ft  July  1O63.  fent  as 
an  Anfwer  to  the  King’s  Letter,  to  Sir  Henry  Bennett 
Principal  Secretary  of  State.  137. 

57.  Letter  of  K.  Charels  11.  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant 

&  Council  of  Ireland,  in  the  behalf  of  the  Marquis  of 
Antrim,  whom  he  was  pleafed  to  find  innocent  of  any 
Malice  or  rebellious  Purpofe  againft  the  Crowne  ;  and 
that  what  he  did,  by  way  of  Correfpondence  or  Com- 
plyance  with  the  Irilh  Rebels  (in  1641.  Sic.)  was  in 
Order  to  the  Service  of  his  Royal  Father,  and  warranted 
by  his  Inftrudions,  and  the  Truft  repofed  him.  Given 
10th  July  1663.  142. 

58.  Some  Account  of  the  Family  of  Bareth.  144. 

59.  Part  of  a  Speech  made  in  Parliament  by  the  Earl 

of  Briftol,  26  April  1641.  againft  the  extravagant  De¬ 
mands  of  the  Seotts.  145. 

60.  Letter  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  to  the 
Juftices  of  the  Peace  in  the  County  of  Somerfett,  con¬ 
cerning 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse* 


r3  5 


Num.  1579. 

tcercing  the  Abufes  accruing  by  the  excelfive  Number 
'of  Malfters,  and  the  Complaints  arifing  thereupon,  dat. 
31ft  Mai  ell  1635.  146. 

61.  Petition  of  the  Relations  of  Charles  Talbot,  Earl 

(now  Duke)  of  Shrewsbury,  to  the  Houfe  of  Lords,  upon 
the  fhamelcfs  Cohabitation  of  George  Villiers  Duke  of 
Buckingham  with  Anna- Maria  C.ountefs  of  Shrewsbury, 
the  Relid  of  the  faid  Earl’s  Father.  146.  b. 

62.  Projed  for  fitting  out  a  Royal  Fleet,  to  conf: If 

of  Five  Squadrons ;  with  the  Charge  thereof,  temp.  R. 
Carolin.  147. 

63.  A  Note  of  all  the  Shipps  bound  for  Turkey,  out 

of  England  ;  with  the  Burden  of  them,  and  the  Cap¬ 
tains  Names.  1 50, 

64.  The  Meafure  of  the  King’s  Race-Parkes  at  Tut- 

bttry.  1 5 1  • 

65.  Minutes  of  the  Privy-  Council,  16th  April  1630. 

upon  the  Petition  of  the  Tenants  of  Barwick.  152. 

66  Abflrad  of  a  Survay  of  the  Mannor  &  Chafe  of 
Enfield;  taken  by  the  King’s  General  Survayor,  8th  July 
1572.  z55- 

67.  Petition  of  the  Tenants  of  the  Demeafne-Lands 

of  the  Manner  of  Berwick  in  Elmett,  to  the  Lords  of 
the  Privy-Council.  *57- 

68.  Anfwer  of  the  Lord  Ncw'burgh  Chauncellor  of 
the  Dutchie  of  Lancalter,  to  the  foregoing  Petition. 

158. 

69.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy  Louis  xiv.  au  Roy 

d’Efpagne,  fur  la  mort  de  fon  Eminence  le  Cardinal  Ma- 
zarin.  le  9  Mars  1661.  161. 

70.  Letter  (Original)  of  W.  L.  a  Lawyer,  direding 

him  how,  by  different  means,  he  might  make  his  Te¬ 
nant  uneafy,  Sc  confequently  ejed  him.  162. 

71.  A  Note  of  all  fuch  Moneys  as  have  bin  payd 

unto  me  Sir  Edward  Barrett  Kt.  for  the  Affairs  of  the 
King  of  Bohemia,  A.D.  1620.  163. 

72.  Sir  Edward  Barretts  Notes  of  what  paffed,  re¬ 

lating  to  himfelf,  front  20  July  1628.  when  he  was 
fworne  Privy-Councellor,  to  the  20th  of  Auguft  follow¬ 
ing  :  together  with  the  Manner  Sc  Ceremony  ufed,  upon 
that  day,  in  adminiltring  the  Othes  unto  Richard  Lord 
Wefton  as  Lord  High  Treafurer  of  England,  and  unto 
him,  as  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  &  Under-Trea- 
furer.  164. 

73.  Teflamentum  Politicum  illuftriflimi  Politici  Ar- 
maridi  Cardinalis  de  Richlieu,  a  morte  perferiptum  ad 
excellentiifimum  Gallorum  Regem  Lodovicum  xiit. 

.l6?‘ 

74.  State  of  the  Matter  relating  to  William  Fielding 

Earl  of  Denbigh,  as  Mailer  of  the  Royal  Wardrobe,  and 
the  Accontpts  of  that  his  Office.  A.D.  1640.  167. 

75.  Warrant  of  K.  Charles  11.  for  a  Grant  of  the 

Eftate  of  Richard  Sandford  (outlawed  upon  his  Flight 
after  being  convided  of  the  Murther  of  a  bafe  Child) 
unto  Carolina  Wyndham,  Daughter  of  Sir  Edmund 
Wyndham,  Knight-Marlhall  of  the  Houfehold.  4th 
June  1670.  168. 

76.  An  Abftrad  &  Difcovery  of  certaine  unlawfull 

Sc  deceitfull  Pradifes  Sc  Abufes,  touching  chiefly  cer¬ 
taine  Officers,  that  have  to  do  in  the  Allowances,  re¬ 
ceiving,  chargeing,  difehargeing  of  the  King’s  Ma- 
jeflies  Debts  &  Revenues,  taken  in  Allowance  upon  their 
Accompts  and  otherwife.  t68.b. 

77.  Oratio  habita  in  Theatro  Sheldonianoin  Vefperis 

Comitijs,  10  Jul.  1 669.  ab  Henrico  Gerrard,  (e  Collegio 
Wadham.  A.  M. )  Terree-filio.  .  170. 

78.  Pleading  before  the  Houfe  of  Lords,  in  behalf  of 

the  Commons  of  England,  upon  aTrefpafs  in  feizing 
the  Goods  of  Mr.  Skinner  (a  Member  of  the  Houfe  of 
Commons?)  and  affaulting  his  perfon.  I73-h* 

79.  A  Speech  in  the  Houfe  of  Lords,  for  leffening 

the  Taxes,  Sc  Supply  to  his  Majefty  K.  Charles  11.  af¬ 
firmed  to  be  made  by  John  Lord  Lucas,  a  little  before 
his  death.  9  176. 


Num.  1570,  1580. 

80.  Three  humourous  Letters  ;  the  Two  former 

flu  fid  with  Bombafl :  the  latter  from  the  Lady  Savage 
to  her  fon  Harry,  2 1  Feb.  1624 ;  chiding  him  for  lofing 
firfl  his  Ruffe.  &  then  his  Shirt.  177  b. 

81.  Minutes  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Houfe  of  Com¬ 

mons  from  12  January  1673.  to  the  1 6th  of  the  fame 
Month;  both  inclufive.  178. 

82.  The  entire  Speech  of  the  Earl  of  Brifloll,  fpoken 
in  the  Houfe  of  Commons  above  mentioned  at  Nu  54. 
t..r j  1 ~ 


Inferied  here  at  j  80. 

83.  State  of  the  Cafh  in  the  .  .  i  .  .  Office,  nth 
May  1657.  Inferted  at  182. 


84.  The  Manner  &  Forme  of  Swearinge  and  placinge 
of  the  Chanceilour  of  the  Exchequer ;  and  namely  Sr. 
Fulke  Grevell ;  who  was  Chauncellour  when  as  the 
Earl  of  Suffolk  was  Lord  Treafurer.  Inferted  at  184. 

Turning  up  the  other  end  of  the  Bock,  I  find, 

85.  Receipts  Sc  Accompts  of  Andrew  Henley  Efq. 

A.D.  1656.  1. 

86.  The  Lord  Comvaies  Relation  concerning  the 

Paffages  in  the  late  Northerne  Expedition  ;  upon  the 
Scotrs  Invading  England,  temp.  R.  Caroli  1.  3. 

S7.  A  Speech  delivered  by  Robert  Cecil  Earle  of 
Saliiburie,  Lord  Treafurar  of  England,  by  the  Ap¬ 
pointment  of  the  King’s  Majeffie,  unto  the  Lords, 
Knights  &  Burgeffes  of  both  Houfes  of  Parliament,  att 
their  Meeting  in  the  painted  Chamber  A.  D.  1 609.  1 3. 

88.  A  Survey  of  Afhdowne-Forreft,  taken  30th 

April  1632.  by  John  Hatton  his  Majefties  Surveyor  for 
the  Dutchie  of  Lanealter.  22. 

89.  Two  of  the  Epiflolary  Poems  written  between 

Mr.  Nathaniel  Wanley  my  Father  ;  and  Dr.  John  Wilde  ; 
but  incorre&ly  written.  23.  b. 

90.  A  Breviate  of  the  Petition  to  bee  preferred  to  his 

Majeffie,  concerning  Tenures  in  Socage.  26.  b. 

9 1 .  Petition  of  the  Long  Parliament  of  K.  Charles  i. 
defiring  him  to  quit  his  Army,  and  joyn  with  them. 

28.  b. 

92.  Warant  of  the  Commiffioners  of  the  Treafury 

for  Payment  of  200  1.  unto  Mrs.  Ann  Wyndham.  dat. 
25th  May  1670.  30. 

93.  Letter  of  Prince  Rupert  to  James  Zouche  Efq. 

High  Sheriffe  of  Surrey,  in  the  behalf  of  Sir  Andrew 
Henley  ;  unto  whom  his  Highnefs  had  granted  the 
Cuftody  of  Frimley  Walke,  within  the  Foreft  of  Wind- 
for.  dat.  17  June  1670.  30.  b. 

NB.  All  the  Letters  and  Papers  contained  in  the 
Six  Volumes  next  enfuing,  were  given  by  the  Reverend 
Sc  Learned  Dr.  William  Stratford,  Canon  of  Chrilt- 
Church  and  Archdeacon  of  Richmond. 

1580. 

A  Book  in  fol.  confiding  of  Letters  &  Papers  of  State, 

moftly  Originals,  relating  to  the  time  of  K.  James  1. 

bound  up  together  in  Order  alphabetical.  They  are, 

1.  Three  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Walter  Alton,  Am- 

baffador  in  Spain;  to  the  Marquis  or  Duke  of  Bucking¬ 
ham.  1  - 

2.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to  the  King. 

4  April  1621.  8. 

3.  Three  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  xo. 

4.  Sir  Walter  Alton’s  Copie  of  his  own  Letter  to  Mr. 

Secretary  Conway.  22  Jan.  1622.  18.  b. 

5.  Sir  Walter  Aftons  Copie  of  his  Memorial  given 

to  the  King  of  Spain,  19th  Jan.  1623.  as  it  was  tranf- 
lated  into  Englilh.  22. 

6.  Original  Letter  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  to 

Sir  Walter  Alton.  24  Feb.  1623.  24. 

7.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to  the  Duke 

of  Buckingham.  6  March  1623.  26. 

8.  Sir 


-it' 


*3  6 


Cataiogus  Librorum  MSS- 


Num.  1580. 

8.  Sir  Walter  Alton's  Copie  of  his  Difpatch  to  Mr. 

Secretary  Conway.  6  March  1623.  28. 

9.  Two  Original  Letters  of  *i>ir  Walter  Alton  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  June  1024.  30. 

10.  Sir  Walter  Alton’s  Copie  of  another  of  his  Dif- 

patches  to  Mr.  Secretary  Conway.  34. 

1 1.  Three  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  A.  D.  1624.  40. 

12.  Copie  of  Sir  Walter  Alton’s  Letter  to  Mr.  Secre¬ 
tary  Conway.  17th  July  1624.  46. 

13.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to  the  Duke 

of  Buckingham.  9th  Augult  1624.  48. 

14.  An  Abftradt  of  Sir  Walter  Alton’s  Letter  (to  Mr. 

Secretary  Conway  ?)  9  Aug.  1624.  50. 

15.  Three  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to 

the  D.  of  Bucks.  A.  D.  1624.  52. 

16.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Walter  Alton,  to  the 

Prince.  24  Dec.  1624.  60. 

17.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to  the  Duke 

of  Buckingham.  24th  Dec.  1624.  62. 

18.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to  Sir  Fran¬ 
cis  Cottington.  24  Dec.  1624.  65. 

19.  Abftraft  of  Sir  Walter  Alton’s  Letter  of  3  Febr. 

1624.  67. 

20.  Sir  Walter  Alton’s  Copie  of  his  Difpatch  to  Mr. 

Secretary  Conway,  29th  March  1624.  69. 

21.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to  the  Duke 

of  Buckingham.  29  March  1624.  73. 

22.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Walter  Alton  to  Mr.  Se¬ 
cretary  Conway.  29th  March  1624.  75. 

23.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Duke  of  Bucking¬ 
ham  to  Sir  Walter  Alton.  79. 

24.  The  Duke  of  Buckingham’s  Copie  (as  it  feemeth) 

of  his  own  Letter  to  Sir  Walter  Alton.  8 1 . 

25.  Tranflation  of  Don  Carlos  Letter  to  Mr.  Secretary 

Conway.  3  Septr .  83. 

26.  Tranflation  of  the  Marques  de  la  Yniofa  his  Let¬ 

ter  to  Mr.  Secretary  Conway,  dated  the  5th  of  Septem¬ 
ber  1 623.  85. 

27.  Tranflation  of  Count  Gondomars  Letter  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  /3th  Febr.  1625.  87. 

28.  Abftraft  of  Mr.  Atye’s  Letter  to  Sir  Walter  Al¬ 
ton.  11  May  1625.  89. 

29.  Three  Original  Letters  of  Sir  William  Becher  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  90. 

30.  Original  Letter  of  Sr.  William  Becher  to  the 

King,  from  Paris  14  Aug.  96. 

31.  Copie  of  Sir  John  Digbye’s  Letter  to  the  Lord 

Treafurer.  Madrid  9  Aug.  1611.  98. 

32.  Nine  Original  Letters  of  the  fame  Lord  Digbye, 

to  the  D.  of  Buckingham,  &c.  102. 

33.  Copie  of  the  Lord  Digbies  Letter  to  Sir  Richard 

Welton,  16th  Sept.  1622.  122. 

34.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Briftoll,  to  K. 

James  1.  Madrid  26  April,  1623.  124. 

35.  Two  Original  Letters  of  the  Earl  of  Briftol,  to 

the  Bilhop  of  Lincolne.  A.  D.  1623.  126. 

36.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Briftol,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham,  21  Stpt.  162.3.  130. 

37.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Briftol,  to  the 

Prince.  24  Septr.  1623.  132. 

38.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Briftol,  to  the  Bilhop 

of  Lincoln.  24  Septr.  1623.  134. 

39.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Briftol,  to  theDuke 

of  Buckingham.  6  Deer.  1623.  136. 

40.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Briftol  to  Mr.  Se- 

cretarie  Cottington  Poicliers,  1 5  April  1624.  138. 

41.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Briftol  to  His  Ma- 

jeftie.  London,  27  July  1624.  140. 

42.  Copie  of  the  Letter  of  K.  Charles  1.  to  the  Earl 

of  Briftol.  21  January  1625.  (Imperf.)  142. 

43.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Briftol,  to  Sir 

Kenelme  Digby,  his  Ccufm.  6  Febr.  1625.  144. 


Ntifti.  1580,  1581. 

44.  Orip-inal  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Briftol,  to  theDuke 

of  Buckingham.  27  Febr.  1624.  146. 

45.  Copie  of  the  Earl  of  Briftoi’s  Letter  to  the  Lord 

Conway.  4th  March,  1625.  148. 

46.  Copie  of  the  Lord  Conway’s  Letter  to  the  Earl 

of  Briftol.  6th  March  1621;.  150. 

47.  Coppye  of  the  Earl  of  Briftoi’s  Letter  to  thePrince, 
touching  the  Deliverye  of  his  Proxye  to  the  King  of 
Spayne.  (thus  indorled  by  the  Earl  himfelf?)  152. 

48.  Articles  of  the  Earle  of  Briftol,  whereby  hee 
chargeth  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  x  May  1626.  156. 

49.  Fifteen  Original  Letters  of  Sir  George  Calvert, 

Secretary  of  State,  to  the  Lord  Marquis  or  Duke  of 
Buckingham.  A.  D.  1623.  158. 

50.  Copie  of  a  Letter  fiom  Mr.  Secretary  Calvert, 

to  Mr.  Secretary  Conway.  u!t.  Julij,  1623.  189. 

51.  Original  Letter  of  James  Hay  Earl  of  Carlifle,  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  19;. 

52.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Carlifle,  to  K. 

James  1.  14  Febr.  1 623'.  193. 

53.  Three  Original  Letters  of  the  fame  Earl  of  Car¬ 
lifle,  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  1 97. 

54.  Twenty-four  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Dudley  Car- 

leton,  written  to  theDuke  of  Buckingham,  during  many 
years.  209. 

Among  them  1  find, 

55.  Extract  d’tine  Lettre  de  Monfr.  l’Ambaffadeur 

Carleton,  au  Prince  d’Orange,  3oAouft,  A.  D.  1622. 
Stilo  Novo.  240. 

56.  Abftrad  of  the  Advices  fent  by  Sir  Dudley  Car¬ 
leton  from  the  Hague,  26  Febr.  1623.  263. 

57.  Three  Original  Letters  of  Mr.  Edward  Clarke  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  A.  D.  1623.  274. 

58.  Eight  Original  Letters  from  Edward  Lord  Con- 

wey,  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  279. 

59.  Original  Letter  of  .  .  .  John  Coke,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  2  May,  1623.  297. 

60.  Twenty  Original  Letters  of  Edward  Lord  Con- 

wey,  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  299. 

6 1.  Copies  or  Abftra&s  of  Two  Letters  from  Monlr. 

de  Vie,  to  the  Lord  Conwey.  347. 

62.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Francis  Cottington,  to  Mr. 

Secretary  Winwood,  x  Oct.  1616.  351. 

63.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Francis  Cottington  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  22  Jan.  1619.  355. 

64.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Francis  Cottington  to  the 

Lord  Digbie.  22  Jan.  1619.  357. 

65.  Six  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Francis  Cottington  to 

the  Marquis,  or  Duke  of  Buckingham.  361. 

C6.  Original  Letter  of  .  John  Eyre  fent  to 

the  Marquis  of  Buckingham  from  Conftantinople,  with 
a  Tranfcript  of  a  former  Letter  therein.  372. 

67.  Two  other  Original  Letters  from  .  .  .  John 

Eyre,  to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  374. 

68.  Seven  Original  Letters  from  Sir  Thomas  Roe,  to 

the  Marquis,  or  Duke  of  Buckingham.  378. 

69.  Reafons  or  Prefedents  to  induce  his  Majeftie  to 
imploy  Ambafiadours  in  Turkie  of  his  owne  Nomination ; 
with  more  Honor,  and  noe  more  Charge  then  heretofore, 
with  Beholdingnes  to  the  Turkie-Marchaunts.  392. 

70.  Thirty-four  Original  Letters,  or  Papers,  from  Sir 

George  Goring  (afterwards  Lord  Goring)  to  the  Mar¬ 
quis,  or  Duke,  of  Buckingham.  394. 

1581. 

A  Book  in  fol.  confiftingof  a  parcel  of  Original  Letters 

&  Papers,  ferving  as  a  fecond  Part  to  the  former  Col¬ 
lection  j  bound  up  in  the  following  Order. 

1 .  Three  Original  Letters  of  James  Marquis  of  Ha¬ 
milton,  to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  1. 

2.  One  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  Charles  Prince 

of  Wales.  "  .7. 

3.  One 


3 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


*37 


Num.  1581. 

3 .  One  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,,  to  the  Duke  of 

Buckingham.  .  9* 

4.  One  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Edward  Herbert  (af¬ 

terward  Lord  Herbert  of  Cherbnry)  to  the  Marquis  of 
Buckingham.  1  October  1619.  1 1- 

5.  Two  Original  Letters  of  the  fame,  to  K.  James  i. 

6.  One  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  Mr.  Secretary 

Naunton.  1 5th  Febr.  1620.  17- 

7.  One  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  K.  James  I. 

(dat.  31  October  1623O  _  2I- 

8.  One  Original  Letter  of  Henry  Rich  Lord  Kenfing- 
ton  (afterwards  Earl  of  Holand)  to  Prince  Charles. 

9  March  1623.  ^  24- 

9.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame  Lord  Kenfington,  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  26  Febr.  1623.  26. 

10.  Original  Letter  of  the 'fame,  to  the  Lord  Con¬ 
vey.  1  May  1624.  28* 

11.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  the  Duke  of 

Buckingham.  3 1  Auguft  1 624.  31, 

12.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame  to  Prince  Charles. 

26  February.  35- 

13.  Six  Original  Letters  of  the  fame,  to  the  Duke  of 

Buckingham.  .  37- 

14.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  the  King.  3  March 

1625.  48- 

1 5.  Original  T.ctter  of  tire  fame,  to  the  Duke  of 

Buckingham.  3  March  1625.  _  52* 

16.  Four  Original  Letters  ot  Lodowick  Stuart  Dukfc 
of  Richmond  Sc  Lenox,  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham. 

.56. 

17.  Two  Original  Letters  of  Mr.  Thomas  Lorkin,  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham  A.  D.  1625.  64. 

18.  Four  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Robert  Manfell,  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  A.  D.  1621.  &c.  70. 

iy.  Four  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Tobie  Matthew,  to 
the  Marquis  cf  Buckingham.  A.  1).  1623.  78. 

20.  Seven  Original  Letters  of  Lionell  Cranfield  Earl 
of  Middelfex,  to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  87. 

21.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  K.  James  1.  26 

April  1624.  I01* 

22.  Seven  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Robert  Naunton,  to 

the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  1  °3‘ 

23.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  K.  James  1.  16 

Julie  1623.  11 7- 

24  Five  Original  Letters  Sc  Papers  of  Sir  Robert  Pye, 
to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  .  1 18. 

2;,  Five  Otiginal  Letters  of  Francis  Manors  Earl  of 
Rutland,  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  127. 

26.  Original  Letter  of  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham, 

to  the  fame  Earl  of  Rutland.  J34* 

27.  Two  Original  Letters  of  Thomas  Howard  Earl  of 

Suffolk,  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  136. 

28.  Two  Original  Letters  ot  the  fame  Earl,  to  the 
King. 

29.  Seven  Original  Letters  of  Advertifement,  by  Sir 

William  Trumbull.  A.  D.  1616.  &c.  142. 

30.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Edward  Vere,  to  his  bro¬ 
ther  Henry  Earl  of  Oxford  ;  with  a  Copie  of  a  Letter 
written  in  French  by  General  Count  Mansfield.  16c. 

31.  Two  Otiginal  Letters  of  Sir  Horatio  Vere  (after¬ 
ward  Baron  of  Tilbury)  to  Sir  George  Carleton.  162. 

32.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  thei Marquis  of 

Buckingham.  30  O&ober  16,2.  .  ‘65. 

33.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  Sir  Edward  Con¬ 
way.  30  Oftober  1622.  168. 

34.  Original  Letter  of  Arthur  Lord  Chichefter,  to 

the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  8  Sept.  1622.  170. 

3  5.  Epiftola  Originalis  Confiliariorum  Sec.reti Senates 
Frederic!  Regis  Bo'ljemise,  Eleftoris  Palatini,  ad  D£m  Jo- 
haimerh  Digby.  dat.  Heidriberga:,  8  Oitob.  1621.  172. 

36.  Original  Letter,  in  French,  from  .... 
R  ied,  to  Monlr.  William  de  Trumbul.  9th  Octr.  1621. 

174. 


Num.  1581. 

37.  Extrafl:  of  certain  Letters  vmtten  by  the  Emperor. 

1 76. 

3S.  Copie  of  a  Letter,  in  Spaiiifh,  written  by  the 
Arch-Duchefs  Ifabella,  to  Don  Gonfalvo  Fernandez  da 
Cordova.  Bruflells,  24  Augufl,  1622.  177. 

39.  Five  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Ifaac  Wake  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  178. 

40.  Ten  Original  Letters  of  S'r  Richard  Weflon,  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  192. 

41.  Ofiginal  Letter  of  Sir  Henry  Wotton  to  the  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Buckingham:  25  Jan.  1619.  212. 

42.  Copie  ot  a  Letter,  lent  as  a  New-vears  Gift  by 
Sr.  Hen.  Wotton,  to  the  I.ord  Treafurer  Weflon.  214. 

43.  Five  Original  Letters  from  the  fame,  to  the  Duke 

of  Buckingham.  216. 

44.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Richard  Martyn,  to  the 

Ld.  Vifcount  Villiers.  23  Oftober  161  6.  2:6. 

45.  Letter  of  lgnotus  ;  dated  from  York-houfe,  nth 

September  1617.  228. 

46.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Oliver  St.  John  to  the  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Buckingham.  13  Febr.  1618.  230. 

47.  Copie  of  a  Letter  in  French,  perhaps  from  Count 

Gondomar  to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  20  April 
1620.  232. 

48.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Ogle,  to  the  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Buckingham.  1  Januar.  1620.  -234. 

49.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Richard  Hawkyns,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  8  Febr.  1620.  238. 

50.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lady  Mary  Jacob,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  28  April  1621.  240. 

51.  Original  Letter  of  Henry’ Lord  Falkland,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  1  Sth  July  1621 .  242. 

52.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  George  Paule,  to  the  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Buckingham.  Oil.  1622.  244. 

53.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Allen  &  Charles 

Moncke,  to  the  Lord  Vifcount  Falkeland,  Lieutenant  of 
Ireland.  23  January,  1622.  248. 

54.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame  Lord  Falkland,  to 

the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  28  Jan.  1622.  250. 

55.  Original  Letter  in  French,  of  P.d’Aremberghe 

Due  d’Arfchot,  to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  19th 
Febr.  1612.  252. 

56.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Edward  Barrett,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  3  Mar.  1622.  254. 

57.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  W.  Sent-Leger,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  24  March  1622.  256. 

58.  Original  Letter  of  lhomas  Lord  ?  Savage,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  30  March  1622.  258'. 

59.  Original  Letter  of  Henry  Fury?  to  Prince  Charles. 

25  March  1623.  260. 

60.  Original  Letter  cf  William  Lord  Mandeville,  to 

the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  30  March  1623.  262. 

61.  Original  Lettei  of  the  fame,  to  K.  James  1.  1  ft 

April  1623.  264. 

62.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Aylefburie,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  3  April  1623.  266. 

63.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lord  Mandevile,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  8  April  1623.  268. 

64.  Original  Letter  of  Fulke  Grevile  Lord  Brooke, 

to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  10  April  1623.  270. 

65.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  John  Coke,  to  the  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Buckingham.  11  April  1623.  272. 

66.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Francis  Crane,  to  the  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Buckingham.  1 2th  April  1623.  274. 

67.  Original  Letter  of  ...  .  Lord  Annand, 
to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  23  April  1623.  276. 

68.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Richard  Yonge,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  21  April  1623.  278. 

69.  Original  I.etter  of  Sir  Robert  Anflruther,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  24  April  1623.  280. 

70.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Lord  ?  Savage,  to 

the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  2  May  1623.  282. 

7  1 .  Original  Letter  of  Sir  John  Coke,  to  the  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Buckingham.  4  May  1623.  284. 

N  n  72.  Original 


Cat.  Haul.  iVol.  II. 


i38 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num,  1581. 

72.  Original  Letter  ofj  ohn  Packer,  to  the  Duke  of 

Buckingham.  24  June  1623.  2gg 

73.  Original  Letter,  in  French,  of  X.  R.  de  Yngrade 

PrmceffedeBarbanfon,to  theduke  of  Buckingham,  iojuly 
1^23-  288. 

74.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Allen  Apfley,  to  the  Duke 

of  Buckingham.  22  July  1623.  2g0. 

75.  Original  Letter  of  Arthur  Lord  Chichefter,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  22  July  1623.  292. 

76.  Original  Letter  of  George  Lord  Carew,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  26  July  1623.  294. 

77.  Original  Letter  of  Oliver  Lord  Grandifon,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  2  Auguft  1623.  296. 

78.  Original  Letter  of . Campbel  Earl  of 

Argyle,  to  the  Marquis  of  Bucks. 4  April  1623.  298. 

79.  Original  Letter  of  William  Cecil  Earl  of  Salif- 
bury,tothe  duke  of  Buckingham.  io Auguft  1623.  300. 

80.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Robert  Alton  to  the  Duke 

of  Buckingham.  1  $  Auguft:  1623.  302. 

81.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Allen  Apfley,  to  the  Duke 

of  Buckingham.  13  Auguft  1623.  304. 

82.  Original  Letter  of  Henry  Cary  Vifcount  Falk¬ 
land,  to  the  Duke  of  Bucks.  11  Nov.  <623.  306. 

83-  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  the  Duke  of  Buck¬ 
ingham.  29  Febr.  1623. 

84.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Griffyth  ?  Markham,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  22  March  1623.  310. 

85.  Original  Letter  of .  .  Em.  Giffard,  to  the  Duke 

of  Buckingham.  1 9  July  1 624.  312. 

86.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Button,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  30  July  1624.  3^. 

87.  Original  Letter  of  Oliver  Lord  Grandifone,  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  20  Sept.  1624.  315. 

88  Copie  of  a  Letter  to  Capt.  Alexander  Brett. 

7  O&ober  1624.  ^17 

89.  Original  Letter  of  Capt.  Alexander  Brett,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  20  May  1625.  3  x  g. 

90.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  John  Wentworth,  fro ni 

Dunkirk.  31g. 

91.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  John  ILarrifon,  fromTituan. 

1  o  July  1625.  320. 

92.  Original  Letter  of  Captain  John  Pennington,  to 

the  Duke  of  Bucks.  27  July  1625.  324. 

93.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Lord  Coventrye,  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  13  Septr.  1625.  328. 

94.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Conwey,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  28  Decemb.  1626.  329. 

95.  Original  Letter  of  Capt.  John  Pennington,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  3,^ 

96.  Original  Letter  of  James  Hay  Earl  of  Carlifle,  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  jo  Aug.  332. 

97.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  then  Vifcount 
Doncafter,  to  the  Duke  of  Bucks.  1 8  Auguft.  334. 

98.  Two  Original  Letters,  in  French,  from  the  Vif- 
count  de  Lormes,  to  the  Marquis  of  Bucks.  340. 

99’  Two  Original  Letters  from  the  Lady  Francis 
. to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  346. 

100.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lord  Piers  Butler,  to  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  „^.g 

101.  Original  Letter  of  Henry  Earl  of  Dunbar,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  26  April.  ,  -0 

102.  Original  Letter  of  Sr.  Thomas  Jermyn,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  25  March.  --2 

103.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  John  Maynard,  to  the 
Marquis  of  Buckingham. 

104.  Original  Paper  of  Sir  John  Crofts  (as  it  was 
thought)  _ 

1 05..  Original  Letter  of  Sr.  Humfrey  Maye,  to  the 
Marquis  of  Buckingham.  2.3  April.  3  -g 

106.  Original  Letter  of  Edward  Montgomerie,  to  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham.  g 

107.  Cafe  of  Sir  Lewis  Trefham  ;  tranflafed  out  of 

Spamfh.  3g2> 


Num.  1581,1582. 

108.  Letter  in  French,  to  the  duke  of  Buckingham  1 

being  a  Banter,  fubferibed  Theophile.  364. 

109.  Original  Letter  of  Robert  Radcliffe  Earl  of 

Suflex,  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  366, 

1  io.  Original  Letter  of  William  Herbert  Earl  of  Pem¬ 
broke,  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  368. 

in.  Two  Original  Letters  of  Sir  John  Hippefley,  to 
the  duke  of  Buckingham.  ,-0 

1 1 2.  Original  Letter  ofMargaret  Countefs  of  Notting¬ 
ham,  to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  374; 

113.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Lord  Gerarde,  to  the 
Marquis  of  Buckingham. 

114-  Original  Letter  of  William  Fielding  Earl  of 
Denbigh,  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  378* 

7  5-  Two  Original  Letters  of  Henry  Lord  Rochford, 
to  the  duke  of  Buckingham.  3-9 

,  ' 16 .  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Jermyn,  to  the 
Marquis  of  Buckingham.  -g 

117.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Richard  Taverner,  io  the 
Duke  of  Buckingham.  „g^ 

TlS.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Francis  Crane,  to  the 
Duke  or  Buckingham.  -gg. 

119.  Original  Letter  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  ab 

Ignoto.  j88. 

i  20.  Ccpie  of  a  Letter  from  Thomas  Howard  Earl  of 
Arundel  &  Surrey,  to  Elizabeth  Lady  Maltravers,  his 
daughter  in  law.  5  March  1625.  3g0i 

121.  Copie  of  the  Lady  Maltravers’s  Anfwer  to  the 

foregoing  Letter.  ibid> 

122.  Original?  Letter  of  Advife,  to  the  Duke  of 
Buckingham. 

123.  Original  Letter  ab  Jgnoto,  to  K.  James  againll: 

the  Duke  ol  Buckingham.  „0_ 

124.  To  h  s  Majeftye  ;  a  bitter  Relation  agalnft  the 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  .. 

,  13 5-  | 0  bis  Majeftye  ;  concerning  the  Pallatinate,  and 
thole  of  the  Religion  in  France;  by  Sir  William  BofwcU 
as  1  take  it. 

126.  Tranflation  of  a  Latin  Memorial,  to  K.  James  'i 
on  the  part  of  Venice.  ‘ 

T,  UP™  the  Anfwer  of  Lionell  Craniidd 

Earl.  1  Middlefex,  about  the  bad  Payment  of  the  Army 

in  Ireland ;  by . late  Lord  Lieu- 

tenant  thereof. 

128.  Original  Letter  ab  Ignoto,  to  Mr.  Archball  Cam¬ 
bell. 

,  eg.  Original  Accompt  delivered  by  mee  (Sir  hVancis 
Blundell)  to  the  Lord  Marquis  of  Buckingham  fof  all 
fuch  Money,  as  1  have  received,  or  am  to  ,°ecee  v’e  for  his 
Lordilup-  ufe  111  Ireland  ;  fince  I  have  attended  his  Ma- 
jefty  for  his  Irilh  Afiayres,  until  this  12th  of  May  1622. 

411. 

T582. 

A  Book  in  fol.  confifting  all  of  Letters  and  Papers  of 
Sta'e,  Protocol  Is,  Originals,  and  Copies  ;  bound  up 
(not  without  fome  rdpeft  to  Order  of  Time)  in  the 
following  Manner. 

1.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  William  Pykerynge,  to 
the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council.  Paris  25  February ’1552. 

1. 

Part  of  this  Letter  is  in  Cyfer ;  but  being  interlined 
in  plain  Hand,  ’tis  legible  enough. 

2.  Copie  in  Common-hand,  of  the  following  Letter. 

3.  Original  Letter  of  Dr.  Nicholas  Wotton,  "*to 
Queen  Mary  i.  Soifions,  13  June  1554,  almoft  all  in 
Cyfer,  which  is  explained  by  the  preceding  Copy. 

4-  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Thomas  Wilks,  to 
Mr.  Francis  Walfingham.  Poifly,  12  February  157" 

1 1. 

3  5.  Original 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


139 


Num.  1582. 

5.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  the  Earl  of  Lei* 

cefter.  Lyons  10  September  1574.  13. 

6.  Original  Letter  of  Dr.  Valentyne  Dale,  to  Sir 
Thomas  Smythe,  and  Mr.  Francis  Walfingham,  her 
Majefties  Principal  Secretaries.  Paris  9  Auguft  1574. 

«5- 

7.  Original  Letter  of  Dr.  Valentyne  Dale  to  O.  Eli¬ 
zabeth.  Lions  8  Novembre  1574.  18. 

8.  Original  Letter  of  Dr.  Valentyne  Dale  to  Q.  Eli¬ 
zabeth.  Paris  28  February,  1575.  20. 

9.  Copie  of  a  Letter  of  Sir  Amyas  Powlet  to  Q.  Eli¬ 

zabeth  ;  lent  by  Sir  Amyas,  under  his  own  Seal  to  Mr. 
Secretary  Walfingham,  from  Paris.  22. 

10.  Original  Letter,  (partly  in  Cyfer)  of  Sir  Amias 
Powlet,  to  Mr.  Secretary  Walfingham,  from  Paris.  28. 

1 1.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Amyas  Powlet  to  Q.  Eliza¬ 
beth.  from  Paris  25  Marche  1 1:78.  34. 

12.  The  Commodities  and  Difcommodities  of  the 

Marriage  to  be  had,  betwene  A.  (Duke  of  Anjou  ?)  and 
E.  (Qu.  Elizabeth  ?).  36. 

13.  Whether  it  be  good  for  her  Majeftie  to  aftift  the 

Duke  d’Anjou  in  his  Enterprife  of  the  Lowe  Countryes  ? 
Nov.  1581.  by  SirFrancis  Walfingham  38. 

14.  Commifiionis  Tenor,  qua  R.  Elizabetha  conftitu- 
tit  D.  Francifcuin  Walfinghamum,  D.  Henricum  Cob- 
hamum  Equitem  Auratum,  et  Johannem  Sommer  unum 
ex  Clericis  Sigilli,  Commiffarios  ipfius,  ad  traclandum 
de  Matrimoniu  inter  fe  et  Ducem  Andium  ac  Alenconij. 

.  .  .  42‘ 

15.  Copie,  in  French,  of  the  Acknowledgement  made 

by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Burleigh,  of  his  having  received 
from  the  Duke  of  Anjou  two  Obligations  of  30,000k 
each  ;  for  6o,oool.  lent  to  that  Prince  by  Q.  Elizabeth, 
dat.  19  Decemb.  1581.  44. 

16.  Protocoll  of  a  Difcourfe  entituled,  a  Confvdera- 

tion  of  the  dyfeafed  State  of  the  Realme,  and  how  the 
fame  may  in  fome  Kynde  of  Sort  be  recovered,  temp.  R. 
Eliz.  46. 

1 7.  A  Paper  containing,  as  it  feemeth,  certain  Ex- 

traics  from  Letters,  touching  the  Earl  of  Leicefter,  and 

the  Lord  Willoughbie,  whole  Servant  was  killed  by  the 
Lord  Norris.  153. 

18.  Twelve  Original  Letters  of  Sir  Edward  Stafford 
Embaffador  in  France,  to  SirFrancis  Walfingham,  A.D. 

‘5!:6-  55 ■ 

N.B.  what  is  written  in  Cyfer  at  fol.  71.  &  71.  b. 
followeth  in  Common  Hand.  72. 

1 9.  a  Minute,  or  firft  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  her 

Majefty  to  Sir  Edward  Stafford.  80. 

20.  Firft  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Secretary 
Walfingham?  to  Sir  Edw.  Stafford.  30  Apr.  1588. 

88. 

21.  Firft  Draught  of  her  Majefties  Letter  to  Sir 

Edward  Stafford,  concerning  the  Motion  made  to  Her 
for  the  Repaver  of  the  French  Ambafadour  Monfr.  de 
Chateau-Neuf  into  France,  for  a  certen  tyme.  25  No¬ 
vember  1588.  '  90. 

22.  Firft  Draught  ofa  Letter  to  Sir  Edward  Stafford 

in  France.  28  January  1588.  9a. 

23.  Original  Letter  in  French,  of  Mr.  de  Buzennas 

to  Sir  Francis  Walfingham.  Aug.  15S6.  97. 

24.  Original  Letter  in  French,  of  the  French  am- 

baffador,  fubferibed  De  l’aubefpine  Chateau-neuf,  to 
Sir  Francis  Walfingham.  22  Febr.  1586.  99. 

25.  Original  Letter  in  French,  of  Monfr.  Brique- 

maulte,  to  SirFr.  Walfingham.  17  May  1586.  101. 

26.  Copie  of  a  French  Letter,  from  Mr.  Palavifino, 
to  Sir  Francis  Walfingham  ?  Francfort  3".  Julij  15S6. 

103. 

27.  Original  Letter  in  French,  of  Monfieur  de  Bu- 
zenueil,  to  Sir  Francis  Walfingham.  1  Aug.  104. 

28.  Original  Letter  in  French,  of  the  Due  de  Bo- 
villon,  to  Sir  Francis  Walfingham.  4  Aug.  1586.  106. 


Num.  1582. 

29.  Original  Letter  of  Walter  Williams,  to  SirFran¬ 
cis  Walfingham.  13  Aug.  1386.  xo8. 

30.  Original  Letter  in  French,  from  Francoys  de 

Civille,  to  Sir  Francis  Walfingham.  dat.  London.  17 
Auguft  1586.  109. 

31.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  de  Buzenueil  to  Sr.  Fran¬ 
cis  Walfingham.  22  Aug.  1586.  in  French.  no. 

32.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  de  Chateu-neuf  the  French 

ambafiador,  to  Sir  Francis  Walfingham.  8  Septr.  1586. 
in  French.  m. 

33.  Original  Letter  of  the  Great  King  Henry  iv.  of 
France  (while  King  of  Navarre)  to  Mr.  Secretary  Wal¬ 
fingham  ;  all  written  in  French,  with  his  own  hand. 

"4- 

34.  Three  Original  Letters,  with  a  feparate  Difcourfe 

of  Capt.  Mafino  del  Bene,  to  Sir  Francis  Walfingham. 
A.  D.  1586.  In  Italian.  115. 

35.  La  Requefte  de  fa  Majefte  (la  Reyne  Elizabeth 

d’Angleterre)  a  Monfieur  le  Due  Jean  Cafimir,  fur  les 
Moyens  de  prefter  Secourz  aux  Eftatz  dez  Pais  Bas.  8 
Mart.  1577.  128. 

This  is  figned  by  the  Hands  of  Fra.  Walfyngham, 
8c  Tho.  Wylfon. 

36.  Coppy  de  Lettre  de  Monfr.  le  Prince  d’Orange, 

efeript  a  Due  Cafimir  parmoy,  le  27  du  Juillet  1577. 
dJEnchuyfen.  130. 

37.  Copy  of  a  French  Letter  from  Duke  Cafimir,  to 

Sir  Francis  Walfingham.  24  Aug.  1 577.  132. 

38.  Copy  of  a  French  Letter  from  Duke  Cafimir,  to 

Sir  Philip  Sydney.  24  Aug.  1 577.  133. 

39.  Minutes  or  Notes,  of  fome  Memorial  to  be  laid 

before  the  Ele&or-Palatin,  againft  the  unufual  Proceed¬ 
ings  of  fome  troublefome,  raft),  &  indifereet  Foreign 
Proteftant  Divines  ;  who  had  condemned  the  Tenets  of 
other  Divines,  without  hearing  them  in  their  own  De¬ 
fence.  In  French,  drawn  up  by  Duke  Cafimir,  Auguft 
*577-  '  134- 

40.  Copie  of  a  Letter  in  French,  fent  to  the  Elector 

Palatin  at  Francfort,  6  Septr.  1577.  135. 

41.  Copie  of  a  Letter  in  French,  fent  by  O.  Elizabeth 

to  the  Duke  Cafimir,  31  Odtob.  1577.  137. 

The  Tranfcriber  hath  endeavoured  here,  to  imitate 
her  Majefties  hand ;  as  before  he  did  thufe  of  others. 

42.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Letter  ;  not  fo  con¬ 
trived  to  look  like  an  Original  as  the  former.  138. 

43.  Conventiones  inter  feriniflimam  Reginam  Eliza- 

betham,  et  illuftriffimum  Principem  D.  Johannem  Cafi- 
mirum,  Comitem  Palatinum  Rheni,  &c.  concernentes 
certam  Pecunife  Summam,  quam  diftus  Dux  petit  fibi 
mutuo  dari  a  difta  ferenifiima  Regina.  Initte  inter  di&um 
illuftriffimum  Daccrn,  et  Danielem  Rogerium,  dicks 
Seriniffimze  Nuncium  et  Oratorem,  fperiale  ad  illud 
Mandatum  habentem.  140. 

Thefe  Articles  are  fubferibed  by  the  Hand  of  Sir 
Fra-  Walfingham. 

44.  Copie  of  CL  Elizabeth’s  letter,  in  French,  to 

Duke  Cafimir.  8  April  1588.  142 

4,.  Conventiones  inter  fereniffiinam  Reginam,  &c.. 
(utfupra,  no.  43.)  fubferibed,  in  like  manner  by  Sir 
Fra.  Walfyngham  ;  and  thus  endorfed,  The  Second 
Articles  to  be  accorded,  in  Cafe  the  Firft  will  not  be 
received.  Wherein  the  Order  is  to  be  followed,  which 
is  preferibedin  the  Inftructions.  143. 

46.  An  Abftraift  of  the  Capitulation  betwene  the  Prince 

of  Conde,  and  Duke  Cafemir.  145. 

47.  Copie  of  the  Agreement  betwene  Thomas  Wylkes 

Efq;  (on  the  behalf  of  Q.  Elizabeth)  Frederick 
Count  Palatin.  11  April  1575.  in  Latin.  147. 

48.  Interprctatio  Gallica  Refponfi  dati  ab  illuftriflimo 

Ludovico  Ele&ore  Palatino,  Danieli  Rogerio,  4  Septem- 
bsr.  1577.  150. 

49.  Th’  Aunfwer  of  the  Elettour  Palatine  unto  Daniel 

Rogers 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


140 


Nufti.  1582. 

Rogers  Oration  ;  tranflated  out  of  the  Duche  into  Eng- 
lilh.  4  Septembr.  1577.  150. 

50  Exemplar  Literarum  D.  Petri  Dalbeni,  ad  Dnm 
Francifcum  Walfynghamum.  Franckenthalij  21  Decem- 
bris  1577.  152. 

51.  Coppie  (or  Protocol  ?)  of  my  (Daniel  Rogers?) 

French  Letter,  font  from  Franckfort  unto  Duke  Cafimir, 
the  24th  of  December  1577.  153. 

52.  Coppie  of  the  Arch-Duke  Matthias  his  Letter,  in 

High-Duch,  fent  by  me  (Daniel  ?  Rogers,)  unto  Duke 
Cafimir.  in  Marche  1578.  154. 

53.  Certain  Nots  to  be  confidered  uppon,  by  the 

Lordes  of  the  Pry  vie  Councell,  before  the  Departure  of 
the  Commiflioners  which  are  to  be  fent  into  Germany, 
unto  the  Dyett  appointed  at  Smalcalde  in  Thuringia,  the 
7th  ofJuneA.D.  1587.  156. 

54.  Inltruftions  which  were  drawen,  as  Wee  (the 

Commiflioners)  fhouldbe  fent  towards  Smalcalde.  A.D. 
1587.  15s. 

55.  Protocol  of  a  French  Letter,  from  Her  Majefty, 

to  the  Duke  of  Litleftein.  5  April  1588.  161. 

56.  The  Heads  of  a  League  to  bee  treated  between 

hir  Majeftie,  ar.d  fuche  Princes  as  make  Profefiion  of  the 
Gofpell.  163. 

57.  Exemplar  Literarum  Linguii  Germanic^  fcripta- 

rum  ab  illuftriflimo  Cafimiro  Duce,  ad  Archi-Ducem 
Matthiam.  20  April  1578.  165. 

58.  Coppie  ot  the  Initru&ions  which  the  Eftats  Gene¬ 

rali  delyvered  unto  Mr.  Orteli  their  Minifter  in  England, 
15  January  1587.  167. 

59.  Dilcourtcs  touching  the  Lowe  Countries.  Novem¬ 
ber  1589.  169. 

60.  Refponce  fur  l’Efcript  de  l’Ambafladeur  de  la 

Royne  d’Angleterre.  dat.  du  23  du  Janvier.  1574. 

Replique  faict  le  16  du  Febviier,  fur  ung  Refponce  mis 
en  Elcript  par  Autheur  incertain  et  delivre  le  7  du  mefme 
moys  par  Monfr.  Bofchott,  au  Secretaire  du  l’Ambafla- 
deur  d’Angletcrre,  faiftfur  l’Efcript  que  le  dit  Ambafla- 
deur  prefentoit  a  l'on  Excellence  le  23  de  Janvier.  1 73. 

Thefe  are  written  by  way  of  Apoftills,  and 
relate  to  the  Trade  of  the  Englifh  in  the  Nether¬ 
lands. 

61.  Difcours  veritable  fur  ce  qui  eft  advenu,  touchant 

le  Alborote,  et  Efmotion  des  Elpaingno'z  mutinez  es 
Ifles  de  Relande,  incontinent  apres  la  priufe  de  Zuericzee, 
le  2  de  Juillet  1 576.  177. 

62.  Coppie  ot  the  Queens  Letter  in  French,  written 

unto  rh’Eltats.  4  March  1578.  180. 

63.  Coppie  of  Her  Majefties  Letter,  in  French,  fent  to 
the  Prince  of  Orange.  4  March  1577.  (wherein  the 
Tranfcriber  hath  endeavoured  to  imitate  her  Hand) 

182. 

64.  Inftrumentum  Principis  Araufini  prtcftitum 

Bruxellis,  20  Januar.  1 578.  184. 

65.  Copie  d’uneLettrede  le  Prince  d’Aurenge,  efcripte 

le  21  de  Janvier  1578.  et  Envoye  par  le  Sieur  Daniel 
Rogers.  186. 

It  is  alfo  entituled  thus,  in  Englilh,  A  Coppie  of 
the  Prince  of  Aurengs  Letter  fent  by  me  unto  her  Majef- 
tie  at  my  firil  Retourne  out  of  Germany. 

By  this  Tranfcript,  both  the  Hands  ufed  by  Mr. 
Daniel  Rogers  (in  writing  Englifli,  or  Foreign  Langua¬ 
ges)  may  be  fixed.  Thus,  for  inftance,  it  may  appear 
that  many  of  the  Endorfements  above-mentioned,  were 
written  by  that  eminently  learned  Perfon. 

66.  Protocol  of  a  Paper  entituled.  What  Coorfe  were 

fitt  for  hir  Majeftie  to  hold,  in  mediating  the  Accord, 
betweene  the  Duke&  the  States.  88. 

67.  Certen  generail  Prr.pofitions  moll  probable  to  be 

aiaynteaned,  with  regard  to  the  Low'-Countries,  and  the 
Freedom  of  the  fame  ;  all  written  by  the  Hand  of  the 
Lord-Treafurer  Burleigh.  1 94. 

68.  Certayn  Difcourfes  which  the  Prince  of  Orenge 


Num.  1582. 

had  with  me  W.  Herlle,  at  foundry  Tymes,  touching  the 
Eftafeof  the  Lowe  Countryes,  and  of  the  Troubles  that 
did  impend  to  all  thofe  of  the  Religion,  unlefl’e  they  pro¬ 
vided  for  the  fame,  in  tyme.  1 96. 

This  was  prcfented  to  the  Lord-Treafurer  Burghley, 
as  it  feemeth. 

69.  Original  I.etter,  in  Italian,  of  Alexandra  della 

Torre,  to  Antonio  di  Fonti.  24  Mar.  >  5  S9.  208. 

70.  Letter  ofFriderick  11.  King  of  Denmark,  to  Julius 
Duke  of  Brunfwicke,  and  the  Landgrave  of  Hefle,  &c. 
tranflated  out  of  Dutche,  into  Latin.  4  July  A.D.  1 585. 

2  1  o. 

71.  Letter  of  William  Landgrave  of  Heffe,  to  the  Elec¬ 

tor  of  Brandenbourgh  ;  tranflated  out  ot  Dutch,  into 
Latin.  13  Aug.  A.D.  158  3.  214. 

72.  The  Effect  of  the  Letters  of  the  Kinge  of  Den- 
marke,  Duke  Julius  of  ErunTwicke,  William  Landgrave 
of  Hefle,  Ludowic  Duke  of  Winembtrg,  Duke  Otro  cf 
Brunfwicke,  Duke  Joachimus-C  irolus  Her  Majefties 
God-Sen;. e,  written  unto  her  Majeftie  O.  Elizabeth. 

2.8. 

73.  An  F.xtrafte  out  of  the  King  of  Denmarks  Latin 

I.etter  to  her  Majeftie,  towching  the  Leage.  1  2  Septem' 
ber  A.D.  157 7.  221. 

74.  Protocol  of  a  Letter  in  Spanifti,  from  Qu.  Eliza¬ 
beth?  to  the  Emperor  of  Morocco.  A.D.  60  ;  .  222. 

75.  Ordersance,  Munition,  and  llnbiliawents  ofWarr 

for  Land-Service  onely  :  de  i  e  ed  out  or  her  Majefties 
Store,  in  the  Expedition  to  Cadis,  Anno  1596.  224. 

v6.  Adveriifinenres  touching  the  Action  of  the  Englifh. 
from  Cafcaies  in  the  River  of  Lilboa,  the  5th  of  June 
1589.  '  328. 

77.  The  Articles  of  the  Peace  in  France,  faict  a  Paris 

le  24  d'Avril  1 576.  2  jo. 

78.  Occurrences  fent  out  of  France  from  mv  Lord 

Ambafladour,  the  icth  dt  19'h  of  Julie  1 C77.  24:. 

7,..  Memoire  de  l’Ordrequ’il  fumble  devoir  eftre  renu, 
au  Progres  de  cefte  Negotiation  de  Neuftar,  pour  la  con- 
duire  au  but  ou  on  pretend,  le  21  de  Juillet  1^77. 

244- 

80.  ADifcourfe,  in  French,  touching  the  Defigns  of 
the  King  of  Spain,  againft  France  and  England;  and  of 
the  means  to  be  ufed,  in  order  to  fruftrate  the  lame. 

245* 

8 1 .  Confideration  fur  les  Propos  et  Moyens  de  la  Paix. 

en  France.'  249. 

82.  Opiuioni  fopra  la  Difficult;!  del  Mariaggio  di  Ma¬ 

donna,  et  il  Signior  Principe  di  Navarra,  with  Anfwers 
to  the  feveral  Objections.  2^3. 

83.  Difcours  fur  l’Eftat  du  Roy  de  Navarre,  ct  de  ion 

Party  cn  France.  2  97. 

This  is  a  Tranfcript  of  the  following  Paper ;  ex¬ 
cepting  what  is  therein  written  in  Cyfer. 

84.  L’Eftat  du  Rov  dc  Navarre,  et  de  fon  Party  en 

France.  263. 

The  Quinteflence  cf  this  is  in  Cyfer;  which  per¬ 
haps  might  be  decyfored  without  much  trouble. 

85.  An  Italian  Difcour 

of  Europe,  imperfect  at  the  beginning.  263. 

86.  Original  (  ’agot ;  (in 

French)  who  owned  qu’il  avoit  uelibere  de  iuer  Ja  Royne. 

269. 

87.  Inftrnction  pour  le  Depute  a  co  iparo'ftre  aux 
F. flats  Generaux,  qui  fe  l'emennem  ?  a  B’oys,  an  Nom 
des  Eglefes  pretendueez  Refiormees  en  l’lfle  de  France. 


(Written  by  a  French  Hand).  27 1 .  b. 

88.  Eftat  de  la  Defj enfe  que  le  Roy  entant  .  .  .  par 

chacun  Moys  pour  l’Fntretenment  de  i’Armcc  de  !)aul- 
phine.  (Written  by  a  French  Hand)  279. 

89.  Forme  du  Payement  d’une  Companve  de  Cin- 

quante  Lances.  Written  by  alike  Hand.  284. 


93.  The  Articles  proposed  to  the  1  rtnch  King  by  the 
Deputies  for  the  Peace,  in  the  Name  of  Mc.nl; cur.  in 

French 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


141 


Num.  x  5  {1 2,  1583. 

.91.  Original  Letter,  in  French,  from  Monfr.  Villiers 
to  Sir  Francis  Walfingham ;  relating  his  Conference 
with  Bellieure.  9  June  1582.  302. 

92.  Copie  of  a  French  Letter  (written  by  a  French 

Hand)  from  Mary  Queen  of  Scotts  to  Monfr.  Mauvifiure. 
dat.  12  &  15  of  July  1583.  306. 

93.  The  Tranflation  of  Villiers  Letter  (abovemen* 

tioned  at  No.  90.)  307. 

94.  Six  French  Letters,  fent  by  Mary  Queen  of  Scotts 
to  Monfieur  Mauvifiure;  all  written  by  a  French  Hand., 


3M* 

95.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  Monfr.  de  Ghauteauneuf 

the  French  Ambaflador,  to  the  King  his  Mailer,  dat.  de 
Londres  ce  iyme  Janvier  1583.  324. 

96.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  fame,  to  Monfeig- 

neur.  27  Novembre  1583.  327. 

97.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  fame,  to  the  French 

King.  1 9  Decembre  1583.  329. 

98.  Double  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy,  a  la  Royne  d’Efcofle. 

Efeript  a  St.  Germain  en  L’aye  la  2ome  jour  de  De¬ 
cembre  1583.  332. 

90.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  Monfr.  de  Chateauneuf 
to  the  French  King.  1  Jan.  1584.  334. 

too.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  fame,  to  the  Queen- 
Mother  of  France.  x  Jan.  1584.  338. 

10 1.  Part  of  a  Copie  of  a  French  Letter,  from  the 

fame,  to  the  French  King.  (24  Jan.  1 584  ?)  339. 

The  conclufion  feemeth  to  be  found  at  348. 

1 02.  Protocol  of  another  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  the 

French  King.  15  Janvier  1584.  341. 

103.  Draught  of  another  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  the 

French  King.  343. 

104.  Draught  of  a  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  the  French 

Queen.  24  Janvier  1584.  346. 

105.  Draughts  of  three  Letters  of  the  fame,  to  the 

French  King.  i4Febvrier  1584,80:.  349. 

106.  Protocol  of  a  Letter  from  the  fame,  to  Moniig- 

neur  the  Due  de  Guife.  4  May  1584.  355. 

107.  Protocols  of  two  Letters  from  the  fame,  to  the 

French  king.  3  59, 

108.  Original?  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  Monfr.  1'Evef- 

que  St.  Andre.  363. 

109.  Copie  of  Three  French  Letters  from  Joan  Queen 

of  Navarre,  to  Mademoifelle  de  Bourbon  Sr.  Monpen- 
fier’s  daughter,  being  with  the  Palfgrave.  A.  D.  1571 
&  1572.  367. 

1 )  o.  Protocol  of  Ten  Letters  from  Mr.  de  Challeau- 
neuf  either  to  the  French  Queen,  or  to  the  Queen  of 
England.  369. 

111.  Draughts  of  Seven  other  Letters  or  Papers,  from 
the  fame  Monfieur  de  Chateu-neuf  (as  it  feemeth)  to  fome 
ol  the  Perfonages  abovementioned.  392. 


*583- 

Another  Volume  of  State-Papers  Sc  Letters,  Protocols, 
or  firft  rough  Draughts,  Authentic  Originals,  or 
Copies,  bound  up  together,  as  follovveth. 

1.  Mr.  Palmers  Anfwers  to  my  Queries,  about  the 

Valuation  of  Coines.  20  March  1630.  1. 

2.  Sir  Robert  Cotton’s  Opinion,  againfl  abafing  the 

Coine  of  England;  given  at  tha  Council-Table,  Sep¬ 
tember  1626.  . 

3.  Certaine  Generali  Rules,  collected,  concerning 

Money  &  Bullion  ;  out  of  the  late  Confutation  at  Court5, 
by  Sir  Robert  Cotton,  in  the  Prcfence  of  the  Kino-c  ?’ 
Sept.  1626.  6 

4.  Quellions  propounded  to  the  Merchants,  Mint- 

M  afters,  and  Goldl'miths,  concerninge  the  Alteration  of 
the  Silver  Moneys.  ^  b 

5.  The  State  of  Gold  Sc  Silver,  as  yt  is  at  this  prefent. 

1  September  1626,  by  Sir  Robert  Cotton.  §. 

6.  A  Paper  touching  the  Projedl  of  raifing  our  Coyne : 

by  Sir  Robert  Cotton  ?  '  ()> 

Cat,  Harl.  Vol.  If. 


Num.  155:3. 

__  7-  Ed.  Johhfon’s  Propofition,  :  of  the  Caufes  of 
Tranfportation  of  Bullion  and  Coyne,  with  the  Meanes 
of  Prevention.  '  I2> 

8.  Two  Copies  of  a  fmall  Trad  intituled  The 

Groundes  of  Exchandge.  j  j. 

9.  Ihe  Valuation  of  our  Coyne,  with  the  Dutch.  19. 

10.  Reafons  to  proove  that  the  intended  rayfinge  of 

Gold  &  Silver  Ouoines,  will  greatly  endainadge  all  the 
Subjects  of  this  Kingdome,  with  apparent  Lofle  to  his 
Majedie  likewife.  2c- 

1 1.  Reafons  why  the  Under-Valuation  of  our  Moneys 

caufeth  the  Tranfportation  thereof,  and  the  Decay  of 
Trade.  22- 

1  2.  Draught  of  Indrufrions  (perhaps  as  in  the  Name 
of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  and  in  fome  places 
amended  by  Mr.  Secretary  Conway)  relating  to  a  Mef- 
fage  to  be  delivered  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  concern¬ 
ing  the  horrid  bufinefs  of  Amboyna,  Sc  the  Recovery  of 
the  Palatinate.  2^_ 

13.  Draughts  of  divers  Letters  &  Papers;  written, 

haflily,  by  Sir  Edward  Conway,  in  13  Pages.  26. 

1 4.  Copie  of  Sir  Edward  Conway’s  Relation  of  the 

lad  Voiage  to  Cales.  ’  36. 

15.  Draught  of  the  Lord  Conway’s  Relation  concern¬ 

ing  the  prefent  State  of  things  ;  to  the  Lord-Ambafiador 
Carleton.  13  Septr.  1627.  40. 

16.  Draughts  of  divers  Letters  written  by  the  Lord 

Conway  to  K.  Charles  1.  A.  D.  1627.  45. 

1 7.  Advcrtifements  of  a  Loyall  Subjed,  to  His  Gra- 

tious  Soveraigne  K.  James  1.  Drawne  from  the  Obferva- 
tion  of  the  Peoples  Speaches.  gc. 

18.  Copie  of  Things  for  the  prefent  Confideration  of 

the  Council!;  with  a  Draught  of  a  Letter  by  the  Lord 
Conway.  62. 

19.  Things  for  prefent  deliberation  in  Councell.  66. 

20.  1  hings  to  bee  prefently  handled  in  Councell.  68. 

21.  Lids  of  the  antient,  and  alfo  of  the  newly-erec¬ 
ted  Patent-Officers  of  the  Navy,  &  their  Salaries.  70. 

22.  Memorandums  mod  nefecer  for  the  Safety  of  the 

Kingdome  of  Scotland  much  negleclit ;  written  by  a  Scots 
Perfon  of  Quality.  ,,j_ 

23.  The  Lid  of  the  Officers  of  theFleete,  A.  D.  1625. 

76. 

24.  Captain  Hugh  Bullock’s  Relation  ofthcFleete.78. 

25.  Original  Paper  wherein  Lodowick  Duke  of  Lenox 
&  Richmond,  Thomas  Earl  of  Arundall  Sc  Surrev,  with 
divers  others  cf  the  Nobility  l'ubfcribed  their  refpe&jve 
Sums  toward  the  Edablifhment  of  a  Coluny  of  Eno-lifh 
about  the  River  of  Amazons. 

26.  Nicholas  Leate’s  Advertifement  to  the  Duke  of 

Buckingham  Lord  High  Admiral,  concerning  Sir  John 
AYrcs-  .  82. 

27.  Lid  of  the  Perfons  of  Quality  of  both  Sexes,  who 
came  to  fpeak  with  the  Earl  of  Oxford  being  prifoner 
in  the  Tower  of  London. 

28.  Original  Paper  of  Advife,  from  George  Abbot 

Arch-bifhop  of  Canterbury,  to  Mr.  Secretary  .  • 

.  .  .  .  touching  one  Baxter,  who  was  an  Indrument 

to  Sir  James  Mac-connel,  in  the  intended  Divorce  of  Sir 
James  fp  in  his  Wife,  by  whom  he  had  5  Children,  in 
order  to  his  Marriage  with  the  Coumc.Te  of  Tyrone.  86. 

29.  Quc-dions  (as  it  feemeth)  propounded’  bv  .  . 

M  xwell  Lord  Nithifdaill,  a  Papid  ;  as  Tin  order  to  his 
being  indrucled  in  Sc  converted  to  the Protedant  Fail'll. 

87. 

3c.  SpeechtotheKing,againdTolerationofPapids.  88, 

I  think  elfewhere,  I  have  feen  this  to  be  a  Letter  -of 
George  Abbot  Arch-Bifhqp  of  Canterbury  to  K  James  1. 

31.  Project  for  raifmg  to  the  King  a  Standing  Army 

of  15000  Foot  Sc  5000  ilorfe.  pQ. 

32.  Neceffarie  Conliderations and  Queries  maturely  to 

b  •  adviftd  uppon,  before  wee  enter  into  an  Offer  live 
Warre.  94. 

O  0  33.  Memorialls 


I41 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1 583. 

33.  Memorialls  of  fuch  Heads  as  have  beene-  moved  to 
his  Hignes  and  the  Lords  of  the  Committee  for  Munitions. 
96. 

34.  Total  Sums  of  the  Warrants  part  to  the  Threa- 

forers  &  Secretaries  already  in  Propofition.  7  October 
A.  D.  1625.  98. 

35.  Propofal  for  making  Spanilh  &  French  Money 

current  in  England  ;  6c  for  redeeming  the  Englifh  Cap¬ 
tives  in  Algiers.  1 00. 

36.  A  Declaration  made  by  the  Kings  Majefty  K. 

Charles  1.  of  the  true  Caufes  of  the  late  affemblinge 
of  the  High  Court  of  Parliament,  of  the  manner  of  the 
Proceedings  therein,  and  of  the  Reafons  for  the  diffol- 
vinge  thereof.  101. 

37.  The  Spanifh  Laborinth ;  or,  a  true  Relation  of 

that  Narrative  made  by  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  his 
Grace  to  both  the  Houfes  of  Parliament  alTembled  £at 
Whitehall  the  24th  of  February  1623.  As  alfoe  all  the 
Supplements  and  Additi  ns  made  thereunto,  either  bv  the 
Prince  his  Highnefs  at  that  tyme,  or  my  Lord  duke  him- 
felfe  fithence  that  Meetinge,  upon  the  fame  occafion. 
Together  with  the  Letters  &  Dil'patches  mentioned  or 
referred  unto  in  this  Narrative.  107. 

38.  Proceedings  at  the  Council-  Table,  4  April  1628. 

with  Heads  of  what  was  then  &  there  fpoken  by  K. 
Charles  1 ,  &  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  149. 

39.  Project  of  an  Addrefs  of  both  Houfes  of  Parlia¬ 

ment  to  K  Charles  1  as  it  was  fent  up  by  the  Commons, 
and  apoflilled  by  the  Lords.  It  was  againft  the  Encreafe 
of  Popery  here.  1 31. 

40.  Letter  ofK.  James  i.to  the  Commons,  touching 

the  Union.  1  May  1604.  156. 

41.  Addrefs  ofthe Commons  HoufetoK.  James  1.  158. 

42.  Copie  of  a  French  Letter  from  Sir  lfaac  Wake  to 
the  King  of  Denmark,  dat.  1  Januar.  1627.  S.N.  1 63. 

43.  Sir  lfaac  Wake’s  Propofitions  for  the  King  of 

Denmarke,  to  the.  State  of  Venice.  165. 

44.  Copy  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  Robert  Anftruther, 

His  Majefties  Refident  at  Hamburgh,  to  the  Command¬ 
ers  of  the  Kings  Ships  in  the  River  of  Elbe.  30  June 
1626.  167, 

45.  Relation  of  the  Voiage  of  the  Kings  Ships  made  to 

guard  the  Haven  of  Hamburgh.  1  July  1626.  1 69. 

46.  Original  Letter  of  Monfr.  Palloyfeau  Governor 
of  Calais,  to  Mr.  Apfley,  Lieutenant  of  Dover-Caftle, 
about  Ships  of  Calais  detained  here,  See.  2  Janvier  1626. 

I7I- 

47.  Original  Letter  of  Monfr.  De  Poifloree  to  K.  James 

1.  touching  the  Affaires  of  Rochell  &  of  Bearne.  Writ¬ 
ten  from  Rochelle,  lpFebvrier  161  c.  173. 

48.  Occurrences  from  Paris,  in  French.  26  February 

1619-  175. 

49.  Two  Original  Letters  of  Monfr.  du  Noyer  to  Mr. 

Secretary  Naunton,  containing  an  Account  of  Occur¬ 
rences  in  France.  Paris,  A.  D.  1 6 1 9.  1 77. 

50.  Transition  of  a  Letter  from  the  States  General 

to  the  French  King.  6  May  1619.  181. 

5 1 .  Copie  of  a  Letter  containing  Advertifements  from 
France.  Paris,  5  June  1619. 

52.  Original  Letter  of  Henry  Due  de  Rohan,  perhaps 

.to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham,  in  French.  1 9  Juillet 
j6i9-  185. 

53.  Original  Letter  of  Monfr.  La  Ferte  to  the  Marquis 

af  Buckingham,  in  French.  29  Juillet  1619.  jg6. 

54.  Original  Letter  in  French,  from  certain  Rochel- 

lers,  to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  Portfmouth  1  Mav 
l622-  187. 

55.  Original  Letter,  in  French,  of  the  abovemen- 

Ck-ned  Due  de  Rohan  to  K.  James  1.  written  from  Mon- 
laubon,  28  de.Jeuillet  1622.  Igg 

56.  Original  Letter,  in  French,  of  the  Marechal  de 
Soubize,  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  19  Auguft 

190. 


Num.  1583. 

57-  Original  Memorial  of  the  Baron  de  Sance  Sc  the 
Sieur  De  Fos,  agents  of  Monfr.  de  Soubize,  in  French. 
29  March  1626.  192. 

58.  Lettera  del  Principe  de  Piemonti,  touching  the 

Queen  Mother,  &  the  Duke  d’Efpernon’s  taking  Arines. 
uMarzoi6i9.  194. 

59.  A  Propofal  for  ere&ing  a  Society  in  England,  to 

trade  in  the  Weft  Indies.  196. 

60.  Original  Letter  of  Emanuel  Duke  of  Savoy  to  the 
Duke  of  Buckingham,  in  French.  23  Auguft  1625.  198. 

61.  Four  Original  Letters  ofthe  Abbot  de  Scaglia,  to 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  as  it  leemeth,  A.  D.  1626. 
in  French.  200. 

62.  Original  Letter,  in  French,  of  C..  Baron  de  Dona, 

to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  Windfoor  7  Septembre 
1619.  21c. 

63.  Exfraict  des  Lettres  eferittes  a  fon  Excellence 
l’Eledteur  Palatine,  par  les  Eftats  de  Boheme,  &c.  A.D. 

1619.  212. 

64.  Original  Letter,  in  Latin,  from  Monfr.  Bildebel, 

to  Mr.  Secretary  Naunton.  Colonise  27  die  Martij  A.D. 
1629.  '214. 

65.  Copie  of  a  French  Letter  from  the  Moft  Chridian 

King,  to  the  Emperor?  7  Janvier.  1620.  216. 

66.  Advices  from  Prague  44  January  1620.  in  French. 

218. 

67.  Copie  of  a  Letter  of  Frideric  Elc&cr-Palatine,  &c. 

toK.  James  1.  his  father  in  law  ;  in  French.  Wolfein- 
buttell,  3 1  Janvier  1621.  219. 

68.  Original  Letter  of  Monfr.  de  Pleffen,  to  Achatius 

Bourgrave  de  Dona  Ambaffador  of  ihe  King  of  Bohemia 
at  the  Court  of  England,  in  French.  Heidelberg  19 
Jan.  1620.  221. 

69.  Advices  from  Heidelberg,  in  French.  4  Fevrier 

1620.  223. 

70.  Extraift  d’une  Lettre  d’lntelligence  eferite  d’Al- 

lemagnc,  20  Avril  1620.  224. 

71.  Original  Letter,  in  latin,  of  Richard  Blond  a 
Jefuit  in  England,  to  Pere  Saguiran  a  Jefuit  at  Paris ; 
touching  the  French  match.  Lo'ndini2oJulij  1624.  227. 

72.  1  hree  Latin  Letters  of  K.  James  1.  to  Pope  Urban 
vi  11.  Dated  the  26.  28.  &  30  of  September  1624.  all 
written  by  the  fame  Hand.  The  firft  of  thefe  is  fub- 
feribed  by  Him  ;  and  was  fealed  with  his  Signet.  The 
two  others  are  not  fubferibed,  nor  were  fealed  up.  230. 

73.  Two  Original  Letters,  in  French,  of  William 

.  .  .  .  Arch-Bifhop  of  Ambrun,  to  the  Duke  of 

Buckingham,  A.  D.  1624.  236. 

74.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  eferitte  de  Rome  par  le  Pere  de 

Berulle,  a  Monfeigneur  de  la  Villeauxchers,  le  3  Decern- 
bre  1624.  240. 

75.  Original  Letter,  in  French,  of  the  abovemcn- 

tioned  Archbifhop  of  Ambrun,  to  the  Duke  of  Bucking¬ 
ham,  from  Paris  25  Janvier  1625.  242. 

76.  Original  Letter  of  Marie  Queen  Mother  of  France, 

to  K.  Charles  1.  all  written  with  her  own  hand:  from 
Amiens,  16  June  1625,  244. 

77.  Original  I.etter  of  the  abovefaid  Arch-Bifhop  of 

Ambrun,  to  King  Charles  1.  written  from  Paris,  25  Jan¬ 
vier  1625.  in  French.  246. 

78.  La  Copie  de  la  Remonftrance  de  I’Ambaffadeur 

de  France,  du  3me  de  Novembre  16 25.  248. 

79.  Extratt  of  Monlieur  Augieres  Letter  of  Advice 

from  Paris,  13  November  1625.  25°. 

80.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  du  Charles  1 .  Roy  de  la  Grande 

Bretagne,  au  Due  de  Chevreufe,  20  Nov.  1625.  252. 

81.  Copie  of  a  Letter,  in  French,  from  K.  Charles  1. 

to  fome  Nobleman  of  France.  24  March  1626.  254. 

82.  Original  Letter  ofMarie  Queen-Mother  of  France, 

to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  ;  all  written  by  her  own 
Hand.  Paris  24th  March,  1626.  2 36. 

83.  TheSecondDemandsoftheFrench  Ambaffador. 2 5 7. 

84.  Reponfc  aux  Demandes  que  fait  le  Marquis  de 

Blain* 


Bibliothecae  Harleiamse- 


4! 


Num.  1 58  3. 

BlaiAville  Ambaffadeur  du  Roy  tres-C.hreftian,  pres 
de  fa  Maje!*e  de  la  Grande  Bretagne.  259. 

8  Copie  of  the  Letter  lent  by  the  Oueen  Mother  of 
France  to  K.  Charles  1.  abovementioned  at  n©  76.  261. 

8a.  Copie  of  the  (Latin)  Brief  fent  by  Pope  Urban 
viii.  to  K.  James  1.  262. 

87.  Copie  of  the  (Latin)  Brief  fent  by  the  fame  Pope, 

to  Prince  Charles.  263. 

88.  Copie  of  the  French  Letter,  written  by  K.  James  1. 

to  Madame,  22  December.  264. 

89.  Draught  of  a  Difpatch  for  France  ;  corre&ed  by 

Mr.  Secretary  Conwey.  266. 

90.  Articles  of  Mariage  betwcene  the  molt  excellent 

Prince  of  Wales  Charles  ;  and  Donna  Maria  the  Infanta 
of  Spayne  ;  with  a  Lift  of  the  Lords  of  the  Council  who 
fwore  to  oblerve  the  fame.  20  July  '623.  268. 

91.  Original  Letter  ?  of  Sir  Humfrey  May,  about  the 

Spanifli  Match.  31  July  1623.  ’  272. 

92.  Lift  of  the  Jewelis  to  be  fent  to  Spayne.  274. 

93.  The  Copie  of  a  Letter  fent  by  confent  of  the 
Prince  of  Grear-Britaine,  in  anfweare  of  another  for¬ 
merly  fent  to  him  from  His  Catholicke  Majeftie. 

.76. 

94.  Advertifements  from.  Spaine.  280. 

9  5.  Fragment  of  a  Draught  for  an  Anfvver  of  Prince 

Charles  to  the  K.  of  Spain  ( perhaps  by  the  Duke  of 
Buckingham)  281. 

96.  The  King  of  Spaines  Anfwer  to  aProvifion  made 

by  Sir  Walter  Alton,  from  his  Majefty  of  Great  Britain: 
in  Spanifh.  _  2S3. 

97.  Copie  of  the  Proportions  made  by  the  Spanifh 

Ambaffadors ;  for  the  Kings  Pardon  to  all  his  Roman 
Catholic  Subjects  :  in  Spanifli.  2  85. 

98.  A  Copie  of  the  Provifions  of  Grace  agreed  upon 

for  the  Romaine  Catholiques  his  Majefties  Subjects : 
figned  at  Saliibury  by  Edward  Lord  Conwey  Principal 
Secretary  of  State  ^Auguft  1623.  _  287. 

99.  Reafons  whereby  the  Catholique  Clergie  of  En¬ 

gland  hath  beene  moued,  to  requefl  mod  humbly  of  the 
Sea  Apoftolique,  his  Difpenfation  in  the  Mariage  be- 
twecne  the  molt  high  and  noble  Charles  Prince  of 
Wales,  and  Ladie  Marie  Infanta  of  Spaine.  291. 

100.  An  Addition  unto  the  Reafons  of  the  Clergie  of 

England  for  the  Marriage,  wherein  it  is  proved,  that 
they  are  blinded  with  their  owne  malice,  who  goe  a  'out 
to  derogate  from  the  faith  &  performance  of  our  Kings 
promifes  made  about  this  match,  and  fo  by  that  fubtilitie 
would  hinder  the  Difpenfation.  293. 

lor.  Another  Paper  about  the  Difpenfation.  297. 

102.  Three  Original  Letters,  in  French,  of  Don 

Carlos  Colonna  one  of  the  Spanifh  ambaffadors  ;  per¬ 
haps  to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham,  or  to  Mr.  Secre¬ 
tary  Conwey.  A.  D.  1622.  299. 

103.  Original  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  K.  James  r.  in 

French.  8  Novembre  1622.  305. 

104.  Three  other  Original  Letters  of  the  fame  Don 

Carlos.  A.D-  1622.  &  1623.  307. 

105.  Refponfe  de  Secretaire  Conway  ii  Don  Carlos 

de  Colonna.  29  Aug  1623.  313. 

106.  Tranflate  of  Mr.  Secretary  Conwey’s  Letter  to 

the  Marquis  of  Injofa.  29  Auguft,  1623.  315. 

107.  Original  Letter,  in  Spanifh,  of  Dan  Balthal'ar 

de  Zunega,  perhaps  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  Ma¬ 
drid,  20  Septr.  317. 

108.  Copy  of  the  Marquis  Ynojofaes  Letter  to  the 

King  of  Spaine.  1  2  Auguft  1623.  S.  N.  319. 

109.  Copy  of  the  Marquis  Ynojofas  and  Don  Car¬ 
los  Letter  to  the  King  of  Spaine.  23  Auguft  1623. 

321. 

1 10.  Original  Letter  of  the  Marquis  Ynojofa,  perhaps 

to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  A.  D.  1623.  323. 

lit.  Original  Letter  rof  the  Marquis  la  Ynojofa,  to 

7 


Num.  1583,  1584. 


the  Duke  of  Buckinghatnin :  Spanifli.  16  Aug.  1623* 

235-  ' 

1 1 2.  Refpuefta  del  Rey  Catolico  a  lo  propofito  enlo 

del  Palatinato,  al  6  Dize  1623,  del  30  Memorial' de  lo§ 
Embaxadores  de  Ynglaterra.  ,  327- . 

1 13.  Original  Representation,  in  French,  of  the  Spa¬ 

nifli  Ambaffadors,  to  K.  James  1 .  iigaihff  the  Duke  of 
Buckingham.  9  March  1624.  329-. 

1 14.  Copie  of  a  Spanifli  Letter  of  Ciri^a  the  King  of 

Spain’s  Secretary ;  perhaps,  to  Sir  Waiter  Afton.  2 6. 
June  1621.  •  -  •33,-J 

115.  Original  Letter,  in  Spanifli,  of. PYay  DiegcFde 

la  Fuente  ;  dated  Madrid  17  Febr.  162K  333- 

116.  Extract  of  a  Letter  from  thffc|d£.  Maeftre  a t 

Rome,  to  the  Spanifli  Ambaffador  in  pngland,  12  of 
June  1621.  pSTir* 

117.  Original  Letter,  in  Spanifli,  of  Fftry  Diigo  df 

la  Fuente,  otherwife  called  Father  MaftfpV  perhaps  to 
the  Spanifh  Ambaffador  in  England  :  dared  Roma,  1 9 
Julio  1 622.  337- 

118.  Tranflaiion  of  a  Letter  from  the  Cpnnt  of  Gbn- 

domar  to  K.  James  1 :  dated  from  Madiifl-the  6th  of 
February  1619.  \  339- 

119.  Original  Letter  in  Spanifli,  of  the  Conde  dc.Gitfi; 
domar :  written  in  London  the  20th  of  April*  r6*2o, 

V-  34 1- 

1 20.  Four  other  Original  Letters  of  the  fagfe  xo  the 

Marquis  of  Buckingham,  and  others  ;  in  Sphmfli  or 
French.  A.D.  16  0.  1622.  343- 

1 21.  Original  Letter,  in  Spanifli,  of  Meddaque  de 

Alburquerque.  17  Julio  1622.  ,  3r51' 

122.  The  Coppie  for  rather  Draught)  of  a  Letter;  front 

the  Duke  of  Buckingham  (all  written  with  his  own  ira'hdj 
to  Count  Gunddniar  (as  I  take  it).  3  53-  ‘ 

1*3.  Copie  de  la  Lettre  du  Roy  Jaques  1.  au  Comti 
d’Glivares.  357- 

124.  Oiiginal  Letter  in  Spanifli,  of  the  Conde  de 
Olivares,  to  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham.  22  Dec. 
1622.  359- 

i2s.  Another  original  Letter  of  the  Conde  de  Olivares, 
to  the  fame.  2 2  Sept.  1 6 2  2  in  Spanifh.  361. 

126.  Extract  of  a  Letter  of  Advice,  from  Madrid. 

363- 

1 27.  A  Projedt  for  War  with  Spaine.  ",64. 

128.  Original  Letter,  in  French,  of  Jaques  Bruneau 
the  Spanifh  Minifter  here,  to  K  Charles  1 .  upon  the 
detaining  fo  me  Ships  :  dated,  Chelfi,  7de7brei625. 

368. 

1  29.  aTraft  concerning  the  State  of  the  United  Pro¬ 
vinces.  37°- 

130.  Memoria  de  las  Naves  prefas  de  dos  mefes  a 
fta  parte  en  el  Rey° de  Inglaterra.  377- 

i;i.  Original  Letter,  in  Spanifli,  of  Edward  Pafton 
to  D011  Diego  de  Carcamo  ;  at  the  Cburt  of  Madrid. 

378. 

132.  Two  original  Letters  of  the  States  General  to 
the  Duke  of  Buckingham  ;  in  French.  380. 

13:5.  Copie  de  la  Kefponce  de  Meflieurs  le  E flats 
Generaux  a  laPropofition  deMonfr  de  Boifflfey  du  29ms 
de  Mars  1619.  ,  384- 

1  34.  Draught  of  a  Pe'ition  6f  Ellen  Manninge  Wi¬ 
dow  ;  to  the  Lord-Keeper  Williams.  388. 

1584. 

Another  Volume  of  State-Papers,  moflly  Draughts 
or  Copies,  bound  up  in  the  following  order  J  viz. 

1.  Inftmaitms  for  Dudley  C-arleton  Kfq  ;  Agent  of 
K.  Charles  i.  with  the  States  Generali  of  the  United 
Provinces  :  for  the  reducement  of  the  4  Lnglifh  Re¬ 
giments  there,  to  one.  3  July  1628. 

2.  The  State  of  the  Reducement  of  the  above  men¬ 

tioned 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


tioned  Troopes  into  one  Regiment,  as  the  fame  is  or¬ 
dered  to  be  i'ett  dowhe  by  His  Majeftie.  3. 

3.  Inflrudions  for  our  Cofen  the  Earle  of  Rutland 

now  to  ufe  hunfelf  for  the  execution  of  Our  Com  million 
given  to  him  tor  our  Service,  in  goeing  to  the  Coaft  of 
Spaine,  and  bringing  home  our  dear  Sonne  the  Prince, 
and  the  Infanta  Donna  Maria  of  Spaine.  4. 

NB.  The  King  &  His  Minifters  were  at  that  time  fo 
fure  o!  this  Marriage,  that  in  the  Preamble  to  thefe 
Inflrudions,  it  is  Lid  to  be  blelfed  and  made  in 
heaven. 

4.  Heads  of  the  Orders  to  be  obferved  by  the  Com¬ 

manders  and  aH-o:::  ,r  Perf  ms  of  the  Fleete  under  the 
ciiardge  &  conduct  of  the  Earle  of  Rutland  His  Ma- 
jefties  Admirall  to  the  Coaft  of  Spaine  ;  the  .  .  of  May 
1623.  .  7. 

5.  Inflrudions  for  James  Hay  Earl  of  Carlifle,  and 

Henry  Rich  Lord  Kenfington,  AmbafTadors  extraordi¬ 
nary  from  K.  James  1.  to  the  French  King.  The  firft 
Draught.  10. 

6.  Firft  Draught  of  the  Inflrudions  of  King  Charles  1. 

for  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  failing  with  a  Fleet  to  make 
War  upon  Spain  A.  I).  1625.  17 . 

7.  Inflrudions  for  Sir  Frances  Annefley  Kt.Sc  Baronet, 

Vice-Threaforer  k  Receaver-Generall  of  all  our  Rents, 
Revenues,  Compofition,  &  Cafualties,  of  what  kind 
foever,  within  our  Realme  of  Ireland.  Signed  and  at- 
tefted,  as  fit t  for  His  Majefties  Service,  by  Sir  James  Ley 
then  Lord  Treafurer,  and  afterwards  Earl  of  Marlbo¬ 
rough.  20  July  1626.  20. 

8.  Copie  of  certain  In  ftrudions  of  King  Charles  1. 

relating  to  Sweden.  17  October  1625.  26. 

9.  Inflrudions  of  K.  Charles  1.  for  the  Duke  of  Buck¬ 
ingham,  k  Henry  Rich  Earl  of  Holland  AmbafTadors 
extraordinary  to  the  King  of  Denmark.  17  Odober 

I62J.  zg. 

10.  Firft  Draught  of  the  Inflrudions  ofK.  Charles  1. 

for  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  and  the  Earle  of  Holland, 
appointed  to  be  his  AmbafTadors  extraordinary  into  the 
Lowe-Countries,  A.  D.  as  drawn  up  by  the  Lord 
Conwey.  31. 

1 1 .  Firft  Draught  of  the  Inflrudions  of  K.  Charles  1 . 
prepared  provifionally  by  the  Lord  Conwey  for  the 
above-mentioned  Duke  k  Earl,  appointed  AmbafTadors 
extraordinary  in  France;  though  the  Duke  went  not. 

39- 

12.  Second  Draught  of  the  Inflrudions  mentioned 

above  at  No.  10.  51. 

13.  Copie  of  the  Inflrudions  of  K.  Charles  1.  to 

. Ambaflador  in  France. 

14.  Inflrudions  for  the  Earle  of  Holland  andSirDud- 
ley  Carleton,  b;s  Majefly’s  AmbafTadors  extraordinary 
to  the  molt  Chriftian  King.  29  December  1625.63. 

t  ;.  Draught  of  the  fame  Inflrudions :  dated  30  De¬ 
cember  1625.  gg. 

16.  The  Lord  Conweys  firft  Draught  of  the  fame 
Inflrudions  ;  perhaps  larger  than  the  others.  30  De¬ 
cember,  1625. 

ij.  Copie  of  the  Inflrudions  given  by  K. Charles  1.  to 
Dodnvire  Cotton  Efq;  Gentleman  of  His  Privie  Chamber 
in  Ordinary,  and  Ambaflador  to  the  King  of  Perfia. 
April  1626.  s-. 

18.  Draught  of  the  fame  Inflrudions.  87. 

19.  Original  Inflrudions  of  King  Charles  1.  for  Sir 

Edward  Barret  Kt.  Ambaflador-Leger  to  the  moft  Chrif- 
tian  King.  dat.  30  April  1626.  Signed  at  the  top  by 
the  King,  and  at  the  bottom  by  the  Lord  Conwey  Prin¬ 
cipal  Secrctaiy  of  State.  ^  gy# 

20.  C-opie  of  the  fame  Inflrudions.  93. 

2 1 .  Inflrudions  of  King  Charles  r .  to  Sir  Edward 
Barrett,  as  pafling  by  the  Hague  to  the  King  of  Denmark. 

98. 


22.  Copie  of  the  fame  Inflrudions.  [9,. 

23.  Part  of  the  fame  Inflrudions,  fuperferibed  bv 

K.  Charles  1.  I0g_ 

24.  Draught  of  the  fame,  indorfed  thus,  “  Part  of 

Mr.  Dickenfon  s  Inflrudions,  when  he  was  imployed  to 
the  States.”  1 10> 

25.  Branches  of  Inflrudions,  relating  to  Denmark. 

112. 

26.  Copie  of  the  inflrudions  given  by  the  Lord  Con¬ 

wey  one  of  His  Majefties  Principall  Secretaries  of  State, 
by  Order  from  His  Majefty ;  to  Mr.  Hawkins,  now 
emploied  in  Elis  Majefties  Service  in  the  Frenche  Courte. 
13  July  1626.  II4. 

27.  Inflrudions  for  the  Lord  Willoughby,  appoint¬ 
ed  to  make  Warre  upon  Spain.  30  Aug.  1626. 

28.  Inflrudions  of  K.  Charles  1.  to  Francis  Gour* 

don  Efq ;  employed  as  Agent  to  the  King  of  Poland, 
the  Eledor  of  Brandenburg,  the  Senate  of  Dantzicke, 
and  Towne  of  Elbing.  2 1  September  1626.  1 1 8.  ’ 

29.  Copie  of  the  Inflrudions  of  K.  Charles  1.  to  Sir 

Charles  Morgan  Kt.  appointed  Colonel- General  of  the 
Forces  going  to  the  afliftance  of  the  King  of  Denmark. 
23  November  1626.  ,  2o< 

30.  Another  Dranght  of  Inflrudions  for  the  fame  Sir 

Charles  Morgan.  ,  2  2> 

3 1 .  An  Addition  to  Sir  Charles  Morgan's  Inflrudions, 

for  the  carrying  of  a  Jewell  to  the  King  of  Denmarke.’ 
Signed  by  His  Majeftie.  I24, 

32.  Copie  of  the  Inflrudions  given  to  Dudley  Carle- 
ton  Efq;  attending  His  Majefties  Affairs  in  the  United 
Provinces,  and  Philip  Calendrini.  23  November 
1626. 

.  33-  Draught  of  Inflrudions  for  Captain  John  Har- 
rifon.  His  Majefties  Agent,  to  the  Kings  States,  and 
Governours  of  Barbary.  6  December  1626.  128. 

34-  The  Lord  Conwey’s  Draught  of  the  fecond  In- 
Itrudions  for  Sir  Edward  Barrett  Ambaflador  in  France. 
27  December  2626.  j 

35.  Copie  of  the  fame  Inflrudions.  j,/ 

36.  Inflrudions  for  Captain  Thomas  Penninton.  s  2 

March  1626.  137. 

37.  Copie  of  the  Inflrudions  for  the  Captains  that  are 

to  condud  the  3000  Men  to  be  leavyed  for  the  Service  of 
his  Majefty  in  Afliftance  of  the  King  of  Denmark.  3 
April  1627.  138. 

38.  Copie  of  the  Inflrudions  for  Sir  Robert  Anftru- 

ther  Kt.  Ambaflador  to  the  Emperor  k  Princes  of 
Germanie,  att  the  intended  Dietc  att  Nuremberg.  1 8 
April  1627.  *  14q. 

39.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Inflrudions.  142. 

40.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  ....  to  Mr.  Clarke. 

26  July  1627.  I44>‘ 

41.  Copie  of  the  Inflrudions  for  George  Duke  of 
Buckingham  Highe  Admirall  of  England,  k  Commander 
in  Chief  of  the  Forces  to  be  employed  in  this  Expedition. 

.  .  June  1627.  ,4g_ 

42.  Draught  of  the  Inflrudions  for  Mr.  Montague. 

1 3  July  1627.  153. 

43.  Copie  of  the  Inflrudions  for  Edward  Clarke  Efq; 
employed  to  the  King  of  Denmarke.  27  July  1627. 

156. 

44.  Copie  of  the  Inflrudions  for  Henry  Rich  Earle 
of  Holland,  appointed  to  have  the  chiefe  Command  k 
Charge  of  carrying  over  the  Supplies  now  Tent  by  the 
King  tohis  Army  in  the  Ifle  of  Rhc.  6  Odober  1627. 

158. 

45.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Inflrudions.  161. 

46.  Draught  of  Inflrudions  for  the  Lord  Wilmott  to 

go  to  the  Ifle  of  Rhe.  Odober  1627.  jg^. 

47.  Lord  Conwey’s  Draught  of  Inflrudions  for  the 

Earl  of  Holland,  to  go  to  the  Ifle  of  Rh  :.  jg^ 

8  48.  Draught 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


*45 


Num.  1584,  1585. 

48.  Draught  of  Inftruttions  for  Sir  Peter  Wyche  Kt. 

appointed  to  be  the  Kings  Ambafladour-Refident,  with 
the  Grand  Signior.  18  November  1627.  169. 

49.  Draught  of  Inftruttions  for  John  Dolbier  Efq  ; 

Gentleman  of  the  Kings  Privie  Chamber,  employed  in 
the  Lowe-Countries.  .  .  Februane  1627.  172. 

50.  Inftruttions  for  James  Hay  Earl  of  Carlifle.  10 

March  1627.  173. 

5 1 .  Copie  of  the  Inftruttions  for  Edward  Clerke  Efq ; 

attending  His  Majeflie  in  his  Bedchamber,  &  imployed 
His  Majcllies  Agent  to  the  To wne  ofRochell,  10  March 
1627.  175. 

52.  Copie  of  the  Inftruttions  to  James  Earl  of  Car¬ 

lifle,  &  Dudley  Lord  Carleton,  Ambaffadors  Extraordi¬ 
nary  to  the  States  General.  14  March  1627.  178. 

5^.  Draught  of  the  fame  Inftruttions.  179. 

54.  Additional  Inftruttions.  180. 

55.  In  (fractions  for  Mr.  Secretary  Coke,  fent  down 

to  Portfmouth.  19  May  628.  183. 

56.  Inftruttions  for  the  Earl  of  Bedford,  Lieutenant 

of  the  Coun'y  of  Devon,  employed  by  his  Majeltie,  to  the 
Porte  of  Plymouth.  20  May  1628.  185. 

57.  Second  Draught  of  Inftruttions  j  relating  to 

France.  187. 

58.  The  Lord  Conweys  Firft  Draught  of  the  fame 

Inftruttions.  189. 

c,  9.  Inftruttions  for  Sir  Edward  Barrett,  Ambaflador 
to  the  Molt  Chriftian  Kinge.  19. 

60.  Inftruttions  relating  to  the  Grifons.  197. 

6 1 .  Draught  of  Inftruttions  for  Sir  Edward  Barrett, 

Ambaflador  in  France.  198. 

62.  Draught  of  Inftruttions  for  Capt  Peter  Belt  &  Sir 

William  Sellinger  aboard  the  two  G<>od  Shippes  called 
the  Garland  &  Bonaventure ;  how  they  Avail  carry  them- 
felves  in  this  their  intended  Voyage  to  the  Harbour  of 
Aberdey  in  Scotland.  203. 

6,.  A  Tratt  (endamaged  by  moifture-'  being  the 
Life  and  Death  of  our  late  Noble  Prince  Henry,  by  ir 
Charles  Cornwallis.  2  05. 

64.  A  Tratt  written  by  a  modern  hand,  and  thus 
entituled,  A  true  and  juft  Relation  of  Majoi -General 
Sir  Thomas  Morgans  Progrefs  in  France  &  Flanders, 
with  the  Six  Thoufand  Englilh,  in  the  V’eares  1657.  & 
1658.  230. 

Incipit  Catalogus  Codd.  MSS.  quns  illuftriflimo  Do¬ 
mino  meo  D.D.  Henricvs  Worsley,  Armiger. 

1585. 

Codex  membranaceus,  et  Medicinalis,  in  4to.  in  quo 
continentur, 

1.  Prefatiuncula  de,  hoc  in  Codice,  contentis.  i.b. 

2.  Capitula  Libri  Platonis  Apulienfis,  de  Medicina 

Herbatica.  ibid. 

3.  Defignatio  Dierum  iEgyptiacorum  per  fingulos 

Anni  menfes.  6.  b. 

4.  De  Quatuor  Humoribus  ex  quibus  conftat  hu- 

manum  Corpus.  ibid. 

5.  Effigies  Medici,  fimul  atq;  Medicina;  Studiofi,  qum 

cum  fequentibus  circa  tempora  Regis  noftri  Henrici  H. 
calamo  videntur  delineate.  7.  b. 

6.  Modus  curandi  diverfos,  varijs  laborantes  morbis 

Pitturis  repraefentatus.  8. 

7.  Epiftola  Ypochratis  ad  Mecenatem  fuum,  de  Cor¬ 
pora  curando.  10. 

8. - Imago  Medici  Terram  conjurantis  (prout  ifta  fere- 

bant  fecula)  affabre  reprasfentata.  1 2.  b. 

9.  Formula  Conjurationis  prEeditt®.  ex  Verfibus  forte 

Germanicis  ft  non  potius  Anglo-Saxonicis,  Latins  red- 
dita.  ibid. 

10.  Imago  Medici  conjurantis  Herbas.  13. 

11.  Formula  Conjurationis.  13.  b. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1585 — 158*7. 

Quod  Gentes  Teutonics  Incantationibus  fUerint  de* 
ditiffim®,  nemo,  ut  opinor,  ibit  inficias.  De  hue  autem 
re,  inter  alios,  confulenduS  Burchardus  Epifcopus  W01- 
macienfis,  Libro  x.  Cap.  20.  Ouod  non  liceat  cum  Incan^ 
tationibus  Ilerbarum  Collettionem  fieri ;  et  Cap.  43; 
I)e  cxecrabilibus  Remedijs  qu®  Medici,  fuis  in  pr®cail- 
tationibus,  faciunt,  &c. 

12.  Epiftola  ( Commentitia,  perinde  ac  fuperior)  Am 

tonimufi  ad  Mecenatem  Agrippam  j  unit  cum  Trattatulo 
de  vertutibus  Herb®  Vetonic®.  13.  b. 

Coloribus  repr®'entatur  Herba  Betonica.  fol.  14. 
quin  et  fol.  16.  cernitur  Juvenis  t  cujus  brachium  mordit 
Serpens)  contra  Canem  rabidum  gladio  pugnans  j 
utriufq  ;  enimbeftio!®  morfum  fanat  Betonica.  Habetuf 
etiam  fupputatio  Ponderum  Medicinalium. 

13.  Liber  Platonis  Apolienfis  de  virtutibus  omnium 

Herbarum,  cum  Epiftola  ad  Gives'  furs.  16.  b. 

Dantur  Imagines  Herbarum,  i  c  minum,  &c.  vividis 
coloribus  (et  pro  ilto  feculo)  artificial  fatis  effigiat®, 

14.  Capitula  Libri  Medicinart/m  Placidi  Attoris  ex 

Auimalibus,  Fecoribus,  Beftijfq  ;  et  Avibus.  59. 

15.  Liber  huic  Placido  Attori  aferiptus,  animaliumq  ; 

Figuris  ornatus.  62.  b. 

16.  Liber  Diofcoridis  ffidei  confimilis  cum  prioribus) 

de  Herbis  Femiiiinis.  pro  ufu  Medicin®.  79. 

Deficiunt  hujufee  Trattatus  plurima  folia,  una  cum 
Herbarum  Figuris. 

17.  Epyftola  Apollinis  de  Eniplaftro  Podagrico,  fatis 

admirabili  j  cuidam  mifla  Podagrico,  336.  b 

1  586. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to,  Italice  feriptus  ;  cui  Titulus, 

Trattatodi  Trigonometria,  e  Geometria  prattica. 

Tutto  quefto  Trattato  e  divifoin  tre  Libri,  de  quail, 
il  Primo  ferve  come  d’  Introduttione  agli  altriDue  ;  con- 
tenendo  varie  Dcfinitioni  e  Principij  de  Matematica,  con 
diverfe  prattiche  o  fiano  Operationi  di  Compaflo  ;  cofe 
tutte  neceflarie  alia  Trigonometria  e  Geometria  prattica 
principahnente  per  quelli  che  non  hanno  alcuna  Cogni- 
tione  de  gli  Elementi  d’Luclide.  II  fecondo  Libro  tratta 
della  Trigonometria  piana  ;  et  il  J  erzo  della  Geometria. 
Ciafcun  Libro  poi  fi  divide  in  varij  Membri,  o  Capi, 
come  ft  dira  in  principio  di  effi. 


1587. 

Codex  Chartaceus  in  4to,  ex  diverfis  Grammatico- 
rum  Trattatibus,  fimul  com  nttis,  conftans  :  viz. 

1.  Nomenclatura  fatis  ampla,  La-ine  &  Anglice; 

Scripta,  uti  videtur  manu  Dompni  Willelmi  Inggram  Ec- 
clefi®  Chrifti  Cantuarienfis  Monachi.  j. 

2.  Adnotatiuncul®  quredam  Grammaticales ;  ejufdem 

manu  exarat®.  1 5.  b. 

3.  Alia  Nomenclatura  Verborum  Latinorum  Anglice 

explicatorum.  j6. 

4.  Explanatio  feptem  Nominum  Propriorum,  in  SS. 

Biblijs  occurrentium.  46,  b. 

5.  Nota  de  Die  Dominica.  ibid. 

6.  Quare  non  datur  Pax  in  Mifla  Mortuorum.  47. 

7.  Explication  of  Latin  Words,  orderly  placed  for 

the  eafe  of  Childrens  Memory  ;  written  by  the  fame 
Dompne  Will.  Inggram.  ibid, 

8.  Trattatus  Grammaticalis  in  quo  oftenditur  varia- 
rum  Sententiarum  Conltruttio. 

9.  Regule  Sum,  Es,  Fui.  62.  b. 

10.  Trattatus,  in  quo  prascipue  agiturdeModo  LatinA 

loquendi.  66.  b; 

1 1 .  Verfus  Differentiates,  ac  Proverbiales  ;  manu 

Dompni  Willelmi  Inggram.  96. 

12.  Verfus  Refonantes,  de  moribus  Nobilium  Puero- 

rum  efformandis.  Scripti,  ut  videtur,  eadem  manu  A.D. 
1480.  xi  8. 

Pp  13.  Tra- 


14.6 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Kum.  1587—1589. 

13.  Tra&atus  metricus  de  Significationibus  Vociim, 

per  fingulas  Orationis  Partes.  1 2 1 . 

In  fine  leguntur  h«ec  Verba,  explicit  Secunda 
ParsGrj;cifmi,  Qui  me  fcribebat,  Adami  Nomen  habebat. 
Anno  Domini  1396.  in  die  fefto  Sanfte  Wilhelme 
Confi  Iforis. 

14.  Vcrfus  Leonini  de  rebus  parvi  momenti.  188. 

15.  Copies  of  theEnglifh  Sett-Secretary,  or  Ingroffing 
Hand,  written  for  the  Imitation  of  young  Perfons  in  the 
Reign  of  K.  Edward  1  v.  and  perhaps  A.  D.  1 474.  Some  of 
them  begin  in  Alphebetical  Order,  &  others  not.  Some 
alfo  fhew  the  beginnings  of  Patents,  Indentures,  Letters, 
Petitions,  &c.  partly  in  Latin,  partly  in  Englifh.  188. 

This  Tract  hath  been  damnified  in  fome  Places. 
At  fol.  208  b.  towards  the  middle  of  the  Page,  is  the 
name  Raynoldus  Polus,  which  feerns  to  have  been 
written  there  by  Cardinal  Pole  in  his  very  young 
Years. 


1588. 

A  Book  in  4to,  on  the  outfide  thus  entituled. 

1.  Reports  ab  Anno  23  ufq  ;  37  Eliz.  Inclufive. 

2.  Avefque  Cafes  hors  Curia;  Wardorum. 

3.  Et  Cale  inter  D’n  Buckhurft  et  Juft.  Fenner. 

4.  Et  auxi,  Noates  fur  Statut  32  Hen  viii.  de 
Rents. 


1589. 

A  Book  in  4to,  all  writ'en  in  French,  or  Latin,  by 
Dodtor  Peter?  Du  Prat,  or  Pratams,  as  he  wrote  him- 
felf ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  LaVaillance;  alhortEflay.  1. 

2.  The  Beginning  of  a  Letter,  perhaps  from  Mr.  Du 

Prat,  to  the  prefent  French  King,  about  the  Marefchal 
de  Gaflion.  i.  5. 

3.  Elogedu  Marefchal  de  Gaflion.  2. 

4.  Lettre  de  Mr.  La  Bourlie  a  Mr.  Du  Prat,i  Sedan 
24  Juin  1 666.  touchant  le  dit  Marefchal,  et  fa  Vie. 


t.  b. 

5.  Lettre  du  Mr.  Du  Prat,  a  Mr.  le  Marquis  de  La 

Bourlie  Govemeur  de  Sedan,  15  Juin  1666.  3. 

6.  De  la  Vaillance  Chreftiene.  4. 

7.  Extraitt  du  Tome  vi.  de  la  Morale  du  Mr.  V 
Amyraut. 

8.  Anagrammatifmus  Nominis  Joannis  de  Gaflione, 
autore  D.  de  Montigny. . 

9.  Tumulus  (Epitaphium?)  illuftriflimi  Joannis  de 

Gaflione  Franc ise  Marefchalli.  ibid. 

10.  Quelques  Verfes  Theologiques.  6.  b. 

1 1.  Draughts  of  two  Letters  from  Monfr.  Du  Prat  to 

the  French  King,  about  publiihing  the  Life  of  the 
Marefchall  de  Gaflion.  b. 

That  which  I  have  faftened  in,  maketh  the  other  com¬ 
plete,  which  is  abovementioned  at  N°  2. 

1 2.  La  Vie  du  Marefchal  de  Gaflion,  en  trois  Parties  • 

par  Monfr.  du  Prat.  Q  * 

This  is  the  rough  Draught,  as  it  was  finifhed  4  Sep¬ 
tember  1665.  and  hath  divers,  additional  Notes  belonging 


13.  Poeme Morale.  tI 

14.  Litters  D.  Joannis  de  Gaffiono,  ad  Danoruli 

Regem.  iS  Maij  A.  D.  1646.  lao.  g 

■J-  Littera:  ejufdem,  ad  D.  Oxenfternium  Regi 
Suecix  Cancellarium.  dat.  18  Maij  A.  D.  1646  121 

16.  Litters  D.  P.  Prataei,  ad  Carolum  11.  Anrii- 

Regem.  dat.  Lutelia:,  15  Aug.  1664.  I22 

17.  Littera:  ejufdem,  Gallice,  ad  Jacobum  Eborat 

Ducem.  15  Aug.  1663.  12 

18.  Epiftolte  ejufdem?  de  Gaffiono,  ad  Amicos,  dua 


19.  Lettre  de  Mr.AendendetPafteur 
i fon  Altefle  Roiale.  2  Aouft,  1645. 


de  Bourbourg ; 
127. 


Num.  15B9 — 1591. 

20.  Lettre  du  Mr.  Des  Marefts,  Confeiller  du  Roy 

en  fes  Confeils,  Threforier  et  General  des  fes  Finances 
en  la  Generality  de  Soifions.  128. 

21.  I.ettre  du  Mr.  Du  Prat?  Au  Roy.  130. 

2-2.  Letter,  in  French,  of  the  States  General,  to  the 

French  King,  defiring  that  matters  might  be  fo  accom¬ 
modated  between  them,  as  that  no  War  might  enfue, 
but  both  put  a  flop  to  theii  farther  arming  themfelves. 
xoDec.  1671. 

This  Paper,  I  have  fixed  to  1 34. 

23.  Lettre  de  Mr.  Spanheim,  a  Monfieur  le  Marefchal 

de  Gaflion.  13  Ottobre  1646.  135. 

24.  Difcours  entre  Divine  Foi,  et  1*  Humaine  Raifon: 

faftened  to  135. 

Now  turning  to  the  other  end  of  the  Book.  I  find, 

25.  Extraift  de  l’Hiftoire  des  Yncas,  Roys  du  Peru, 

depuisle  premier  Ynca,  Manco  Capac  ;  jufquesau  temps 
de  Huafcar,  et  d’Atahuallpa  ;  eferite  en  langue  Peru- 
vienne,  par  1’Ynca  Garcillafib  de  la  Vega,  natif  de 
Cozco,  A  Paris  1633.  1. 

26.  Relation  du  Groenland  ;  a  Paris  chez  Courbe 

1647.  eferite  a  Mr.  laMotte  le  Vayer,  de  la  Haye  le  18 
Juin  1646.  .  j4. 

27.  Extraift  de  l’Hiftoire  Naturelle  et  Morale  des 

Indes,  tant  Occidentales  qu’Orientales  ;  compofec  par 
Jofeph  Accxfta.  t6. 

28.  Hiftoire  de  la  Floride,  par  Bazanier.  22. 

29.  Hiftoire  Naturelle  et  Morale  des  Iiles  Antilles, 

de  l’Amerique.  22.  b. 

Laftly,  at  the  end,  yet  remain, 

30.  Le  Tombeau  d’Anne  de  Polignac  Marefchale  de 
Chaftillon. 

31.  A  printed  Cut  of  the  abovementioned  Marefchal 
de  Gaflion. 


I59°* 

A  Paper  book  in  4to,  containing, 

1 .  A  Lavv-Common-Place-Book,  compiled  during  the 
Reign  of  K.  James  1.  from  the  Statute  Laws  of  this 
Realm:  The  feveral  Heads  being  all  written  in  alpha¬ 
betical  Order. 

At  the  beginning,  I  find, 

2.  A  Table  of  the  Heads,  or  Titles  abovementioned. 

3.  Some  Notes  which  could  not  be  inferred  in  their 
proper  Places,  for  lack  of  room. 

I59I* 

A  Paper-Book  in  4to,  containing  the  Collettions  of  fome 

Practitioner  following  the  Law  ;  vizt. 

1.  After  a  Receipt  for  Sleepe,  1.  follow, 

2.  Forms  of  divers  Writts  ufed  in  the  time  of  Queen 

Elizabeth.  2. 

3.  The  Manner  &  Order  of  kepinge  the  Quarter- 
Ceflions. 

4.  Oflicium  Clerici  Pacis.  i0. 

5.  Forms  of  divers  Warants.  10.  b. 

6.  Two  Forms  of  Superfedas.  12. 

7.  Forms  of  Entries  of  Pleas  of  Trefpafs.  13. 

8.  Forms  of  Recognizances.  k,  b. 

9.  Form  of  a  Letter  from  Juftices  of  the  Peace,  to 

the  Lord-Keeper.  1 7.  b. 

10.  Form  of  a  Letter  from  certaine  of  the  Juftices, 

to  the  refidew,  not  to  difeharge  One  by  them  commit¬ 
ted  to  Prifon,  by  the  fpace  of  3  or  4  days;  and  then 
to  bailie  him  with  Suerties  to  appere  at  the  next 
Seflions.  t8, 

11.  Form  of  a  Lycence  that  may  ferve  there,  fora 

Fenfer,  Bernard,  Player  in  Interluds,  Minftrils,  Jugler, 
Pedler,  Tinker,  or  a  Pety-Chapman.  is.  b. 

12.  Formes  of  divers  other  Licences.  20. 

13.  OtherForms  ofWarants,  Appeals,  &  Licence?,  n. 

14.  Direcfions 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


*47 


Num.  1591—1595. 

14.  Directions  for  Proceffes  in  Law.  upon  many  oc* 

rafions.  j4.  b. 

15.  l'orms  of  Indidments  by  Jury.  26. 

ib.  Formula  Compoti  pro  Ballivo  Manerij.  47. 
(nontlum  abfoluta) 

1 7.  Notes  concernants  In  didments ;  in  Law-French.  50. 

18.  Notes  ad  cognofcend.  quid  fit  Haut  Treafon,  Petit 

Trelon,  Felon,  Larceny,  &c.  54. 

19.  Tabula. 

J592. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to,  cui  prtefigitur  hie,  qui  fequitur 
Titulus, 

Commentarij  in  Summam  Theologias  D.  Thomte  Aquin- 
atis,  in  tres  Partes  diftributam. 

*593- 

A  Paper-book  in  4to,  all  written,  about  A.  D.  1646. 
by  one  Thomas  Harland  ;  containing, 

1.  Divers  little  Theological  Trads,  in  Prole  &  Verfe; 
Prayers  ;  &  one  larger  Treatife ;  all  included  by  him 
under  the  following  Title.  The  Soule-Knell,  for  my 
fell  and  others  alfo,  to  prepair  our  felves  for  Death,  and 
laft  Accompt. 

NB.  i  he  Title  of  Soule-Knell,  is  alfo  more  particularly 
aferibed  to  the  larger  Treatife  above  mentioned. 

2.  Table  of  matters  handled  in  the  Soule-Knell  • 
toward  the  end. 


I594* 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to  diverfis  manibus  feriptus  ;  in 
quo  continentur, 

1.  Some  fhort  Notes,  in  Englifh,  but  in  a  peculiar 
Cyfer  ;  with  divers  others  in  Latin  &in  Englifh,  written 
in  plain  Hand ;  perhaps  by  the  learned  Mr. Thomas 
Marefchall  late  Redor  of  Lincoln-College  in  Oxford. 

At  the  beginning, 

2.  Index  Capitum  Tradatus  igfcquentis. 

3.  Statuta  et  Ordinationes  Lcclefue  Cathedralis 

Chriff i  et  Beatte  Maria;  Virginis  Dunelmenfrs,  vigore 
Commiflionis  RR.  Philippi  &  Mariae,  dat.  Weftmo- 
naff.  20  die  menfis  Martij,  Annis  Regnorum  luorum 
prnno  et  fecundo,  confirmafa,  feu'  potius  ordinata  et 
ftabihta  per  Nicholaum  Ebor.  Archi-Epifcopum  Elec- 
tum,  Edmundum  Londinenlem,  Cuthbertum  Dunel- 
menfem,  I  homam  Elienfem,  ac  Gulielmum  Ermyfted 
Sacellanum  Regium.  I# 

Hie  Codex  fuit  Jfaaci  Bafirii  S.  T.  P.  et  Ecclefi® 
Dunelmenfis  Prtbendarij. 

4.  Locale  Statutum  pro  Incremento  Stipendiorum 

Miniffrantium  Ecclelite.  57  ^g> 

5.  Quacdam  Loca  in  Statutis  Ecclefim  Cathedralis 

Dunelmenfis  correda  et  reformata,  31  die  menfis 
Decembris,  A.  D.  1556.  59- 

6.  The  Wanner  of  inftalling  the  Dean,  according  to 

the  Statutes  of  the  Church  of  Durham.  60. 

7.  The  Manner  of  inftalling  of  a  Prebendary.  71. 

8.  Memo-andum  of  the  inftallation  of  Dean  Sudbury. 
A.  D.  1661-2. 

9-  Ecclefiafficall  Livings  in  the  Dean  & 

Chapter  of  Durham’s  Gift.  - . 

10.  Churches  In  &  OfDurefme.  ult'. 

11.  Churches  out  of  Durelme  ;  with  fome  few  fhort 

Nolcs.  ibid. 

I59J- 

A  Book  in  4to,  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Some  French  Sonnets,  Sic.  at  the  beginning,  and 
at  the  end.  0 


Num.  1595— 1597. 


2-  -A-  Difcourfe  of  the  Porte  of  Oran.  1  The  Con* 
vcniency  &  Goodnefs  of  the  Port.  2  The  great  Trade 
and  other  advantages  thereby.  3.  Probable  Waies  & 
Meanes  to  become  Mafters  of  it.  1. 

This  was  written  7  January  1663. 

3*  Warant  of  K,  Charles  11.  for  the  following 
Commiffion  to  Henry  Mordant  Earl  of  Peterborough. 
Given  6  September  1661.  1. 

4.  Commiffion  of  K.  Charles  11.  conftituting  the  faid 
Henry  Earl  of  Peterborough,  Governor  of  Tangier,  & 
Captain-General  of  his  Forces  there,  and  in  thofe  Parts. 
6  Septr.  166  r.  ro. 

5-  Inftrudions  for  the  Earle  of  Peterburgh  Generali 
of  our  Army  defigned  for  Tanger  in  Africa.  1 5. 

6.  A  Copie  of  the  Docket  for  the  Marocco-Company 

endeavoured  to  be  rayfed.  7bef.  1661.  19 

7.  Mr.  Luke’s  Reafons  againft  the  ereding  of  a 

Marocco-Company.  2x. 

8.  Reafons  againft  the  fame,  by  Mr.  Percy.  24. 

9.  The  Marchants  Reafons  againft  the  Morocco- 

Company.  2g_ 

10.  The  humble  Reafons  of  all  the  Marchants  that 

have  beene  the  antient  Traders  to  Barbary,  without  the 
Streights  ;  againft  the  Patent  endeavoured  after  by  cer- 
taine  Perfons,  moft  of  them  Strangers  to  that  Trade, 
under  the  Title  of  the  Morocco-Company  ;  excluding 
all  other  his  Majefties  fubjeds.  32. 

J 1.  Sundry  particulars  relating  to  the  Towne  &  Roade 
of  Tanger.  35. 

12.  A  Letter  concerning  the  fame.  33. 

13.  Extraid  de  la  Relation  d’  Afriq,  par  la  Croix,  4 

Lyon  1688.  45m 

This  is  all  about  Oran. 


14^  Articles  of  Peace  betwixt  his  Sacred  Majefty  the 
the  King  of  Great  Eritaine,  <kc.  and  the  moft  excellent 
Seignor  Mahamet  Balia,  the  Duan  of  the  moft  noble 
Cmy  of  Tunis,  Iladgie  Muftafa  Dije,  Mahamet  Bije, 
and  the  refte  of  the  Soldiers  in  the  Kingdome  of  Tunis : 
concluded,  by  Sir  John  Lawfon  Knight,  the  5  Odober 

,662'  S3- 

15.  Articles  of  Peace  betwixt  His  Sacred  Majefty 

Charles  the  11.  King  of  Great  Brittaine,  &c.  and  the 
moft  excellent  Ofman  Balia,  and  the  People  of  the  noble 
Citty  &  Kingdome  of  Tripoly:  concluded  by  Sir  John 
Lawfon  Kt.  the  19th  Odober  1662.  57. 

16.  Articles  of  Peace  between  His  Sacred  Majefty 

Charles  the  n.  King  of  Great  Brittaine,  &c.  and  the 
Citty  &  Kingdome  of  Algier,  and  the  territories  thereof; 
concluded  by  Sir  John  Lawfon  Kt.  according  to  Inftruc- 
tions  received  in  that  behalfe  from  his  Royal  Highnefs 
the  Duke  of  Y orke,  &c.  and  Edward  Earle  of  Sandwichc, 
&c.  23  April  1662.  63. 


1596. 

Codex  chartaceus  et  pertenuis  in  4to,  in  quo  conti¬ 
nentur, 

Objeda  Judgeorum  in  D.  Matthgei  Evangelium, 
ex  Ipforum  Vernaculis  Latina,  fada,  per  Gilbertum 
Genebrardum  ;  cum  Refponfionibus  ejufdem,  ad  Car- 
dinalem  Caftilioneum. 

Annon  hie  Codex  originalis,  et  ineditus? 

1597- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  410,  regnante  (ut  videtur) 
Elizabetha  Regina  compilatus ;  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Tabula  pro  Demonftratione  Nominum  et  Natura- 
rum  Prefidencium,  tam  Brevium,  Confeffionum  et 
Finium,  quam  aliorum  in  hoc  Libro  contentorum. 

1.  b. 

2.  Prefidencia  diverforum  generum.  5. 

2  Inter 


148 


Cataiogus  I.ibrorurti  MSS. 


Num.  1597 — 1600. 

Inter  hmc  occurrunt, 

3.  Oath  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Cufloms,  in  the 

Porte  of  Exon  Sc  Dartmouth,  and  all  Creekes  &  Places 
to  the  fame  Porte  belonging.  36.  b. 

4.  Fees  in  Mr  Colmans  Office,  Remembrancer  of 

Ireland.  51, 

5.  Fees  due  to  the  Mailer  of  th’Office,  fet  down  to 

Mailer  Colman.  51.  b. 

6.  Feoda  pro  Cullumarijs  Portus  Poole,  in  &  circa 

Compotum  fuum.  54; 

7.  Fees  to  be  paid  in  the  Exchequer  (to  the  Practife 

whereof,  the  far  greater  part  of  this  Book  relateth)  upon 
divers  Occafions.  52,  b* 

1598. 

A  very  thin  Book  in  4to,  wherein  are  written, 

1.  A  Briefe  Narration  of  the  manner  of  the  Death  of 

that  mod  hopefull  young  gentleman  Mr.  William  Gur- 
don  ;  who  departed  this  Life  the  24th  of  December 
1620.  *• 

2.  Elegies  made  upon  the  Deceafe  of  this  Protedant 

Gentlemen;  by  other  young  Gentlemen  his  Fellow- 
Collegiates,  as  it  feemeth.  3* 

3.  Elegy  upon  the  Death  of  old  Mr.Rogers,  Minif- 

ter  of  Wether.- field.  9-  b- 

4.  Verfes  made  by  Mr.  Adam  Winthropp  to  the  Ladie 
Mildmay,  at  the  Birth  of  her  fonne  Henery.  1 1.  b. 

5.  Verfes  to  her  Sonne.  12. 


Num.  i6co — 1602. 

8.  A  Charme  for  the  Tothe-Ache.  _  39* 

9.  For  to  charme  3  Obles  for  the  Fevers.  ibid. 

10.  For  the  Fallyng  Evel,  gud  Medcyne,  or  Charme 

39.  b. 

11.  A  Charme  with  Wile  &  Oil,  for  Wondes.  ibid. 

12.  For  to  charme  aWonde,  on  lnjlislhe.  40. 

13.  Charme  of  Seint  Sufane,  for  healing  Wounds. 

ibid. 

14.  Divers  others,  to  the  fame  purpofe.  ibid. 

15.  Conjuracio  pro  quibufcunque  Febribus.  41- 
But  when  an  extraordinary  Accident  might  happen, 

or  a  diftemper  prove  too  Stubborn;  other  Means  were 
ufed  ;  as  appears  by  this, 

16.  A  Medcyne  to  Haunch  Blod,  when  a  Mayller 

Veyn  is  Corven,and  wil  noght  gl  ully  be  (launched  with 
Charmynge  ;  and  the  Wond  be  large.  17.  b. 

Perhaps  thefe  two  may  be  of  better  Credit. 

17.  An  other  Maner  of  Makying  of  Gracia  Dei, 

that  the  gud  Frl  of  Heiforth  ufed,  that  was  holden  a 
gud  Surgen.  35* 

iS.  Gracia  Dei  made  on  another  Maner;  and  this 
Maner  Gracia  Dei,  ufed  Hopkyn  of  the  Fermory 
(Infirmary)  of  Killyngworth,  and  this  on  a  lither 
Maner.  35m  l5, 

Laitly,  followeth,  by  a  newer  Hand, 

19.  A  Collection  of  Receipts  Medicinal  &  Chirurgi. 
cal ;  partly  in  Englilh,  partly  in  Latin.  42 

l6oi. 


1599* 

A  French  Book  in  4to,  wherein  are  contained,  _ 

1.  The  Original  Journal  of  the  Travels  of  the  Sieur 

Belval  ;  who  fett  out  from  Paris  the  1 2th  of  M  arch 
j62h.  and  arrived  at  Conllantinople  about  the  27th  of 
June  following;  having  taken  the  way  of  AuiTonne, 
Dolle,  Saline,  Neufchaft.  lhSavau,  Bade,  Zuricq,  Wefel, 
Tiran,  Breffe,  Verone,  Padoue,  Vtnize,  Triefle,  Capo- 
diftria’  Ruviguo,  Fafana,  Zara,  Rugutviffa,  Curfola, 
Raguze,  Santa  ‘■'aba,  Foggia,  Plenglie,  Pliepoglie,  Pro- 
copia,  Lalitfa,  Nice,  Tergovifla,  Taribrode,  bofie,  Ca- 
raman,  Philipoppoly,  Cacoly,  Andrinople,  &  fo  to 
Conllantinople  aforefaid.  1  • 

2.  Defcription  de  Conllantinople.  _  45- 

3.  Des  Enfans;  etde  Tribut  du  Grand  Seigneur.  55. 

4.  Des  Officers  du  Grand  Seigneur. 

5.  The  fame  Sieur  de  Belval’s  Relation  of  his  Voiage 

from  Conflantinople  to  Smyrna.  61.  b. 

Turning  up  the  other  end  cf  the  Book,  I  find, 

6.  A  Sort  of  Nomenclature  ofTurkilh  Words,  ex¬ 
plained  in  French  ;  written  by  the  fame  Sieur  de  Belval. 

i6co. 

An  Old  Englilh  Book,  written  on  Parchment,  in  4to, 
containing, 

1.  The  Titles  of  the  Chapters  to  the  following  Trea- 
tife. 

2.  Verfes  in  Praife  of  this  Book  of  LECH-CRAFT, 

all  written  with  Red  Ink.  3.  b. 

3.  A  Collection  of  Receipts,  moftly  Chirurgical ;  in 

number  about  264.  4- 

Amongft  them;  to  (hew  what  our  well-meaning  An- 
ceftors  were  made  to  believe,  by  fome  who  took  upon 
them  to  be  Priefts,  Phyficians,  &  Chirurgeons ;  I  take 
leave  to  mendon, 

4.  A  Charme  agayn  Theffes*  30. 

5.  A  Medcyne  (  that  is  a  Charm)  for  Fevers.  34.  b. 

6.  A  Charme  for  the  Hawe  in  the  Eghe.  38.  b. 

7.  A  god  Charme  for  Erwig,  or  any  Worme  that  is 
r ropvine  into  a  mans  Hed  that  is  fchentyk,  or  any  other 

9  39-* 


An  oblong  paper  Book  in  4to,  wherein  are  wiitten. 
Notes  of  Occurrences  in  the  Commons  Houfe  of  Par¬ 
liament  ;  taken,  upon  the  fpot,  in  the  years  1626. 
1627.  &  perhaps  1628.  1640.  &  1641.  by  fome 

Member  of  the  Houfe. 


r.g  . 

3- 

ibid. 

ibid. 

ibid. 

ibid. 

ibid. 

ibid. 

ibid. 

ibid. 


1602. 

A  thin  Book  in  4to,  belonging  to  the  Medicinal  Clafs 
wherein  are  written  by  feveral  hands, 

1.  To  ceafl'e  any  Payne  in  theTethe.  1. 

Jequitur  fragmentum  membranaceum,  quo  habentur 
'aria  arcana  Chemica, 

2.  Ad  faciendum  Sal  Armoniacum. 

3.  ConfeCtio  Refalgar. 

4.  De  Capillis  colorandis. 

5.  Crillallus,  fic  lolvitur. 

6.  Si  una  Uncia  Sillij  in  Vino  fit. 

7.  Ut  te  defendas  a  Vafpis,  i.  e.  apibus. 

8.  Ut  pannus  videatur  ardere. 

9.  Contra  Ratones. 

10.  Ad  Vitrum  malificandum. 

11.  Si  vis facere  optimum  Argentum.  _  3- b 

12.  Cuprem  fic  dcalbatur  ad  modum  Argenti.  _  4. 

13.  Si  vis  Argentum  facere  aurei  coloris.  ibid. 

14.  Si  vis  ut  Plumbum  fiat  fimile  Argento.  ibid. 

1 5.  Cum  volueris  dealbare  Venerem,  ut  fiat  tanquam 

Luna.  . 

16.  Alia,  utaiunt,  Recepta,  ad  idem.  ibid. 

Then  followeth  another  fragment  in  Englilh; 

(hewing, 

17.  Toheale  the  greateft  Scawle,  or  Scawlde-Heade, 

>r  Itche,  or  Saabbe,  in  the  worlde.  5- 

18.  Excerpta  nonnulla,  e  Libro  cujufdam  De  Mira- 

jilibus.  .  e!j  7- 

19.  Precantatio,  ad  cohibendum  Sangvnnem  ne  nuat. 

6.  b. 

20.  Precantatio,  ad  capiendos  Pifces.  ibid. 

21.  Precantatio,  ut  Vinum  non  pervert  atur.  ibid. 

22.  Veneficia  Amatoria.  7* 

23.  Ut  infcribas  in  Ovo  interius.  7.  b. 

24.  'Chen  cometh  a  fmall  Trad,  in  Old  Englilh, 

jartly  Medicinal,  but  motlly  Chymical.  8. 

2  c.  Another 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


149 


Num,  1602- — 1604.  I 

2 5.  Another  Old  Englifti  Trad,  containing  many  Re¬ 
ceipts  Medicinal  &  Chirurgicall.  1 1. 

Laftly,  follow,  fome  other  Receipts  written  by  a 
later  Hand  ;  &  as  it  feemethby  a  Papift. 

2 6.  To  make  one  fweate»  24. 

27.  To  fweate  for  the  Frenche  Evell,  &c. ibid.  24. b. 

28.  For  him  that  is  breften.  ibid. 

29.  To  kill  any  kind  of  Scabbe,  &  Blayns,  of  the 

Frenche  Evell,  &c.  24.  b. 

30.  For  a  Rupture.  25. 

1603. 

A  Paper-Book  in  4 to,  written  by  divers  Hands  ;  where¬ 
in  are  contained, 

I.  Some  Notes  for  Memory,  15  April  1623.  The 
chiefeft  whereof,  relate  to  a  Conveyance  of  the  Scite  of 
the  College  of  Stoke-Clare  in  Com.  Suft'.  &  Effex.  1.  b. 

3.  Notes  concerning  Lands  held  of  the  Manors  of 
Alresford,  Chorrington,  Much  Bentlv,  Geffes  in  Lang- 
hoe,  &  Brightlingfea.  et  Magn.  Bromleye. 

2.  3.  b.  et.  ico.  b. 

3.  A  Booke  of  Prefidents  for  a  Jufnce  of  Peace  his 

Clarke  ;  written  by  one  Nathaniel!  Rogers  A,  D.  1606. 
herein,  among  many  other  matters,  I  find,  3. 

4.  A  Proportion  for  the  levying  of  100  Souldiers  in 

"Wiltfhire,  to  ferve  in  Ireland.  A.  D.  1606.  20.  b. 

5.  TwoPrefaces  to  Charges  at  the  Seflions  of  the  Peace. 

24.  b. 

6.  Articles  to  be  given  in  charge  at  the  Generali  Sef- 
fions;  for  Memories  fake,  couched  in  Latin  Verfes. 

25.  b. 

7.  Articles  to  be  given  in  charge  at  a  Court-Baron ; 

in  like  Latin  Verfes.  30. 

8.  An  Exortation  to  Prifoners  condemned.  30.  b. 

9.  The  Fees  of  the  Clarke  of  the  Peace.  31.  b. 

Among  the  Precedents  continuing  the  Collection  of 

Nathaniel  Rogers  aforefaid,  are, 

10.  The  Order  of  the  Goale-Delivcrye.  75. 

II.  A  Table  of  all  fuch  Thinges  as  are  contevned  in 

this  Booke.  86.  &  100. 

12.  Les  Charges  en  Fine.  95- 

13.  Le  Charges  dun  Recove ’ye  ovefque  Duble 

Voucher.  95- b. 

14.  Le  Charges  del  Recoverye  oue  Breve  de  Sum. 

eft  a  Gard  al  Vicunt.  96. 

1 5  The  Cofts  of  fuing  out  of  a  Fine.  ibid. 

16.  The  Cofts  if  the  Fyne  be  knowledged  before  a 

Juftice  in  his  Chamber.  96.  b. 

1 7.  The  Cofts  of  a  Recoverye  by  Writt  of  Entrie  in 

the  Pofte.  97- 

18.  The  Fees  for  fuing  oute  La  Lyverye.  97.  b. 

19.  Onera  Recuperations  cum  duplici  Vocatione  ad 

Warant.  et  Summonitione  ad  Warantum.  ibid. 

20.  The  Names  of  the  Philofophers  that  were  in  the 

Common  Place ;  and  the  Shires  to  them  feverallye  ap¬ 
pointed.  99-  ct  ,0°-  b. 

21.  Nomina  Exigendarum  in  Communi  Banco. 

99.  b.  et  101.  b. 

22.  Some Domeftic  Accompts.  ico.  b. 

23.  Prothonotaries  that  were.  99.  b.  et  ioi.b. 

1604. 

A  thin  Book  in  4to.  confifting  of  divers  Traits  to  be 
bound  up  together,  in  the  following  order, 

1.  Adnotatio  de  conftruitione  Ecclcfim  Weftmonafte- 

rienfis,  per  R.  Henricura  ill.  ex  Iiiftoria  Thoma:  Wal. 
fynghami  defumpta.  1 .  b. 

2.  Narratio  de  Fundatione  Donrus  Monialium  de 

Kvlborne,  per  Abbatem  Weftmonafterij  Herebertum, 
Ex  Regiftro  quodam  Weftmonafterienfis  Csenobij,  in 
Bibliotheca  C.ottoniana.  2. 

Ca  t.  Hari,.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1604 — 1606. 

3.  Carta  Hereberti  Abbatis  de  Terra  in  Knyhtbriggj 
Monialibus  de  Kylborne  conceffa. 

4.  De  Jurifdiitione  in  Celia  Monialium  de  Kylebourne, 

per  Epifcopum  Londonienfem  Abbati  Weftmonafterij 
conceffa.  (Ex  Codice  MS.  in  Bibl.  Cotton,  fub  effig. 
Vefpaf.  A.  19.)  3. 

5.  Contentio  cellar  de  Kylebourn  terminata  inter 
Capitulum  Saniti  Pauli,  et  Ecclefiam  Weftmonafterij. 

dat.  A.  D.  1231.  4. 

6.  De  Fundatione  Abbatim  Weftmonafterij,  et  Dedi¬ 
cation  ejuldem  ;  c  varijs  Codicibus  Cottonianis.  5. 

7.  Adnotationcs  ad  Hiftoriam  Weftmonafterienfis 
Ecclefue  fpeitantes.  e  Matthsco  Weftmonafterienfi. 

i3.b. 

8.  Short  Notes  relating  to  the  Hiftory  of  England, 
from  A.  D.  1066.  to  the  Reign  of  Richard  1  r.  14. 

9.  Johannis  Dursei  Difcurfus  de  Fundamentalibus 

verte  Religionis  Captibus,  ex  quibus  Confeflionem 
Fidei  Chriftiante  confici  convenit.  Autographon  Autoris, 
ad  Diium  Forbefium  Stockholmke  feriptum,  16  Kal. 
Mart.  A.  D.  1657.  21. 

10.  Draught  of  Part  of  an  Anfwer  to  fome  printed 

Bock  of  an  Anabaptiftical  Writer.  4 1 .  b. 

1 1 .  Obfervations  upon  the  Report  of  the  horrid  Blaf- 
phemy  of  the  Three  Grand  Importers,  by  fome  affirmed 
to  have  been  of  late  Years  uttered  &  publiflied  in  Print. 

51* 

I  605. 

A  parchment-Book  in  4to,  confifting  of  divers  Traits  to 
be  bound  up  together.  They  are, 

1.  Part  of  a  Poem  in  very  old  French,  the  Subject 

is,  the  Hiftory  of  Great  Britain  ;  but  the  Style  &  Way  of 
Writing,  Romantic.  It  appears  to  be  grounded  upon 
Geffry  of  Monmouth  ;  and  might  have  been  compofed, 
fome  time  after  the  Publication  of  His  Chronicle,  for 
the  Diverfion  of  our  Englilh  Nobility,  who  then  under- 
ftood  the  French  Language  very  well.  1. 

2.  A  Chirurgical  Trail  partly  in  Latin,  &  partly  in. 

old  Englifti.  43. 

Among  various  R  eceipts  ;  I  find  fome  for  making 
Colors,  wherewith  to  illuminate  Books  ;  and  others  for 
painting  the  Face. 

3.  Carmen  contra  Mures  et  Ratones  in  Grangijs. 


4.  FortoflaMys.  ibid. 

5.  For  to  fla  Loppes.  ibid. 

6.  To  do  away  Fleghes.  ibid. 

7.  Ad  Prefervationem  Sanitatis.  52.  b. 

8.  Admonitiones  Spirituals,  ad  Nobilem  quandam 

Sanitimonialem  :  initio  ac  fine  mutilate.  53. 


(Videfis,  an  fint  Petri  de  Honeftis,  Petri  Abailardi, 
iElredi  Rievallenfis,  aut  Simonis  Gandavenfis) 

9.  The  Latter  Part  of  a  Trait  fairly  written  in  old 

Englifti ;  containing  a  Collection  of  Receipts  in  Cookery; 
as  ufed  anticntly  in  the  Royal  Family ;  or  in  that  of 
fome  principal  Nobleman.  98. 

10.  Receipt  for  dreffing  “  Brawne  in  Eger-douce,’* 

by  a  newer  Eland.  1 19. 

1606. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to,  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Excerpta  ex  Arnoldo  Corvino  de  Jure  Canonico 
per  Aphorifmos.  explicato,  Amftelod.  1648.  pag.  n 

2.  Extracts  from  a  Book  of  John  Wilkins  (fince  Bp. 
of  Chefter  entituled  Ecclefiaftes,  or  Guift  of  Preaching, 
as  it  falls  under  the  Rules  of  Art.  London  1651. 

144. 

3.  Extraits  from  the  Guift  of  Prayer,  written  by  the 

fame  very  learned  Bifliop.  169. 

Turning  up  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

Q  q  4.  Extraits 


IM 


in  u 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1606 — 1610. 

v  £rom  ^am’s  Expofition  upon  the  Second 

Epdtle  of  St.Peler.pag.  r.  x?6m 

1607; 

Codes  membranaceus  in  4to,  Gallica  manu  exaratus ; 
in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Calcndarium ;  quo  commemorantur  Dies  Sanfto- 

rum  quorundam,  de  quibus  nulla  fit  Memio  in  Baronii 
Martyrologia.  t  1 

2.  Pfalierium  D.  Hieronymi  Gallicanum.  7. 

Sequuntur  Cantica  S.  Scripture,  fc. 

3-  Canticum  Ifaisc  Prophetsc. 

4.  Canticum  Ezechise  Regis. 

5.  Canticum  Ann  eg. 

6.  Canticum  Moyfis.  Exod.  xv.  1. 

7.  Canticum  Abacuc. 

8.  Canticum  Moyfis.  Deut.  xxxii.  1 

9.  Canticum  irium  Puerorum. 

10.  Canticum  Zacharkc. 

11.  Symbolum  vulgo  S.  Athanafio  adferiptum. 

Tj  .  .  I  76. 

i?.  htymnus  qm  dicitur  TeDeum  laudamus.  178  b 
13.  Canticum  Mariae.  b* 

34.  Canticum  Symeonis.  180. 

Sequuntur, 

15.  Litania  cum  Collects. 

16  Preces,  See.  de  S.  Juliano  Csenomannenfi ;  &c. 

187. 


Num.  161  c- 

9.  Traftatulus  de  Computo  Ecclefiaftico. 

10.  Verfus  nonnulli  Differentials. 

11.  Diffigius.  gloflatus. 

12.  Merarius. 

13.  Verfus  Differentiales. 


4t. 
45- 
45-  b- 
45  b. 
48. 


165.  b. 
ibid. 

1 66.  b. 

167.  b. 
169. 

174.  b. 
>75-  b- 


1608. 

Codes  membranaceus  in  Svo,  majori,  in  quo  continetur, 
Regtftrum  Brevium,  de  Cancellaria  Regis  Edwardi  I 
ut  opmor. 

I  609. 

A  paper-Book  in  4to,  wherein  I  find, 

'•Some  ,Private  Ma«ers  of  finall  moment,  relating  to 
an  Officer  in  Cromwells  Army. 

2.  Ext  rafts  from  the  Rolls  of  the  Common  Pleas, 
from  the  firft  Year  of  K.  Edward  1.  to  the  1  -ah  Year 
mclufive.  Tranfcribed  .  .  December  1 6 54.  from  a  Book 
which  Mr.  .....  copied  from  another  lent 
unto  him  by  Attorney-Geneial  Noy. 

At  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  are, 

3.  Mote  of  Precedents,  from  Rot.  de'  Litteris  Miffis. 

M.ch.  24,  E.  1,  diewing  that  thofe  wbo  were  in  aflual 
Servtce  defending  our  Sea-Coads,  might  not  be  obliged 
to  appear  before  the  Kings  Juftices.  6 

4 ■  Accompt  of  Moneys  paid  unto  the  Officers  of  many 
Regiments,  for  then  perfonal  Pay,  A.  D.  1 6JO,  to  enable 
them  to  defray  their  Charges  in  the  Profecution  of  the 
Service  wherein  they  were  intruded  by  the  Lord  Deputy 
for  the  raifeing  &  tranfpoiting  Recruits  for  Ireland.  '  ’ 

l6lO. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  diveriis  man, ’bus  feriptus ; 
m  quo  habentur, 

cumLc«  aliq„ot 

neceirfrir1®  Ac“ntu“di"  -Lefloribus  SanSc  Ecclefe 

expiicrr  V°Cabu!ariJ  Latinit  AnglicS  pervetuM 

4-  De  Conftruftione  Verborum.  V’ 

5.  Adnotationesalis  Grammatical.  i7.  b.et  10 

6.  De  B.  Margareta  Virgine.  o  ?' 

7.  Objeftiones  contra  Donatum. 

d=  Con&ibu".firma!apCT  P— 

2  6. 


Imperf. 

14. 

ibid, 
ibid, 
ibid. 
14-  b. 
ibid. 


Codex  chartaceus  in  8vo,  manu  Gallica  feriptus  ;  in 
quo  comprehend untur, 

1.  Libellus  de  Sphcra,  feu  Giobo  Ccelefti :  totius 
Aitronomise  Compendium, 

2.  Libellus  de  Sphcra,  feu  Giobo  Terreltri  ;  totius 

Lolmographic  et  Geographic  Synopis.  ,, 

Pod  peraSum  Hifpanite,  Gallic,  Italic,  deferip. 
tionem,  delmit  Autor.  r 

161 2, 

Codex  membranaceus  pertenuis,  in  4to.  minori ;  id 
quo  reperiuntur, 

■  Traa  “bout  the  Knowledge  of  Urines; 

in  old  Enghffi.  &  * 

2.  De  Urinis,  fccundum  Ifaac.  2" 

3.  Ad  denotandum  diverfam  Aeris  difpoficionem  fu- 
tuiam,  per  diverfitatem  Motuum  fuperiorum,  fc.  Plane- 
tarum. 

4.  De  Coloribas  Planetarum. 

5.  Adnotatio  Aftronomica.  12  b* 

6.  Canon  fuper  Calendarium  Abbatis  Sanffi  Albaili 

1.  e.  r.  Richardi  Waliyngefordc.  t , 

7.  Dignitates Planetarum.  ,,  b 

8.  Memoria  de  omnibus  Apoftohs. 

9.  Memoria  de  omnibus  Martyribus. 

10.  Memoria  de  omnibus  Confcfforibus. 

1 1.  Memoria  de  omnibus  Virginibus. 

12.  De  Zodiaco. 

13.  Si  vis  feire  totius  Anni  Varietates.  lbKj 

De'si'deAuslx  MaS'C“S  adfcriP'-. 

ri  Traaff  rieudepigraphi  ffed  tamen'm. 

riffimt)  dedderatur  folium,  fuulus  autem  fic  fe  habet 
Enoch  tanquam  unus  ex  Philofophis,  fuper  Res  quar’ 
turn  Librum  edidit,  in  quo  voluit  deLminare9  ida 
quatuor:  videlicet,  dc  tj  Stellis,  de  ijHerbis,  de  te 
Lapidibus  prec.ofis,  et  de  ij  Figuris  ipfis  Lapidibus 
fculpendis  Idcoq  ;  qu,a  non  moritur  quern  vivifkar 
Scientia  dixit  Enoch  quod  ,5  Sidle  fum,  fuper  Lapi- 
o  •  ■'  nec  Herbe  vel  Herbarum  Radices,  ve! 

Semina  iub  Lapidibus  perfeSe  aptemur.  Ouarmn  Stel- 
larum  clanor,  major,  &  fortior,  ed  Alboran  ” 

busfo&raSm™tUm  CUjUHam  Libri  ^rhbmeticalis,  duo. 

J  '  19. 

t6i  3, 

Codex  chartaceus  in  Svo,  ut  aiunt,  majori,  d, Verbs 
mambus  feriptus,  et  Grccorum  more  comp.aus 
quem  Dno  Henrico  Wordejo  in  Terra  Sancda  pere’ 
grinanti  dono  dedet  Notara  (N.r„;  an  N  ,  Pcrc' 
Metropoida  «.  cfariends  ;  ‘ui  ex7„d“  dem£  do"! 
t  ffimo  fuo  Avunculo,  faflus  ed  Patriarcha  Hiero 
folynntanus ;  adhue,  ni  fallor,  fuperdes.  In  ido 
habentur  vana  Ecclefic  Grace  Officia,  Cantica  i" 
defCnpta'  Nolulifqi  Crccis  Muficalibus  in- 

et°Philofnnh  q“a:  Pjf™,  &™li>apud  EthnicosPoetas 
et  1  hilofophos  m  ufu  fuerunt  ;  quarum  ctiamnuni 

Steriul  *  i”®8?  quafl  e  Naufragio  Tabula  :  fed 

altdius  piMe  forma;,  qUas  ante  plurima  Secnli 
introduftas  adhue  retinet  hodierna  Gracorum  Ecclefia. 
ordbe  fe^uaSr.  “  ^  P™1™  Codtcis,  hoc 

k.ixfa.Fccf  is 


Num.  i6ij. 

I.  Kcxpx'izpta,  ipaXXxoysMx  £.'f  tAj  i-sntrjyous  loprar  trvv  to 
»■— Za-ii-'C'.vO r-u. - «y(§y  a.'.*  j 

&*P*yd(,n  Exclamatorium,  dicitur  Pfalmus  141. 
quj  ab  his  Verbis  incipit,— Kupic  iyAv.pr.Zx  zjpi<  c. 

_ .  2;  KaTfu9uk0i)rw  »i  Wf00-£U^' pou.  x.t.  a.  cjufdem  Pfalmi 
Verfus  eft  fecundus. 

,  ? 

•  „  In  margme  fcribitur*  (  Sj  i.  e.  ni  fallor,  ?Xof 
,  wp^rof.  Hx»f  in  Cantu  Gikco  Ecclefiaftico,  idem  eit 
r~onus  *n  Latino.  Ilabent  autem  Greed  fuos 
Utto 1  Tonos,  k  quibus  Libellus  (etiam  priefens  Trac- 
tatus)  Ovni^oi  dicitur.  Quatuor  Toni  priores  fimpli- 
cem  appellationem  funt  padi,  dyj&  A  primus  ;  vy<&  (S' 
fecundus  ;  y’  tertius  ;  r,yj^  S'  quartus.  Quatuor 
polteriores  difparem  fortiuntur  denominationem.  Quin¬ 
tus  eniin  eft  «^or  7rAafi'ou  zrpdrob  Tonus  obliquus  pri¬ 
mus  ;  Sextus  eft  iS^oj  ?rA.  S'.  Tonus  obliquus  fecun¬ 
dus  ;  lertius  dicitur  vyor  (SxpZr  Tonus  gravis,  propter 
moiam  et  Vocis  gravitatem  inter  ilium  canendum. 
Ultimum  eft  i^or  ts-a.  S'  Tonus  obliquus  quartus. 
Goar.  Srnguli  fuo  Ordine  recenfendi.  (Subnexis  e 
codice  noftro  eorundem  nods,  five  abbreviationibus.  NB. 
^tellula;  frequentes  notarum  in  codice  repedtionem 
defignant) 

,  ^3*  ^T,/C”?01  Ayxd]x<rty.oi  ’ioiayya  aTi'a  t«  A ay.xtrv.woZ.  nyor 
*"  \  •  i  b. 

Iriyiipot  xvxra<ny.ot,  funt  Verfus,  five  Candones  Re- 
furrediuni  Dominicas  confecrati. 

Difcrimcn  non  modicum  eft,  inquit  Goarus,  inter 
vnyev  et  ffTtxyb:  ille  eit  Verficulus  e  Scriptura,  et 
maxime  e  Davidicis  Pfalmis  depromptus:  hie  Verfus 
eft  ab  Hymnographo  Ecclefiaftico,  licet  prolixiori  Sen- 
tentia,  ad  longiufcularum  etiam  periodorum  Normam, 
compofitus.  Et  diferiminis  hujus  annotandi  gratia,  niyov 
Verficulum,  o-ri^ivVerfum,  ubique  fum  interpretatus. 

4.  Alius  tou  A\noZ.Tiy(§y  A*  2. 

5.  'AmroAix*.  tiy&  A*  ejufdem  Joar.nis  Damafceni, 
numera  quatuor. 

’AvxtoXikx  funt  Troparia  Odoechi,  f  I.  htec  qute 
funt  Refurrcdionem  Chrifti  cou.memorantes- 

&c. 

6.  A •£«  xa!  0.  vyo;  A*  3.  b. 

__  Hlc  Videtur  fere  eademac  JoifoAoyia.  Ao£oAoy.'a 
vero  duplex  efl,  yiyxXr,  ac  y.*pA.  Ilia  eft  Hymnus  An- 
gelicus  “  Gloria  in  excelfis  Deo.”  Hsec  repetitafepius 
in  Pfalmorum  fine,  Trinitatis  glorificatio,  Gloria  Patri 
et  Filio,  &c.  Goar.  Ka!  vZ» :  i.e.  Secunda  pars  ejuf¬ 
dem  Doxologire  xal  *fl  fir  r*r  diw*t  r Zv  x\muv. 

7.  ' h.TTOST\yor  TOU  XVTOll.  vyor  <*'.*  4.  5. 

Aztstt )yor,  azroo-Tiy'r,  Triodium.  Du  Gang. 
Tp'uhov,  eft  Liber  Gnecorum  Ecclefiafticus ;  in 
quo  Officium  in  Ecclefijs  eorum  recitari  folitum  a  Sep- 
tuagefima,  quam  ipfi  vocant  Dominicam  Publicani  et 
Pharifasi,  ad  Sabbatum  Sandum  condnetur.  Cum  Ca- 
nones  et  Hymni  in  Solemnitates  Domini  noflri  Jefu 
Chrifti,  B.  Virginis,  et  aliorum  Sandorum  ix.  habent 
Strophas,  ut  ita  dicam,  Odas  nuncupatas,  quafi  Canti- 
ones ;  Liber  hie  Canones  hujufeemodi,  ut  plurimum, 
qui  ternas  Odas  non  exccdunt,  compleditur.  Suicer. 

8.  Auxto  Aixa  tS  AvtS  tria.  vyot  A*  ibid.  5.  605. b. 

9.  Ao£a  MX  1  MbM  9'  (  Immxtom  )  'IuAmmou  Apy  ua-mi" -?ou . 

Quare,  forte  Chryfoftomi.  v  5  b- 

10.  ’Ek  tom  o^ov.'i.  e.  AdLaudes.  Coar  6.  b. 

“•  ’E‘«  TB»f  a/vour.  ibid. 

Pfalmi  1 4  8,  !49,  &  150,  propter  repetitam  in  ijs 
vocem  Amirs,  ximoi  apud  Graxos  audiunt.  Goar. 

Hie  incipit  riyor  five  fecundus.  *  (Ci?) 

12.  T«  <rx(3(3xy,  ivtpM t,  KfxpxyxpioM  tb  Siimpou.  i.  e. 

W  ____  _  ’7. 

,  1  3-  ^<rhy£M  crUyu;  l,  v.xi  ^xXXoy.tM  ehyrsoM  AmxutAt^.om. 

Iuxmmou  xym  ApytcuHTy.ozTis.  rypr  €’.#  y. 

14.  Ta  aura,  bis,  rtyo;  C'.#  &  'AmxtoMkov.  rycr 

6  “  S. 


Harleianse. 

I 

5t 

Num. 

1613, 

15. 

Tb  aura,  vyor  S.* 

T  8- 

bf 

16. 

Tou  atiTa.  r,yov  S.  crAayia  S'.*  Ta  ai/TB. 

w* 

r  •* 

>7- 

Ao'Pa  xal  yuy,  0'.  bis 

Vi  yd  S'.* 

9- 

9- 

b. 

18. 

Auooliyor  tou  a’uTou. 

S/.t  e.* 

10. 

*9* 

AyarcAixoy.  ijp/a  S'.* 

i 

0: 

20. 

Td  xiTd,  iiyz  £d*  bis. 

1 0. 

b. 

21. 

Ao'£a  xa.'  yuy.  0'.  ’W; 

yyou  xpyiioj-iiTxosyov. 

S’* 

23  ’E,t  r'„  p.tTi  rl,  Sx,  r.*  ,  i!b.’ 

b-ZxKly.xy.or, — — 0v.  Sex  Pfalmi,  qui  ut  plurimum 
canebantur  in  Malutinis ;  vel  potius  initio  feil 

Laudum;  erant  Pfal.  3.  37.  4i.  87.  IO:.  £  , 

Du  Cang.  Goar. 

23’  oZrtis.  vyz  S'.*  j, 

24.  ’Ek  tvm  ImmAtw  AS-jv.  MituXvvApiov  Kdo  Mxvouhx  th 

XfUMpu,  W  f.*  ■  J2t 

MiyxXbMApix  funt  Hymni  feu  Tradus  quibus* 
bandi  /xcyxXbMOMTxt.  Hirmologium,  et  Sylliturgica 
Lectons.  Incipiunt  faepe  a  voce  ysyxXv Du 
Cang.  Suicer. 

25.  Eripx  Aytogirixv.  rtyjt  g'.*  12.  b. 

26.  ’Eif  raf  aiVouf.  r,yx  ?'.*  j 

Incipit  'Ayer  tertius^.  *  (^T>) 

TS  K«xe«y4.»  rl  Tflnc.  ;X„ 

’"aS.  I3i4b: 

29.  A-worf,iyor  TV.  aura,  iij/b  y'.#  -rA.  a.*  jj. 

30.  Eif  Toy  opflpoy,  ^tTOi  too  f^ij/*Apooy.  ^of  y'.* 

'  ,  15.  b. 

31.  K.«i  ouTOjf .  vyor  y  *  ibid. 

32.  'Eif  ToJf  a&ouf.  y*  ibid. 

33.  AcryxT wen  jxXxiyiMOM  f,’f  T«y  jo^oAcyiay.  Kupio: 

Maya»)A  T3  ytyAxa  p-nrogos.  16 

.  “^ar«y  Canticum  Canticorum  ;  i.  e.  om¬ 

nium  prasftandffimum,  Salamonis.  ^Aa-yx  Helychio  0.4-,; 
\jy.Mor}  x«;  p*£Aof  wV«.  Du  Cang.  ’  f 

Incipit  Hyor  quartus.  *  ( ef)  ) 

34.  Td  <r*(3(3ArV,  ivigx f,  Ktxpay^iov  T£ra'fT8 

_  ,  ,  ,  ,w  *6.  b. 

..  aVCtVX^V  cVyOM  l  lAfTX 

Td  y.r,Maty.  Iuxvmx  a^yuuri(rxozrov.  Hyn  S'.*  Iy 

.  ,  fubintellige  t^A^m  Modulum  :  et  eit, 

ait  dodus  Ligaridius,  peculiari  fibi,  gravi,  et  concinna 
voce  recitandus,  quafi  ISiov  tyov  yix0f.  At 'EJPMo's  ex 
oppofito,  alios  ad  lui  normam  decantari  permitdt.  Goar 
36.  Tb  AvtoZ.  riyxS'.*  I  ^  b 

37-  Ta  Aurob.  vyno\*  'AmxtoXixcm.  ryu  S' .  ‘  |  8. 

38.  Ta  AvtoZ,  riydS'.  ter.  jg  ^ 

39.  Ao'^a  9'.  by«S\*  w»,  xpyi'znrvAzrou.  in.  k. 

40.  AzroTriyor  tb  AutZ.  vya  S .+  2o.  b. 

41.  AmktoXiv.um  tb  Avtou.  rtyn  o*'.» 

4’.  Tou  ooutou.  »yV  S'.*  '  ibid.  21  ~b. 

43-  ^‘<x  xccl  8  Twayyo-J  AgyitutirxL-src-..  Jfya  J'  • 
fol.22.  bis.  22  b_ 

44.  Eif  T*y  Soj-oXoyixM.  r,yu  S'.*  2.,. 

*  AfX*  <rUl'  *7‘?»  T0U  ^aiou  xfxposyaj'a  TrfsJrou. 

l'or5/  23,  b. 

^46.  I7A.  x'SZnyvpA  AyxAJAmyoM,  ’IuA.mmov  dg^urmivn. 

’r47.n  24- 

40.  AyocToAixcy  3- A.  o.’.* 

49-  T™  «W,  «.  «•  ter.  4j.  b _ 25  b 

i°.  A.£.  ...  to,  r.»*  «'.*  ibid! 

51.  Aaroo-hyor  tb  aura.  ttA.  a'.* 

52.  TJ  «.  .'.*  ter.  2?.  b_  j. 

53-  ^Iwayyou  xpyr^rxoziov.  orA.  a'.^  2g  b 

54-  E.f  riy  o'?9f0,,  yyA.  *'.*  /A£ri6  iZA^Xyx.  2Q. 

55 •  K*1  JrA.  a'.*  M  .  , 

.if  »i-.  \  v  , .  mid. 

50.  i'-if  TBf  aiyouf.  7tA.  a  .**  „  . 

"«“■  ibid. 


r5* 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1613. 


c8.  £ti yr.plv  xvxrrlxTLpxov.  ?PC©-*  (Tff.)  lr*"  3°* 

59.  Ta  auTolI.  ttX.  G'.*  bis.  3°*  b' 

60.  AoaToXixop.  ttX.  G  .  *  3** 

Cl.  Ta  XVTOI;  ttX.  G.*  ter.  31*  bl 

62  Ao£«  xal  mv.  ir\.  G'.*  ,  32, 

63.  ’Juxvvov  a’f  p^ixxrKrxcsrou.  7rX.  G'«  ibid. 

64.  ’Aaroslip^of  tou  aurou.  ffX.  G  .*  32,  b* 

65.  ’AvaroXixov.  orX.  G'.*  33* 

66.  Ta  «W.  ttX.  G'.  *bid- 

67.  Ta  .  JO.  .  •  .  x"X.  G*  •«  •  3^* 

68.  Ai£  r«  »y»,  Iwaova  afp^iEsru ixoxsz.  ttX.  G  *  ibid. 

69.  ’£if DfOfoi',  pisra  too  e^xrpxAfAov.  wX.  6  *•  34- b- 

70.  Kai  ouTUf.  orX.  G’.*  _  35" 

71.  'A'yiofxTixeo  £if  txo  6*  uSriv.  .  .  7rX.  6.*  ibid. 

'Ayiopn'rai,  Monachi  qui  in  Montibus  habitant. 

Pradertim  vero  ita  appellati  Monachi  qui  Montem 
Athon  inhabitant,  quos  ad  6000  hie  efle  aiunt ;  a 
quorum  Santitate  ayiov  opof  inde  appellatur,  ipfiq; 
Monachi  ayioplVai,  vel  uti  effert  Goarus  ad  Euchol. 
pag.  120.  xyiovopeiTXL.  Du  Cang.  _ 

72.  ’Arfij.xTiy.CiV  ipx^o/xcvov  ill  txo  So^eXeyixv.  (u^£w.U)) 

36* 

73.  ’Eif  7.;,-  «w  «x.  .  3S:  •>• 

74.  f  Ta  £a(3-arw,  cucgxf.  xexpxyxpiov  tb  pxpeuf.  • 

(  )  '  ibid* 

73.  Tlx.  Ga;.*  Ao7£ax»i  ouv.  xp^a  7rA‘  ^*P'*  37- 

A.'---.  folitarte  pofita  in  Libris  Ecclefiafticis  Grxcorum, 
Minorem  AgoXoy.'ao  fignificat,  nempe  xal 

ui  xai  elytra  sroEupcan,  &C.  Du  Cang. 

'76.  ’Avoo-Vyo-:,  io£oc  x«l  vZv  O'.  orX.  6a?.*  3.8* 

77.  ’Eic  top  opO fOK.  pira  top  EgaiJ/aXpxop,  rX.  Gaf, ^  ibid. 
78  ‘'Exfpov  t3  Xpura-px.  *X.  Gaf-*  ’Eif  ™f  a.psf  orX. 

C*f.*  _  38-> 

79.  Tu  S-'-(3j3a7<o,  imTtpett*  xtxpayajiop  tb  vXxym  titxptx. 

*  (  .x.  J->  39-  &  39-  b- 

8c.  iTLyjneov  dvxf aVi/*op  Wppou  agptiE’BTiirxowou.  xp^a 
J'.*  TS  aurS  7rX.  <T.*  bis.  39  b-  &  40. 

81.  ’AwhtoXixco.  7rX.  J\*  40- 

82.  Ta  aura  7 rX.  /.*  bis.  ,  ^  4°-  b. 

83.  nx.  <T.*  Ao£x  xxl  vuo.  O'.  ttX.  J'.*  41- 

84.  ’Awori'x,05  tS  S6UT«’  1rA-  .,  f? 

85.  ’AvaroXixop.  ttX.  1b,“- 

86.  Ta  «utoS.  ttX.  .J-'.''  bis.  42-  b. 

87.  Aogas  vxi'  vu  .  O'.  7 rX.  J'.*  «•  43^ 

88.  ’Eif  rev  Zp'fou  per*  tov  IgaiJ/aXjUov.  ttX.  J7.' 

43.  b. 

89.  ’Elf  TXS  oJvou;.  TrX.  44- 

go.  ’Eif  Tro  So^oXayLXv.  ttX.  d  .  tb  AaXar^ou.  ibid, 

o  (.  Tio  itxGQxtu,  isrEfstf.  TT(>oxt!fi.tl/M  QerrtrxhovixxTov. 

r  V  #  '  ’  44.  b. 

n»»«ii>.>.«.  inquit  Goarus  Refponforiura  quidam 
veltnntj  fed  male;  melius  enim  alij  Propofitum  red- 
diderunt.  Ita  porro  appdlari  ait  Verf.culos  e  Pfalmts 
Davidicis  excerpt  os  qui  proprij  funt  cujufque  diet,  qui 
inde  Treoxtiutt/x  T»f  i/Ataxs  dicuntur,  quafi  rrcevia  ;  ut 
qui  mutentur  juxta  Epiftolas  et  Dies  :  lli’O  AOrON  vocat 
Liturgia  S.  Marci. 

Portius;  rifoxsl tptvov,  Propofitum,  Argumentum, 
Materia,  n$oO><n;,  ’TTro^Eo-if.  Efl  TTfoxn/xti/oo  veluti  Ar- 
guinentum  Fcfli  defumptum  e  Libris  Sacris  ;  vel  certe 
quod  K  £W  feu  T ext  in  Pfalmi  prseponatur.  Defcn- 
buntur  totiiis  Hebdomadis  7rfox£i'/*.>i-a  in  Horologio. 
Qusedam  ex  ijs  ^yxXx  feu  Magna  appellabant.  Erant 
et  ttcoxu'/j-lvx  MxrrUrtfAX,  «XXt|XouV»f *«,  et  alia,  quorum 
Initia  deferipfit  Marcus  Elieromonachus  m  Dubijs 
Typicis,  cap.  97.  98,  &  99.  Cang. 

’92.  "Errf :it.  xufia  ’Iwaovou  tb  Kouxou^'Xb.  H  fj.tyxhri 

ji?x.  ttx.  y*  .  45- 

Octoechi  par  Vefpertinahs,  explicit. 

Sequuntur,  v  x  , 

lu9ivx  IhliAtXx  tx  LX  vreLWtVTX  n xdx  x-jbib 

47-  b. 


Num.  1613. 

Ij  autem  fic  litteris  inferibuntur  miniatis. 


94. 

95- 

96. 

97- 

98. 

99. 

100. 

101. 

102. 

103. 

104. 

1  OS- 
106. 

107. 

108. 


109. 


112. 


iwOiooK  x-'.  nyo(  a'.*  47"  b 

iaiOivoo  j3  .  xj^of  (3 48 

IuGliiov  y°‘  .  x^oc  r.*  48-  b 

iwOu'oi'  S  L' .  v%of  i  .*  49 1  b 

LW0IVOP  f wX.  x .*  5° 

Lw Oimr‘-/.  wX.  G'.*  5*-  b 

iwflmoii  £  ctX.  Gap.  52-  b 

£wOi nov  x  ■■■' .  wX.  ¥.*  S3 

JaOivoo  flfo/.  ■b’X.  oi*  54’ 

lu9ivl»  wx.  G'.*  54-  b* 

SwfllKCK  l^’’.  wX.  55-  bl 

.  xx.05  a-*  odies.  57 — 58 

Eij  ToCf  ai'pouf.  x^of.  G  .*  odies.  58.  b.— 60.  b 
Eif  Tou'f  a^ouf.  x^of.  y°  .  odies.  61. — b.  63 
Eif  rouf  xivov f.  x^of.  odies.  63.  b. — 65 


65.-68 
6S.b. — 70.  b. 
71. — 72. b 
73-— 74-b 


75- 


Eif  roOf  aipouf.  zjX.  a.*  odlCS. 

Eif  rouf  uiirovc.  wX.  G'.*  odies. 

Eif  rsuf  xtvovf.  ztX.  Gap.*  odies. 

’Eif  too f  aioouf.  srX.  ^.*  odies. 

Sequuntur  manibus  alienis. 

1 1 3.  Tx  ayi'a  xal  jWsyaXw  Timrxpxxealn,  <^x\Xn 

Op9pr>V,  (JLITX  TOV  yW  3j\.  J1.* 

v".  fort^  legendum  i/uxtixA. 

I  14.  ’’Eira,  — ’EXe'xitA  p*t  0  flfc'f  xala  to  polyx  ?X£Of  <rou. 
orX.  a.*  bis.  7rX.  <J.*  75.  b.  &  76. 

115.  Erffoo  <r\jvoif[LxoTtpov.  r.yoe  zr\.  x*  7* 

116.  ’Ap^x  rx  y.  XX*-*  78. — 80.  duodecies. 

1 17.  Ao'£«,  xal  vw*.  (*  deefl  forte  O'j  80. 

118.  ’Apj^x  tb  (3xpto> f  xxa-*  80.  b.  81.  b.  fepties. 

119.  Ao£x,  xxl  uvv  (>'.  Ta  (3ap£Wf  xj^b*.  81.  b. 

120.  Ao^a,  xal  ouk  P.  Tb  fixpiut  tyx*  82.  b.  1 

I  21.  -}•  ^fupouapi's  (B7.  'H  uwavTx  tb  Kupia  r'jatov  Txirou 

Xpiirls.  <r7i^xpA  iJiojouXoo  flf  to— KupiE  ixtxpx^a.  — t<rJoi/j.cv 
rtf%0{  if-  xp^a  a.*  86. 

Tttxvtv,  &  uVawai/Tx.  Feftum  Puriiicationis  B. 
Maria:,  et  Occurfus  feu  Obviationis  tunc  fads  &  fene 
Symeone  et  Anna  viduS.  Du  Cang. 

122.  Ao£a,  xal  ouv*.  ttX.  a*.  86.  b. 

123.  Eif  tx»  Xitxv.  o-lipcxpA  liic/AiAov.  xp^B.  a'.*  bis.  x** 

G7.*  quinquies.  x^b  J7.*  femel.  87 — 89. 

Aitx,  ficut  et  riapaxXxric  a  pluribus  Supplicationem 
fignificare  putatur :  Proceflionis  tamen  et  Orationis  in 
Proceffione  faciendte  Senfum,  in  Ecclefia  Graeca  fibi 
vendicavit.  Goar. 

124.  Ao£a,  xxl  vvv.  wX.  x*  89.  b. 

125.  Kai  Mv.  wX.  x*  90. 

126.  ’A7rori%of.  rrhyripov  i’A^ueXoo.  -srX.  f3xp.*~  9°.  b. 

127.  2Tip^or— Nuo  aroXuiif  too  Scjj.ov  irov.  — -  srX, 

(3xpsuf.*  91. 

128.  Zri'p^o? — 3>wf  rif  aVoxaXui)no  eOvo.'o.  —  srX.  f3 ap.* 

ibid. 

129.  Aojfa,  xal  ouo*.  xp^B  J7.  91.  b. 

130.  Eif  TBf  aioouc,  Jo^a,  xal  ouo.  xp^.  wX.  ct.*  92. 

131.  |  Tu  auTW  pixn  x~  J7.  ‘H  Eufftrif  rxf  ti/xlx;  xfpaXx f 

tb  ripciB  ivSofcit  xrpo^xTB  Tspi’jSplfj.x  xcii  ftxTrJirrji  luxvvx.  elf 
to— K'J^IE  Ixixpx^x.—  zr>..  X  *  92-  b. 

132.  ’Ax-odlp^of.  TirX.  92.  b. 

[33*  TJ*f  aivoof.  i^o^a.  wX.  G7.1*'  93. 


134.  Ka. 


0  S'.  aVotrit 


tp^of 


Itf/owiXoi 


1  .  (ptaplupixoi/  ?)  Jo^a 


i,(*£paf  xai 
YlpOOpO  IJ.X .  uTA.  G7.*  93-  b- 

TB  fbupLtrXLOV.  Elf  — 
ll  l pXA?.OfAtV  aliyipx 

i  zi xpovTx  y  .  AvSpts 

94. 

18  (quse  prima  eft 


135.  t  Tx  xufiaxx  tb  TeXwoou  xa 

KuflE  ixtxpxf'X. - iVJwpAEK  O-lip^Bf  l, 

xvxr\dm[j.x  y' y  xal  aoaroXixa  i7,  xai 
IIup.  xp^oc  a'.* 

Kupiaxx  tb  teXwvou  xai  tb  fapn  . 

in  Triodio)  Tie  appellata,  quod  e4  Parabola  de  Publi- 
cano  et  Pharifteo  ex  Capite  xviii.  Lucm  recitetur.  Re- 
fpondebat  A.  D.  164’, •  (“>  ait  Leo  Allatius  m  Libello 
de  lJominicis  et  Hebdomadibus  Gracorum)  Dommicm 
iii.  poft  Epiphaniam. 

r  r  8  *36.  Aif. 


bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


r53 


Niim.  1613. 

136.  Ai;.  TS  aura.  mj£©>  a.*  94. 

J 37-  VAirag  Jo'ga.  wA.  o'*  94.  b. 

13S.  Kai  yjy.  •& 0>/.*  Tb  «^a  clvotfliyov.  Sofa.  zrX.  a.* 

.  ..  c,  ,  ,  ,  95- 

I39-  ^ai  11 0,1  ^  ■  Naof  xai  nuA»|.  Eif  raj  amxf.  hrlausu 
m-  VJijpsp*  dvarlaa-ipx  e,  xai  7'  t*  zrxpovTx.  yyo; 

r'-*  ■  ■  •  ,  .  ,  .  9.v 

I40.  iTijMof —  Aiveite  «utoji  tv  >tUjw/3fltAojf.  ibid. 

/  I4I-  ^Ti'^os — ’Avar>j0(  Kupit  0  0tof  piou. — mjm.  7'.*  wA. 
*•’  ......  .  95-'b- 

142.  r.ira  <niyo;  Eif  MpM.  57A.  J.  — Efy.tj.oXolfaoy.xl  ooe 
ki/fie  tv  oA»j  xccgSlx  y.x.  96. 

J43-  T0  siwrOj  xai  vuv,  U57tp — EuAo7M|xtsn'M"  usrap^tif 
0 eot van. — +  T-,j  xupiaxij  ra  aVJra*  (Sic  dida,  quod  ea, 
parabola  de  Filio  Prodigo  ex  Capite  xv.  Lucze  lega- 
tur.  forte  Dominica  Septuagefunzej  ’Eo-mp*;.  irUynfa 

cr.vx<r\d,ny.x  7',  xai  avarcAixa  o',  Jj^of  a.*  96.  b. 

144.  Acfa.Jxo;  6'*  98. 

145.  Kai  vvv  6'.  xiratrltyos.  Sofa.  vfX.  £.*  98.  [i- 

146.  Kzi  vuv  ra  rp^ou. 

t  tif  Tafaiwtifi  hrluyso  n'r/jt;  m,  c\t%r,px  faxtrlfaiux 
t,  Xfti  f  ra  rrapovra.  «j£.  4'.*  ibid. 

'47-  “H%»  ‘J/-#  (  ,  99. 

148.  Srip/of — ifyy.oXoyfaoy.xi  roi  x/.ie. — wA.  o'.  ibid. 
I49..  A;f«.  wA.  t'.*  99.  b. 

15c.  Kal  j>uv  usrsp — ’EuAofry.EV. 

i  T;j  xupiaxM  TV,;  ce.7roy.p-U)  a;  to—  Iv'oe  exixpxfa. — 
00P*.  >i'/o;  srA.  o'.  IOO.  b. 

K.Ti.v.;-.yl  tm,-  ciTroy.p'.u.  Dominica  Sfeptuagefimae, 
qua  Carnis  corned  ends:  finem  faciunt.  Du  C./ng, 

’Avor.p'i>f,  Grtecis,  proprie  dici’.ur  Septiniana 
qua;  apud  Latinos  Septuageji:i;a,  nomenq;  lumit  a 
fubfequente  Dominica,  poll  Carnis  comedendze  finem 
faciunt,  et  Lad'cmijs  utunrur,  ufque  ad  Feriam  Se- 
cundam  poll  Quinquagefnnam,  qua  Quadragefimale 
Jejunium  inchoant.  Unde  qua;  Dominican!  dwoxolu 
fubfequitur,  Tv^ocpxyop  appellatur.  Die  Cang. 

1 5  1  •  Kal  S  ®*.  arroolij^of.  Sofa,  et  A.  S'.*  lot. 

152.  A ofa.  Ei;  tou;  aivouf.  »i^of  a.*  102.  ' 

153.  Ei;  Tovf  aivouf’  trjtyripov  IStcyeXoi.  riyo( -rrX.  S'.* 

1C2.  b.  ttA.  6'.*  105. 

1 54.  ITA«7i8  J'.*  104. 

155'  tTiJ  xupiaxjj  rut  XTroxpeu,  irzrefx;’  r‘%npov  IStcyeXov. 

Krrofi'pvof.  U-A.  d.  IO4.  b. 

156.  TiJ  Stvcegx  TS-geoi  Tflf  Tupoaaylaf.  r,yj§y  x*  I05-b. 
Kupiai'.n  -r,f  Tuoopa7i'ac,  Dominica  Quinquagefimze, 
Grzecis  a  Cafei  efu  nomen  habet.  Du  Cang. 

x57-  ’r‘?  fovTtgx  traripa,  T?r  rvooipx fiW.  7rA.  ^.*  ibid. 

158.  T-o  Tfirrj  wfiii.  f'.  &  «.*  106. 

159.  Tij  rpirj)  Eo-or/faf.  a.*  IC6.  b. 

160.  Tm  TETafTt)  Brpwi.  a.*  107. 

161.  Tk  Tsrxp-y  ttzrhxc.  rip^©-1  f'.*  &  a.*  107.  b. 

162.  (TsJ  7T£f/.7r]JJ  BTfoil)  7'.*  108. 

163.  T«  EffTT.'caf.  6.*  10S.  b. 

164.  Tm  5r*pa<TX£UM-  wpw).  irA.  6'.^  I09. 

IlafatrxEi'M  Dies  Veneris.  Me 7a Am  xat  iyi*  M-ajaa-xtUM 
Dies  Veneris  in  quo  Chriflus.  paffus  eft.  Dtt'  Ci7«^. 

165.  Tm  rrapairxEUM  ivwcpoc f  two  ev  esVxmVei  Aa/xifavTuv 
T«T£fOJV.  Eif  TO KllpiC  E K'Xpxfa. In^Moiv  ISlO/JC&Ot. 

7r^-  3  •*  109.  b. 

^Ao-xMTif  Vita  Monaftica,  fpeciatim  in  Monte  Atho, 
Continentia. 

166.  m.  J\*  bis.  no.  hi. 

167.  Aofa.  ttA.  e'.*.  hi.  b. 

168.  K«I  vuv  6'.  arrofi'pvof.  nj^Mfov  IJtoftfAov.  M^©^  £'.* 

1  12. 

169.  Aofa.  ttA  cJ1'.*  I  12.  b. 

170.  ’Eif  rSf  aivouf.  (Toga.*  nj. 

171.  f.  Tij  xupiaxij  TMf  TU^o9a7i«f.  Jef*.  Eif  to — Ku'pit 

ixtxpxfa.  ttA.  £'.*  Uj.  b. 

Vid.  fupra,  no.  156. 

172.  Eai  vun  too  iipvB  (?)  aVotrJipvof,  Sofa.  rrA.  £'*  1 14. 

x73-  Eif  T0Uf  onvouf.  ri^Mpov  ISiopocXov  oo’varao-ipoov  t'. 

»rA.  a.*  I  j 

Cat.  Harl  Vox..  II. 


Num,  16x3, 


174 .  »a.  ».*  1IJ.  K. 

175.  »!.£.*  IlS. 

1715.  £'.* 

*77'  t  T?  .y.y.  It r.-'y-y.  ,K  T\ — 

'irOpti.  i-i'yj-j;  i,  tt.  Jm,,,,,  ....  .yj, s\  Kx\  r4 

y'-  "MS' 5’.*  bis-  1  Ij.b. — 1 1 3. 

178.  Up.  jw.  s'*  us.  I,. 

J79*  Lira  TOO  zrpocropcoix  tou  poMvai'x.  Jog**  xal  „J„ 

<Jiv;  lAapov,  zrpoxcfatooy.  M^of  rr'.  — Mm  arrorp-^Mf  t'o 

«  (SSrt  ««rvc«.  n)0&  »z. 

~  II9. 

Mijvafo’,  Mentea  ;  dicuntur  Volumina,  cujufque 
Diei  et  cujufque  Saudi  Officia  continentia.  in  1  2  Menfes 
difpertita  ;  in  qiiibus  deferibuntur  pra;terea  eorundum 
Sanflorum,  quorum  Feftum  agitur.  Vita;  aut  Martyrij 
Compendia,  qua;  Suvagapia  vocant.  Qua;  quidem  Menrna 
m  tot  Volumina,  quot  funt  Menfes,  dillribuuntur.  In- 
terdum  tamen  ex  ijs  habehtur  qutedam  redada  iii 
ettito^mv,  ac  in  duo  duntaxat  Volumina  difpertita,  fin- 
gula  Sex  Menfes  continentia,  qua;  vulgo  Anthologii 
tituliim  prteferunt.  Neque  tamen  Temper  et  ubique 
Mentei  Officia  continua  Serie  decantantur,  fed  inter- 
dum  ex  eo  in  Officijs  quotidianis  excerpuntur  Canones, 
L roparia,  et  alia  id  genus  Cantus,  qua;  in  Solemnitati- 
bus  Sandorum  in  Ecclefia  cantantur.  Pra;:erea  Synax- 
arium  ex  Menafis  exceptum  legitur.  Du  Cang. 

npoTCfxoix  ri^Mjo^.  Verfus  Jiniiliares ,  asquali  Syllaba- 
1  uni  numero  conftant,  ut  eodem  Tono  decantentur : 
ficut  et  ejufdein  Metri  Strophae,  five  Gra;cis  five  La- 
tinis.  Goar. 

l8o-i  t  Tij  Sijrlox  TMf  BTfamt  i$3op%S&  tm 
zrpui.  uirorpsoj.  irX.  x.  I  1 9.  b 

181.  T;;  SsvTipa  irnr/p  f.  ri^iv  srpl f  to— n^vraf  uVt. 

•  •  •  rX.&  e  •*  ^  ^  ibid. 

182.  Flpof  TO  Ofl-IE  TTXTCp  XX  tJojxaf - 7rA.  X.*  120. 

l8j.  ’Aurori^of  iSiOfAtXoi.  f'**  &  a.*  120.  b. 

184.  Tm  t^iitm  BTfui*  dororiyof.  nyos  zr\.  a.*  I  21. 

185.  Tij  TfiTj,  Etrn-.-paf  6'if  ri— Kupi*  ixix^xfa.  ?Xof  6'.* 

T  T  .  I  2  I  .  b. 

186.  THjvof  6'.*  bis.  122.  122.  b. 

187.  ’Acj-oriVof.  wA.  J'.*  j/>o  b 

188.  Tij  Tttuprr,  Ts^m.  zr A.  J', *  X23. 

189.  Tij  rtrapTM  TMf  BTfirMf  E^JopiaJof  ts-fftpaf.  -srA.  J'.* 

124. 

190.  Alf'  ElV*  TO  fXXfTlpiXOV,  xx\  TOO  ZTXpoVTX  WfOf  TO - 

'Xlf  wpa0Mf. — M^of  6'.*  ibid. 

A-TapTupixo'y.  Intellige  r^nrxgm  in  Laudem  Martv- 
rum  compofitum.  Goar. 

’’Enx  TO  /xxoTvpixov.  Si  non  oporteat,  ex  Concilio 
I.aodicenfi.  Can.  51.  Natalitia  Martyrum,  Memori- 
amve  eorum  alijs  quam  Sabbati,  aut  Dominicis  diehus 
Quadragefiniffi  tempore,  celebrare  ;  cur  diebus  fingulis, 
etiam  in  Przefandificatorum  Officiis,  hoc  Modulo  navtu- 
9m,«oi  {AUflvge f,  Martyras  aperte  Grzeci  commemorant  ? 
Quia  privatam  cujufpiam  folemnitatem  Canon  vetat 
peragere,  ne  Sandis  debitum  Honorem  detrahant ; 
Omnium  fimul  celebritatem  Sabbato  Sexagefimam  prze- 
cedente  agant,  et  cundorum  quoque  Memoriam  diebus 
fingulis  laudato  Modulo  renovant.  Primam  Refponli 
hujus  partem  confirmat  Balfamon  :  Secundze  vero  non 
minus  Traditio,  quam  ipfa  hujus  Moduli  Ledio,  fuffra- 
gatur.  Goar. 

*9 *•  Opy-oio).  m,o;  C'.#  124,  b. 

192,  '  Lteoov  OTfOf  to, — "One  zrxreo  S\i. — -srA.  a'.*  125. 

!93'  Tm  zrfazrlri  vput.  riyof  f'.*  125.  b. 

I  94.  TiJ  ssrt, usrlr,  eosn'pas  zrgo f — Tov  ponrpioy  ruw.  r,y@» 

.1  X  20. 

1 95*  Oy-otov.  r,yj&  S'.*  '  126.  b. 

196.  "Erepoy. — "n  TOU  [j-eylrov  ptufMpiov.  m^SP  C.m  ibid. 

197.  ‘Azroriyo!.  ny<&  3'.*  ”  127.  b. 

198.  r„‘  srctpao-xEuJJ'  ¥f«i  wA.  S'.*  128. 

*99*  I  Tij  arapatrxEUtJ  rijf  wp:oTMf  eSSo[xxS(&  twv  xyiuv 

n !■£*«>•  Ktoi  t7u  d.y!ov  ©eoJw  ov,  Eif  to'  —  Ku'f.f  ix;xoaga. 

K-  r  iV«(UE» 


f54 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  i6ir. 


Ti!V  '•  nyvpx  i^oy-eXoi.  ^yot;  bA. 

a-  ;  128.  b.  In  fine  J/s. 

Nurnai  dyixi,  Grzecis  xar’  fay™  Dies  Qua  - 
dragehma?.  Hinc  apucl  Scylitzem  in  Conftant.  Por- 
pnyrog.  be^ii  tGS0f*x;  tm  iylm  nrtim.  qua;  Latinis 
Quarta  eft. 

Nam  Gneci  Jejunium  Quadragefimre  aufpicantur 
le  Luna?  poft  Dominicam  Tjj;  xvoxpsu  feu  Quinquage- 
fima?,  al.ter  ac  Latini,  qui  hanc  Mercurij  die  incipiunt, 
qu$  ijidem  Grascis  7r^-„  dytuv  hs-hm  appellatur  : 
at  Latinis,  Priraa  Quadragefima:  Hebdomas,  ca  eft  qua; 
nanc  lubfequitur.  Alia?  pratena  funt  apud  Graces 
j-w.a^feu  Jejunia,  fc.  vr^x  rZv  mo  Am,  feu  ante  Fef- 


J - I  iwy  «7rof9AG 

turn  Apoltolorum  Petri  ct  Pauli :  vr.ru*  r?u  BpoJpoW 
Jejunium  (ofto  dierum)  ante  Feftum  S.  Johannis  Bap- 
ti  a? :  wr tux,  r»f  S sotUov  xoi pujV.wf  Jejunium  ante  Af- 
fumptionem  B.  V^M.  quod  a  primo  Augufti  initium 
ducit.  nrfia  TTji  T7!?  u^euc,  Jejunium,  ante  Fxaltationem 
oancta?  Cruets  dierum  otfto,  non  tamen  ex  neceflitate : 
mrfia  Tvr  T3  Xpif-oo  ycvvriiriui,  de  quo  in  voce  Tco-a-aex- 
xo^n;j.t£ov.  Du  Cang. 

200.  Ei ra  to  poapTup.xo'o,  xal  V  pcapTvpixa  too  Jyov. 

T™  TTr  T“  a>‘'ou  f  Q^r  V e'-*  1 29. 

(T  Ineodoii  Teroms :  ut  in  Libro  Leonis  Allaiij  de 
Dommicts  et  Hebdomadibus  Gracorum,  videre  eft 
col.  1433.) 

20  1.  7 rA.  S'.*  122> 

,  202\£X‘  T0“  71 Eet  «i>ouf>  rtyrpx  zrpo- 

061*010.  a -fax  ttA.  S  *.  £ijteit£  EpcBpoo'0£o  aworiyoi/.  122.  b. 

J  •*  ^lS-  133.  133.  b. 

203.  A zror,y&-  Sot*.  bA.  S'*  b. 

„  2o4*  Eai  ouv,  0  .  ETfpoo  So^xrixon,  £if  to  u;  etiyz;.  ttirtTri 
s/rifiiv.  bA.  S.* 

205.  t  Kupiaxil  TWi/  mrfiwi.*  ijtoi  t«  ot5oSo^xf 

[ff576W  S'.*  ibid. 

OpcroSofcix  appellata  Prima  Dominica  Jejuniorum, 
leu  Quadragefima;  ;  in  quA  celebratur  apud  Gra?cos 
Jeltum  Rcftitutioms  cultus  Sacrarum  Imaginum,  fub 
Michaele  et  lheodora  Imperat.  legiturq  ;  Synodicumin 
hanc  rem  edit  urn.  Du  Cang. 

206.  K«1  m-  r«»'.  ™  Hyu  S'.*  xnor'iy^.  Sl%x.  xal  nr. 

,  v  „  Il6. 

207.  Elf  T 0<jf  Umovs.  $o£x.  ttA.  G'.* 

208.  T  Ti?  xufi*x«  ioxlpxf  £('f  to — x-jpie  Uixox^a.  _ 

ZriWpo*  ■vpoo^oior  5rA.  g'..  Ti—  cp^xyhx^ «Sr. 

,  „  ,  137.  b. 

209.  Kai  ra  i*r,vxi s  urpoxsip won*  ttA.  J'.*  .  .  .  —  t'JWaf 

flAnfoxo^iao  — ’An-ori'^;^  Ui£i*tA(&.  ibid. 

210.  T?  Jfurffa  xu-poi-  r?f  tW'faf  iG$op<iS&.  or  A.  a* 

21  I  Tki  JivTvpxi'  'ctrrrepus.  nyr.  y'%  et  a,.*>  i^g^b 

212.  T»j  rfirw  ■srA.  «'.*  Jj 

213.  tS  ix.  y.‘  a 

_  >.  /  ibid. 

214.  A-rros-tyJ^,  wA.  /3afswf. 

2I|.  t irclprK  zrpcoi.  m-iyes  irA.  (3xp{U;.  j4Q' 

216.  T11  TiTxpr-p'iozsj^xi.  ly.d.*  ibid. 

217.  Tij  7rt/A7rly  Topu\'  cnrofiyoc.  ttA.  J'.*  l4, 

218.  Til  iripnrln  lo-nrspxf.  azrori'^o?.  irA.  141.  b" 

219.  Tij  Tragzcziuti  zrp<A-  uzronyo;.  wa.  J'.*  i42’ 

220.  Tij  Trafan-xiti;  'arzr^x;.  7,^. 

•  221 '  twmWi.  lopr^cut,  ^ 

ayio.;  *»Tfof  n/*Wo  rf^/op,ou  n<rxcV«u  ©f(r(raAo1-,/x»if 
toj  lIaAa,ua. 

«E«.  *».£'•  ,43. 

- K«!  VV*  il  .  x.7ror>xov.  Sofa.  -B-A.  S'*  ... 

*»3-  Hjc©-  «.  P*  I4+- 

224.  t;  i™v,-  „>  xi— k„>„ 

223.  THZ©.  J'.*  J  '4^- 

226.  ®}i(  .i— rl,  J-.  ibid; 

227.  Tlfm, n,  tnrfipfSi~.'Anslx,s.m_r  , 

146. 


Num.  1613. 

228.  Tr  Slurry,,  zrpaft  rnS  itvrtpatf  ISSoudSo;.  irA.  0". 
.  '  146.  b. 

„  2“9-  ?  SijTcpa.  sc ~;sa:'  zrpo;  t.',  —  Jeute  asraorff  xuu- 

pj*oif.tx.rs  j  47“ 

230.  % ror.^of.  €'.*  j4y.  b. 

23  '•  T|»  T/HTjf  BTpeot.  7TA.  (3ap/Wf.  ibid. 

232.  Tij  Tpfrjt  a r-fgx;-  zrpk  t «-£««►  ra  rpi'a. 

148.  b. 

233.  Ajofiyo;.  $X-  €'•  149.  b. 

234-  Tij  TtTuprr,  ■srpu’i.  dn-or ipgoc.  S'.*  ibid. 

235-  rndpTYj  EB-iTipaf.  iip/.  Jy.  j^Q.  b. 

4  ,t®1  Tu  potpTVpn-.'jo'  xai  ti  zrpooofioix,  xal  B-p^j 

TO  —  EX  &£;«»  r5.  —  BA.  e  *  I  5 1 .  b. 

2 37*  EiJ^  TOSf*irly  Bpui'.  xso,-iyj>i'  ttA.  S'.*  151.  b. 

238.  T-p  ziijxTs\r,-  to-Bifaf.  vy.  X.*  ibid. 

239.  Aisrer/pgof.  bA.  S'.*  j  -2- 

240.  Ti;  BapaB-xfuy-  BpaJ.  7rA.  S'.*  j 53.  b. 

241.  Tw  zrxpxwj-  lovlpx;.  bA.  Gap.  u,’ 

242-  HA.  a*  .  .  ,;3i 

243.  Kupiaxi)  rpiTij  tmk  i-rirfiwo-  tou  tiui'ou  caupoU  :  itrn-/- 

“f  xilp'E  txUpx£x  —  $i£ci.  iyo-,  r.  BA.  a'.* 
iwaooov  Apyitircxovov .  j  ~  ^ 

„  af4-  Kal  ouo-  TUf  ?•  JJ^of  S'*iiroTlyo<:  J/aAAfrai  xal 
1'UV'  TIJ  TpiTij  T«;  T£T«fT*K  i(3So/j.xSos.  ICC.  b. 

245.  Elf  Touf  a'lVBUf.  (To^a.  bA.  <}'  2  rg 

2^6.  'Eif  Ztpxr^oy  KX)  PvoTzody  zroooKin.oty  roZ 

rip*, on  r*u?«.  S'.*  ‘  ^  156.  b.‘ 

,  Tij  xypiccxij,  e<rzr;px^  »$■«/* *»  riyouf  T-  xal  ra  b«- 

povTa.ij .  **  f';*  “  b_ 

24  .  IIpoxfi/Afoov  bA.  4.*  .  .  .  tcLxaf  x?, ijpooopti'av.  158. 
249.  Tjj  SiVTipp  zrgui,  Tijf  rpiVi;f  ifiooi*uSo<;.  bA.  S'. 

,  ,  158.  b. 

-5°-  Eif  tijo  Bpoo-xvi/ijirio  ts  Tipti'oy  rauoe-j,  a’ori  -3 _ ra 

SixPn/xxTx. — ^0f  or  A.  «.*  fif  tijv  buwt>:i»  ^.-a: .  j  -0 

^I.^f  BA./.*  ‘  '  J59.  b.’ 

252.  ABOf-i^of.  BA.  J'.*  jg0> 

2-3.  Tij  Tpi'rjj  Bf&it.  or  A.  J'.*  jgj" 

>54. 7;  2PJr»  w,;r ?i  ii 

Mran,.  „z.  «'•  ^  '  I'7? 

25J.  'Ajvlx„  MfuKlIf.  ix.  r."  &  «'.*  ,62’ 

256.  Tj  nr.'fTj.  7re«f.  ,1.  A*  l6j.  b' 

257.  Ertga,  l$tS[At?*ov.  toA,  J'.*  jg.* 

2j8;  Tj  Tir^n,  t«  Ttr^fmr  if3J.a.i,[. 

r 

259.  'Et,{„  ZllGUtXoV.  M.  i.’  lS  g‘ 

260.  nf.t  Ti-xif,,.,  Mwr M.  ’,6..,. 

.si'  T*-  '•*  *64.  b. 

202.  Tj  *£•»*  •nnxO'.  w*.  166 

T?  J'-*  -f;- 

264.  'Anri^,  -j. 

265.  Tj  ;z.  J..*  ;bid 

200.  T;  ^nuvj-  ,V„£,«e.  Sx.  M.  lM 

.  «V«.  «nroo>.  f«»V„  |„. 

«5  ™  Kiij..,,,. 

.  6Sb  b! 

269.  Aoga.  £  If  Tov(  iivovi.  riy.  x  *  g 

270.  Tij  xupiaxij'  ETBspaf.  bA.  (3xok<r.  j6o,  b. 

•  ~'7I'|  *^5ra»‘?c®*-  nyvpuv  iJioptfAoo.  7rpox.i,'ufVov.  — 
aBorpfil/uf.  wa.  (3xgiuf.  ibi(f 

272.  -H*.  BA.  S'.  ?T£p©>. 

273.  Tp  JWpa- Bpwt.  bA.  <r.*  170/b.' 

~  “ft  'g)^TEpa*|^f«f.  Bfif  ri— raupo^aowf  Moj’^f. 

275-  "OpcOlOK*  IJ^.  f'*  &  a'.* 

2yd.  ITpof  to  u  0£oAfxrof  ptapTUf. — ii-^.  S  .*  I  8  I  b. 

277.  ATrorlytpy  nynooy  \Sioy.cAov.  Hy.  ttA.  /3 ap/wf.  I72> 

278.  ETfpoo  iVic/*£A«v.  J'.*  ' 

279-  T?  Tp.TtJ-  BpML  bA.  (Sa.E'l.,.  17-‘ 

280.  Ti,  TpiTj,’  io-Blpaf.— ™  Jb/p  ^  g{#‘ 

281.  'Airoriy&.irA.  a.*  1 7 ^  h 

282.  'ETfpOf.  bA.  J'.*  ' 

J74* 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse 


Num.1613. 


2^3.  Ty  muff  Bryan.  za-A.  d-'.  *  ,7(- 

2l4‘  r*  ibid! 

2«5-  1  VI  TiTzfy  Tag  Tr/^TTTTU  l73Jo/a:)!<5'©J  InrtPXg.  7JT91  TX 

Ka»e»«  vocant  Greed  Serierh  plurium  rtLxp'iuv. 
*v*r**>,«&e nun  de  Refurredione  agit ;  Fxvpo**ar*rl*& 
Crucem  Chrifti  fimul  er  Refurredionem  commemo- 
m:  vtoTOitoU'  verb,  in  Honorem  Deipar*  Virginis  cedit. 
oo^r.  Capit,  Muficis  Graecis,  prasfinitam,  prasfcrip- 
tam,  ac  determinatam  Menfuram  Hymnorum  fignifi- 
eat :  praterea  et  Canonem  vocant,  quod  Modulationes 
earn  Menfuram  non  excedant.  Goar  ex  Aratdio. 

K .xvuv  — Hebdomas  poftea  fequitur  quinta 

yuadragefims.  Hujus  Hebdomadis  Feria  v.  canitur 
Magnus  Canon,  cujus  Audor  fuit  Andreas  Hierofoly- 
nutanus  ex  Damafco  oriundus,  Greta:  Archiepifcopus ; 
qm  colleda  umverfa  Veteris  et  Novi  Fcederis  HiftoriA, 
C.anticum  compofuit;  cohortans  omnes,  ut  qua:  vide- 
ant  in  HiftoriA  efle  bona  et  Jaudabilia,  pro  Viribus  fee- 
^entur,  mala  fugiant  et  execrentur.  Leo  Allat. 

28  6.  Aij 


Num.  1617. 


I  [XXpTVglXOV , 

v  arpog  to — rnv  cvSogot 


0  7 TXfOV,  TX  ITlpX 


»  ■  . o.  Ij6.b. 

2by.  Ty  trtpvrlii’  sr pur  a,  oAx©3-  S'.  ibid. 

288^  Ty  wipon-ly.  'unrip*;,  zrgo g  to  —  a’f^ayy£Aixw,'. 

VU/^flUj)  iyy. 

289.  'A tcoAx©3-  7 rA.  J'.*  177.  b. 

290.  Ty  7r«f acrxfuy  •  iTf mi".  ttA.  J'.*  iyg. 

291.  Ty  irajaa-xiuy  hnrlgxg  Trig  ax«9/roti.  ttA.  g'.* 

,  ,  178.  b. 

AxaS.ror  u,«M)3y,  Hymnus  qui  Hebdomade  quinta 
Quadragefima:  Sabbato  in  Matutinis,  in  Honorem  B. 
Vngims  canitur.  Origo  Nominis,  ut  rede  Cl.  Meur- 
fius  in  Glolfario  fuo  obfervat,  a  Victoria  quam  He- 
raclij  tempore  adverfus  Chofrote  Legatum  obtinuerunt  ; 
ob  quam  impetratam,  totam  Nodem  ftantes  Hymnum 
m  Honorem  B.  Virginis  decantabant.  Hinc.  dxdQirog 
Epitheton  B.  Virginis.  Suicer. 


292.  Kal 

OtOTOXOV.  So%X 

—  t  ’Elf  7 


'  f^otprufutiv.  xx-.  t x  orpovouoix  Tng  uirtgayiag 
’*'•  ^  •* —  T®  ««■'  jnurnfiei-. 

({■xipaXpov.  ttA.  S'.*  ijg.b. 


on.  (xitx 


to  Trpona.^\v. — ’Eif  tuv  dvdf- 

ibid 


293.  ’Ex  Tfln 
vuctv.  tX.  S  .* 

'Avxhurug,  Liber  Grtecorum  Ecclefiafticus,  qui 
Latinis  Lefiionarius ;  in  quo  Veteris  Teflamenti  mp- 
xo*rx)  feu  Sediones  continentur,  qua:  in  Ecclefia  Anni 
diebus  varijs,  pro  dierum  Feftorum  -Solemnitate  can- 
untur.  Diverfus  eft  ab  alijs  Ledionibus  prolixiori- 
bus,  quas  ijdem  Graci  inter  officio  recitant,  ex  varijs 
Sandorum  Patrum  Commentarijs  defumptas.  ^ 
Cang. 

294.  Tuv  01X6)11.  tPaXXopi'v  to  irxgiv,  xal  ’AAAnAouayioi- 

oy.oZ.  irX.  3'.*  ibid.  vX  S'.*  j8o. 

O  oix©r  Hymni  genus  eft,  in  Dei  vel  Sandi  ali- 
cujus  Laudem  ita  conflrudum,  ut  quafi  compagem, 
aedificium,  fabricamq;  virtutum  ejus  ct  gloria:  videatur 
componere :  et  ideo  xoi/r«x>y  opponitur,  ut  eo  amplius 
et  diffufius.  Itali  quoque  fua  Poemata  habent,  Stanze 
fuA  Lingua,  id  eft  Domus  five  Habitacula,  dida.  Goar. 

‘AxxnXomaptoo.  forte  idem  ac  Alleluiacium  Melos, 
five  Alleluiatica  Antiphona  apud  Latinos,  qua:  faltem 
definebant  voce  Alleluia. 

" AxxnXovia.  In  Officijs  Ouadragefimalibus  Canti- 
cum  Alleluia  frsequentant  fsepius  et  iterant  Gneci, 
eiq;  decantando  facilius  indulgent,  quo  tempus  illud 
diuturniores  divinas  I.audes  requirere  agnofeunt:  idem 
quoq;  in  Mortuorum  Exequijs  afiumunt  atq;  ita,  non 
ficut  Latinis  Laititise,  fed  potius  Moeroris,  Compunc- 
tionis,  Devotionifq;  apud  eos  elt  Argumentum.  Goar, 
pag.  205.  videfis  autem  ejufdem  pag.  541. 

295-  TpOTrtXgtOil  TVj'r  (jlQTOKOV .  UytOplTIXOV'  7tA.  S'.* 

r8o.  b. 

Tporxnw.  Vox  generic^  et  Canticis  in  Ecclefia 


Grmca  receptis  communis:  Modulum  femper  vertif, 
et  Antiphonas  Latinorum  quadantenus  refpondere 
oblervat  ©oar us.  Du  Gang. 

In  Ecclefia  Orientali,  canebantur  certis  diebus 
certi  Canones,  quos  in  Trop  iria  dividebanr,  pleru.nq; 
30.  et  nonnunquam  plura  :  excepto  uno  M.igno  Ca- 
none,  c-ui  250  compledebatur.  Suicer.  ex  Triodio. 

Canones  in  Odas  dividuntur ;  Odte  in  Troparia, 
ex  quibus  componuntur.  Singula  name;  Troparia 
continent  aut  plura  aut  pauciora,  cum  eorum  Nu- 
merus  detenninatus  non  fit.  Troparia  quandoque 
V.ra.  ac  vaSa  relinquuntur ;  quandoque  primis 
Littens  quafi  An  nulls  in  Verbis  veluti  Catenula  in- 
leruntur,  quam  Acroftichida  au tores  vocant.  Du  Cane- 
ex  Allatio  de  Georgijs.  & 

C,E”f<'0  J'uXXtTxi*  iv  KuvrxvrivouiroXei.  irX. 

°  •  I.  AxxnXu'xgiov.  ttX.  S  .*  j8  1 .  b. 

297-  t  Ty  xu^axi?  t Xv  Bxtwv  xxvuv.  S'.*  182. 

ri  •  •  •  r.  .  ^  b.  fexies. 

Dominica  in  Ramis  Palmarum. 

298.  ’nS> j  ejufdem  Canonis  titS^tv,,  S  tlgpou 

Libros  Notis  Muficis  exaratos,  inter3 Cantandum, 

1  an tli me  confpICiunt,  vel  etiam  habent,  Grteci :  com- 
munefq;  ideo  et  Verbis  et  Cantu,  memori^  tenaciter 
mligunt  Hymnos,  ad  quorum  Normam  alios  pari 
oyllabarum  numero  conltantes,  cantando  infledunt : 
quorum  ideo  primordia  Canticis  alijs  inferibunt,  ut 
art  eorum  Regulam  fequentes  indicent  effe  decantan- 
d°S’  ,  vocantur  'E,Plxot  five  Trattus  ;  ut  qui  fe¬ 
quentes  Modulos  ad  fuam  Muficam  Inflexionem  tra- 
bant :  eofq;  fecundum  odo  Tonorum  varietatem  col. 
ledos.  Liber  Ecclefia:  EIPMOAOriON  didus,  conti- 
net,  See.  Goar. 

299.  ’nSl  ori/xtfy,  S  tfri,.  Zx.  Ig3_  b.  — tS4. 

300.  aS*i  iySor,.  0  tlpjx if.  j?-/.  $'* 

301.  ’£lSri  ivva.Tr,.  0  ? x.  S'*. 

302.  f  Kujiaxy  TrifXTrJy  tuv  uyiuv  v 
rpo;  r,jxu v  Mxptas  rrf  adurrlUif,  t* f  1 

Sol*.  *X-  »•* 

303.  ’AvoAx©3’  A£st,  ttX.  S'*. 

304.  ETtpcv  ISiopicXov.  tig  TOV  olytov 

<pov.  tif  TO-— tx txgotZet. ’EiOjAoi  u  ,rfw, 

ec-iflcf  Mxpixg.  xxi  \]/xXXa  1  raijra.  Sogz.  rix.  6  .*  187. 

riporoi:.  Hac  voce  frequenter  denotatur  Antiftes, 
curte  et  Adminiftrationi  Ecclefite  prtefedus.  Suicer. 

305.  'Ansljdfr.  S\*  187.  b. 

^306.  K«|  VUV  $  TX  ixutx  ixpo.  ’Elf  TBf  (tiVouf.  So£x.  r-g. 

J88. 

,  3°7-  J?  xvpmcw  ia-rrsgug.  tig  to  —  xu'fi*  t’xsxfa^a. _ 

IrufAiv  Ax©3  xai  ipdxXofAiv  tS.  XC6TC6  VVXTIXOV  TX  XX 

0  TTZ?C,  a.  188.  b. 

308.  npoxn/xtiov,  J>X©?  7r^*  ¥ — tJwxftf  xXrigovofxiav 

XTrogix©3.  IStofjotXov.  rix •  «**  189. 

309.  Ty  SvjTica.  rroui  ty, g  txrJif  IpSoptxS^.  ttX.  x. 
189.  b. 

7ti  Muutriug. 
190. 

3M.  Arroax©3  ‘SiofctX©^  S\*  ibid. 

3  I  2.  Ty  rfiVy.  7T put'  cnroAx©3'  *X.  a*.  igo.  b. 

3 *3’  Ty  Tfiry.  itrvigKg.  rrfog  to — ernirxv. — y  • 

,  191 

314.  Awog-ix©3  iSiopiX©  .  r,x-  a..* 

315.  Ty  TlTxpTVI.  TTfUI.  r,X>  ct.* 

316.  Yy  Tfrafty.  itnrifx'.  nX.  x.* 

3!7*  rl—x(jpn  eVI  tov  rxpov.  7 rX.  S'. 

3x8.  T«  rrtjxTr] y  7rfl6)f.  XTrofi'x©3.  1 rX.  a'.* 


184.  —  1 84.  b. 
185 — 183.  b. 
'ig-nuv.  Trig  oaixg  pot,- 
0  —  xufit  ixexpxgx, 
186. 
ibid. 

IwTUp  TCI*  u/xvoygx- 
TTpuigug  ida-v, 


3XO.  Ty  SlVTlgCt.  ft 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


i56 


Num.  1613. 


piixplv,  S!f,  xx 1  to  pixorvpiy.lv  (/xaxfoy  ?)  xasi I  T«  Trajot-T* 
Idiopj-tAx  pj.%  xx  1  ffoiafifi'  WTa,  irX.  6  .  x97‘ 

^vyu/piAy;  Animain  juvans,  quod  animse  prodeft, 
Animx  utilitas.  Suiccr. 


199. 

ibid.' 

«i  \pdAAo/j.tv  rip/rf« 
200. 
4oi.  b. 
202.  b. 
203. 


323.  Ao'£a.  7rX.  J* 

324.  K»>  KUO.  7fX.  d' .# 

3 2 5- 

idiopxtAa s  «p£.  a. 

326.  J'.  *  bis. 

327.  nx.  <T.*  bis. 

328.  Ao£*.  wx.  S'.* 

329.  t  Tm  nxfifidr m"  inntpzs"  vroi  run/  Sxfwv.  ci 
Kjjie  ixexfaPz.* — Zri^rjoo  IdidpxtAov.  yy^©3  nA. 

330.  *»£=..  « 
uhcpsAoy. 

'ft*©*  a.*  bis. 

332.  tH yj&  £'.*  bis. 

333.  Ao'£a,  xai  w.  /. 

’Airon'^©1,  t3  trxGSd- 


Sy/xifov  «'  —  Eif 


njc’ip^ 

331 


334- 


ibid* 

205.  b. 
ibid. 

206.  b. 
-o  7- 


’«»  Sxful/.  7tA. 

208. 


335-  H*.  bis.  ibid.  208.  b. 

336.  '  Anso^iy!^'  rip^xpoi'  Idiopj-tAov  —  Xa7f£  xsel  fu 

0  <rtor»f>  0  to7c  ytpovfdlpj.  t  .  .  .  ’Eif  roOf 
iii/oi'f.  J'.*  209. 

337.  (T.  ter.  209.  b. — 211. 

338.  Ao£z.  xal  kM  Jfo©'  7rX-  ffo 

21 1.  b.  ("nil  fcripti  fequitur.) 

359-  t  Tw  xu/siaxii'  brnepxs.  fjf  TO - Kvpte  ix:xpx£x. — 

ri^ouf  $•'.  xai  \JjxAAopj.tv  fiyripa  ld,o/J.tAx.  rxvrx  yyj& 
OrX.  ^ .*  <?£UT££>OUmf  Ct’vT«.  £  I  2. 

340.  nx.  J".  bis.  ibid. — 212.  b. 

341  Ao£a.  xal  *Uv. — Xaiff  xjti  tv/ppxlvt. — Hpoxtipj-tv^ 
—  Ida  dy  ivAoytirxi.  — ’ An o? I yjt$y  ld,opj.tA<&.  vy®3  £’.* 

T  ,  *  2,3- 

342-  213.  b. 

343.  TH^(^  TrX.  (ixpeui;.  ibid. 

344-  t  Tm  xy’ix  xx)  pj.tyctA y  dsvripx  riyvpee  \$io(xt\et  ipxA- 
Acififvx  t if  t aivouf  aiiT/if.  x«u  lif  too  trirf^iyo  TXf  a’uTflf 
rpjtpxc.  yy.  d.*. 

Unaquxque  hujus  Hebdomadis  dies  aGrxcis  ayi*. 
xad  fA-yz Ay  vocatur. 

345-  n/-  *•*  (  __  214.  b. 

346.  As£«.  X«l  kUX.  7fX.  /.*  215. 

347.  ’A/ro  fi'^a  rxvrx.  nA.  d.  ibid. 

348.  nx.  d .*  bis.  215.  b. — 216. 


349.  Ao£x.  > 

35°*  t  Tjf  «V« 


«/C- 


ay.  wX.  J’. 


216.  b. 

*»f  T8f  ixiyouf 

ibid. 

217. 

217.  b. 
ibid. 

218. 

219. 

'Elf  T8f  cii'youf. 
219.  b. 


THx^ 

352.  Ai^a.  x.l  yuy  o\* 

353.  An -ocly(§f  liti/xcAov  .  .  .  nA.  S'. 

354.  nx.  6'.*  bis. 

355'  Ao£a.  xal  vZv.  nA.  (2zctw;. 

356-  t  Tm  dyix  xx  1  pj.iyd.Ay  titccotyi. 

S’lyjp'.v  lito/j.[Aoy.  yy d. 

357 •  H/C&  “•*  ter.  ibid. — 222.  b. 

358.  rHy&  £'.*  22I. 

359.  ’An or‘y<&.  ny, ig«y  iJicfuXoy.  ttX.  g'*  ibid. 

360.  nx.  g.*ter.  221.  b.  222. 

361.  Ac£a.  x«i  yCy.  n-X.  0  .*  220.  b. 

362.  t  T»  dyi'x  xx)  pj.iyd.Ay  nlpj-nry.  nrfut  ei;  Txf  xii/ovc. 

riX«foi'  ISio/acAou’  yy@>  g*  2  2  2.  b. 

363.  "H yj&  S'*  ter.  ibid.— 224.  b. 

364.  xx)  »vh7lX.  g.*  2  2 

365.  A-or.-  (gj.  riy*i§ii>  iSicpj.tAov.  nA.  S'.*  22c.  b. 

3^.U-,.IS  i,6. 

307.  nx.  j  .*  &  a.*  2 

3ts.  a«„.  rt.  jS7.  b.‘ 

3S9.  Hun,..**,  £■'  ,  ;bid 

370.  t  T;j  ayi*  X*.  puydAi)  nlpj-nly.  ■riyr.fd  Id,  out  Ax 

^xAAcpjtvx  £.f  Toy  E.’f  K^i*  ix£x?*£* _ Tro>- 

/xfy  PVvaf  ^ .  /.«■  4-xaao pit*  tuvtz  rd.  \S,ipj.tAx.  yy<&  d.* 

2  28. 


Num.  16  £3. 

NittImj,  ita  appellatur  Graeeis  Lotio  Fcdum  qux 
fit  Feria  quinta  Hebdomads  Majoris,  &c.  Du  Ciitig. 

371.  'THyj&  S'*  bis.  228.  b. — 429. 

372.  Ao'£*.  xai  yCy.  ttX  f .•  ^  229.  b. 

373.  *E(f  TTjy  XfiTeupy/ax.  Sifpx.'xx  1  yuv.  ttX.  g'.*  23O. 

AfiTBfyi'os  dicitur  (inter  alias  ejufdem  Vocis  figni* 

ficationes)  A£lio  et  Ritus,  quo  Sacro  Sandlmn  Cor¬ 
pus  Chrifti  et  Sanguis  conficitur.  Aeirxpyla  i-eXsia 
Sacrificium  integrum  appellatur,  ad  Uifcriinen  illias 
quod  fit  per  npoyyixry.H/X .  Dll  CiVlg. 

374*  t  XtpzfSixoi/  ry  auT-ij  ypj.ipx.  optotu f  xx 1  KoiyyyixoV. 
Kugia.Nixypopx  m  ’Hfiixx.  orX.  g'.*  232- 

XE/Jaj3ixyf,"Tpy@J  S'fa9ixcf,',T^yo'^-' AyytAix-. . 

ijdem  ac  Tpurxytov.  Du  Cang.  videfis  avitem  qus  infra 
dicenda,  voce,  Tpi<rxy,oV.  no.  428. 

K01  kunxoi/  Modulus  ad  Sacram  Communinnem 
prxvius,  et  ante  ipfam  Hoftix  fractionem  Cani  folitus. 
Goar,  p  146. 

373-  t  ’AxoXotS/as  two  a  ■y.M  nx5r-M  T8  Kt'fi'a  yyccv  'lynx 
Xp ira.  iiTif  tpxAAirxt  ry  xylx  xx)  pxtyxAy  nepzdy  irrnipx;. 
yym/  xno  dpxf  ftvrtpxf  ry;  vuxTOf  pj.tr x  too  ivAoyyriu  xx 1  too 
tj;xi]jxAft,ov.  ipxAAopxty  re — *AxX»uv7» — -’'Eif.  ny®3  nA.  d'.* 

,  -3'-  b'- 

'AxoAzSix  in  Liturg’cis  Grxcorum  Libris  fingu- 
larem  habet  Significationem,  de  qua  Meurfius  in  Gloi’- 
fario  fic,  'AxoXa^ia,  OrJo,  fcqucntia.  Nomen  fVe- 
queritiffimum  in  Ecclefia  Grxcanica  :  et  xxvm.  i-e- 
cenlentur  in  Euchologio.  Hs  tamen  nondum  expli 
cant  earn  Significationem  de  qua  nobis  hie  agendum. 
Oux  igitur  ilia  ?  id  nos  optime  docet  Gersfimus 
Vlachus  in  Thefauro  Quadralingui,  ’AxoAo-?,*  inquit 
OJJicitim ,  riAsry,  o^yix,  fAurxyuyix,  •jpj.v:,:d,x.  dpj.v1^,  xx>du. 
Efl  ergo  Officium,  Ceremonia ,  Ritus Juccr  :  cjl  Hymnus, 
Canon,  c dc.  Suiccr. 

’E yAoyyr^r,  Antipbona  Bcnediftionis,  a  qua  apud 
Grxcos  Officia  quxvis  initium  ducunt.  Du  Can*. 

Hoc  in  Officio,  qux  fequuntur  Rubricx  fpcciatim 
duxi  recenfendx. 

37^.  Ex  rp,rx'  tirx  0  Iiptv f  xai  umtp  rs  xx Tzjjiu$yvxi 
y/J-x f  ny;.  xx 1  xvxyiv'j!<sxi~ou  to  sspUTO-j  ioxyytAiov  T«r  dixSy- 
XXf'  ,  ,  ,  232. 

377-  ^ai  irXrif oufj-tv*  ra  tvxyysAia '  Atyo/Jtv.  ibid. 

3/8.  Kx,  euSuf  ipdAAopttv  rx  cj.’jrltpwjx  e^vTf^ovvTff  xvxi/tx 
tx  rgonxpix.  ’Avrupuvw  d.  nA.  d'.*  ibid. 

‘Amf«M».  Fxmineum  Antipbona  a  Neutrio 
Antipbonum  diferimen  apud  nos  obtinet  maximum : 
quamvis  ab  uno  Grxco  vocabulo,  utrumq;  fuerint 
Latini  mutuatL  Antiphona  namq;  eft  Sententia  vel 
Modulus  cuilibet  Plalmo  decantato  adjunftus  et  quafi 
ex  oppofito  refpondens,  inquit  Honorius  Solitarius 
Lib.  2.  Cap.  17.  Antipbonum  autem  ut  hie  i.furpatur, 
PJ'almi  funt  plures  Verfus,  ad  quorum  fingulos,  una  et 
cadem  fit  femper  ab  altero  Choro  Refponfio  :  et  propter 
hanc  Unam  et  Reciprocam  Sententiam  femper  illatam, 
aoTipMm,  quafi  Vox  oppofita,  feu  Vocis  oppoiitio  vccatur. 
Ejus  forma  qualis  fir,  ex  his  Miflalibus  Antiphonis  (i.  e. 
Liturgia  S.  Chryfoftomi)  fol.  105.  et  feq.  pofitis  inno- 
tefeit.  Extat  enim  ibi  Pfalmus  uyxS'.v  to  c^opjoAyyttnSx, 
ru  xup, o),  &c.  cujus  fingulis  Verfibus  refpondet  o>npi- 

yo>,  T*‘f  ^ptnftiixic  TJif  &£CTc'xa,  xai  rx  tgx;,  illis  fxpiv.S 

opponendum.  Quamvis  fatear  rem  potius  in  adverfum 
fenlum  trahendam  :  cum  enim  Pfalmus  ipfe  vocatur 
x'j Ti>w»«y,  ejus  Verfus  funt  qui  uni  et  eidem  difto,  i.  e.  re- 
fumpto  (ttpvp/.u.)  ejus  frequentius  repetito)  opponuntur. 
Vel  certe,  quia  muiua  et  utriufq;  Chori  ad  invicem  Re¬ 
fponfio  :  ct  voces  jam  auditx,  rurfum  vel  ex  toto,  vel 
ex  parte,  iterantur  (prout  quoque  in  Latinis  Relpon- 
forijs  contingit)  xyrlfuuov  appellatur.  Unde,  turn  propter 
Vocis  Significationem,  turn  propter  Compofitionis  for- 
mam,  Latine  Refponforium  congrue  reddi  poflet.  Ve- 
tat  tamen  Ufus  loquendi  antiquus,  ut  Miffix  Introitum 
alio  quam  Antiphoni  vel  Antiphonx  Nomine  dicat ur. 
See.  Goar. 

379.  A, lx.  xx)  w.  6'. 


232.  b. 
380.  Ayrupuio. 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


Ntnn.  1613. 


380.  'AnriQuiiov  g7.*  7 -A.  £'.*  .  .  .  bi 

(.Antiphonon  3  forfan  invenitur.  fol.  233.) 

381.  Ao'£a.  xal  yuy.  S'.  Sp^©4  gV*  fexies.  233. 

382.  A ofca.  xal  yuy.  0\  234. 

383.  Kos0  pp^a  |3 xptus.  ibid. 

384.  Ac£a  to  t .-A©4.  Kaf  y~y  to  xvto.  TEiTa  xal  ump  ts 


XXTX^iu 

S«y«i.  ’Euayy/Aiov  Svjtssgv  xa 

Ta  ’Iwa'yyjiy.  ibid. 

3  8S- 

Ampmov 

TiVapToy.  7tA.  a.* 

ibid. 

386. 

yyy.  6'. 

23S- 

387- 

’Ay  ritpmov 

7ri/A7rJoy.  7rA.  g’.* 

ibid. 

388. 

Ao'ga.  xal 

yyy.  6'.  y'.* 

235.  b. 

389- 

’Acnlipwov 

EXToy.  7rAayia  (3ap£( 

or.  ibid. 

39°* 

Al£«.  *»* 

yoy.  6'. 

236.  b. 

39 1  * 

Aoja  Ti  t 

eA©4.  x 

ai  yjy  7raAiy  xvto.  Eitx 

fuayysAioy 

xxtx  WarS'aioy. 

ibid. 

392. 

EtTa  n Xr,Fx  iSioucAx.  ’Aynpwyoy  i^Soyov.  ttA.  <T.* 

ibid. 

393- 

A^a.  xal 

yjv  6'. 

237.  b. 

394- 

AyTipwyoy 

1  ®V^osi'" 

S'.* 

ibid. 

395- 

4,'£«.  x«i 

yuy.  0'. 

238. 

396- 

AyTifxoyoy 

syyaToy 

■  VX&  y  * t 

ibid. 

397- 

Ao^a  to  te'A©4.  ; 

*al  7raAiy  a’uTo.  EiTa  1 

luayyiAioy 

t  ETapToy 

|_xai  •jVe’p 

Ta  xara 

^Vio^iioaij  xaTa  ’Iwayyjjy. 

238.  b. 

398. 

’AyTi^coyoy 

Jc’xaToy 

.  7tA.  g  *. 

ibid. 

399- 

Ail*,  xal 

yoy.  0'. 

239* 

400. 

AyTipwyoy 

EyiJs'xaT 

oy.  7tA.  g/.* 

239.  b. 

401. 

1  no.  0'. 

240. 

402. 

AyTipayoy 

1  J'wJ'ExaToy.  v.p/©4  7rA.  J  •* 

ibid. 

ZnTflTE  0!UTa 

T«  iJl 

SjxiXx  £if  Tar  copaj  rrjf  ptEyaAiif 

7rapao-x£ 

U»lf. 

403. 

Ao£a  xal 

yCy.  0'. 

ibid. 

404. 

Ao'^a  to 

TEA©4. 

xal  vZv  xvto.  v EiTa  xa 

I  VKTip  TZ 

xxTxfciuSy.vxi,  EoayyEAioy 

K£jJ.K]ov  XXTX  MuT$a7ov. 

.  ibid. 

405. 

AyTipyjyoy 

Tpia-xxi 

SiXXTOV.  7rA.  g'.* 

240.  b. 

406. 

_  Al£., 

■  yUy  y. 

t 

'H  to  pxa/pi 

£  Jl  xyy'iKz  Stfaxyin,  xal  Tixztrx  too— 

’AyTiyoy 

TiXlXpiTXX 

iSiXXTOI 

'.  7TA.  J  .* 

241. 

407. 

ALlx  xal 

y£y. 

24 1.  b. 

408. 

AyTipwyoy 

■Kiy.-KTlXXlSiV.XTOV.  CvTilTi  tl{ 

txc  wpaj. 

X.  T.  A. 

ibid. 

409. 

TEiTa  Ta 

KXpOVTO 

ibid. 

410. 

Ao'ga.  xal 

y. 

xa0'  /*. 

242. 

41  1.  'EiTa,  xai  usrEp  Ta  xxtx^ioi^tivxi.  iuxyyiXiov  lxtov 
xxtx  M apxoy.  ibid. 

412.  ’EiTa,  01  y.xxxptKy.oi.  iftopiEy  ri p^a;  «.  jjyouy  ETEpuj  to 

—  MaXaplOl  01  7T£iy»yT£?.  ibid. 

Maxz/JKr/Aoi.  Hymni  Samftorum,  Beatitudinis 
memoriatn  recolentes :  vel  potius,  es  Beatitudines  de 
quibus  Matthsi  vto.  vel  tandem,  pia  viventium  Vota 
Precefq;  pro  Defun&orum  Requie,  ut  Regni  Cceleftis 
Beatitudinem  confequantur,  perfoluts,  et  Beatitudini- 
bus  Evangelicis  a£tu  recitatis  adjunct  as,  y.xxupur[Ao\  vo- 
cantur.  Goar. 

413.  Kai  7rA»ipw&iyTuy  two  y.axxpirry.Zv,  zrpov.ily.ivov.  »ip£© 

^  •*  ^  ibid. 

414.  Kai  U7r /p  tz  xxtx%iu&Zvxi.  ivxyyiXiov  i(3Soy.ov  xxtx 

M«T$aIoy.  ibid. 


415.  ’EiTa  fl  (SzXtrxi  xvxyvutrtf  xal  t’uS'fuf  0  Aoyof.  Ttx  y.x 1 
Jtt££  Ta  v.xTxfciuSwxi.  cuuyyi\iov  oySoov  xxtxAzxxv.  ibid. 

416.  Kxi  euS’ewj  tx  co  Ta  Kupa  Korpta.  0  tipytof  fx  Jeu- 

Ti'pa.  Xal  T*  ZrfOKXplX  tiff  SlSScKX.  [XtTX  Si  TV?  y  ifcxwor- 
TflAa'pioy.  ibid. 

’E^a7ror£iAawioy.  Num  ille  Hymnus  eft  ad  quern 
concinnendum  in  Chori  gremium  mittitur  aliquis  ?  An 
tabs  alius  qui  in  San&i  vel  Myfterij  alicujus  Memori- 
am  (PxTTcriAXiTxi  emittatur  ?  Num  potius,  is  eft,  qui  mit- 
tendam  Spiritus  Sandti  gratiam  advocet  ?  vel  denique, 
qui  juxta  do£ti  Ligaridij  fenfum,  fere  Temper  de  Apof- 
tolorum  in  Orbem  difperfione  et  prsdicatione,'  vel  aperte 
vel  fubobfcure  memoriam  habent  ?  Goar. — Certe  longe 
videtur  pvobabilius  ita  appellatos  ejufmodi  Hymnos  it 
Voce  i^x7r crtiAov,  qus  in  ijs  fere  Temper  occurrit.  Du 
Gang. 

417.  Ex  TpiTa.  lira  luayy/Aioy  tvvxTOv  xxtx  luxvvriv. 

242.  b. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


t 


$7 


Num.  1613. 

4IS.  Kal  taS’ivs  to — Hxirx  7 ryotj, — ’Wcoy.ui  S',  xxi 


oy.ev  fip£»lpa  lSto[*s\x  tov;  rfsic  toit 


419.  Ao'£a.  ryj&  ttA.  g'.*  .  . 

420.  Kal  vvv.  7rA.  g'* 

421.  vEirx.  xxi  u^rlp  Ta  xxrx£io$> 

•i  Ta  xxtx  Mapxoy. 

422.  O  oi  iepev f  rr,v  Zuvx'ktoiv,  to — U.\r,pua-uxii/,  x. 


?x©  y* 

242.  b. 

244. 
244.  b. 

fuayylAioy  oixxTOt 


ibid. 

Zvvzttt*.  In  Ecclefia  Orientali,  ut  cl.  Meurfius 
docct,  variae  erant  precationum  Formula:  a  Diacono 
pronunciari  folits :  qus,  quia  Conne&ebanturj  et  fi- 
mul  pronunciaDantur,  o-wzktxi  fimpliciter  vocabantur*. 
Erant  autem,  1.  >!  y.syx\n  2uya7TT5)  tZv  ’Eip«yix«uy,  md- 
jor  Connexio  Irenicorum  ;  in  quit  ad  finem  fingulorum 
Verfuum  Populus  refpondebat  Kupit  ixiwrov ;  ad  pe- 
nultimum  <rol  xvpu  ;  ad  ultimum  xy.w.  2.  ycixpx 
Eui/x7ttv  t oiv  ’EtpnvixZv,  minor  Connexio  Irenicorum  :  ab 
ejus  Initio,  alias  di£ta  "Eti  xx 1  m  3.  Xwzttt h  rZi/’xirn- 
o-ccoo,  Connexio  Petitionum  j  ad  cujus  ftngulos  Verfus 
refpondebat  Populus  ;  7rxpxa-^ou  xSpu  :  exceptis  penul- 
timo  et  ultimo,  ubi  eadem  erat  Refponfio  qute  t«k 
’Eifjjyixwy.  Suicer. 

423.  K«i  v7rLp  tz  xxtx  VJxyyiXton  IvSUxTov  xxtx  ’Iatm « 

*'**>'-  ibid. 

424.  EiTa  iJ/«AA oy.su  IJiopt'Ax.  a 245* 

425.  Ao'^oe.  7tA.  /.*  246.  b. 

426.  Kal  ihjit,  7tA.  S'.*  247. 

427.  Eira,  xai  07 rip  tz  xxtx  VJxyy'iAm  SuSIxxtov  xxtx 

MxtSxTov.  247.  b. 

428.  Tfio-ayioy.  ibid. 

Tpirayioo,  Tri/anflum, Hymni  gertus,  cujus  heec  eranf 

Verba "Ayi^  0  yof/ayi^4  i^po?,  uyc<§r  dSxvx rof,  £A£ri(roy 
:  in  quo,  0  referebatur  ad  DeumPatrem  ; 
ayioj  Wyropo',  adDeumFilium;  dy\<§y  dSxvxTo;  ad  Spiritual 
Sanftum.  Vocatur  etiam  Tpio-oly^  Sy.vo\oy!z,  y<c a3ixoc 

vy-v^y  ay/AAwy  oy.oXoycx,  to irxyi!§y  x\v(§y^xyy'o.u-j  uyvoSiz, 

et  Tpia-xyix  (pan.  Anno  enim  Theodofij  Junioris  quinto 
(vel  trigefimo  fecundum  Cedrenum,  &c.)  magno  ex. 
iftente  Terrs  Motu,  et  Muris  corruentibus,  quia  Ama- 
lechits  intra  Urbem  inhabitarent,  et  adverfus  Hym- 
num  hunc  Blafphemias  proloquerentur :  Preces  et 
Supplicationes  in  Campo  Tribunalis,  Theodofius  cum 
Proclo  Patriarcha  inftituit.  Cum  vero  KJ.-i£  eAe'tktoo 
clamarent  Horis  aliquot  continuis,  Adolefcentulus  qui- 
dam  in  confpectu  omnium  in  aerem  fublatus  eft,  audi- 
vitque;  Angelos  clamantes,  "ky\(C5y  S  Scot,  Hy.^y  ia-^upof, 
ayi©4  xSxoxtos,  eAe'jjitov  rj y.x;.  Quod  CUlll  mox  demif- 
fus  narriUfet,  omnes  eodem  modo  Trifagium  canere 
cceperunt,  et  celfavit  Terrs  Motus.  Huic  Hymno 
Imperator  Anaftafius  poll  ilia  xyi&  xSDxto;  addi 
voluit  0  s-z’jcoS;];  bVlp  riyuv,  verum  id  cum  magno  Malo 
et  fuo,  et  Conftantinopolitanorum. — Obfervandum  tan¬ 
dem  diferimen  quod  eft  inter  to  Tpirayion  et  Hym- 
num  Epinicion ,  in  quo  fimiliter  "Ayi^  canebatur,  hunc 
in  modum,  "Ayi©4,  ayi©4,  xyi'SSy  xupi^-  o-a|3 xuQ. — Ergo 
Tpiirayioy  initio  Liturgis  ante  Epiftols  Letftionem  cane- 
bantur.  Hymnus  vero  Cherubicus  et  poll: 

Catechumenorum  etPoenitentium  dimiffionem.  Tpio-a'yioy 
quoque  ufurpabant  pro  Sacrofanfla  Trinitate.  Suicer. 
Deinde  fequuntur, 

429.  f  Tps-olpiAs  iSioy.e\x  i^x^^o/xci/x  ei(  txc  ci'paj  riJc 

ayiaj- xo:i  ji*£yaAJK  7r«p«(rx£u»i?. 'I2pa  srpwT«.  7rA.  S'.*  .  .  . 

ibid. 

430.  EnyJ-y — Auy.i^ljxvro  tx. — 7rA.  S'.*  &  x  *  ibid. 

431.  — “E Saxxu  fi{  to  £jgxy.x  y. a  pxoA7io.— 

A ofcx.  7rA.  S'.*  2a8. 

432.  Kal  yov  xvru.ll£lpx  y.  ttA.  S'.*  ibid. 

433.  Ai£/*EgiVayro  too  'i  ydnx  y-i.—-  7tA.  S'* 

249-c 

434.  Er\y(& — 'ESuxxv  e!;  To  (Spuyx  y.z  yoXnv’  xx't 

T»iy.  Ao£a.  7tA.  a*  249.  b. 

435’  ^a'*  VUV  dvro.  "flfix  tXTTI.  7rA.  S'.*  25°' 

436.  I.TIXJ& - Al£y.tpiCXVT9  TX  iyoiTlX  [XX. - a'* 

250.  b. 

S  s  43 7- 2tW 


i  s,8 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1613. 

4  37-  to  (3p3 ftu  (J.-4  x^v.—  Aoga. 

°  •*  230.  b. 

438.  ".fips  £?!/«TJ|.  rX.  pxptu;.  252. 

439.  Eti> AitptipicxvTo. — v t'.*  ibid. 

,■  440.  Zti/j©--  EJuxao  sifTa  optopt*. — A#£,*.r-X.5'.#253. 

44 1.  ‘O  a-purof  yopt;.  ttX.  S'.*  253.  b. 

Xc.i  V,  proprie  notat  Canenthim  atq;  Saltantium 
cnllcfiam  Multitudmem.  Notum  eft  in  Ecclefia  hodie 
Pfaimodiam  reiineri,  et  quidem  Choro,  quibufdam  in 
Locis,  bifariam  divifo.  Improprie  notac  Multitudinem 
amice  confpirantium  in  Docirina,  &c.  Suiccr. 

Xopc,.  Dividebanfm-  >  -cl  in  SigUy  dextrum  et 
cTf!r  ■  finijlrtwi.  'I  riodiunx  inSabbato  Sancio,  upyerat 

M'Xar  0  «h£iof  w»|i  o’  srpwrof  y°po;,  in  quo 
quidem  dextro  ac  ^raro  Choro  confiflit  Saccrdos  qui 
Sacra:  Liturghe  prseft.  Du  Cang. 

44:. \x;v*  elf  to  to  ISdytxcy 

'  y  <  T  . 

•  ■!/-F,xo(  T>1  Jcfia  j/cp.  TrX  S'.c  ibid. 

Project  us  Canonum,  qui  Monachos  ad 
pfailendos  in  Vigilijs  Canones  excitabat. 

‘Ei<pny.!^,  Laudes  Imperatori  ,  immo  Pontifici)  ac- 
clamare  ;  woAu^3o»io:  ,  feu  iroxx*  iVn  ad  precari.  Du  Cong. 

De  Ecclefiaflico  Domeftico.  Erat  in 
■!  :r  n /'  '■  «©*  H*  xwh  et  -  Soph r»  *?i  .  ' 
Hie  alijs  dicitur  3:pt r.x<^  TJ  srpJiT8  x*i  0X,Tl-5  di- 
cebalur  etiam  «ov  ;  c.c.  Horum  tria  erant  genera.  ’  Alii 
ad  Patriarcham  five  Ecclefiam  ;  alij  ad  Imperatoris  Cle- 
rum ;  alij  ad  Dominse  pertinebant.  Codin  us,  £Ss 

zrpuro^ixATnu  tyjiJ  !xx\n<rtx,  dxxd  Jo/Atnxon.  i  5\  (}&?,- 
Ai;:cs  r./.rp^y  x.ai  ufjpcrtfs;.  xai  0  fjty  So/jtrix^  T-  oWttj,- 

yx.K.  Obfervabis,  Cieri  Imperatricis  principem  fuifle 
Domcfticu in, '  quemadmodum  Imperatoris  erat  0  srpWTo- 
ip:c?.T>-,; :  ct  illic  Js-rirciwy.'t,  hie  punXixh  fuifle  appella- 
tum  ;  at  in  Ecclefia  mt piupyixoy.  Atq;  hie  poftremus 
m  Leclorum  Ordine  erat,  ejufq;  Munus,  to  ■jroXvyjhiov 
(five  to  fif  ttoXX*  hr,)  dicere  Patriarchs  in  Proccilioni- 
bus.  Suicer. 

443'  t  x*1  fJtyxXr  TrxfuoTctujj  h;  t.!?  tririptyvy 

hr  to— K -.pit  ixUpxfa.—XTtyr, ;pa  ISdfjtXu  tu  h;  t*;  4'»>8j 
TTif  fj.eyj.Xn;  my.Tr]r;.  nyovy  to — Ucksx  r  XTt'tri;  vXXoiZto. — 

A,f—  Asth  iiic trcSr';-  ’£«  £&*.  ™  $f«fii<r».— 

E.t*  to  iraoh  £lf  to— 0Tl  ixf« t«i«^m  to  tXto;.—'lr3uoy 

e,x*  *  2  c  c. 

444-  ...  2CC.  b. 

445.  Kwm.  ^  ^  256.  b. 

.  VU!'-  a’#  aVorix©*.  Ta  Trpuo-o'uola. 

to — Ot£  .x  t.?  J'/  K.  ‘ 

447.  t  TS  4,  x,y,y^:,  „CCA,.  x;, 

rK  rJ-K  f,«  ,,  r^.s; 

“V*  ,+■»»•(«>  ■ .  -  ,  r::, 

«"'?  »»•  ««!  T.  *f; .4.  i  •  258. 

44S.  A.p. ^4.  J*  25g. 

449.  K.:  »•>.—  Ti  KJ«._ 

XT‘  ’■*  ri—1 ‘0„, 

.  TZOu.ro:  X0,u,  An*.,.  „ 

r».oe£oi>;.  , 

’  ,  .  259.  b. 

4JO.  t  Am  V, tJ-'A«.,4s'.4._t;  „'„J 

'“"V7“n '“X'-  .  ,  =60. 

4-,  •  IUA10  avro.  e.tj;  to  irapoo.  ,rX.  Gupta;,  iKIJ 

452.  nx.  a  .*  ^  .“• 

453-  %  Hi’,,*  tS  KoJ^i.rt.  S’*  2gI' 

454.  Kor*,*J*  TJ  KL>«  W.t5  AauJa- 

•upix,  TtTpxfuuov  :  ry.  c  * 

ac-  *p,.  '  ■'  202 

r  455.  r„  ..es.'™,  W,«f.  Jze, 

490. 4.£r^.,,r,  _ 

458.  «'.•  ,,35.4- 

459.  twa-  25^: 


Num.  1613. 

Deinde  fequuntur, 

4Co-/  Zt,XV';  vpo<r£fJ.oi<*  faxxlfj.hu  h;  tx;  uyh;  fj.t»prvpa( 
TilrtrupuxovTu.  ry<&  £'*  ’la^g  rf.y,£»l0-xcirei;.  2^6. 

461.  Te  y  £.»  ibid! 

4X  T“  "X-.e-*  .  260.1. 

463.  Ao^a  To  —puTov.  xai  yZy.  6  .  T«f  i.  tif  to  _ _ 

Ku'p.f  £Xixoa|«.— -Ao0«.  £'.*  26„ 

4C4.  Ao^a.  ’Ejf  tx;  aii-ouf.  dvxToXiv.ov,  ttX.  x a6jt.b. 
4?5'  ’A7r0JX&;  T^»  <*«<»».  tV  aurX  Vv.  6.*  268. 

466.  f  To)  *UT!o  fj.r,n  y.f.  0  t'Jxyy;Xicy.:.;  ttj;  Zsftpuyiu; 

^»TOxa.  tl;  t/'v  X.'niv.  r-^rph  IXoptXov.  Zy& 

*.*««•»«.  ^  _  '  268.br 

EuayyjXir/AOf,  dies  Feftus  Annuntiationis  Dei  pars. 
23  Mamj.  r  * 

Afo-TTo/m,  Titulus  honorificus,  primitus  Imperatorum 
Uxoribus,  Matribufq;  tribntus ;  deinde  B.  V.  Maris ; 
tandem  cuicunq;  ex  Nobilioribus  foeminis. 

467.  *!»«»«  xpyjtir HTAorrx.  r,y^.  u  *  2(JQ> 

468.  «'.*  269.  b. 

Aojx.  xut  nu.  ZyJ&  C*—Euxyyt\^nxi  S  yuSptr?  . 

ZflTfiT*  tpo^oSfo-  tlS  a  to?  irX.S'.* — ’Ejipptt^h^aaay  h 
ovpui/01. — ZjjTriVf. 

.  469',  t  ’Awtc©*.  Ul'..Ao.  ;Z6-  J'.»  K,,U 

t.  ami  iiy..rai  f  r;'__ 

K“f“  »*.  r.*  ...  'ibij. 

47°-  Ta  auTa.  >ipo;.  J'.*  bis.  27  1. 

47  l  •  Ao£a,  xai  *u».  t3  «ut5..  <T.*  27 1 .  b 

.  ^7V.f.A0^:  X*‘  ’ 'E,S  T®1'  t2  ffSpa.  r  tl;  t* 

it»i?  o^a.  xai  ?•.?.  orX.  J^.*  .  .  .  ao^iron!rxoVa. 

.  .  .  272.  b. 

4-73*  t  Elf  To — KufiE  U'txexl X. — Ao'tdi.  xai  oL?.  £  .* 

Icooma  xpyitwirxoznt  2y^ 

474-  xa‘  *«*•  f»f  t«?Xit)5?.  xai  Th Qto^xvs 
Tre«To*pon.  ry.  S'*. 

47 J.  t  E.t  rit  im  ?«..  «.! ;x&,  c'.*  274:  b. 

1  olt  vacua  qusdam  folia,  fequuntur, 

470.  t  X,p,c„l,  rS  «y»  »«i 

™  J”””"  T.  A .fMwmoi.  »A.'  £'.* 

477-  F.T‘40.  Aoyyua  (^wxo^.Atb  ?  confer  4q3- 

509.  51 1,  infra)  .a.  C.*  276.  b. 

478.  Inawi  W»>»  n  Aayuw.sy.  .  .  ,  X,' 
479*  Ta  ai/Ta  Thpxtpmov.  Zy.  a'.*  [jt 

480.  "Erspo?  xvpS  M«»a»X  Axy.rrxSxph  t5-  Xpvtrutpr  .  .  . 

48  J.  "Erepov  t5  auTa.  J'.*  278.^! 

^402.  Ti,  xvpiaxw  Tirpo.'T),  m  «>'"•'  vto.tZ;  ’O 

Soft*; ^xXopeu  tov  0 rxphru  TjpiXoyoy  d;  rrv  dpyry  T7c 
utuyi/areu;  m  irvviSixx.  ryoiy  tl;  Th  Xtirxylxv  T»orv  tS 
Tpitrxyw  byva.  pj,lx<&  xvpa  MavaiiX  t5  Xpurrccfn.  irX.  S'  070 

VA.,®.  in  Limrgia  S.  Marci  dicitur.  qnod  in 
Eibris  Ecclefiafticis  Grscorum  zrpoxdytvoy.  Du  Can? 

peculiar!  appellatione  donatur  Synod’alis 
ilia  bententia  promulgata  in  Concilio  Conftantinopoli- 
tano  contra  Iconomachos,  Theodori  et  Michaele  fiiio 
lmperatoribus ;  quod  deinceps  legi  quotannis  deeve- 
tum,  prtma  Dominica  Jejuniorum,  qua:  ob  reditu 
tionem  Cuitus  Imaginum  Orthoimiu  NomenciaturS 
donata  eft.  Du  Caug. 

48.5.  HA.  ^  bis.  379,b. 

484-  tlw.  +«».>...  T«  iyif  „i  ulyiM  r,„u„- 

;:crp,  TV)  xupi«x«-  vsiripx;.  7 rX.  S'*  ’  2gQ 

485.  'H  fj.iyd.Xr.  Scyr  VX.  S'.* 

MtyxXr  Soyr.  f.  Sacra  Ccena. 

486.  I-p  StvTr.au  xvpiuxr  Tuy  yrfiitiH.zrpoxdfJtvov.  riy&  xX 

o  ,  ,  28c.  b. 

4»7.  H  F,y»Aa  9.X;  .A.  /.*  ibid. 

4»8._  Sit  ™  Muru/yU,  rt  B«..A,|‘.,  J,»AA.» 

TASta.  ,X.  S'.*  _  r2j^ 

489.  R.Jf.'  g.Va  ra  Kcou'.Ti  ttA.  J'.*  2 2  (  b 

'  'A,xt  J”  “T>X“  i""w»i.  X©-  «'•*  S'* 

7-  "  •  trA.  a.*  UA.  £.*  at.  Sap.  .A.  a'.*  t3s  b 

In  Photagogico  toni  primi  legumur  rubricte  minu- 

tiores. 


Bibliothecae  Haiieianae. 


f5S> 


N'um.  1613 — 1615. 

tiores,  quse  cum  fenfum  congruum  e  loco  fuo  vix  prae- 
bercnt,  in  ipfo  codice  videantur. 

QuTayuiytx*  lucem  Aniinre  et  Oculorum  advocamia. 
Goar.  Preccs  pro  Illuminatione.  Suicer. 

49  *•  t  "Ey-vo  1  rfiajotoi  ipaWopecvoi  ry  uyt'x  xal  [xcyD.y 
’Ar/j  Ta  r.yx  zrpurnt  283-' 

'Y/mioi  Tpictiiy.oi.  Hymni  o&o  in  Honorem  S.  Tri- 
|  nitatis,  qui  iv  I'pSpu  decantantur.  Du  Cang. 

492-  ’Ex  rfir«.  ttA.  o\*  283. 

493-  ibid. 
94.  Kal  m.  ibid.  Sequuntur  r.yj&  6'.*  y'.*  J'.*  ttA. 

a  .*  -irA.  €'.*  ttA.  (3ap.  7tA.  S'.*  28 6» 

495-  t  Xtp«/3  ixc>  T9  fxfya  xupS  xtvx  rx  Kopuvv.  ’Eygqlpt) 

TXTO  TBSr.pX.TUV  VEtdV  SlSxCXCcXUV.  i US  tlXVTtOTVTX  TV  7r6MJTB. 

»*•  *'•*  _  286.  b. 

496.  riapcv.ftoXv  t«  «*ut£.  288. 

Sequuntur,  denique,  Fragmcnta  bina  alterius  cujuf- 

dam  Libri  Mufici,  diverfa  plane  manu  exarata,  quorum 
Rubrics  lie  fe  habent. 

497.  T9  irxpcv  xvpx  Meevxv\  ra  Xpvtrutpn-  a.'.* 

290.  ( forte  fubintelligendum  volvpvct') 

498.  '  E ripov  t a  ’AyaAAiaya.  S'.  290.  b. 

499.  "Ercpov  KvpaGWaAa  (f.  uirxvrx,  vid.  509.)  S'.* 

,  ,  ,  ,  ..  _  »9*-b* 

500.  Ercpov  us  rov  a.yi&irfr.ov  xupx  ’I udvvx  ra  Kaaa £cXr,. 

9TA.  «  .*  292. 

jOI.  ErfpoK  xt/pS  'Iuxvba  fa  AxpoituSupix.  tt>.  a'.* 
29*.  b. 

j  02.  Ercpov  xvpx  0to JaAa.  293. 

503.  'Ercpov  xvpis  MayajiA  ra  Xpvtrxpv.  irA.  J’*  2 94. 

504.  "Ercpov  ra  aura.  7rA.  a'.*  ed-A.  /.*  294.  b. 

505.  llapcxfioXv  rZ  a’ura.  7rA.  J'.*  296. 

506.  ’  Erfgoi'  Jcupa  *Iw%vi>8  tb  TAuxsWf.  7tA.  «'.*  297.  b. 

507.  i-  ’AAAnAa«jiox.  irolnpex  rZ  AyaAAiava.  Tjp^a  £'.* 

298. 

508.  "Ercpov  aAAjjAaiapix.  iroctipa  xvpZ  ©eoJJab  pi.ovu.yx. 

VX.&  <*■'■*  Bap-Js.  298.  b. 

5°9-  t  ^xipa(3ixov.  7 Toivfr-oc,  xvpx  ’luuvvx  ra  TXwAut  xal 
TTfWTOl^aATB.  >1;^  Id.*  7rA  a.*  299" 

npuro^uATvs,  Primicerius  Cant  or  um ;  qui  dictus 
etiam  Sopcs-ix©*  ruv  i^x^ruv.  Verum  non  habebant  Ec- 
clefia:  Proto-pja/tas ,  fed  Domefticos  Cantorum  ;  cum 
Proto  pfaltm  proprie  effent  Cleri  Palatini,  &c»  Du 
Ca"s' 

510.  "Ercpov  iroi'vy-x  <E>coSil\x.  fx«AoiriirOii>  Je  Jesto  ra  xuaa 

AvS'jpiz.  vid.  498.  J'.*  300,  b. 

51 1.  Koinwuxi/Y.  nroivpou  xvpx  m  MavaijA  ra  XpvtrxQv-  vy. 

^  302.  b." 

512.  'ErtpoK'  Troivpr.cc  ra  aura  xupa  MavaiiA  tb  Xpvtrupv- 

v\.  (3up.  203  b, 

513.  Ta  ’H^>i:ta.  .  .  .  3°5* 

1614. 

A  paper  Book  in  8vo,  written  by  fome  Student  in 
our  Common-Law,  and  containing  his  Collections 
upon  the  following  Heads. 

1.  Fee-Simple.  j, 

2.  Fee-Tayle.  2  5. 

3.  Tenant  au  Tayle  apres  pofs't  y  difs.  extinct.  46. 

4.  Tenant  per  le  Curtefye  d'Engleterre.  48. 

5.  Tenant  en  Dower  ^x. 

6.  Tenant  a  Terme  deVyc.  66. 

7.  Tenant  par  Terme  des  Ans.  71. 

8.  Tenant  a  Volunt.  po. 

9.  Tenant  per  Copye  de  Court-Roll.  94. 

This  9th  Chapter  is  but  juft  begun. 

1615. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minori.  Initio,  ut  videtur; 
at  tamen  certe  in  fine  mutilatus  :  quo  continentur, 

1.  Trattatulus  de  Prsdicatione.  1. 

Sequuntur  Sermones  varij,  in  diverfa  S.  Scriptura: 

&c.  Loca,  fcil. 


Num.  1613. 

2.  Tuferunt  Jhefum  in  Jerufalem  ut  fiftei*ent  eum 
Domino.  Luc.  2.  22.  Imperf. 

3.  Occurrunt  Turbe  cum  Floribus  et  Pfalmis  Re- 

demptoii  obviam.  Joan.  12,  13.  4. 

4.  Luceat  Lux  veftra  coram  Hominibus  Matth.  c. 

lS-  ,  .  .  s.b. 

5.  Lupus  rapit  et  difpergit  Oves.  Joan.  10.  9* 

Sequuntur, 

6.  De  malis  Prelatis,  Locus  Gregorij  M.  12.  b. 

7.  Moralitas  Operum  Sex  Dierum.  ibid. 

Dcinde,  uberior  Sermonum  Colledtio,  in  infra 

lcriptas  Authoritates. 

8.  Cum  appropinquafiet  Jhefus  Jerofolimis,  et  ve* 

mflet  Bethphage,  &c.  Matth.  21.  l3, 

9.  Erunt  Signa  in  Sole,  et  Luna,  et  Stellis,  &c.  21. 

18.  b. 

10.  Cum  audiflet  Johannes  in  vinculis,  opera  Chrifti, 

&c.  Matth.  11.  23 

11.  Miferunt  Judei  ab  Jerofolimis  Sacerdotes  et 

Levitas,  &c.  Joh.  1.  2>s  b_ 

12.  Exijt  Edidlum  a  Cefare  Augufto,  &c.  Luc.  2. 

13.  EcceEgo  mitto  ad  Vos,  Prophetas,  et  Sapientes, 

et  Scnbas,  &c.  Matth.  2  3.  37- 

14.  Dixit  Jhefus  Petro,  Sequere  me.  Johannis 

ultimo.  39  b 

15-  Angelus  Dhi  apparuit  in  Sompnis  Jofeph, 
dicens  ;  Surge  et  accipe  Puerum  et  Matrem  ejus,  et 
luge  in  Egiptum,  et  eiio  ibi  ufq;  dum  dicam  tibi. 
Matth.  2. 

16.  Homo  quidam  Nobilis  abijt  in  Regionem  Ion- 

ginquam,  accipere  fibi  Regnum.  Luc.  19.  44.  b. 

17.  Erant  JoYeph  et  Maria  mater  Dni  mirantes 

luper  hijs  que  dicebantur  de  illo.  Luc.  2.  4S. 

18.  Poftquam  confummati  funt  dies  ofto,  ut  circum- 

cideretur  Puer,  &c.  Luc.  2.  21.  50.  b 

19  Cum  natus  effet  Jhefus  in  BethlecmJude,  in 
diebus  Herod  is  Regis,  &c.  Matth.  2.  hi 

20.  Vidit  Johannes  Jhefum  venientem  ad  fe,  et  ait 
Ecce  agnus  Dei ;  ecce  qui  tollit  peccata  Mundi’joh.  1! 

2 1 .  Venit  Jhefus  a  Galilea  ad  Johannem  ut  bapti- 

zaretur  ab  eo.  Matth.  3.  ^ 

22.  Cum  fadlns  effet  Jhefus  annorum  duodecim 

afeendentibus  illis,  &c.  Luc.  2.  62  b 

23.  Nuptie  fade  funt  in  Chana  Galilee.  Joh.  2. 

6c.  b. 

24.  Cura  defeendiffet  Jhefus  de  Monte,  fecute  funt 

eum  Turbe  multe.  Matth.  8.  gg.  b. 

25.  Afcendente  Jhefu  in  Naviculam,  fecuti  funt  eum 
Difcipuli  ejus.  Matth.  8. 

.  261  Simile  eft  Regnum  celorum  homini  qui  femina- 
vit  bonum  Semen  in  agro  fuo.  Matth.  13. 

~7:  Simile  eft  Regnum  celorum  homini  patri-famili- 
as,  qui  exijt  primo  mane,  &c.  Matth.  20.  -,-g. 

28.  Cum  turba  multa  convenerunt,  et  de  civitatibus 

properarent  ad  Jhefum,  &c.  Luc.  8.  8  c 

29.  AfTumpfit  Jhefus  duodecim  Difcipulos  fuos,  etait 

illis,  Ecce  afeendimus  Jerofolymam,  &c,  Luc.  18.  91. 

30.  Ductus  eft  Jhefus  in  defertum  a  Spiritu,  ut  temp, 

taretur  aDiabolo.  Matth.  4.  Q/ 

31.  EgrefTus  Jhefus  feceffit  in  partes  Tiri  et  Sydoms 

&c. Matth.,;  ,OI.b.’ 

32.  Erat  Jheius  ejtciens  Demonium  j  et  illud  erat 

mutum,  &c.  Luc.  11.  IO-  b_ 

33.  Abijt  Jhefus  trans  mare  Galilee.  Joh.  6.  1 14. 

34-  Quis  ex  vobis  arguet  me  de  peccato?  Joh. 8.  no. 

35.  Hie  eft  Calix  Novi  Teftamenti  in  meo  Sanguine. 

Luc.  22.  Imperf.  122.  b. 

Dili's  in  Sermonibus  laudantur  Leo  Magnus,  Chry- 
foftomus,  Ambrofius,  Damafus,  Auguftinus,  Hierony¬ 
mus,  Gelafius,  Ifidorus,  Gregorius  Magnus,  Bernardus, 
Hugo  de  Sto.  Victore,  Gul.  Panfienfis,  Rod.  Lincolnien- 
fis,  et  Richardus  Armachanus. 


Codex 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


160 


Num.  1616,  1S17. 

Num.  j6i6. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  in  quo  continetur  Regi- 

ilrum  Hofpitalis  Sts.  Cruris  juxta  Wyntoniam.  Pias¬ 
ter  Cartas,  Papales  3ullas,  aliaq;  varij  generis,  hoc  in 

Codice  habentur, 

1 .  Series  Regum  Anglorum  a  Willelmo  Ballard,  ufq; 
ad  Ricardum  1  .. 

2.  Series  Epifcoporum  Wyntonienfium,  a  Walkelino 

ad  Stephanum  Gardyner.  7. 

3.  Adnotationes  diverfas  de  Henrico  fratre  Stephani 

Regis,  Epifcopo  Wyntonienfi,  ac  Fundatore  hujufce 
Hofpitalis  Site.  Crucis.  8. 

4.  Nomina  omnium  Cuftodum  Domus  five  Hofpitalis 

Ste.  Crucis,  fecundum  quod  rcperiri  poterit  per  Infpec- 
tionem  Rotulorum  Cancellarie,  8c  per  Rcgillra  Epifco¬ 
porum  Wynton,  poftquam  dictum  Hofpitale  pervenit  ad 
manus  Secularium  Peilbnarum,  de  manibus  Hofpitala- 
rioTura.  126. 

H:ec  Nomina  continuantur  ufq;  ad  Gulielmum  Lewis, 
A.  D.  1627. 

1617. 

Codex  chartaceus  et  per- tenuis  in  fol.  in  quo  etiamnum 
reliant, 

1.  Breve  R.  Henrici  111.  quo  prrccipit  Drogoni  de 

Barantine  Cuftodi  Infularum  de  Gerefia  8c  de  Gemeria, 
ut  dillinCle  et  exquifite  faceret  Inquifitionem  de  Confue- 
tudinibus  et  Servicijs  quc  Homines  earundcm  Infularum 
facere  confucverunt  tcmporibus  Predecelforum  fuorum. 
Regum  Anglie.  Telle,  8cc.  1 1  die  Septembris,  anno 
Regni  32.  1. 

2.  Inquificio  fatla  de  Servicijs,  Confuetudinibus,  et 

Libertatibus  Infule  de  Gemeria,  et  Legibus  conllitutis  in 
Infulis,  per  Dominum  Johannein  Regem,  per  Sacramen- 
tum  Roberti  Blundel,  Sic.  ibid. 

3.  Littere  Patentes  R.  Edwardi  1.  de  fupervidendo 

Compoto  Arnoldi  Johannis  Ballivi  fui  de  Gernefeye  et 
Jerefeye.  Telle,  & c.  8  die  Odlobris,  anno  Regni  2.  2. 

4.  Extenta  Spedlantium  ad  Dam  Regent  in  Infula  de 
Gemerye,  fa£ta  per  Sacramentum  Juratorum  Magne 
Affile  Infularum  ejufdem,  A.  D.  1724.  Menfe  Novembris. 

ibid. 

4.  Extenta  Spedlantium  ad  Regem  in  Infula,  de 
Serke.  ibid. 

6.  Extenta  Spedlantium  ad  Regem,  in  Infula  de  Aver- 

ney.  2.  b. 

7.  Litters  Patentes  R  Edward  in.  fuper  Coniirma- 

tione  Libertatum  ac  Privilegiorum  quae  et  quas  Antecef- 
fores  fui  concelferunt  Hominibus  Infularum  de  Jerefey, 
Gemerye,  Serke,  et  Aureneyc.  Telle,  See.  lodieJulij, 
anno  Regni  15.  ibid. 

8.  Littera:  Patentes  R.  Henrici  vm.  de  Confirma- 

tione  Libertatum  ac  Privilegiorum  In fulanorum  de  Guer¬ 
nefey,  Serke,  et  Aueney.  Telle,  Sic.  5  die  Martij,  anno 
Regni  1.  3. 

In  ijs  recitantur  Cart;e  Regum  Henrici  vii.  et  Ed¬ 
wardi  iv.  ut  aiunt,  per  Infpeximus. 

9.  Letters  Patents  of  K.  Henry  vi.  touching  the  Ex¬ 

emption  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Gucrnefcy,  from  the  Pay¬ 
ment  of  Toll  in  the  Ports  of  Plymouthe,  Dartmouthe, 
Poole,  et  Southampton,  See.  in  French.  Given  under 
His  Privy  Seal  8  May,  anno  Regni  22.  3.  b. 

10.  Part  of  the  Statute  of  28  Hen.  vi.  touching  the 

Immunity  of  the  Merchants  of  Gafcoyne,  Guyen,  lre- 
lande,  Gcrnefey,  and  Jernefey,  from  divers  Impositions 
laid  upon  them  in  the  Ports  above-mentioned.  4. 

11.  Certificatio  Richardi  Comitis  Warwici  et  Sar. 

Magni  Camerarij  Anglie,  Conftabularij  Caftri  Dovor- 
enfis,  Cullodis  et  Admiralli  v.  Portuum,  de  Libertati¬ 
bus  Hominum  de  Guernefey.  dat.  17  die  Marcij,  anno 
4  Regis  Edwardi  iv.  4.  b. 

12.  Litterze  Patentes  Elizabeths:  Reginze,  de  Liberta¬ 
tibus  et  Privilegiis  Incolarum  Infularum  de.  Gernezey, 
Aurency  alias  Alderney,  et  Sarke,  infra  Ducatum  fuum 


Num.  1617,  1618. 


Normania:.  Tefte,  &c.  15  die  Marcij,  anno  Regni  a. 

5.  b. 

13.  Licenfe  of  Q.  Elizabeth,  to  the  Inhabitants  ol 
Guemefaye,  for  the  Tranfportation  of  a  limited  Quan¬ 
tity  of  Provifions  &  other  things,  yearly,  from  England, 
to  their  Hland.  13  October,  in  her  fii  !l  Year.  7. 

14.  Order  of  the  Privy-Council  inhii  king  the  Courts 
of  Weflminller,  efpecially  the  Chauncery  and  Courts  of 
Requelts  to  award  any  Proceffe  igainfi.  the  Inhabitants 
of  the  liles  of  Jerfey  8c  Guernefey.  21  June  1  565.  7.  b. 

15.  Exemplification  of  the  Award  made  by  the  Ix>rds 

cf  the  Privy-Council,  between  Frauncis  Chamberlen 
Efq;  Capten  Sc  Govcrnour  of  the  Ific  of  Guernefey,  and 
the  Bailife  &  Jurats  of  the  fame.  1 1  Marche  A.  1). 
1568.  8. 

16.  Exemplification  of  the  Letter  from  the  Lords  of 
the  Privy  Council  to  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon  Lord  Keeper, 
defiring  him  to  caufe  the  Award  lalt  abovementioned  to 
beinrollcd  in  the  Chauncerie.  13  Marche  1568.  10.  b. 

1618. 

A  paper  Book  in  fol.  on  the  out-llde  thus  entituled, 
“  Payment  of  Ilis  Majefty’s  Works  8c  Buildings  for 
half  a  Year,  ended  the  lull  of  November,  1 664.”  This 
is  the  Office-Book,  and  each  Accompt  therein  is  fub- 
feribed  by  the  hands  of  Sir  John  Dinjiam  his  then 
Majefties  Surveyour,  8c  other  Officers  of  that  Board. 
Thefe  Accompts  are, 

1.  Charges  in  Painting  &  Glafing,  in  the  Lieute¬ 

nants  Lodgings  within  the  Tower  of  London,  September . 
1664.  1. 

2.  Charges  in  doing  fome  Works  and  Reparations  in 

the  Tower  of  London,  November  1 664.  3. 

3.  Charges  in  doing  divers  needful  Workes  8c  Repa¬ 
rations  in  Whitehall.  June  1664.  5. 

4.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  and  Reparations 
the  Duke  of  York’s  Lodgings  in  Whitehall.  June  1664. 


\4- 

5.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  and  Reparations 

in  Whitehall.  July  1664.  j  8. 

6.  Charges  in  Building  part  of  the  Duke  of  York’s 

Lodgings  one  Story  higher  5  and  doing  other  Works  there. 
July  1664.  27. 

7.  Charges  in  making  a  new  Clufet  for  the  Queen, 

over  the  Shield  Galleiy.  July  1664.  33. 

8.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  and  Reparations 

in  Whitehall.  Augufl  1664.  37* 

9.  Charges  in  Raifeing  part  of  the  Duke  ofYorkes 

Lodgings  one  Story  higher;  and  doing  other  needful 
Workes  in  Whitehall.  Augufl;  1664.  45. 

10.  Charges  in  doing  fome  Workes  and  Reparations 

about  the  Oueenes  Clofet.  Auguft  1664.  52. 

11.  Charges  in  doing  .needfull  Workes  and  Repara¬ 
tions  in  Whitehall.  October  1664.  56. 

12.  Charges  in  Raifeing  part  of  the  Duke  of  Yorkes 

Lodgings  one  Story  higher ;  and  doing  other  needful 
Workes  there.  October  1664.  66. 

13.  Charges  in  doing  fome  Workes  and  Reparations 

about  the  Queenes  Clofet.  Sept.  8c  Oct.  1664.  77. 

14.  Charges  In  doing  divers  Workes  and  Reparations 

in  Whitehall.  September  1664.  81. 

15.  Charges  in  Raifeing  part  of  the  Duke  ofYorkes 

Lodgings  one  Story  higher ;  and  doing  other  needful 
Workes  in  Whitehall.  September  1664.  90. 

1 6.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  8c  Reparations 

in  Whitehall.  November  1664.  97. 

17.  Charges  in  Building  the  Duke  of  Yorks  Lodg¬ 

ings  one  Story  higher  ;  and  doing  other  needful  Workes 
there.  November  1664.  106. 

18.  Charo-es  in  doing  divers  Workes  and  Reparations 

in  Weftminlter.  June  1664.  112. 

19.  Charges  in  doing  fome  needful  Workes  and  Re¬ 
parations  in  Weflminller.  July  1664.  115. 

20.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  &  Reparations 

in  Weftminlter.  Auguft  1664.  118. 

10  21.  Chargee 


Bibliothecae  Haricianx; 


i6i 


Num.  1618,  1619. 

21.  Charges  in  doing  fome  Workes  and  Reparations 

in  Weftminfter.  September  1664.  1ZI- 

22.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  &  Reparations 

in  Weftminfter.  November  1664.  124. 

23.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  &  Reparations 

at  St.  James’s.  June  1664.  1 29- 

24.  Charges  in  doing  fome  Works  &  Reparations  at 

St.  James’s.  Sept.  &  Oft.  1664;  *33' 

25.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  &  Reparations 

at  St.  James’s.  November  1664.  I3^; 

26.  Charges  in  doing  of  Workes  at  his  Majefties 
New  Buildings  in  the  Garden  at  Greenwich.  June  1604- 

1 39- 

27.  Charges  in  doing  of  Workes  at  the  fame  place. 

July  1664.°  '51, 

28.  Charges  in  doing  Workes  at  the  fame  place. 

Auguft  1664.  I^1- 

29.  Charges  in  doing  of  Workes  at  the  fame  place. 

September  1664.  171, 

30.  Charges  in  doing  fome  Workes  at  the  fame  place. 

Oftoberi664.  179- 

31.  Charges  in  doing  Workes  at  the  fame  place.  No¬ 
vember  1664.  l%7‘ 

32.  Charges  in  doing  fome  Workes  and  Reparations 

at  Hampton  Court.  June  1664.  192* 

33.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  and  Reparations 

at  Hampton- Court.  July  16(14.  197. 

34.  Charges  in  doing  fome  Workes  and  Reparations 

at  Hampton- Court,  in  Auguft  1664.  20i. 

35.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  and  Reparations 

at  Hampton-Court.  September  1664.  208. 

36.  Charges  in  do  ng  fome  Workes  and  Reparations 

at  Hampton-Court.  October  1664.  2 ‘6*  ■ 

37.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes  at  Hampton- 

Court.  November  1664.  220. 

38.  Charges  in  doing  divers  Workes,  at  the  Tennis- 

Court  at  White-hall ;  in  making  Lodgings  there  for 
the  Duke  of  Monmouth.  June  1664.  224. 

39.  Charges  in  doing  fome  Workes  and  Reparaiions, 

about  the  faid  Tennis  Court-  July  1664.  228. 

40.  Allowances  to  the  Officers  of  His  Majefties,  from 

June  to  November  1664.  bothinclufive.  231. 

Thefe  Allowances  were  made  Monthly,  and  fo  fign- 
ed  by  the  Board. 

The  abovementioned  Accompts  were  fo  many 
diftinft  Trafts,  beforethey  were  thusbouna  up  together  in 
one  Volume. 

1619. 

A  Paper-Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Short  Notes  touching  Cover-few-Bell  ;  the  Quan¬ 

tity  of  an  Hide  of  Land  ;  the  Foundations  of  Merton, 
Oriel,  Exeter,  Queens  &  New-(  olleges  in  Oxford; 
and  of  St.  Michaels  College,  Pembroke-hall  &  the  Kings 
Hall  in  Cambridge  ;  St.  Stephens  College  in  Weftmin- 
fter  ;  and  the  College  of  Winchefter.  1 . 

2.  Twelfe  Steppes  that  a  Chriftian  may  ftride  towards 

Heaven,  and  being  in  the  Firlt  may  think  himfelf  a 
good  Chriftian  ;  yet,  except  he  fliide  the  thirteenth, 
he  (hall  miffe  Iieaven-Gate,  and  fall  into  the  Fire  of 
Hell  for  ever.  2. 

3.  The  Heavenlie  and  Spirituall  Beads  of  a  Chriftian 

to  be  meditated  oji,  and  Laid  over  in  the  whole  or  in  part 
everie  day,  for  the  godlie  governing  and  reforming 
of  our  Thoughts,  Words,  and  Deeds,  refpefting  God, 
our  felves,  and  others  ;  and  therefore  confifteth  on  Ten 
Vowes,  having  Ten  Precepts  for  eache,  as  the  Earthlie 
Beads  have  Stone,  whereby  we  may  encreafe  in  Know¬ 
ledge  Sc  Comfort  of  a  Godlie  Life,  and  be  readie  for  a 
Godlie  Death  in  Chrift  our  Saviour.  3. 

4.  Note  concerning  William  the  Conquerour ;  with 
the  Catalog  of  fuch  Noblemen,  Lords,  &  Gentlemen, 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  IT. 


Num.  1619,  162O. 

as  came  into  this  Land  with  William  the  Conquerour  ; 
out  of  William  Tailieur  that  wrott  the  Cronicles  of 
Normandy.  (This  Catalogue  feemeth  to  be  Imper- 
feft.)  _  .  5- 

5.  Account  of  the  Creations,  of  the  Engliffi  No.  ility, 

from  the  Conqueft,  toSirHenrie  Norris,  who  was  made 
Lord  Norris  by  Queen  Elizabeth  A.  D.  1572.  6. 

I  take  this  to  be  different  from  the  reatife  compiled 
by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.. 

6.  Account  of  the  Marriages  of  very  many  Heireffes  to 

our  Engliffi  Nobility.  34-  b. 

7.  Engliffi  Tranflation  of  the  8  Books  of  Ariitotles 

Politiques.  39. 

8.  An  Hiftorical  Difcource  of  the  Affairs  of  Syria, 

Paleftine,  iEgypt,  &c.  from  the  death  of  Alexander 
the  Great,  to  Herod  the  fon  of  Antipater ;  collefted 
from  Sacred  &  Prophane  Writers;  but  with  efpecial  re¬ 
gard  to  the  Prophecies  of  Daniel.  1 44. 

Turning  to  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find,  a 
Traft  confifting  of  7  Leaves  thus  entitled, 

9.  Nefeffarye  Notes  for  the  beter  Underftandinge 
of  the  Varietye  ofTydes,  by  the  Cource  of  the  Mone. 

1620. 

Codex  membranaceus  et  opfimte  Notse  in  fol.  cui  prie- 

figitur  Titulus  his  verbis  litteris  miniatis  feriptus. 

1.  “  Incipit  Prologusin  Librum  qui  F lores  Hi ftoriarum 
intitulatur.”  Superius  etiam,  h?ec  Verba  vetuftS  manu 
fcriptacernuntur,  “  FloresYftoriarumeft  omnium  Primus 
Liber”  (in  e£  fcilicet  Bibliotheca  ubi  tunc  reponebatur) 
quia  Fruftus  omnium  Yltoriarum  hie  inveniuntur:  et 
paulo  inferius  aliena  ac  longe  recentiore  manu  (f.  D.  Jo- 
annis  ?  Dee)  “  MatheusFlorigerus.”  Hinc  etiam  in  Cata- 
logo  Codd.  MSS.  in  Anglia;  Biblio^hecis  adlervatorum, 
edit.  Oxon.  A.  D.  1697.  212.  no.  6862.  difertis  verbis 
Matthteo  Monacho  Weftmonafterienfi  tributus  legitur. 
Verum  vel  primo  intuitu  appareat  Codicem  pradentem 
longe  antiquiorem  effe  temporibus  Matthad  Weftmo- 
nafterienfis,  qui  claruit  circa  A.  D.  13 77.  regnante 
Rege  Anglorum  Edwardo  11 1.  fi  non  potius  nepote  fuo 
Richardo  1  1. 

In  eo  habentur  Annales  rerum  geftarum  ab  Origine 
Mundi,  ufq :  ad  Mortem  Regis  Henrici  11.  qui  diem 
fuum  claufit  extremum,  Anno  Salutis  1189. 

In  evolvendo  Codice,  priorem  partem  A.  D.  1065. 
aut  10 66.  prtecedentem,  impreffo  Matthad  Weftmo- 
nafterienfis  Libro  omnino  fere  convenientem  compcri  : 
pofteriorem  vero  partem,  ab  Anglia;  nempe  conquifitione, 
ufq  ;  ad  pradiftam  mortem  R  Henrici  1 1  Matthamm. 
Pjrifienfem  de  S.  Albano  monachum  planiffime  referre: 
at  qui  Matthreum  Weftmonafterienfem  “  Flores  Hiftoria- 
rum”  fiveMajoremParifienfisHiftoriamdeflonlffe;  immo 
quoad  ejufdem  magnam  partem  deferipfiffe ;  et  pro  Flo- 
ribus  fuis  proprijs  palam  divenditafie ;  nemo  nunc  infi- 
cias  ibit. 

Inter  quamplurimos  hujus  rei  teftes,  audi  ipfus 
Weftmonafterienfis  Editoreni,  in  Praffatione  fic  diffe- 

rentem. - “  Mattha:us  Paris  Camobij  Albanenfis 

“  Monachus,  circa  A.  D.  1  246.  Hiltoriam  binam,  Ma- 
“  jorem  unam,  alteram  Minorem,  fedulo  conlcripfit, 
“  Major,  ut  vocatur,  qua;  nunc  fub  prado  eft,  et  Deo 
“  favente,  propediem  in  publicum  prodibit,  ab  Adamo 
“  originem  trahens,  ad  Gulielmi  Neuftrij  Viftoriam,  et 
“  hinc  ad  Henrici  tertij  annum  1287.  eft  exporrefta. 
“  Hanc  Hiftoriam  ad  Gulielmum  ufq ;  praedictum  ita 
“  prope  expreffit  et  fequutus  eft:  Florilegus,  ut  parutn 
“  aut  nihil  ab  ejus  feribendi  methodo  declinaverit ;  atq; 
“  ha;c  eademeft  prior  pars  Matthad  Weftmonafterienfis 
“  difta  Hiftoria,  qui  claruit  circa  A.  D.  1375. — 
“  et  ipfe  Author  Florilegus  appellatur.  Sane  hanc  pri- 
“  orem  partem  Fliftoria;  Albane.ifem  Monachuin  lcrip- 
“  fiffe,  etiamfi  alice  deeffent  Demonftrationes,  cx  Scriptis 
T  t  "quibufdam 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


162 


Num.  1620; 

<c  quibufdam  Exemplaribus  non  obfcure  colligitur:  quod 
“  ram  multus  eft  in  defcribendo  Albanum  Britonum 
“  Protho-martyrem,  et  primum  Caenobij  fui  patrem, 
“  ut  in  anno  gratis  303.  et  quod  de  Fundatore  illius 
“  Crenobij  Oifa  fcilicet)  et  de  tranftatione  didi  Albani 
“  tam  officiofe  commcmorat,  ut  in  anno  794.  ubi  de 
“  fundatione  Caenobij  Weftmonafterienfis  fere  nihil 
“  afcripferit  ;  vel  in  Vita  Regis  Aithelberti,  cujus  fuafu 
“  primo  fundatam  efle  illam  Kcclefiam  per  civam  quen- 
“  dam  Londinenfem,  et  ornatius  fadam,  et  quafi  de 
“  novo  sedificatam,  perEdovardum  Confefibrem  fcribunt 
“  quidam  Hiltoriographi,  quam  certe  Occafionem, 
“  illam  Ecclefiam  extollendi,  non  omififlet  Matthreus 
“  Weftmonafterienfis,  fi  verifimile  eiTet  cum  fuifle  illius 
“  Hiftonre  primum  Authorem.” - 

D.  Wat'ii  Nota  de  Parifienfi.  “  Triplices,  quantum 
“  video,  confc  ripfit  Annales,  Hiftorias  vulgo  di&as  Mat- 
“  threushic.  Primi  aborigine  Rerum  in  pofteriora  Henrici 
“  tertij  tempora  dedudi  funt.  Unde  et  meminit  Balaeus 
“  Hiftorias  ejus  ab  origine  Mundi.— Pars  prior  Primo- 
“  rum,  totidein  ferme  verbis  exfcripta  habetur  in  priore 
“  parte  Florilegij  Matthasi  Weftmonafterienfis  non  femel 
“  typis  editi.  Flores  Hjloriarum  Opera  fua  htec  vocavic 
“  Monaqhus  uterque.” 

Ex  allegatis  liquido  conftet  hunc  Codicem  in  fe 
continere  primam  Partem  Majoris  Hiftorias  Matthau  Pa- 
rifienfis,  ab  Orbe  fcilicet  condito,  ufque  ad  A.  D.  1 1 89. 
cum  Audoris  titulo  “  Flores  Hiftoriarum.”  Ejufmodi 
Codicis  ufu  fruebatur  Matthzei  noftri  Parifienfis  Editor 
primarius,  qui  fic  de  eo  praefatus  eft,  “  Nonnulla  etiam 
“  petita  funt  e  vetufto  quodam  Codice  Edovardi  Agli- 
£C  onby  de  Balfal-Temple  Armigeri,  quantum  ad  priorem 
“  partem  hujus  integral  Hiftorife  Magnee,  qua;  continua- 
“  turab  Exordio  Mundi  ufq;  ad  Annum  Domini  1129.” 

Aglionbianum  Codicem  ab  hoc  diverfum  efle,  docet 

nos  dodiflimus  Watfius  in  prsefatione. - “  Tranfcrip- 

‘ £  turn  Papy raceum — exemplificatum  utpote  ex  Codicibus 
“  Aglionbeiano,  Cecilianoq ;  qui  jam  adhuc  in  Archivis 
“  Collegij  S.  Benedidi  five  Corporis  Chrifti  celeberrimi 
“  reconduntur,”  a  reverendiflimo  Antiftite  de  eodcm 
Collegio,  de  Academia  Cantabrigienfi,  de  Ecclefia  An- 
glicana  optime  merito  Matthaso  Parkero,  un&  cum  quam- 
plurimus  alijs  vetuftioris  asvi  reliquijs  pretiofiffimis  in 
iEtemitatem  duraturis. 

_  Quinetiam,  in  Codice  quodam  Seldeniano  manu  Jo- 
annisBakeifcripto,  ac  a  D.  Watfio  citato,  habebatur  htec 
qure  fequitur  Adnotatio.  “  Ex  Bibliotheca  Dni  Regis,  In 
“  alio  Vo lu mine  habetur  Hiftoria  (fc.  Matthasi  Parienfis) 

“  ab  , Origine  Mundi  ufq;  ad  Annum  Dni  1189.  in 
“  quo  fequitur  Continuatio  ab  eo  anno.”  Tail's  Codex 
in  Bibliotheca  Regis  hodie  non  comparet  ;  hie  autem  1 
Harleyanus  ab  eo  anno  Continuationem  exhibet,  ab  ilia 
fortaffis  Bibliotheca  in  Cecilianam  cafu  quodam  tran- 
flatus  :  cum  in  tegmine  D.  Gulielmi  Cecilij  Infignia 
Gentiliiia  Auro  imprefla  etiamnum  obferventur.  Denique, 
de  eximia  raritate  Exemplariorum  H i  .orici  noftri,  audi- 

endus  idem  Primarius,  quifquis  fucrit  Editor, - “neque 

“  volebant  (Romanenl'es)  permittere  hanc  Hiftoriam 
“  per  ora  et  manus  hominum  volitare,  et  libere  pervul- 
“  gari  :  quod  vel  ex  eo  fatis  conftat  et  comprobatur, 

“  quod  rara  lint  et  paucifli ma  hujus  Hiflome  Exemplaria 
“  qua:  hodie  extant  ;  quum  paflim  plura  fint  et  nume- 
“  rofa  Exemplaria  Gaulfridi  Monumetenfis,  Henrici 
Ci  Huntingdunenfis,  Gulielmi  Parvis,  Guilelmi  de  Mal- 
melbery,  Ranulphi  Cellrenfis,  Florilcgi,  et  fimilium 
“  qnamvis  manca,  mutijata ;  et  in  multis  locis  mii'ere 
l:  et  turpiter  depravata,  quod  ex  varijs  collatis  Codicibus 
“  manifefte  deprehenditur.” 

Deinde  fcquuntur,  ut  fupra  dixi,  manu  aliena  atq  • 
longe  recentiore,  ’ 

-■  Annales  breviculi  de  rebus  geftis  R.  Ricardi  x.  per 
fin  gules  fui  Imperij  annos.  igg.  b. 

3.  Habentur  etiam Adnotationes  Hiftoricte  marginales, 


Num.  1620—1623 

varijs  manibus  adject®  ;  uti  videre  ell  ad  oras  foil.  j.  b. _ 

15.  b.—  16 — 16.  b.— 20.  b. — 37.  b.  &  38.  ubi  Pro¬ 
phetic  aliquot  Merlini.— 51.  b.— 54.  b. — 53. — 55.  b. _ 

56.-59.— 69.  b.— 79— 97.  b— hi.— j  14.-115.  b. 
—118 — 125.  b.— 135.— 146.  b —  250.-176.  b.— '177. 
—177.  b.— 179-b. 

1621. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  Hands  ;  wherein  is 
contained, 

A  Comment  on  the  Tenures  of  Judge  Littleton } 
by  no  meanes  to  be  aferibed  to  Sir  Edward  Coke, 
whofe  Works  are  often  therein  cited,  the  Author  lived 
in  the  time  of  our  K.  James  j. 

1622. 

An  oblong  Book  in  fol.  on  the  outfide  thus  entituled, 
Liber  Pads  Anno  primo  Caroli  Regis,  1625. 

This  is  a  Lift  of  the  Juftices  of  the  Peace,  and  alfo 
ftieweth  who  were  putt  out  of  the  Commiflion,  and 
who  were  put  into  their  Places.  This  alfo  appeareth  to 
have  been  the  Office-book,  or  that  Book  which  remained 
with  the  Lord-Keeper. 

1623. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  diverfis  manibus  feriptus ; 
in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Rcgeftum,  feu  Liber  Irrotulatorius  Cartarum  de 
Terris  et  Poflfeflionibus  Familiarium  de  Popham,  Dareli, 
London,  Calfton.  Ingpenne,  &c.  in  Villis  et  Manerijs 
de  Marleberghe,  Hamvvle,  Ingelflode,  Ingelflodc-Bellet 
Comberwelle,  Sandone,  Goud  Ingelflode,  South-brome, 
Cherletone,  Axeforde,  Meydone,  Knyghtone,  Comtone, 
Combe,  Akeleftone, Ubefone,  Knouke,  Werdur, London, 
Lytylcotc  juxia  Remmefbury,  Parva  Demeforde,  Ebief- 
bomewake,  Efte-Yep,  Langebrydie,  Baggelake,  Lacoke, 
Lacham,  Nattone,Beveleye,  Ebrigge,  North Todeworthe, 
Stotefcumbe,  Bramley,  Candelmelhe,  Almoftone,  Raf- 
flieleghe,  Combe  juxta  Liteltone,  Cumptone  juxta 
F.neford,  Balleftone,  Hafelbere,  Aislhleghe,  Fenny- 
Suttone,  Knoltone,  Puttenye-Lurty,  Quemerforde,  So- 
merfelde  in  parochia  de  Remylbery,  Teterigge,  Frox- 
felde,  Hlikwe  le,  Offeley,  Lylley,  Luttone,  Lletewike, 
Poderigge  PudJefmere,  Woghfeldc-Banaftre,  Tacchele, 
Kokerenho  in  parochia  de  Odcleye,  Edboldcfthrope, 
Knolle,  Hynfhcte,  Belany-Pallyng,"  Croiton,  Brayboef, 
Ilewyslhe,  Wyke-Sturmy,  Bouclilfe,  Liteltone,  Balat- 
teftone,  Sandone,  Hclme,  Inkepenne,  Hulle,  Ilunger- 
forde,  Schalborne,  Tidekenham,  Kenetebury,  Kyntbei-y, 
Eft-Enborne,  Brecheholte,  Wokefelde,  Sillamftede* 
Hamme,  Sutton- Walronde,  Maydene-N cwtone,  Stc. 
Pneterea,  hie  invenire  licet. 

2.  Genealogia  familiarum  de  Cmr.be,  et  de  Calftone, 

ex  Hildebrando  Loundres  Chivaler.  j. 

3.  Rotulus  Curite  Baron.  Dominorum  de  Knvghtone, 
per  Matildam  Dominain  de  Lovelle  et  de  Holande  feofla- 
torum  ;  tenta;  2:  die  Febr.  ann.  10  Henr.  iv.  b. 

4.  Rentale  (Willelm.  Darelle  Armigeri,  ut  videtur) 

de  Comtone,  Combe,  et  Akeleftone,  7. 

5.  The  Rentalle  of  William  Darelle  Squver  of  id s- 
Rents  Sc  Tenementes  in  the  Cite  of  Londonc  ;  made  at 

n  iv.  7.  et 

6.  Defcent,  in  French,  of  Popham,  Calcftone,  te 

El  larryn.  10.  b. 

7.  Deductio  Piofapire  familiarum  de  Ingham,  et  Sta- 

piltone ;  nec  non  de  Neville,  de  Sando  Martino,  Cale- 
Itone,  Darelle,  et  Popham,  e  duabus  filiabus  Walteri 
Walronde  Militis,  qui  delponfavit  filiam  Willelmi  filij 
et  hcredis  Willelmi  Lorgeipeye  Comitis  Sa- .  ibid. 

8.  1  he 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


163 


Nutn.  1623 — 1625. 

8.  The  Title  of  Thomas  Killebef  which  he  {hewed 
agayene  Elizabethe  Darelle  in  the  Mannere  of  Hukwelle. 

14. 

9.  lndrumentum  pro  Capellano  de  Combe,  infra 

Parochiam  de  Enforde.  dat.  9  Nov.  1391.  17. 

10.  Indenture  de  Advocatione  porcionis  Dicimarum 

de  Hakeledone.  22.  b. 

11.  De  Succeflione  Capellanorum  de  Combe,  24. 

12.  De  Prefentacione  Ecclefie  de  Chelrey.  38. 

1 3.  De  Prefentacione  Ecclefie  de  Upledecombe.  ibid. 

14.  De  Prefentacione  Cantarie  B.  Marie  de  Chelrey. 

38.  b. 

1624. 

A  Paper-Book  in  fol.  confiding  of  divers  feparate  Tracts, 
&  loofe  Papers  bound  up  together.  The  Subject  of 
them  is  chiefly  Reports,  in  Law-French,  of  Trials  held 
in  Wedminder-Hall,  vizt. 

Reports  from  ann.  4.  Hen.  vii.  to  the  lad  Year  of 
his  Reign.  K 

2.  Reports  of  ann.  1.  6.  9.  1 1 .  7  Hen.  vm.  33.  b. 

3.  Reports  of  ann.  4&  5  Phil.  &  Mar.  55.  b. 
4-  Reports  of  ann.  1.  2.5.  7.  8.  9.  10.  14.  15.  23. 

26.  27.  30.  31.  32.  34.  35.  36.  37.  38.  &  39  Eliz.  but 
not  111  the  order  of  Time,  as  here  mentioned.  80.  b. 
to  the  end. 

Among  thefe  Paid  Reports,  I  find, 

5.  Le  Title  de  Edward  Duke  de  Buckingham  al 

Office  de  Condablefhipp  de  Englcterre.  ann.  6  Hen. 
vm.  o 

6.  Le  Title  del  dit.  Duke  a  le  Caftle  de  Brenles, 
Penkellay,  Canterfellay,  et  Allyfaunderdowne  in  Wallia 

&C'  39- 

7.  Le  Title  del  dit  Duke  al  Maner  de  Bedmyit,  en 
Com.  Somerfet. 

8.  Sir  John  Savage’s  Cafe,  when  the  Matter  of 
Sanctuaries  was  fully  argued ;  an.  9  Hen.  vm.  ibid. 

9.  De  la  Capacitie  del  Roy.  30  b. 

1  o.  De  la  Perogatyve  del  Roy.  ibid. 

11.  Des  Parols  de  Charters  le  Roy,  et  CondruCtion 
dyceux  ;  et  Dales  de  Parlement. 

12.  Of  Lands  arifing  in  the  Sea  ;  and  of  the  fait 

Shore ;  compared.  g 

13.  Late  Preddents  in  Kent,  of  the  fame  matter, 

14.  Collection  of  Pleadings,  in  matter  of  Slaunder. 

15.  Refolutions  de  Sir  John  Popham  et  Sir  ^Ed- 

mund  Anderfon  Chief  Judices,  fur  le  Statute  de  19. 
Lhz.  cap.  6.  fur  Quedions  referre  al  eux,  per  Thomas 
Lgcrton  Chivaler,  Signior-Garden  del  Graund  Seale. 
Term.  Mich  41  &  42  Eliz.  '  23Q. 

1625. 

A  Book  in  fol.  confiding  of  divers  Trafts,  written  by 
different  Hands  ;  vizt. 

1.  A  Charafiter  of  Edward  Montagu  Earl  of  Sand- 

wich,  &  Vice-Admiral  of  England,  unfortunately  lod 
111  a  Sea-fight  againll  the  Dutch  A.  D.  1673.  written 
in  french,  a  Bourg-Charente  le  10.  Octob.  1684.  1. 

2.  Account  of  the  Intrigues  in  the  Conclave  held  A. 

D.  1  655.  alter  the  Death  of  Pope  Innocent  .  .  before  the 
Election  of  Cardinal  Chigi  who  called  himfclf .... 
in  French.  s 

3.  Articuli  Tra flatus  Ratifbona:  conclufi,  inter  1m- 
perarorem  &  Regem  Chridianiflimum,  occafione  con¬ 
trovert  re  Succeflionis  utriufque  Ducatus  Manture  e 
Montisferrati,  die  mends  Odlobris  anno  1630.  451- 

4.  Certain  Doubts  about  fome  points  of  Doctrine  & 

Practice  of  the  Roman  Church,  anfwered.  49. 


Num.  1625 — 1627. 

They  are, 

1.  About  the  manner  of  fetting  down  the  Tenn 
Commandements,  in  fome  Catholick  Cate- 
chifmes. 

2.  Concerning  the  Publique  Service  of  the  Church 
in  a  Tongue  unknown  to  the  Common  People. 

3.  Touching  the  Immunity  &  Purity  of  the  Bleffed 
Virgin  Mary  from  all  Sin. 

4.  About  the  Communion  under  one  Kind. 

5.  Touching  the  Worfhip  of  Holy  Images. 

6.  Concerning  the  Power  of  Prieds  to  forgive 
Sinns.  . 

7.  About  the  Necedity  of  Auricular  Confeffion,  to 
the  Remiffion  of  Sins,  &  Salvation. 

8.  About  St.  Peters  Supremacy  over  the  reft  of  the 
Apodles,  and  the  Whole  Church. 

9.  Concerning  the  like  Supremacy  of  all  Popes. 

10.  The  Conclufion  of  this  Treatile. 

5.  Mr  Henry  ?  Keep’s  Collections,  driving  at  a  fhort 

Account  of  our  Englifli  Bifhops  from  A.  D.  155.  to  A. 
D.  1670.  65. 

Here  are  alfo,  a  Succeflion  of  the  Deans  of  Wed- 
minder,  with  an  Account  of  their  Lives.  Imperf. 

6.  Thoma:  Gatakeri  Concio  ad  Clerum,  Canta¬ 
brigian  habita  circiter  A.  D.  1 603.  manu  Autoris.  1 26. 

7.  Seconde  Partie  de  1’  Eftat  Politique.  131.  Imperf, 

8.  The  lad  Will  of  Gafper  de  Colligny  Admiral  of 

France,  in  French,  dat.  5  Junij  1569.  143. 

9.  Sonnet  fur  la  Mort  de  Gafpart  de  Colligny  Admiral 

de  France.  146. 

10.  Points  fur  lefquels  arrivant  en  pay«  incognu  on 

peut  enquerir  toute  forte  de  perfonnes,  chaucun  felon  fa 
Capacite.  147. 

1626. 

A  Book  in  fol.  being  the  Autographon  of  the  Author* 
who  prefixed  a  Title  thereunto,  before  he  had  finifhed 
the  Work  he  undertook :  over  which  he  afterward 
paded  another  leaf  wherein  the  fame  Title  is  fet  forth 
in  Print,  vizt. 

A  Diclionarie  in  Englifli  &  Brittifh,  commonly 
called  the  Wclfli  Tongue ;  very  neceflary  for  all  fuch 
Engliflnnen  as  doe  inhabite  the  Confines  of  Wales,  or 
fncli  as  have  any  commercement  with  the  people  of  that 
Countrey,  or  cary  any  Afte&ion  to  that  Language,  &c. 
Whereunto  is  added  a  little  Treatife  of  the  true  and 
naturall  Sound  of  the  Letters  in  the  Brittifh  Tongue, 
and  of  the  means  how  an  Englifli-man  may  come  to  the 
right  Pronunciation  of  them.  Gathered  together  by 
Richard  Lhoyd  Parfon  of  Stoke-Ncwington  in  Mid- 
dlefex.  &c. 

The  Di£lionary  is  incomplete  ;  and  the  other  Trea¬ 
tife  (if  he  ever  wrote  on  the  Subject)  is  not  here. 

1627. 

A  thick  Book  in  fol.  written  by  feveral  Hands  ;  where¬ 
in  are  contained, 

Very  many  Precidents  or  Reports  of  Law-Pleadings, 
reduced  under  the  following  Heads. 


1.  A£t:on  fur  le  Cafe,  &  Confpiracy. 

32. 

2.  A  (life. 

48. 

3.  Artaynt. 

60. 

4.  Audita  querela. 

84. 

5.  C.ui  in  Vita. 

ic8. 

6.  Copy-houlde. 

1 16. 

7.  Covenant. 

124. 

8.  Debt. 

148. 

9.  Debt  fur  Statut. 

206. 

10.  Dower. 

2  66. 

1 1.  Droit,  Patent  &  Clofe. 

24’S, 

12.  Error,  et  Faux  Judgment. 

258. 

1 5.  Efchete. 

278. 

14. 

Formcdon 

1 64 


Catalog  us  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1627,  1628 

*4.  Formedon. 

15.  Ingreffu. 

16.  Partition. 

1 7.  Prohibition. 

*8.  Quare  impedit. 
ig.  Replevin. 

20.  Tranfgreflion. 

21.  Utlary. 

22.  Waft. 


286. 

3,Q- 

3.8. 

342- 

366. 

389- 

422. 

45°- 

470. 


This  book  feemeth  to  have  been  formerly  of  good 
(Jfe  and  Value  ;  and  at  the  beginning  are  divers  Notes 
ihewing  what  Gentlemen  of  the  Long  Robe  have  been 
the  Owners  of  it. 

1628. 

Codex  membranaceus,  folijs  oblongis,  variorum  manibus 
exaratus  ;  in  quo  conitnentur, 

1 .  Sinonimus  Serapionis  :  fc.  Gloftarium  Medicum, 

alphabetico  Ordine  difpofitum.  4. 

2.  Gloftarium  aliud  Medicum,  Ordine  confimili  di- 

geftum.  .  ,  5. 

3.  Difpenfatorium  ;  five  Modus  componendi  Aquas, 

Emplaftra,  Unguenta,  &c.  a  celebrioribus  Medicis  et 
Chirurgis  adhibitas.  25. 

4.  Liber  fecundus  Libri  didli  Servitoris  Abulcafin  Telf 
Ben  Abes  Azarii(i.  e.  Serapionis  Medici)  tranflatus 
a  Simone  Januenfi  interpretatore  Operum  Abraham 
Judei  Tortuofienfis  ;  cui  prasmittuntur  Capitula.  99. 

Hoc  in  Tra&atu,  leu  Opere  Secundo,  tracfat  Au¬ 
thor, 

1.  De  Preparatione  Lapidum  et  Mineralium. 

103.  b. 

2.  De  Preparatione  Medicinarum  que  funt  ex 

Plantis,  12.  b. 

3 .  De  Preparatione  Medicinarum  que  fumuntur  ex 

animalibus.  j46.  b. 

Quinetiam,  folijs  atq;  paginis  vacuis,  feribuntur 
Medicamenta  plurima,  pro  ufu  particulari  Regis  Ed- 
wardi  iv.  Magnatum,  &c.  per  ejufdem  Regis  Phar- 
macopolam,  nomine  forfan  Johan.  Whelar,  e  quibus 
hffic  qua:  fequuntur,  duxi  recenfenda. 

5.  Pro  Domina  Rychemonde.  2. 

6.  Pillulae  contra  Peftem,  fecundum  Ordinacionem 

Magiftri  Thome.  ibid. 

7.  Pro  Domina  Cantlow.  2.  b. 

8.  Elettuarium  pro  Domina  Denham,  31,  Jul.  1483. 

3.  b. 

9.  Pro  Rege.  22.  b. 

10.  Aqua  vite,  compofita  pro  Rege.  ibid. 

11.  Pro  Rege.  23. 

12.  Elettuarium  de  Gemmis.  ibid,  &.  24. 

13.  Prefervatvam  Ricardi  Medici.  ibid. 

14.  Stomaticon  Ricardi.  ibid. 

15.  Pro  Domino  Matrevare.  24.  b. 

16.  Aqua  contra  Peftem.  28.  b. 

17.  Teriaca  Diatefiaron,  compofita  pro  Rege  Ed- 

wardo  quarto,  contra  Venenum  ;  fecundum  Ordinaci¬ 
onem  Magiftri  Jacobi  Frys.  29. 

18.  Elettuarium  de  Succo  Pomorum  &c.  pro  Domina 

Ducifta  Burgundie.  2g.  b. 

19.  Emplaftrum  Jacobi,  (vid.  infra  no.  22.)  31  b. 

2o;  Eleduarium  Campho'ratum  Magiftri  Lowes'5  Doc- 

toris  in  Medecinis.  ^2. 

21.  Eleftuarium  Contra  Peftem.  33>  b.  &  34. 

22.  Emplaftrum  pro  Renibus  fecundum  diftem- 
peracionem  ?  Magiftri  Jacobi  Baraza  de  la  Rol'a.  34. 

23.  Pro  Rege  Edwardo,  Aqua  Vite 

24.  Unguentum  pro  Stomacho,  fecundum  difere- 

cionem  Magri  Bartholomei.  i^jj 

25.  The  inakyng  of  divers  Cerufis  (for,  or  by)? 

Monfenior  Hary  Dewke  de  Bokyngham.  34.  b. 


26.  The  makyngof  diverz  Clarificaciouns. 

27.  Pro  Rege,  diverfa  Medicamenta. 


35* 

35-  b. 


Num.  1628 — 1631. 

28.  Pro  Domina  Warwyke.  eg.  b. 

29.  Pro  Domina  Ducifta  de  Bokyngham.  62.  b. 

30.  Pro  Domino  Johanne  Denham,  Domino  de  Den- 

ham-  64.  b.  et  78. 

31.  Pro  Rege.  68. 

32.  Pillule Mirabolanorum  pro MagiftroFilloll.  73.  b. 

33.  For  Sir  Thomas  Mongomery  Knyght.  78. 

34-  Pro  Rege  Edwardo  iv.  78.  b. 

35.  Prefervativi  contra  Peftem.  96.  b. 

36.  Dragetum  pro  Domino  Duce  Clarencie.  ibid. 

37.  Dragetum  Regale.  98.  b. 

38.  Pro  Rege.  _  154. 

39.  Aqua  Imperialis  pro  Rege  Edwardo  iv.  154.  b. 

40.  Pro  Domina  Margareta.  1  c  c^. 

41.  Pro  Rege  Edwardo.  jbxb 

42.  (Jnguentum  I  uthie  fecundum  refeptum  Magiftri 

Willelmi  Hatcliffe.  15?-  b. 

43.  Pro  Domino  Thefauraryo.  156. 

44.  Pro  Domino  Glouceftre.  ibid. 

45.  Aqua  Tuthie  fecundum  Refeptum  Magiftri  Wil¬ 
lelmi  Hatcliffe.  jbid. 

46.  Fumigacio  pro  Rege.  ibid. 

47.  Pro  Domina  Yngelftorpe.  156.  b. 

48.  Ele&uarium  contra  Guttam,  fecundum  Receptum 

Magiftri  Johannis  de  Latone.  1 57. 

49.  Pro  Magiftro  Thoma  Gravfone.  1 57. 

50.  Pro  Magiftra  Uxore  ejus."  ibid. 

1629. 

An  old  Parchment-book  in  fol.  imperfect  at  both  ends, 
and  containing. 

Part  of  the  Romance  of  King  Arthur  ;  in  French 
Profe. 

ifi3o. 

A  Book  in  fol.  wherein  is  curioufty  written,  the  manner 
of  the  Country  at  that  time  confidered, 

1 .  Calligraphia  R  ufiica,  or  Specimens  of  the  fair- 
Writing  of  the  Mufcovites,  in  all  the  leveral  Hands  ufed 
by  them,  according  to  the  Order  of  their  Alphabet, 

2.  After  the  Alphabet,  follow  like  Specimens  of  their 
Numbers,  from  1  to  900,000. 

Such  Specimens  as  thefe,  I  remember  to  have  feen 
in  the  Bodleian-Library,  Arch.  A.  Seld.  not  in  form  of 
a  Buok  as  this,  but  in  a  very  long  Roll  or  Volume. 

1631. 

A  Book  in  fol.  relating  to  the  Pra&ife  of  the  Commone- 
Law  of  England.  It  confifts  of  divers  Trafts  bound  up 
together  in  the  following  Order. 

1  Reports  of  Trials  at  Weftminfter,  ann.  23.27.  33. 
34-  35’  3^K  3 7’  3^-  39*  &  40  Eliz.  in  Law-French.  1. 

2.  Table  to  the  preceding  Treatife.  in  Alphabetical 

Order.  j  56. 

3.  Obfervations  made  at  divers  Trials,  touching  points 

in  Law,  then  declared.  iyi. 

4.  Like  Reports  of  Trials  (but  larger  than  the  for¬ 
mer)  made  ann.  36.  37.  38.  39.  &  40  E  iz.  173. 

5.  Like  Report  of  Trials,  made  ann.  1.  2.  & 4  Jac.  1. 

287. 

6.  Notes  taken  from  divers  Law-Readings  of  Mr. 
Baker,  Mr.  Hefketh,  Mr.  Gerard,  Mr.  Wilburham  &c. 
toward  the  latter  end  of  the  Raign  of  Elizabeth. 

310. 

7.  Notes  upen  the  Statute  of  Rogues,  ann.  39  Eli 

Cap.  4.  and  upon  the  Statute  for  Releife  of  Poor  People, 
43.  Eliz.  Cap.  2.  in  Englifh.  323. 

8.  Reports  of  Trials  in  Banco  Regis,  ann.  4  5. 

J'dC'  5-  ....  324. 

9.  R.portsofTrialsinBanco Regis,  ann.9  Car.  1.  376. 

3  Codex 


Num.  1632—1638. 


163 


Codex  chartaceus, 


fol.  quo  conti- 


et  tenuis, 

nentur, 

x.  Genealogia  Regum  Anglorum  ab  Adamo,  ufque  ad 
mortem  Regis  Henrici  v.  cum  Adnotationibus  hifto- 
ricis  :  initio  mutila  1  • 

2.  The  Hiftory  of  the  Siege  of  Rhodes  by  the  Grand 
Signior  Mahomet  ii.  tranflated  into  Englilh  by  Johan 
Kay  Poete-Lawreate  to  Kynge  Edwarde  xv.  &  Printed 
by  William  Caxton.  Imperf.  17. 

1633. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  for  the  moll  part  in  Law-French, 
and  containing. 

Reports  of  Law-Cafes  tried  at  the  Queen’s  Bench, 
ann.  30,  31,  32,  &  33  Eliz. 

1634. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  about  the  Time  of  K.  Henry 

viii.  entituled, 

A  Dyalogue  of  Comforte  agaynfte  Ttybulacyon, 
made  by  an  Hungaryen  in  Latynne,  and  tranflated  owte 
of  Latyn  into  Frenche,  and  out  of  French  into  En- 
glylhe. 

1  his  Dialogue  is  divided  into  3  Books,  each  con¬ 
fining  of  a  certain  Number  of  Chapters. 

The  Interlocutors  are  Anthony  Sc  Vyncent. 

l635- 

Codex  tenuis  et  chartaceus  in  fol.  in  quo  habentur, 

Commentarij  in  Librum  Secundum  Rhetorico- 
rum  Aiillotelis,  Authore  Simone  Grinato ;  forte,  adhuc 
inediti. 

1636. 

A  Law-book  in  fol.  thus  entituled, 

1.  Certayne  Cafes  quexi  Jeo  tranlcrie  horfe  del  Livre 
del  tres-reverend  Judge  Sr.  Richard  Hutton  Chivalier ; 
jades  un  des  Juftices  del  Common  Banke,  quel  luit 
efcrie  ove  fon  proper  mayne. 

2.  At  the  beginning  is  an  Alphabetical  Table,  with 
this  t  itle,  Les  Nol'mes  de  touts  Ls  C  afes  ou  report  ou 
citc  encefl  Livre,  que  font  i flint  tianfpole  que  les  Cafes 
point  efte  trove  per  les  Nofmes  des  Playntifl’es  ou  De¬ 
fendants. 

i637- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  fcil. 

Authenticus  Liber  Contrarotulamenti  Hanaperij 
Cancellarite,  tarn  Cartarum  et  Patentium,  quam  Bre- 
vium  et  Finium,  a  fefto  S.  Michaalis  Archangeli,  anno 
Regai  Dhe  Elizabethe  Regine  fexto,  ufq  ;  idem  feftum 

S.  Michaelis  anno  feptimo  ejufdem  Due  Regine. 

Liber  examinatus  per  Thomam  Powle,  Subfcrip- 
tioneq;  ejufdem  Notariali  munitus. 


Forty-five  Original  Impreft-Warrants  figned  by  Arthur 
Lord  Chichefter  Lieutenant  of  Ireland  A.D.  1607. 
&  1608.  or  elfe  by  the  Privy  Council  of  Ireland,  in 
his  abfence  ;  for  lo  many  Sums  of  Money  ;  together 
with  the  Receipts  taken  thereupon. 

They  arc  all  filled  with  a  Gut,  and  being  included 
within  a  Parchment-Cover,  on  the  out-fide,  look  like 
a  Book. 

Cat.  Hari,.  Vol.  If. 


Num.  1639,  164b; 

i639- 

A  large  Book  in  fol.  well-written,  &  formerly  bo 

longing  to  the  Viblualling- Office,  wherein  are  con- 

tained, 

1.  The  Accompts  of  Victualling  the  Royal  Navy,  as 
well  in  Harbor,  as  at  the  Narrow  Seas,  and  for  extra¬ 
ordinary  Sea-Vi£tualling  (under  the  Charge  of  Marma- 
duke  Darell  Efq  ;  Surveyour  Generali  of  the  Viduals 
for  Sea-Caufes)  during  four  Quarters,  beginning  the  firft 
of  Januarie  1602.  &  ending  the  31  of  December  1603.  1 

Every  Page  of  thefe  Accompts  is  fubferibed  by 
the  Hands  of  Sir  Henry  Palmer  Sc  Sir  John  1  revor 
Knights,  & 

In  this  Book  I  alfo  find, 

2.  A  Letter  di reded  from  the  Lorde  Treaforer  & 
Lorde  Admirall,  to  the  Officers  of  the  Navie,  direding 
them  to  view&  fell  certain  gr.at  Quantities  of  Viduals 
lying  on  the  kings  hands;  part  whereol  had  been  bought 
for  the  Supply  of  the  1*  leete  bowiule  to  the  bouthwardes, 
under  the  Condude  of  Sir  Richarde  I.evefon  Knighte, 

&  afterwards  countermanded,  dat.  4  June  1603.  40. 

3.  Another  Letter  directed  to  the  .ume,  irom  the 
Lorde  Treafurer,  Lorde  Admirall  ik  the  Lorde  Cecill 
Principail  Secretarie  to  his  Majeftic,  preferibing  a  pe¬ 
remptory  Method  to  be  ufed  in  the  Sale  of  the  above- 
mentioned  Viduals,  whereby  the  Subjed  was  to  be 
compelled  to  become  Buyers:  dated,  21  June  1603. 

ibid. 

4.  Accompt  of  the  proceedings  upon  the  lalt  Letter. 

40.  b. 

5-  A  book  fhewinge  whatt  Vidualls  was  delivered 
unto  the  Shippes  for  theire  4  Mooneths  Service,  begon 
the  1  1  of  March  1602,  and  to  end  the  lafle  of  June 
followinge  ;  as  allfo  what  Supplie  of  Bilkett  and  bcere 
they  receaved,  and  how  muche  of  all  the  laid  Pro  vifions 
they  expended  in  Service :  how  muche  alll’o  was  re- 
torned  to  Sir  Marmaduke  Darell:  what  was  allowed 
unto  the  Purlers  forwafte,  &  what  was  fett  “inl'uper’* 
uppon  theire  Heads.  4 1 . 

This  is  the  Original  Book,  and  it  appearing  there¬ 
by*  that  Sir  Maimaduke  was  over-charged;  Car.  was 
taken  for  his  R  elide  ;  and  therefore  here  we  find  the 
Original  or  Authentick  Certificates,  &c.  of  Sr.  Ihomas 
Bludder;  Sir  Hen.  Palmer  &  Sr.  Jclm  1  revor  ;  Mr. 
Auditor  Gofton,  &  Thomas  Earl  of  Dorfet  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  of  England. 

6.  Original  Warant  (under  the  Signet  &  Sign  ma¬ 

nual)  of  K.  James  1.  to  the  Auditor  of  the  Impr-.ft,  for 
difeharging  certain  Purfers  of  ■  hips  of  the  Debts  due 
from  them  to  His  Majefty,  by  rea'on  of  the  \\  aff  of 
Visuals  on  board  their  Ships,  ipent  in  treat  .ng  People 
who  came  to  make  themfelves  merry,  upon  his  Accdiion 
to  the  Crown,  18  June  4  Jac;  1.  5  2. 

In  a  loofe  Parchment,  is  the  following  Accompt, 

7.  Denarij  prefliti  extra  Receptum  Scaccarij  Donfin 

Regis,  Marmaduco  Darrell  et  Thome  Bludder  Mil 
Superviforibus  Generalibus  ad  Vi&ualacionem  Navium 
fue  Majeftatis,  during  the  Year  abovementioned.  Attelled  • 
by  the  hand  of  Sir  Vincent  Skymxer.  56. 


A  large  Book  in  fol.  formerly  belonging  to  the  Office 
of  the  Ordnance  wherein  are  contained, 

The  Authentic  Accompts  as  to  the  Wr.ges  of  the 
Artificers  &  Laborers  dayley  working  in  the  Office  of 
the  Queens  Majefties  Ordenaunce  for  her  Highnes  Ufe 
in  the  Affares  of  the  fame,  from  the  Month  of  January 
1579.  to  the  Month  of  December  1580.  both  inclulive. 

Thefe  Accompts  were  made  up  every  Month,  and 
each  of  them  are  figned  by  the  Officers  fitting  at  that 
Board. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


1 66 


Num.  1641—1647. 

1641. 

A  large  Book  in  fob  containing  Accompts  of  all 
Sommes  of  Money  receyved  by  Sir  Thomas  Hen- 
neage  Knight  Threaforer  of  Her  Majefties  Chamber, 
and  by  him  defrayed  and  difburfed  :  accomptinge  from 
the  Feaft  of  St.  Michaell  th’arkaungell  anno  27  R. 
R.  Elizabethe,  untill  the  Feaft  of  S.  Michaell  th’ark¬ 
aungell  anno  28  didie  Regine  Eliz.  then  next  after, 
conteyninge  one  whole  yere. 

1642. 

A  large  Book  in  fol.  containing, 

,  „The..AcC„0mpts  of  Slr  Thomas  Henneage  Treafurer 
of  Her  Majefties  Chamber,  as  to  all  Receipts  &  Dif 
burlements  from  29  Sept.  ann.  33  Eliz.  for  one  Year. 

i6+3- 

A  large  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  fairly  written 
The  Accompts  of  Sir  George  Carteret  Kt.  &  Baro¬ 
net,  1  realurer  of  His  Majefties  Navie,  as  to  all  Sums  of 
Money  received  &  difburfed  by  him  during  the  Space 
°‘‘ >ne  "hole  Year,  beginmng  the  firft  day  of  January 
1664,  and  ending  the  31II  of  December  1665. 

T  his  is  the  Authentic  Book,  all  along  figned  by  the 
Hands  of  the  proper  Officers.  It  is  alib  fijned  by  Sir 
George  Carteret  h.mfelf,  who  alfo  took  an  ofth  as  to  the 
I  ruth  of  the  faid  Accompts,  to  the  beft  of  his  Know- 
ledge,  &c. 

1644. 

A  large  Office-book  in  fol.  containing, 

I  he  Accompt  of  Sir  Thomas  Henneage  Kt.  Trea- 
iurer  of  the  Queens  Chamber,  as  to  all  Sums  of  Money 
received  and  difburfed  by  him,  during  one  Year  com¬ 
mencing  the  29th  Day  of  September,  ann.  23  R.  h  ljz. 

This  Book  is  in  very  many  Places  figned  by  the 
Hands  of  thole  who  received  the  Money. 

i645- 

A  large  Office-book  in  foi.  on  the  out-fide  thus  enti- 
tuled. 

The  Account  of  Sir  Robert  Manfell  Knioht  Threa 
forerofhts  Highnes  (the  King's)  Navy,  for  one  whole 

^of’Diemb?,^.°fJan"ary  ,S°*  2"d 

T  hts  Book  Sir  Robert  delivered  in  upon  his  Oath 
as  to  the  Truth  of  the  Accompt  ;  and  each  Page  of  the 
Difburfements  is  figned  by  Sir  Henry  Palmer,  Sir  John 
N"“r’  S,r  !  Peter  Buck’  Commiilioners  of  the 

I  646. 

Code*  chartaceus  in  fol,  tarn  in  i„itio  quam  in 
inutilatus  ;  m  quo  continebantur 
Apographa  five  Irrotulamenta  Litterarum  Patentium 
deTeiris  lenememis,  &c.  quas  ad  firman,  dimifaft 
Regma  Elizabetha,  anms  fui  Regni  33  Sc  34. 

1647. 

A  Urge  well-written  Office-book  in  fol.  on  the  outf.de 
entituled, 

'l he  Firft,  the  2d.  3.  4.  c,  Q  <7  0  __j 
Monthly  Boke  of  the  Leger  of  the  Workes  of  the  Kmges 

Sf  R  6  b“  4anidgatei-rm  lhe  Tyme  of  Thomas  Cockes 
and  Rycharde  Keye  Efquyers,  Commiffioners  :  viz  from 

a"^'H-™.totbe7tJlof 


Num.  1647—1650. 

The  Book  feemeth  to  hare  been  engrofled  by  one 
Thomas  Buflie,  Clerk  of  the  Leger  there :  and"  each 
Page  ot  the  Dilburfements  is  figned  and  attefted  by  the 
Hands  of  the  proper  Officers. 

I  648. 

Codex  membranaceus  et  per-tenuis  (nam  odto  tantum 
folijs  ccnftat)  in  quo  conlinentur, 
x  -Tabula  (five  Commentarius)  de  Utilitate  Orationis 
Petition^  ’  qUa  breviler  tractatur  de  ejufdem  feptem 

2.  Bona  et  utilis  1  abula  Fidei  Criftiane,  in  qua  con- 
tmentur  fub  brevibus,  Primo,  Septem  Virtutes  Prin¬ 
cipals  ;  Item,  Septem  Peccata  Mortalia,  et  Septem 
Virtutes  contrarie  Septem  Peccatis  Mortalibus  :  Item 
Septem  Opera  Mifericordie  pertinencia  ad  Corpus  :  Item’ 
Septem  Opera  Mifericordie  ad  Animam  pertinencia  : 
Item,  Septem  Sacrameata  Ecclefie  :  Item,  Septem  Pe- 
ticiones  contente  in  Oracione  Dominica:  Item,  Septem 
Dona  Sp'ritus  Sandti  :  Item,  Duo  Principals  Mandata 
Teg's :  Item,  Decern  Mandata  Legis :  Item  Quinque 
Senfus  Corporis  :  Item,  Quatuor  Confilia  Crifti  ad  que 
tenentur  Vin  perfedti :  Item,  Odo  Beatitudines  Juftorum: 
Item,  Septem  Dotes  Hominis  glorificati :  Item,  Princi- 
cipalia  Gaudia  Paradifi  :  Item,  Pene  principals  Inferni  : 
Item,  Sex  Etates  Mundi  :  Item,  Septem  Etates  hominis  • 
Item,  Indumenta  Spiritualia  Anime  :  Et  etiam  Spirituals 
Anime  Nutrimentum.  ^ 

1649. 

A  very  thick  Office-book  in  fol.  wherein  is  contained 
(or  fhould  have  been,  if  perfed) 

The  Accompt  of  the  feveral  Summes  of  Money  re- 
caved  &  difburfed  by  Sir  William  Ruffell  Knight  & 
Baronet  I  hreaforer  of  Ilis  Majefties  Navie  :  for  all  the 
1  eare  1630  and  part  of  the  Yeare  1631. 

,  EachEa8e  of  the  Dilburfements  is  fubferibed  by 
the  Commiffioners  of  the  Navy,  &c.  as  Sir  Henry  Palmer, 
Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  Sir.  Den.  Flemyng. 

1650. 

A  large  book  in  fol.  as  to  the  Contents  whereof,  what 
followed!  (bang  an  Abridgment  of  the  Title)  may  be 
Notice  fufficient.  7 

This  Booke  made  the  14th  of  Marche,  in  the  ,6th 
}  eare°t  Qu^en  Elizabeth,  contaigncth  an  Inventoryofall 
iuche  1  arcelles  of  the  Quenes  Juelles,  Plate,  &  other 
btuffe,  as  remaine  in  the  Cuftodie  of  John  Aftelev  Ef 

quire,  Maifter  &  Threafourer  of  Her  Highnes  Juelles  St 

Plate  ;  delivered  to  him  by  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon  Kt. 
Keper  of  the  Create  Seale  of  Englande  ;  William  Lorde 

Knrghl  'y  Kl I1,rrcafour“  ®f  Englande,  Sir  Fraunces 
Knowles  Kt.  Threafourer  of  Her  Highnes  Honfholde  ; 
S11  Raufe  Sadler  Knight  Chauncellour  of  the  Duchev 
of  Lancafter ;  and  Sr.  Waulter  Mildmay  Kt.  Chaun- 
cellour  of  the  Exchequer.  As  expreffed  &  entred  in 
two  Bookcs,  whereof  th'one  being  fubferibed  upon 
every  written  Page  with  t'handes  of  3  of  the  faide 
Commiffioners  at  the  leaft,  doth  remaine  with  the  faide 
John  Afteley:  and  th'  other  fubferibed  upon  every 
written  Page  with  t’hande  of  the  faid  John  Aftelev 
dothe!  remaine  with  the  Quenis  Majeftie,  whereby  herel 
alter  to  chardge  him  with  the  Particularities  at  lardge 
fides^  m  thisBoolce»  in  138  Eeaves  written  on  both 

o'  PaSe  bcing  fuMcribed  by  the  Hand  of 

bir  John  Alteley  abovementioned  (for  he  was  afterward 
knighted,  as  I  have  heard)  it  plainly  appearcth  that  this 
is  that  individual  Bo  k,  which  jemained  with  the  Queen 
in  order  to  charge  him  with  all  the  particula.  ities  of  the 
immenfe  Trealure  then  entrufted  to  his  Care. 

An 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


167 


Num.  1651 — 1655. 

1651. 

An  Office-book  in  fol.  on  the  out-fide  whereof  I  read 
the  following  Title, 

The  toth,  the  nth,  12th,  13th,  14th,  15th,  16th, 
17th,  i8;h,  and  the  19th  boke  of  the  Leeger  of  the 
Workes  of  the  Kynges  Caftelle  of  Sandgate  in  Kent,  in 
the  tyme  of  Reynold  Scott  Efquyer  beyng  Surveyour 
ther.  of,  and  R  chard  Keys  Efquver  then  beyng  foie  Pay- 
3  mailer  of  the  feid  Workes. 

This  book  beginneth  at  the  7th  day  of  December 
lann.  31  Hen.  viii.  where  the  former  book  (No.  1647.) 

■  leaves  off ;  and  fo  proceedeth  to  the  fecond  day  of  Otto- 
ibcr  ann.  32  Hen.  viii.  when  the  faid  Caftell  was  fully 
ifinifhed  &  completed. 

It  appeareth  to  have  been  engroffed  by  Thomas 
*  Busfhe  Clerk  of  the  Leger,  who  wrote  the  former  Book. 
Every  Accompt  or  Page  is  fubfcribed  &  attefled  by 
.  the  Hands  of  the  proper  Officers  ;  and  at  the  end  is 
approved  under  the  Hand  of  Sir  Walter  Midmay  then 
Auditor  to  the  King. 

1652. 

A  thin  OlHce-book  in  large  fol.  wherein  is  con¬ 
tained, 

A  Lift  of  the  feverall  Officers  &  Servants  employed 
about  His  Majefties  Cuftomes  in  the  Port  of  London  ; 
and  of  the  refpeclive  Salaries  due  unto  them  for  the 
Quarter,  ended  at  Midfummer  Anno  Domini  1685. 
Approved  and  figned  by  the  then  Lord  High  Treafurer 
of  England' Laurence  Hide  Earl  ofRochefter. 

1653. 

L  A  large  Office-Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  entered 

The  Particulars  of  all  Summes  of  Money  received 
&  difburfed  by  Andrew  Kerwin  Pay-Mafter  of  His 
Majefties  Works  for  one  Half  Yeare  begun  the  firft 
of  April  1614.  and  ending  the  laft  of  September  1614 
Bellowing. 

This  includeth  All  the  feveral  Workes  done  within 
that  Space  of  time  ;  and  each  Accompt  is  made  in  a 
particular  book  by  itsfelf,  and  is  in  that  manner  diftin&ly 
attefled  &  figned  by  the  Officers  of  that  Board. 

1654. 

An  Office-book  in  fol.  which  may  be  thus  en- 
tituled, 

The  Booke  of  Wages  of  Artificers,  Woorkmen, 
&  Labourers  in  th’Office  of  th’Ordinaunce  at  the 
Tower  of  London  and  elfwhere  belonging  to  the  fame, 
for  one  whole  year,  commencing  at  the  firft  of  January 
'1572,  &  ending  the  laft  day  of  December  1573. 

TheAccompts  are  reduced  into  12  feveral  Books 
one  for  each  Month  :  and  they  are  all  figned  by  the 
SOfficers  fitting  at  that  Board. 

1655. 

An  Office-book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

L  TheAccompts  of  all  Sums  of  Money  received  & 
(liiburfed  by  Sir  William  Ruffel  Knight  and  Baronet, 
Ireafurer  of  His  Majefties  Navy  :  which  Payments 
include  the  ordinary  Charge  of  all  His  Majefties  Ships 
&  Veffells  in  Harborough.  As  alfo  of  8  Gonners  fer- 
ving  in  His  Majefties  Caftle  of  Upnor,  with  the  enter¬ 
tainment  of  Clarkes,  Store-keepers,  Boat-Swaines  of 
His  Majefties  Yards,  Houf-rents,  Ground-rents,  &c. 
And  for  Wages  for  Laborers,  and  Hire  ofHorfes  which 
brought  upon  I Iis  Highnes  works  inOrdinary,  by  the 
Space  of  one  whole  Yeare,  begun  the  firft  of  January 
lb’ 1,  and  ended  the  laft  of  December  1632. 


Num.  1655—1 660. 

Every  Page  of  theDifburfements  is  attefled  by  the 
Commifli oners  of  the  Navy-board  ;  and  the  book  deli¬ 
vered  in  upon  Oath,  as  to  the  Truth  of  the  whole  Ac¬ 
compt. 

1656. 

A1h?ACr  b0<>^  “f  ,contai":ng  particular  books  of 
the  Accompts  of  ail  Charges  as  to  Works  &  Repara¬ 
tions  done  m  the  rower  of  London,  at  White-hall,  Welt- 
mtnfter,  St.  James’s  Houfe.  Somerfet-Houfe,  Hemp. 
ton-Court,  &  for  General  Monke,  together  with  the 
Accompts  of  all  Allowances  to  Officers,  &c.  for  fix 
Months  beginning  at  December  A.  D  1660.  &  ending 
vath  May  1  6m  .  Each  of  the  Articles  relating  to  the 
Workes  confifteth  of  Six  feverall  Books,  and  each  of 
thefe  Books  is  attefled  &  fubfcribed  by  Sir  John  Lin- 
ham  Surveyour  of  the  Works,  &  his  Brother  Officers. 


i657- 

An  Office-book  in  fol.  containing  Monthly  Books  of 
Accompts  of  all  Works  &  Reparations  done,  during 
certain  Months  of  the  Years  1662  &  1663.  at  theTower 
of  London,  White-hall,  Weftminlter,  St  James’s  Houfe, 
Greenwich,  Hampton-Court,  with  the  Allowances  made 
to  the  Officers  of  the  Workes. 

This  book  is  alfo  attefled  &  fubfcribed  by  Sir  John 
Durham  Surveyor  of  the  Workes,  &  his  Fellow-Officers 
m  the  fame  manner  as  mentioned  in  the  former  book.  * 


An  Office-book  in  fol,  containing  the  particular  Books 
of  Accompts  of  all  Works  &  Reparations  done 
at  the  Tower  of  London,  Whitehall,  St.  James's,  Sno- 
well  near  Berklhire-houfe,  Hampton-Court,  Greenwich - 
with  the  Accompts  of  Allowances  for  Riding  Charges’ 
&  to  the  Officers  for  incidental-matters,  for  Haifa  Year 
ending  the  laft  of  May  A.  D.  tfi6y.  Attefled  &  fub- 
fertbed  by  Sir  ChriRopher  Wren,  then  &  Hill  Surveyor 
of  the  Workes, and  his  Fellow-Officers,  in  the  fame 
manner  as  the  books  laft  above  deferibed. 


1659. 

Codex  membranaceus  et  crairiufculus  in  4to,  in  quo 
continentur, 

t.  Fragmenta  quatdam  Traftatus  Domini  [nnocentij 
lape  m.  de  contemptu  Mundi  ;  in  folijs  prioribus 
rejettaneis  .  .  Sequuntur, 

2.  Gulielmi  Arverni  Epifcopi  Parifienfis  Liber  de 

Virtutibus.  j 

3.  Ejufdem,  ut  videtur,  Traftatus  Moralis  in  vii. 

Vicijs  capitalibus.  22I 

4.  Farrago  Verfuum  et  Adnotationum  diverfi  generis 
fed  (me  judice)  exigui  momenti,  in  folijs  ad  finem 
rejeclicijs.  Inter  eas,  comparet, 

5.  Infcriptio  five  Notula  Hebraice,  litteris  Germano- 
rum  Rabbinicis  exarata. 


1660. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  initio,  et  prefertim  in  fine 
truncatus:  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Colledtio  Sermonum  de  Tempore,  ut  aiunt-  cum 

alijs  nonrmllis  de  Sanftis,  per  Nicholaum  de  Aqucvilla 
Ordmis  Fratrum  Minoruin.  t 

Defideratur  folium  in  quo  feripta  fuit  pars  Sermonis 
In  Adventu  Domini  habiti. 

2.  Tabula  Materiarum  Sermonibus  prsefatis  adaptata 

3.  Sermones  alij  De  Sandis,  eidem  Nicholao  forfan 
adjudicandi. 

Ad  ealeem  defiderantur  Quaterniones  plures. 

9  Codex 


/ 


j6g  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1661,  1662. 

1661. 

Codex  membranaceue,  et  fatis  probe  feriptus,  in  410, 
quo  continentur, 

1.  SS.  Biblia  (excepto  fo'.o  Libro  Pfal  morum;  Editio- 
nis  VulgatEe,  cum  Prologis  D  Hieronymi. 

2.  Explicatio  Nominum  Propriorum,  qua:  in  SS. 
Biblijs  inveniuatur  :  Remigio  Rhemenfi  Antiftiti  vulgo 
tributa. 

1662. 

A  Vellum-Book  in  8vo,  written  in  the  Low-Dutch 
Language,  and  prettily  illuminated  after  the  manner  of 
thofe  People.  It  is  a  Manual  of  Prayers,  A  c.  on  feveral 
Occafions,  to  be  fpecified  in  the  following  Articles. 

1 .  A  Calendar ;  wherein  is  no  mention  of  Thomas 

Beckets  day  ,- 

2.  A  Picture  of  the  Salutation  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 

13.  b. 

3.  The  Form  of  fume  dayly  Prayers,  Colletts,  Pfalins, 

LefTons,  &c.  for  the  time  of  Mattins,  without  any  gene¬ 
ral  Rubrick.  !4- 

4.  Form  for  the  Third  Hour.  36.  b. 

5.  Form  for  the  Sixth  Hour.  4°- 

6.  Form  for  the  Ninth  Hour.  43- b* 

7.  Form  for  Even-Song.  46-  b. 

8.  F;rm  for  Complyn.  53. 

9.  The  Seven  Hours  of  our  dear  I.ord  Jefus  Chrift, 

as  they  ought  to  be  read.  58.  b. 

10  A  Pitture  of  the  taking  of  our  Bleffed  Savior  by 
the  Jews:  and  of  St.  Peter’s  cutting  of  Malchus  his  Ear 
with  a  very  great  Knife.  59-  b. 

,1.  p  avers  for  the  Seven  Hours  of  our  Dear  Lady. 

62.  b. 

12.  The  Seven  Penitential  Pfalms.  65. 

13.  A  Pitture  reprefenting  the  Refurrettion,  and 

Chrift  fifing  in  Judgement  at  the  laftDay.  65.  b. 

14.  A  Litany  with  Prayers.  76.  b. 

ic  Form  for  the  Seven  Hours  of  the  true  Wifdom. 

Sy. 

16.  A  Pitture  of  our  Saviour  bleiling,  with  a  Label 

wherein  is  written  this  Infcription,“  Ego  fum  Via,  Veritas, 
et  Vita.”  85.  b. 

17.  Form  for  the  Hours  of  the  Long  Crofs.  1 13. 

18.  Pitture  reprefenting  our  Saviour  on  the  Crofs, 

with  the  B.  Virgin,  A  St.John.  "3*  b. 

19.  Torm  of  Prayers,  See.  for  the  Vigils.  140.  b. 

20.  The  Bleffed  name  1HS  in  very  large  Characters, 
illuminated  with  Azure,  Gold,  A  Crimfon.  180. 

The  Fancy  or  Whim  of  the  Illuminator  in  contriving 
divers  other  Principal  Letters  in  this  Book,  is  extraordi¬ 
nary  ;  as  may  be  feen  at  14.  66.  86.  100.  106.  b. 

1 1 4.  where  are  the  Armes  of  the  Family  who  formerly 


owned  the  Book.  141* 

21.  An  Hymn-like  Prayer  upon  the  fweet  Name 

Jhefus.  ibid. 

22.  A  Prayer  to  be  faid  as  Men  receive  our  Dear 

Lord.  '  182.  b. 

23.  A  fine  Prayer.  183. 

24.  A  Prayer  to  be  faid,  when  Men  fee  the  Crofs  of 

our  Lord.  183.  b. 

25.  A  Prayer  upon  the  Five  Wounds  of  our  Dear 

Lord.  184. 

26.  Some  other  Prayers  to  Jefus  Chrift.  184.  b. 


27.  A  Prayer  upon  the  7  Words  which  our  Dear 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift  fpake,  as  he  hung  upon  the  Crofs. 

187.  b. 

28.  A  Prayer  to  be  faid  as  Men  eat  the  Holy  Sacra¬ 
ment.  191. 

29.  A  fine  Prayer  upon  our  Lady.  192. 

30.  A  fine  Prayer  upon  our  Lady.  196. 


Num.  1662—1666, 

31.  A  very  good  Prayer  upon  our  dear  Lady  Maria. 

.  197* 

32.  A  Prayer  upon  St.  John  the  Evangelift.  198.  b. 

33.  A  Pitture  of  St.  John  the  Evangelift.  198.  b. 

34.  A  Prayer  of  Saint  John  the  Baptilt,  Ac.  199- 

35.  A  Prayer  to  our  Holy  Angell.  199-  b. 

36.  A  Prayer  to  Sr.  Brigitta.  2°°* 

37.  A  Prayer  to  St.  Katherina.  200.,  b. 

38.  A  Prayer  to  St.  Barbara.  2°l- 

1663. 

Codex  ecclefiaflicus  et  membranaceus  in  nmo  quo 
continentur, 

1.  Calendarium,  diebus  Feftivalibus  diverforum  Mar- 

tyrum  atq ;  ConlVfforum,  utriufque  Sexus,  et  quidem 
ex  Anglica  gente  (de  quibus  nulla  in  Martyrologio  Baro- 
nij  fit  mentio)  lettu  non  indigna.  1- 

2.  Horse  Beat®  Virginis  Marise.  7* 

3.  Septem  Pfalmi  Pcenitentiales.  47- 

4.  Litania  (in  qua  memorantur  Santti  plures  Angli, 
fpeciatim  de  partibus  Aquilonaribus)  cum  Collettis  non- 
nullis  forte,  fecundum  Ufum  Ecclcfue  Ebor.  58.  b. 

5.  Pars  Iconifmi  cujufdam  imprefli,  Adventum  irium 

Magorum  infantulo  Jefu  et  Bear;-:  Virgini  reprelentantis; 
qua:  tantam  prse'  fe  fert  vetuftatsm,  ut  illam  ^  in  ipfis 
Artis  Typographies:  incunabulis  elaboratam  facile  credi- 
derim.  69-  e}  vi;b  6? •  b. 

6.  Officium  in  Vigilijs  Mortuorum  recicari  foh'.um, 

cum  Notulis  Muficalibus :  omnino  fecundum  Ufum 
Ecclefim  Ebor.  ut  videtur.  7°" 

7- 

8. 

1664. 

A  parchment-Book  in  121110,  very  indifferently  written  ; 
but  formerly  belonging  to  the  brave  Englifh  Hero. 
Charles  Brandon  Duke  of  Suffolk  ;  as  appeareth  by 
his  name  written  iheiein  by  his  own  Hand,  at  fol.  22. b. 
It  containeth, 

1.  A  large  Rubrick  in  French,  de  la  Louenge,  Vertu, 


et  Eflicace  des  Pfeames. 

2.  Plalmi  cum  aliquot  precibus.  5. 

3.  Pfalms  of  Thankfgiving  to  God,  for  his  Benefits 

&  Mercies  received.  9-  b* 

4.  Pfalms  A  Prayers,  to  be  faid  in  time  of  trouble; 

either  as  to  Body  or  Mind.  14. 

5.  Pfalms,  Ac.  for  times  of  Temptation.  19. 

6.  Pfalms,  Ac.  for  times  of  Tribulation.  22. 

7.  Pfalms,  Ac-  to  be  faid  after  Reft  taken  28.  b. 

8.  Pfalms  to  be  frequently  repeated,  in  peoples  ordinarj 

Occafions.  32,b» 


The  Pfalms,  or  Verfes,  abovementioned,  are  all  ii 
Latin  ;  &  the  Rubrics  in  bad  French. 

1665. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  minori ;  quo  continentur 
SS.  Bibliorum  Pars  prima  ;  foil,  a  Libro  Genefeos 
ufque  ad  finem  Pfalmorum,  inclufive. 

Verfio  horum  Librorum  eft  Vulgata;  Pfalteriun 
vero,  quod  in  Rubrica  inf'eribitur  Liber  Hymnorum,  ve 
Soliloquiorum  Prophete  de  Crifto,  eft  D.  Hieronym 
Gallicanum. 

1666. 

A  parchment-Book  in  nmo.  imperfett  at  the  end  ;  an< 
otherwife  damaged  by  the  Book-binders  Plow  (whi 
feemeth  to  have  bound  it  a  fecond  time,  for  Matthev 
Parker  Arch-Bifhop  of  Canterbury)  in  the  Great  Ca 
4  talogu 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


169' 


lsTiim.  1666. 

talogue  of  MSS.  printed  at  Oxford  A.  D.  1697.  no. 
6g  ^ 8.  entituled  Wicliff’s  Wicket,  but  it  is  plainly  dif¬ 
ferent  from  the  little  Treatife  upon  thefe  Words,  “  Hoc 
eft  Corpus  meum,  ”  entituled  “  Wrycklyff’s  Wycket ; 

«  whyche  he  made  in  Kyng  Rychards  days  the  fecond, 

«  in  the  yere  1395.  and  faid  to  be  (together  with  Mr. 

«  Tracies  Will,  &  Tindale’s  Comment  upon  it)  in- 
“  printed  at  Norenburch  1 546.”  (Which  mull  be  a 
falfeDate,  fince  WyclifFe  died,  ult.  Decemb.  1387.) 
The  Defign  of  this  prefent  MS.  is  a  fort  of  Sum¬ 
mary  of  the  fcveral  Books  of  the  Old  Teftament,  with 
certain  Declarations  of  their  Authority,  ScUfe  to  Chriftian 
Men.  Whether  this  Traft  took  in  the  Books  of  the  New 
Teftament,  doth  not  now  appear.  Nor  can  I  now  tell 
whether  this  Traci  be  that  Prologue  to  the  Bible  afcribed 
to  John  Wyckliff  St  printed  at  London  A.  D.  1550. 
becaufe  that  Book  hath  been  lately  taken  away  from  a  pri¬ 
vate  Collection,  Sc  is  too  fcarce  to  begotten  again  in  haft. 

That  this  Treatife  was  written  originally  by  an 
Englifhman  St  a  Lollard,  may  plainly  appear  by  fol.  89.  b. 
where  mention  is  made  of  London :  and  by  fol.  74.  b. 
where  are  thefe  words,  “  Now  in  Engelond  it  is  a  comyn 
Proteftioun  azens  Perfecufcion  of  Prelatis  &  of  fumme 
Lordis,  if  a  man  is  cuftomable  to  fwere  nedeles,  Sc  fals, 
&  unavifid,  by  the  Boonys,  Nailes,  Sc  Sids  St  othere 
Membris  of  Crift  ;  and  to  be  Proud  and  Leccherous  ;  Sc 
fpeke  not  of  Godds  Lawe  ;  and  repreve  not  Synne  aboute 
him.  And  to  ablteyne  fro  Oothis  nedeles,  Sc  unleevefull ; 
and  to  efchewe  Pride  ;  St  fpeke  Onour  of  God,  Sc  of  his 
Lawe  ;  and  repreve  Synne  bi  weie  of  Charite  :  is  Matir 
&  Caufe  now,  whi  Prelatis  Sc  fumme  Lordis  fclaundren 
Men  &  clepen  hem  Lollardis,  Eretikitis,  Sc  Riferis  of 
Debate  Sc  of  Trefoun  azens  the  King.” 

When  the  Term  Lollards  was  firft  ufed  in  England, 

I  find  not :  but  by  Fox’s  Martyrology  it  Ihould  feem  to 
have  been  ufed  by  Henry  Crompe  a  Ciftercian  Monke  Sc 
Regent  in  Divinity,  in  his  LeCtures  at  Oxford,  before  or 
about  the  14  July  1382.  at  which  very  time  Sc  place, 
the  Perfecution  raged  mod  violently  againft  John  Wycliffe 
and  his  adherents.  I  will  not  affirm  that  thefe  Sc  former 
Troubles  there,  provoked  him  to  lay  fome  horrid  Impu¬ 
tations  on  that  Univerfity  Sc  the  Clergy  there,  worfe  than 
Perjury  Sc  Simony,  and  in  terms  beyond  the  Truth ; 
the  Places  may  be  found  fol.  100.  b.  Sc  101.  as  to 
locking  up  the  Holy  Scriptures;  and  efpecially  fol.  ici.  b. 
Sc  102.  where  he  faith  that  “  the  fecond  Orrible  Synne 

«  is - St  ftrong  mayntenaunce  thereof :  asitisknowen 

«  to  many  Perfones  of  the  Reume,  Sc  at  the  laftParlement.” 
I  have  taken  fome  pains  to  inquire  into  this  foul  matter, 
but  could  not  find  ground  fufficient  for  fuch  a  Charge. 

Moreover,  the  Author  declaims  againft  Tranfub- 
ftantiation,  fol.  91.  b.  Image-Worfhip,  fol.  76.  Simony 
fol.  68.  102.  and  divers  other  public  Scandals,  with 
reference  to  Religion.  Among  others,  that  of  Public 
fetting  the  Pardons  of  Sins  to  Sale,  did  not  elcape,  foi¬ 
st  fol.  67.  b.  he  faith -  “  Summe  Griften  Lordis 

“  fenden  generalLettris  to  alle  her  Myniftris  ScLeegemen 
“  either  Tenauntes,  that  the  Pardouns  of  theBifchopis  of 
««  Rome  (that  ben  opin  Leefings,  for  the  igraunten  many 
«  hundred  zeeris  ofPardoun  after  Domes  day)  be  prechid 
tc  generallydn  her  Rewmes  Sc Lordfchipis  :  and  ifeny  wijfe 
«  man  azen-feith  the  opin  Errouris  of  Antecrift ;  and  teche 
“  men  to  do  her  Aimes  to  pore  nedy  men,  to  afcape  the 
«  peynes  of  Plelle,  and  to  win  the  blifle  ofHevene  ;  he  be 
«  prefoned,  as  a  man  out  of  Criften  Bileve,  andTraytour 
«  of  God,  Sc  of  Criften  Kings  Sc  Lordis.” 

One  thing  more  as  to  the  Author  of  this  Treatife, 
fol.  3.  b.  he  writeth  thus  :  “  And  therefore  Y  tranflatide 
“  not  the  Thridde,  neither  theFourthBook  ofEfdre,  that 
“  ben  Apocrifa :  but  only  the  Firft,  Sc  of  Neemye,  that 
«  ben  rikened  forTweyBookisanentisGrekis  ScLatyns  ” 
All  thefe  Citations  feem  to  agree  well  enough  with 
the  Perfon  Sc  Opinions  of  Wycliffe  ;  who  is  alfo  com- 
Cat.  Harl.  Vox..  II. 


Num.  1666 — 1670. 

monly  faid  to  have  tranflated  the  Bible  out  of  I  atin  into 
Englifh  ;  though  I  could  never  yet  fee  fuch  a  Book  with 
his  Name  written  therein  by  the  firft  Hand.  (Not  to 
mention  what  Sir  Thomas  More  wrote,  that  there  were 
then  divers  Tranflations  of  Scripture  into  Englifh,  allowed 
by  Authority  ;  Sc  that  the  W)  clivites  were  only  charged 
with  keeping  certain  Prefaces  to  Biblical  Books  of 
Wycliffes  compofure). 

Not  having  the  printed  Prologue  now  by  me,  1  will 
not  affirm  that  this  MS.  is  the  fame  with  that,  which 
Mr.  Wharton  in  his  Appendix  to  Dr.  Cave’s  Hift.  Litt. 
defcribeth  in  thefe  Words.  53- 

“  Prologus  ad  integrant  Bibliorum  Verfionem 
“  Anglicani,  ab  ipfo  adornatum,  Anglice,  Lond.  1550.” 
8vo. 

Nor  will  I  affirm  (though  it  may  be  likely)  that  it 
is  the  fame  with  what  he  calls  “  prolixa  adtnodum  In- 
troduflio  de  Autoritate  atq;  Ufu  S.  Scripturtc”  (at  the 
beginning  of  a  MS.  New  Teftament  in  Englifh,  in  the 
Univerfity-Library  of  Cambridge,  clafs  3.  no.  4.)  “  Sub 
cujus  initium,  enumeratis,  ex  judacorum  ac  Reforma- 
torum  fententia,  libiis  Scriptural  Canonicis,  rcliquos 
omnes  Apocryphos  effe,  et  Automate  Fidei  carere  afferit.” 

1  believe  this  Tratt  may  be  found  entire  in  certain 
old  Englifh  Bibles,  in  Her  Majeftics  Royal  Library ;  Sc 
in  that  in  the  Ld.  Bp.  of  Ely. 

1667. 

Volumen,  five  Rotulus,  e  16  membranis  fimul  confutis 
conftans :  cui  Titulus, 

Compota  omnium  et  fingulorum  Ballivorum,  Pre- 
pofitorum,  Firmariorum,  et  Miniftrorum,  ac  aliorum 
Occupatorum  omnium  et  fingulorum  Caftrorum,  Domi- 
niorum,  Maneriorum,  Terrarum,  et  Tenementorum, 
prepotentis  Principis  EdwardiDucis  Bukyngham.  Comitis 
Hertford.  Stafford.  Sc  Northampt.  ibidem  (i.  e.  in  Co- 
mitatibus  Kancie  &  Surreyse  tantum)  computabil.  ex- 
iftencium  :  una  cum  Compoto  Receptorum  eorumdem, 
de  uno  Anno  integro  determinate,  coram  Johanne  Butts 
et  Willelmo  Becke  auditoribus  di£ti  Domini  Diicis  aflig- 
natis ;  viz.  a  fefto  S.  Michaelis  Archangeli  anno  tercio 
Regis  nunc  Henrici  vm.  ufq;  idem  Feftum  anno  ejufdem 
Dili  Regis  quarto,  &c. 

1668. 

A  long  Parchment  Roll,  being  the  Originall  under  the 
proper  Hands  Sc  Seals  of  the  Jurors,  i.  e.  The  Inqui- 
fition  made  at  the  Inqueft-houfe  in  Eafl-Smithfield 
A.  D.  1663.  of  all  Encroachments,  Stopps,  Letts, 
Impediments,  Nuifances,  Sc  Offences  ;  done,  fuffered, 
or  continued,  in  or  upon  any  Sewers,  Ditches,  or 
Waier-courfes ;  and  of  the  Decayes  Insufficiencies  S: 
Reparacions,  of  all  Sluces,  Inletts,  Outletts,  'lruncks, 
Wharfes,  Walls,  Grates,  &  Bridges,  within  Lyme- 
houfe,  Ratcliffe,  Shadwell,  Eaft-fide  of  Foxes  Lane, 
Stepney,  ....  Sc  Bednall-Greene  in  the  County  of 
Middellfex. 

1669. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to,  recentiflima  manu  feriptus ; 
in  quo  continentur, 

Anonymi  Auctoris  Commentationes  Mataphyficte. 

167O1. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to  grandiori,  quo  continentur, 
htec  Opera  Philofophica  Davidis  Echlini  Philolophia: 
Profefforis  apud  .  .  .  .a  Difcipulis  fuis  de- 

feripta,  viz. 

1 .  InPhilofophiam  in  genere,  Prolegomena  :  incepta  a 
Petro  Verdello.  20  die  Odlobr.  A.  D.  1597.  *• 

X  x  2.  Prasludia 


rar 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


I  76 


Num.  1670 — 


2.  Prariudia  quaedam  in  Indcrodudlionem  Porphyrij. 

20.  b. 


3.  In  Proeemium  Porphyrij,  &c.  24. 

N.  B.  Manumde  Tabula  fubftraxit  Petrus  Verdellus, 


a  fol.  4S.  quern  tamen  fecutus  eft  Petrus  Etchardus 

4.  In  Categorias  Ariftoteles. 

5.  In  Librum  de  Interpretatione.  7. 

Hie  iucipit  manus  Joannis  Martelli,  qua:  dcfinit  in 

fine.  fol.  96.  b. 

6.  In  Libros  Priorum  Analyticorum.  84. 

Manibus  Joannis  Martelli,  Joannis  Salvagii,  Joannis 

Pontierij,  Joannis  Puteani,  P.  Grefij,  &c. 

7.  In  Libros  Topieorum. 

8.  In  Reprehenfiones  Sophiftarum.  isr. 

9.  Schcdula  impreffa,  in  qua  diverfse  Thefes  Logicte, 
Ethica:,  ct  Phyficas,  quas  publice  propugnabant  ^ferijs 
Ludovicalibus,  in  Aula  Collegij  Aquiraniei,  adolefcentes 
Logics  candidati,  Prsfide  D.  Eehlino,  Burdigalm. 

10.  In  Ethica  Ariftoteds,  Pradudia  (etdeindein  ipium 
Librum). 

Hie  etiam  confpiciuntur  manus  .  .  Serrani,  Gafparis 
.  .  .  Amici,  Petri  Longi,  &  alburn. 

11.  In  Phyfica  Ariftotelis,  Prolegomena  ac  Com- 

mentarij.  lr,^ 

Manibus  Joannis  Canori  Carmelitag  Joannis  Eglifad, 
Petri  Perrifaci,  Joannis  Fraiteti,  Joannis  Truehoni,  Joannis 
Chatilhoni,  Gratiani  Tartafij,  Dominici  Dufmti,  F.  G. 
Amici,  G.  Dainheftoni  Vafconis,  Ac. 

12.  In  Tres  Libros  Meteorum.  337- 

Manibus  varijs. 

13.  In  Libros  de  Anima. 

Manibus  Jacobi  Portepani  Tarbeyenfis,  cujufdam 
ignoti,  et  tandem  Jacobi  Thueti,  qui  Codicem  abfolvit 
4  die  Martij  A.  D.  1599. 

14.  Alia  Davidis  Echlir.i  Schcdula  Thefium  Logicarum 
Ethicarum,  Phyficarum,  Mathematicarum,  ac  Meta- 
phyficarum,  D.  Gabrieli  Ternellio  dicata  :  nec  non  Bur- 
digalas  typis  excufa,  A.  D.  1 599. 


1671. 


A  Book  in  fmall  fol.  Parchment ;  written  in  the  Old 
Englifh  ;  wherein  I  find, 

1 .  Verfes  (written  in  manner  of  profe)  in  pfaife  of 
Synt  Herafmius ;  and  exhorting  People  to  offer  at  his 
Image.  In  the  firft  fpare  Leaf, 

2.  A  poem  upon  Mortality  k  Death ;  where  almoft 

each  Line  Chimes  on  thefe  Words  apGil  qt{iC. 

ibid. 

3.  A  large  Theological  Treatife,  imperfect  at  both 

ends,  which  feemeth  to  have  been  entiiuled  ChC  tTilcne 
tO  and  to  have  been  compofed  by  lbme Secu¬ 

lar  Prieft  of  no  great  learning  or  capacity.  He  citeth 
Maifter  Robert  de  Sorbonne  for  a  good  part  of  the  Work  ; 
which  he  endeavored  to  illuftrate  by  a  company  of  Pictures 
drawn  in  a  inoft  rude  &  wretched  manner;  which 
neverthelefs,  may  be  of  fome  ufe  to  thofe  who  iearch  after 
the  Habits  ufed  by  the  common  People  in  that  Age. 


1672. 


A  paper-Book  in  fol.  written  in  Italian  by  Giulio  Mancini 
and  by  him  divided  into  two  parts,  thus  entituled,  * 
Alcune  Confiderationi  appertinenti  alia  Pittura 
come  diletto  d’un  Gentilhuomo  Nobile,  e  come  Intro- 
duttione  a  quello,  fi  deve  dire.  Parte  prima. 

Aicune  Confiderationi  intorno  a  quello  che  ha  feritto 
qualche  Autore,  in  materia  della  Pittura  ;  con  dire 
Confiderationi  di  Pittura  e  Pittori,  che  non  lbno  pomte 
effier  offervate  ne  fapute  da  quelli,  che  anno  feritto  avanti 
quefto  tempo.  Parte  feconda. 


Num.  167^—1675. 


1673. 

A  paper-Book  in  finall  fol.  wherein  are  written, 

1.  Ordinances  by  the  Lord  Chancellour,  for  the  better 
A-  more  regular  adminiftration  of  Juftice  in  the  Chancery ; 
to  )e  dudy  obferved,  lavinge  the  Prerogative  of  the 
Court.  Pubhlhcd  in  the  Court,  the  firft  day  of  Candle- 
mafs  I  erm,  1618.  , 

This  Tradf  is  but  begun. 

2-  The  1  he 61  of  that  which  was  fpoken  by  the  Lord 
Aeepcr  Sir  Francis  Bacon,  at  the  taking  of  his  Place  in 
Onancery ;  m  performance  of  His  Majefties  Charge 
given  unto  ’  m,  when  he  received  the  Great  Seal  of 
Eng|a^d  the  feventh  of  May  1617.  c. 

3.  .  opeech  made  by  the  Reverend  Father  in  God 
John  Lord  Bifhop  of  Lincolr.e-eleft,  Lord  Keeper  of  the 
G,eat  ot.de  of  England,  after  hr-  Oath  taken  in  the  High 
Court  of  t  hancerie.  " 

4*  Ordinances  made  by  the  Right  Honorable  Thomas 
Loid  Coventry  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great  Seale  of 
England  w;-h  the  advice  &  afiiftance  of  the  Right 
Honourable  Sir  Julius  Ctefar  Kt.  Mafter  of  the  Rolls 
?  errnino  Sti.  1\L  Sadis,  11  Carol!  :  for  the  RedreiTe  of 
iundry  Errors,  Defaults,  k  Abufes  in  the  High  Court  of 
Chancerv.  ^ 

5.  Additional!  Rules  for  the  better  Governaunce  of 

the  Court  of  Chancery,  k  the  Great  Seale.  iQ 

6.  Forma  Juramenti  Sub-clericoi  urn  Sex-Clericorum 
Cancellariffi,  per  directionem  D’ni  Cancellarij,  anno  39 

7.  The  Fees  of  the  Lord  Chancellour  or  Lord  Keeper 
of  ihe  ( meat  scale  of  England  ;  and  of  others  the  Mini- 
fters  of  Juftice  k  Officers  within  the  Court  of  Chancery. 

,  8-  A  Treatife  concerning  the  Court  of  Chancery,' 
the  Minnters  cV  Officers  employed  therein.  1  J  b. 

9.  Carres  Cale,  who  was  lued  upon  a  Bond,  in  the 
!•  xchequer  as  Debtor  to  the  King  ;  when,  in  truth  he 
was  noe  Debtour  to  the  Kinge.  2  _ 

.0  Order  of  the  Lord  Keeper  &  3  Barons  touch?™ 
the  1  lea  between  Sir  Nicholas  Sake  Kt.  &  the  Executors 
of  I  nomas  Bennet  late  Alderman  of  London.  2  c  Octob 
14  Caroli.  J  ^  * 

11.  Copie  of  a  Report  upon’  a  Reference  from  His 
Majefty  (a  Form  only). 

12.  Form  of  a  Warrant  from  Referrees.  28.' 

13.  Form  of  an  Award.  ' 

14.  Inftruaions  for  the  Mafter  of  the  Wards  & 
Liveries,  for  the  better  authorifinge  &  direefinge  him 
m  the  Execution  of  his  Office,  &  Performance  of  that 
Service. 

_  '-*■  Dir,-!llll 3e,W“n  La"Ter  &  Prifoner,  upon  die 
Quelhon,  Vt  hether  it  be  as  necefiary  for  a  Chrifiian  State 
to  have  a  Chancery  for  the  miferable,  who  bee  affixed 
m  Pnfon ;  as  for  them  who  bee  at  Liberty,  &  ab!°  to 
follow  their  Suites,  &  beare  the  Charges  thereof.  12 
16.  'Ihe  Plea  upon  Oath  of  etc.  in  Curia  Requifi- 
cionum  0  1  b 

,  ‘?,'-„Thce  Plea  ^  DemlllT<;r  of  Eliz.  B.  WiddL'wir'li 
the  Bill  of  Complaint  of  W.  W.  Complainant  34.  b. 


i674' 


A  paper-Book  in  final!  fol.  wherein  are  written,  by  fome 
Perfon  of  Learning, 

A  Colleflion  of  Law  Common-Places,  in  Order 
Alphabetical ;  perhaps  w-orthy  the  perufal  o t  thofe  who 
are  Students  of  our  Laws. 


1  675- 

Codex  chartacc-us  in  fol.  min.  Sedani  feriptus,  et  quidem 
circa  A.  D.  1591.  perpetuis  infuper  fere  Commentarijs 
atq  ;  gloflemalis  interlinearibusD.  Burcheti  Prol'efforis 
ut  videtur,  publici  inluftratus  :  quo  continentur, 

1.  ,M. 


Nilm.  1675 — 1677. 

f.  M.  Tullij  Ciceronis  Tradtatulus  qui  dicitur  Som- 
nium  Scipionis  ;  x.p«A  .  1 . 

2.  A.  Perfij  Flacci  Satyrte  vi.  18. 

3.  Ariftophanis  Plvtvs,  Grace.  54. 

Deinde  Colledtio  hpiftolarum  Grace  fcriptarum ; 

quaruin  Infcriptiones  ordine  fequuntur  viz. 

4.  TsAi iAjuoj  ITAa'Jxiof  toTi  tmk  ’EAAjii/umji,  ejmi  v  ’  ' 

T»if  ©foyon’a?  apw. 

5-  TaAi.-A^sj  BaJais?  AoJoaoca  ru  aiiiTa 
O.  BzJtzio;  'IccucJ  Aa<rx«f£»  rsi  PuvJjBxr,: 

7-  IA tf/ioj  BaJKiof  Xooxui. 

8.  ’iA^ytof  Ba^.roj  Xfi ffjopofw  AeyfoAiw. 

9.  ’lAfff/.of  s  BaJaio;  'IAe^wu  tw  Mania 
xo.  Epiftola  ivatiy^a.qo<,. 

1 1 .  BaJaio;  EpxT/A'o. 


Budai,  ut  videtur,  Epiftola  Graca. 

103. 

13.  Alia  ejufdem,  ut  videtur,  Epiftola  Grace  con- 

fcripta,  A.D  1  cj  1 9.  103.  b. 

14.  Alia  Epiftola  Graca.  104. 

15.  B '  io4. 

16.  Iliados  Homeri  Liber  1.  Grace  curn  Arguments. 

107.  b. 

17.  M.  T.  Ciceronis  Tufculanarum  Quaftionum, 

Liber  v.  _  I03.b. 

x8.  Q^  Horatij  Flacci  Epiftolarum  Liber  1.  169  b. 


Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  min.  Italicamanu  vetuftiori 
exaratus  ;  in  quo  habentur, 

Conftantini  African i,  Montis  Caftinenfis  Monachi, 
Locorum  communium  Medicinalium  Libri  x.  ad  Defi- 
derium  Abbatem  Caftinenfem. 


Codex  chartaccus  in  4to,  ampliff.  quo  continetur  Pars 
media  cujufidam  Opens  Philofophia,  foil. 

Liber  Ottavus  ;  De  Philofophia  Epicuri,  universe, 
in  quo  Capita  xn. 

1.  Quid  lit  Philofophia.  x. 

2.  De  fine  Philofophia.  5. 

3.  De  Origine  Philofophia.  1  3. 

4.  Qui  ad  Philofophiam  nafeantur.  22. 

5.  Qui  pracipue  Philofophati  prater  Gracos  dim 

fucrint.  3o_ 

6.  Quam  varia  apud  Gracos  fuerint  philofophandi 

Rationes  et  Sefta.  3 

7.  De  Seda  lonica  ejufq  ;  propaginibus  47. 

8.  De  Seda  Iialca,  ad  quam  prater  cameras,  Epicurea 
relata. 

9.  Sedatores  F.picuri.  §-,% 

10.  Libri  Ipicuri. 

11.  Quid  ex  his  Libris,  feu  ex  Dodrina  Epicurea 

fuperfit  94. 

12.  Partitio  Philofophia.  I0 , _ 

Liber  Noma.  De  Canonica  Dialedica  fubftituta 

fcil. 

13.  Canonices  Etymon  &  Defcriptio.  109. 

I4-  Quid  fit  Dialedica,  et  qualis  antiquiflima  fuit. 

1 16. 

15.  Dialedica  Zenonis,  feu  Eleatica.  126- 

1 6.  Dialedica  Euclidis,  feu  Megarica.  1 3  5. 

17  Dialedica  Platonis.  142. 

18.  Dialedica  Ariftotelis.  x  q0- 

19.  Quatenus  Dialedica  ab  Epicuro  repudiata.  168. 
*0.  Quatenus  Canonica  Dialectics  fubftituta ;  ac 

potiflimum  circa  Ufum  Vocum. 

Liber  Dccimvs,  De  Critcrijs  Veritatis  generaliter. 

21.  QuidVerum,  quid  Falfum  dicatur.  ig>. 

22.  Quid,  quotuplexq  ;  Criterium  ;  et  de  Quo  heic 

Sermo.  199. 

23.  Veritatis  Criteria  qui  tollant.  204. 


Codex  membranaceus  &  crafliis  in  4to  ampliori ;  in  quo 
feribuntur, 

x  Capitula  fequentis  Operis. 

2.  Regiftriim  Brevium  de  Cancellaria  R.  Richardi  11. 


A  paper-Book  in  fmaH'fol.  written  in  Law  French ; 
wherein  I  find, 

1.  Reports  of  Trialls  Term.  Mich.  ann.  41.  &  Hill, 
ann.  42  Eliz. 

2.  Reports  of  like  Trials  &  Cafes,  from  Term.  Mich, 
arm.  1  Jacobi  1.  ad  Term,  Pafch.  ann.  ii  ejufdem 
Regis. 

3.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  Names  at  the  end. 

1680. 

A  Book  in  large  4to,  confifting  of  divers  Ioofe  Trad 

to  be  bound  up  together,  in  the  following  Order. 

A  Quaternio  of  Parchment  written  moftly  in  Old 
Enghfti,  A  entituled, 

1 .  Code  Mcdicinis  that  gode  Leches  habbeth  fown- 

den  h  drawen  out  of  grete  Bokis,  Galiene,  Afclcpius, 
&  Ipocras.  1 

Among  thefe  I  find, 

2.  Modus  conficiendi,  five  diftillandi  Aquam  Virs  * 

cujus  Virtutes  pene  innumerabiles.  4  * 

.  3*  Collirium  Magiftri  Mauricij,  quod  fecit  ad  omnia 
vicia  Oculorum  :  et  eft  tante  eflicacie,  quod  Vifum 
amilfum  per  decern  annos,  infra  40  dies  reftaurabit. 

4.  Medicinal  Receipts,  in  French.  ibid. 

5.  Midicine  (i.  e.  a  fooliih  Charm)  for  to  wv'te 

whether  a  Man  fchal  lyve  other  deye.  7.  b. 

6.  For  to  Staunche  Blod  ;  a  Charme.  ’  3*. 

Then  follow,  written  by  feveral  Hands,  upon 

Paper. 

7.  Colledanea  Ilenrici  Keepi,  de  Fundatione,  et 
Hiftoria  Csnobij  S.  Petri  Weftmonafterienfis.  9. 

8.  Qucftion  ;  s’il  eft  licite  de  fouffrir  les  Juifs  entre 

les  Chriftiens  ;  ou  les  Introduire  de  nouveau  es  lieux,  ou 
ils  n’ont  encore  efte  j  7 

9.  Interefts  de  la  France,  avee  la  Flandre  20. 

10.  Abrege  de  Finance:  ou  Interrogatoire  avec  les 

Refponces  d’un  afpirant  a  la  Charge  de  Treforier  de 
France.  2 

11.  De  Acuto  et  Arguto. 

12.  S  il  y  a  plus  de  Gloire  k  fe  Vaincre  f;’-mefme, 

qu  a  triomfer  de  fes  Enemis.  Difcours  fait  fur  la 
Queftion  propofeea  1’Occafion  de  laPaix,  donnee  par  la 
Roy  de  France,  en  1678.  ‘  -0_  5 

This  is  of  the  Hand-Writing  of  the  Earl  of  Sand¬ 
wich,  then  under  the  Charge  of  a  Tutor. 

I3-  Patience ;  a  Meftieurs  de  1’Academie  Fran- 
^oife.  A.  D.  1687.  y 

14.  Charite  d’un  Reforme. 

15.  Remonftrances  faites  au  Roy  par  Meftieurs  les 

Maiftres  des  Requeftes,  par  1’Organe  du  Sieur  Gomain, 
ii  Compiegne  1656.  contre  les  Entreprifes  de  Meftieurs 
du  Parlement,  faites  a  leur  prejudice,  touchant  les 
Evocations.  JQ^m 

16.  Remarques 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS- 


171 


Num.  1680 — 1683. 

ffi.  Remarques  fur  la  Rcponfe  a  la  Lettre  de  Mon- 
fieur  Fagel.  27  Febr.  1688.  105. 

168 1. 

A  French  Book  in  an  oblong  4*0,  wherein  are  written 

by  Dr.  Du  Prat  the  elder, 

1.  Lettre  de  Meffieurs  de  Chaalons,  a  Monfteur  de 

£hailillon.  9. 

2.  Effay  d’Elogedu  Roi  de  Suede  Charles  ix.  with  a 

Latin  Tranflation  by  Dr.  Du  Prat.  1 1 . 

3.  Memoires  fur  l’Eftat  d-  la  France  depuis  la  n-.ort 
du  Roi  Henry  iv.  jufques  a  la  de-niere  Pais  laite  avec 
les  Proteftans  de  France,  fur  le  fin  de  Juin  1629.  par 
1c  Due  de  Rohan. 

4.  Extrait  de  1’IMoire  de  la  Vie  de  Henri  dernier 

Due  de  Montmorenci,  par  Simon  du  Cros.  16  •. 

5.  Mort  du  Comte  Strafford  en  Angleterre.  1641. 

*75- 

6.  Du  I’avant  dit  Due  de  Montmorency.  '76. 

7.  La  Charit£  rrancoife ;  par  un  Gent’lhomme 

Anglois;  i.  e  Monlitur  (Kenelm?)  Digbv.  178. 

8.  Extraifl  de  la  Vie  du  Coneftable  de  1’Ffdigui  res 

Frangois  de  Bonne  ;  par  fon  Secretaire  Vidcl.  1 . ' 3 . 

9.  Reception  de  Mr.  le  M  irefchal  de  la  Face,  en  la 
Dignite  du  Due  &  Pair  de  France.  13  Aoull  1637. 

207. 

10.  Some  French  Verfes,  &  Latin  Notes,  of  little 
moment,  at  the  end. 

1682. 

Codex  pertenuis  membranaccus  in  4*0  nmpliori :  fcil. 

Statutorum  Ecclefim  Welienfis  Exemplar  vetuftum; 

in  quo  leguntur, 

t.  Statuta  Jofcelini  Epifcopi;  16  Kal.  Novembris 
A.  D.  1242.  1. 

2.  Statuta  edita  tempore  Jofcelini  Epifcopi :  in  crallino 

Sti.  Augultini  Apoltoli,  A.  D.  124'.  2. 

3.  Statuta  antiqua  de  Officio  cujuflibet  perfone  Ecclefie 

Cathedralis  Wellen.  2.  b. 

4.  Statuta  edita  per  Decanum  et  Capitulum,  tempore 

Willelmi  de  Buftone  Epifcopi  fecundi,  i.  e.  Idus  Julij 
A.  D.  1273.  J. 

5.  Statuta  edita  tempore  Walter!  de  Hafelchawe 

Decani  Welienfis,  in  Crallino  Sti.  Andree  Apoltoli 
A.  D.  1298.  6. 

6  Statuta  edita  tempore  Domni  Johannis  Goddele 
nuper  Decani  Ecclefie  Wellen.  A.  D.  1331.  13. 

7.  Statuta  edita  per  Domnum  Walterum  de  London. 
Decanum,  et  Capitulum,  tempore  Radulphi  Epifcopi, 
A.  D.  1338.  de  Negocijs  et  Miniftris  Ecclefie  Wellen. 

15- 

Heic  inter  alia  habentur, 

8.  Confuetudo,  fecundum  Ufum  Ecclefie  Cathe- 

dralis  Wellen.  ad  intronicendum  Epifcopum.  23.fi. 

9.  Juramentum  Decani  Ecclefie  Wellen.  quando  debet 
inftallari. 

10.  Juramentum  Prepofiti  Ecclefie  Wellen  24.  b. 

11.  Juramentum  Canonicorum  Ecclefie  Wellen.  25. 

12.  Juramentum  Vicariorum  Ecclefie  Wellen.  cum 
debeant  perpetuari,  fecundum  Statuta  Ecclefie,  prediclc. 

ibid. 

13.  Carta  Jofcelini  Epifcopi  Bathonienfis,  de  Hofpi- 

tali  Sti.  Johannis  de  Welles,  et  fubjeflione  ejufdem 
Domus  Ecclefise  Cathedrali  Wellen.  25.  b. 

14.  Statuta  tempore  Johannis  Carleton,  Decani  Ec- 

clefie  Wellen,  A.  D.  1351.  25.  b. 

1683. 

Codex  Medicinalis,  chartaceus  in  4to,  quo  conti- 
nentur, 

t.  Tn  I  ibrum  Hippocratis  de  Natura  Humana,  Dhi 
Perdulcis  Praeleftiones,  A.  D.  1579.  •  j. 


Num.  1683 — 1685* 

2.  In  Jacobi  Sylvij  Anatomen,  D.  Perdulcis  Pir 

fecliones.  35. 

3.  In  Galeni  I.ibros  de  Tcmperamentis,  ejufdem  D. 

Perdulcis  Prseleflior.es.  79. 

4.  In  1  .ibrum  primum  et  fecundum  Galeni  de  r.a- 

turalibusFacultatibus,  Pradeftiones.  153. 

5.  Eorum  quae  Libro  Galeni  de  Differentijs  Mor- 
borum  continentur,  ignymnr  diclata  a  Domino  Perdulci. 

21 1. 

6.  Tn  Librum  Galeni  de  Morborum  Cai  fis.  254. 

7.  In  Librum  Galeni  de  Differentijs  Symptomat-um. 

D  Perdulcis  Prselcfliones.  2 63. 

8.  In  Ties  Galeni  Libras  de  Caufis  Symptomatum, 

Comnientarius  D.  Pcidulcis.  aSo. 

1684. 

An  ancient  paper-Bcok  in  large  4to,  alm.ofl  wholly 

written  in  the  Flemifh  or  Low-Dutch  Tongue,  wherein 

are  contained  the  following  Chirurgical  and  Medicinal 

Trafts : 

x.  Van  die  Urinen.  1. 

2.  Receipts  for  making  certain  Ointmenrs,  Plaiflers, 

& c.  2.  104.  b.  139.  b.  173.  b. 

3.  Summa  Artis  Cirurgie,  cum Praftica  Thome  Umbra 

de  1  hemfmonte,  que  Thomafio  vocatur;  4  Libris  com- 
pilataA.D.  1343.  5. 

4.  Some  Low-Dutch  Verfes,  written  with  Red  Ink. 

I04* 

5.  Cirurgia  Lanfranci  de  Mcdiolano,  2  Libris.  105. 

6.  Praflica  et  Doflrina  compolita  a  Magiflro  Johanne 

Ypermane,  quamipfc-  traftavit  in  Flamingo,  ad  Utiliratem 
fylij  fui  in  tempore  Vite  fue  ;  fane  quia  voluit  quod  ipfe 
haberet  aliquid  de  Opere  et  Doflrina  compofita  a  multis 
Magiltris:  fcilicet  de  Lanfrancko,  et  a  quatuor  Magiftris 
de  Salaerno,  et  a  Galieno,  et  a  Rolando,  et  a  Rogerio, 
et  a  Bruno,  et  a  Rafo,  et  a  Magillro  Hugone  de  Lukeo, 
et  a  Magillro  Albucafo  :  3  Libris.  142. 

1685. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  longiufculo  ;  et  quidem  in 
Italia,  ut  videtur,  feriptus  ;  in  quo  continentur, 

Opera  Medica  vetulli  Medici  Latini  nomine  Garipoti, 
Warmipoti,  five-ut  in  Impreffis  Garioponti:  fcilicet, 

1.  De  Morbis  Capitis. Lib.  1.  (inferibitur  Galeno,  See.) 

1. 

2.  De  Morbis  Stomachi.  Liber  11.  (inferibitur  Galeno 

& c.  16.  b. 

3.  De  Morbis  aliorum  Intellinorum.  Liber  in.  (In¬ 
feribitur  Galeno,  &c.)  40. 

4.  De  Morbis  Membrorum,  Sciatica,  Podagra,  Rheu- 
matifmo,  &cc.  Liber  iv.  (Inferibitur  Galeno,  &c.) 

69.  b. 

5.  De  Spafmo,  Paralyfi,  Sec.  Liber  v.  (Inferibitur 

Garipoto,  &c.  77.  b. 

6.  De  Febr  bus.  Liber  vi.  108. 

7.  De  alijs  varijs  Paffionibus  atq;  Morbis.  Liber  vii. 

131. b. 

N.B.  I  otumOpusinRubrica  d!citur“Paffionarius.” 

De  Garipoto  Medico  et  Opere  fuo,  audiPraffationem, 
“  Materia  hujus  Libri  ell  Theorica  &  Praflica.  Intencio 
fua  ell  ollendere  Paffiones  et  Signification es  earum. 
Utilitas  dandi  congrua  Medicamina  unicuiq;  Pallioni. 
Cui  parti  Philofophiae  fupponatur  principalirer  Phifice. 
Ille  Liber  a  G.  (Galeno?)  compofitus  Glauco  Nepoti 
luo  miffus,  apud  Latinos  male  ordinatus  erat ;  Inicium 
enim  a  Febre  habebat :  Quern  Garipotus  a  Capite  inicium 
faciens  compofuit ;  adjiciens  ei  multa  Pauli  (JEgineta) 
Alexandri  (  Tralliani)  Theodori  Prifciani  (Medici  a  Prif- 
ciano  Grammatico  plane  diverfi )  in  Paffionibus  tangens 
Theoricam,  fcil.  res  naturales,  et  nonnaturaies,  et  que 
funt  co  itra  Naturam  ;  in  Curls  Praflicam  tangit,  fcilicet 
Cirurgiim,  Fannatiam,  etfimili1.” 

Aliud 


£ 


Bibliothecae  Harkiana*. 


*73 


Num.  1685—1687. 

Aliud  hujufce  Operis  exemplar  videtur  exftare  in 
Bibliotheca  Domus  five  Collegjj  Sti.  Petri  apud  Canla- 
brigvnfes,  no.  207.  infcriptum  ;  cumhi\c,qute  fequitur, 
adi-oiatione.  vid.  Catal.  MSS.  Impr.  207.  Galenas  in 
PafTmnario. 

“  Nota.  l.iber  ifte  merito  Paflionarius  vocitatur,  quia 
de  Paflionibus  agit  ;  quern  quidam  Galenum  compo- 
fuifle  alferunt,  led  non  eft  verum  ;  quia  hujus  Libri 
diverfi  fuerunt  auftores  :  foil.  Alexander,  Galenus, 
Paulus,  atq;  Prifcianus ;  et  non  fimul,  neque  uno  con- 
fenfu  :  fed  femotim  de  Paflionibus  Corporis,  et  prout 
cuicue  vifum  eft  tractaverunt.  Sed  Theodorus  Prifcianus 
cc.llcgit,  et  a  femetipfo,  et  a  quibufdam  additis,  aliter 
quam  nunc  fit,  ordinavit.  Febres  enim,  uipote  Uni- 
verfales  in  Tradtatu  premifit,  deinde  camera  quafi  Par- 
ticulaiia  fubjunxit;  id  eft,  de  Cephalia,  et  alijs  hu- 
jufmodi.  Secundum  quofdam  vero,  non  pradidd  plures 
Unum  Librum  compofuerunt ;  fed  Unus,  icilicet  Paulus, 
compofuit.  Sed  five  hi  five  alij  compofuerunt,  War- 
mipotus  (annon  legend.  Warimpotus  ?;  quidam  Medicus 
Salernitan  us,  videns  eum  in  multis  efle  falfum,  in  plu- 
ribus  verum,  utpote  in  omnibus  inordinatum,  cum  qui¬ 
bufdam  Clericis  optimis  fibi  adhibitis,  hunc  Librum, 
in  quantum  ejus  ct  eorum  Scientia  diligens  potuit, 
emcndavit;  et  ordinem  Traftatus  pradictum  tranf- 
mutavit  ;  et  Errata  diluendo,  fuperflua  refecando, 
Ambiguaq;  referando,  prout  nunc  ordinavit,  a  Particula- 
ribus  incipiens  ad  fimilitudinem  totius  lntegri.” 

8.  Marginibus  cemuntur  recentioribus  exaratas  ma- 
nibus,  Adnotationes,  Incantationes,  Medicamenta,  Latine, 
Gallice,  Anglicfi. 

Se  iuumur  manu  Anglica, 

9.  Adnotaiiones  Chronologia:,  de  Beilis  et  alijs  An- 

glorum  Regum  rebus  preclare  geftis,  ab.Origine  Mundi, 
ul'q;  ad  finem  fere  Regni  R.  Edwardi  111.  143.  b. 

1 6°  6. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to.  ( quern  a  me  redemit  D- 

Henricus  Woiflejus)  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  ITi!/a£  Ti  ■arajoi'TOf  £i€Ai»  twi»  Teozronx.uv.  I- 

Hoc  in  Indice  Capitum,  nempe  ad  Librum  ter- 

tium,  recenfentur  Nomina  '  enfium  Roman' rum,  ac 
ASgyptiormn  ;  quorum  htec  fcribuntur  litteris  rubris. 

2.  b. 

2.  Imp  '  oris  Conftantini  Porphyrogenneti,  five  ut 
vult  Petrus  Needhamus  Cafliani  Balfi 

Tiosronxuv  feu  de  Re  Ruftica  Libri  xx.  12.  b. 

Codex  Calligraphus,  ac  a  Melchifedecho  Thevenoto 
ex  Oriente  advedius. 

1687. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  litteris  minutis  exaratus  • 
in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Significatio  Nominum  19  Litterarum  Alphabeti 
Hebraici ;  in  fob  primo  rejedlicio. 

2.  Didtionarium,  in  quo  Voces  SS.  Bibliorum  diffi- 

ciliores,  alphabetico  Ordine  explicantur.  2. 

Inc’p.  Prefat.  “  DifEciles  ftudeo  partes  quas  Biblia 
“  geftat, 

“  Pandere  :  ”  &c. 

Hoc  Opus  Guilhelmo  Bretono  tribuit  Pitfams, 
quern  diem  fuum  obijffe  teftatur  apud  Grymesby  anno 
lncarnationis  Dominica;  1356.  Atqui,  hunc  Guilhel- 
jnum  Bretonum  hujufce  Operis  Audlorem  minime  fuifle 
conftet  ex  Antiquitate  prefentis  C.odicis,  qui  modum 
fcribendi  temporibus  Regis  Henrici  m.  plane  conve- 
nientem,  per  totum,  exhibeat. 

Audiitaque  Joannem  Lelandumde  Gulielmo  Bri- 
tone  (in  Comment,  de  Script.  Brit.  Cap.  382.)  his 
Verbis  diflerentem.  “  Frequens  erat  ejus  Lexicon  in 
Academijs  Biblite  videlicet  Interpres,  quantum  ad  ob- 

Cat.  Harl.  Vox..  II. 


Num.  1687,  1688. 

fcuravulgo  literatorum.  Vocabula  pertinebat.  Unde  et 
Famain  eo  tempore  celebrem  nactus  eft.  Illud  plane 
fuo  non  carfct  Sale;  quod  (Henricus)  Staudicius  Fani 
Afaphi  Epifcopus,  Erafrao  incomparabili  amiulus.  Bri¬ 
ton’s  autoritatem  objecerit.”  Quonam  vero  tempore 
c lament  Gulielmus  ille  Brito,  non  indicat  Lelandus. 
Quinetiam  in  inftructiflimis  Bibliothecis,  Norfolciana  et 
Collegij  Corporis  Chriili  quod  eft  Cantabrigiee,  adfer- 
vantur  ejufdem  Operis  Exemplaria,  cum  Nomine  Bri- 
tonis  tanquam  Autoris,  heic  defiderato.  Quid  igitur 
obftat  quo  minus  Librum  clariftimo  illo  Gulielmo 
Britoni  natione  Armorico  adjudicem,  viro  infigniter 
dodto,  Philippi  Augufti  Francorum  Regis  Clerico; 
qui  in  tertio  Philippeidos  Libro  (quam  circa  A.  D. 
1223.  hexametris  confcripfit  Verfibus)  le  jam  tunc  55 
annos  natum  confitetur. 

3.  Tradhtus  Grammaticalis,  quern  haud  ad  finem 

perduxifle  videtur  Librarius.  128. 

Notandum,  in  Codice  Norfolciano  (qui  infcribitur 
162.)  poft  c*  Britonem  de  diverlis  S.  Bibliorum  Voca- 
bulis  fecundum  Ordinem  Alphabeticum,  Pr.  Difficiles 
ftudeo  partes,  &c. —  ex  tare  Grammaticam  editam  (ut 
nonnulli  opinantur)  ab  Ariftotele,  quam  e  Greco  in  La- 
tinum,  Robertus  Grofleteft  tranftuliffe  dicitur.  Expl. 
in  Libro  Figurarum.” 

4.  Adnotatio  de  Coitu,  tempore  menftruali,  ex  Hu- 

guicione ;  aliena  manu.  64. 

1688. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  410,  ex  parte  maxima  litteris 

grandiufculis  fcriptus,  in  fine  vero  mutilatus  ;  in  quo 

habentur, 

1.  A  Rule  to  know  every  Monyth,  what  tyme  the 

Sonne  ftiall  arife.  1 . 

2.  Divers  Notes,  fomein  Englifli,  fome  in  Latin,  re¬ 
lating  to  many  particular  Perfons  of  the  Family  of  Derham 
(who  feem  to  have  been  before  called  by  the  Name  of 
Crumpilfliam)  and  alfo  to  fome  other  Families  akin  to 
them,  namely  Veer,  Haultoft,  &c.  fol.  1.  and  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  [Calendar. 

3.  Calendarium  ;  in  quo  memorantur  dies  quorun- 

dain  Sandtorum  Feftivales,  de  quibus  in  Baronij  Mar- 
tyrologio  nullam  inveni  mentionem.  2. 

4.  Pfalterium  Divi  Hieronymi,  ut  dicitur,  Gallicanum 

8. 

Sequuntur  Cantica  S.  Scripture,  fc. 

5.  Confitebor;  i.  e.  Canticum  Ifaia;.  If.  xn.  x. 

139.  b. 

6.  Ego  dixi ;  i.  e.  Canticum  Ezechia;.  ibid. 

7.  Exultavit;  i.  e.  Canticum  Anna;.  ibid. 

8.  Cantemus ;  i.  e.  Canticum  Moyfis.  Exod.  xv.  r. 

I4I» 

9.  Domine  audivi.  i.  e.  Candcum  Abacuc.  142.  b. 

10.  Audite  cceli.  i.  e.  Canticum  Moyfis.  Deut.  xxxii. 

r*  >44- 

ir.  Te  Deum  Laudamus.  b. 

12.  Benedicite  ;  i.  e.  Canticum  trium  Puerorum, 

X47-  b. 

13.  Benedidlus  ;  i.  e.  Canticum  Zachariae.  148. 

14.  Magnificat;  i.  e.  Canticum  Maria:.  149. 

1 5.  Nunc  dimitds  ;  i.  e.  Canticum  Symeonis.  149.  b. 

*6.  Quicunque  vult.  i.  e,  Symbolum  S.  Athanafio 

vulgo  adjudicatum.  ibid. 

17.  Litania.  151.  b. 

18.  Pieces,  Colledta:,  Hymni,  &c.  qua;  in  hujufmodi 

Codicibus  frequentiflime  occurrunt.  1  ^4. 

Vacuis  quibufdam  paginis  confpiciuntur, 

19-  De  Sandta  Katerina  Virgine  6t  Martyre,  An- 
tiphona;  notulis  Muficaiibus  infignita;.  108. 


Y  y 


A  Paper 


174 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1689—1691. 

1689. 

A  Paper-Book  in  fol.  wherein  is  contained, 

A  Treatife  of  the  Court  of  Star-Chamber,  in 
three  Parts. 

This  was  compiled  by  William  Hudfon  of  Grayes 
Inne  Efq:  as  appeareth  by  a  Note  of  the  Lord-Keeper 
Finch,  entered  into  the  Book,  no.  1226. 

1690. 

Codex  Juridicus  et  membranaceus in  fol.  min.  quo  con- 
tinentur, 

1.  Capitula  diverforum  Statutorum.  1. 

2.  Statutum  de  Marleberge,  dxttpaXw.  3. 

3.  Statutum  Weftmonafterij  primum.  (Gallice) 

5-  b' 

4.  Diftricciones  Scaccarij.  Gallice.  n.b. 

5.  Statuta  de  Scaccario.  Gallice.  12. 

6.  Statutum  de  Julliciarijs  aflignatis.  Gallice,  13.  b. 

7.  Capitula  in  Itinere.  14. 

8.  Statuta  Glouceftrie.  Gallice.  15.  b. 

9.  Explanations  eorundem.  17.  b. 

10.  Statutum  de  Libertate  clamanda  ;  (quod  modo 
vocatur  Quo  Warranto) 

11.  Novi  Articuli  in  Itinere  Jufticiariorum.  18.  b. 

(Imperf.) 

1 2.  Statutum  Weftmonafterij  fecundum,  dxifuXov. 

21. 

13.  Statuta  Wyntonie.  Gallic^.  32.  b. 

14.  Statuta  Exonie.  Gallice.  33.  b. 

15.  Statutum  de  Moneta,  cum  Articulis.  Gallice. 

35 ■ b- 

16.  Compoficio  Monete.  Gallic^.  36.  b. 

17.  Compoficio  de  Ponderibus.  ibid. 

18.  Statutum  de  Religiofis.  37. 

19.  Statutum  de  Mercatoribus.  Gallic^.  37.  b. 

20.  Statutum  de  Militibus.  38.  b. 

21.  Circumfpede  agatis.  39. 

22.  Regia  Prohibitio.  ibid. 

23.  Capitula  deTonfura  Monete.  ibid. 

24.  Statutum  de  Emptoribus  Terraruin.  39.  b. 

25.  Statutum  de  habentibus  Redditus  in  London.  40. 

26.  Tradatus  (five  ut  in  alijs,  Statutum)  de  antiquo 

Dominico  Corone.  40.  b. 

27.  Statutum  Extenta  Manerij.  41. 

28.  Confuetudines  et  Affife  de  Forefta.  41. 

29  Statutum  de  Waranto.  4i.b.  (deeft) 

30.  Conclufio  Statuti  de  Recognitoribus.  42. 

31.  Statutum  de  Bigamis  ;  aliena  ac  recentiore  manu: 

42.  b. 

32.  Summa  qua;  dicitur  Fet  aflaver.  43.  (deeft  pars 
prior) 


33.  Magna  Hengham; 

45- 

35.  Summa  Cadit  Aflifa 

54- 

35.  Summa  Parva  Hengham. 

58. 

36.  Summa  Judicium  Elfoniorum. 

61.  b. 

37.  Modus  componendi Brevia. 

64. 

38.  Tradatus  Corone. 

65. 

39.  Placita  Corone. 

66.  b. 

40.  Statutum  de  vocatis  ad  Warantum  ; 

,  aliena  manu 

68.  b. 

41.  Pars  prior  Statuti  de  Conj  undim  Feolfatis  :  eAdem 

manu.  ibid. 

Sequitur  manu  prima. 

42.  Regiftrum  Brevium  de  Cancellaria  R.  Edwardi 

1.  Capite  et  Calcc  truncatum,  69. 

1691. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  in  Law-French,  &  confiding  of 
divers  loole  Tracts  bound  up  together  in  the  following 
order. 

1.  Reports  out  of  fome  larger  Colledion.  j. 


Num.  1691. 

2.  Arguments  de  Cafez  en  tempz  Edw.  iv.  et  HeiL 

vii.  in  Interiori  Templo ;  et  en  temps  Lien.  vm.  par 
Keble,  Frowyke,  Kedwelley,  Welles,  Baker,  Fullwoode, 
Brudnell,  Shelley,  Bawldwyn,  Vavydor,  Pygott,  Lyt- 
tylton,  et  plufers  autres.  }  6. 

3.  Cafes  argues  en  Vacacione  Quadragefimali.  Whid* 

don.  Ledor.  56. 

4.  Les  Cafez  enfuants  jeo  avay  hors  del  Lyvre  Magif- 

tri  Kellwaye.  58. 

5.  Ex  Libro  Magiftri  Carelle.  62. 

6.  De  anno  4  Hen.  vii.  ex  Libro  Magiftri  Carelle. 

66. 

7.  De  Annis  5.  6.  7.  8.  9.  &10.  Hen.  vit.  67. 

8.  Cafus  in  Banco  R.  (ann.  1  &  2  Phil.  &:  Mar.) 
parentre  Fullmerftone  PI.  et  Symeon  Stueard  Defend. 

90. 

9.  Other  Reports  of  the  time  of  Phil.  &  Mar.  93. 

xo.  Ex  Libro  Magiftri  Johannis  Carylle  Attornati 

Ducatus  Lancaftre,  viri  valde  pij  &  dodi,  ac  Interioris 
Templi  Socij.  98. 

11.  De  Libro  alio  Magiftri  Carelle.  hi. 

12.  Reports,  of  divers  Years  of  the  Reign  ofK. 

Hen.  vm.  1 13. 

13.  Short  Notes  by  a  more  modern  Hand.  122.  b. 

14.  Reports  of  ann.  25  Hen.  viu.  123. 

15.  Ledura  prima  fecunde  Ledionis  Magiftri  Wil- 
lelmi  Symonds  Interioris  Templi  Socij,  fur  l’Eftatute  de 
Anno  tercio  et  quarto  Edwardi  Sex' i  Cap.  3.  concern- 
ant  Improvement  per  lez  Seigniors  en  lour  Wafts.  134. 

16.  Secunda  Ledura  iecunde  Ledionis  Magiftri 
Willelmi  Symonds  Interioris  Templi  Ledoris.  135.  b. 

1 7.  Tertia  Ledura  ejufdem.  137. 

18.  Quarta  Ledura  Willelmi  Symonds.  138.  b. 

19.  Report  0/  a  Cafe  argued  in  the  Exchequer-Cham¬ 
ber,  before  all  theJullices.  140. 

20.  C.eo  fut  argue  per  les  Juftices  de  Commune 

Banke,  Mich.  26  Hen.  vm.  142 

21.  Cell  Cafe  argue,  Trin.  33  Hen.  tiii.  144.  b. 

22.  Un  Vacation-Cafe.  143, 

2 1  •  Other  Law-Cafes.  146. 

24.  Prima  Ledura  Magiftri  Smythe,  fada  in  Quadra- 

gefirna,  anno  Regni  Regis  Edwardi  vi .  quarto  ;  fur  le 
Statute  de  anno  27  Hen.  vm.  165. 

25.  Report  de  anno  36  Hen.  vm.  Termino  Mich. 

iC7. 

2 61  Ledura  Richardi  Halle  fuper  Statut.  GIouc. 
Cap.  1.  in  Quadragefima  ann.  21  Ed.  iv.  171. 

27.  De  Prifonibus  Prifonam  irangentibus,  Baldewyni 

Ledura?  pro  forma  Serjant  .  187. 

28.  Ledura  Litiltoni,  in  Quadragefimali  tempore, 

fuper  We 1m.  11.  Cap.  12.  188. 

29.  Another  Reading  without  a  Title.  192. 

30.  Cafus  Magiftri  Bromley  Left,  in  Autumpno,  25 

Hen.  vm.  194. 

31.  Cafus  Ifake  &  Jacobe  Mote  25  Hen.  vm.  in 

Autumpno.  Bromley  Ledor.  194.  b. 

32.  Ledura  prima  Geo rgij  Willowby  Interioris  Tem¬ 
pli,  fada  in  tempore  Quadragefime,  anno  R  R.  Ed¬ 
wardi  vi.  tertio,  fuper  Statutum  de  Prerogativa  Regis. 

*97* 

33.  Ledura  fecunda.  198.  b. 

34.  Ledura  tertia.  200. 

35.  Ledura  prima  Willelmi  Symonds  Interioris  Tem¬ 

pli  Socij,  fada  in  tempore  Autumpni,  Anno  RR.  Ed¬ 
wardi  Sexti  tertio ;  fur  FLftatiue  de  32  Hen.  vm. 
Cap.  28.  202. 

36.  Ledura  fecund  a  ejufdem.  203.  b. 

37.  Tertia  Ledura  ejufdem.  204.  b. 

38.  Quarta  Ledura  tjufdenu  205.  b. 

39  Quinta  Ledura  ejufdem.  206.  b. 

40.  Two  Notes  by  a  modern  hand.  208.  b. 

41.  Lxtrad  from  the  Record  touching  the  Cafe  of 

Will.  Reed,  argued  at  G'ouceiter,  beiore  Sir  William 
Portman,  &  Mr.  Juftice  Whyddcne.  209.  b. 

3  A  Book 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


17 


Kum.  1692—1694. 

1692. 

A  Book  in  fol.  containing  the  following  Collection  of 
Law  matters. 

1.  Sommer  Readings  at  Cliffordes  Inne.  A.  D.  1610. 

1. 

i  2.  At  Staples  Inne.  1.  b. 

’  3.  At  Furnival’s  Inne.  2. 

4.  At  New  Inne.  ibid. 

5.  At  Barnardes  Inne :  Reader,  Jenkins  ;  vel  Vice- 

Reader.  i.  b. 

6.  Mr.  Readers  Cafe  at  the  Bolt ;  Mr.  Waltham  then 

•Reader.  3. 

1*  7.  Mr.  Robins’s  Readings.  4.  b. 

8.  At  New  Inne.  6. 

•“  6.  Mr,  Colvin’s  Lectures  upon  54  (32)  Hen.  viii. 
Cap.  34..  6.  b.  (at  Thavies  Inne?) 

K  10.  Mr.  Wentworth’s  Lectures  upon  32  Hen.  vtir. 
Cap.  28.  A.  D.  1612.  9. 

.  11.  Repetitions  of  the  fame  Lectures.  1 2. 

12.  Argument  del  Flemin  Cheife  Juflice  (en  James 

Skidmores  Cafe)  13. 

13.  Mr.  AylofFs  LeCtures,  on  34.  Hen.  viti.  Cap. 

21.  14-  b. 

14.  Mr.  Finches  Lectures  at  Lions  Inne.  17.  b. 

15.  Mr.  Bawtry’s  Readings,  A.  D.  1612  upon  14 

Eliz.  Cap.  8.  19.  b. 

16.  Mr.  Chibborne’s  Readings,  A.  D.  1613.  fur 

I’Eft.  de  33  Henr.  viii.  21.  b. 

17.  Mr.  Finche’s  Readings  at  Lions  Inne,  A.  I). 

1613.  22.  b. 

'  18.  Chibbornes  PrasleCtioftes.  23. 

19.  Le  Cafe  del  Trotnam  ;  Cliffords  Inne.  23.  b. 

1  20.  Cafes  de  Stecill  Reader  del  New  Inne.  ibid. 

1  21.  A  large  Collection  of  Reports;  temp.  Jac.  1. 
&c.  among  which,  fome  are  of  Trials  in  the  Star- 
Chamber.  24.  b. 

K  22.  LeCture  of  Mr.  Trotnam,  at  Cliffordes  Inne,  ann. 
u  Jac.  I.  74- 

23.  4  Lecture  del  Richardfon  fur  27  Hen.  viii.  del 

intures.  ibid. 

24.  PrasleCliones  del  Richardfon.  75. 

25.  3  Cafe  Read  by  Mr.  Trotnam  at  Cliffords  Inne. 

.z6- 

26.  Mr.  Denns  Cafe  ;  at  Lions  Inne.  ibid. 

27.  Mr.  Sidnors  Cale*  read  it  Furnivals  Inne.  ibid. 

28.  PrasleCtions  et  LeCtui'es  del  Richardfon,  quant 

fiat  Serjeants  eleCt.  12;  Jac.  1.  76.  b. 

29.  Brookes  Readings,  A.  D.  1614.  fur  43  Eliz. 

Cap.  8-  77.  b. 

30.  Le  Departing  Cafe  del  Trotnam  Reader  at  Cliff- 

ordcs  Inne.  78.  b. 

31.  Courtnam’s  Cafe,  at  Furnivalls  Inne.  ibid. 

32.  Mr.  Thomas  Hitchcocks  Reading,  A.  D.  1614. 

fur  1’  Eflat  del  Merton.  Cap.  1.  79. 

■  33.  John  Jeffreys  Lectures  in  Lincolnes  Inne,  A.  D. 

1613.  furl’  Eftate  del  21  Hen.  viii.  80.  b. 

34.  Readings  of  William  Jones  Reader  del  Lincolnes 
Inne,  A.  D.  1615.  fur  l’Eftat.  del  43  Eliz.  Cap.  1. 

82. 

1693. 

A  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  entered  by  divers  Hands, 
Reports  of  Law-Cafes  argued  in  the  Queens  Courts, 
toward  the  latter  End  of  Q.  Elizabeths  Reign. 

1694. 

A  Book  in  fol.  confifting  of  divers  large  TraCts,  to  be 
bound  up  together,  vizt. 

1.  A  Treatife  compendiouflye  declaringe  the  firft 
originall,  &  Ereccion  of  the  Epifcopall  See  of  Durham  ; 
firft  inflituted  at  Holye-Ifland,  &c  from  thence  removed 


Nunn  6  94—1699. 

to  Chefter,  and  afterwards  transferred  to  Durham,  & 
there  eftablifhed  ;  with  Occaflons  of  removeinge  the 
fame  See  ;  and  order  of  Succeffion  of  all  the  Bulhopps 
from  St.  Aidan  the  firfl  Bufhopp  untill  Cuthberf  Tun- 
ftall  late  Bufhopp  thereof.  Summarely  comprifeinge  fuch 
memorable  ACts  &  Workes  of  Charitie  as  fundrie  of  them 
in  their  Tymes  refpectively  performed  ;  With  fundrie 
other  Thinges  wort  hie  of  Remembrance;  collected  out 
of  the  auncient  &  late  Records  of  the  Cathedrall  Church 
of  Durham  ;  and  for  the  moft  part,  tranflated  out  of 
Latin  into  Englifh,  the  firft  of  Auguft  1603.  at  the 
charges  of  Mr.  John  Hall  of  Confett  in  the  Countie  of 
Durham.  1. 

2.  Reports,  in  Banco  Regis,  ann..  9  Caroli  1.  20. 

3.  Hiftorical  Notes  extracted  A.  D.  1634.  (for  the 
mofl  part)  from  the  Chronicle  of  England  by  the 
School-Mafler  of  St.  Albans.  &  the  Fructus  Temporum, 
printed  in  London,  A.  D.  1520,  by  Wynkyn  de  Worde. 

57. 

4.  John  Cufack’s  whimfical  Treatife  entituled  Au- 

rea  Perif'eellis,  and  directed  to  K.  Charles  the  Firfl.  of 
the  Authors  own  Hand.  105. 

5-  A  Treatife  written  in  Defence  of  a  TraCl  againfl 
general  &  indifereat  Extorting  of  Oaths,  eiiherby  colour 
of  Authoritie,  or  ex  Officio  mero. 

1695. 

Livre  Francois  en  fol.  dans  lequel  fe  contiennent, 

1.  Remarques  fur  l’Eftat  de  Ja  France,  durant  le 

temps  du  Roy  Louis  xm.  j. 

2.  Eflat  des  Penfions  que  le  Roy  paye  a  plufieurs 

Princes,  Seigneurs,  Gentilzhommes,  &c/  72. 

1696. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  in  Law-French  ;  wherein  is 
contained, 

A  pretty  large  Collection  of  Law-Cafes,  happening 
from  the  5  to  the  27  Eliz.  mclufive.- 

1697. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  in  Law-French,  wherein  is  fairly 

entered. 

A  Collection  of  Law-Cafes,  or  Reports  of  Trials 
at  Queens  Bench,  from  Term.  Pafche  anno  36  Eliz. 
to  term.  Hill,  anno  40  ejufdem  Reginas;  both  in- 
clufive. 

1698. 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  containing  a  Treatife  entituled. 

Judicature  in  Parliament;  with  a  Table  of  the 
Contents  thereof  prefixed. 

I  have  heard  that  the  late  Lord  Chief-Juflice  Hale 
left  a  Treatife  by  him  written  upon  this  fubjeCt,  but 
whether  this  be  the  fame  with  that,  I  cannot  tell. 

1699. 

A  Book  in  fol.  for  the  mofl  part  written  in  Law -French 
and  entituled, 

1.  Notes  colleCt  in  tempes  dell  Raigne  le  Roigne 
Elizabethe. 

It  is  a  Law- Common-Place- book  of  fome  ftudious 
Perfon,  and  feemeth  to  contain  more  good  matter  than 
is  commonly  found  in  this  fort  of  Books  :  which  might 
occafion  the  very  paiticular  direction  to  the  Book-binder, 
which  may  be  feen  in  the  firft  vacant  Page. 

At  the  beginning,  is 

2.  An  Alphabetical  Table,  or  Index  Materiarum. 


Codex 


U-V 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


i 


76 


Num.  1700 — 1701. 

■  •  1 700. 

Codex  membranaccus,  antiquus,  nitidaq ;  manu  ex- 
aratus  ;  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Libri  xrr.  Prophetarum  Minorum,  Verfionis 
Hieronymiana:,  cum  Prologis  ipfius  D.  Hieronymi,  et 
aliorum  ;  nec  non  cum  Commentarijs  uberrimis  ejufdem 
D.  Hieronymi.  Gregorij  1.  Papa:,  D.  Auguftini,  ac 
aliorum  ■  ut  Gloffas  interlineares  mittam)  illultrati. 

2.  De  Prologis  D.  Hieronymi  Adnotatio.  “  Com- 

mentatus  Ieronimus  fuper  Ofee,  Johel,  et  Amos,  Abdiam, 
et  Jonam,  Pammachio :  fuper  Naum,  Micheam,  So- 
phoniam,  et  Aggeum,  Paule  et  Euflochio  ;  fuper 
Abacuch,  Cromatio  :  fuper  Malachiam  Exuperio  To- 
lofane  Ecclefie  Pontifici,  et  Minervio,  et  Alexandro 
Monachis  :  fuper  Zachariam,  Exuperio  Tolofano  Epif- 
copo.  8-. 

3.  De  duratione  Captivatis  Babylonicte ;  in  ima 

margine.  92.  b. 

4.  De  Matrimonio,  Adnotatio  ;  in  ima  marg.  108. 

5.  Paging  tres  redundantes  (nam  fupra  habentur, 

fcil.  ad  fol.  109.  &c.)  1 1 9. 

6.  Succeffio  Regum  Ifraelis,  et  Judte ;  cum  notulis 

marginalibus.  120.  b. 


A  Parchment-book  in  fol.  written  in  Old  Englilh 
Rhythms  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  The  Bok  that  men  clepyn  yn  Frenfhe  Manuele 
Pecche  (i.  e.  Manuale  Peccatorum)  the  whych  Boke 
made  yn  Frenfhe  Robert  Grofteft  Bysfhop  of  Lyncolne. 

The  Trandatorwas  one  Robert  of  Brunne,  who  not 
being  now  much  known  among  us,  I  (hall  here  tranfcribe 
the  account  he  gives  of  himfelf,  by  way  of  Preface. 

To  alle  Cryflyn  men  vndir  Sunne, 

And  to  gode  men  of  Brunne, 

And  fpeciali  alle  be  Name, 
pe  Felaulhepe  of  Symprynghame, 

Roberd  of  Brunne  gretej)  zow 
In  al  godeneffe  ]>at  may  to  J?row 
Of  Brymwake  yn  Kefteuene 
Syxe  myle  befyde  Sympryngham  euene. 

Y  dwelled  yn  the  Pryorye 
Fyftene  zero  yn  cumpanye. 

In  pe  tyme  of  gode  Dane  Jone 
of  Camehon,  that  now  ys  gone. 

In  hys  tyme  was  I  Jiere  Ten  zcres, 

Andknewe  and  herde  of  hvs  Maneres  ; 

Sythyn  wij>  Dane  Jone  of  Clyntone 
Fyue  wyntyr  wyj?  him  gan  y  wone. 

Dane  Felyp  was  May fler  Jiat  tyme 
^at  Y  began  J>ys  Englyslhe  Ryine, 
pe  zcres  of  Grace  fyl  J>an  to  be 
A  Thoufynd  &  J>re  hundred  &  J>re. 

In  f>at  tyme  turnede  Y  Jiis 
On  Englysfhe  tunge  outofFrankys.  &c. 

2.  Medytaciuns  of  the  Soper  of  our  Lorde  Jhefu  ; 

and  alfo  of  hys  Pailyun  ;  and  eke  of  the  Peynes  of  hys 
Swete  Modyr  Mayden  Maryc  ;  the  whyche  made  yn 
Latyn  Bonaventure  Cardynall.  84. 

This  feemeth  to  have  been  tranflated  by  the  fame 
Robei  t  of  Brunne. 

Then  followeth  by  another  Hand, 

3.  A  Poem  upon  the  Fall  of  Pride  ;  exemplified  in 

the  Legendary  Tale  of  Robert  King  of  Sicily.  In  Old 
Englifh  Vcrfe.  '  g2. 

4.  Cfficium  five  MifTa,  cuihsec  loco  Rubrics:  prtemit- 
tuntur,  ct  Dominus  Papa  Clemens  fecit,  et  conilituitur 
Coilegio  cum  Cardinalibus  et  conceffit  omnibus  au. 
dientibusfequentem  MiHaui,et  dicentibus  ;  ducentas  et 


Num.  1703— 1703. 

fexaginta  dies  Indulgentie.  Et  omnes  Miffam  illam  au- 


dientes  debent  portarein  manu  vnam  Candelam  ardentem 
per  quinque  dies  continue  fequentes  ;  et  eis  Mors  fubitania 
nocere  non  potent.  Et  ell  certum  et  approbatum  in 
Avinione,  et  in  alijs  partibus.  ‘  95.  b. 


1702. 

Codex  chartaceus1  in  fol.  min.  quo  continentur,  Petri  ? 
Prattei  Medici  clari,  Anale&a  Medicinalia,  propria' 
fua  manu  exarata. 


A  paper  Book  in  fmall  fol.  wherein  are  contained,  ; 

a  Collection  of  Old  Englifh  Poems  ;  all  as  it  fboulc 

feem)  written  by  William  Forelt,  except  one  by  thi 

Lord  Vaux,  and  another  by  John  Ileywood.  Theii 

Poems  are, 

1.  A  Ireatyfe  vppon  the  Salutation  of  the  molb 
Gloryous  Virgyn  Marye ;  and  that  all  Pi  ayfmges  tha 
eauer  hathe  beene  l'aide  of  Her  (after  the  fayinge  o: 
Saincle  Auguftvne)  are  farre  infufiyelebt  to  Her  Wor 
thynes  &  Honoure  ;  with  a  Prologue,  1. 

In  this  Treatife  (;uw  but  little  known)  are  to  be 
found,  in  like  Englifh  Verfe, 

2.  The  Legend  of  S.  Dionyfius  the  Ariopagite,  whe 

defired  S.  John  the  Evangelift  to  help  him  to  a  Sight 
of  the  Virgin  Mary  who  was  then  living.  22.  b. 

The  Spurious  Epiftles  of  St.  Ignatius  to  the  Bleffec 
Virgin,  &  Her  Anfvvers.  24. 

An  Hyflorye  Myraculous,  howe  the  Feafte  of  the 
Conception  of  the  Gloryous  Vyrgyn  Mary  wasbegoone, 
in  the  tyme  of  the  noble  Kynge  Wy’llyam  the  Conquerour 

41 .  b. 

The  Sayinge  or  Sermon  of  the  excellent  Gretiar 
John  Damacene,  in  th’  Aflumption  of  the  rnofle  gloryous 
Vyrgin  Marye  Mother  of  God. 

3.  Vox  Patris  cceleftis  ad  facram  Virginem  prtedidam, 

in  ejus  migratione  a  Corpore  mortali ;  in  hijs  Verbis  pro^ 
rumpens,  fecundum  Guilelmum  Forreftuni.  62. 

4.  The  Canty cle  before  enfuynge,  in  Englifche  Verfe. 

62.  b. 

5.  Vppon  the  Angelyke  Salutation, 

(As  yt  were)  an  Elucydation. 

6.  Uppon  the  Anteme,  Salve  Regina. 

7.  Prayer  to  the  Gloryous  Vyrgyne  Maiye, 

To  helpe  agaynfle  the  Aduerfarye. 

8.  A  Reafon  I  afke,  The  Vyrgyn  Marye, 

Whye  not  to  liaue  the  Name  of  a  I.adye 

9.  To  eauerye  Member,  a  Veneratyon, 

Of  themoite  Gloryous  Vyrgin  Marye  : 

Ateache;  to  be  fayde,  the  Salutatyon  : 

Due  vnto  that  Celeftyall  Ladye. 


63* 

65. 


67.  b. 


10.  De  AfTumptione  gloriofillima:  Virginis  Maria:. 


7°. 


72.  b. 


73-  b- 


79- 


Englifh. 

11.  To  the  gloryous  Vyrgin  Marye, 

To  fhewe  Her  Helpe  to  Peters  Navye. 

1 2.  Another  Prayer  to  the  Virgin  Mary. 

J  3.  In  Praife  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 

14.  Another  Poem  on  the  fame  fubjett. 

15. _  -^n  Hymn  upon  the  Salutation  j  by  way  ofc< 
tinuation  of  another,  made  by  a  devoute  Scotte.  80. 1 

1 6.  On  thefe  words,  Mifericordia  et  Veritas  ob\ 

verunt  fibi,  Jufticia  &  Pax  ofculate  funt.  82.  1 

17.  On  Thankgiving  to  God  i<  oure  Ladye.  85.  1 
Mention  is  herein  made  of  Alexander  Berkeley  ;  w 

a  Chara&er  of  Him  &  his  Works. 

18.  That  Crifts  Mother  is  a  Ladye.  g; 

19.  A  Ballad  in  Praife  of  the  Bleffed  Virgin  &  I 

Infant-Son.  88.1 

20.  In  Praife  of  Marye  Magdalen.  89.  I 

21.  Olculetur  me  Ofculo  oris  fui ;  Indifferent  to 

Holy  Virgins ;  but  here  apph  ed  to  the  glo.  ious  Virj 
Saint  Katherine.  gi,  i 

22.  N 


9 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae; 


1 77 


Num.  1703,1704. 

22.  Non  ultra  fapere  quam  oportet.  95.  b. 

23.  Upon  the  Life  to  come.  .  96.  b. 

24.  How  each  Degree  ought  to  fpende  theire  time. 

98.  b. 

25.  A  Dyttye  or  Sonet,  made  by  the  Lorde  Vaus,  in 

time  of  the  noble  Queene  Marye,  reprefentinge  the  Image 
of  Death.  ioo. 

26.  Will.  Forreft  upon  Death.  joo.  b. 

27.  On  Contrition  for  Sin.  102. 

28.  A  Treatife  for  the  Frydayes  Fade.  103. 

29.  Confi deration  to  be  had  before  Marriage.  106. 

30.  John  Heywoode’s  ingenious  Difcription  of  Queen 

Mary  1.  at  1 8  years  of  Age.  108. 

31.  On  the  Grace  of  God.  i©9-  b. 

On  Everlaltinge  Feiycytee.  1 1 1 .  b. 

On  the  Love  of  Ciirifl  to  Mankind.  1  1 3. 

On  the  Gifts  of  God.  113.  b. 

On  Faith,  Hoape,  &  Charitee.  » 16. 

36.  bine  Fide  impoflibile  eft  placere  Deo.  117. 

37.  Tranflations  of  the  Pfalms  Beat  us  vir,  Quare  fre- 

muerunt,  Domine  quid,  Cum  lnvocarem,  Verba  mea, 
Domine  ne  in  furore,  Due  Deus  nofter,  In  Domino  con- 
fido,  Salvum  me  fac,  and  the  beginning  of  Ulquequo 
Domine.  xiS.b. 

38.  Deomini  Verbo  otiofo  reddes  rationem,  1  27.  b. 

39.  The  Legend  of  Theophilus  who  fell  into  Idolatry. 

132. 

This  feemeth  to  have  been  Will.  Forrefts  original 
Book. 


32- 

33- 
3  4- 
35- 


I7°4- 

Codex  paTtim  chartaceus,  partim  membranaceus,  in 

fol.  min.  ex  diverfis  Tracfat;bus  fnnul  compafturis 

conftans  ;  in  quo  continentur, 

Senio  Membranea,  cui  Titulus,  Leges  que  vocantur 
Leges  Edwardi,  quia  cum  diu  eflenr  dimifl'e,  ipf’as  fecit 
reparare  :  et  de  Legibus  Willelmi.  Me  autem  judice,  ha: 
Leges  funt, 

1 .  Leges  Regis  Canuti,  binis  ad  calcem  Capitibus,  et 

Praftatione  ;  quam  imprefl'a:,  autliores.  1. 

2.  Leges  R.  Eadwardi  Gonfelibris,  prout  a  R.  Wil- 

lelmo  Primo  confirmatse.  7.  b. 

3.  Adnotatio  de  Anglo-Saxonum  Mancufa:,  et  Man- 

ca:,  valore.  6. 

Sequitur  pars  Codicis  chartacei,  fed  tamen  vetufti, 
in  quo, 

4.  A  Fragment  of  a  Comment  upon  the  vr  1  Peneten- 

tial  Pfalms ;  in  Old  Englilh  Verfe.  1 3. 

5.  An  apocryphal,  or  rather  fabulous  Traft  (begin¬ 

ning  &  ending  with  Scripture)  about  the  Creation  of 
Adam  &  Eve,  their  Penitence  Sc  Sufferings,  as  alfo 
about  their  Death  and  Interment,  8c c.  18. 

This  Tradl  was  tranflated  out  of  Latin;  and  part 
of  the  Latin  Original  remaineth  in  MS.  40.  B.  1.  When 
it  was  invented  ( I  mean  the  fabulous  part  thereof)  or 
compofed,  I  cannot  tell  :  But  this  may  be  remembered, 
that  whereas  the  Maifter  of  Stories,  vizt.  Petrus  Comef- 
tor  is  herein  cited,  at  fol.  26,  lin.  6.  there  is  no  men¬ 
tion  of  him  in  the  Latin  Original.  49.  lin.  16.  &  17. 

If  this  be  fotne  of  the  Ilereticks  fpawn  during  the 
primitive  Times  of  the  Church ;  perhaps  that  Prayer 
afcribed  to  Noah,  &  extant  in  the  Workes  of  Mr.  Gre¬ 
gory  of  Chrift-church  (where  the  Sorrows  of  Adam 
(1  think)  are  remembred)  might  have  have  been  ground¬ 
ed  upon  it. 

6.  A  Poem  to  Chrift ;  whofe  Rubric  is,  Do  Mercy  to 

forethi  Judgement.  27. 

7.  A  Poem  entituled  Alma  Redemptoris  Mater.  28. 

Tis  a  Legend  upon  the  Story  of  the  Jewes  muthering 

a  young  Boy,  who  had  learned  to  fing  that  Anthem  in 
Honor  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 

Cat.  Marl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1704,1705. 

8.  Another,  on  this  Saying,  In  thy  moft  Helth,  wifely 

be  ware.  3 1  • 

9.  An  Allegorical  Tretis  of  the  Abbey  of  the  Holi 

Gooft.  32.  b. 

In  the  Library  of  Corpus-Chrifti-College  in  Oxford, 
is  another  Copie  of  this  Treatife,  acknowledging  John 
Alcock  for  the  Author.  This  John  Alcock  during  the 
laft  30  Years  of  his  Life,  was  Bifliop  of  Rochefter, 
Worcefter,  &  Ely,  fucceftively  :  He  was  all'o  Mafter  of 
the  Rolls  ;  and  died  with  the  Reputation  of  a  Saint, 
A.  D.  1500. 

10.  Divine  &  Moral  Counfels  ;  but  ftriking  at  fome 
general  Points  of  Religion  then  moft  in  Vogue  ;  as,  “For- 
bere  a  Wicked  Word  fro  thyn  euen  Crillen;  &  it  fchalle 
like  me  better  than  thou  bete  thylelt  with  alle  fo  monye 
R oddis  as  growen  in  an  Acre  of  Londe. 

“  Vifite  the  Pore  &  the  Sike,  fpekyng  all  Goodnefle;  and 
it  fchalle  like  me  better  than  thou  goo  barefote,  that  the 
waye  renne  Blod  after  thy  fete,”  &c.  48.  b. 

11.  Legend  or  fabulous  Hiftory  of  the  Three  Wife 

Men,  or  Kingsof  Cullen.  Imperf.  49.  b. 

Then  follow,  by  much  later  Hands 

12.  Mr*  Secretary  Nauntons  ?  Fragmenta  Regalia,  or 

Obfervations  on  Queene  Elizabeth,  her  Tymes,  and 
Favorites.  76.  b. 

13.  A  Copie-Book,  done  (as  it  feems)  by  fome  Boy, 

about  A.  D.  1 650.  1 44. 

Some  of  the  principal  Letters,  are  copied  from  the 
large  Text-Letters  in  ufe  about  the  'lime  of  K.  Henry 
vi  1 1.  the  others  are  of  more  modern  Sc  lefs  curious 
Invention.  The  Leaf  beginning  with  the  Letter  E  is 
wanting  ;  but  perhaps  it  may  be  no  great  lofs, 

I  70  c, 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  min.  Italicis  manibus  nitide 
feriptus  et  inluminatus ;  verum,  quod  fane  dolen- 
dum,  ab  improbiflimo  quodem  puero  exciflis  quibuf- 
dam  folijs  ac  litteris  principalibus,  nunc  male  habitus. 
In  eo  tamen  continentur, 

1.  P.  Candidi  Decembris,  ad  illuftriflimum  et  litte* 

ratiflimumPrincipem,  DominumDucem  Glouceftrenfem, 
Fratrem  Sereniflimi  et  Inviftiflimi  Domini  Plenrici  Regis 
Anglia:  &  Francia: ;  luper  nova  ei  oblata  traduftione 
totius  Platonice  Politie.  j. 

2.  Illuftrilftmi  et  litteratiflimi  Principis  et  Domini  Du- 

cis  Glouceftrenfis,  ad  P.  Candidum,  fuper  oblata  tra- 
du&ione,  Epiftola  Refponfiva.  1.  b. 

3.  Illuftriliimi  et  litteratiflimi  Principis  Domini  Ducis 

Glouceftrenfis,  ad  P.  Candidum  de  eadem  re.  Epiftola 
Secunda.  2. 

4.  P.  Candidi  Decembris  ad  illuftriflimum  et  littera- 

tiflium  Principem,  Dominum  Ducem  Glouceftrenfem, 
Epiftola  Refponfiva.  Imperf.  2.  b, 

5.  Capitula  Librorum  quinque  priorum  Politie  Plato- 

nice.  3.  Imperf. 

6.  P.  Candidi  Decembris  Oratoris,  in  traduttione 

noviflima  totius  Puli.ie  Platonis  Athcnienfis  Philofophi 
praeftantiflimi,  ad  illuftriflimum  et  litteratiflimum  Do¬ 
minum  Ducem  Glouceftrenfem.  5. 

7.  Platonis  Athenienfis  Philofophi  illuftriliimi,  Celef- 
tis  Politie  Liber  Primus  ;  e  Grecis  litteris  feliciter 
converfus  in  Latinas,  per  P.  Candidum  Decembrem.  6. 

8.  P.  Candidi  Decembris  Oratoris,  in  Libro  Politie 
Platonis  Secundo,  ad  prmclariflimum  et  optimum  Prim 
cipcm  Dominum  Ducem  Glouceftrenfem,  Prologus.  22. 

9.  Platonis  Athenienfis  Philofophi  illuftriflimi,  Celeftis 

Politie,  Liber  Secundus.  22.  b. 

1 0.  P.  Candidi  Decembris  Oratoris,  in  Libro  Politie 

Platonis  Tercio,  ad  illuftriflimum  et  litteratiflimum  Prin¬ 
cipem,  Dominum  .  .  Ducem  Glouceftrenfem,  Pro¬ 
logus.  39. 

Zz  ji.  Platopi# 


iy8 


Catalogus 


Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  17  05,  1706. 


ix. _  Platonis  Athenienfis  Philofophi  illuftriffimi, 

Celeflis  Poftie,  Liber  (^uartus.  ^  b-  ’ 

12.  P.  Candidi  Decembris  Oratoris,  in  Libro  Po¬ 
litic  Platonis  Quarto,  ad  illuftriflimum  ct  optimum 
Pnncipem  Doinmura  Duccm  Glouceltrienfem,  Prologus. 

>3  Platonis  Athenienfis  Philofophi  illullriffimi,'  Ce- 
eltis  Politie,  Liber  Quartus.  CQi  b> 

14.  P.  Candidi  Decembris  Oratoris,  in  Libro  Politie 

Flatoms  Quinto  ;  In  laudem  biuftriilimi  et  litteratiflimi 
1  nncipis,  Domini  Ducis  Glouceftrenfis,  Prologus  ;  ad 
druditiliimum  Jurifconiultum  Johannem  Amadeum  civem 
Medtolanenfem,  Traduftio  Prima.  jr  b. 

15.  Platonis  Athenienfis  Philofophi  ill uftriflimi,  Celeftis 
Politie,  Liber  Quintus. 

16.  Tituli  Librorum  v.  infequentium  Platonis  Poluix, 

alio  Codice fcriptorum.  b 

-n  H,UnTC,  f,!Crerum  Codicem  tenet>  ut  accepi,  Carolus 
Baro  de  Hallifax. 

In  fine  habetur  adnotatio  pradifti  Principis  manu ; 
c.  Celt  bure  eft  a  moy  Ilomfrey  Ducde  Glouceftre,  du 
Don  P.  Candidus  Secretariedu  Due  de  Mylan. 

1706. 

An  Old  Engliih  Book  in  fob  written  by  different  Hands, 
rained"1  VClfe’  &  pmIy  in  Profe'  "'herein  are  con- 

x.  Divers  Medicinal  Receipts.  j  b 

■  v  AI-  ?  “lan“rc  ln  l-nglyslhe,  made  in  Balade  (i.  e. 
m  Verie)  by  Dann  John  Lydgate  Monke  off  Bury. 

3.  A  lytell  Tretyfe,  de  Cantieo  Amoris,  in  Verie'-  by 
the  lame  Author.  3 

4-  A  Prayer  to  Chrift,  that  the  Merits  of  His  Faihon 
may  redound  unto  us  ;  in  Verfe,  perhaps  by  the  fame 
Dan  John  Litigate.  10  b 

•  5d  ^  NineLeffons  of  the  Dirige,  whych  Job  made 
■n  hys  I  rybulacyon,  lying  on  the  Donghylle  ;  and  ben 
declared  more  opynly  to  Lewde  mennes  Underftandvng 
by  a  folempne  worthy  and  dyferete  Clerke  Rychard 
Hampolet  and  is  clepyd  IPctp  Jot,  and  ys  full  pr0- 
ly table  to  (lere  Synners  to  Compunflion.  ibid. 

6.  A  Tretyfe  of  Parce  michi  Doniine.  jr  b" 

This  is  an  Allegorical  Poem  upon  the  Vanity  & 
Incertamty  of  Youth,  Beauty,  Strength,  &  Riches  ; 
compoled,  perhaps,  by  the  above-mentioned  Richard 
Kolle  Hermit  ofHampole. 

7-  A  Poem  enriruled  The  Seyyn  Dedely  Synne. 

This  feemeth  alfo  to  be  of  the  fame  Richard  Ham- 
pole’s  compofition. 

A  Poeni  (P.ad[aps  of  the  fame  Author)  on  the  Sex 
onLnanda  omni  Cnfhano  in  extremis  •  fril 
Debiti,  Compofitio  Teilamenti,  ConSo’  Pe  '  ari 
trema  Uncho,  Via, id  Snfceptio,  Intenta  Sopp^doi 

3.  A  Decryption  off  Fey, he,  Hope,  and  Charyt'e. 

noo.0’  B°W  “  Man  may  Wc  'vhether  he  be  meke^r 
11.  Upon  the  Image,  or  Pifture  of  Death  “it b’- 
mSM.-  ho^h'g  n  Spear  in  one  hand,  and  a 

nJSo^SrASr  or*““fc-  ™ 

r3-  The  Fyfte  Chapytle  of  a  Tretyfe  called  n,-| 

DyiIogc 

RichLh  ampa„,r  C°mp0fcd  by  tba  ahovemendoned 


Num.  1706. 

.  'J-  J’fhard  Hampoles  Treatife  of  the  Craft  of  Dying) 
in  Six  Chapters.  2  ‘  ^ b 

Hampot Tretyre  °f  GOlliy  Batayk  ;  by  ,he  fame  RW'tttd 

17.  A  Traci  intituled  A  Ladder  off  4  Rowgis,  by  the 
whyche  Ladder  men  mowen  welle  clymbre  to  Hevyn. 

This  feemeth  alfo  to  be  another  of  Hampcle^  Com. 

Pits  °ns ’’  *°  Whom  1  find  a  Scala  Mundi  attributed  by 

1 8.  How  to  recede  the  Sacrament. 

to  Seen,  4IK  able  n"°5  to  be  ""““"it  this  is  aferibed 
to  beynt  Alberte  the  Byflchop. 

Mif”?  ™it  Maria  Magdalena,  fecundmrt 
Magiltium  Adamum  Carthufienfem.  b 

fvx^Ma'ft  ,ytyl m  Tr£[yfe that  tellettl  h™  'here  were 

Whafrh^  affiflb  ed  t0Sedere’  andyche  on  afked  other 
deaf  1iy7es  th.e>'  n,yght  bell  fpeke  of  that  myght  bell 
pleafe  Cod,  and  were  moll  profytable  to  the  people  : 
and  alle  they  were  accordede  to  fpeke  off  Trybuladon! 

21.  De  Palienda.  lb’d' 

22.  The  12  Profetes  and  Evangeliiles  of Tabulation, 

I  look  upon  the  Words  [and  Evangeliiles]  to  hare 
been  no  part  of  the  Original  Title  of  this  Trad,  which  was 
Duodecnn  Utih.ates  Tribulationis  ”  &c.  tranilated  by 
BWenfisHamPOle’  asIfuPPore>  “ut  of  the  Latin  of  Petrus 

23.  Libellus  Ricardi  Heremite  de  Ifampole  de  Emerf- 
datione Peccatons ;  qui  obijt  A.  D.  1  !4o.  apud  Sanfli 

“ene  ,“2  d'c?amPt,lc  :  ™h  this  farther  Rubric,  Here 
bene  12  Chapitres  whiche  Rychard  Hampole  the 
Hercmyte  made  j  how  that  a  Man  (hulde  lyve  in  Con- 
templacion,  &  m  Metlitacion,  and  in  olher  yertuos 
Lyumge,  and  after  thys  Lyfe  to  come  to  the  Lyfe  ever, 
lailynge,  and  dwelle  with  God  in  the  Biyflb  of  Heuyno. 

Ri5U^Mcdy,ad0"£“rs^  ™vc% 

25.  How  a  Man  or  or  Woman  or  fympyl  Connvnir 
Ihale  make  hys  Prayer  to  God  AlmyghtJ.  °  8,  ° 

Bnndnn  Co.nfellyo"  'vhyche  Xs  ^  a  Prayere  that  Seym 
Brandon  made  ;  and  hit  ys  ryghtc  ncdefulle  to  a  Chryfien 
Man  to  fey,  and  to  wyrche  thereafter.  g 

27.  A  Confeflion  of  Sins,  drawn  from  the  Ten  Com 

maundementys.  ,m" 

28.  Another,  upon  Confideration  of  the  Five  Sen  fa. 

Cor?ord"a?ther’  “P°n  ‘he  SeP'em  °Pera  M^ricortfe 
Sp^„at°ther’  “POn'he  SCptem  °P£ra  Miferico/die 
3'-  Carta  celeilis  Hereditatis  ;  an  allegorical  Traft. 

Wyci?ff:byMr.wt,Sl0ma  ^  ^ '«*• 

32.  Confyderacion  of  Man  hymfelfe.  „„ 

33-  Aryilotles  A.  B.  C.  made  by  Mayfter  Benmt. 

Thefe  are  Moral  Sentences,  with  a  Letter  of  the 

Kke  theHem'p'  w  t?em'1“d  a  double  Crofs  falmoll 
hte  the  Heralds  Efcarbuncle)  over  all ;  that  it  might  be 
'that  was  antiently  called  the  ChriiPs-Crofs  Row  S 

Seynt  Anfclme  ^  °f  H“"y,ytt-  a““di"S  *> 

35-  Of  the  7  Degrees  of  Pryde. 

Book,  ,hu"s VT*"  1  ab'e  °f  thC  TraSs  C°"tai“d  “  *e 

byRich?rfHl"a,roftheDyin«Cr“'-iP^aPa 

38.  -lhc  Myrrour  of  Synners;  by  Richard  Hampok. 

I06. 


Nuiii.  1706. 

-9.  A  Trelys  of  3  Arowes,  that  fchulleri  be  fchot 
&t  Domefday  to  hem  that  there  lchullen  be  dampned. 

1 10.  b. 

Mr.  Wharton  in  his  Appendix  to  Dr.  Caves  Hido- 
tia  Literaria,  pag.  54.  afcribeth  a  Tra£t  eniituled  Tres 
Sagittre.  to  John  Wycliffe  ;  but  whether  this  be  the  fame, 
or  rather  written  by  Richard  Hampole,  I  cannot  now 
determine. 

j  40.  Four  profitable  Thinges  to  have  in  mynde,  wyche 
ben  taken  oute  of  the  thrydde  Chapitele  of  a  deuoute 
Tretys,  and  a  Forme  of  Lyuynge  that  Rychard  Ampol 
wrote  to  a  deuoute  Perfon.  ii4.  b. 

41.  A  Souvereyn  &  a  notabyle  Sentence,  to  comforte 

a  Pcrl'on  that  is  inTemtacyon.  115.  b. 

This  is  a  pretty  large  Treatife,  confiding  of 
1 1  Chapters  ;  perhaps  by  the  fame  Author. 

42.  The  gadered  Counfeyllcs  of  Seynt  lfodre ;  to 
conferme  a  Man,  howe  he  fchall  fle  Vyces,  and  folowe 
Vertues. 

43.  Augultinus  de  Contemptu  Mundi,  in  Englith. 

149-  b. 

44.  Sentences  collefted  from  the  Works  of  Seyntc 

Audyne.  15°- 

45.  The  Maters  of  Nyne  Poyntys,  that  mude  be 

byfylye  ltudyed  in  hys  Iierte,  that  wylneth  for  to  pro- 
fyzte  in  the  Wey  of  Perfeccyon,  and  feuereynly  to  plefe 
God.  1 5 1  • 

46.  A  Devout  Treatife,  concerning  the  Love  of  God  : 

divided  into  above  24  Chapters,  each  marked  with  a 
particular  Letter,  according  to  the  Order  of  the  Alphabet. 
Thefe  Chapters  have  alfo  their  feveral  Titles,  of  which 
there  is  a  Table  prefixed,  with  a  fort  of  Prologue  before 
all.  i54- b- 

After  this  Treatife  ("wherein  befides  the  Holy  Scrip¬ 
tures,  many  of  the  Old  Fathers  of  the  Church,  &  other 
i  Do&ors,  are  cited)  follow  feveral  fliort  Poems  in  Lngliih, 
with  thefe  Titles, 

|  47.  Decern  Mandata. 

[  48.  Septem  Vitia  capitalia. 

I  49.  Septem  Virtutes,  contra  Septem  Vicia. 

'  50.  Septem  Opera  Mifericordie. 

5 1 .  Septem  Opera  Charitatis. 

52.  Quinque  Senfus  corporaliter. 

53.  Quinque  Senfus  fpiritualiter 

54.  Tres  Virtutes  theologice. 

55.  Quatuor  Virtutes  Cardinales. 

56.  Octo  Beatitudines. 

57.  This  Leflon  a  vertuofe  Chylde  fchuld  often  fey 

to  hys  Souereynes.  209.  b. 

58.  Upon  the  Pafiim  of  our  Lord,  efpedally  upon 
the  5475  open  Woundes  which  he  received  for  us,  as 
Clerkes  feyne,  and  fpecyally  Seynt  Anfelme.  210. 

59.  A  large  Rubrick  or  Remark,  of  the  Ufe  &  Pro¬ 

fit  to  be  had  by  Books  in  our  Devotions,  for  Formys 
of  Pr.yfynge  and  Preyynge  to  God.  21 2.  b. 

60.  Upon  the  Incommodities  of  Old  Age,  St  the  Pa¬ 
tience  neceffary  for  thofe  in  that  State.  ibid. 

61.  Some  few  Medicinal  Receipts.  215. 

62.  Colle&a  una  atq  ;  altera  ad  Santtam  Ethelburgam 

2*5- 

From  thefe  fhort  Collects  a  Quefiion  is  darted  (in 
the  Account  given  of  this  Book  in  the  Great  Catalogue 
of  MSS.  Printed  at  Oxford,  pag.  212.)  Whether  this 
Book  did  not  belong  to  Ely- Abbey  ?  To  which  an  Anfwer 
may,  with  probability  enough,  be  returned  in  the  nega¬ 
tive  ;  for  as  much  as  our  Lthelburga  was  not  the  Lly- 
Saiat  (but  St.  Elheldrith  wife  to  Ecgfrid  King  of  the 
!  Northumbrians)  k  it  appears,  that  St.  Ethelburg  was 
much  about  the  fame  Time  fett  over  the  New  Monaftery 
of  Nuns,  which  her  brother  Erkenwald  Bifhop  of  London 
had  built  at  Barking  ;  to  which  place  if  this  Book  had 
been  given,  in  all  likelyhood  it  would  have  ftaied  there 
till  after  the  Difiolution  thereof.  But  before  the  Difib- 


205. 
205.  b. 

206. 
2c6.  b. 

207. 
207.  b. 

ibid. 

208. 
ibid. 

20  K.  b. 


lution  ’tis  certain  that  it  was  the  proper  goods  of  a  very 
great  Lady,  who  was  firit  the  wife  of  William  Vifcount 
Beaumont  (who  died  the  2S  December  24  Hen.  vii.) 
in  which  capacity  fhe  wrote  her  Name  herein  (Elyfabeth 
Beaumont)  twice,  as  mav  be  feen  at  fol.  1 1 .  &  216.  in 
the  former  place  writing  thus,  “Thys  is  my  Boke.”  She 
was  afterward  married  to  John  Vcre  Earl  of  Oxford, 
and  as  fuch  (or  at  lead  as  his  widow,  for  die  furvived 
him  many  years)  She  entered  her  Name  four  times 
more,  to  be  feen  at  fol.  3.  93.  b.  95.  &  214.  b.  in 
which  lad  Page,  at  the  top  thereof,  are  thefe  words, 
‘‘Thys  yes  my  Boke  ;  quod  Elyfabeth  Oxynforde.” 


Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  min.  quo  continetur. 

Opus  quoddam  Hidoricum,  e  locis  nonnullis  Giraldi 
Cambrenfis  inibi  citatis,  et  male  intelle&is  ;  in  dorfo, 
eidem  Giraldo  perperam  adjudicatum  :  in  Catalogo  autem 
Codicum  MSS.  in  Oxonia  A.  D.  1697.  exculb,  fimul 
ac  in  uno  foliorum  rejettaneorum  fronti  Codicis  prtepo- 
fitorum,  Ranulpho  Plygdeno  Monacho  Cedrenfi  tribui- 
tur ;  eo  quod  in  fol.  ejufdem  26  hmc  leguntur  verba, 
“  Ed  et  alia  Urbs  Legionum  ejufdem  Nominis  (i.  e.  Ca- 
erlion)  ubi  et  prefens  Cronica  fuit  elaborata.  Urbs  qui- 
dem  in  confinio  Anglie  ad  profpeefum  Cambrie,  inter 
duo  Marina  brachia  five  duo  Humina  Dee  et  Merfee 
fituata,  que  tempore  Britonum  capud  fuit  &  Metropolis 
Venedocie,  i.  e.  Norwallie ;  fieut  alia  Urbs  Legionum 
quondam  capud  fuit  Demecie.  Urbs  aliajacet  defolataj 
ida  fubllat  refornrata.”  -Adde,  quia  initiumPolychronici 
Hygdenfis  (foil.  “  Podpredaros  arcium  Scriptores,”  &c.) 
in  fummitate  paginse  prioris  feriptum  legitur. 

Atqui,  pace  eorum  qui  hujus  Chronici  autorem 
Ranulfum  Statuunt  Hygdenum  ;  rationes  quibus  inducor 
ut  credam  potius  Rogerum  Monachum  Celhrenfem  (Ra- 
nulfu  illo  priorem)  dodifiimum  illius  Operis  pariterq ; 
laboriofilfimum  Compilatorem  fuifie,  in  medium  pro- 
feram. 

1.  Joannes  Pitfcus  (e  Balmo,  ut  arbitror)  de  Rogcro 
nodro,  hsec  habet.  inter  alia.  “Rogerus  Cedrenfis, 
vel  de  Cedria,  ordinis  S.  Benedi&i  Monachus  Anglus 
ad  S.  Werburgam,  inipfa  urbe  Cedrenfi.  Vir  in  omni 
politioris  litteratura  genere  eleganter  dodus — vetudifli- 
mos  quofque  Codices  incredibili  diligentia  ferutatus  ed, 
deduxitq;  rerum  narrationem — (aborigine  mundi)  ufq; 
ad  annum  Chridi  1314-  Deinde,  adjundus  annis  25  ad 
annum  Domini  1339.  omnia  puro,  etnitido  ftylo^  Quo 
nomine  non  feme!  ab  Hugone  Virleio,  in  Hidoriarum 
Figuris,  honoris  caufa  citatur.  Hidoriam  porro  majo- 
rem,  hoc  titulo  infignivit. 

Polycratica  temporum,  Libros  feptem.  Procemium 
incipit,  “  Intrabo  in  agros  Prifcorum  Subfequi.”  Initium 
Libriprimi,  “  Julius  Cfefar  divinis  humaniflimifq;  rebus.” 

‘‘Additamentum  viginti  quinque  annorum,  Librum 
unum.  Septimo  anno  R.  Edwardi.  Claruit  anno  pod 
adventum  promifii  Meflite  1339.”  Ac. 

2.  In  Catalogo  Audorutn  qui  feripferunt  Hidoriam 
Anglite,  quorum  opera  ad  manus  Joannis  Jofielyni  per- 
venerunt,  et  ubi  extant,  MS.  Bibl.  Cotton.  Nero.  C.  3. 
fie  inveni, 

“Rogerus  Cedrienfis  Polycratica  temporum  edidit ; 
opus  elegans  et  rotundum,  a  Mundi  initio  ulq ;  ad  annum 
Domini  1327.  (f.  leg.  1324.)  quod  incipit  Intrabo  in 
agros  prilcorum  fubfeq.  Compofuit  etiam  additiones 
Quindecim  Annorum,  qum  incipiunt,  Septimo  anno 
Regis  Edwardi  fecundi.  Polycraticorum  vero  primus 
Liber  pod  Prasfationem  incipit,  Julius  Ctefar  divinis  hu- 
manifq ;  rebus,  &c.  Claruit  hie  Cedrhis  anno  a  Chridi 
nativitate  1339.  quo  ultimum  opus  finivit,  lub  Ed  war- 
do  1 1 1.  Scit  Joannes  Twynus  ubi  habeatur.” 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


180 


Num.  1707. 

Talis  Codex  etiamnum  fervatur  in  Bibliotheca 
Collegij  Corporis  Chrifti  quod  eft  Cantabrigian,  ubi  inter 
Codices  Parkerianos  locum  obtinuit  6tum. 

3.  Hac  in  Bibliotheca  habetur  Codex  vetuftus  (nondum 
proprijs  Litteris  aut  Cifris  notatus)  cujus  Prsfatio  ab  his 
verbis  incipit,  “Intrabo  in  Agros  Prifcorum  Subfequens, 
et  Liber  Primus  ejufdem  fic,  Julius  Cafar  divinis  hu- 
manifq  ;  rebus,”  in  cujus  prima  pagina  fummitate, 
Titulus  manu  Joannis  Balai  fcriptus  poteft  legi,  Poly- 
cratica  temporum  Rogeri  Ceftrenfis  ;  et  interiore  Teg- 
niinis  facie,  idem  Balaus  fcripfit  taliter,  Rogerus  Cef¬ 
trenfis,  alius  a  Ranulpho,  Polycratica  temporum  edidit, 
Libris  vn.  Denique  neotericus  alius  nefcio  quis  in 
primo  folio  vacuo  alium  Titulum  Codici  pramifit,  Rogeri 
Ceftrenfis  Polychronicon.  Et  hie  quidem  Codex,  cum 
Codice  prefenti  no.  170;.  (excepta  fola  Prafationis 
parte)  convenit  omnino. 

4.  Quinetiam  in  Bibliotheca  Cottoniana,  alius  habetur 
Codex,  fcilicet  ejufdem  Operis  Exemplar  vetuftum, 
fronte  tamen  valde  imperfe&um;  incipit  enim  A.  D.  4 1 3. 
in  cujus  folio  priori  Titulus  cernitur  manu  coavit  fcriptus, 
“Polycratica  temporum  per  Rogerum  de  Ceftria,”  et  fub- 
tus,  manibus  diverfis,  .  .  .  “  Multum  differt  a  Ranulpho 
Ceftrenfi.  Rogerus  Ceftrenfis.” 

5.  Infuper,  hac  in  Bibliotheca  adfervatur  Codex  pra- 
clarus,  hujufmodi  opus  continens,  inferiptufq;  no.  655. 
in  quo  inter  Tabuiam  Materiarum,  et  ipfum  Librum 


Num.  1 707. 

(fcil.  ad  fol.  10.  b.)  confpicitur  hac  Infcriptio  “Policro- 
nica  Fratris  Ranulphi  Ceftren,”  ubi  Verba  duo  piiora 
etiamnum  prira&  manu  reftant  feripta;  reliqua  vero,  alijs 
abrafis  (forte,  Rogeri  Ceftrenfis)  a  recentiore  quodam 
evidentiifime  fuperferibuntur. 

Quod  attinet  ad  vocem  Polycronica ;  In  Audoris 
Prafatione,  qua:  in  tribus  hujufee  Bibliotheca  vetuftis 
Exemplaribus  (viz.  no.  655,  no,  1707.  no.  1728.)  datur 
integra,  hac  Verba  leguntur,  “  Et  quoniam  prefens  Cro- 
nica  multorum  continet  gefta,  idcirco  earn  Hiftoriam 
Policronicam,  a  pluralitate  temporum  quam  continer, 
cenfui  nuncupandam-”  Ubi  in  Exemplari  quodam  Cot- 
toniano,  inveni  vocem  Policraticam,  Titulo  libri  a  Balao, 
Joffelyno,  ac  Pitfao,  ulurpato,  plane  convenientem  : 
uti  cuivis  videre  eft,  e  Codice  MS.  cujus  Notre  funt 
Nero.  D.  8. 

6.  A  Rogero  Ceftrenfi  ad  Ranulfum  common  ’chum 
fuum  tranfeamus ;  cujus  efFufiffima  Laudes  adeo  a 
Lelando,  Balao,  Pitfao,  Whartono,  et  alijs  circumfe- 
runtur,  ut  eas  repetendo,  operam  atq;  oleum  meum 
perdiderim.  Is  etiam  “  Policronicam,”  five  ut  alijs  placet 
“  Polychronicon,”  ex  ijfdem  Autoribus  quibus  ante  eum 
Rogerus  nofter  ulus  erat,  tot  Libris  contentum,  tot  et 
ijldem  Epochis  notabile,  ficuti  e  Collatione  Prafationis 
Rogeri,  cum  Henrici  Whartoni  de  Ranulfo  fuo  Narra- 
tione,  luce  clarius  apparebit. 


Hen.  Whart. 

Ranulphus  Higdenus— Operi  fuo  Polychronici  nomen 
indidit  ;  totumq ;  in  Septem  Libros  juxta  numerum 
retatum  Mundi,  ac  dierum  quibus  orbis  creatus  eft  diftri- 
buit. 

Primus  Liber  non-nifi  topographicam  Orbis  Defcriptionem 
exhibet. 

Secundus  ab  Orbe  condito  ad  Captivatem  Judaorum 
Babylonicam  progreditur, 

Tertius  a  tranfmigratione  Babylonica  ad  Chrifti  ad- 
ventum. 

Quartus  a  Chrifto  nato  ad  Saxonum  in  Angliam  ad- 
ventum. 

Quintus  a  Saxonum  appulfu  ad  adventum  Danorum. 
Sextus  ad  irruptionem  Normannorum. 

Septimus  adfuaufq;  tempora,  annum  vero  1357.” 


Rog.  Cestr.  ms. 

In  cujus  negocij  pertradatione,  exemplo  primitivi 
Opificis,  fub  benario  cunda  condentis,  et  in  Septimo 
quiefeentis,  cujus  Adio  noftra  eft  Inftrudio  ;  fubftradum 
Opus  in  Septem  Libellulos  fubdiftinxi.  In  Quorum 
Primo,  Mundus  et  ejus  Partes  deferibitur,  donee  perve- 
niatur  ad  Britanniam,  &c. 

Secundus  liber  Quatuor  atatum  continet  gefia,  fcilicet 
ab  Adam  ufq  ;  ad  Incenfionem  Templi. 

Tercius  a  tranfmigracione  Populi,  ufque  Adventum 
Chrifti. 

Quartus  a  Crifto  ufque  adventum  Saxonum. 

Quintus  abinde,  ufq  ;  adventum  Dacorum. 

Sextus  abinde  ufq  ;  adventum  Normannorum. 

Septimus  abinde,  ufque  ad  evum  noilrum,  quod  eft  fub 
Regno  Edwardi  Tercij  poll  Conqucftum. 


7.  Porro  deeodum  Ranulpho,  deq;  fuo  Polychronico, 

•licit  Pitfasus,- - “  Scripfit  igitur  nobiliftimum  illud 

Opus  quod  dixi,  in  cujus  prima  pagina  (f.  leg.  primo 
hbro)  ut  in  quodam  vetufto  Codice  feriptum  inveni 
Capi tales  littera  haefequentia  Verba  continent :  Prafen- 
tem  Chronicam  compilavit  frater  Ranulphus  Ceftrenfis 
Monachus.  Titulum  autem  operi  prefixit  audor 


prrcclaro 


Polychronicon,  Libros  Septem.  Poft 
artium  Scriptores. 

8.  Johannes  Trevifa  Capellanus  Thomte  Domini  d 
Berkeleye,  Verhonem  Chronicorum  Ranulphi  Celbcnli 
Anglicam  abfolvit  18  die  Aprilis  A.  D.  138;.  in  cuiu 
43.  b.  (juxta  exemplar  Cottonianum  Tib.  D.  7.)  hse. 
inveniuntur  verba,  “  hyt  was  nozt  the  fame  bat  made  hy 
nt  Latyn,  &  lurnede  hyt  in  to  Englyfch.  Nober  hyt  wa 
yturiul  into  Englyfch  in  the  fame  place  Jztr  hyt  was  ymai 
furft  yn  Latyn.  j,e  heed-lettres  of  the  Chapiters  of  thi 
furlt  book  ywryte  a  newe  as  fe  Chapiters  ftondeb  afnel 
lej?  J>ys  Latyn  refon  “Prefen tem  Cronicam  compilavi 
Frater  Ranulphus  Ceftrenfis  Monachus,”  bis  Latyn  refoi 
ys  to  menyng  an  Englyfche,  Brother  Ranulph  Monk  o 
Cheftre  compilede  &  made  pis  prefent  Cronyk  ” 

9.  Ranulfi  Hygdeni  Poly-chronicon,  ut  dicitur  (cum 
Capita  nonnulla  typis  mandavit  vir  dodiflimus  'J  homa' 
Galteus,  nuper  Decanus  Eboracenfis)  extat  in  hac  Bi 
bliotheca  inicriptus  no.  1320.  in  quo  Libri  primi  Littera 


initiales  hate  Verba  confidant, 

aaaMXfl  s.o'xisxx.^xcxrj 

.  .  .  ^  _  rlJi’  MS.  Colton.  1 

r  ^?'  niT  et  cum  R°geri  noRn  Exemplaribus  I 

fupradidis  levmfcule  contuli ;  ftatimq  :  ;cuod  antea 
fufpicatus  eram)  inveni  iftum  Ranulfum,  etfi  ab  omnibus  i 
fere  pradicatum  ;  tot  Dodrina,  Candoris,  Pieraris  1 
laudibus  cumulatum  ;  vaferrimum  fuilTe,  atq  ;  omnium 
noftra  Gentis  Hiftoricorum,  Plagiarium  maxime  infig- 
nem.  Ifte  enim  (quod  nemo  ante  eum  fecerit)  omni 
pudore  procul  fepofito,  Rogeri  Hiftoriam  nadus, 
quibufdam  gravions  momenti  Locis  quail  arnputatis 
ahjs  fee di (lime  interpolatis,  Verbis  etiam  et  Phrafibus 
fubinde,  pro  arbitrio  immutatis,  Novam  prm  fe  ferebat 
Hiftoriam  litterato  Orbi  obtrudere,  fi  fra  us  laterat, 
iEternitati  confecratam.  Quamobrem,  ut  melius  teo-erel 
tur  furturn,  Sententia  fuperior  (PRESENTEM,  &c.)  fuit  « 
mventa  ;  Capitum  Libri  Primi  turbatus  Ordo  ;  Novum  I 
Prafationi  fuperindudum  Exordium  ;  totaq  ;  Senten-  \ 
tia  Perfona  loco  (fi  ita  mihi  fas  fit  dicere)  in  fingula  J 

fua.  Capita,  litteratim,  moreq;  Acroftcho.  diftiibuta 

Verum,  ne  incnriofos  Ledores  tantum  fugeret  Myfte-  ] 
rium,  Gloriamq;  gloria  avidulus  fucofam  amitteret  J 
^  Ranulphus,  i 


Bibliothecas  Harleiana 


18i 


Kum.  1707)  1708. 

Ranulphus,  eundeiii  qucm  fupva  citttl  locum  (pag:  77  ) 
deturpavit,  Nomenq ;  fimul  et  Patriam,  cum  Rehgione 
(Utaiunt)  pa'efecit.  Locum  exhibet  Codex  notalus  no. 
1120.  fol.  21.  ubi  hsec  habentur  verba.  “  Jh.  Ell  eciam 
a'lia  Urbs  Legionum  ejufdem  Nominis,  ubi  prefens 
Cronica  fuit  elaborata,  ficud  ‘Per  Capitales  Hujus  Irimi 
Libri  Apices  Clarius  Patet’.  Urbs  quidem  in  confimo 
Anglie,  ad  profpe.ctum  Cambric  inter  duo  manna  brachia, 
Dee,  &  Merfie.”  &c.  Eadem  Verba  leguntur  in  Codice 
MS.’  Cottoniano  Otho.  D.  i.  in  libroper  D.  Tho.  Ga¬ 
lium  typis  edito,  nec  non  Angliec,  inVerfione  Joanms 
Trevif®.  , 

10.  Quinethm,  haud  contends  depravanda  (ne  dicam 
furand^)  Hiftoria  Ranulphus  ifte  ;  neque  pro  fuo  vendi- 
tando  Roger i  Au&orum  Syllabo ;  ulterius  progreflus, 
ipfum  Rogeri  Nomen,  ipfius  dodilluna  atq,  curiofiihma 
Obfervata  fut  Fama  ejus  ac  Memoria  astern®  traderetur 
Oblivioni)  contra  Jus  Fidemq  ;  Scriptorum,  nec  non 
Injuria  fumma  ufurpare  non  erubuit.  Cujus  rei  leltis 

locupletiflimus  eft,  hie  locus  Prmiatioms  Rogeri. - 

“Si  quid  vero  a  Fide  difibnum,  aut  a  Monbus  alisnum 
hie  reperiatur,  hoc  Tempori  pocius  quam  Viro  afcribat  ur. 
Ouamobrem,  in  hac  alfercione  Hiftorica,  per.culnm 
yen  ftatuendi  per  omnia  michi  non  facio  :  led  que  apud 
diverfos  Auclores  legi,  fine  invidia  ccmmumco.  Et 
quamvis  alienum  fit  quod  afl'umo,  meum  tamen  iacio, 
quod  meis  aliquando  verbis,  antiquorum  Temper  Senten- 
cijs,  proi'ero  adeo  ut  quos  Auclores  in  capue  libri  per- 
feripfero;  illis  utar  pro  Clipeo  contra ^  fuggillantes. 
Ouando  vero  Compilator  loquitur,  fub  hac  figuratione 
Rprefcribctur.  Sunt  autem  hec  audorum  Nomina,  de 
quibus  potilfime  extracla  eft  Cronica,  Jolephus  Judeorum 
Hiftoriographus,”  &c.  qu®  quidem  Verba  lpfiffima  (non 
tamen  fine  ulla  interpolatione)  in  Ranulphi  defloratoris 
pi  cefatione  retinentur,  uti  cuivis  utramq ;  conterentt 

facile  pateat.  .  .  f  . 

11.  Denique,  fi  quis  nobis  objecent,  paefauenem 
Codicis  prsefentis,  ucc  non  corum  qui  infenbuntur  no. 
6tc.  muhum  ab  altero  diferepare  Codice,  quern  ohm 
in  Balici  manibui  fuiffe  (et  forte  Joannes  Joflelym)  fupe- 
rius  innucrim  :  Refpondebo,  ij  de  codice  quern  folum 
(ut  videlur)  habuerunt,  mentionem  fecer.nl  ;  et  11  alij 
integriorefq  ;  Codices  exinde  e  renebns  eruti,  jam 1  nunc 
in  Bibliothecis  confpiciuntur,  id  fane  Cunofitati,  Felicl- 
tatiq  ;  recemioris  asvi  (in  quo  plures  Vm  clanffimi 
indagandis  Codicibus  vetultis,  prtefertim  Hiilonas,  uullos 
pepercere  fumptus)  maxime  deben  videatur. 

1  V  gej  ut  a  Rogero  Ceftrenfi,  ad  prtefens  Polycrati- 
corum  Riorum  exemplar  redeam, 

Continet  Hiitoriam  ab  Orbe  condito  (una  cum  de- 
feriptione  Mundi)  ufque  ad  priores  annos  Regni  Regli 
Edwardi  Tertij. 

Deinde  fequitur  Tabula,  five  Index  Matenarum  in 
prsecedenti  Hiftoria  contentarum  ;  cujus  folia  a  Muribus 
male  habita  funt. 


Num.  i  708,  1709* 


1708. 


Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  min.  diverfis  manibus 
feriptus,  in  quo  continetur, 

1.  Regeftum  Chartarum  Abbati®  de  Radinge,  Ordinis 
S.  Benedidi,  per  Regem  Henricum  i  fundat®. 

Codice  volvendo,  h®c  qu®  fequuntur  curiofa,  aut 

faltem  alieni  Argumenti,  amevila.  .. 

2.  Adnotationes,  ubi  fit  mentio  dc  Juitiaarijs  JJm 

Regis,  ad  Cuftodiam  judeorum  afiignatis.  4- 

Abbreviate  Magna  Carta  R.  Henna  hi.  de 
Libertatibus ;  anno  Regni  fui  9  edua.  .  5- 

4  Abbreviatio  Carta  de  Forefta  ejufdem  Regis,  et 
.  7.  b. 

3  LiteraR.  Henrici  i.  five  Breve  ipfius,  Abbati  et 
Conventui  Radingenfl  data;  una  cum  glonofa  manu 
beat!  Jacobi  Apoftoli  quam  Matildis  Imperatrix  filia  fua 
de  Allemaunia  rediens  fecum  afportavit.  15-  b. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol  II. 


6  Carta  Davidis  Regis  Scotie,  qua  donat  Abbati  et 

Conventui  de  Radinge,  Viliam  de  Rmdalgros,  tnper- 
petuam  Elemofi nam.  .  ,  1 

7  Carta  Matildis  Imperatncis,  Regina:  Anglorum 
Titulo  gaudentis.  (Vid.  Monaft.  Angl.  tom.  n.^pag. 

I3t  Carta  JohannisComim  Moretony,  nec  non  Brevia 
diverfa  eiuldem  pofquam  Rcgnum  Anglia:  adcpMs  eft, 
de  annuo  unius  Marcte  Auri  Ilcdditu  quam  dedem  Ec- 
clefisc  Radingenfl,  ad  maniim  Sanfli  Jacobi  coopenendam, 
quam  Ricardus  Ret:  frater  fuus  in  Ilinere  Peregrination* 

fue  denudavit.  .  ...  ...  .  ’  2J  ,  ‘ 

Q.  Carta  Rogeri  Sarifburienfis  Epifcopi,  et  Regni  An¬ 
glia:  Procuratoris.  fol.  ili.etvid.  .  188.  b.  aiS. 

to.  Narrationes  Piacitorum,  Abbatim  Radingenfl  fpec- 
tantiiim.  fol.H4- («  vid.  87.  m.h.  i8i.b  013. 

1  1.  Pur.fta  Gilde ;  i.  e.  Certain  Statutes,  or  Ordinances 
of  the  Traders  imheTown  of  Reading,  whofeem  to  have 
been  included  in  one  general  Gild;  m  old  french. 

160.  b. 

12  Litere  Regis  Henrici  Sexti,  direde  Cuftodr  Glide 
de  Redyng  :  in  ‘OU  Englifli  ;  inhibiting  the  Ufe :  of  a 
Ma  e  to  him  or  his  fuccelfors,  as  prejudicial  to  the  RlSht 

of  the  Abbey.  .  J  ( 

1  2  Finalis  Concordia  inter  Monailerinm  Radmgenic, 
Burgenfes,  et  eiufden,  Ville,  hiper  Placito  Libenatum 
(eorundem  Burgenfium;  moto,  in  Cum  Dm  Regis  : 
ann.  38  R.  Henr.  ill.  ....  r  T 

1 4.  Syllabus  Nominum  Archiepifcoporum  ac  Epiicopo- 
rum,  qui  Dies  Indulgentiarum  Radingenfl  Monailerio 

concefferunt.  .  r  1  ^  ‘K 

1  c.  Littcra  Prslatorum  Abbatiar  Radmgenfis,  ad  i  a- 
pales  Colleaores  in  Anglia,  dat.  3.  non.  Jul.  A.  D. 
.286.  .  2!3-b-. 

16  Pars  prior  Placiti  falforum  Scriptorum,  a  Judxis 
faciorum  fub  nomine  blr.uis  et  Conventus  de  Radinge, 
falfoq;  Sigillo  sigillatoruui  circa  ann.  16  R.  Edw.  1. 

2  1  5* 

1 7.  Placita  de  Praefentatione  ad  Ecclefiam  de  Eya,  See. 

'  218.  227.  244:  b. 

18  Tenores  Brevium  quorundam  R,  Edwardi  i.  pro 
examinanJis  et  judicandis  Libertatibus,  per  Prelaws, 
Comites,  et  Barones,  et  alios  de  Regno  fuo  (m  Terris 
eorum)  clamatis.  .  ,2?3* 

in.  Fxcerpta  e  Statuto  Glouceftrie  &c.  ut  videtur ; 
Gallice. 

20.  Placita  varia  de  Hominibus  Sc  Terris  Abbati® 

Radingenfis.  .  . 

21.  Statuta  Dni  Regis  Hennci  ill.  fatta  apud  Marle- 

berge.  234- 

2’.  Statuta  Gregorij  Pape  x.  in  Concilio Lugdunenfi. 

233. 

21.  Bulla  ejufdem  Pap®,  direfta  Magiftro  Reymundo 
de.  Nogerijs  ?  Capellano  et  Nuncio  fuo  in  Anglia,  et  l  ratri 
Johaoni  deDerlintone  Ordinis Predicatorum  Colkaonbus 
Subfidij  Terr®  Sand®  in  Partibus  Angli®  ;  in  qua  re- 
l'cribit  luper  Dubitationibus  in  eodem  Subfidio  colhgendo 
exortis. 

24.  Affifade  Pane  et  Serviha.  245. 


1709. 

A  Paper-Book  in  finall  fol.  fairly  written,  and  formerly 
(as  it  fhould  feem)  belonging  to  the  Chapel  of  King 
Henry  vi  n.  Itcontaineth  divers  Anthems  by  our  oldEn- 
gliih  Muficians  fett  to  Mufick,  in  feveral  Parts,  written 
in  their  refpedive  Books,  whereof  this  is  on  the  outfide, 
entituled  Medius,  or  the  Mean-Part ;  which  Books,  if 
now  to  be  had  together  ;  would  make  a  valuable  Set. 
The  Anthems  herein  contained,  are, 

1.  Gaude  plurimum  Servatoris  noftri  Mater.  1. 

2.  Salve  Dei  Patris  filia  nobiliflima.  3-  b- 

3.  Adoro  te  Domine  Jhefu  Crifte  in  Cruce  vulne- 

ra,um-  3  A  4-S0 


vh 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1769 — 1711. 

4.  O  quarn  tri II is  et  affliaa  fuit  ilia  benedifU  mater 

l  mgeniti.  (by  Aslhwelle)  „  ^ 

j.  Salve  Regina  pudica  Marer  et  Pietatis  Exemplar, 
(by  LudfurdeJ.  r 

6?  Ave Maria  Anciila  Trinitatis humillima.  ,,b 

7.  Sanfta  Maria  mater  Dei,  ora  pro  Nobis  „  b' 

5.  Salve  Regina  mater  Mifericordie,  Vita,  Dulc’edo 

et  ipcs  neitra.  1  b  * 

9.  Salve  Regina  mater  Mifericordie,  Salve  ;  ad  tecla- 
mamas  exules  lilie. 

x-  O  quani  triftis  benedida  mater  Unigeniti.  20! 
11.  O  Domine  Cell  et  Terre  Creator,  tocius  humani 
generis  redemptor.  22 

l2-  lota  pulchra  es  Arnica  mea;  Mel  et  Lac  fub 
Lingua  tua  (by  Mr.  Thomas  Hyllary)  24.  b- 

13.  Salve  Regina,  Mater  Mifericordie,  Vita,  Dulcedo, 
et  Spes  noftra,  Salve  (by  Pyguttj  z6 

inme4nr,medT‘a’  ^  rPlend°r:S  ^  “f™ 

15.  le  Virtutes  Angelorum,  te  matrices  et  Celonnn. 

dign^ma  ^  D“  PatriS  ^  nobiliffima>  Dei  FiIiJ  mater 

1 7-  Pariendo  non  gravaris,  Virgo  manens,  nec  vincaris 
propter  puerpenutn  (by  R.  Davy)  «  . 

1 8.  G loria  Saadorum,  decus  Angelorum.eleda  Maria. 

.  ^Mariam  Virginem  confitemur  (i.  e.  Canticum 
Ambrofij  B.  V .  M.  adaptatum)  (by  Aslhwelle).  39.  b. 

20.  Ave,  cujus  concepcio  folemp.ni  plena  Gaudio. 

V‘  Gaude  Virgo,  mater  Crifti,  que  per  aurem’con- 
cepilh,  Gabrielis  Nuncij.  4  b. 

22.  Et  dum  conciperesac  ufque  ad  partum.  46.  b. 

33.  Salve  Regina,  mater  Mifericordie,  Vita,  Dulcedo 
et  Spcs  noftra,  Salve  (by  Ludford)  4g.  b.  ’ 

24.  Iterum  :  by  W.  Connysfhe.  51.  b. 

25.  O  bone  Jhefu,  o  pijffime  Jhefu,  o  dulciffime  Jhefu. 

FairL:)’1'1'13  V'Vi  A'pha  “  °’  fiUa  fuPcrnilr™a  0>y 
1710. 

A  Parchment-Book  in  fmall  fol.  wherein  are  fairly  writ- 
ten,  in  Old  Englilh, 

1 .  The  Gofpelis  &  the  Epiftolis  of  allege  Feftis  in  be 
zeer,  ftondende  by  ordreas  J?ei  ben  red  in  be  Mefle-book 
alter  pe  vie  of  Salilbery. 

This  Englifh  is  according  to  the  Tranflation  com- 
monly  alcribed  unto  John  Wycliffe. 

Under  the  Denomination  6f  Feftis,  Sundays  are  in- 
eluded,  as  not  being  Fafting-days. 

2.  At  the  beginning  is  this  Note,  “  Thys  booke  was 
Sr.  Roger  Lyne  Chantre-Prell  of  Saint  Swythyns  at 
London-Stone;”  which  is  a  fort  of  Proof  that  in  Times 
of  Popery,  the  Reading  Gods  Word  in  our  Mother, 
tongue,  was  r.ot  denied  by  Authority  ;  and  this  is  alfo 
ailerted  by  Sir  Thomas  More. 


1711. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  quo  habentur, 

1.  Syllabus  I  iberorum  Tenendum  cujuilibet  Hundred! 

m  Com.  Mtdd.  anno  17.  &  ,8  Domine  Elizabethe 
Regme  _  , 

2.  Brevia  de  Venire  facias,  Habeas  Corpora,  &  Dif- 
tring.  Jur.  tempore  Edwardi  Olbornc  &  Wulftani 
Dixie  Vice-comitum  Midd.  anno  Regni  D’ne  Elizabethe 
Regme  nunc  t;  &  1 8.  &  anno  1575. 

3-  Omnia  brevia  tam  de  Execucione  Guam  alia  que 
eunque,  cum  earum  Execucionibus  &  Retornis,  tempore 
Corundem  Vice-comitum. 

4.  Brevia  deExigi  facias,  tempore  eorund-m  Vice 
comturn. 

7i- 


Codex  membfanceusin  fol.  craffiufculo,  varijs  mambas 
exaratus  ;  in  quo  cominentur, 
r  l-1'  T‘ShJUOrUndam  e  Sermonibus  Petri  Comeftoris 
f alias  dicti  Manducatoris)  Parilienfis  Academia:  Cancel- 
lanj,  m  pnmo  folio  rejedaneo. 

2.gabula  noans  Inceptiones  omnium  Sermonum  idius 
incipit  “  P“  I'lgUraS  “  q“°  folioLibn  quiUibet  Sermo 

tii  S“mriar"m  "  feqUenti  S“m0nUm 

Petri  &Jamtn  Sermonum  pradi{K 

4-  Sermo  MagilM  Petri  Manducatoris,  in  Sinodis  1 

5.  Ad  bacerdotes.  , 

6.  In  Sinodo.  8- 

7.  Ad  Sacerdotes.  .  ‘ 

8.  Ad  Sacerdotes. 

9.  Ad  Sacerdotes.  w 

10.  Ad  Sacerdotes. 

1 1 .  Ad  Sacerdotes. 

12.  Ad  Prelatos. 

13.  In  Sinodo. 


1 4 ■  Sermo  ad  Sacerdotes, quomodofubjedos  inftru'ant. 


13* 
14. 
I5’ 
5.  b. 


15.  Sermo  ad  Monachos. 

16.  Item,  ad  Monachos. 

17-  De  beato  Auguftino  ;  ad  Canonicos. 
18.  item,  ad  Canonicos  Regulares. 

In.  In  Vp/lIiriHto  D  *  .  n  - 


lares. 

20.  Item  in  Fefto  Sandi  Auguftini ; 

21.  Sermo  ad  Clauftralcs. 

22.  De  Paftione  Domini. 

23.  Item,  eodem  die. 

24.  De  Adventu  et  Feftivitate  bead  Andree. 

25.  De  Adventu. 

26.  In  Nativitate  Domini. 

27.  Item,  in  Nativitate  Domini. 

28.  Item,  in  Nativitate  Domini. 

29.  Item,  in  Nativitate  Domini. 

30.  Dominica  infra  Odavas. 

31.  In  die  Ephiphanie. 

32.  Item,  in  die  Epiphanie. 

33:  Dominica  Seconds  port  Epiphaniam. 

34.  In  Dominica  Septuagefime. 

35.  Ypapanti  ad  Sandum  Vidorem. 

-36.  In  principio  Quadragefime. 

37-  In  prima  Dominica  Quadragefime. 

38.  In  Dominica  mediana  Quadragefime 

39.  In  Annuntiatione. 

40.  De  Annuntiatione. 

41.  De  Conceptione. 

42.  De  Annuntiatione. 

43.  Item,  de  Annuntiatione. 

44‘  In  prima  Dominica  Paflionis. 

45.  In  Paftione  Domini. 

46.  In  Ramis  Palmarum. 

47.  In  Quadragefima. 

48.  De  Paftione. 

49.  In  Cena  Domini. 

50.  De  Jejunio  et  Pafcha. 

5 1 .  De  Cena,  et  de  Pafcha. 

52.  In  Refurredione  Domini. 

53.  In  die  Pafche. 

54.  Ad  Monachos. 

55.  Item  ad  Monachos. 

56.  In  Letania  Majori. 

57-  In  Aicenfione. 

58.  In  die  Pentecoften. 

59-  In  Odavis  Pentecoftes  ;  De  Tr'n'tatc 
60.  Item  de  Trinitate. 

9 


22. 
2.3-  b. 
24.  b. 
27. 


29.  In  Jeftivitate  B.  Auguftini;  ad  Canonicos  Regi- 


29. 
3t.b. 
33- 
35’ 
36.  b. 

38- 

40.  b. 
42.  b. 
46. 
48. 
5i- 

53-  b- 

54-  b. 
56. 
57- 

59.  b. 

67. 

69. 

70. 
72. 
74- 

75-  b. 
77-  b. 
82. 
83- 
84. 
86. 
88. 
90. 
92. 
93- 
94. 
95- 
96.  b. 
97- b- 
99 ■ 

1 00. 

1  ox.  b. 
103.  b. 

1 05.  b. 
106. 


61 


‘.In 


Bibliothecse  Harlelanas. 


183 


Niim.  1712. 

6 1 .  In  die  Apoftolorum  Petri  et  Pauli ;  ad  Sandum 

Vidorem.  1 1  o. 

62.  Item,  in  Feftivitate  Apoftolorum  Petri  et  Pauli. 

hi. 

63.  In  Fefto  Magdalene.  1 12. 

64.  In  Fefto  beati  Jacobi  Apoftoli,  Criftofori  Marty- 

ris,  Germani  Confefloris.  1 1 5. 

65.  Ad  Vincula  Sandi  Petri ;  ad  Sandam  Genofevam 

1 1 7* 

66.  In  Aflumptione  beate  Virginis  ;  ad  Sandum  Vic- 

torem.  1 1  9. 

67.  In  illud  Cantici,  Ofculetur  me  ofculo  oris  lui, 

fine  Rubrica.  122. 

68.  Ad  Sacerdotes.  123.  b. 

69.  In  Nativitate  Sande  Marie.  125.  b. 

70.  De  qualibet  Virgine.  127.  b. 

71.  In  Fefto  Omnium  Sandorum.  129. 

72.  In  Fefto  Omnium  Sandorum;  ad  Sandum  Ger- 

manum.  1 30.  b. 

73.  In  Fefto  Omnium  Sandorum  ;  ad  Sandum  Mar- 

tinum  132. 

74.  In  Dedicatione ;  ad  Sandum  Vidorem.  134.  b. 

75.  Item,  In  Dedicatione  Ecclefie.  136. 

76.  AdMonachos.  137.6. 

77.  In  Vigilia Natalis  Domini.  138.  b. 

78.  De  Jejunio.  141. 

79.  De  Jejunio..  142.  b. 

80.  Deinde,  incipiunt  Sex  Ale  Penitentiales  cum 

pennis  fuis,  quas  levant  ad  aftra.  143.  b. 

81.  De  Ponderibus,  et  Menfuris.  146. 

Deinde  fequuntur,  Sermones.  fcil. 

82.  De  Adventu.  *47.  b. 

83.  In  prima  Dominica  Quadraeefi me.  148.  b. 

84.  In  Fefto  S.  Jacobi  Apoltoli,  Criftofori  Martyris, 

Germani  Confefloris.  1  50. 

35.  In  Fefto  S.  Maria;  Magdalene. 

86.  In  Feftivitate  S.  Marie  Magdalene. 

87.  In  Aflumptione  Beate  Marie. 

88.  De  Beata  Maria. 

89.  Sermo  in  Nativitate  Beate  Marie. 

90.  De  Virgine. 

91.  In  Septuagefima. 

92.  In  principio  Quadragefime. 

93.  Item,  in  Quadragefima. 

94.  Item,  in  Quadragefima. 

95.  De  Dominica  Pallione. 

96.  Item,  in  Paflione  Domini. 

97.  De  Afcenfione  Domini. 

98.  Item  in  Afcenfione  Domini. 

99.  Ad  Vincula  Sandi  Petri, 
ieo.  De  Omnibus  Sandis. 

10 1.  In  Cena  Domini. 

102.  In  Purificatione  Beate  Marie. 

103.  Ad  Canonicos  Regulares  ;  de  Sando  Auguftino. 

177. 

104.  De  Adventu  Domini.  178. 

105.  Item,  de  Adventu  Domini.  179.  b. 

306.  Sermo  in  Natali  Domini.  180.  b. 

107.  In  Circumfifione  Domini.  181.  b. 

108.  In  Ephiphania  Domini.  183. 

109.  De  Sando  Vincenu'o,  et  alijs  Martiribus.  184. 

110.  In  principio  Adventus.  185.  b. 

h  i.  Item,  in  Adventu.  186.  b. 

1 12.  Dominica  in  Ramis Palmarum.  188. 

1 13.  In  Fefto  Sandi  Andree.  200.  b. 

114.  In  Adventu  Domini.  201.  b. 

115.  Item,  in  Adventu;  apud  S.  Vidorem.  202.  b. 

116.  In  Fefto  S.  Nicholai.  203.  b. 

1 1 7.  Item,  de  Sando  Nicholao.  205. 

118.  De  Adventu;  &  Beata  Lucia.  206.  b. 

119.  In  Quadragefima.  208. 

j,  120.  Sermo  in  Dedicatione  Ecclefie.  209. 

i2i.  Item,  in  Dedicatione  Ecclefie.  a  10. 


152. 

I53* 
154.  b. 

I55- 
159. 
1 6 1 . 

161.  b. 

1 62.  b. 

163.  b. 

164.  b. 

165.  b. 

167. 

168. 
170. 

17 1.  b. 
172. 
174. 
175.  b. 


Num,  1712,1713. 


122.  Sermo,  in  Sinodo.  21  h 

123.  In  Fefto  Omnium  Sandorum.  211.  b. 

124.  In  eodem  Fefto.  212.  b. 

125.  Primadie,  in  Sinodo.  213. b. 

126.  In  Sinodo.  215  b. 

127.  De  eodem,  ad  Sacerdotes,  216. 

128.  Item,  ad  Sacerdotes.  2i7.b. 

1 29.  In  Fefto  beati  Vincentij .  2 1 8.  b. 

130.  I11  Quadragefima.  219.  b. 

131.  In  Fefto  Petri  et  Pauli.  220.  b. 

132.  In  eodem  Fefto.  221. 

133.  Sermo  in  Sinodo.  221.  b. 

134.  Sermo  in  illud,  Ecce  ego  ladabo  earn,  et  ducam 

earn  in  Solitudinem,  &c.  222.  b. 

135.  Sermo  de  Jejunio.  223.  b. 

1  <6.  Sermo  ad  Sacerdotes.  224.  b. 

137.  In  fando  die  Pentecoften.  227. 


E  fupra  defcriptis  Sermonibus,  nonnullos  extare 
audio  inter  Opera  Petri  Bliefenfis:  caiteri  nondum,  quod 
fciam,  typis,  mandati. 


A  Book  in  fol,  containing  fome  of  the  Theological 

Trads  written  or  colleded  by  one  F.  S.  an  old  Popifh 

Gentleman  living  in  Ireland  at  the  beginning  of  the 

laft  Century. 

They  are  bound  up  together  in  diforderly  manner  j 
and  may  be  thus  del'cribed. 

1 .  Of  Hereticks  &  their  Properties  ;  with  an  Intro- 

dudion  ;  written  A  D.  1595.  1. 

2.  A  breife  Declaration  of  Faithe,  Workes,  and  our 

Juftification ;  agenft  the  opinion  of  thes  who  fay,  that 
Faithe  only  juftifieth,  A.  D.  159  c.  14. 

3.  Of  the  Signe  of  the  Crolfe,  &  Crucyfix.  A.  D. 

1588.  30. 

4.  The  Defcription  of  the  Body  of  Jefus  being  Man  : 
recordid  in  the  Cronycles  of  Antoninus  Archbifhopp  of 
Florence  (i.  e.  the  fpurious  Epiftle  of  Lentulus)  37. 

5.  A  Glafle  of  Charitie,  wherein  thow  mail  behdde 

her  Beawtie.  A.  D.  1591.  38. 

6.  The  fevene  Penytentiall  Pfalmes  of  Davyde,  ex¬ 
plained,  A.D.  1598.  '  46. 

7.  A  breife  Platt-forme  foi'the  buyldinge  of  a  Howfe 

to  God.  A.  D.  1598.  53. 

8.  Explanation  of  Part  of  the  Firft  Epiftleof  Paule  to 
Timothie. 

9.  The  like  of  the  Seconde  Epiftole  of  Paule  to  Timo¬ 
thie.  _ ,  69.  b. 

10.  Out  of  the  Epiftle  of  Paule  to  Titus.  70.  b. 

ix.  Notes  owt  of  the  Epiltle  to  Phylemon.  72. 

12.  A  Dialoge  betwene  Faythe  &  Charytie.  A.  D. 

J599*  73. 

13.  Certeyne  Exercyfes  vppon  euery  Verfe  of  the 

42  Pfalme.  A.  D.  1600.  80. 

14.  A  Confolatyon  agenft  Temptatyon  A.  D.  1600. 

93. 

1 5.  Certeyne  Annotations  owt  of  the  Epiftles  of  Peter, 

Jcmes,  &  Jhon  ;  fpecyally  futche  as  leade  to  good  Lyfe. 
A.  D.  1600.  100. 

16.  Of  Peanaunce  the  Salve  for  Sinne.  A.  D.  1600. 

1 13. 

17.  Of  the  Name  of  Chriftian.  A.  D.  1600.  122. 

18.  Of  Poore  and  Rytche.  129. 

19.  A  Confolatyone  agenft  Defperation.  138. 

20.  A  Comfortable  Contemplacyone  of  the  Love  of 

God  towarde  Man;  and  of  the  Lyfe  of  a  trew  Chryftyan. 
fynyftiide  in  January  1601.  whe  I  was  81  yeres  olde. 
Wrytten  withe  myne  awnehande.  144. 

21.  A  breife  Diredyone  how  to  become  a  trewe 

Chryftyan.  1 54. 

22.  Of  the  laft  Judgement.  1 55. 

23.  A  Myrroure 


184 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Hum.  1 71 3>i  y  14* 

23.  A  Mynoure  of  Chriftianytie :  colleftyde  out  of 

tlleWorkes  of  thes  auncyente  k  holly  Fathers  of  the 
Prymatyve  Churche,  Hierome,  Ambrofe,  Auguftine, 
and  Chryfollome.  A.  D.  1601.  163. 

24.  Notes  out  of  the  Epiftle  of  Paule  to  the  Galathi. 

ans.  1 7  4; 

2 5.  Notes  oht  of  the  Epiftle  of  Paule  to  the  Ephely- 

ans.  I7^- 

26.  Notes  out  of  the  Epiftle  of  Paule  to  the  Phyhp- 

pians.  1 7  8* 

27.  Notes  out  of  the  Epiftle  of  Paule  to  the  Collofly- 

ans.  1 

*8  Notes  out  of  the  Firfle  Epiftle  of  Paule  to  the 

Theflalonyans.  181.  b. 

29.  Notes  out  of  the  Seconde  Epiftle  to  the  'lheffalo- 

nyans.  i5'3‘ 

30.  Godlv  Medytacyons  vppon  certeyne  Pfalmes. 

A.  I).  1602.  '  r  l85\ 

31.  Of  the  Catholickc  Churche  (a  fort  of  Homily) 

192. 

32.  Of  the  Seven  Sacraments  of  the  Catholicke 

Churche.  1 94* 

33.  An  Exhortation  to  lcame  to  dye.  200. 

34.  Of  a  good  Conlcience.  201.  b. 

35.  To  lcame  to  know  thy  Selfe.  202.  b. 

■2,6.  The  Prafte  of  Peace ;  and  how  to  preferve  it. 

203.  b. 

37.  Of  the  I.oue  dew  to  our  Neighbours ;  and  why 

we  ar  to  loue  our  Enemy es.  205. 

38.  Admonytions  out  of  the  twoF.piftlc3  of  St.  Peter  j 

&  ipccyally  for  holly  Converfation.  1603.  207. 

39.  Of  the  Eficnce  of  God.  210. 

40.  That  Heretvkes  ar  not  to  be  dyfputyde  wythall : 
Out  of  a  Worke  of  four  Partes  of  the  Apeafynge  of  the 
Tmpudencye  of  Heretykes  :  authore  Roberto  Praefule 
Arboricenli,  Theologo  Ordine  et  Origine  Parifienfi 

219. 

'I  his  Traft  concludeth  the  firft  Volume  of  this  F.  S. 
his  Theological  Writings  Sc  Colleftions ;  ending  at 


I7I4* 

A  Bonk  in  fol.  written  by  the  foregoing  F.  S.  being 

another  Volume  of  his  Theological  Colleftions,  bound 

up  in  the  fame  diforder  as  the  former. 

They  are 

1 .  Of  the  Myfery  of  thys  Life  :  and  of  the  Good  of 

Deathe.  A.  D.  1603.  1- 

2.  A  Sermon  of  Mafter  John  Thauler  a  mod  parfytte 

Devyne  ;  made  unto  the  People  wherin  he  mod  bytterly 
reprovythe  Svnne.  7* 

3.  An  other  Sermon  made  by  Mafter  Jhon  Thauler  ; 
that  excellente  Dyvyne,  unto  the  Commen  People.  11. 

4.  Another  Sennon  ;  perhaps  of  the  fame  Jhon  Thau- 

Icr.  17  • 

5.  Out  of  the  Boke  of  Staniflaus  Hoflius  Bifhoppe  of 

Wormes,  A  Prdydent  of  the  late  Councell  ofTiente, 
of  the  Defence  of  Catholyke  Doftryne :  wrytten  agenft 
Brentius  an  Heretyke.  23. 

6.  A  Platte-forme  for  a  trew  Chryftyan  to  buylde  a 

bewtyfull  Houfe  to  God  :  colleftyde  out  of  the  tv  Evan- 
gelyltes.  30. 

7.  A  Poem  upon  the  fame  fubjeft.  36. 

8.  Of  Contynency  and  Sole  Lyfe.  A.  D.  1605.  38. 

9.  Upon  Thys  ys  my  Bodye,  Andrea  Althemero 

authore.  44* 

10.  Of  the  Catholyke  Churche.  47. 

11.  Of  Tradytyons.  50. 

12.  The  Prehetnynence  of  Peter  ;  and  the  Admony- 

tyons  to  beware  of  falfe  Seducers.  Exhortinge  to  ftande 
fafte  to  the  Fayethe  whyche  hathe  bynne  tawghte  from 

the  begynnynge :  owt  of  the  Newe  Teftamente.  51. 


Mum.  1714— 1717. 

1 3 .  Of  the  Sacramente  of  the  Body  &  Blode  of  Chrille. 

A.  D.  1592.  55- 

14.  Notes  out  of  the  Gofpell  of  St.  Matthew ;  with 

Remarks  upon  them.  66. 

1 5.  Notes  out  of  the  Fowre  Evangeliftes  ;  fpecyally 
concernvnge  the  good  Lyfe,  and  holly  Converfatyon 
of  a  Chryftyan.  A.  D.  1607.  by  F.  S.  then  aged  87. 

68. 

1 6.  A  briefe  Colleftyone  out  of  the  Epiftles  of  the 

Apoftles  ;  teachinge  how  a  Chriftyan  owght  to  lyve  in 
this  Lyfe.  A,  D.  1604.  81. 

17.  Like  Notes  out  of  the  Evangelifts.  87. 

1 8.  Notes  out  of  the  Boke  of  Staniflaus  Hoflius  Bys- 
flioppe  of  Wormes,  intytylyde  of  the  trew  Chryftyan  k 
Catholycke  Doftryne,  agtnffe  Brentius  the  Heretyke.  92. 

15.  Certeyne  bieife  Colleftyons  out  of  the  Workes  of 
Staniflaus  Hoflius  Byffhoppe  of  Wormes,  k  Prefydente 
in  the  late  Generali  Council!  of  Trente.  A.  D.  1608.  99. 

ao.  Certain  Herefies  aferibed  to  Martin  Luther  in  a 
Boke  imytulyde  Catalogus  Heretiorum.  105. 

21.  Fourty-one  Arn  cles  of  Luther,  whiche  he  aflfyr- 

mvde.  '  io5-  6- 

’22.  Extra  ft  out  of  a  Book  written  by  the  Reverente 
Father  John  Fyslher  ByTnoppe  of  Rochefler  Sc  Chaun- 
celler  of  the  Unyvcrfytie  of  Cambrydge,  iutjtylyde 
Af.ertionis  Lutherana:  Ccnfutatio.  106. 

23.  The  Cenlure  of  Chiifoftome  of  the  Theator- 

Playes.  11 7" 

24.  Notes  taken  out  of  Tymothy  k  Tytus.  1  ty. 

25.  Paraphrale  upon  the  Pfalm  Milerere  inei  Deus. 

124. 

56.  An  Admonytyone  to  Chyldren  to  honour  their 
Parents,  A  D.  1607.  129. 

27.  Of  the  Honour  dew  to  our  Heavenly  Father.  13a. 

28.  The  Places  ofScrypture  whiche  the  Phantaftycall 

Heretycks,  to  difproue  the  Wordes  of  Chryfte,  This  is 
my  Bodye,  do  Ufe,  difproved.  136. 

29.  Certeine  Nqtes  collcftide  out  of  a  Boke  intitlede 

The  Parliament  of  Chrifte,  colltftid  and  fett  forthe  by 
Thomas  Hofkins  Dcftor  of  Divinitie,  A.  D.  1 560. 
declaring  the  enaftid  k  receyvideTiutheofthePrefence 
of  his  Body  tk  Blode  in  the  bleflid  Sacrament;  iinpugnide 
in  a  wickide  Sermon,  by  Mafter  Juell.  140. 

30.  Notes  out  of  the  Epy  files  of  the  Apoftles.  151. 

31.  Catholic  Anfwers  to  Heretical Objeft ions.  159.  b. 

17I5- 

A  Paper-Book  in  fol.  wrkten  by  feveral  Hands,  wherein 
are  contained, 

1.  A  Kalendar,  or  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  following 
Collection, 

2.  Reports  of  Pleading*  had  in  the  Courts  at  Weft- 
minder  ;  extrafted  from  the  Plea-Rolls  of  King  Henry 
viii.  and  reduced  under  certain  &  ftated  Heads,  by 
fome  diligent  Student  of  our  Common  Law. 

1716. 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  wherein  is  written, 

A  Treatife  concerning  the  Infti'ution  of  the  High 
Court  of  Chancery  ;  the  Praftice  thereof ;  and  the  feveral 
Officers  thereunto  pertaining. 

1 71 7. 

A  Parclnnent-Book  in  fol.  well  written  in  very  old  French 
Verfe.  It  containeth,  I 

1.  A  Chronicle  of  the  Dukes  of  Normaudy  from  the 
beginning  to  the  Death  of  Henry  the  Fnft  kmg  of  Eng-  j 
land.  .  . 

Herein  are  cited  Iftdorus  Hispalenfis,  Pliny,  k 
Auguftin.  Notwithftanding  which,  I  take  the  main  part 
of  the  Work  to  be  a  Tranflation  of  feme  Copie  of  rhe 
Hiftory  of  Dudo  Canon  of  St.  Quintin’s,  to  which  Con- 
tinuaiions  or  Additaments  were  made  bv  other  Hands. 

7  That! 


/ 


Bibliothecse  Harleiana?. 


Num.  1717- 

That  the  Tranflators  Name  was  Benedict  or  Beneeir, 
appeared)  from  fol.  85.  &  192. 

.And  that  it  was  done  by  the  command  of  K.  Henry  x  1 . 
may  be  gathered  from  fol.  163.  &  236. 

But  who  this  Beneeit  was  ;  or  whether  this  Work 
hath  ever  been  publiflied ,  I  cannot  now  fay;  noc  having 
rnctrlTary  Helps  at  Hand. 

Then  follow, 

2.  A  Prophefie  in  Englifh  Verfe  ;  feeming  to  refer  to 
the  Wars  between  the  lloufes  of  York  ik  Lancafter. 

250. 

3.  Imperfeft  Prophefies  in  Latin  Profe ;  perhaps  of 

Merlin,  or  fome  fuch  Dreamer.  250.  b. 

I.aftly  comes,  after  a  vacant  Page,  by  another 
Hand, 

4.  A  very  old  A  godly  French  Balad,  confiding  of 

fever al  Stanzas,  and  fet  to  Muiic,  in  thofe  Square  Notes, 
commonly  called  Gregorian.  2^1,  b. 

(The  Tune  would  go  beft  if  struck  upon  Bells,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Cuitom  of  thofe  Times) 

1718. 

A  Book  in  fol.  (feeming  to  have  been  the  Original  Re- 
gifter)  as  containing. 

Copies  or  Entrances  of  all  Warrants  palling  under 
the  Signet  of  Charles  Prince  of  Wales ;  from  the  1 6th  of 
September  1617.  to  the  21ft  of  March  1624-5.  who 
within  four?  days  after,  by  his  Fathers  deceale,  became 
King  of  England,  ike. 

In  this  Book  much  curious  matter  may  be  found. 

*7  1  9- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  litteris  ijs  quadratis  quas 

nos  Anglice  dicimus  Church-Text  ab  egregio  quodam 

Librario  eleganter  feriptus  et  inluminatus  ;  quo  conti- 

nentur, 

1.  Calenaarium,  in  quo  memorantur,  prceter  alios, 
ptures  e  Sanctis  Eboracenfibus  ;  nec  non  dies  feftivalis 
Sandi  Thomre  de  Cantilupo  Epifcopi  Herefordenfis.  1. 

2.  Pfalterium  D.  Hieronymi  Gallicanum ;  cum  Ver- 

ficulis,  Refponfionibus,  &c.  7. 

Folium  primum  nefaria  cujufdam  manu  exfciCTum, 
jam  defideratur. 

Sequuntur  Cantica  Sacra,  fcilicct. 

3.  Canticum  Jfaia:,  Confitebor.  108. 

4.  Canticum  Evechia:.  ibid. 

5.  Canticum  Annas.  109.  b. 

6.  Canticum  Moyfis.  Cantemus.  1 10. 

7.  Canticum  Abacuc.  iix. 

8.  Canticum  Moyfis.  Audite. 

9.  Canticum  Ambrofij  &  Auguftini. 


1 12. 

Te  Deutn. 
1 1 4.  b. 

us- 

it  5.  b. 

1 16. 

1 1 6.  b. 
ibid. 
8. 


10.  Canticum  trium  Puerorum. 

1 1.  Canticum  Zacharias. 

1 2.  Canticum  Marias. 

1 3.  Canticum  Symeonis. 

14.  Symbolum  (ut  dicitur)  Athanafianum. 

15.  Litania  cum  Precibus  nonnullis. 

Hie  etiam  inveniuntur  Litania:  et  Preces  particu¬ 
lates.  fc. 

16.  Litania  Feria  tercia  recitanda. 

1 7.  Feria  quarta  Litania. 

18.  Feria  quinta,  Litania. 
lq.  Feria  Sexta,  Litania. 

20.  Sabbato,  Litania. 

Sequuntur  Colleda:,  8:  alia:  Preces,  vizt. 

21.  In  Vigilijs  Mortuorum. 

2:.  Pro  Corpore  prefenii,  cujufcunque  fuerit.  ibid. 

23.  I11  Anniverfario,  de  quocunque  fuerit.  124.  b. 

24.  In  die  Tricennalis,  de  quocuuque  fuerir.  ibid. 

25.  Pro  Epifcopis  defundis.  ibid. 

z6.  Pro  Fratribus  &  Sororibus.  ibid. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


121.  b. 
122. 

122.  b. 
”3- 

1 23.  b. 


Num.  1 719 — [72 

27.  Oracio  Generalis  ad  Placebo. 

28.  Le&iones  Novem,  cum  aliis  precibus  de  Officio 

Mortuorum.  ibid. 

29.  Commendado  Animarum. 

I72O. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  magno  labore  atq;  ftudio 
scriptus  et  emendatus  ;  cui  Titulus, 

Georgij  Joachimi  Rhcetici  Magnus  Canon  dodrina: 
Triangulorum,  ad  Decades  fecundorum  Scrupulorum, 
et  ad  partes  1 0000000000.  Primo  folio  vacuo,  aliena 
manu,  cemitur  htec  Adnotatio.  “  Canonem  Mathe- 
maticuni  Operis  Palatini  manuferiptum,  labore  M.  Valen- 
tini  Othonis  concinnatum,  et  a  Poflelfore  recuperatuni. 
Specula:  Matlematictc,  qua:  eft:  in  contuberno  Academia: 
Heidelbergenfis,  tradidit  M.  Jac.  Chriftniannus,  Decanus 
1‘acultatis  Artium,  anno  1603.  die  l9  Decembris.  ” 


An  Englifh  book  in  fol.  at  the  beginning,  thus  en* 
tituled, 

The  Proceedinges  in  Parliament  (contayning  divers 
&  fondrie  Speaches,  Arguments,  &  other  Paflages) 
holden  at  Weftminfter  17  Martij  anno  tertio  Caroli  Regis, 
and  there  contynued  vntill  26  Junij  anno  quarto  Caroli 
Regis,  following  :  arid  from  thence  prorogued  vnto  the 
20th  of  Odober  then  next  following  ;  and  after  adjorned 
by  His  Majefties  Proclamation  vntil  the  20th  of  January 
following. 

But,  more  particularly  this  Book  containeth, 

1 .  A  Lift  of  the  Committee  appointed  by  the  Com¬ 
mons  to  examine  &  confider  of  all  Matters  relating  to 
their  Privileges  &  Eledions  ;  20  Martij  anno  3  Caroli 
Regis. 

2.  The  Kings  Speach.  T# 

3.  The  Lord  Keeper’s  Speach  in  Paraphrafe,  eodem 
die,  17  Martij  1627. 

4.  Sir  John  Finch  his  Speach  in  Parliament,  1 9  Martij, 
being  Speaker. 

5.  The  I.ord  Keepers  Replie,  eodem  die.  17. 

6.  Mr.  Speakers  Speech  or  Replie,  to  the  Keeper 

thereupon.  jg. 

7.  Propofitions  made  by  Sir  John  Finch  Speaker  after 

the  delivery  of  his  Speech.  2g, 

8.  The  I.ord  Keepers  Surreplie.  go. 

9.  A  Petition  for  a  Fall,  by  the  Lords  &  Lower  Howfe 

of  Parliament.  21  Martij  1627.  41. 

10.  Mr.  Goodwins  Speech,  22Marcij  1627.  43. 

ji.  Sir  Francis  Seymors  Speech  in  Parliament,  22 

Marcij  1627.  44. 

12.  Sir  Robert  Phillipps  Speech.  47. 

13.  Sir  Thomas  Edmonds.  g2. 

14.  Sir  John  Elliot.  ggt 

1 5.  Mr.  Chauncellor  of  the  Duchie.  ibid. 

16.  Sir  Benjamin  Rudiard’s  Speech.  ibid. 

17.  Sir  Thomas  Wentworth’s  Speach,  22  Martij  55. 

18.  The  Speach  &  Arguement  of  Mr.  Creftfeild  of 

I.incolns  Inne,  one  of  the  Members  of  the  Howfe  of 
Parliament,  concerning  the  Subjeds  Greivance  by  the 
late  Ymprifonment  of  their  Perfons  without  any  Decla¬ 
ration  of  the  Caufe.  ^ 

19.  Sir  Edward  Cokes  Speech,  25  Martij,  1628. 

77- 

20.  Sir  John  Cooke  his  Speech  at  the  Conference 

betwene  the  Lords  &  Commons  aboute  the  Peticion  to 
the  King  againft  Recufants.  81. 

21.  His  Majefties  Propofitions  to  the  Lower  Howfe, 

to  be  taken  into  Confideration,  for  prefent  Supplie. 
29  Marcij  1628.  85. 

22.  Several  Speeches  made  at  the  Debates  concerning 
the  Kings  Propoficions  for  Supplie.  10  April  1628. 


iS6 


Catalogus  Librarian  MSS. 


Num.  1721. 

The  Speakers  were,  Mr.  Alford.  Sir  Francis  Seymour, 
Sir  Peter  Hayman,  Mr.  Pym,  Mr.  Secretaire  Coke,  Sir 
Dudlie  Tiggs,  Mr.  Spencer,  Sir  Edward  Cooke,  Sir 
Thomas  Wentworthe,  Sir  Henrie  Martin,  Mr.  Kerton, 
Sir  Robert  Philipps,  Serjeant  Hoikins. 

23.  The  Kingcs  Speach,  at  the  Councell  board. 

94- 

24.  The  Petition  againfl:  Recufants.  1  April  1628. 

95- 

25.  His  Majefties  Anfwerc  to  the  Petition  prerented 

unto  Him  by  both  llowfes  of  Parliament,  concerning 
Matters  of  Religion.  103. 

26.  The  Kings  Speech  at  the  Council-Board.  4  April 

1628.  108. 

zy.  The  Duke  of  Buckingham’s  Speech  to  his  Ma- 
jefrie  at  the  Councell-board,  4  Aprilis  1628.  109. 

28.  The  Refolution  concerninge  the  Libertie  of  the 

Subject.  26.  Martij.  113. 

29.  S  r  John  Elliot  in  anfwere  to  Mr.  Secretarie  Cokes 

Meffage  of  thanks  from  the  King  &  Duke  of  Buckingham. 
5  April  1628.  1 1 5. 

30.  Sir  Dudlie  Diggs  his  Charge  delivered  at  an 
Affembhe  of  both  Houles  of  Parliament  on  Wcdnefday 
fhe  9  of  April  1628.  Reported  to  7  the  Lord  Prefident. 

ri  9- 

31.  Mr  Litleton  his  Arguement  made  by  the  Com¬ 

mand  of  the  Commons,  oute  of  the  Attes  of  Parliament 
A  Authorities  of  I.awe  ;  expounding  the  fame  at  the  firfk 
Conferance  with  the  Lordcs,  concerning  the  Libertie  of 
the  Perfon  of  everie  Freeman.  126. 

32.  The  Objection  ofthe  Kings  Councell;  with  the 

Anfweres  made  thereunto  at  the  twoe  other  Conferances 
touching  the  fame  matter.  136. 

3^.  The  true  C.oppies  ofthe  Records  non-printed, 
which  were  ufed  on  either  Side,  in  that  Parte  of  the 
Debate.  1 7 1 . 

34.  Mr.  Seldons  Arguement  reported  to  the  Lords 

by  the  F.arle  of  Devon.  1 88. 

35.  Sir  Edward  Cokes  Arguement,  reported  by  the 

Lord-Bifhopp  of  Lincoln,  9  Aprilis  1628.  241. 

36.  The  Subftance  of  the  Objections  made  by  Mr. 
Attorney-Generall,  before  a  Committee  of  both  Houfes 
to  the  Aj-guement  that  was  made  by  the  Howfe  of  Com¬ 
mons,  at  the  firft  Conference  with  the  Lords,  out  of  the 
Prefidents  of  Record  &  Resolutions  of  Judges  in  former 
Tymes  touching  the  Libertie  of  the  Perfon  of  every  Free 
Man.  And  the  Anfwers  &  Replies  then  prefentlie  made 
by  the  Howfe  of  Commons  to  thefe  Objections.  263. 

37.  Mr.  Serjeant  Afhleys  Arguement ;  feconding  Mr. 

Attorney,  on  the  behalfe  of  his  Majeftie.  3 1  o. 

38.  Sir  Edward  Coke's  Speach  att  th’  end  of  the 

Confc-rance.  322. 

39.  Secretarie  Coke’s  Meffage,  1 1  Aprilis.  323. 

4"'-  Inft ruCtions  given  by  the  Lower  Howfe  to  the 

Speaker.  1 1  Aprilis.  324. 

41.  The  Speakers  Speach  to  His  Majeftie,  uppon 

the  9  Inftructions.  1 4  Aprilis.  327. 

42.  The  Kings  Speech  in  Anfwere  to  the  Speaker. 

14  April  1628.  334, 

43.  The  Commons  Petition,  concerning  the  Bil- 

letting  of  Souldiers.  33b. 

44.  A  Meffage  by  Secretarie  Coke  from  the  Kinge, 

to  the  Lower  Howfe.  15  April  1628.  ^44. 

45.  Mr.  Noy  his  Arguement,  16.  April  1628. 

345- 

46.  Mr.  Glanvile’s  Arguement,  16.  Aprilis  .1628. 

349. 

47-  The  Earle  of  Warwick’s  Speech  in  the  Upper- 
howfe,  22  April  1628.  ^{2. 

48.  The  Anfwere  of  the  Judges  for  Matter  of  Faft, 
uppon  the  Habeas  Corpus:  eodem  die.  ^g-)<  * 

49-  Sir  Dudlie  Diggs  Report  of  that  which  the  Right 
Honorable  the  Lord  Keeper,  at  a  Conferance  of  both 


Num.  1721. 

llowfes,  declared  concerning  the  Judges  Refolution  before 
the  Lords.  22  Aprii  1628.  373. 

50.  Thomas  Arch-bifhopp  of  Canterburies  Speech, 
att  the  Conferance  of  both  Howfes.  25  April  375. 

This  Thomas  muft  be  a  Miftake  ;  for  George  Ab¬ 
bott  was  then  Archbifhop  of  Canterbury. 

51.  The  Five  Propofitions  by  the  Lordes  ;  delivered 

by  the  Bifhoppof  Norwich..  25.  April  1628,  377. 

52.  The  Anfwere  of  Sir  Dudlie  Diggs  in  the  behalf 
of  the  Commons. 

5J.  1  Lord-Keepers  Speach  at  the  Meeting  of  both 
Howfes;  the  King  being  prefen  t.  382. 

54.  Sir  Benjamyn  Rudiards  Speach,  28  April.  384. 

55.  A  Melfage  by  Secretarie  Cooke,  primo  Mai] 

l6^.  _  391. 

56.  Mr.  Hackwell  of  Lincolnes  Inne  his  Argument 

about  the  Habeas  Corpus.  1  Maij.  393. 

5-7-  Mr.  Mafon’s  Arguement.  1  Maij.  400. 

58  ihe  Kings  Meflage  by  Secretarie  Cooke,  2  May. 

41 2. 

.59-  Clegatt’s  Ol  der  for  his  Enlarggment,  being  com¬ 
mitted  by  the  Lord-Mayor  of  London.  2  Maij.  414. 

60.  The  Bifliop  of  Exeters  Letter  to  the  Parliament. 

416.  b. 

61.  The  Speakers  Speach  to  his  Majeftie.  c  Mail 

(628,  4i  8. 

62.  His  Majefties  Speech  &  Anfwere  delivered  by  the 

Lord  Keeper.  5  Maij  1628.  422. 

63.  Sir  Edward  Cokes  Speech  before  reading  the 

Petition  of  Right.  8  Maij  1628.  42r. 

64.  The  Petition  of  Right.  42p, 

65.  The  Lords  Declaration.  438. 

66.  The  Kings  Letter  to  the  Lords  Spiritual.  1 2  Maij 

67.  The  Lord-Keepers  Speech  at  the  Conference  of 
both  Howfes,  in  the  Painted  Chamber  1 2  Maij,  about 
the  Lords  Addition  in  the  Petition  of  Right.  442 . 

6S.  The  Offer  of  Accomodation  made  by  the  Bifhopp 
of  Lincolne.  445 

69.  The  Kinges  Meffage  to  the  Lordes,  by  the  Lord- 

Keeper.  21  Maij  1628.  '  446_ 

70.  The  Reafons  of  the  Commons  Howfe  delivered 

by  Mr.  Glanvile  ;  why  they  cannot  admitt  of  the  Propo¬ 
fitions  tendered  to  them  by  the  Lordes.  ibid. 

7 1.  Sir  Henrie  Martins  Speech.  22  Maij.  4.^3.* 

72.  Sir  Benjamin  Rudyards  Speach,  concerning  the 

Mainteynance  of  Mynifters.  28  Maij  1628.  472. 

73.  Touching  the  Wrong  conceived  to  be  done  unto 

Mr.  Selden,  by  the  Earle  of  Suffolke.  478. 

74.  Articles  of  Complaint  againfl  Mr.  Richard  Burgefs 

Viccar  of  Whitney  in  the  County  of  Oxon.  48  -. 

75.  Richard  Burgefs  his  Catechifme ;  being  Viccar 

of  Whitney  in  Com.  Oxon.  4p0> 

76.  The  Kings  Speach  at  the  Meeting  of  both  Howfes. 

2  Junij  1628.  500> 

77.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speach  att  the  fame  tyme  ; 
dcclaringe  His  Majefties  Pleafure  more  at  large.  ibid. 

78.  The  Kings  Anfwere  to  the  Petition  of  Right. 

2  Junij.  502. 

79.  His  Majefties  Meffage  to  the  Lord-Keeper. 

6  Junij.  ibid. 

80.  The  Kings  Meflage  delivered  by  the  Speaker. 

6  Junij.  304. 

81.  The  Howfes  Petition  to  his  Majeftie  being  prelent 
in  Parliament :  delivered  by  the  Lord-Keeper.  7  Junij. 

J05. 

82.  The  Kinges  Anfwer.  7  Junij.  506. 

83.  The  Kings  Meflage  by  Sir  Humfiie  May,  for 

priming  the  Petition  of  Right.  10  Junij.  307. 

84.  The  Motions  of  the  Lower  Howfe  to  the  Higher. 

509. 

85.  Sir  Thomas  Wentworth,  thereupon.  511. 

86.  A  Report  from  the  Comittee  for  Trade  by  Sir 

Dudlie  Diggs.  3  ( 3 _ 

87.  Motives 


Bibliothecae  HarleianEfej 


187 


Hum.  1711 — 1723 

87.  M  otives  to  induce  the  Knights,  Citizens,  &  Bur- 
gefi'es  of  the  Commons  v  of  Parliament,  to  Petition  his 
Majeftie  for  the  revoking  &  abolifhitig  of  the  Degree  of 
Baronet  ts  latelie  erefted  by  his  Highnes  Letters  Patents. 

.  .  .5!9- 

88.  'I  he  Complaint  of  the  Commons  in  Parliament 

againft  Dr.  Manwaringe.  525. 

89.  The  Declaration  of  the  Commons  againft  ltoger 

Manwaring  Clerke  &  D.  D.  ibid. 

90.  Dr  Manwaring’s  Charge  delivered  by  Mr.  Rowfc. 

576- 

91.  Dr.  Manwarings  Tenents.  584. 

92.  1'he  Lord-Keepers  Speech  before  he  pronounced 

the  Cenfure  againft  Dr.  Manwaring.  585. 

93.  The  Cenfure  of  Roger  Manwar  ing  Clerk,  given 

in  Parliament,  13  Junij  1628.  586. 

94.  I  r.  Manwarings  Submillion,  kneeling  att  the  Barr 
in  the  Commons  howfe,  on  Satterdaie  21  Junij  1628. 

587. 

95.  A  Colle&ion  of  the  Subftance  of  a  Speech,  made 

by  Sir  John  Elliott  in  the  Commons  Howfe  of  Parliament. 
June  1628.  589. 

96.  Heads  of  the  Remonftrance  touching  the  Danger 
of  the  King  &  Kingdome,  to  be  prefented  to  his  Majeftie 

605. 

97.  The  Remonftrance  prefented  to  the  King  by  the 

Lower  Howfe  of  Commons  in  Parliament,  Anno  Domini 
1628.  616. 

98.  The  Kings  Anfwere.  ,  641. 

09.  The  Callendar  or  Scedule  of  Shipps  which  have 

been  taken  by  the  Enemy,  &  loft,  within  the  space 
of  Three  Y ears  laft  paft.  Collected  this  Parliament, 
1628.  642. 

100.  His  Majefties  Speach  to  both  Iiowfes,  at  th' 

end  of  this  Seflion.  v  Junij  1028.  644. 

1 01.  1  he  Second  Remonftrance  ;  purpofed  to  have 

ben  delivered  to  his  Majeftie.  648. 

102.  A  Privie  Seale  for  the  tranfportinge  of  Horfes  ; 

30  Jan.  3tio  Caroli  Regis.  657. 

103  A  Commiffion  to  the  Lords  &  others  of  the 
Privie  Councell,  concerninge  the  prefent  Raifinge  of 
Money.  659. 

104.  The  Table  of  fuch  Proceedings,  in  divers  be 
fundrie  particuler  Paflages  in  this  Seflion  of  Parliament, 
holden  at  Weftminfter  17  Martij  anno  3tio  Caroli  Regis, 
&  continued  by  Prorogation  &  Adjournment  to  the  20th 
of  Januarie  followinge  ;  being  conteined  in  this  Volume. 

665. 


1722  . 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  in  Law-French  ;  wherein  is  begun, 
A  Collection  of  Reports,  which  feem  to  have  been 
accurately  taken. 

They  begin  with  Term  Trim  ann.  27Eliz.  and  end 
with  Term  Hill.  ann.  29  Eliz. 

!723- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  •  manu  cujufdam  £  Sacra: 
Theologian  Profefloribus  Academicis  confcriptus;  in 
quo  continentur, 

t.  Syllabus  Argumentorum,  cum  otium  a  Deo  faCtum 
fuerit,  ab  AuCtore,  ferio  pertradtandorum. 

2.  Preecatiuncula,  qua:  fingulas  PranleCtiones  aperiebat. 

3.  Precatiuncula,  cum  Gratiarum  ACtione,  qua:  lin¬ 
gulas  Pradeftiones  claudebat. 

4.  PradeCtionum  Theologicarum  Volumen  alterum. 

fcil.  Prade&iones  numero  87  in  Angulos  Anglicana: 
C.onfeflionis  Articulos,  ab  Odtavo  ad  3 7 mum.  inclufive, 
atq ;  ab  eodem  D’no  Profeflbre  publice  habitas,  a  die 
25  menfis  Januarij  A.  D.  x  6 1 8.  feriatim  ufq ;  ad  menfem 
Maij.  A.  D.  1625.  7 


Num.  1724,7725. 

1724. 

An  original  Office-book  in  fol.  the  purport  whereof  may 
be  underftood  by  this  Title, 

The  C.hargs  of  the  Kyngs  Majefties  Works  at  Warke 
Caflell ;  begynnyng  Monday  12th  Day  of  February 
the  34th  yere  of  the  Reigne  of  our  Soueraynge  Lorde 
Kyng  Henry  the  vnith,  and  errdyng  the  10th  day  of 
November  anno  35.  dicti  Domini  Regis,  both  days 
accompted. 

Thefe  Accompts  appear  to  have  been,  all  alongj 
audited  once  a  Fortnight,  and  are  fo  figr.ed  by  the 
Hands  of  Thomas  Gower  &  Thomas  Pettyt. 

1725. 

Codex  antiquus,  at  chartaceus,  in  fob  quo  continentur, 
1.  Regillrum  contentori’in  in  hoc  Volumine.  1. 
Sequumur  ColleCtio  Epiftolarum  Hildcgardis  Abba- 
tiflse  Monafterij  S.  Ruperti  in  Monte  ad  Bingiam,prdpe 
Rhenum  fluvium,  ac  aliorum  ad  earn  data:,  vizt. 


2.  Eugenius  Papa  111.  Hildegardi. 

6. 

3.  Refponfum  Hildegardis. 

ibid. 

4.  Analtatius  Papa  iv.  Hildegardi. 

XI. 

5.  Refponfum  Hildegardis. 

11.  b. 

6.  Adrianus  Papa  iv.  Hildegardi. 

l3- 

7.  Refponfum  Hildegardis. 

14. 

8.  Alexandra  Papa:  111.  Hildegardis. 

14.  b. 

9.  Refponfum  Alexandri  ad  Wezelium  Prsepofitum. 

16.  b. 


10.  Henricus  Archiepilcopus  Moguntinus,  Ililde- 

gardi.  ibid. 

11.  Refponfum  Hildcgardis.  16. 

12.  Arnoldus  Archiepilcopus  Moguntinus,  Hilde- 

gardi.  16.  b. 

13.  Refponfum  Ilildegardis.  17. 

14.  Criilianus  Archiepifcopus  Moguntinus,  Hilde- 

gardi.  17.  b. 

15.  Refponfum  Hildcgardis.  ibid. 

1 6.  Hildegardis  ad  Archiepifcopum  Criftianum.  18. 

1 7.  Criftianus  Archiepifcopus,  Hildegardi.  19.  b. 

18.  Hertwygus  Bremenfis  Archiepifcopus,  Hildegardi. 

20.  b. 

19.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  21. 

20.  Arnoldus  Colonienfis  Archiepifcopus,  Hildegardi. 

22.  b. 

21.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  23. 

22.  Archiepifcopus  Unanenfls,  Hildegardi.  23.  b. 

23.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  24. 

24.  Hillinus  Trevirorum  Archiepifcopus,  Hildegardi. 


2  5- 

25.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  2 6. 

2:.  Eberhardus  BabinbergenfisEpifcopus,  Hildegardi. 

26.  b. 

27.  Refponfum  Hildegard's.  27. 

28.  Gunterus  Epifcopus  Spirenfts,  Hildegardi.  31. 

29.  Refponfum  Hildcgardis.  3 1 .  b. 

30.  Cunrad us  l.pl Icopus Wormacienfis,  Flildegard i.  3  2 . 

31.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  32.  b 

32.  Epilcopus  Conftantienfis,  Hildegardi.  33. 

33.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  ibid. 

34.  Adelbertus  Epifcopus  Wirdimenfis,  Hildegardi. 

33-  b. 


35.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  34. 

36.  Rudolfus  Epifcopus  Leodicenfls,  Hildegardi. 

3 4-  b. 


37.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  35. 

38.  Godefridus  Epifcopus  Traje&enfium,  Hildegardi. 

35  h. 

39.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  36. 

40.  Henricus  Epifcopus,  Bragenfium,  Hildegadi. 

36.  b. 


41.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  37. 

42.  J.  Epifcopus  Jerofoluiuitanorum  Hildegardi. 

37-  b- 

43.  Refponfum 


1 88 


Catalogus  Librdrum  MSS. 


Ntrnl.  1725. 

4j.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  38.  b. 

44.  Henricus  Epifcopus  de  Beueruin,  Hildegardi.  39. 

45.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  39.  b. 

46.  Arnoldus  Epifcopus  Trevirorum,  Hildegardi. 

40.  b. 

47.  Refponfbm  Hiidegardis.  41. 

48.  Philippus  Archiepifcopus  Colonienfis,  Plildegardi. 

42.  b. 

4).  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  43. 

30.  Cunradus  Imperator,  Hildegardi,  44.  b. 

51.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  ibid. 

52.  Fredericus  Imperator  Plildegardi.  4v  b 

53.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  46. 

54.  Philippus  Comes  Flandrize,  Hildegardi.  47. 

55.  Refponfum  Plildegardis.  47.  b. 

56.  Bernardus  Clarevallis  Abbas,  Hildegardi.  48.  b. 

57.  Refponfpm  Hiidegardis.  49. 

58.  Adam  Abbas  de  Ebra,  Hildegardi.  50.  b. 

59.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  51. 

60.  E.  Abbas  de  Eberbach,  Hildegardi.  54.  b. 

61.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  ^3. 

62.  Abbas  Santti  Anaftafij,  Hildegardi.  56. 

63.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  56.  b. 

64.  Cunradus  Abbas  de  Keifheiin,  Hildegardi.  57. 

65.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  37.  b. 

66.  Abbas  de  Hirfania,  Hildegardi.  59. 

67.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  59.  b. 

68.  Provifor  Santti  Emmeramni,  Hildegardi.  ibid. 

69.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  60. 

7c.  E.  Abbas  Nuremburgenfium,  Hildegardi.  60.  b. 

71.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  61. 

72.  H.  Abbas  Santte  Marie,  Hildegardi.  62. 

73.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  62.  b. 

74.  Cuno  Abbas  Santti  Dyfibodi  Hildegardi.  63. 

75.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  63.  b. 

7 6.  Helengerus  Abbas  Santti  Dyfibodi,  Hildegardi. 

64.  b. 

77-  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  65. 

78.  H.  Abbas  Campidonenfis ,  Hildegardi.  66. 

79.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  66.  b. 

80.  A.  Abbas  Eluacenfis,  Plildegardi.  68. 

81.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  68.  b. 

82.  Heb.  Abbas  de  Mulenbrurmen,  Hildegardi.  69. 

83.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  69.  b. 

84.  H.  Abbas  de  Santto  Michaele  in  Babenbcrch, 

Hildegardi.  70. 

85.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  70.  b. 

86.  R.  Abbas  Iwineldenfis,  Plildegardi.  ibid. 

87.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  71. 

88.  H.  Abbas  in  Salem,  Hildegardi.  71.  b. 

89.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  72. 

90.  B.  Abbas  de  Santto  Euchario,  Plildegardi. 

72.  b. 

91.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  73. 

92.  Ludewicus  Abbas  de  Santto  Euchario,  Hildegardi. 

7i‘  b* 

93.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  74. 

94.  W.  Abbas  Bofonis  Villa;,  Hildegardi.  75. 

95.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  7 3.  b. 

96.  A.  Abbas  Santti  Martini  in  Colonia,  Hildegardi. 

76. 

97.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  76.  b. 

98.  H.  Praipofitus  de  Wetel,  Hildegardi.  78.  b. 

99.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  79. 

100.  Nicolaus  Abbas  in  Halefbrunum,  Hildegardi. 

.  80. 

j  o  1 .  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  8 1 . 

ic2.  B.  Abbas  Bellevallis,  G.  Clari-loci,  A.  Clare- 
fontis,  ?  R.  Caritatis,  &  B.  Bethania;,  Hildegardi. 

81.  b. 

103.  Refponfum  Plildegardis.  s2. 

104.  E.  Abbas  in  Eberburthde,  Hildegardi.  83.  b. 

103.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  84. 


Num  .1725. 

106.  llichardus  Abbas  in  Sprincheribach,  Plildegardi. 

84.  b. 

107.  Refponfum  Plildegardis.  83. 

108.  S.  Abbas  in  Rodenkyrchin,  Hildegardi.  S5.  b. 

109.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  36. 

110.  PI.  Abbas  de  Flanheim,  Hildegardi.  86.  b. 

111.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  S7. 

1 1  2.  W.  Abbas  in  IPegcnhee,  Hildegardi.  ibid. 

113.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  S7.  b. 

114.  Abbas  de  Vefcera,  Hildegardi.  88. 

113.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  88.  b. 

116.  N.  Abbas  in  Eluelcat,  Hildegardi.  89. 

1 1 7.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  ibid. 

1 18.  N.  Abbas  in  Selbolth,  Hildegardi.  89.  b. 

119.  Refponfuin  Hiidegardis.  90. 

120.  PI.  Pra.'pofitus  in  Herde,  Hildegardi.  u  j.  b. 

121.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  91. 

122.  A.  Pitepofitus  in  Halmeleun, Hildegardi.  91.  b. 

123.  Refponfum  Hildegardi'.  92. 

124.  N.  Praipofitus  in  Waldegos.  Hildegardi.  ibid. 

123.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  93. 

126.  C.  Praipofitus  in  Wderefdorf,  Hildegardi. 

ibid. 

127.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  93*  h. 

128.  Fridericus  Prtepolitus  in  Valle  Dei,  Hildegardi. 

94. 

129.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  ibid. 

1 30.  N.  Praipofitus  in  Kappenberch,  Hildegardi. 

94.  b. 

131.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  9-. 

132.  Praipofitus  de  Santto- Vittore,  Hildegardi. 

95.  b- 

133.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  96. 

134.  S.  Prepofitus  in  Confluence,  Plildegardi.  96.  b. 

135.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  ibid. 

136.  Arnoldus  Prepofitus  S.  Andree  in  Colonia,  Hil¬ 
degardi. 

137.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  97.  b. 

138.  A.  Prepofitus  Erphodie,  Hildegardi.  98. 

139.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  98.  b. 

140.  Hermannus  Praipofitus  de  Domo  in  Mogun- 

cia,  Hildegardi.  ibid. 

1 41.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  gg. 

142.  Beldericus  Prepofitus  de  S.  Simeonc  in  Tre- 

viorenfi Ecclefia,  Hildegardi.  9c.  b. 

143.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  J0o. 

144.  PI.  Prepofitus  in  Knetftethde,  Hildegardi.  100.  b. 

143.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  IOI. 

146.  G.  Prepofitus  in  Frankenforth,  Hildegardi 


1  o  x .  b. 

147.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  ibid. 

148.  C.  Prepofitus  in  Bunna,  Plildegardi.  102. 

149.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  ibid. 

130.  Quidam  Prepofitus,  Plildegardi.  103. 

151.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  ibid. 

152.  Adelheidis  AbbatilTa,  Hildegardi.  104. 

133.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  104.  b. 

154.  G.  Abbatifla,  Plildegardi.  103. 

155.  Refponfum  Plildegardis.  103.  b. 

156.  Q.  Abbatifla  in  Wethderfwimkele,  Plildegardi. 

ibid. 

157.  Refponfun  Plildegardis.  106. 

158.  B.  Abbatifla  in  Althena,  Hildegardi.  107. 

159.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  107.  b. 

160.  S  Abbatifla  in  Altwich,  Hildegardi.  108. 

161.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  10S.  b. 

162.  S.  Abbatifla  in  Krzingun,  Hildegardi.  109, 

163.  Refponfum  Plildegardis.  109.  b. 

164.  R.  AbbadflaS.  Marie  inferioris  Monafierij  Ra- 

tilbone,  Hildegardi.  xcg.  b. 

163.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  1 10_ 

166.  H.  Abbatifla  in  Koyfungun,  Hildegardi.  no.  b. 

167.  Refponfum  Hiidegardis.  j  L }  _ 

12  '  168.  R, 


Bibliothecas  Harleiange. 


189 


Num.  1725. 

168.  R.  Abbatiffa  in  Gcrbeftethde,  Hildegardi. 

111.  b. 

169.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  1I2\ 

170.  B.  Abbatiffa  Sci.  Ciriaci  Erphodie,  Hildegardi. 

}  l3- 

171.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  ibid. 

172.  O.  Abbatiffa  in  Lubboldelberge,  Hildegardi. 

1 14. 

173.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  ibid. 

174.  H.  Abbatiffa,  Hildegardi.  U4-  b. 

175.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  ibid. 

176.  S.  Abbatiffa  in  Wildergoldefdorf,  Hildegardi. 

115. 

177.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  115.  b. 

178.  Hazecha  Abbatiffa  de  Crouchdal,  Hildegardi. 

1 16. 

179.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  ibid. 

1 80.  Lucardis  Abbatiffa  in  Babenberche,  Hildegardi. 

1 16.  b. 

181.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  1 1 7 . 

182.  H.  Abbatiffa  in  veteri  Monaflerio  Moguntine 

Ecclefiae.  ii7-b. 

183.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  ibid, 

184.  O.  Abbatiffa  in  Eloftat,  Hildegardi.  118. 

185.  Refponfum  Hildegardis,  n8.b. 

1S6.  Elizabeth  Magiftra  Sororum  in  Sconaugia-  Hil¬ 
degardi.  ibid. 

187.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  120  b. 

1 83.  E.  Abbatiffa  in  Superior}  Monaflerio  Ratilbone, 
Hildegardi.  12 1.  b. 

189.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  122. 

190.  L.  Abbatifa  in  Miffun,  Hildegardi.  123. 

1 9 1.  Refponfum  Hildegardis  123.  b. 

192.  C..  Abbatifa  in  loco  Sanftarum  Virginum, 

Hildegardi.  ibid. 

193.  Refponfum  Hildegardis  124. 

194.  L.  Abbatiffa  de  Didenkirchim,  Hildegardi. 

124.  b. 

195.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  125. 

196.  Tengfwich  Magiftra  Sororum  in  Anturnaco, 

Hildegardi.  126. 

197.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  126.  b. 

198.  H.  Abbatifa  Ste.  Glodefindis,  Hildegardi. 

128. 

199.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  128.  b. 

200.  Hazech  Abbatifa  de  Croechdal,  Hildegardi. 


201.  Refponfum  Hildegardis. 

129.  b. 
130. 

202.  B.  Sacerdos,  Hildegardi. 

132.  b. 

203.  Refponfum  Hildegardis. 

*33- 

204.  Sacerdos  quidam,  Hildegardi. 

*33-  b- 

205.  Refpondum  Hildegardis. 

*34- 

206.  H.  Monachus  quidam,  Hildegardi. 

ibid. 

20 7.  Refponfum  Hildegardis. 

'35- 

20S.  Baldewinus  Monachus,  Hildegardi. 

ibid. 

209.  Refponfum  Hildegardis. 

‘35-  b- 

2 !  0.  Magifter  de  Trajetto,  Hildegardi. 

i36. 

211.  Refponfum  Hildegardis. 

t  36.  b. 

212.  Cunradus  &  Bertolfus  Sacerdotes,  Hildegardi. 

*37- 

213.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  137.  b. 

214.  Sacerdos  quidam,  Hildegardi.  138. 

215.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  138.  b. 

216.  Sacerdos  quidam,  Hildegardi.  139. 

217.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  139.  b. 

218.  Udo  Parienfis  Magifter,  Hildegardi.  140. 

219.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  140  b. 

220.  Quidam  Sacerdos  Hildegardi.  141.  b. 

221.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  142. 

222.  Hermanus  Decanus  de  S.  Martino  Moguntine 

Ecclefia,  Hildegardi.  143.  b. 

2’. 3.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  ibid. 

224.  Clericus  quidam,  Hildegardi*  144.  b. 

Gat.  Hap.i.,  Vol.  II. 


Ntlrh.  1725. 

225.  Piefponfum  Hildegardis.  144.  b. 

226.  Monachus  quidam  in  Mulenbrunniun.  Hilde¬ 
gardi.  143.  b. 

227.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  145.  b. 

228.  Monachus  de  Ebra,  Hildegardi.  147. 

229.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  ibid. 

230.  Monachus  quidam,  Hildegardi.  147.  b. 

231.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  148. 

232.  Canonicus  Traieclenfis,  Hildegardi.  148.  b. 

233.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  149- 

234.  Morardus  Monachus,  San&i  Dyfibodi.  Hilde¬ 
gardi.  ibid. 

235 .  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  149.  b. 

236.  Sacerdos  quidam,  Hildegardi.  150.  b. 

237.  Refponfum  Hildegardis;  de  Corpore  &  San¬ 
guine  Crifti.  151. 

238.  Sacerdos  quidam,  Hildegardi.  152. 

239.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  152.  b. 

240.  Wibertus  Monachus,  Hildegardi.  1  54. 

241.  Ipfa  Hildegardis  de  modo  Vifionis  fue.  156. 

Ex  his  luce  clarius  patebit  hallucinatio  D.  Guil. 

Cave,  qui  in  Hill,  fua  Litt.  pag.  685.  Epiflolas  tantum 
xx xvi  11.  Hildegardi  tribuit. 

Sequunter, 

242.  Liber  Queftionum  ;  five  Wiberti  Monachi  In- 

terrogationcs  Theologicce,  cum  Refponfionibus  Hilde¬ 
gardis.  .  .  *59- 

Sequuntur  et  alias  Epiftolte,  v.  g. 

243.  Fratres  in  Sigeberch,  Hildegardi.  172.  b. 

244.  Congregationi  Sigebergenfium,  Hildegardis. 

ibid. 

245.  Conventus  in  Hirfaugia,  Hildegardi.  173.  b. 

246.  Congregationi  Hirfanenfium, Hildegardis.  174. 

247.  Conventus  in  Eberbach,  Hildegardi.  174.  b. 

248.  Congregation  in  Eberbarh,  Hildegardis.  175. 

249.  Bertolfus  Prior  in  Zwifilda,  Hildegardi.  175.  b. 

250.  Ad  Fratras  Zwifilda,  H.  176k 

251.  Sorores  in  Zwifilda,  Hildegardi.  176.fi. 

252.  Congregation  Sororum  in  Zwifilda,  Hildegar- 

dis.  177. 

253.  Adelbertus  Prior  in  Monte  San&i  Dyfibodi, 

Hildegardi  178. 

254.  Ad  fratres  Sanfii  Dyfibodi,  Hildegardis.  179. 

255.  Conventus  Saudi  Eucharij,  Hildegardi.  183. 

236.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  ib:d. 

257.  Prior  Cifcellenfiuin  Ffatrum,  Hildegardi. 

1S3.  b. 

258.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  184. 

259.  Quidam  Sacerdotes,  Hildegardi.  186.  b. 

260.  Ad  Clericos  diverfi  Ordinis,  Hildegardis.  187. 

261.  Quidam  Sacerdotes,  Hildegardi.  189.  b. 

262.  Ad  Seculares  homilies  diverforum  Popqlorum, 

Hildegardis.  190.  b. 

263.  Volmarus  Prepofitus  Sandi  Roberti,  dile&e 

Matri  fue  Hildegardi.  193.  b. 

264.  Ad  Congregationem  Sororum  fuarum,  Hilde¬ 
gardis.  '  97* 

265.  Narratio  de  Vita,  fei:  Legenda  Sandi  Roberti 
Confefforis,  Bingiorum  Ducis,  per  Hildegardem.  ?  1  o. 

2 66.  Conventus  Fratrum  de  Domo  inMoguncia,  Hil¬ 
degardi.  230. 

267.  Hildegardis,  de  Catharis.  2301  b. 

268.  Phillippus  Dechanus  Majoris  Ecclefias  Colo- 

nienfium,  cum  castcris  Clericis,  Hildegardi.  =31.  b. 

269.  Ad  Clerum  Colonienlium,  Hildegardis.  233.  b. 

27c.  R.  Prepofitus  Sandi  Petri,  totufq;  Clerus  Trc- 

virorum,  Hildegardi.  241.fi. 

271.  Ad  Clerum  Trcvirorum,  Hildegardis.  242. 

272.  T.  Decanus  Ecclefias  SS,  Apoltolorufn,  qurc 

eft  inColonia;  et  L  Magifter  Scolarum,  cum  univerfis 
ejufdcm  Ecclefia; Fratribus,  Hildegardi.  245.  b. 

273.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  246. 

?“j.  Meftrid its  Prior  in  Eberbach,  Hitdegaidi.  246.  b. 

3  C  275.  Ad 


IOO 


Catalogus  Librofurn  MSS 


Num.  1725,1726* 

275.  Ad  Grifeos  Monachos,  Hildegardis.  247. 

276.  Werner  as  Ecclefiae  de  Kirchem,  cum  ceteris 

Societaiis  fine  Fratribus,  Hildegardi.  034. 

277.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  254.' b.' 

278.  Fratres  in  Hagende,  Flildegardi.  2 56.  b. 

279.  Congreg'acioni  Fiat  rum  in  Hagende.  257. 
2S0.  Congregacio  Hummenfis  Cenobij,  Hildegardi. 

259.  b. 

Deinde  fequuntur, 

-Sl-  De  Regula  Sanfti  Benedifli  (fc.  Expofitio 
ejufdem)  Hildegardis.  '  2g0- 

182.  F.pifloia  Ilelengeri  Abbatis  Sandti  Dyfibodi,  ad 
Hildegardem.  268.  b 

283.  Refponfum  Hildegardis.  260.  b. 

284.  Vita  San£li  Dyfibodi Epifcopi.  273.  b. 

Hanc  Yitam,  in  recenfcndis  Operibus  S.  Hildegar- 

dis,  omifit  D.  Guil.  Cave.  6 

j'j,  Expoficioilcs  quorundam  Evangel  iorum,  quas 
divina  infpectante  Gratia  Hildegardis  expofuit  (i.  e. 
Homilies  numero  54.)  2g_  ’ 

De  his  etiam  Hcmilijs  nullam  fecit  mentionem  D. 
Guil.  Cave;  difertis  autem  verbis  deferibuntur  in  Epiftola 
Gebenonis  Prioris  Ciitrenfis  ad  Reymundum  Scholalli- 
cum  &  Reynerum,  de  Vila  et  LibrisS.  Hildegardis,  Pen- 
tachrono  iuo  praemifla;  MS.  Bibl.  Cotton.  Vitel.  D.  3. 
Oui  quidem  Gebeno,  cum  opufculo  fuo  priediclo,  a  D. 
Cavaeo,  itidem  omittitur. 

1726. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  in  French,  and  relating  to  the 
Government  of  the  City  of  I.icge  and  the  Depe-' dan¬ 
ces  thereof ;  as  may  appear  from  the  following  par¬ 
ticulars. 

1 .  Que  les  Efchevins  (de  Liege)  wardent  &  falvent  le 

Loix  d’Allemangne.  , 

2.  Le  Serment  Monfieur  de  Liege,  (i.  e.  Monfeigneur 
PEvefque?) 

3.  Le  Serment  que  doient  faire  les  Chanoines  de  Liege. 

3.  b. 

4.  Le  Serment  des  Archi-diacones.  4. 

5.  Le  Serment  des  Chanoines  qui  tiennent  les  Cleilz 


delle  Seants. 


4.  b. 


6.  Le  Serment  des  Chanoines  qui  ont  les  Previleiges 

&  les  Chartes.  j|,id. 

7.  Le  Serment  de’Ofhcial.  ibid! 

8.  Le  Serment  de  Eearicr.  ibid! 


9.  Le  Serment  del  Adurto  de  Hiftaugue. 
j  o.  Le  Serment  de  Maintour. 


5- 
ibid. 

it.  Le  Serment  dc  Mayeurde  Liege.  ibid. 

12  Le  Serment  des  Efchevins  de  Liege.  5.  b." 

13.  Le  Serment  des  Chaftellains.  ibid*. 

14.  La  Table  des  poindlz  v  tenus  en  Status  cy  def- 

futz  eferites.  ’  g 

15.  Statuts  nouveaux  contre  les  Malfaiteurs,  faits  par 
les  Mailtres,  les  J urez,  les  Governeurs  &  l’Univerlite 
de  la  Cite  de  Liege,  par  Paudhorite  de  Monfeigneur 
Engelbert  Efleu  de  i  iege  1 5  d’  Oclobre  1345.  g. 

16.  Les  Pointz  des  Status  nouvellement  oioderez 

17.  La  Letlre  de  Comun  Proffit.  24  jour  de  Mars 

I37°-  23/ 

CL  Autrcs  Status  contre  les  Malfaiteurs,  ordonnez 

le  Samedi  devant  le  St.  Jacque  &  St.  CriftofFre,  Pan  1  353’ 

c  ,  _  ,  2  6. 

19.  Status  oruonnez  par  Johan  de  Beautier  Efleu  de 
Liege,  lei  Jurez,  et  toutte  PUniverfite  de  lamefme  Cite. 

de  Feverier.  2y 

•2°.  La  Table  des  Articles  contenus  en  la  Paix  des 
xvi.  condifl.  la  Paix  de  Tougre.  „2 

21.  La  Paix  des  Sauzes  (ou  xvi.)  faidte  Pan  1403. 
le  28  jour  d’Aoull.  ^  ^ ' 

La  Table  de  la  Moderation  faicle  de  la  Paix  des 


xvi.  condifl:  la  Paix  de  Tongre. 


43.  b. 


Num.  1726. 

23.  I.a  Moderation,  faifte  par  Johan  Beautier  Efleu 

de  Liege,  et  toute  1’  Univerflte  de  mefme  la  Cilf  :  i'an 
14O3.  le  2S  jour  d’Oclobre.  44,  j, 

24.  La  d  able  des  Articles  contenus  en  la  Moderation 

des  Status  des  Magiftrez  de  Liege.  59.  b. 

25.  La  Dicfle  Moderation.  Faite  Pan  1433.  le  28 
jour  d’Odtobre. 

T  I?6,  fYf1'1  tlesClerques;  faihie  par  le  Confeille  du 
Johan  de  Flandre  Eveique  de  Liege,  &  du  Johan  Duck 
de  Lotnnge.  A.  D.  1 287.  g, 

a  .t7'.fa0L?y  mU&:  faiae  1,a"  I287-  le  vendredy 
devant  le  Sr.  Laurence.  „  J 

28.  La  Paix  de  Fexhe  :  accorde  l’an  1316.  gn 
29  Goppie  delle  Lettre  de  Chapre  de  Liege,  fur  la 
dtae  Paix  de  Fexhe,  A.  D.  1324.  8e  1, 

30.  La  Lettre  des  Venaulx  &  comun  Proffit,  dohne 

lani3'-\  ,  86.  b. 

3  '  ■  La  Lettre  des  xx.  condifl  La  Declaration  de  la 
raix  de  i'exhe  :  donne  Pan  1324.  Q  - 

32.  La  Paix  de  Wihougue:  faifle  l’an  1326.  roo^'. ' 

33.  La  raix  de  Floen  :  faicle  Pan  1330.  !6l- 

34.  L’Addition  faite  fur  les  Status.  107.  b! 

35.  La  Paix  de  Teneffe  &  de  Vottement.  faicle.  Pan 
1331. 

36.  La  Lettre  de  St.  Jacque.  donne  Pan  1343. 

37.  La  Fore  Ceneralle  de  Liege,  faia  l’an'fjjo. 

38.  La  Moderation  de  la  Paix  de  Waroux,  “condifl 

La  novel  le  Lny  accordee  a  Waroux,  A.  D.  1  3  cc.  1 10.  b. 
f.  -A9'  Ari,MIcS’(.  Stat,us’  Prohibitions,  et  Ordonnances 
faictcs  par  1  Lvefqne  Engelbert  delle  Marche  a  fts  Efche- 
vmsde  Liege,  enratiffiant  &  conflruant  la  Loy  nouvelle 
A.  U.  1 367.  J  i2  ^  ' 

40  Cefle  l’Ordonnances  des  Bollengiers  &  Mouin'iers. 
A-  D.  1357.  , ,c  k 

41-  Le  Regiment  des Bartons.  A.  D  142-  1  b" 

4a’„9cfte  |eSt™  les  32  Homme7eileues  d« 

32  Meltiers,  doivent  faire.  1 

43.  Le  Seriment  que  Les  M'res  delle  Cite  elleus  par 
les  32  Homines  des  32  Meltiers  doivent  faire.  Rfd 

faire4'  ““  ScmnMlt  10e  ks  Meiers  font,  St  doivent 

4J.  Le  Seriment  que  les  Commiflhires  font  “Fleurs 
lnltitutions.  .^.j 

46.  La  Commillion  des  Deputcz.  ibid.  (A  D  1024) 

47-  Le  Regiment  deuxiefme :  A.  D.  1424  ,  ^ 

48-  Le  Regiment  troixefme,  condifl  La  Dieramme- 

Ordonnance  aifle  par  Its  22  Commifl’aires  i’an  ,4,4’ 
R24  jour  d  Oclobre.  ^ -34 

40.  Ung  Jugement  par  Recharge  aux  Efchevinfde 
Jitppi  le,  de  quelle  Iargeffie  les  Royal  Chemins,  Voles 
Hodalx,  Ruvals,  de  et  prefentes  dovent  eflre  fourpor.e 
par  Loy  aflez  nouvellement  fus.  i  -7^  b 

so.  Le  Syet  delle  Cite  t  comment  les  Commiffaires 
peullent  entrerf  leurs  mefure,  oir  amys  porter  Armures 
&  Ballon  en  la  Cite  de  Liege.  1  _S  ' 

51.  L’acord  feit  par  les°dits  Commiffidfes.  .  ’'ibid 
(A5D  V“3°/d—  fai‘ae  Par  ks  di,s  Commiflhires 

53.  Coppie  delle  Commiffion  de  part  la  Cfle9& 

3  aMefliers  generallment  donnec  aux  Commiflhires.  A  D 
,434'  160  ' 

lepL^UXvN?tes,H‘ftoriq„es  de  Pan  1446.  toucham 
le  I  ont  des  Arches  de  Liege. 

55.  Touchant  hoires  Legittimes  au  Regard  d’autres. 

56.  L’Ordonnances  &  le  Status  delle  I.oy  amen^con- 
tenant  des  MefFais,  des  Amendes,  des  Plaintes.  A  D 

57.  Le  Seriment  des  Vingte  deux. 

58.  De  laPaixj  des  di.£ls  Vingte-deux.  (A.  D  \ 

le  1  de  Mars)  v  1 

59-  AultrePaix  des  Vingte-deux.  A.  D.  njEle  ,  dP 
lRctmbre.  J/-'  , 

176.  b. 
6c..  Aultre 


4 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


19 1 


Num.  1726—1729. 

61.  Ault  re  Paix  des  didts  Vingte-deux.  180. 

61.  La  Ramification  Johan  de  Hynfberch  Evefque  de 
Liege,  fur  k  Paix  des  Vingte-deux.  fait,  Pan  1 420. 

181.  b. 

62.  Le  Patron  de  la  Temporalite.  182. 

63.  Ordonnance  &  Conftitutions  faidles  par  Ies  vene- 
rables,^  nobles,  &c  tres-honores  Seigneurs  les  Deputez 
&  Amis?  tant  par  la  Grace  de  noltre  Revere ndiffi me  & 
Illuftriffime  Prince  &  Seigneur  Cornelle  de  Berghes, 
Evefque  de  Liege ;  que  de  Trois  Eftats  de  fon  Pays  ; 
touchans  les  Reformations  &  Corrections  d  ’aucuns  Abus 
des  Courtes,  &  Juftice  Temporelz,  tant  en  la  Cite  & 
bonne  Ville,  que  en  didt  Pays  de  Liege,  Pan  1538. 

197.  t>* 

64.  Declaration  des  Droicls  que  on  deverat  payer  tant 

aux  Sieurs  Efchevins  que  leurs  Officiers.  204.  b. 

65.  Lettre  Hiftorique  du  Guilheaume  Chanteron 

Gre-ffier  de  Liege,  aux  Burghemaiftres,  Jurez,  Confeil- 
lers,  &c.  de  la  didte  Cite.  A.  D.  1531.  20 6.  b. 

In  this  I’radt  a  large  account  is  given  of  the  great 
Difturbances  happening  in  Liege,  and  of  the  Ordinances 
made  thereupon,  with  other  Public  Occurrences ;  with 
Lifts  of  the  Ring-leaders  of  the  Confpiracy,  of  thofe  who 
weie  punifhed,  and  of  thofe  who  craved  Mercy,  &c. 

I727* 

A  Paper-book  in  fol.  relating  to  the  Practife  in  the  late 
Court  of  Wards;  the  former  part  whereof  is  written 
in  Law-French,  and  may  be  underftood  by  the  follow¬ 
ing  Title. 

1.  UnbreifeColledtion.de  touts  tiels  Decrees  fait  in 
Court  de  Gards,  queux  decidont  afeun  Doubt  in  Ley, 
ou  auterment  a  exprefle  ou  explayne  afeun  matter  necef- 
fary  pour  eftre  conus,  daver  experience  de  inefme  le 
Court.  Les  queux  Decrees  remayne  enroll  &  enter  en 
le  Livers  de  Decrees  del  dit  Court ;  hors  de  queux  Livers 
jeo  aye  fait  cefty  Collection  pur  mon  experiente  de  mefme. 
IncipiuntTermino  Trim  an.  RR.  EdwardiSexti,  ftptimo. 

1. 

Then  follow,  inEnglifti, 

2.  Occafional  Orders  made  in  the  Court  of  Wards  : 
with  Minutes  of  the  Proceedings  there,  ann.  3  Jacobi. 

105. 

3.  Notes  of  Cafes  that  haue  beene  refolved  in  Curia 

Ward  or  uni,  annis  7,  8,  9,  &  10  Jacobi,  but,  for  the 
raoft  part,  in  the  firft  of  thofe  years.  1 1 8. 

4-  Obrervations  relating  to  the  Praftife  in  the  Cour’te 
ofWardes.  Mich.  7  Jac.  147.  b. 

1728. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol,  min.  quo  continentur, 

, 1  •  Adnotatio  de  Diftindtione  Policronicse,  in  Septem 
Libros.  ^ 

2\  Nomina  Regum  Anglia:  a  Conqueftu;  et  in  quibus 
Libns  &  Capitulis  de  eis  tradtatur  in  prefen ti  Hiftoria  ; 
et  quam  diu  regnarunt,  et  quo  tempore.  ibid. 

3;  tabula  Materiarum  praecipuarum,  cum  in  prm- 
fonti  turn  in  infequenti  codice  contentaium.  Alphabetic 
Ordtne  difpofita. 

4.  Hiftoria  Policronican  inferipta,  qaam  nuper  Partem 
Pnoretn  I’olycraticorum  Rogeri  Monachi  Ceftrenfis,  effe 
deprehendi;  fcil.  ab  initio  primi  Libri,  ufq;  ad  finem 
fere  Libri  tertij. 

1729. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  min.  Superisris  fcilicetPars 
altera ;  in  quo  habtntur  ; 

Pars  reliqua  Policraticorum  Rogeri  Ceftrenfis;  cum 
arnplifiima  continuatione  ufque  ad  annum  1 308.  ubi 
plura  de  Joanne  Wyclift'e  &  ejus  Sequacibus  liceat 
lnvemre.  Defideratur  autem,  aliquo  infortunio,  folium 
ultimum. 


Num.  1730 — 1732, 

1730. 

A  Book  in  4to,  (fomewhat  imperfect  at  the  end)  written 

in  Old  Englifh,  upon  parchment;  wherein  is  contained, 
A  Treatife,  by  a  modern  hand,  entituled  Wickliffs 
Poftills ;  hut  is  really  a  Colledtion  of  Sermons  de  Tem¬ 
pore,  for  the  whole  Year:  which  is  here  almoft  complete, 
as  beginning  with  Advent-Sunday,  and  ending  in  the 
22  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

This  Work  being  aferibed  to  John  Wycliffe  (as 
many  others  are,  which  do  not  appear  to  have  been 
written  by  that  great  Man)  I  curforily  turned  it  over, 
and  upon  the  whole  do  believe  it  may  be  of  his  com¬ 
piling.  For, 

1.  The  Author  was  an  Englifh. man. 

2.  The  Author  complains  of  the  Schifni  then  in  being 
between  Pope  Urban  &:  another.  Now  Pope  Urban  vi. 
at  Rome,  &  Pope  Clement  vu.  at  Avi’gnion,  were 
Anti-Popes  to  one  another  A.  D.  1378  at  which  time 
John  Wyciifle  publickly  feti  forth  his  Doft lines. 

3.  The  Dodtrines  here  taught  are  agreeable  to  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  and  to  that  held  by  the  Church  of 
England  at  this  day.  He  preacheth  againft  Tranfub- 
ftantiation,  Image-Worlhip,  Indulgences  :  the  inordinate 
Lives  of  the  Popes,  Cardinals,  Bilhops,  A  generally  of 
the  Whole  C  lergy :  and  above  all,  he  cxclaimeth  againft 
the  Pride,  Hypocrifie,  &  Frauds  of  the  four  Mendicant 
Orders,  namely  the  Auguftinians,  Carmelites,  Dotni- 
mcans,  &  Francilcans'. 

4.  I  am  not  unfenfible  that  fome  of  our  late  &r  prefent 
Divines,  have  charged  John  Wycliffe  with  the  holding 
of  divers  unwarrantable,  abfurd.  Sc  heterodox  if  not 
heretical  Tenets.  I  fee  none  fuch  in  this  Book,  nor  do 
believe  that  all  that  which  was  alledged  againft  him  by 
Wvdford  &  others  his  fworn  enemies  was  true.  If  his 
Tmlogus  could  be  retrieved  (which  was  his  chiefeft 
Work)  this  matter  might  foon  befett  in  a  true  Light. 

I  hear  there  is  a  Copy  of  the  Trialogus  now  remain¬ 
ing  ;  being  found  fome  years  fince,  in  an  old  Monaftery. 
Moreover,  my  Lord  Weymouth  hath  lately  bought  the 
Trialogus  (or  at  lead  a  great  part  of  it)  of  a  very  old 
Print:  perhaps  fett  forth  by  the  Huffites  in  Bohemia. 

*7  3*- 

An  Old  Englifh-book  in  4to,  written  upon  paper,  wherein 
are  contained, 

1.  A  Theological  Poem  entituled,  at  the  end,  Prvke 

of  Conference  :  compofed,  as  1  find  in  Pitts,  by  Richard 
the  Hermit  of  Hampole.  '  ,  _ 

This  feemeth  to  want  a  Leafe  or  two  at  the  beginnino- 

2.  A11  old  Englifh  Poem  grounded  on  Alcuin’s  Epiftle 

do  Virtutibus  &  Vitijs  ad  Guidonem  Comitem,  here 
called  (as  is  alfo  feen  in  fome  of  the  more  modern  Latin 
Manufcript  Copies)  Guy  Earl  of  Warwick;  which  can 
by  no  means  be  true,  even  fuppofing  that  there  was  fuch 
a  man,  by  reafon  of  an  Ahachronifm  of  above  an  hun¬ 
dred  years.  j 

This  is  imperfect  at  the  end. 

By  a  Note  at  the  End,  it  appeareth,  that  on  the  5th 
ox  July  1473.  one  Richard  Ryder  of  Petyrsfelde,  de¬ 
livered  up  to  the  Commiffary-Gcneral  of  the  Diocefe  of 
Wincherter  three  Books;  there  feverally  delcribcd 
(according  to  the  antient  manner)  by  fpecifying  the  firft 
Words  in  the  Second  Leafe  of  each  of  them.  By  which 
it  is  plain,  that  this  Book  was  one  of  the  Three;  the 
owner  being  perhaps  fufpc&ed  of  Lollardifm. 

I732. 

Codex  chartaceus  |n  4to,  a  feftinante  calamo  exaratus  ; 
in  quo  reperiuntur, 

'.  Loci  Communes  Theologici,  ex  Operibus  Petri 
Mar  tyris  felecti.  , .  &  j  g  1 . 

2.  Theological 


192. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nnta.  i732— I734- 

2.  Theological  Colle&ions,  from  the  Writings  of  Dr. 

Downhain.  1 73* 

At  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find 

3.  An  Anfwer  to  certain  Popilh  Demands  ;  with  a 

Preface.  u. 

4.  A  Breife  recitall  of  certain  Untruths  Scattered  in 
the  Paniphletts  &  Libels  of  the  Papifts,  concerning  Con¬ 
ferences  in  the  Tower  betwixt  Edmund  Campion ;  Goad, 
*r  ri,-  Wilier  -  Mtiih  an  Anfwer  to  the  fame,  bv  Alex¬ 


ander  Nowell,  &  C.  Dayes.  ,  32- 

5.  A  Remembrance  of  the  Conference  had  in  the 

Tower  with  Edmund  Campion  Jefuit,  by  William  Fulke 
&  Roger  Goad,  Doctors  in  Divinity,  1 6  September  1581; 
with  an  Epiftle  to  the  Reader  by  John  Feild  Student  of 
Divinity.  3®* 

This  is  called  the  Second  Dayes  Conference. 

6.  A  Remembrance  of  the  Conference  had  in  theTower, 
with  Edmund  Campion  Jefuite,  by  William  Fulke  &  Ro¬ 
ger  Goade,  Dodors  inDivinitye,  September  23.158/.  70. 

This  tract  feemeth  not  be  perfect,  for  want  or 
room  :  but  rather  referreth  to  another  book  for  the 
remaining  Part. 


173  3- 

A  Book  in  4to,  confifting  of  certain  loofe  Tracts  to  be 
bound  up  together  ;  namely, 

1 .  A  Treatife  of  Gods  purpofes  towards  his  Reafonable 

Creatures.  1  * 

2.  The  Manner  of  holding  a  Court  Leet,  or  Court 

Baron?  (the  Court  of  Quarter-Sefiions?)  with  Charge 
to  the  Jury,  the  Oaths  to  be  taken  by  feveral  Officers, 
and  other  incidental  matters.  .  33* 

o  Notes  colleded  from  an  Hiflory  of  the  Kings  of 
France.  .  43-  &  48- 

4.  Notes  out  of  Sr.  Walter  Rawleigh  s  Hiltory.  45. 

5.  Some  Law-Cafes  ;  &  Notes  relating  to  them.  51. 

6.  Sermoin  1  Pet.  in.  1  5. — Vro^o.  it  diroMyUv 

navr'i  tw  abeam  '/.-.you  r.-tf*  t»k  tvvy.~v  eMtioo?.  59. 

7.  Calculation  made  23  April  1677.  of  what  had 

been  granted  to  the  King  by  Parliament,  until  that 
time.  7°* 


*734- 

A  Scotch  Book  in  4to,  thus  entituled 

Ane  Nottabill  &  Excellent  Medicine-Buik,  for  all 
Difeiffis.  and  alfo  thus, 

Ane  Medicyne-Buik  perteininge  to  ane  Richt-Hon- 
orabill  man,  Johnne  Forbes  of  Echt.  writtin  be  me 
Patrik  Scot  his  Servant ;  quha  wiffis  to  him  &  his  Lady 
Beatrix  Gordoun,  continewall  Grace,  Merde,  Sc  Peace 
from  the  Lord.  The  10  day  ofMerch,  anno  1605. 

Thefe  Medicines  are  written  fometimes  in,  and 
fometimes  out  of  Order.  Sometimes  alfo  there  are  addi¬ 
tional  Medicines,  inferted  in  the  Margin  by  other  Hands. 
Here  are  alfo,  others  fett  under  proper  Heads,  looking 
like  particular  Trads ;  namely  thefe  that  follow. 

1.  The  Maner  to  make  Savis,  Entreatis,  ScDrinkis, 
to  Woundis,  or  to  wther  hurtis  of  Manis  Bodie.  6. 

2.  Of  the  Virtues  of  divers  Herbs.  14.  219.  269. 

3.  Scotch  Rhymes  on  the  different  Complexions  of 

Man  ;  &  of  the  feveral  Seafons  of  the  Year.  65. 

4.  To  make  feveral  Sorts  of  Oils,  Powders,  Perfumes, 

Confer  ves.  _  92. 

5.  Antedotes  or  Medicynes  prefervatyve  againft  the 

Pelt.  ’  _  96. 

6.  Receipts  about  Dying,  Coloring,  or  Tinging.  99. 

7.  Of  the  four  Complexions  of  Man  ;  in  prole.  103. 

8.  Ane  Regiment  of  the  tuell  Monethis,  113. 

9.  Certane  Conjed  ouris  of  the  Hufbandmen  touch¬ 
ing  the  tuell  Monethis  of  the  Zejr.  1 1 6. 


Num.1734,1735. 

10.  Ane  lytill  teiching  to  gar  Vemen  liaif  knowledg 

of  thair  avin  Infirmiteis,  &c.  ll7m 

11.  Hippiatric  Medicines.  1 5°* 

1 2.  Ane  Reull  of  the  anciant  Phifition  Ipocrates,  con¬ 
cerning  Maladies.  _  20  5-. 

13.  Sundrie  Sortis  off  Diftellit  Watteris,  with  thair 

properties.  2°7* 

14.  Of  Componit  Medicenis.  259. 

This  C.olledion  of  Receipts,  of  all  kinds,  entered 

into  this  book,  takes  up  384.  Pages ;  to  which  a  Table 
might  be  made. 


1 735* 

An  old  Englilh  book  in  410,  written  partly  upon  Parch¬ 
ment  &  partly  on  Paper ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  imperfect  Si  idle  Trail  in  Verfe,  prediding 

Good  or  Bad  Luck  to  People  &  their  Bufincfs,  from  the 
Confideration  of  the  Moons  Age.  *  - 

2.  An  impeded  Trad  in  Profe,  of  fomewhat  better 
ufe :  as  containing  fome  Receipts  in  Cookery.  1 6.  b. 

Each  of  thefe  Trads  have  fome  rude  delineations  in 
the  Margin. 

Thus  far  is  written  on  Parchment ;  what  follows  is 
on  Paper. 

3.  An  Impeded  Trad  written  by  fome  antient  Student 
in  Phyfic  &  Altrology,  unfolding  the  Myfteries  of  his 
Art,  as  to  the  Good  &  Bad  Days";  the  Planets  Signs,  & 
Elements ;  the  Complexions  of  Mans  Body,  Phlebotomy 
&  Urin  :  concluding  with  a  Mailer-piece  of  Art,  namely 
a  Tretys  or  Chapter  of  “Calculacion,  to  know  what  ]jou 
wilt  and  thisby  Obfervation  of  Perlbns  Names. 

The  Writer  of  thefe  wonderful  Secrets  was  John 
Crophill  (not  that  Great  Sir  John  Crophull  Knight,  whole 
blond  runs  Hill  in  the  Veins  of  many  Perfonages  of  our 
higheft  Nobility,  but)  a  Cunning-man,  who  pradifed 
in  Suffolk,  in  the  reign  of  K.  Henry  iv,  &  perhaps 
before.  29- 

4.  John  Crophill’s  private  Regifter  of  the  Names  of 

Perfons  cured  by  him,  in  Neylond,  &  other  adjacent 
Towns  :  with  accompt  of  the  Money  due  to  him  from 
fome  of  them.  3^-  k* 

5.  The  Names  of  the  12  Signs;  with  fuch  Marks  as 
fhew  that  this  John  Crophill  was  a  dabler  in  Gcomancy. 

39.  b. 

6.  A  Charm  to  eafe  or  mitigate  the  Pains  of  Women 
in  Travel  as  I  fuppofe ;  not  of  plenary  exemption ;  written 
in  the  Latin  Tongue,  Sycut  elizabet  i’ep’it  Joh’nn 

BaPTISTAM.  &  SC* A  ANNA  PEP’lT  MARI  &  SICUT 
MARIA  PEP’lT  D’nM  I’hEM  x’PM  EX  s’pU  SC’o  N’o  EX 
VIRILI  SIMINE  P.  An’uSYACIONH’  SC’e  GABBRIELYS 
ARCHANGELI  SINE  DOLORE  SIT  p’EAT  HEC  ANCE^LA 
DEI  +  ^CC.  4°- 

This  Iheweth  that  John  had  added  Learning  to  the 
Occult  Sciences. 

7.  John  C.rophills  Rewle  of  the  12  Synnis  ;  or  Re¬ 

gimen  to  be  obferved  as  to  Diet,  Phlebotomy,  Ac. 
during  the  1 2  Months  of  the  Year.  4 1  • 

8.  John  Crophills  more  regular  &  mafterly  oblerva- 

tions  upon  Urin.  43* 

9.  Oracular  Anfwers  prepared  before  hand  by  this 

great  Dodor,  for  thole  of  both  Sexes  who  fhould  come 
to  confult  him  in  the  momentous  affair  of  Matrimony  ; 
according  to  the  feveral' Months  of  the  year  wherein  they 
ffiould  apply  themfelves.  ••  ,T»44'b‘ 

10.  Some  of  John’s  Expences;  &  Medicinal  Receipts. 

46.  b. 

11.  Some  of  John’s  Poetry  or  Rhymes  (without  doubt 

all  extempore)  at  the  Entertainment  of  Frere  Thomas 
A  five  Ladies  of  Quality  whofe  names  are  here  mentioned  ; 
when  the  two  great  Bowls  or  Cups  called  Mercy  & 
Charity,  were  brilkly  putt  about.  48. 

12.  The  Vertu  of  Rofe-marry ;  8c  other  fecrets.  50. 

x  A  Medicinal 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


*93 


Num.  i736—i739. 

i736- 

A  Medicinal  Book  in  4to,  written  in  old  Englifli  upon 
paper  ;  wherein  are  contained^ 

1.  Some  few  Receipts  in  the  fpare  leaf  at  the  begin¬ 
ning. 

2.  The  Contents  of  the  Treatife  next  enfuing.  2. 

3.  A  Chirurgical  Treatife,  untruely  as  I  conceive 
(from  two  Notes  in  the  firft  &  laft  Leaves  mifunderftood) 
entituled,  Mefue  Englifhed.  For  the  Author  faith  in 
his  Preface,  fol.  b.  wherfor  to  the  Worfchype  of 
allemyghty  Gode,  and  his  glorios  Modyr  Saynt  Mary 
Sc  Alle  Halows,  and  to  the  prophete  of  aUe  Cryfhen 
pepulle ;  and  namely  of  Studyars  of  HraDyzars  in  Sur¬ 
gery,  I  have  compylyd  Sc  made  this  Boke  in  the  yere  of 
owr  Lord-e  1446.  Which  words  feem  not  reconcileable 
with  the  Time  or  Character  of  Mefue.  The  Work  is 
divided  into  3  Parts;  i .  De  Anathomia  humani  Corporis. 
2.  De  Divifionibus  Vulnerum.  3.  De  Apoftematibus. 
toward  which  laft  part  (viz.  at  fol.  143.  b.)  is  a  Receipt 
to  make  Diachylon,  according  to  Mefue  aforefaid  ;  who 
is  cited  for  it  in  the  Margin. 

4.  Surgery  after  the  Ufe  of  the  Ryght  Worefchypfulle 

Mailer  Doctore  Rede.  *  1 67. 

5.  Some  Medicinal  Receipts,  partly  in  Latin,  by 

another  Hand.  1 84.  b. 

6.  The  makvnge  of  Entretts,  Salvys,  both  Sanatyvys 
Sc  Tradyvys,  Sc  dyverfe  Oynements  arid  Waterys,  Sc 
Corofyvys ;  for  many  dyverfe  Sorts  &  Seknes,  the  wyche 
behovys  every  Leche  <k  Surgeon  to  knowe ;  fecundum 
Magiftrum  Rede:  written  in  Englifli  by  firft  Hand  1  go. 

7.  Off  defterens  betwvx  Ulcus  Sc  Vulnus  ;  and  after 

of  Ipekynge  univerfali  of  Ulceris;  that  is  to  fay,  an  Uni¬ 
versal  Sermon  off  Ulceris.  196. 

8.  Medicamenta  varia,  et  Latine  Sc  Anglice;  inter- 

quaj,  ununi  in  ufum  Perfonae  Bramtonite.  212.  b. 
Aliumeft,  '  • 

9.  Pro  Lepra,  fecundum  Ordinacionem  Magiftri  de 

Anoma,  Medicus  Regis  defun&i.  221. 

10.  Receipts  collated  as  I  fuppofe  from  fome  of  the 

Works  of  John  Arden.  224. 

1 1.  lYlcdicinalia  excerpta  de  Libro  Magiftri  Fyncham. 

227. 

12.  Incantatio  ad  Aves  Sc  Feras  capiendum.  230. 

13.  Various  Receipts,  Latin  Sc  Englifh  ;  by  different 

Hands.  230.  b. 

14.  The  Boke  ofYpocras.  In  this  boke  he  techy th 

for  to  know  be  Planetes,  both  Lyffe  and  Dcthe  (by  the 
firft  hand)  ,  232. 

15.  Many  other  receipts  written  by  divers  hands. 

237. b 

Amongft  thefe  are, 

16.  Divers  Hippiatrical  Medicines,  239.  b. 

r737- 

Codex  tenuis,  fed  membranaceus  et  antiquus ;  in  quo 
continentur. 

Pars  Arithmeticorum  Severini  Boethii ;  cum  Scholiis 
(folijs  33.) 


An  old  Book  in  4to,  written  upon  Parchment  Sc  Paper 
alternately  ;  &  entituled 

“Medulla .  Grammatice.”  It  is  a  Latin-Englifh ' 
Dictionary,  which  upon  occafion,  may  give  light  "into 
the  meaning  of  fome  obfolete  Words. 

r739- 

An  old  Book  in  4to.  written  on  Parchment  Sc  very 
old  Paper,  alternately  ;  being 
The  Travels  of  Sir  John  Maundevile  Kt.  in  French  ; 
with  the  Superfcription  of  his  Letter  to  K.  Edward  111. 
in  Latin  ;  at  the  end. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.IL 


Num.1740 — 1746. 

I74°. 

A  Book  in  4to,  written  partly  on  Paper ;  but  the  molt 
Parchment ;  wherein  arc, 

1 .  Some  Medicinal  Receipts  ;  kept  (as  it  feemeth)  in 
the  f  amily  of  Leventhorpe  .  j , 

Then  follow  on  Parchment, 

t»  r  lc^c  ^  b’inS  Legendary  tale  concerning  the 
Paffionof  our  bleffed  Lord  &  Savior,  his  Death,  Burial, 
Refurre&ion,  Afcenfion,  Sec.  as  affirmed  to  be  repre- 
fented  by  God  to  a  certain  Man  of  Religion.  5. 

3-  Paffione  Crifti,  bona  Contemplacio.  22. 

This  I  take  to  be  another  performance  of  the  fame 
whimfical  Author. 

Then  followeth  by  another  hand, 

4.  A  Sermon  upon  thefe  words  of  the  Evangelift, 
Homo  quidam  fecit  Cenam  magnam,  &  vocavit  multos. 

24. 

174T- 

A  very  thin  Book  in  4to,  by  the  Author  thus 
entituled, 

A  breaf  Collection  of  the  Qucenes  Majeftis  H.  Courts 
of  Recorde,  kept  in  &  aboute  the  Cities  of  London  & 
Weltmifter.  What  Magiftrates,  meaner  Officers,  & 
manner  of  proceeding  fat  the  Common  Lawes  of  this 
Real  me)  are  ufed  in  everie  of  the  fame  Courtes,  to  the 
Glorie  of  God,  Honor  of  Hir  Majeftic,  and  Commonne 
Wealth  of  hir  Subjects  ;  by  IT.  Borne. 

1742. 

An  old  Paper-book  in  4to,  adorned  with  fome  odd  Sc 
fanciful  Letters  ;  wherein  are  contained 

1.  Some  Grammatical  Rules  for  the  ufe  of  young 

Boys  who  were  to  be  initiated  in  the  Latin  ;  by  One 
Mafter  F.  Framton,  who  (as  I  believe)  might  be  both 
Grammar-Schole-Mafter  Sc  Writing-Mafter.  1 . 

2.  De  Scolafticis  Officijs,  Epitome;  forfan per eundein. 

39.  b. 

3.  Syllabus  Adverbiorura,  ConjunStionum,  Prsrpofi- 
tionum,  &  Interjettionum  ;  Latine  Sc  Anglicc.  43.  b. 

1  743- 

Codex  chartaceus  et  pertenuis  in  8vo.  cui  Titulus, 

Obfervationes  &  Additiones  ad  Buxtorffij  Abbre- 
viaturas;  ut  et  ejufdem  et  Reliquorum  Bibliothecas 
Ebrreas.  Cceptze  14  Aug.  1694. 

1  744- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4  to,  min.  Capite  Sc  Calce  trun. 
catus  ;  in  quo  tamen  continentur, 

Poftillte,  leu  Sermones  breviores  in  Epiftolas  ac 
Evangelia  Dominicalia,  Ordine  ufitato. 


*745-  . 

A  paper-Book  in  8vo,  written  in  Law-French ;  as 
being, 

A  Law-Common-Place-Book,  colkaed  by  fome  Stu¬ 
dent,  for  his  more  ready  Sc  particular  Die  :  It  beginneth 
with  the  feveral  Tenures  of  Land  ;  and  confifteth  of  747 
Obfervations  or  Notes. 

17  46. 

A  Book  in  8vo,  written  by  a  recent  Hand  wherein  are 
contained, 

1.  A  Briefe  Declaration  concerning  the  Ufe  of  the 

Lawe. 

3  I> 


2.  Obfervations. 


194 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  i  747?  i 74®* 

2.  Obfervations  as  to  the  pradtife,  about  Arrefts  ’ 

efpecially  in  London  or  Middlefex.  79- 

3.  The  Legal  Part  of  Surveying.  107. 


1747- 


Codex  membranaceus  in  1  imo,  in  quo  continental-, 

1.  Tradtatus  Alchymicus  Dompni  Johannis  Sawtre 

Monachi  de  Thorneve.  ...  1  • 

2.  Tabula  Capitulorum  prrccedentis  Libri.  15. 

3.  Excerpta  minutuia,  e  Libro  qui  intitulatur  Spe¬ 
culum  Secretorum  Alkimie.  *5-  b. 

4.  Ex  Hermete.  *6- 

c.  Expolitio  Ortolan i  fuper  prredictum  Textum  Her- 


metis.  .  i3  I0’ 

6.  Tradtatulus  qui  incip  t  “Ecce  quod  quens.”  20, 

7.  Trattatas  didtusProl'a  Aque  Vite  ;  et  incipit  Flores 

Secretorum.  2  f  • 

8.  De  Compoficione  Lapidis  Philofophorum.  Incipit, 

“  Quoniam  Ignis  hujus.”  .  28*  b. 

9.  Trattatus  qui  incipit, “  Quoniam  in  Libris  Philofo¬ 
phorum.”  _  31, 

10.  Tradlatus  qui  incipit,  “  Ex  diverfis  libris.’  32.  b. 

11.  Benedicti  Qureftiones  de  Lapide  Philofophorum 

•3?'„ 

12.  Excerptum  ex  Libro  qui  incipit,  “  Quia  pocius.” 


37- 

13.  The  way  of  obtaining  the  Grand  Elixir,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Tamyrtone  ;  in  Englifh.  41; 

1 1 4.  Excerpta  ex  Libro  duorum  Verborum,  qui  incipit, 
“  Hie  eft  Liber  paritatis.”  44-  b. 

15.  Vifio  cujufdam  Alchymici.  4 S-. 

16.  Tra£tatus  qui  dicitur  Secretum  meum  mihi. 

.48. 

1 7.  De  formatione  Ada:  in  Campo  Damafci.  5 1 .  b. 
Finis  Catalogi  Codd.  MSS.  quos  illuftiiflimo  & 

excellentifliino  Domino  meo  dono  dedit,  Vir  egregius 
Ilenricus  Worfeley,  Armiger. 

NB.  Coll.  Worfeley  gave  Two  Books  more,  which  by 
miftake  are  thus  placed  no.  1811.  &  1812. 


1 74-8- 

Codex  Theologicus,  et  membranaceus  in  4to,  quo  con¬ 
tinentur, 

In  folijs.  ad  frontem  rejedtaneis, 

1.  Capitula  v.  Librorum  Moyfis,  reliquorumq;  om¬ 
nium  Librorum  Veteris  Inftrumenti  Hiftoricorum.  1. 

2  Ordinatio  Librorum  Biblie ;  qua:  ab  hodierna 
diferepat. 

Adnotatio  manu  recentiore,  fed  tamen  antiqua,  “  lira 
Ordinacio  que  hie  ponitur,  eft  fecundum  antiquam  Or- 
dinacionem  Parifienfem.”  .  . 

3.  Initium  Tabuire  cujufdem  matcriarum  Biblicarum, 

Ordine  alphabetico.  2- 

4.  Compendium  totius  Sacrre  Scripturre  breviflimum, 

Carminibufq;  Hexametris  expreffum;  ubi  per  fmgula 
Verba,  Materia  totius  Capitis  denotatur.  5. 

5.  Syllabus  Librorum  Biblie,  Verfibus  feptem.  12.  b. 
Carinina  lupraditta,  chartis  vetullis  exarantur. 
Sequuntur  Biblia  Verfionis  Vulgatre  cum  Prologis, 

tenuioribus  membranis  l'cripta,  hoc  ordine. 

6.  Epiftola  beati  Hieronymi  ad  Paulinum  Prelbyterum, 
de  omnibus  divinie  Hiftorire  Libris.  —Prater  Ambrofius. 

J3- 

7.  Prrefatio  Sancli  Ilieronvmi  Prefbyten  in  Penta- 

teuchum  Moyfi. — Defiderij  inei.  14- b. 

8.  Pentateuchus  ;  in  quo,  ante  librum  Deuterono- 

mij,  vitio  Librarij,  confpicitur  Prologus  D.  Hieronymi 
in  Librum  Joiue.  15- 

n  Eadeni  Prrefatio  D.  Hieronymi  in  Librum  Jolue. 

66.  b. 

10.  Prrefatio  beati  Ieronymi  in  Libro  Regum. — Vi- 
ginti  &  duas.  ibid. 


Num.  1 748. 

11.  Liber  Jofue,  i.  e.  ben  Nun.  67. 

12.  Liber  Judicum.  73* 

13.  Liber  Ruth.  79*  b. 

14.  Regum  Libri  iv.  80.  b. 

15  Ad  Domnionem  &  Rogatianum  in  Librum  Para- 

lipomenon,  Prmfatio  beati  Hieronymi — “Quomodo” — - 
quam  excipiunt  ipli  Paralipomenwn  Libri.  112.  b. 

16.  Liber  Efdrre  primus  ;  et  Secundus,  i.  e.  Neemia:; 

cum  Prologo  Hieronymi — “  Utrum.”  13°-  b. 

17.  Liber  Tobire,  cum  Prologo  D.  Hieronymi  in  fine. 

.  I37* b*. 

18.  Liber  Judith,  cum  Prrefatione  D.  Hieronymi, 

p:remi(Ta.  140.  b. 

19  Liber  Efter,  cum  ejufdem  Prrefatione.  144.  b. 

20.  Liber  Job,  cum  Prologo  altero  D.  Hieronymi — 

“  Si  aut  fifcellam  ” — in  fine.  1  47- 

21.  Machabreorum  Libri  11.  cum  hac  Adnotatione  in 

fine,  “Explicit  fecunda  Pars  Biblirc.”  154-  b. 

22.  Sequuntur,  aliena  manu,  Colled! re  varire,  Canon 
Miflre,  Memorial,  cum  precibus  id  genus.  170.  b. 

23.  Libri  Salomonis  tres,  cum  prrefatione  D.  Ilielo- 

nymi — “Jungat.”  >73* 

24.  Liber  Sapientire,  &  Ecclefiafticus  :  cum  l’ras- 

fatiuncula  e  fuperiore  decerpta.  182. 

25.  If.uas,  Jeremias,  Baruch,  Ezechiel,  &  Daniel, 

fine  Prologis  ;  excepto  eo  in  Danielem.  197.  b. 

In  fine  Danielis  defiderabantur  hrec  verba,  Pave- 
ant  habitantes  univerfam  Terra m  Deum  Danielis  :  quia 
ipfe  eft  Salvator  Sc  Liberator,  faciens  Signa  &  Mirabilia 
in  Casio  &  in  Terra ;  qui  liberavit  Danielem  de  lacu 
Leonurn. 

26.  Prophets  Minorcs,  cum  Prologis  _  ufitatis. 

246.  b. 

In  fine  cernitur  hrec  adnotatio,  manu  aliena,  1  lie 
deberent  poni  I.ibri  Machabreorum,  ita  quod  Libri 
Machabreorum  ultimo  ponantur  inter  omnes  Libros  Ve¬ 
teris  Teftamenti ;  Sc.Spalterium  deberet  poni  immediate 
ante  Libros  Sulamonis.  Et  hoc  fecundum  novam  Or- 
dinacionem  L  ibrorum  Biblie. 

27.  Pfalterium  D.  Hieronymi,  quod  vulgo  dicitur 

Gallicanuin.  261. 

28.  Evangelia  iv.  cum  Prologis.  275. 

In  Oratione  Dominica  (Math.  vi.)  verbum  i-riJ.ciov 

dupliciter  tranflatum  legitur ;  nempe,  et  cotidianum 
juxta  veterem  Italicam,  ct  fuperfubftantialem  fecundum 
D.  Hieronymi  Verfionem. 

In  D.  Lucre  Evangelio,  omittitur  Prrefatio  fiVe 
Exordium"  Ouoniam  quidem  multi,”  & c. 

Oratio  Dominica  (Luc.  xi.)  his  tantum  verbis  (quod 
mirandum)  feripta  legitur,  “  Pater,  Sanctificetur  Nomcn 
tuum.  Adveniat  Regnum  tuum.  Panem  noitrum, 
cotidianum  da  nobis  hodie.  Et  dimittee  Nobis  debita 
noftra  ficut  et  Nos  dimittimus  debitoribus  noltris.  Et 
ne  nos  inducas  in  Temptationem.” 

In  calce  Evangeliorum,  confpicitur  hrec  Adnotatio, 
manu  alie  a,  “N  ndum  quod  Epiftolre  Pauli  deberent 
poni  immediate  poll  A . ..  g  .'.turn  ;  et  polt  Epiftolas.  Pauli 
deberent  poni  EpiftohiL  Canonicre  ;  et  polt  Epiftolas 
Canonicas,  Actus  Apoftolorum  ;  et  tandem  Apocaiypfis. 
Et  hoc  fecundum  Novam  Ordinationem  Librorum  Bib- 
lire.” 

29.  Actus  Apoftolorum,  cum  duobus  quafi  Prologis 

prremillis.  3°5- 

30.  Apochalipfis.  3 1 3 • 

3  1.  Epiftolre,  ut  vocantur,  Canonicre,  at  fine  Prologo. 

318. 

In  1  Job.  v.  lie  fe  habet  Teftimonium  Triplex, 
“  Quia  tres  funt  qui  Teftimonium  dant  in  C.elo,  Pater, 
Verbum,  &  Spiritus  Sanctus ;  et  hij  tres  Unum  funt. 
Et  Tres  funt  qui  Teftimonium  dant  in  T.erra  ;  Spiritus, 
Aqua,  et  Sanguis,  Si  Teftimonium  hominum  accepimus, 
&c” 

32.  Epiftola:  Pauli  omnes  j  finePrologo.  321.  b. 

Adnotatio 


Bibliothecas  Harleiati®. 


Num.  1748-' — 1750* 

Adnotatio  manus,  qu®  luperiores  appofuit,  “  No- 
tandum,  quod  ilia;  Epiltol®  San&i  Pauli  deberent  fcribi 
immediate  poll  Evangelia.”  32i.b. 

Poll  Epiftolam  ad  Hebrxos,  habetur  et  h®c  Ad 
notatio  e^dem  manu,  “  Poll  iltas  Epillolas  deberent  poni 
Epiftol®  Canonic®.  Et  poll  Epillolas  Canonicas,  Aclus 
Apoftolorum  ;  et  tandem  Apocaliplis:  ita  quod  Liber 
Apocalipfis  fit  ultimus  Liber  tocius  Bibli®,  fecundum 
Novam  Ordinationem  Librorum.” 

Sequuntur,  in  folijs  ad  finem  rejectieijs, 

33.  Adnotationes  Theologic®,  Stibio  ut  videtur,  et 
quidem  fellinanter  fcript®  ;  ac  jam  nunc  pene  illegibiles 

340. 

34.  Capitula  Ewangeiiorum,  nec  non  Actuum  Apof- 

lolorum.  '  343.  b. 

3.5.  Harmonioja  qu®dam  Evangeliorum,  huic  Codici 
adaptata.  344. 

36.  Defignatio  quorundamc  CanticisSacris.  34;.  b. 

37.  Nomina  Menlium  Hebraicorum.  ibid. 

38.  Nomina  Regum  duarum  Tribuum,  Jud®  et 

Benjamin.  ibid. 

39.  Nomina  Regum  x.  Tribuum,  i.  e.  Ifraelis. 

ibid. 


1740. 

CoJex  chartaceus  in  4to,  in  quo  continrntur, 

r.  Prathca  Juris  Civilis  in  Curijs  Ecclefiall'ds,  per 
Frartcifcum  Clarke  Aim®  Curi®  Cantuarienfis  de  Ar- 
cubus  London.  Procuratorem,  in  Lucem  editu  ;  ac  per 
Robertum  L  wnes  diet®  Curi®  Procuraroris  Clericum 
referipta.  A.  D.  163  ..  Pr®mittuntur  bin®  hujufee  Opcris 
Cenfur®. 

2.  Index ;  feu  Tabula  Materiarum,  alphabetico 

Ordine  difpofita.  499. 

3.  Tra&atus  ejufdem  Francifci  Clarke,  De  modo 

inchoandi  five  inllituendi  Atlionem  in  fuprema  Curia 

Adrniralitatis  Angli®,  De  Tenore  Warranti  live  Mandaii 
originalis  Judicis.  30;. 

4.  l'abula  Materiarum  in  fuperiore  Tradlatu  conten- 

tarum.  37  a. 

5.  It  feemeth  that  this  Robert  Lownes  abovementiuned, 
was  given  to  Love  Sc  Poetry;  marks  whereof  he  hath  left 
at  &  towards  the  beginning  &  end  of  the  book.  In  one 
of  his  performances  (at  pag.  570.)  he  mentions  his  four 
chief  Poets,  Chaucer,  Spenfer,  Beaumont,  8c  Shakefpear, 
but  giveth  the  preference  to  the  laft. 


1750. 

Codex  chartaceus,  a  Francifcanis  quibufdam,  minutls 
characleribus  feriptus  ;  etfut  facilius  in  finu,  feu 
manica  circumferri  polfet)  in  oblongiori,  quod  aiunt 
ab  opifice  formatus.  In  eo  cominentur, 

1.  Verfus  de  Penis  Inferni,  ad  ufum  Fratris  Thome 
Cowts.  In  primo  folio  vacuo. 

2.  De  Angelis. 

3.  Notando  pro  fello  1 1 1 .  Regnum. 

4.  Locus  Hieronymi :  “  Maledictus  qui  facit  opus  Dei 
negligenter,  et  qui  prohibet  gladium  fuum  a  Sanguine.” 

5.  De  eadein  re,  ex  Auguftino  &  Lincolnienli. 

6.  Ex  Bernardo  in  Sermone  de  Vigilia  Apoltolorum 
Petri  and  Pauli. 

Haftenus  in  folijs  prioribus  rejettaneis 
unt  Sermones  de  Santtis  valde  boni. 

7.  De  Santlo  Andrea,  Sermo. 

8.  De  Santlo  Nycolao,  Sermo. 

9.  Alius  Sermo  de  eodem. 

10.  De  Sancla  Lucia,  Sermo. 

11.  De  Santlo  Thoma,  Sermo. 

12.  In  Vigilia  Nativitatis  Domini. 

13.  In  Die  Nativitatis  Domini. 

1 4.  De  beato  Stephano  Prothomartire. 

15.  Sermo  brevis  deSanfla  Katherina. 


:  mcipi- 


2.  b 

3 


5-b 
6.  b 
9-  b 


Num:  1750. 


16.  Locus  Ambrofij,  in  fuo  Examero,  contra  adulteros. 


17.  De  Stupro.  ibid. 

18.  De  Paffione  bead  Bartholomei.  15.  b. 

1 9.  De  beato  Johanne  Ewangelilta.  1 7. 

20.  De  Innocentibus.  20. 

21.  Dc  Santlo  Thoma  Epifcopo  8c  Martire.  2 1 . 

22.  In  Circumcifione,  Sermo.  22. 

23.  Alius  Sermo  de  eodem.  23. 

24.  In  Epyphania  Domini.  24.  b. 

25.  Alius  Sermo  de  eodem.  23.  b. 

26.  De  Santla  Agnete.  26.  b. 

27.  In  Con verfi one  beati  Pauli.  28. 

28.  In  Fello  Purificationis  Virginisgloriofe.  30. 

20.  Cathedra  Petri.  32. 

30.  In  fello  Mathie  Apolloli.  4  3. 

31.  In  Annunciations  Virginis  gloriofe.  34.  b. 

32.  De  Santlo  Johanne  Baptilta.  33. 

33.  Alius  Sermo  de  eodem.  36.  b. 

34.  Tertius  Sermo  de  eodem.  37.  b. 

35.  Pro  fello  I.aurencij  Martins.  39. 

36.  De  Maria  Magdalena.  40. 

37.  Ad  Vincula  Sancli  Petri  Sermo.  40.  b. 

38.  De  Santlo  Laurencio  Marty  re.  42. 

39.  Alius  Senrlo  de  B.  Laurencio.  43. 

40.  Sermo  tertius  abbreviatus  j  de  eodem.  44. 

41.  De  Alfumptioiie  Beate  Marie  Virgin^.  43. 

42.  Alius  Sermo  de  eodem  fello,  8cc.  46.  b. 


43.  De  gloriofo  Apoltolo  Santlo  Bartholomeo.  48. 

44.  Sermo  de  eodem  ;  ex  eodem  Sermone  abbrevia- 


tum.  4g. 

45.  Sermo  in  fello  Decollacionis  Johannis  Baptille. 

5°- 

46.  Alms  Sermo,  unde  fupra.  51.  b. 

47.  In  Na  ivitate  bcate  Virginis  Mav’e.  32  b. 

4^.  Alius  Sermo,  unde  fupra,  5’-b. 

49.  In  ExaltacioneSanctc  t  rucis,  Sermo.  34.  b. 

50.  Serino  fecundus,  unde  fupra.  57.  b. 

5 1 .  De  Santlo  Matheo,  Sermo.  39. 

52.  Sermo  de  Angelis.  60. 

53.  Alius  Sermo  de  eodem.  61.  b. 

54.  Pauca  ex  tercio  Sermone,  unde  fupra.  62.  b. 

55.  De  beato  Patre  nollro  Francifco.  6f. 

56.  Sermo  de  Apoftolis  Symone  8c  Juda.  64.  b. 

57.  In  fello  Omnium  Sanflonun,  Serino  65.  b. 

58.  Sermo  fecundus,  unde  fupra.  67. 

59.  Sermo  tertius,  unde  fupra.  68. 

60.  In  die  Animarum,  Sermo.  69. 

61.  Sermo  fecundus,  unde  fupra.  70. 

62.  De  beato  Martino.  70.  b. 

63.  Alius  Sermo,  unde  Supra.  72. 

64.  De  beata  Cecilia,  Sermo.  73. 

65.  De  beata  Katherina,  Serino.  73.  b. 

66.  Sermo  de  beato  Clemente  Martire.  74  b. 

67.  Sermo  de  Gracia,  fed  abbreviate ;  exTractatu  bead 

Bernardi  de  Spiritu  Santlo.  73.  b. 

68.  Ex  Traflatu  Sancli  Bernardini  de  Spiritu  Santlo, 
Sermo  tertius  tie  Inlpirationibus,  fed  abbreviatus,  quia 
omiffis  duobus  primis  Membris,  tantuin  tertium  pono. 

79-  h. 

Sequuntur  aliqui  Sermones  de  Communi:  et  primo, 
6 y.  De  Apoftolis. 

70.  De  fello  Apoftolorum  Petri  Sc  Pauli ;  Sermo. 


83.  b. 

71.  Sermo  de  Ewangeliflis,  et  Dotloribus.  S4.  b. 

72.  Sermo  fecundus  unde  fupra,  fcilicet  de  Ewance- 

.  85.  b. 

73.  Ex  Dieta  Salutis,  de  Patientia.  87. 

74.  In  fello  Johannis  Baptift®  Sermo.  87.  b; 

75.  De  Confeftbre  non  Pontilice,  Sermo.  89. 

76.  Sermo  prcdicabilis  pro  Confelforibus  &  Virgini- 

bus.  9„. 

77.  Sermo  primus  de  Virginibus,  plus  vero  pro  Re- 

ligiolis,  gi. 

78.  Sermo 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


196 


Num.  i  7 50. 


78.  Sermo  alius  de  Virginibus.  92. 

79.  Alius  Sermo  de  Virginibus.  _  _  92.  b. 

80.  Sermo  de  Spiritualibus  Nuprijs,  quibus  anima 

defponfatur  Deo.  Et  poteft  applicui  De  Virginibus,  et 
pro  Religiofis.  93* 

8 1 .  Sermo  de  Sanffa  Paupertate.  93.  b. 

82.  Sermo  de  Sanfta Kaiherina.  94.  b. 

83.  DeSan&o  Francifeo,  Sermo  primus.  97. 

84.  Alius  Sermo,  de  eodem.  98.  b. 

85.  In  fefto  Sanfti  Ludowici  Epifcopi  &  Cont'eil'oris, 

Ordinis  Minorum  ;  Sermo.  100. 

86.  Item  de  Sandio  Ludowico,  Sermo  ex  Sermonibus 

fratris  Henrici  Ber  ...  ioi.  b. 

87.  Item  Sermo  de  Sancta  Clara.  102.  b. 

88.  Ad  Religiofos  Sermo,  quod  otto  funt  quefaciunt 

Religiofum  pertectum  ;  fic  in  octo  amiis  tuit  Templum 
Saloraonis  perfedum.  1 04.  b. 

89.  Sermo  ad  Religiofos.  103.  b. 

90.  Sermo  Beati  Bernardiniad  Religiofos.  108.  b 

9 1 .  De  pacificaConverfatione&Suppo;  tacioneProximij 
Et  quod  feptem  ad  hoc  funt  neceiTaria:  Sermo.  1  ic.b. 

92.  Sermo  communis  de  Domina  ;  et  ad  Spirituals 

Penas.  1 1 2.  b. 


93.  Alius  Sermo  ad  Religiofos.  1 1 3.  b. 

94.  Sermo  alius  ad  Religiofos :  Sermo  in  Adventu 

Domini.  115.  b. 

95.  Alius  Sermo  ad  Religiofos.  117. 

96.  Sermo  de  triplici  Millerio,  et  de  Spiritual!  Bap- 
tifmo,  in  fine  ;  videlicet  ad  prtcdicandum  in  Indudione 
fiveProfeffione;  et  etiam  infelto  beati  Stephani.  1 18. 

97.  Sermo  de  Eledione  Unius  vel  plurium,  x  19. 

98.  Sermo.  12  •. 

99.  Tradatus  dejOrnamentis  ;  et  fi  Mulieres  peccant 

mortaliter  portando  Veltes  caudatas;  et  de  Vellibus  alatis ; 
et  de  Vicio  Superfluitatis  in  ornatu  ;  et  ornatibus  Clerici 
facientibus.  123. 

1 00.  Memoranda  de  Septem  Panibus,  feptem  Statibus 

Anima;  adaptatis.  128.  b. 

101.  Sermo  Sandi  Bernardini  contra  mundanus  Vani- 

tates  &  Pompas.  129. 

ic2.  Sermo  beati  Bernardini ;  quod  debent  honorari 
Sc  venerari  Ecclcfiaft.  Gradus  et  Sacramenta.  132. 

103.  Contra  Lefperacionem.  135.  b. 

1 04.  Aliqua  Excerpta  Dyonifij  Cartufienfis  valde  utilia ; 

ex  libello  quodam  qui  intitulatur  “Illuminatorium  faluta- 
ris  Scientiie  quern  libelluin  compofuit  ad  Inllantiain 
cujuldam  Fratris  Minorum  Nepotis  fui ;  quemadmoduin 
in  fine  Prologi  ejufdem  atteftatur.  136. 

105.  Sermo  demultipliei  hominum  Ignorancia;  Sandi 

Bernardi.  _  150. 

106.  Sermo  ,de  Cogitatione ;  multum  bonus  et  utilis. 

152.  b. 

13 7.  De  eodem,  Sermo  fecundus.  153.  b. 

io8.  Sermo  de  Loquacitate  &  Taciturnitate.  154.  b. 

xoq.  De  Defencione  proprij  Peccati.  157. 

110.  De  Adulatione.  *57- b. 

in.  De  Detradione,  Sermo  158.  b. 

1 1 2.  Alius  Sermo  de  Detradione.  1 59. 

113.  Sermo  de  Peccato  operis.  1 6 1 . 

114.  Sermo  Sandi  Bernardini,  de  Judicijs  Dei.  163. 

1 1  3.  Alia  Introdudio  prredidi  Sermonis.  165. 

110.  Sermo  Sandi  Bernardini,  de Partialitate.  ibid. 

1 17.  Sermoejufdem,  de  eodem.  167.  b. 

1 1 8.  In  RamisPalmarum,  DePace  &  Concordia  inimi- 
coruin,  ac  remillione  Injuriarum.  Sermo  Bernardini. 

169. 

119.  De  Sanda  Anna,  Sermo  abbreviatus.  173.  b. 

120.  Excerpta  alia  e  fupradido  libello  Dionyfij  Car- 

thufienfis.  1 74. 

j2i.  Sermo  de  Converfione  Peccatorum.  188. 

122.  Sermo  de  falfa  Penitencia,  et  vera.  190. 

123.  Sermo  de  Converfione  et  Contritione.  192. 

124.  Nota  de  Dainpnacione  Gentilium.  104.  b. 


Num.  J750 — 1752. 

125.  Sermo  de  Confeflione.  195. 

1 26.  Sermo  de  .  .  .  pie  Penitentie;  fcilicet  Sa- 

tisfadione.  igg. 

127.  Sermo  de  jejunio,  &  ejus  Utilitate.  199.  b. 

128.  In  illudj  “  Erant  appropinquantes  ad  Jhefunt 

Publicani  &  Peccatores.”  202. 

x  29.  Bina;  adnotationes  Theologicse.  203.  b. 


1 751* 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  (quondam  peculium  Joannis 
Bala-i )  ut  fupra  memoravi,  in  deferiptione  Codicis 
no.  1707.  notati.  In  eo  continentur. 

Rogeri  Monachi  Cellrenfis,  Polycralicorum,  fell 
Poly-chronicae  Libri  vri. 

Notandum,  in  hoc  Exemplar^  Prafationem  efie 
breviorem,  quani  in  alijs  ejufdem  operis  Codicibus. 

Quinetiam  Librarius  manum  de  Tabula  abrupte  tra- 
hebat  poft  narrationem  decollacionis  Thoma;  Comitis 
Lancafirienfis,  qua;  accidebat  A.  D.  1322. 


1752- 


Codex  chartaeeus  in  4to,  non  antiquus  quidem,  fed 
Idiomate  et  Raritate  pnellans ;  quem  anno  luperiore, 
llluftriflimus  Dominus  meus,  pro  fuo  innato  favore 
ac  benevolentia,  a  me  gratiofiffime  accipere  non  dedig- 
natus  eft.  Totus  eft  Gracus,  etScripta  inibi  exhibita, 
funt  inter  CJailica,  ut  aiunt,  annumerauda.  lllius 
afriygaipov,  durante  Paganlfmo,  deferibebatur  ;  ut  mihi 
viderur  confideratione  vocum  ayaQii  rZy*:  fumniis  plu- 
rimis  paginis  exaratarum,  a  quo  ritu  Chriltianorum 
Religio  iemper  abhorruit. 

Set  ut  ad  Contenta  redeam  ;  in  illo  reperiuntur, 

1.  Inicriptio  rariffima,  in  laudem  Pijffimi  Imperatoris 
Antonini  (i.  e.  Baffiani  Caracallte)  et  Papinij  Philofopbi  j 
infculpta  (ut  videtur)  Imperij  fui  anno  primo  ;  et  per 


Theodoruin  Sapientem  e  Marmore  explicati.  1.  b. 

2.  Oy-rigov  -jy-ioi  tg  Jiov;.  2. 

Sequuntur  diverfomm  Verficuli  &  Epigrammata  fc. 

3.  Eif  yijax;  xxt  yUoyra.;,  MsmxocZrovs’  Bu^Dsvriou*. 

$iA&w<§F*  Aaxiava.  6.  b. 

4.  Eif  eAxi  in/j-stynv  ’iyjj-jca.il  apraAov.  ibid. 

5.  ’ Ei ;  xhiiifiv  irofj'Ji?  ixiro  $xtpvr\;.  ibid. 

6.  Ahter,  Aaxiai/n,  &  2 rjVoJs'ra.  ibid. 

7.  Ejyit  ’A  .  ibid. 

8.  ’ Eli  GznzToy  y.xi  sif  QvnniovTXi’  A y*0ia..  ibid. 

9.  Aliter,  ‘tiAoJjyxou,  &  IlitAAaJia.  7. 

10.  ’Eif  8is;.  A«xi«v«.  ibid. 

11.  ’Et;  xjiTa;,  ugatoviiccl  aArD/c.  ITaAAacia.  ibid. 

12.  ’Ei;  tJ  ibid. 

13-  ’Ei;  a’tuwTiv.  n«AAa^iz. 


14.  Ta  cc’-jts. 

Deinde  fequuntur, 

I  3.  Avrt7raTfa  cip^oi  rov-iXtyua  ’Oc®£a:. 
16.  'Et;  tov  dvrov. 
lj.  Elf  toy  xxrrci/. 

18.  ’Eif  Tim  avroti. 

19.  Ofpiwf  TfA£r*i.  tuOi;  \Istxio-j. 

20.  'Eif  Ala. 

21.  ’Eif  "Hgccy. 

22.  Eif  flocfiJw. 


ibid. 

7.  b. 
ibid, 
ibid, 
ibid. 
8. 
8  b. 
ibid, 
ibid. 


*3- 

’Eif  ’'Aarfjuuv. 

9* 

24. 

’Eif  AttoAAio. 

ibid. 

25‘ 

’Eif  ’Hpatiron. 

9-b. 

26. 

Eif  At eyveoy. 

10. 

27. 

’Eif  ’AO* yxy. 

10. 

28. 

’Eif  ’Tirayx. 

ibid. 

29. 

’Eif  arpz. 

ibid. 

3°- 

’Eif  ^Ai ay- 

10.  b. 

3lm 

*£if  arihiviw. 

ibid. 

32* 

,lTy.y(&  y-oiyoc. 

11.  b. 

XI 

33.  ’£iS 

Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


197 


11.  b. 
ibid. 

12. 
12.  b. 


Num.  1751—^ 1754 

33.  ’Eis  AuxiV  Affetirnn- 

34.  XOtVOf. 

33.  *E K  T«f  Msiruf. 

36.  ’Eif  Apfotfrnv. 

*7.  'E.5 

38.  ibii; 

40!  ;e  !'  «i_  i.w.»  ? 

41.  ’Ofpixii  £if  A*«  fisoAoyia. 

Adhuc  fequuntur,  . 

42.  ’Op®f«?  Apyopaunx*  (verfibus  tantum  137®v  5* 

4  Adnotatio  cujufdam  Germani.  Orpheus  Vetujbffi- 

bus  eft  l’oearum  &  Kqualis  ipforum  Deorum  ;  <“}“■“ 
Itaditur  inter  Argonautas  cum  Tyndaridis  &  H 

Havigaffe.  Laftant.  Lib.  I.  Divin.  Inftit.  Cap.  5-  P-  *7- 

43.  'Eif  fiao-ap  BaxpPd^'. 

44.  rfTfM<SP  »f  ‘  ’ 

4C.  ’Eif  Nfuio-iv.  ' 

a6.  Awho>po*®»*a*?^*-  (verfibus  1470.)  5°* 

Agmen  claudunt,  Pindari  opera  pleraque,  cum  ve  - 
fibus  ad  ilium  fpe&antibus.  .  -  ,  -  n 

i.7.  Envoi  lawixol  olSrav  yty?U[Al*(v<H  tv  rn  rr>\n  th  ,  tv- 

u£, 

TO  £iriX«XOU<*£VOV  T8  Z£uHin'a'!J*  , 

4g.  ’E.fTiWu™  ThvS^0-j  iixe»«*  Amw*T{8 

49.  ’Eif  riv  «  utop-  HUfOP  M  urtdruv.  jbld. 

50.  ’Elf  XOETfOP  £%OPT«niW*fOP.  -y* 

51.  T5  ’Apri7r«Tf ou  £Tl  £if  «utop.  • 

52.  AtuvlSu  £if  top  aurop.  ’ 

53.  nipJijB  ’oxu/ATTioprxai  cum  Scholijs.  ^  9^- 

C4.  iWxpa  NfSiopTxai.  ,  .  .  .  l3»*  • 

55.  iw/gK  NEpovTxa..  (abruptc  defirnt  m  191^.) 

1753* 

A  book  in  4to,  confiding  of  Three  Tradb,  or  Books, 
bound  up  together.  They  all  contaP»  „ 
Notes  taken  from  divers  Sermons  preached  by  N  • 
Edmund  Calamy,  A.  D.  1650. 

1754- 

An  Heraldical  book  in  4W.  written  &  tricked  haftily 
bv  the  Painters  ;  and  now  contaimng, 

1.  Certain  Coats,  with  fome  few  Crefts  St  Impale¬ 
ments  ;  belonging  to  feveral  Families. 

2.  Some  few  fliort  Defcents.  4* 

1.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto  William  Browne 

of  Bobingworth  in  Com.Effex,  Gent,  by  Robert  Cooke 

Clarenceux.  .  * 

4.  Defcent  of  Pickeryng  from  Kymer;  with  Arms.  7. 

5.  Arms  of  Samarey,  with  Quartenngs,  Crelt,  ^ 

(L  Account  of  the  Foundation  of  the  Umverfity  of 
Cambridge  ;  &  of  the  feveral  Colleges  &  Halls  thereof, 
with  their  Armes;  as  alfo  of  the  Publick  Schools  & 
Librarie;  their  Magiftrates  &  Officers.  ibid. 

7.  Conformation  of  Arms,  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  o 

Sir  Richarde  Knight,  Principal  Secretarie  of  State  in 
Ireland,  &  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer ;  by  William 
Camden  Clarenceux.  .  22‘ 

8.  Defcents  without  Armes  ;  &  Armes  without  JJe- 

fcents;  put  down  promifcuoufly.  *3*  47- b-  &c' 

Among  them  are  the  Armes  of  the  City  of  Exeter  ; 
&  of  the  Merchants  Adventurers  there.  25. 

q.  Notes  taken  in  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Chriit, 
at  Oxford.  .  3^*  b-  ^  37-  * 

10.  Notes  taken  in  Jefus-College  in  Oxford.  37-  b- 

1 1 .  Notes  taken  in  Trinity-College  in  Oxford,  ibid. 

1 2.  Some  larger  Defcents,  mil'cellaneous,  with  Armes. 

38. 

1-7.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft,  unto  John 
Browne  of  Borland  in  Com.  Norffi  Efq;  by  William 
Camden  Clarenceux.  47- 

Cat.  Hari..  Vol.  II. 


Num.  I754-’ 

1 4.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Cafhalton  in  Surrey? 

48. 

1  c.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Sprofton  in  Nor¬ 
folk^.  49’  b- 

1 6.  Promifcuous  Defcents.  50.  53.  b.  36.  58.  60.  b. 

61.  b.  72.  74.  b.  1 16.  b.  80.  .  .  , 

1 7.  Notes  taken  in  North-Moore  Church  in  Uxtord- 

18.  Large  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  &  Hall-houfe 

of  Stanton-Harcourtin  Oxfordffiire.  d‘ 

10.  Notes  taken  in  Broadgate-hall  in  Oxford.  52.  b. 

20.  Notes  taken  in  Corpus-Chrifti-Collegein  Oxford. 

ibid. 

ai.  Notes  taken  in Exeter-College  in  Oxford.  53. 

22.  Notes  taken  in  Lyncolne-College  in  Oxford,  ibid. 

23.  Notes  taken  in  New-College  in  Oxford.  56. 

24.  Grant  of  a  Creft  (without  confirming  the 
Armes)  to  William  Lawewell,  alias  Wombwell  of 
Wombwell,  by  William  Flower  Norroy.  9  July  1565. 

57.  b. 

2 5.  Notes  taken  at  Ipfwich  in  Suffolk.  58.  b. 

Now  the  Writing  in  the  book  mull  be  read  as  from 

the  wrong  end.  ,  .  r  „ 

26.  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  the  Lord  Chief  Baron 
Tanfield,  at  Burford  in  Com.  Oxon.  9  Jun.  1625.  61. 

27.  Armes  of  Cleere’s  Matches,  in  Trick.  65. 

Now  the  Defcents  are  entered  long-ways,  for  the 

molt  part. 

28.  Defcents  of  fome  of  the  Effex-Gentry.  66. 

29.  Pedegree  of  Fortefcue.  74- 

30.  Confirmation  of  Armes,  &  Grant  of  a  Crelt  to 

John  Eldred  of  London,  Gentleman  ;  by  William  De¬ 
thick,  Garter.  10  June  1592.  Q8, 

3 1  Confirmation  of  a  Coat,  with  many  Quartenngs  ; 

&  Grant  of  the  Creft  of  Sir  Auncell  Gorney  (who  was 
laid,  ai  the  Winning  of  Aeon  by  K.  Richard  1.  to  have 
taken  i  Yii'oner  a  King  of  the  Moores)  to  Sir  John  New¬ 
ton  of  Richemond-Cafttll  in  Com.  Somerfet,  by  Sir 
Gilbert  Dethick  Garter.  1  2  December,  10  Eliz.  1 16. 

•7  2.  Trick  of  the  Armes  of  Clopton,  empaling  Pecoke. 

1 14.  b. 

33.  Pedegrees  &  Armes  of  many  of  the  SulTex-Gentry. 

34.  A  Note  touching  the  Original  of  the  Families  of 

Jerningham,  &  Jennihingo  or  Jennings;  with  the  Arms 
of  the  latter.  .  b; 

1  c.  Notes  taken  in  the  Houfe  of  Sir  William  Harris, 
at  ^ .  •  •  86.  b' 

36.  Notes  taken  in  the  Houfe  of  Sir  Andrew  Affiley, 

at  .  •  -  ibld- 

37.  Notes  taken  at  Sir  Edward  Bullock’s  houfe.  86. 

38.  Notes  taken  at  Mr  Boddes  Houle,  ibid. 

39.  Defcents  of  fome  Suftolk-families.  85.  b. 

40.  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Baynton  ;  with  a 

Defcent,  by  Mr.  Nicholas  Charles  82.  b. 

41.  Series  of  the  Kings  of  England  from  the  Conq. 

to  King  Charles  1.  8  x . 

42.  Matches  of  Claxton,  in  Trick.  80.  b. 

43.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Shellingford  in 

Barkeffiire.  _  .79/ 

44.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Cretinge,  in  Com. 

Suff.  78.  b. 

45.  Notes  taken  in  the  Houfe  of  Mr.  Sherdelow,  at 

Shimpline  in  Norff.  ibid.  &  78. 

46.  Notes  taken  in  St.  Peters  Church  in  Norwich. 

ibid. 

47.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  St.  Peter  the  Poore, 

London.  77- b- 

48.  Notes  taken  in  the  Houfe  of  Sir  Thomas  Lowe. 

75.  b. 

49.  Notes  taken  in  Lothbury-Church.  ibid. 

50.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  St.  Andrew-Under- 

ffiaft.  _  7  5  • 

51.  Defcent  of  Gervies,  with  Armes.  74-  b. 

3  E-  Now 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS.' 


198 


Num.  1754—1756. 

Now  turning  about,  toward  the  end  of  this  irrre- 
gular  Book,  I  find, 

52.  Some  few  Painters-Entrances  of  Funerals.  1 19.  b. 
i  53.  An  Alphabetical  fable  of  Sur-names,  mentioned 
n  the  Book. 


Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  quern  illuftriflimo  Domino 
meo  dono  dedit,  Joannes  Anflifius  Armiger  ;  in  quo 
continentur, 

i*t  Confuetudines  Kancie ;  Normanno-Gallice.  Tra&a- 
tus  ctxif&xQy.  j 

2.  De  Sacramento  Vicecomitum  et  aliorum  Miniftro- 

rum  Regis  in  Principio  Itineris.  2.  b. 

3.  Modus  Calumpniandi  Effonia.  3.  b. 

4.  Dies  communes  in  Banco.  ibid. 

5.  Dies  Dotis.  4- 

6.  Vifus  Franci-plegij.  b. 

7.  Modus  faciendi  Homagium  &  Fidelitatem.  c.  b. 

8.  AflifaPanis.  5  6m 

9.  Allifa  Cervifie.  b. 

10.  Lucrum  Piftoris.  7. 

1 1.  Compoficio  fa£ta  ad  puniendum  Infringentes 
Afiifam,  Forftallarios,  et  hujufmodi  Meneftrallos  7. 

1 2.  Modus  admenfurandi  Terram.  8.  b. 

1 3.  Expofuiones  vocabulorum  in  Cards.  9.  b. 

’  *■  De  Ponderibus  &  Menfuris.  1 t. 

Tra&atus  de  Baftardia.  12. 

.  Extenta  Manerij.  2o. 

.  Adnotationes  aliquot  Juridicales ;  Normanno-Gal- 

22.  b. 

iS.  Summa  qua:  dicitur,  Cadit  Affifa.  23. 

19.  Summa  qua:  diciter,  Feta  faver.  32. 

20.  Excepciones  ad  caffandum  Brevia.  49.  b. 

21.  Adnotationes  Juridicae  ;  Normanno-Gallice.  54. 

22.  Excepciones  contra  Brevia.  33. 

23.  Modus  Ordinandi  Brevia,  in  fuis  Cafibus.  62? b." 

24.  Parvum  Hengham.  67.  b. 

25.  Magnum  Hengham.  77.  b. 

26.  In  quibus  Cafibus  in  antiquis  Dominicis  Corona, 

capiendi  eft  Affifa  Nove  Difleiline.  gg. 

27.  Capitula,  reddenda  Militibus  eleflis,  de  Forefta : 

in  fine  truncata.  100> 

1756. 


15- 

16. 

}7* 

lice. 


Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  cujus  Titulus  in  exteriore 
tegminis  facie,  litteris  Anglicis  vetuftis,  nuncpene  fu- 
gientibus,  lcgitur  fcriptus,  (£cipia  JFCODclr,  Joh'iS 
'liouap  militis  ©~ni  DC  lt)otog-|)aiiL  in  iii0,  notatu 
digniora  qua;  hie  memorentur,  exftant, 

1 .  Memorandum,  de  Antecefibribus  k  Dominis  de 

Scottone.  i.  e.  Progenies  Nevillorum,  quorum  ha-redem 
defponfavit  Johannes  Bufly  Miles ;  deq  ;  eoruin  filijs  k 
nepotibus.  ^ 

2.  Memoranda  alia,  de  Genealogijs  Nevillorum  8c 

Bufly oru  m.  ^  ^ 

3.  Nomina  Pafronorum  Ecclefim  de  Hagham,  cum 

Capella  tie  Merltcme,  &  alijs  appendices.  3 

4.  Nomina  Rcftorum  Ecclefuc  de  Hagham,  cuin 

Capella  dc  Merltone.  jbid 

5.  Tenent. s  Johannis  Bufly  Militis  Domini  de  Hag- 
ham,  per  Homagium  &  Forinfecum  Servitium,  de  Feodo 
de  Gaunt  ;  quondam  Johannis  Dy  ve  Militis.  r  b 

6.  Feoda  predict i  ITni  Johannis  in  Southe-Wenna  de 
Kok  ;  feodum  pertinens  Manerio  de  Thifteltone.  S.’b. 

7.  Tenen  tes  predicti  Dni  Johannis  de  Bufly  in  Thi¬ 

fteltone;  &  alibi  di&o  Manerio  pertinentes  j  qui  tenent 
per  dittum  Servicium.  lQ 

8.  Cretone,  z  (  ^ 

9.  Les  Tenentz  Sire  Johan  de  Bufly  in  South  Wuna 
o  en  Cretone,  c  en  Thifteltone,  de  i  Fe  de  Chivaler  • 
del  Fe  de  Koc,  purtenaunt  au  Maner  de  Thifteltone,  o 


Num.  1756, 1757. 

toutz  jours  ad  efte  par  Homage  e  Foreyne,  quaunt  ele 
court  ;  e  Sute  de  Courte,  Garde,  e  Mariage,  quant  ele 
chete  ;  e  efte  tenu  des  Heires  de  Wilughby,  per  mens 
e  cuy  de  la  Dame  de  Vefcy.  1 2. 

10.  Tenentes  Johannis  de  Bufly  Militis,  Domini  de 
Hagham,  per  Homagium  8c  Forinfecum  Servicium,  in 
Comitatu  Leceftrie. 

1 1 .  Tenentes  Johannis  Bufly  Militis,  Domini  de 

Hagham,  qui  tenent  per  Homagium  &  Forinfecum  Ser¬ 
vitium,  de  Feodo  Epifcopi  Lincolnienfis.  1 5. 

Inter  alia,  fcil,  ad  fol.  19.  habetur  Carta  Johan¬ 
nis  de  Bufly  Militis,  qua  vendidit  Thome  de  Metham 
Militi,  Cuftodiam  k  Maritagium  Edmundi  filij  Henrici 
Pyrpount,  qui  defe  tenebat  quartam  partem  feodi  unius 
Militis  in  Baldertone,  per  Servicium  Militare.  dat.  1 5 
die  Maij  ann.  io  R.  Edwardi  in. 

12.  Succeffio  Epifcoporum  Lincolnienfium,  a  Remigio 
ad  Henricum  de  Burwache  ;  cum  notatione  Annorum 
k  dierum  Confecrationis,  kc.  k  Obitus  cujuflibet. 

34.  b. 

13.  Stemma  Dni  Willelmi  de  Bufly,  ex  parte  ma- 

terna.  ...  36. 

1 4.  Defignatio  dierum  quibus  commifla  fuere  prariia 
de  Halewdone-hille,  k  de  Erne,  in  Scocia.  ibid. 

15.  Varia  feripta  de  Ecclefijs  de  Thiftiltone,  North- 
wyne,  8c  Southwyne,  8c  Decimis  earum,  kc.  38. 

1 6.  Conceffio  Mercati  icFerise  Johanni  de  Bufly,  apud 

Manerium  fuum  de  Hogham  ;  per  R.  Edw.  m.  dat. 
28  die  Mart,  anno  Regni  fui  quarto.  4I.  b. 

1 7’  De  Eccleiia  parochiali  de  Hogham.  42.  b. 

18.  DeWarennaquamclamavitJohannes  de  Bufly  Miles, 
in  Dominicis  fuis  Terris  de  Baldertone  k  Wygeflee! 

19.  De  Rulevio  D'no  Regi  dato  poll  mortem  Hu. 
gonis  Bully,  per  Johannem  filium  fuum  &  haredem. 

45.  b. 

20.  The  Manner  of  making  Homage.  46.  b. 

21.  Carta  Charitatis,  qua  Abbas  k  Conventus  S. 

Maria;  de  Voto  juxta  Cefaris-burgum  receperunt  Animas 
Patris  et  Matris  ETni  Lamberti  de  Buffiy  Militis,  fuam, 
fihj  fui,  et  antecefloruin  fuorum,  fpecialiter  in  Annuali’ 
&c.  A.  D.  1232.  47.  b/ 

22.  Terrarium  de  Feodo  Rogeri  Bordeance  in 
Thiftyhone,  de  quibus  Abbas  de  Croyland  debet  habere 
Decimam  Frugum,  Feni,  8c  Pecudum,  et  de  omnibus 
Terris  cum  pertineneijs,  quas  quondam  Hermannus  & 
Ambrofius  de  Thiftyhone  de'prEeditloBordeance  tenuerit. 

23.  Extracts  from  Public  Records,  illuftrating  the 
Genealogy  of  this  antient  Family  of  Bufly.  53.  b. 

1757- 

Codcx  (quern  de  me  redemit  illuftriffimus  Dominus 
meur.)  chartaceus  in  fol.  varijs  manibus  fcriptus :  in 
quo  continentur, 

1.  Fragmentum  Annalium  de  Rebus  Anglicis,  A.  D. 

1381.  1382.  1383.  1384.  &  1385.  1. 

Dil'crepant  ab  ijs  quos  contexuit  Thomas  Walfyng- 
hamus  Monachus  Sanft-Albanenfis. 

2.  Annales  Ab  A.  D.  741.  ufq;  ad  A.  D.  1131. 
inclufive ;  a  duobus  (ut  Titulum  in  dorfo  taceam) 
Mariano  Scoto  Chronographo  adjudicati.  Re  autem 
vera,  conftat  Traclatus  ille  ex  polteriore  parte  Chronici 
Horentij  Monachi  Wigornieniis  (qui  Marianum  dc- 
floravit)  et  priore  parte  Continuationis  ejufdem.  7, 

3.  Annalium  pars  de  Bello  Sacro  in  Oriente  gefto, 

ab  A.  D.  1095.  ufque  ad  A.  D.  1118.  in  cjuaplurima 
inferuntur  Hiftorica  de  rebus  Anglicis.  -g. 

4 •  Magiftri  Jacobi  de  Vitriaco  Epifcopi  Aeon enfis,  poll 
modum  Sedis  Apoftolica  Cardinalis,  Abbreviac  Hittoria 
Terra  Sandta,  Liber  primus.  io^_ 

13  5.  Robert! 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


199 


Num.1757. 

5.  Roberti  Cybole  S.  T.  P.  Cancellarij  Sc  Canonici 
Parifienfis,  ac  Decani  Ebroiceniis,  Examinatio  ProcefTCts 
fadti  Rothomagi  A.  D.  1430.  &  1431.  contra  Joannam 
d’  Arc  (La  Pucelle  d’Orleans)  per  D.  Petrum  Cauchon 
tunc  Bell uacenfem  Epifcopum,  in  materia  Fidei.  144. 

Exfcripta  ex  Originali  ipfius  Authoris. 

6.  Pars  prior  Proceffus  memorati  contra  Joannam  d’ 

Arc.  _  .  *57- 

Sequitur  traftatus  aliena  manu  exaratus,  in  quo, 

7.  Claufula,  eo  prseclariflinlo,  Libro  quem  de  Hif- 

toria  Abbatite  S.  Augudini  Cantuarienfis  compilavit 
ejufdem  Com-monachus  Thomas  de  Elmham  (deinde 
Prior  Lantonienfis)  qui  nunc  fervatur  in  Aula  S.  Tri- 
jiitatis  apud  Cantabrigienfes;  defcripta  ;  et  a  D.  Henrico 
Spelmanno  Concil.  Tom.  1 .  pag.  1 25.  publici  juris  fadla  ; 
de  Libertatibus  Ecclefia;  Chridi  ac  Metropolitica;  Can- 
tuaricnfis  agens.  170. 

8.  Concilium  Becanceldenfe  A.  D.  694.  fub  With- 

redo  Cantia;  Rege  celebratum  :  ejufdem  Tenoris  ac  illud 
Exemplum  quod  edidit idem  D.  Hen.  Spelmanlius  Concil. 
Tom.  1.  pag.  191.  ibid. 

In  iftius  Diplomatis  (fed  in  binas  quafi  formulas  di- 
verfificati)Latineq;  per  omnia  fcripti,  incidit  Sc  publicavit 
Vir  ille  fummus  ;  cui  haudquaquam,  ut  videtur  innotuit 
Chronicon  illud  duplex,  quod  in  Cottonian^  Bibliotheca 
infcribitur  Domit.  A.  8.  ubi  habetur  et  aliud  Exemplar 
cum  Anglo  Saxonic£  (quod  exinde  in  Cl.  Gibfonij  Chro¬ 
nicon  Saxonicum,  ope  apographi  Juniani  tranflatum  fuit) 
turn  Latine  exaratum.  Quinetiam  in  hac  indrudtiflima 
Bibliotheca  exftat  et  tertium  exemplar  a  Spelmanno  non 
vifum,  ac  adhuc  ineditum  ;  Normanno- Gallice  quidem 
fcriptum,  Titulum  vero  Latinum,  his  qua;  fequuntur 
Verbis,  przefe  ferens,  “  PrimumPrivilegium  Regale,  Ec- 
slefia;  Anglicanas  conceflum,”  ut  videre  ell,  in  Codicis 
no.  6,6.  notati,  folio  36. 

9.  Chartse  Regum  Wythredi,  Ceneuulfi,  Edgari, 

Athelredi,  Knutonis,  Edwardi  Confelforis,  et  Wiilchni  1 . 
de  Libertatibus  &  Franchefijs  Ecclefia;  Metropolitica; 
Cantuarienfis :  una  cum  Narratione  Placiti  apud  Pi- 
nendene  ex^gitati  A.  D.  1072.  170.  b. 

10  l.piflola  Domini  Papas  Clementis  vi.  milfa  Im- 
peratori  Carolo  iv  ?  pod  Capcionem  Johannis  Regis 
Francie,  per  R.  Edwardum  in.  pro  liberatione  ipfius. 

*73*. 

11.  Litera  ejufdem  Papas  miffa  Edwardo  111.  Regi 

Anglia;,  pro  Pace  inter  ipfum  &  Philippum  Regem 
Francorum  habenda.  173.  b. 

12.  Littera  Innocentij  vr.  Papas,  mifia  Karolo  iv. 
Imperatori  ;  pod  Captionem  Johannis  Regis  Francias. 

1 76.  b. 

Superiores  Epidolas  apud  Rymerum  non  inveni. 

13.  Inquifitio  tangens  Pontem  Roffenfern,  virtute 

brevis  Dni  Regis.  Ex  libro  quodam  fcripti  Magidri 
Twyne.  177.  b. 

14.  Memoranda  de  Ponte  RofFenfi  :  Excerpta  ex 

Libro  quodam  Ecclefia;  Chridi  Cantuaria;.  178. 

Eadem  fere  (e  Libro  Domefdei  exfcripta)  habentur 
in  membranaceo  hujus  Bibliotheca;  Codice,  cujus  Nota; 
funt  59.  A.  3.  fcil.  ad  fol.  86.  b. 

15.  Defcriptio  demondrans  aperte,  unde  debeat  Pons 
.de  Rochedria  redaurari,  quoties  fuerit  fractus.  1 78.  b. 

1  16.  Littera;  Patentes  R.  Richardi  n.  de  Reparatione 

&  Sudentatione  Pontis  Roffenfis.  Tede  &c.  4to  die 
Januarij,  anno  regni  fui  2 1 .  1 79 .  b. 

17.  Littera;  Patentes  ejufdem  Regis,  de  Sudentatione 
memorati  Pontis  ;  nec  non,  de  Fundatione  Cantaria;  ad 
finem  ejufdem  per  Joannem  Dominum  de  Cobeham. 
Tede  &c.  30  die  Januarij,  anno  Regni  fui  1  8.  ibid. 

18.  Ind*. umenta  varia  adDotutionem  ejufdem  Canta- 

liae  Ibeftantia.  ibid. 

19.  Carta  TTcnrici  Regis;  qua  conceffit  Monachis 
Ecclefia;  Chridi  Cantuaria;,  novam  Warennam  in  Do- 
minicis  Terris  fuis  quas  habuerunt  in  Comitatibus  Kane. 


Num.  1757. 

Surr.  Suffex.  ElTex.  Suthfolch-  Northfolch.  Bukingh 
Oxon.  et  Devon.  181. 

20.  Conceflio  Regis  Edwardi  ii.pro  Se&  Succefforibus 

fuis  ;  ut  (nos  Monachi  prtedicli)  habeamus  Amercia- 
menta  hominum  nodrorum,  coram  quibufeunque  Judi- 
cibus  adjudicatis  ;  et  Catalla  Felonum  &  Fugitivorum 
nodrorum.  ibid. 

21.  Bulla  Papa;  Bonifaeij  vm.  qua  Monachos  fupra- 

memorata;  Ecclefia;,  a  pra;datione  Minutarum  Deci- 
marum  immunes  reddidit.  182. 

22.  Taxacio  Temporalium  et  Spiritualium  Perfonarum 

Ecclefiadicarum  in  Civitate  &  Diocefi  Cantuarien.  in 
Provincia  Cantuarienfi  ;  nec  non  &  Eboracenfi.  ibid. 

23.  La  Maniere  coment  Horn  deyt  chargier  Baylifs 

Sc  Provos,  fur  lur  acounte  tenir  de  un  Maner ;  et  de 
Maner  garder.  1 84. 

24.  Inditutiones  Henrici  Regis  1.  187. 

Ed  Magna  Carta  Regis  Henrici  1.  uti  condet  ex 

exempiari  ejufdem  membranaceo,  qua;  hUc  in  Bibliotheca 
infcribitur,  no.  453.  i- 

Now  follow  the  learned  Works  of  Sir  John  Fortef- 
cue,  who  was  Lord  Chief  Judice  of  the  Kings  Bench, 
A.  D.  1442.  &  1443-  which  feldome  occur  in  manufeript. 
They  are, 

25.  The  Declaration  made  by  John  Fortefcu  Knight 

upon  certeyn  Writinges  fent  out  of  Scotland  agaynd 
the  KingesTitleofhisRealmeofEnglar.ee.  1S8. 

26.  The  difference  betwen  Dominium  Regale,  & 

Dominium  Politicum  &  Regale.  1 96. 

27.  Another  Copie  of  part  of  Sir  John  Fortefcues 

Declaration  (above  mentioned  at  no.  25.)  204. 

28.  Ejufdem  Tra&atus  de  Laudibus  Legum  Anglia;. 

208. 

Ladly,  follow  a  pretty  numerous  Colleftion  of  Pa¬ 
pers,  which  feem  to  have  been  fent  or  the  greated  part 
of  them)  to  Cardinal  Wolfey,  or  fotne  other  Minidcr  of 
State  belonging  to  King  Henry  vm.  or  his  poderity. 
vizt. 

29.  Oraifon  fai£te  a  Marie  d'Angleterre.  227. 

This  was  at  her  Entry  into  Paris,  and  concludeth 

thus,  Cy  finilt  la  Compofition  Sc  Oraifon  quei  a  eue 
l’Univerfitte  de  Paris,  par  l’organe  de  Mailtre  (Meffire) 
May  le  Boneil,  Dodleur  en  Theologie,  a  la  Royne  de 
France  Marye  d'Angleterre,  Pan  1514.  le  26  jour  de 
Novembre. 

30.  Le  Couronnement  de  PEmpereur  Charles  v. 

239- 

31.  Les  Ceremonnees  gardees  le  jour  que  le  Pape 

donna  a  l’efieu  Empereur  Charles  v.  a  Boulongne  la 
Couronne  de  fer.  241. 

32.  Le  deux  Coronnementz  (ced  affcavoir  de  Lom- 

bardie.  Sc  du  Sainft  Empire  de  Rome)  du  tres-invin- 
cible  Charles  v.  de  ce  nom,  Arche-Roy  des  Romains. 
de  Deux  Germanies,  et  des  Hefpaignols  ;  couchez  par 
Efcript,  par  Meffere  Henry-Cornille  Agrippa,  Confeillier 
&  Judiciare  de  la  dicte  tres-facree  Majede.  245. 

33.  Le  Seige  de  Vienne  en  Odriffe,  en  Pan  1529. 

v  276- 

34.  Homagium  Malcolmi  Regis  Scotorum,  fadtum 
Edwardi  filio  Egelridi,  A.  D.  1043. 

35.  Homagium  Joannis  Ballioli,  fadttim  R.  Edw.  1. 

A.  D.  1296.  Gallice.  ibid, 

36.  Homagium  Magnatum  et  Communitatis  Regni 

Scotia;.  A.  D.  1297.  Gallice.  288. b. 

37.  Homagium  Roberti  Brus,  A.  D.  1319.  288.  b. 

38.  Remilfio  five  Relaxatio  fadta  Regibus  Scotia;,  de 

Fidelitate  debita  Regibus  Anglia;,  per  Edwardum  in. 
A.  D.  1  330.  289.  b. 

39.  Homagium  David  Regis,  cum  claufula  de  non 

obdante,  &c.  A.  D.  1346.  290. 

40.  Surfum-redditio  Regni  Scotia;  in  manus  Edwardi 

in.  per  Edwardum  Baillioll  Regem  Scotorum.  A.  D. 
,3j5.  ibid. 

41.  A  Par. 


200 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1757. 

41.  A  Particular  Account  of  the  Damages  done  to 

the  Scots,  by  the  Inroads  of  the  Englifh,  from  the  9th 
bf  September  (ann.  34  (35)  Henr.  viix  ?)  to  the  29th  of 
June  following.  293- 

42.  Exploits  doone  uppone  the  Scotts  from  the  be- 

ginyng  of  July  anno  3610,  R.  Regis  Henrici  vm.  to  the 
5th  of  Auguft  following.  3° 1  • 

43.  Silveftfi  Giraldi  Cambrenfis  Topographia  Cam¬ 
bria:.  ad  Hlibef- turn  Cantuarienfem  Archiepifcopum. 

3°3- 

44.  Ejufdem  liber  de  Ulaudabilibus  Wallia:.  _  308. 

45.  Relation,  in  French,  of  the  Caufe  of  the  Difference 

between  the  Captain  of  Northam,  &  the  Lord  of  Hume, 
about  the  Salmon-Fifhing  in  the  Tweed,  ann.  5  Hen. 
vm?  3I3* 

46.  A  Note  of  fuche  Spoiles  &  other  Injuries  as  have 

of  late  ben  committed  by  the  Scotts  ageinft  the  Quenes 
Majefties  Subjects,  vpon  the  Borders  towards  Scotlande. 
A.  D.  1553.  3*4- 

47.  Names  of  Scots  Townes  &  Vyllages,  bumede 

when  the  Englifh  Army  was  in  Scotlande  (ann.  35  Hen. 
yin?)  315. 

This  Paper  containeth  alfo  an  Account  of  other 
damages  done  to  the  Scotts  by  the  fame  Army. 

48.  The  Caufes  &  Affayrcs  between  th’Emperour 

Charles  v.  &  his  Alliez,  againft  the  French  King  Fran¬ 
cis  1.  &  his .  319. 

49.  Sententia  Caroli  v.  Cafaris,  lata  in  Gandavenfes, 

A.  D.  1540.  ob  Rebellionem.  325. 

50.  La  Police  &  Ordonance  du  SainCt e  Empire  ;  faicte 

a  la  Journee  de  Wormes,  a°.  1545-  328. 

51.  Nomina  Praffidum  in  Colloquio  Wormacienfi  ; 

nec  non  Legatorum,  ex  parte  tarn  Proteflantium  tarn 
Pontificiorum  inibi  prasfentium.  360. 

52.  The  Names  of  fuche  Lordes,  Knyghtes,  &  other 

Gentyls,  being  about  the  Kinge  (Henry  vii  ?)  at  his 
metynge  with  the  Archeduke  of  Auflrige  (Philip,  then 
entituled  King  of  Caflile,  A.  D.  1506?)  361. 

53.  Lift  of  the  Chief  Perfonages  in  the  Arch-dukes 

Company.  3^2* 

54.  Italian  Letter  of  the  Marquis  Jovanni-Jacomo 
de  Medici,  to  the  Citizens  of  Sienna  ;  9  January  1 555. 

363- 

55.  Copia  della  rifpofta  della  Signoria  di  Sienna  al 

Marchefe.  ibid. 

56.  The  Coppye  of  an  Italian  Lettre  written  from 
Roome  to  the  Seignior  Paulo  Vitello.  1 6  di  Gennario. 

1355-  .  .  364- 

57.  Lift  of  the  Officers  &  Soldiers  killed,  taken,  or 
miffing,  after  the  Battle  of  ....  In  Italian. 

365- 

58.  Lift  of  the  Cardinals,  Prelats,  &  other  Perfons 
oFDiftinCtion,  alfembled  in  Trent,  the  26  of  May  1545. 

366. 

59.  Lift  of  the  Ships,  &c.  appointed  for  the  guard 

of  the  Narrow  Seas ;  temp.  Hen.  vm.  367. 

60.  The  Names  of  Officers  of  the  Houfholde  of 

. 368. 

61.  Bernardi  Navagerij  Oratio,  habita  in  funere  An- 

drec  Gritti  Venetiarum  Principis.  370. 

62.  Negotiatio  faCta  Bloefij  nomine  Imperij,  anno 

1 560.  pro  reftitutione  Metenfis,  Tullenfis,  et  Verdu- 
nenfis  Civitatum,  per  Legatos,  EleCtum  Tridentinum  & 
Comitem  de  Stollemberg.  ^76. 

63.  Difcours  du  PaiTage  de  Monfeigneur  de  Guyfe 

par  la  Lombardie,  A.  D.  1566.  382. 

64.  Notes  touching  theDiftances  of  one  French  Town, 

City,  Caftle,  or  Village,  from  another.  Collected  from 
Froilfard,  Enguerraunt,  &c.  ^85. 

65.  Other  Notes  concerning  the  antient  Names  of 

Places,  Rivers,  &c.  in  France.  387. 


Num.  1758. 

1758. 

A  velom-Book  in  fol.  given  by  the  Very-Reverend  & 
learned  Dr.  Francis  Atterbury,  now  Dean  of  Chrift- 
church  ;  being  a  very  antient  &  fair  C.opie  of  Geffrey 
Chaucers  Canterbury-Tales  ;  of  which  it  may  be 
worth  while  to  give  the  following  particular  account, 
becaufe  the  Manufcript  books  of  this  Treatife  differ  not 
a  little  from  one  another. 

1 .  The  General  Prologue  under  this  Title,  “  Here 
begynnethe  the  Book  of  Tales  of  Caunterburye  ;  com¬ 
piled  by  Geffraie  Chaucers  of  Brytayne  chef  Poete.” 

i.<J 

Herein  Chaucer  faith  that  they  were  29  in  company, 
befide  the  Holt ;  but  in  the  Characters  he  defcribeth 
more.  The  agreement  alfo  was,  by  Order  of  the  Holt, 
that  every  Perfon  ffiould  tell  two  Tales  in  the  way  to 
Canterbury,  &  Two  more  in  the  way  back  ;  now  here, 
no  Perfon  (but  Chaucer  himfelf)  telleth  more  than  one 
Tale ;  which  feemeth  as  if  the  Work  was  not  finiffied. 
More-over,  among  the  Tales  that  remain,  here  are  none 
of  Two  of  the  Prioreffes  Chaplains,  the  Haberdalher, 
Carpynter,  Webbe,  Dyer,  Tapicer,  Ploughman,  & 
Hooft,  who  ar-e  all  particularly  mentioned  ;  but  there  is 
of  the  Chanons  Yeman,  of  whom  I  find  no  particular 
Character. 

This  Prologue  is  imperfeCt  at  the  end. 

2 .  The  Knights  Tale.  1  o. 

This  is  imperfeCt  at  the  beginning ;  perhaps  the  : 

leaf  wanting  had  the  Picture  of  the  Knight  on  Horfe-  ■ 
back,  and  was  therefore  cult  out. 

3.  The  Millers  Prologue,  &  Tale.  33. 

Here  fpace  is  left  for  his  Picture,  which  was  not  1 

filled  up ;  and  another  Leaf  wanting,  wherein  were  : 
written,  the  latter  end  of  the  Prologue,  &  the  beginning  ; 
cf  the  Tale. 

4.  The  Reves  Tale  &  Prologue.  40. 

3.  The  Cokes  Tale  &  Prologue,  both  imperfeCt ;  j 

a  Leaf  being  cutt  or  torn  out.  45.  b. 

Here  room  is  left  for  his  Picture,  which  was  not  1 
inferted. 

I  am  of  Mr.  Urry’s  opinion,  that  the  Story  about  t 
Gamelyn  doth  not  tally  with  the  former  part  thereof  ;  ; 
and  perhaps  it  might  have  been  what  he  judges  it.  The  : 
Tale  of  the  Squires  Yeoman,  or  Part  of  it. 

6.  The  Prologue  &  Tale  of  the  Man  of  Lawe.  55.  b. 

7.  The  Squyers  Tale  &  Prologue.  68. 

Every  body  knows  that  the  Squyer’s  Tale  could  1 

never  be  found  perfeCt  in  any  Book  of  Chauceis  Works;  ; 
for  which  reafon,  divers  have  endeavoured  to  fupply  | 
what  they  thought  wanting,  particularly  Edmund  Spenfer;  ; 
&  John  Lane  ;  whole  book  now  remaineth  in  the  Afh- 
molean  Mufasum  at  Oxford,  No.  53.  with  this  Title, 
“  Chaucers  Pillar,  or  the  Squires  Tale  found  out.” 

8.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Marchaunt.  76. 

9.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Wif  of  Bathe;  with:' 

room  for  her  Picture.  89.  I 

Between  the  Prolog  &  the  Tale  are  The  Wordis  of 
the  Frere, 

10.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Frere;  with  room  for  i 

his  Picture.  102. 1 

1 1 .  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Somnour ;  with  room  r 

for  his  Picture.  106.  b. 

12.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Clerke  of  Oxenford  ; : 

with  room  for  his  Picture.  114  1 

This  is  clofed  with  L’Envoyc  de  Chaucer,  in  En-  J 

gliQi. 

13.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Frankeleyne ;  with  li 

room  for  his  Picture.  127.  | 

14.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  fecunde  Nonne  ;  with  It 

room  for  her  Picture.  137.I 

15.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Chanounys  Yeman  ; 

with  room  for  his  Picture.  14?.  1 

This  i 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


2.0  i 


Num.  17s?,  1759. 

This  Is  imperfeft  at  the  end,  &  by  realon  of  the 
lofs  of  divers  Leaves,  there  remaineth  but 

16.  Part  of  the  Doftour  of  Phifik’s  la'e.  t5°* 

17.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Pardoner  ;  (with  room 

for  his  Pi&iire.)  150.  b. 

18.  The  Prolog  &  Talc  of  the  Schipman;  (with  room 

for  his  Pifture.)  !5^- 

19.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Priorefle.  (with  room 

for  her  Pifture.)  .  1 

20.  The  Prolog  &  T ale  of  Chaucer  of  Sir  1  liopas  ; 

(with  room  for  his  iftdture.)  _  1  ^6. 

2t.  (Chaucer’s  Tale  of  Melibe  &  Prudence,  in  Prole  : 
Imperfedt  at  the  beginning.  1  ^9* 

22.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Monkc.  1  83. 

23.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  NonnesPreeft,  (with 

room  for  his  Pi&ure.)  192.  b. 

24.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Manciple;  (with  room 

for  hi 5  Picture.)  2'-°; 

25.  The  Prolog  &  Tale  of  the  Perfon ;  before  which, 

was  room  for  his  Picture.  204.  b 

26.  Geffray  Chaucer’s  Requeft  to  his  Readers,  that 

they  would  pray  for  him,  that  he  might  be  forgiven  for 
compofing  or  tranflating  l'uch  ot  his  lighter  1  rafts  as 
might  have  given  Offence  ;  among  which  this  prefent 
Work  of  the  Canterbury-Tales  is  more  efpecially  re¬ 
membered  ;  but  as  to  his  other  Works  of  Morality  & 
Devotion,  he  craves  no  Pardon.  23°’ 

This  Book  in  the  Reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  be¬ 
longed  to  the  Family  ot  Foxe  of  Pichford,  and  hath 
divers  Entrances  relating  to  the  faid  family  ;  as  may  be 
perceived  at  the  beginning  &  end.  ffoll.  126.  b.  127. 
204.  fee. 

1  759- 

A  P  00k  in  fol.  (bought  of  me)  wherein  are  entered  many 
different  matters  occurring  to  fume  Gentleman  in  his 
Reading,  A.  D.  1617.  and  by  him  judged  meet  to  be 
put  down  together,  for  his  more  immediate'  ufe. 
They  are, 

1.  (A  'Table  of  the  Contents.  2.) 

2.  Concerning  the  Title  of  Prince  Leopold  to  the 

Dutcliies  of  Cleves  &  Julieir,  dec.  by  the  Gift  of  the 
Emperor  Charles  v.  The  Titles  of  the  other  Competitors  ; 
&  the  Ambaffages  thereupon.  "  8. 

(Taken  from  a  Ercneh  I-liftory  printed,  A.  D. 
1611.  fol.  1272.) 

3.  How  Frederick  Duke  of  Saxony  refufed  to  be 

Emperor  (from  Sleidan.  Lib.  1.)  11. 

4.  Of  (lie  Perpetual  League  concluded  betwixt  the 

Pope,  the  King  of  Spaine,  and  the  Venetians,  againit 
>he  Turk,  24  May  1571.  (from  the  Turkiih  Hiltory. 
fol.  S60.)  12. 

5.  Of  the  beginning  &  Inftitution  of  the  Electors  in 

Gcrmanie  (from  Cation’s  Chronicle.)  13. 

6.  Concerning  the  State  of  Gcrmanie  (from  the 

Hiitorye  of  Hungary.)  13.  b. 

7.  1  he  Ceremonye  touchinge  the  Execution  which 

is  donne  in  Spaine  againit  Herctickes,  as  they  call  them 
(from  the  Hiltory  of  Hungary.)  16. 

With  an  account  of  the  manner  of  proceeding  in 
the  Inquiiition. 

8.  How  the  Emperor  Charles  v.  renounced  the  Em¬ 

pire,  to  the  ende  that  Ferdinand  might  have  it  (from 
the  Hiltory  of  Hungary)  2  < . 

Here  is  alfo  an  account  of  that  Emperors  Death  & 
Funeral. 

9.  Concerninge  the  Emperor  Charles  the  Great; 

&  his  Family  (from  C.arion)  24. 

10.  The  Manner  of  Solyman  the  Magnificent’s  Fu¬ 
neral  ;  &  his  lbn  Selym’s  Entrance  upon  the  Turkiih 
Government  (from  the  Huugatian  Hiltory.)  24.  b. 

1 1 .  Of  the  Emperor  Maximilians  Entrance  into 
Prague  ;  and  of  the  Succours  granted  unto  him  by  the 


Num.  1759. 

Bohemians,  Silefians,  and  Moravians,  againft  the  Turk 
(from  the  Hiltory  of  Hungary )  _  r  f-E 

1 2.  The  Manner  of  the  Election  of  a  Kinge  ol  Poloma 

(from  the  fame  book.)  2  5-  ^ 

1 3.  A  Ihort  Note  of  Julius  Caffars  Military  Succeiles 

(from  the  Life  of  Pompev.)  r.  27- 

14.  Account  of  the  Coronation  of  Rodolph  King  or 

Hungary  (who  was  afterwards  Emperor)  (from  the  fame 
Hungarian  Hiltory.)  2i?‘ 

15.  A  molt  notable  Enfample,  for  all,  oftheUnler- 
tenty  of  worldly  Thingcs  ;  in  the  Death  of  the  French 
King  Charles  vi u.  (from  Philip  de  Comines.)  68. 

16.  Concerning  the  Pragmatical  Sanction,  (from  the 

Life  of  the  French  King  Lewis  xi.)  68.  b. 

17.  Remarks  upon  the  Life,  Sicknefs  &  Death  of 
K.  Phi 'ip  1!.  of  Spain  ;  &  of  Don  Carlos  his  fon. 

72.  b. 

18.  The  Death  and  Charafter  of  Armurath  1  •  Sultftn 

of  the  Turks  (from  Knowles.)  7  T  b- 

19.  The  Charafter  of  Mahomet  1.  Sultan  of  the 

Turks  ;  of  his  Death  ;  and  how  the  fame  was  concealed 
4 1  Days  ;  viz.  until  the  arrival  of  his  Son  &  Succeffor 
Armurath  (from  Knowles.)  75- 

20.  The  Privilege  ot  Phyficians  ;  vizt.  that  the  Sun 

fees  their  Praftife,  &  the  Earth  hides  their  Faults  (from 
the  French  Hiltory.)  7.®* 

21.  Short  extracts  from  the  Hiltory  of  the  Idle  or 

Henry  iv.  of  France.  76.  b. 

22.  Of  the  Death  of  Acmet  the  Emperor  of  the 

Turkes,  72  Nov.  1617;  and  of  the  Succeflicn  of  his 
brother  Muftapha.  _  77-. 

2  3.  Ol  the  Death  of  Ferdinand  King  of  Arragon  ;  his 
Charafter;  &  of  the  Honors  which  he  fhewed  to  the 
Corps  of  his  General  the  Great  Gonfalvo.  (from  Guic¬ 
ciardini.)  _  77- 

24.  The  Speech  of  Francis  Peren  Bifhop  of  Waradin 

in  Hungary,  before  the  Battle  of  Mohaez  ;  with  a 
Charafter  of  King  Lewis  1 1 .  (from  the  Hungarian 
Hiltory.)  78- 

25.  How  the  x 8th  of  July  1621.  was  a  Day  of  Ju¬ 
bilee  ;  or  of  great  Rejoycing.  .  79. 

26.  Relation  of  what  palled  in  the  laft  Hours  or 

Monfieur  du  Plcffis  Mornav.  122. 

27.  Of  the  Synod  held  at  Gap  (from  the  French 

Hiltory.)  128. 

28.  Of  the  Death  of  Theodore  Beza  (from  the  fame.) 

ibid. 

29.  Brief  Relation  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  Peter  de 

Pinac,  Arch-biihop  of  Lions,  (from  the  fame.  1  29. 

30.  Divers  CoUeftions  from  Sleidans  Commentaries, 
concerning  the  Inftitution  of  the  Year  of  Jubilee  ; 
Luther’s  Death ;  the  Manner  of  clefting  the  Pope. 

130.  b. 

31.  Of  the  Death  of  Burrhus  ;  and  of  Seneca  (from 

the  Annals  of  Cornelius  Tacitus)  131.  b. 

32.  Other  CoUeftions  from  Sleidan;  as,  the  Inftitution 
of  the  Interim;  of  the  force  of  Holy-Water ;  the  Hal¬ 
lowing  of  Churches,  Bells,  &  Altars  ;  the  Ceremonies 
at  the  making  a  Pall  ;  and  of  the  Money  exacted  thereby; 
alfo  the  Occafion  of  the  Tumult  at  Strafbourg.  134. 

33.  K.  Henry  vm’s  Injun  Mon,  for  the  Decanoni¬ 
zation  of  Thomas  Becket,  rafing  his  name  out  of  the 
Books  of  Devotion,  &c  (from  Foxe’s  Martvrology) 

136. 

34.  The  Manner  of  the  Confecration  of  the  New 

Churchyard  &  Church  of  Fulmer  in  Com.  Bucks. 
iNovemb.  1610;  by  Dr.  Barlow  then  Bilhop  of  Lincolne 
(from  Stowes  Annals)  137. 

35.  Names  of  the  Arch-bilhops  of  Canterbury,  from 

Augultin,  to  Henry  Deane.  138.  b. 

This  is  crofted  out,  as  Imperfeft. 

36.  A  better  Catalogue  of  the  Arch  bilhops  of  Can¬ 
terbury,  with  the  words  laid  at  the  Delivery  of  the  Pall 

2  F  unto 


Cat.  Hap.l.  Vol.  II. 


2C4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num  1759. 

unto  them  ;  the  Value  of  the  Archbifhoprick  in  ihe 
Kings  books  ;  and  the  Sum  paid  to  the  Pope  at  their 
Entrance,  ,  ^  b. 

37.  Like  Catalogues  &  Eftimates,  as  to  the  Biihops 

of  London,  Wincheftcr,  Ely,  Coventrye  &  Lichfevlde, 
Salifburye,  Batli  and  Wells,  Exeter,  Norwich,  Worcefter’ 
Hereford,  Chichefter,  Oxford,  Gloucefler,  Peterbo¬ 
rough,  Briftol,  St.  David,  Eandaffe,  Bangor,  St.  Afaph  • 
Archbi/hops  of  Yorke,  Biihops  of  Durham,  Carlile  & 
Chefter.  ’ 

38.  Collections  out  of  Guicciardini’,  Hiftory  con¬ 
cerning  the  Great  Gonfalos.  b. 

39.  Collections  out  of  Guicciardini’s  Hillory,  con¬ 
cerning  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Tremouille,  the  Death 
of  the  Marlhall  Dornano  ;  &  of  Defdiguieres.  172.  b. 

40.  Of  the  Emulation  between  two  Roman  Cen¬ 
turions  ;  from  ^Caefars  Commentaries.  j  73.  b. 

4>-  Of  the  Confederacy  between  fome  Circles  of  the 
G  erman  Empire ;  (from  the  French  Hiltory.)  ibid. 

42.  Of  the  Death  ofProfper  Colonno,  &  his  Qua¬ 
lities;  (from  Guicciardine.) 

43-  The  Anfwer  of  George  Stadlowe  Citizen  of  Lon¬ 
don,  to  the  Lords  demand  of  aid  from  the  City  of 
London,  againft  the  Duke  of  Somerfet  then  Protedtor  • 
in  the  Reign  of  K.  Edward  vi.  174.  b.  &  2cr. 

t,  J4/  Jhe  Conclufion  of  the  firft  Part  of  Sir  Walter 
Raleigh’s  Hiltory. 

ihe  Speech  of  Spurius  Liguftinus,  upon  a  fort’of 
Mutmy  in  the  Roman  Army.  j~g 

ArtrJc  ReP“rf  of 'he  Truth  of  the  Fight  about 
the  Illes  of  Acores,  this  lalt  Summer,  (i.  e.  A.  D.  1  e.  ) 
betwixt  the  Revenge,  one  of  Her  Majeflies  Shippes  (Sir 
Richard  Gnnvill  Commander)  and  an  Armado  of  the 
Kmge  of  Spaine.  180  b 

V;  Lf"er,  of  the  f-0"!5  of  the  Privy  Council,  dated 
31  March  1622.  to  the  High  Shireft' &  Juftices  of  the 
1  eace  in  the  County  of  Kent,  about  levying  a  volun¬ 
tary  Contribution  from  the  fubftamial  Inhabitants  of 
that  County,  in  Order  to  the  Recovery  of  the  Palatinate. 

48.  Letter  of  the  Duke  of  Lenox,  enforcing  the 
former.  186  b 

49-  Colleftions  from  Knowles’s  Turkiih  Hiftory,  con¬ 
cerning  fome  of  the  Cuftoms  of  that  Nation;  &c. 
r>  r  229.  b. 

50.  Part  of  the  Commentaries  of  Sir  Francis  Vere. 

51.  Relation  of  the  Fight  between  an  Englilh  Ship  of 

9  Imall  Guns  &  50  Men,  called  the  Margaret  &  Jonah 
Capt.  James  Cheller ;  and  two  Spanilh  Ships,  the  one 
of  300 Tons,  and  22  brafs  Guns,  the  other  of  above 
200  Tons  and  16  Guns,  both  full  of  Men:  in  the 
Harbour  of  Mevis,  19  March  1621.  2g2. 

52.  Large  Extraft  out  of  Sir  Roger  Williams’s  Treatis 

ottheWarre.  20  e  b 

53-  The  Declaration  of  the  Lord  De  la  Noue,  noon 

tlkinge  Armes  for  the  juft  Defence  of  the  Townes  of 
Sedan  &  Jametz,  frontiers  of  the  Realrne  of  France  and 
under  the  protection  of  his  Majeftye.  at-  h 

54-  The  Siege  of  Meziers,  defended  by  the  valyant 
Captayne  Bayard  ;  with  a  Relation  of  the  faid  Bayard’s 
Death  (from  the  French  Hiftory.) 

Si‘  M?h0,<(  of  Life  ufed  by ,he  Capuchins.  401^ 

56.  Lpitaphia  Hennci  Howard  Comitis  Northamnto. 
nue;  I  horns  Waller!  Militis,  Uni  Henrici  Howard! 
Locum-Tenenlis  de  Caftro  Dovorenfi  ;  ac  Roberti  Aft„„ 
Mihtis  Conftabulanj  ejufdem  Caftri,  prout  in  Ecclefia 
mlra  Caftrum  Dovorenfe  pofita  confpiciuntur.  41 0 

57.  ABooke  wherin  is  contayned  afwell  ail  the  Beni 

ftces  Iinproprut,  as  others  s  &  whofe  Giftes  they  be  • 
together  with  their  feverall  Valuations  ;  as  alfo  the  Nom’ 
ber  ofDwelhnge-Howfes,  and  Communicantes  in  everye 
feverall  Panfhe  wuhm  the  Diocefle  of  Caunterburye 
Made  the  12th  dayeofMaye  1578.  . 


Num.  1759,  1760. 

5S.  Colle&ions  out  of  Camdens  Remains.  ^31. 

59.  The  Story  of  the  counterfeit  Don  Sebaftian  King 

of  Portugal  (from  the  French  Hiftory)  44, 

60.  Concerning  the  Edidt  of -Pacification  in  France 

(from  tha  French  Hiftory)  451  &  452.  b. 

61.  Articles  concluded  bv  the  Inquifition  of  Spaine 

againft  the  Netherlander  (out  of  the  Netherland  Hifto’ 
ryej  .  1 5  j.  t>. 

02.  Breviat  of  the  Barons  of  the  Cinque  Portes,  the 
Two  auncient  Townes,  &  their  Members,  which  ’they 
humblye  offer  to  the  Honorable  the  Knights  &  Burgefles 
of  the  Howie  of  Commons  of  Parliament,  concerninge 
there  Greivances.  Firlt,  that  they  are  reftrayned  to  trade 
into  the  Lowe-Cuntries  &  Germanye  ;  Secondlye  that 
they  are  reftrayned  of  free-buyinge  &  fellinge  in  London. 

456. 


A.Book  in  fol.  given  by  my  worthy  friend  Mr  Georg* 
Holmes)  wherein  are  contained  a  Colleftion  of  Oiigi- 
nal  Letters,  &c.  written  or  figned  by  Princes  % 
bound  up  together  in  the  following  Order. 

1.  Original  Letter  in  French,  from  Queen  Elizabeth 
to  K.  Henry  iv.  of  I  ranee,  dated  20  July 

It  is  Sill  of Expoftulations  for  his  delay-inn  to'pav 
the  Money  he  owed  her  ;  or  returning  any  fatis&Sori 
Anfwer  about  it.  1  he  Queen  was  I'o  touched  at  Ins 
procedure,  that  (lie  wrote  another  Conclufion  to  the 
Letter,  befides  that  of  Her  Secretary. 

a.  Letter  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  the  States  General  of 
of  the  United  Provinces,  dated  13  January  1506.  de- 
manding  payment  of  all,  or  part  of  the  Money  (he  had 
lent  them ;  and  that,  in  Order  to  oppofe  ihe  Spaniffi 
Deiigns,  they  would  lend  her  20  Men  ol  War  well  fitted 
out,  loTranfports;  &  jo-,  11  their  Land-forces  to  Hers 
It  is  m  French;  fubferibed  by  the  Queens  own 
Secretary  of  St™*  ^  Robeu  C“I11’  Principal 

3.  Letter  of  K,  James  1.  (figned  above  by  himfelf/to 
Henry  Grey  Earl  of  Kent,  &  given  22  March,  in  the 
1  ith  year  of  his  Reign  ;  whereby  he  gave  licenfe  to  the 
to  abfent  himfelf  from  Parliament;  notwith- 
itandmding  his  having  been  fummoned  thereunto  bv  the 
Royal  Writ.  3  6 

4-  Letter  of  K.  James  1.  (figned  as  the  former)  to  Sir 
ihomas  Edmonds  his  Ambaflfador  Refident  in  France  - 
27  Nov.  Anno  Regni  8.  requiring  him  to  further  the’ 
matter  of  GcorgeWood  who  hadfurni/hed  the  JaieFrench 
King  with  a  certain  quantity  of  Gun-powder  for  which 
he  had  not  been  paid.  ^ 

0-5-  Let^  °fl£.  Charles  r.  (figned  as  the  former)  to 
Sir  llaac  Wake  his  Ambaflador  Refident  with  the  French 
King :  1 2  June,  ann.  Reg.  7.  approving  what  he  had 
hitherto  done  ;  and  deeding  him  in  the  demand  of  the 
moyety  of  his  Queens  Portion  then  remaining  unpaid  - 
as  alfo  about  the  Rendition  of  Quebec  in  Canada,  and 
the  Scots  retiring  from  Port-Royal  in  Nova  Scotia  ;  &c. 

6.  Letter  of  K.  Charles  1.  to  theFrenchKirig Louis  xm 

his  brother  in  law  ;  in  French,  k  fubferibed  by  his 
own  Hand  in  ample  manner.  20  September  1 625.  for 
theReleafeof  fuch  of  the  Reformed  Religion  as  were 
kept  in  Pnfon  for  that  realon  only ;  according  to  the 
promife  his  mod  Chrillian  Majefty  had  given  to  him  by 
the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  '  j , 

7.  Inftrudtions  figned  by  K.  Charles  1  to  Henry  de 
Vic  Efq  ;  His  Secretary  for  the  French  Tongue,  &  Agent 
to  the  King  of  Denmark  :  (hewing  how  the  Earl  of 
Arundel  &  Surrey  (Thomas  Howard)  had  been  trifled 
with,  in  his  Embafiage  at  the  Emperors  Court,  abotit- 
the  reftitution  of  the  P-.datinate  :  And  that,  fince  his  Ne¬ 
phew  the  Prince  Elector  Palatine,  to  whofe  Perfon  they 

could 


Bibliothecae  Harieianse; 


tox 


Muni.  176(3. 

could  object  no  Crime,  uncalled,  unheard,  uncon- 
clemned,  againft  all  forme  of  Juftice,  contrarie  to  the 
Emperors  Proinife,  k  theEle&orsProteftation,  mud  by 
that  moft  cruell  Combination  made  at  Prague,  bee  ut¬ 
terly  excluded  from  his  hereditary  Rights  :  He  defired 
that  His  Danifli  Majefty  would  joyn  with  him  in  oppofing 
that  Wronge.  dated  22  January  1637.  and  fubfcribed 
by  Sir  John  Coke.  j  ^ 

8.  Letter  of  K.  Charles  1.  in  French,  to  Erncit  Prince 

de  Mansfelt,  whom  he  permitted  to  raife  Men  by  Mr. 
Lefley,  for  the  Service  of  the  Elector  Palatine.  It  is  full 
af  expreffions  of  Grace  &  Favor,  &  fubfcribed  by  the 
King,  20  May  1(125.  16. 

9.  Letter  K.  Charles  1.  in  French,  to  the  Duke  of 

VTeckclburg,  by  Sir  ....  Anftruther  his  Ambaf- 
“dor,  whom  he  had  appointed  to  Hand  Godfather 
for  him)  at  the  Chrillening  of  the  Dukes  Child.  Sub- 
cnbed  by  his  Majefty.  30  April  1 626.  j  S. 

10.  Warrant  of  K.C.harles  11.  to  Sir  Harbotrle  Grim- 

lone  Mafter  of  the  Rolls,  for  permitting  Jofeph  William- 
on  Efq  ;  Keeper  of  the  Papers  of  State,  to  infpett  the 
Records  in  the  Chapell  of  the  Rolls,  and  from  them  to 
ranferibe  fuch  1  reaties.  Leagues,  Coramiilions,  or  Pub¬ 
ic  Grants,  as  he  ihould  think  fit,  without  Fee  or  Reward, 
jiven  5  March  1668-9.  Superfcribed  or  figned  by  his 
IJajefty,  and  fubfcribed  by  Ilenry  Bennet  then  Lord  Ar- 
ington  &  Principal  Secretary  of  State.  20. 

r  1  1 .  Letter  of  Marie  de  Medicis  Queen  of  France,  to 
c-  James  1.  Complementing  him  upon  his  acceffion  to 
he  Crown  of  England.  Subfcribed  by  her  Maiefty 
June  1603.  J20J’ 

1 2.  Another  Letter  of  the  fame  Queen,  &  of  the  fame 

)ate,  all  written  with  her  own  Hand  to  Anne  of  Den- 
lark  the  new  Queen  of  England,  whom  flic  comple¬ 
mented  with  a  very  good  Grace.  23. 

(The  former  Letter  is  fealed  with  her  Privy  Seal* ; 
ut  this  to  the  Queen,  is  fealed  with  two  Signets,  the 
ne  hath  her  Cypher  under  the  Crown  of  France  the 
ther  the  Arms  of  France,  &  Her  own  Arms  empaled 
nder  the  fame  Crown.  J 

13.  Copie  of  a  Private  Letter  from  K.  Henry  iv.  to 
..James  1.  fent  with  fome  Menaged  Horfes,  and  an 
3le  Efcuier  who  was  to  teach  his  Son  the  Prince  to 

de-  24. 

14.  Letter  of  the  fame  K.  Henry  iv.  of  France,  to 

ur  King.  James  the  1.  complementing  him  upon5 his 
xeflion  to  the  Crown  of  England.  Subfcribed  by 
irrifelF,  2  June  1603.  26  1 

15.  Letter  of  King  Louis,  xm  of  France  to  his  Officers 
Guivrande,  commanding  them  to  let  at  Liberty  all 

nghfh  Prifoners  of  War  as  ffiould  remain  in  their 
rifons,  at  the  time  of  their  Receipt  hereof :  dated  gth 
jptember  1729.  Subfcribed  by  himfelf;  and  lower 
us,  Bouthillier.  2 

1 6.  ^  Soch  another  Letter  to  the  fame  Kings  Officers7 'at 

uinpircorentin.  2g 

17.  Latin  Letter  of  Gabriel  Prince  of  Tranfylvani'a 
George  Villiers  Duke  of  Buckingham,  recommending 

aunt  Peter  Bethlea  (his  Brothers  ,Son  )  to  him,  in  his 
rav  .ils  to  England,  dat.  27  Auguft  1627.  2q 

18.  French  Letter  of  the  Arch-Duke  Albert  to  K 
mes  1.  m- favor  of  Mr.  William  Copley,  who  (with 
J  I'athei)  had  left  England  upon  the  fcore  of  their 
eligion  ;  and  defiring  that  his  Majefly  would  receive 
f  faid  Mr-  Copley  into  his  Grace  &  Protection,  dat. 

April  1603.  3,. 

119.  French  Letter  from  the  Infanta  of  Spain,  the 
rcn-duchtfs  Ifabella-Clara-Eugenia  to  K.  James  1.  con- 
ltulating  Him  upon  his  Succeffion  to  the  Crowns  of 
igland  &  Ireland.  Subfcribed  3  June,  1603.  33. 

20.  French  Letter  from  the  Infanta  to  Queen  Anne  of 
inmark,  upon  the  fame  Occafion  j  &  fubfcribed  the 
ne  Day. 

7  .35- 


Num.  1760. 


sr.  French  Letter  of  the  Arch-Dukc  Albert  to  K. 
James  1.  upon  the  fame  Occafion  :  fubfcribed  by  him, 
the  fame  Day.  ’  ’ 

22.  biench  Letter  of  the  Arch-Duke  to  the  Queen, 
Upon  the  fame  Occafion ;  fubfcribed  the  fame  Day. 

23.  French  Lettei-  of  the  Arch-Duke  Albert  to^K. 
James  i.  written  m  Order  to  bring  on  a  Treaty  of  Peace 
between  England  &  Spain.  Subfcribed,  i9  April  1604. 

24.  Letter  of  Prince  Victor-Amedeo  of  Stvoy  to  K, 

Charles  t.  recounting  divers  Wrongs  done  by  Cardinal 
Richelieu  to  his  Houfe  ;  and  craving  aid  at  the  prefent 
juncture  ;  the  Cardinal  having  inducidj  the  King  of 
France  to  invade  Savoy  ;  with  a  View  alfo  of  pehetratine 
into  Italy.  r  6 

The  whole  is  of  the  Princes  own  hand  (who  wrote 
French  but  badly)  &  is  dated  from  Pancalier,  i  o  Mav 
i63°-  .  43. 

25.  French  Letter  of  Emanuel  Duke  of  Savoy  to  K. 
Charles  1.  appriling  him  of  the  Injuftice  of  Cardinal 
Richelieu,  &  the  Wrongs  done  to  him  &  his  Houfe,  by 
his  means.  As  alfo  of  his  perfidious  taking  ofPignerol 
from  Him,  during  the  Time  of  Treaty.  Whereupon,  he 
humbly  craves  His  Majelties  Protection  This  is  all  writ¬ 
ten  with  his  own  bland,  &  dated  as  the  former;  43. 

26.  French  Letter  of  Vidor- Amadeo  Duke  of  Sav-o’y 
to  k.  Charles  1.  congratulating  him  upon  the  Birth  of  the 
1  mice  of  Wales.  All  written  by  him  29  July  1630. 

27.  French  Lelier  of  M . Cardinal  of  Sa¬ 

voy,  to  K.  Charles  i.  complimenting  his  Ma idly  (as  I 
luppofe)  upon  the  fame  occafion.  Written  by  him 
20  July  1630.  ’ 

28.  French  Letter  of  the  fame  Cardinal  of  Savoy,  to 
K.  Charles  I  .  acquainting  him  with  the  Death  of  Duke 
Emanuel  his  Father.  Written  by  him  12  Auguft  1630. 

29.  French  Letter  of  Viftor-Amedeo  Duke  of  Savoy 
to  k.  Charles  t.  eicufing  the  delay  of  difpatehing  Count 
Searnafis  to  his  Majefty,  with  his  Congratularions  for 
the  Birth  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  ;  by  reafon  of  the  Plague 
raging  m  his  Territories.  Written  all  with  his  own  Halid. 
20  December  1630. 

30.  French  Letter  from  the  fame  Duke  of  Savoy/to 

K.  Charles  1.  manfwer  to  one  from  the  K.  who  thanked 
™m*or  .  Good  Service  done  by  the  Abbot  Paglia  his 
Mm.fter  m  the  Negotiation  of  Peace  with  Spain.  Written 
all  by  him,  12  February  1631.  “ 

31.  French  Letter  of  Emanuel  Duke  of  Savoy  to  K 
James  ,.  congratulating  him,  upon  his  Succeffion  to  the 
Crown  of  England,  See.  Written  by  him  at  Turin  1  Oc¬ 
tober  1603. 

32.  Another,  all  written  by  the  fame  Duke,  to  Queen 
Anne,  upon  the  fame  Occafion,  and  with  the  fame  Date. 

j 

33.  French  Letter  of  the  Cardinal  of  Savoy,  t05K. 

Charles  1.  full  of  Thanks  for  a  kind  Letter  fent  unto 
him  by  His  Majefty.  Written  by  the  Cardinal  23.  Febr 
i63 *•  J  5,  ’ 

34.  French  Letter  of  Prince  Thomas  of  Savoy,  to  K 
Charies  1.  congratulating  his  Majefty  upon  the  Birth  of 
the  Prince  of  Wales,  &  of  the  Conclufion  of  the  Peace 
with  Spam.  All  written  by  him,  28  Febr.  163  r.  6-. 

35.  French  Letter  of  Chrcftienne  the  WTidow-Du- 

chefs  of  Savoy,  to  K.  Charles  t  fent  at  the  fame  Time 
with  thofe  abovementioned.  ’Tis  all  of  her  Hand  •  & 
fealed  with  black  Wax.  g 

36.  French  Letter  of  Viaor-Amedeo  then  Dukeof 

Savoy  to  k.  Charles  i.  acquainting  His  Majefty  with  the 
Deceafeof  DukeEnianuel  his  Father  ;  which  (as  it  ffiould 
fam)  happened  the  fame  Day.  All  written  with  his  own 
Hand,  26  July  1630.  ^ 

8  37.  French 


ica 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nuni  1759. 

unto  them  ;  the  Value  of  the  Archbifhoprick  in  the 
Kings  books  ;  and  the  Sum  paid  to  the  Pope  at  their 
Entrance*  i-’g.  b. 

37.  Like  Catalogues  &  Eftimates,  as  to  the  Bilhops 

of  London,  Wincheller,  Ely,  Coventrye  &  Lichfevlde, 
Salifburye,  Bath  and  Wells,  Exeter,  Norwich,  Worcefter’ 
Hereford,  Chichefter,  Oxford,  Gloucefter,  Peterbo- 
rougl),  Briftol.  St.  David,  Landaffe,  Bangor,  St.  Afaph  • 
Archbi/hops  of  Yorke,  Bifhops  of  Durham,  Carlile,  & 
Chefter.  ,4I> 

38.  Collections  out  of  Guicciardini’,  Hiftorv,  con¬ 
cerning  the  Great  Gonfalos.  171.  b. 

39.  Collections  out  of  Guicciardini's  Hiftorv,  con¬ 
cerning  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Tremouille,  the  Death 
of  the  Marlhall  Dornano  ;  &  of  Defdiguieres.  i72.b. 

40.  Of  the  Emulation  between  two  Roman  Cen¬ 
turions;  from  Ctefars  Commentaries.  J73>b. 

41-  Of  the  Confederacy  between  fome  Circles  of  the 
German  Empire;  (from  the  French  Hiftory.)  ibid. 

42.  Of  the  Death  of  Profper  Colonno,  &  his  Qua¬ 
kes  ;  ftrom  Guicciardine.)  j~4. 

43-  The  Anfwer  of  George  Stadlowe  Citizen  of  Lon¬ 
don,  to  the  Lords  demand  of  aid  from  the  City  of 
London,  againft  the  Duke  ofSomerfet  then  Protestor  • 
m  the  Reign  of  K.  Edward  vi.  174.  b.  & 

„  I4.'  ,The  c°nclufion  of  the  firft  Part  of  Sir  Walter 
Raleigh  s  Hiftory. 

45-  The  Speech  of  Spurius  Liguftinus,  upon  a  fort* of 
Mutiny  in  the  Roman  Army.  I7g 

.t4,5;  Artme  RePortof  the  Truth  of  the  Fight  about 
the  lfles  of  Acores,  this  laft  Summer,  (i.  e.  A  D  1  c  ) 
betwixt  the  Revenge,  one  of  Her  Majefties  Shippes  (Sir 
Richard  Gnnvill  Commander)  and  an  Armado  of  the 
Kmge  of  Spame.  180.  b. 

47;  Lf 1 cter  of  the  I-ords  of  the  Privy  Council,  dated 
31  March  1622.  to  the  High  Shireff  &  Juflices  of  the 
I  eace  in  the  County  of  Kent,  about  levying  a  volun¬ 
tary  Contribution  from  the  fubftantial  Inhabitants  of 
that  County,  m  Order  to  the  Recovery  of  the  Palatinate. 

48.  Letter  of  the  Duke  of  Lenox,  enforcing  die 
former.  186  b 

49-  Cohesions  from  Knowles’s  Turkifh  Hiftory,  con¬ 
cerning  fome  of  the  Cuftoms  of  that  Nation,  &c. 

50.  Part  of  the  Commentaries  of  Sir  Francis  Vere. 

5 !.  Relation  of  the  Fight  between  an  Englifh  Shi^of 
9  Imall  Guns  &  50  Men,  called  the  Margaret  &  Jonah 
Capt.  James  Chelter ;  and  two  Spanifli  Ships,  the  one 
of  300  Ions,  and  22  brafs  Guns,  the  other  of  above 
200  Tons  and  16  Guns,  both  full  of  Men:  in  the 
Harbour  of  Mevis,  19  March  1621.  „q2. 

Sl-  Large  Extraft  out  of  Sir  Roger  Williams's  Treads 
or  the  Warre.  „  , 

T,  t,  ,  „  ,  29c.  b. 

53-  I  he  Declaration  of  the  Lord  De  la  None,  upon 

tskinge  Armes  for  the  juft  Defence  of  the  Townes  of 
Sedan  &  Jametz,  frontiers  of  the  Realme  of  France  and 
under  the  protection  of  his  Majeftye.  ?I’  b 

54-  The  Siege  of  Meziers,  defended  by  the  vaiyant 

Captajne  Bayard  ;  with  a  Relation  of  the  faid  Bayard's 
Death  (from  the  French  Hiftory.)  %  ,  g 

J  J.  The  Method  of  Life  ufed  by  the  Capuchins.  40 1. 
jS.  Epitaphta  Henri ci  Howard  Comitis  Northampto- 
Ihornte  Waften  Mtl.te,  Dm  Henrici  Howirdi 
Locum.  TenennsdeCaftro  Dovorenf,  ;  ae  Robert!  Afton 

dfr,  rC(f  ”ftabnarlJ  Caftri>  Prout  “  Ecclefia 

mlra  Caftrum  Dovorenfe  pofita  confpiciuntur.  4i0 

57.  ABooke  wherin  is  contayned  afwell  all  the  Beni 
r.ces  Impropmt,  as  others  i  &  whole  Giftes  they  be  ■ 
together  with  their  feeerall  Valuations  ;  a.  alfo  the  Norn’, 
ber  ot  Dwellmge-Howfes,  and  Communicantes  in  eveiye 
feverall  panthe  rnthm  the  Diocefle  of  Cannterburye 
Madethe  1 2th  daye  of  Maye  1578.  4 ,  q 


Num.  1759,  IJ&Q- 

58.  Collections  out  of  Camdens  Remains.  431. 

59.  The  Story  of  the  counterfeit  Don  Sebaftian  King 

of  Portugal  (from  the  French  Hiftory)  4,^m 

60.  Concerning  the  Edict  of  Pacification  in  France 

(from  tha  French  Hiftory)  451  &  452.  b. 

61.  Articles  concluded  by  the  Inquifition  of  Spaine, 

againft  the  Netherlande3  (out  of  the  Netherland  Hifto- 
ryc)  1 51.  b. 

62.  Breviat  of  the  Barons  of  the  Cinque  Portes,  the 
Two  auncient  Townes,  &  their  Members,  which  they 
humblye  offer  to  the  Honorable  the  Knights  &  Burgdfes 
of  the  Howfe  of  Commons  of  Parliament,  concerninge 
there  Greivances.  Firft,  that  they  are  reftrayned  to  trade 
into  the  Lowe-Cuntries  &  Germanye ;  Secondlye,  that 
they  are  reftrayned  of  free-buyinge  &  fellinge  in  London. 

456- 

1760. 

A  Book  in  fol.  given  by  my  worthy  friend  Mr  Georg* 
Holmes)  wherein  are  contained  a  Collection  of  Origi¬ 
nal  Letters,  &c.  written  or  figned  by  Princes,  % 
bound  up  together  in  the  following  Order. 

1.  Original  Letter  in  French,  from  Queen  Elizabeth 
to  K.  Henry  iv.  of  France,  dated  20  July  . 

It  is  full  of  Export  ulations  for  his  delaying  to' pay 
the  Money  he  owed  her ;  or  returning  any  farisfaftory 
Anlwer  about  it.  1  he  Queen  was  fo  touched  at  his 
procedure,  that  fhe  wrote  another  Conclufion  to  the 
Letter,  befides  that  of  Her  Secretary. 

2.  Letter  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  tlie  States  General  of 
ol  the  United  Provinces,  dated  13  January  1596.  de¬ 
manding  payment  of  all,  or  part  of  rhe  Money  Ihe  had 
lent  them ;  and  that,  in  Order  to  oppofe  the  Spanifii 
Dcligns,  they  would  lend  her  20  Men  of  War  well  fitted 
out,  !o  Tranfports  ;  &  joyn  1  heir  Land-forces  to  Hers- 

It  is  in  French;  fubferibed  by  the  Queens  own 
Hand,  6:  underneath  by  Robeti  Cecvll,  then  Principal 
Secretary  of  State.  '  1 

3-  Letter  of  K.  James  1.  (figned  above  by  himfelf/ro 

rlenry  Grey  Earl  of  Kent,  &  given  2  2  March,  in  the 
1 1  th  year  of  his  Reign  ;  whereby  he  gave  licenfe  to  the 
laid  Earl  to  abfent  himfelf  from  Parliament;  notvvith- 
itandinding his  having  been  fummoned  thereunto  bv  the 
Royal  Writ.  3  g 

4-  Letter  of  K.  James  r.  (figned  as  the  former)  to  Sir 

Ihomas  Edmonds  his  Ambaffador  Refident  in  France  - 
27  Nov.  Anno  Regni  8.  requiring  him  to  further  the 
matter  of  GeorgeWood  who  hadlurnifhed  the  late  French 
King  with  a  certain  quantity  of  Gun-powder  for  which 
he  had  not  been  paid.  g 

e-^rr^^tr  CharIes  r-  (hgned  as  the  former)  to 
Sir  Ilaac  Wake  his  Ambaffador  Refident  with  the  French 
Kang:  12  June,  ann.  Reg.  7.  approving  what  he  had 
hitherto  done  ;  and  directing  him  in  the  demand  of  the 
moyety  of  his  Queens  Portion  then  remaining  unpaid  ■ 
as  alfo  about  the  Rendition  of  Quebec  in  Canada,  and 
the  Scots  retiring  from  Port-Royal  in  Nova  Scotia  ;  &c. 

6.  Letter  of  K.  Charles  1.  to  theFrench  KingLouis  xm 
his  brother  inlaw;  in  French,  k  fubferibed  by  hh 
own  Hand  in  ample  manner.  20  September  1 6 ->  c  for 
the  Releafe  of  fuch  of  the  Reformed  Religion  as  were 
kept  m  Pnfon  for  that  reafon  only  ;  according  to  the 
promife  his  molt  Chriftian  Majefty  had  given  to  him  by 
the  Duke  of  Buckingham.  t  3 

...7*  Jnftruftions  figned  by  K.  Charles  1  to  Henry  de 
Vic  Llq  ;  His  Secretary  for  the  French  Tongue,  &  Agent 
to  the  King  of  Denmark  :  Ihewing  how  the  Earl  of 
Arundel  &  Surrey  (Thomas  Howard)  had  been  trifled 
with,  in  his  Embaffage  at  the  Emperors  Court,  aboUt- 
the  reftitution  of  the  Palatinate  :  And  that,  fince  his  Ne¬ 
phew  the  Prince  Elector  Palatine,  to  whofe  Perfdn  they 

could 


feibliothecse  Haiicianac; 


‘°3 


Nuni.  t  766. 

could  object  no  Crime,  uncalled,  unheard,  uncon- 
cleraned,  a0ainft  all  forme  of  Juftice,  contrarie  to  the 
Emperors  Promife,  &  the  Eleftors  Proteftation,  mu  ft  by 
that  moft  cruell  Combination  made  at  Prague,  bee  ut¬ 
terly  excluded  from  his  hereditary  Rights  :  He  defined 
that  His  Danifii  Majefty  would  joyn  with  him  in  oppofing 
that  Wronge.  dated  22  January  1637.  and  fublcribed 
by  Sir  John  Coke.  ,  ^ 

8.  Letter  of  K.  Charles  1.  in  French,  to  Erneft  Prince 

de  Mansfelt,  whom  he  permitted  to  raife  Men  by  Mr. 
Lefley,  for  the  Service  of  the  Eleftor  Palatine.  It  is  full 
of  expreftions  of  Grace  &  Favor,  &  fubfcribed  by  the 
King,  20  May  1(125.  \6 

9.  Letter  K.  Charles  1.  in  French,  to  the  Dub-  of 

Meckdburg,  by  Sir  ....  Anftruther  his  A.nbaf- 
fador,  whom  he  had  appointed  to  ftand  Godfather 
(for  him)  at  the  Chriftening  of  the  Dukes  Child.  Sub¬ 
scribed  by  his  Majefty.  30  April  1 626.  ,  3. 

10.  Warrant  of  K. Charles  11.  to  Sir  Harbotrle  Grim- 

ftone  Mafter  of  the  Rolls,  for  permitting  Jofeph  William- 
ion  Efq  Keeper  of  the  Papers  of  State,  to  infpeft  the 
Records  in  the  Chapell  of  the  Rolls,  and  from  them  to 
tranfcribe  fuch  Treaties,  Leagues,  Commiflions,  or  Pub¬ 
lic  Grants,  as  heihould  think  fit,  without  Fee  or  Reward 
Given  5  March  1668-9.  Superlcribed  or  figned  by  his 
Majefty,  and  fubfcribed  by  Henry  Bennet  then  Lord  Ar¬ 
lington  &  Principal  Secretary  of  State.  20. 

1 1.  Letter  of  Marie  de  Medicis  Queen  of  France,  to 

K- James  1.  Complementing  him  upon  his  acceffion  to 
the  Crown  of  England.  Subfcribed  by  her  Majefty 
1  June  1603.  22- 

1 2.  Another  Letter  of  the  fame  Queen,  &  of  the  fame 

Date,  all  written  with  her  own  Hand  to  Anne  of  Den¬ 
mark  the  new  Queen  of  England,  whom  flic  comple¬ 
mented  with  a  very  good  Grace.  23. 

(  The  former  Letter  is  fealed  with  her  Privy  Seal  • 
but  this  to  the  Queen,  is  fealed  with  two  Signets,  the 
one  hath  her  Cypher  under  the  Crown  of  France  •  the 
other  the  Arms  of  France,  &  Her  own  Arms  empaled 
under  the  fame  Crown.; 

13.  Copie  of  a  Private  Letter  from  K.  Henry  iv.  to 

K.  James  1.  fent  with  fome  Menaged  Horfes,  and  an 
able  Efcuier  who  was  to  teach  his  Son  the  Prince  to 
ride.  24 

14.  Letter  of  the  fame  K.  Henry  iv.  of  France,  to 

our  King.  James  the  i.  complementing  him  upon ’his 
acceftion  to  the  Crown  of  England.  Subfcribed  bv 
himfelf,  2  June  1603.  2g  ; 

15.  Letter  of  King  Louis,  xm  of  France  to  his  Officers 
at  Guiyrande,  commanding  them  to  let  at  Liberty  all 
Englilh  Prifoners  of  War  as  ffiould  remain  in  their 
Pnlons,  at  the  time  of  their  Receipt  hereof:  dated  nth 
September  ,72,.  Subfcribed  by  himfelf;  and  lower 
thus,  Bouthilher. 

16.  Such  another  Letter  to  the  fame  Kings  Officersat 
Quinpircorentin. 

I  g-  Latin  Letter  of  Gabriel  Prince  of  Tranfylvani, 
to  George  \  filters  Duke  of  Buckingham,  recommending 
Count  Peter  Bethleu  (his  Brothers  gen  )  to  him,  in  hil 
drav  .ds  to  England,  dat.  27  Augufl  1627.  20 

iS.  French  Letter  of  the  Arch-Duke  Albert  to  K 
James  1.  m  favor  of  Mr.  William  Copley,  who  (with 
his  I  atheij  had  left  England  upon  the  fcore  of  their 
Religton;  and  defiring  that  his  Majefty  would  receive 
the  raid  Mr.  Copley  into  his  Grace  Jc  Protefiion.  dat 
27  April  1603.  ' 

19.  French  Letter  from  the  Infanta  of  Spain,  the 
Arcu-duchtfs  Ifabella-Clara-Eugenia  to  K.  James  1.  con¬ 
gratulating  Him  upon  his  Succeflion  to  the  Crowns  of 
England  te  Ireland.  Subfcribed  3  June,  1602.  n 

20.  French  Letter  from  the  Infanta  to  Queen  Anne  of 
IfcnmarK,  upon  the  fame  Occafion  ;  &  fubfcribed  the 

-*  "'y'  35- 


Num.  1760. 


21.  French  Letter  of  the  Arch-Dultc  Albert  to  K. 

James  1.  upon  the  fame  Occafion  ;  fubfcribed  by  him 
the  fame  Day.  -tv 

22.  French  Letter  of  the  Arch-Duke  to  the  Queen, 
Upon  the  fame  Occafton ;  fubfcribed  the  fame  Day. 

23.  French  Letter  of  the  Arch-Duke  Albert  to^K 
James  1.  written  in  Order  to  bring  on  a  Treaty  of  Peace 
between  England  &  Spain.  Subfcribed,  t9  April  ,604. 

24  Letter  of  Prince  Victor- Amedeo  of  Sivoyto  K 
Charles  1.  recounting  divers  Wrongs  done  by  Cardinal 
Richelieu  to  ins  Houle  ;  and  craving  aid  at  tile  prefent 
juncture  ;  the  Cardinal  having  inducSdJ  the  Kin-  of 
l-rance  to  invade  Savoy  ;  with  a  view  alfo  ofpehetraiiug 
into  Italy.  6 

The  whole  is  of  the  Princes  own  hand  (who  wrote 
French  but  badly)  &  is  dated  from  Pancalier,  io  May 
1630.  o  1 

23.  French  Letter  of  Emanuel  Duke  of  Savoy  toK. 
Charles  i.  apprifing  him  of  the  Injuftice  of  Cardinal 
Richelieu,  &  the  Wrongs  done  to  him  h  his  Houfe,  by 
his  means.  As  alfo  of  his  perfidious  taking  ofPignerol 
From  Him,  during  the  Time  of  Treaty.  Whereupon,  he 
humbly  craves  His  Majefties  Protection  This  is  all  writ¬ 
ten  with  his  own  Eland,  A  dated  as  the  former:  4  e 

26.  French  Letter  of  Viaor-Amadeo  Duke  of  Savoy 
o  K.  Charles  1.  congratulating  him  upon  the  Birth  of  the 

Irince  of  Wales.  All  written  by  him  29  July  1630. 

27.  French  Letter  of  M.  .  .  .  .  Cardinal  of  Sa¬ 

voy,  to  k.  Charles  i.  complimenting  his  Majefty  (as  I 
luppofe)  upon  the  fame  occafion.  Written  by  him 
20  July  1630.  1 

28  French  Letter  of  the  fame  Cardinal  of  Savoy^to 
K.  Charles  1.  acquainting  him  with  the  Death  of  Duke 
Emanuel  his  Father.  Written  by  him  re  Auguft  1630. 

,  ?-9  vFTh  Lc“cr  ofVia°r- Amedeo  Duke  of  Savoy, 
to  K.  Charles 1.  eveufing  the  delay  of  difpatching  Count 
Scarnafis  to  his  Majefty,  with  his  Congratulations  for 
the  Birth  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  ;  by  reafon  of  the  Plague 
raging  in  lus  rl  emtories.  Written  all  with  bis  own  Hand. 
20  December  1630. 

30.  French  Letter  from  the  fame  Duke  of  Savoy,' ’to 
K.  Charles  t.  inanfwer  to  one  from  the  K.  who  thanked 
him  tor  the  Good  Service  done  by  the  Abbot  Paglia  his 
Mintfter  in  the  Negotiation  ofPeacewitli  Spain.  Written 
all  by  him,  12  February  1631. 

31.  French  Letter  of  Emanuel  Duke  of  Savoy  to  K 
James  t.  congratulating  him,  upon  hts  Succeftiot;  to  the 
Grown  of  England,  &c.  Written  by  him  at  Turin  1  Oc¬ 
tober  1603. 

32.  Another,  all  written  by  the  fame  Duke,  toQra 

Anne,  upon  the  fame  Occafion,  and  with  the  tameDate. 

* 

33.  French  Letter  of  the  Cardinal  of  Savoy,  to*  K 

Charles  I  full  of  Thanks  for  a  kind  Letter  fent  unto 
iS3|by  HlS  Wrilten  by  *he  Cardinal  23.Febr. 

34.  French  Letter  of  Prince  Thomas  of  Savoy,  toK. 
Charles  1 .  congratulating  his  Majefty  upon  the  Birth  of 
the  Prince  ol  Wales,  &  of  the  Conclufion  of  the  Peace 
with  Spain.  All  written  by  him,  28  Febr.  163  r  6- 

35.  French  Letter  of  Chreftienne  the  Widow-Du- 

chels  of  Savoy,  to  K.  Charles  i  fent  at  the  fame  Time 
with  thofe  abovemen tioned.  ’Tis  all  of  her  Eland  •  & 
fealed  with  black  Wax.  J 

36.  French  Letter  of  Viftor-Amedeo  then  Duke^of 
Savoy  to  K.  Chariest,  acquainting  His  Majefty  with  the 

Deceafe  of  DukeEmanuel  his  Father  ;  which  (as  it  fhould 
fcm)  happened  the  fame  Day.  All  written  with  his  own 
Hand,  26  July  1630. 

8  37.  French 


Z04 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1700. 

37.  French  Letter  of  Louys-Philippe  Prince  Palatin,  : 

to  Meflieurs  de  Vic  &  Rugier,  Refidents  of  K.  Charles  j 
1 .  in  France  ;  defiling  them  to  give  Credence  to  what  , 
the  Sieur  Curtius  (hould  inform  them  of,  with  relation  to 
the  Iuterells  of  the  Elettor-Pdlatine,  &  the  Ele&oral 
Family.  Subfcribedby  him, ;  !  May  1635.  69. 

38.  French  Letter  of  Louife  Jullienne  Electrefs- Fa- 
la  line-Dowager,  to  K.  Charles  r.  written  all  with 
her  own  Hand,  6  January  1623.  (except  the  Two  laft  ' 
figures  of  the  Date)  acquainting  his  MajeFy  with  her  | 
leaving  the  Duchy  of  Wirtemberg  after  the  taking  of 
Heidelberg  ;  and  retiring  with  the  Electoral  Family  (or 
her  Children,  who  were  part  of  it)  to  Berlin;  from 
whence  in  this  pitiful  DiFrcfs,  fhe  moll  humbly  &  ear- 
neitlv  craves  his  Majeflies  Liberality. 

39.  French  Letter  of  Frideric  Ele&or-Palatin  to  K. 

James  1.  {hewing  his  gladnefs  to  hear  (by  his  Ambaffadors) 
that  his  Majeflies  Intention  was  to  fupport  the  Proteflant 
Religion,  and  the  States  of  the  United  Provinces  in  par¬ 
ticular.  Written  by  him,  20  Augufl  1603.  73. 

40.  French  Letter  of  Frideric  King  of  Bohemia,  to 
his  brother  in  law  K.  Charles  1  acquainting  him  that 
his  Queen  had  lately  brought  him  a  young  Princefs ;  to 
whom  he  defiles  that  the  Queen  his  filler  in  law  would 
be  Godmother,  dat.  at  the  Hague  -fL  July  1G26.  75. 

This  is  written  wholly  by  the  Hand  of  that  unfor¬ 
tunate  Prince. 

41.  French  Letter  of  Frideric  F.leflor-Palatin,  to 

K.  James  1.  congratulating  him  upon  his  being  called  to 
the  Succeflion  of  England.  Subfcribed  by  himfelf, 
12  April  1603.  77. 

42.  French  Letter  of  Compliment  from  the  Cardinal 
of  Lorraine  to  K.  James  1.  dated  the  24  July  1604  79. 

The  Letter  feemeth  to  have  been  written  by  a  Secre¬ 
tary  ;  the  Words  V"re  tres  humble  et  plus  obeilfant  Cou- 
fm  et  Serviteur,  by  himfelf,  or  fume  other  for  him  ;  Sc 
his  Name  &  Title  Charles  Cardinal  de  Lorraine,  to  have 
been  impreffed  with  a  Stamp. 

43.  French  Letter  of  the  fame  Cardinal  to  Q.  Anne 

of  Denmark,  complimenting  her  Majefty  upon  the  Suc¬ 
ceflion  of  her  Ha  (band  K.  James  J.  to  the  Crown  of 
England.  Si. 

This  Letter  is  fubferibed  by  the  Cardinals  own 
forry  hand. 

41.  French  Letter  of  Charles  Duke  of  Lorrain  fent  to 
the  King  of  England  by  an  Herald  of  Armes,  for  want 
of  another  Meffenger ;  excufing  his  not  writing  to  his 
Majefty  before.  Subfcribed  by  himfelf,  without  lpecify- 
ing  the  Time  when.  83. 

45.  French  Letter  of  Charles  Duke  of  Lorrain,  to 
Charles  Prince  of  Wales,  notifying  unto  him  the  Deccafe 
i'f  the  Duke  his  Unkle  5c  Father  in  Law  (perhaps,  him 
lafl  abovementioned)  fubferibed  with  his  own  hand 
y  Augufl  1624.  85. 

4(1.  French  Letter  of  the  Dutchefs  De  Bourbon  to 
the  King;  notifying  to  him  the  Death  of  her  Idufband  ; 
and  in  moll  humble  manner  craving  Aid  of  his  Majelly 
in  this  her  miferable  condition.  Subfcribed  by  her  felf, 
at  Bruffels,  20  Ftbr.  1618.  87. 

47.  French  Letter  of  Maurice  de  Naffau  Prince  of 
Orange  to  K.  James  1.  in  favor  of  Cornelius  Liens.  Sub¬ 
fcribed  by  himfelf  the  23  of  Augufl  1624.  88. 

48  French  I.etter  of  l'rideric  Duke  of  Wirtemberg 
to  K.  James  1.  congratulating  him  upon  his  fucceeding 
to  the  Crown  ol  England.  Subfcribed  by  his  own  hand 
1  July  1603.  90. 

:  49.  French  Letter  of  the  fame  Duke  of  Wirtemberg 
to  K.  James  1.  returning  his  Majelly  molt  hearty  Thanks 
.lor  the  honor  done  him,  in  lending  to  him  the  Habit 
N  Enfigns  of  the  Older  of  the  Garter  ;  unto  which  be 
had  been,  lbme  Years  before,  elefted  by  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth.  Subfcribed  by  his  own  hand  13  November  1603. 

3  S2- 


Num.  1760. 

50.  Latin  Letter  of  Maurice  Landgrave  of  Ileflen  to 

K.  Charles  1.  defiring  his  Majelly  to  give  Credence  to 
Jacobus  Hyllenius  his  Ambaflador.  Subfcribed  by  him¬ 
felf.  Febr.  1625-6.  94. 

51.  French  Letter  of  Philippe  (as  he  Files  himfelf) 

Landgrave  de  Hefien  to  K.  Charles  r.  complimenting 
him  upon  his  fucceeding  to  his  Fathers  Kingdoines,  as 
aho  upon  his  Marriage  :  with  many  Offers  of  his  Service. 
Written  all  with  his  own  hand,  at  the  Hague,  6  April 
1626.  96. 

52.  French  Letter  of  John  George,  AdminiFrator  of 

StraFrourg,  Marquis  of  Brandenburg,  to  K.  James  1.  con¬ 
gratulating  his  MajeFy  upon  his  Succeflion  to  England. 
Subfcribed  bv  himfelf,  20  Noveinb.  1603.  98. 

53.  French  Letter  of  Henry  de  Lorraine  Duke  of  Bar, 

to  K  James  1.  upon  the  fame  fuhjedt.  Subfcribed  by 
himfelf,  25  June  1603.  100. 

54.  French  Letter  of  the  fame  Prince,  to  the  New  Queen 

of  Engl;  nd  ;  upon  the  fame  fubjedt.  Subfcribed  alfo 
by  himfelf,  the  fame  day.  102. 

55.  French  Letter  of  Margaret  Dutchefs-Dowger  of 

Lorraine,  to  Charles  Prince  of  Wales  ;  notyfying  unto 
him  the  late  Deceafe  of  her  Lord.  Subfcribedby  her 
own  hand  (notwithflamling  the  manv  Tears  of  Bloud 
flic  had  fhed  on  that  occafion  ;  which  might  have  made 
her  Lies  lore)  the  roof  Augult  1624.  104. 

56.  French  I.etter  cf  Charles  de  Lorraine  Due  de 
Guile,  to  the  Queen  of  England  ;  being  all  Compliment. 
Subfcribed  wi.h  his  own  hand,  22  AuguF  1603.  106. 

57.  French  Letter  of  the  fame,  toK.  James  1.  upon 

the  fame  fubjedl  ;  perhaps  occafioned  by  his  attaining 
to  the  Crown  of  England.  Subfcribed  by  him,  the  fame 
dtiy.  108. 

58.  French  Letter  of  the  elder  Dutchefs  of  Guife  to 

the  Queen  of  England,  congratulating  her  Majefty  Sc 
the  King  her  Confort  upon  their  Profperity  ;  perhaps 
with  regard  to  their  Succeflion  to  the  Crown  of  England. 
Written  all  by  her  felf.  1 10. 

59.  French  I.etier  of  the  fame  Dutchefs  of  Guife 

(Katerine  de  Cleves)  to  the  King  of  England,  all  written 
by  her  own  hand  upon  the  fame  fubjedt.  1  12. 

60.  French  l  etter  of  Compliment,  from  Henry  de 

I x> rune  due  d’Aiguiilon  to  the  King  of  England.  Sub¬ 
fcribed  by  himfelf,  without  date.  14. 

61.  French  Letter  of  Congratulation  from  Charles  de 

I. oraine  Due  de  Mayenne  ;  to  K.  James  1.  Subfcribed 

by  his  own  hand,  30  May  1603.  1x6. 

62.  French  Letter  of  Steven  Bille  the  King  of  Den¬ 

mark’s  Governor  of  Norway,  to  K.  James,  very  heartily 
congratulating  his  Majefty  upon  his  Succeflion  to  the 
Kingdom  of  England.  All  written  w  ith  his  own  hand, 
28  June  1603.  j iS. 

63.  French  Letter  of  Charles  de  Croy  Prince  Marquis 

deEIame?  to  K.  James  1.  upon  the  fame,  fubjedl.  All 
written  with  his  own  hand,  8  June  1603.  120. 

64.  French  Letter  of  Chriflianus  K.  of  Denmark  to 

his  C.oufin  Charles  Prince  of  Wales  ;  written  24  Febru¬ 
ary  1625.  wirh  his  own  hand.  122. 

The  Subject  of  the  Letter  is  Compliment,  and  the 
Stile  fuch,  as  to  let  the  Prince  underhand  how  much 
his  Danifli  MajeFy  thought  himfelf  above  him  ;  or  that 
he  was  really  Complimenting  himfelf  all  the  while. 

65.  Latin  I.etter  ofHedwiga  (Daughter  of  Frideric 

I I.  King  of  Denmark,  &  Widow  of  Chriftian  1 1 .  Elec¬ 

tor  of  Saxony)  to  her  nephew  Charles  Prince  of  Wales, 
Subfcribed  by  her,  16  Sept.  1624.  124. 

66.  French  Letter  of  ChriFiana  Duchefs  ofFlorence 

to  K.  James  1.  congratulating  him  upon  his  SucceFion 
to  the  Throne  of  England.  All  written  by  her  own 
hand.  126. 

67.  French  I.etter  of  Anthoniette  Dutchefs  of  Cleves,' 

to  K.  James  1.  meant  I  fuppofe,  is  a  Congratulation 
upon  his  SucceFion  to  England  :  written  by  herfelf 

25  September  1603.  128.' 

68.  French1 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse, 


205 


Num.  1760,  1761. 

68.  French  Letter  of  Victor- Amedeo  Duke  of  Savoy, 

excufing  his  Delay  in  not  before  congratulating  his 
Majefty  upon  the  Prince  of  Wales's  Birth,  nor  notifying 
fooner  his  Father  Deceafe ;  &c.  All  written  with  his  own 
hand.  130. 

69.  The  Anfwer  (in  Latin)  of  the  King  of  Denmarks 

Minifters  to  the  Sieur  de  Vic,  fent  to  that  Court  by  K. 
Charles  i.  with  a  Meffage  about  procuring  the  Reftitu- 
tion  of  the  Palatinate.  Given  28  March  1637.  beneath 
which,  is  that  Kings  Privy  Seal,  or  Signet.  132. 

70.  Anfwer  (in  Latin)  of  the  King  of  Denmarks  Mi" 

nifters,  to  the  Englilh  Ambaffador,  touching  hisPropo* 
fal  of  procuring  Peace  to  Germany.  24  July  1637.  Sealed 
in  the  fame  Manner  as  the  former.  134. 

7 1 .  Anfwer  (in  Latin)  of  the  King  of  Denmark, 

to  Sir  Robert  Anilruther  the  Englilh  Ambaffador. 
r.  to  his  Mailers  Notification  of  the  Peace  he  had 
made  with  Spain.  2.  To  the  Overtures  of  a  New  Treaty 
with  Denmark.  3.  About  the  Bufinefs  of  the  Palati- 
nate.  4.  Concerning  Jacobus  Jukius  who  had  clan- 
deftinly  married  with,  &  bedded  a  young  Holftein  Lady, 
&  had  procured  his  Majeflies  lnterceflion. Given  29  April 
1641.  13s. 

72.  A  printed  Pafle-port  of  Cardinal  Richelieu  granted 

to  one  Mathurin  Boiveau,  6  September  1028.  140. 

(NB.  the  Cardinals  Name  is  cutt  in  Wood,  &  fctt  with 
the  Letter) 

73.  French  Letter  of  a  Captain  (lately  in  the  Service 
of  the  King  of  Bohemia  in  the  Palatinat)  named  Jules 
von  Damme;  offering  his  Service  to  K.  Charles  1.  141. 

74.  Latin  Epitaph,  made  by  a  Fryer  at  Rome  upon 

Guftavus  Adolphus  K.  of  Sweden.  143. 

75.  Friderici  iv.  Eleftoris  Palatini  ad  Rhenum,  Pa- 

tema  Sc  Prophetica  Admonitio,  Friderico  v.  Eleftori 
Succeffori,  Filio  (poll  hac  Regi  Bohemorum)  olim  ante 
obitum,  propria  manu  inferipta  in  Album  amicorum, 
Germanicc.  J44. 

1761. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  diverfis  manibus  Scrip- 

tus,  nonnullis  etiam  in  locis  mutilatus  ;  in  quo  conti- 

nentur, 

1.  Inquifitio  capta  ann.  9  R.  Henrici  v.  de  Jure  Ab- 

batis  Sc  Convenlus  S.  Petri  de  Hida,  ad  Manerium  de 
Muchel-dovere  in  Com.  Suthampt.  cum  Refponfione 
ejufdem  Abbatis.  1 .  b. 

2.  Enumeratio  Damnorum  qua;  fecit  Henricus  (Ble- 

fenfis)  Epifcopus  Wyntonienfis,  Ecclefite  B.  Petri  in 
Hyda  extra  Wyntoniam  (Summa  tocius  dampni 
4862ft.  13s.  46.)  _  3. 

3.  Civitates  five  Ville  que  funt  ad  feodi  firmam,  in 

Com.  Suthampt.  ibid. 

4.  Tituli  Cartarum  (hoc  in  Codice  quafi  Inrotulata- 
rum)  fpeftantium  ad  Poffeflioues  Abbatife  de  Hida  in 
Wyntonia,  Mucheldevre,  Stanhain,  Sandelflede,  Lynge- 
felde,  Chefelden,  Pcuefey,  Colyngburne,  Wodeman- 
cote,  Larkellok,  Bedhamptone,  Aulton  &  Suthwerke. 

3.b. 

5.  Littera  Patentes  R.  Henrici  .  .  quibus  concefiit 

Perdonationem  fuam  Generalem  Abbati  Sc  Conventui  de 
Hyda  juxta  Wyntoniam.  Telle,  See.  1 5  die  Aprilis, 
anno  Regni  3.  9. 

6.  Carta  Godefridi  de  Luci  Wyntonienfis  Epifcopi, 

qua  concefiit  Monachis  B.  Petri  de  Hyda,  ad  Opera- 
tionem  ejufdem  Ecclefise  de  Hyda,  annuos  40  Solidos 
in  Ecclefia  de  Aulton.  percipiendos.  9.  b. 

7.  Adnotatio  de  Homagio  quod  fecit  Ricardus  Piftor 

Domno  Nicholao  Strode  Abbati  de  Hyda,  in  Magno  Oflio 
Caftri  Domini  Regis  Wynton.  Pro  tertia  parte  umus 
feodi  Militis  in  Drayton,  die  Luna;  proxima  ante  feftum 
Sanfti  Petri  in  Cathedra,  anno  17  Henr.  vt.  quo  die 
Ricardus  Neuton  Jufticiarius  D~ni  Regis  tenuit  Afiifas  in 
Aula  pradiQa.  ibid. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.II. 


Nam.  1761. 

8.  Adnotatio  de  Homagij  praftatione  Abbati  eidem, 

per  Johannen  Moteffount,  pro  dimidia  Hida  Terra  in 
Mucheldene  :  Anno  r  8  R.  Henr.  vi.  9.  b. 

9.  Tabula  pracipuarum  Materiarum  hoc  in  Codice 

contentarum.  10. 

10.  Tabula  quadruplex,  in  qua  columnatim,  atq; 

ordine  notantur,  Anni  ab  lncarnatione Domini,  ab  872 
ufque  ad  1478.  una  cum  Succefftonibus  Regum  An¬ 
glia,  Abbatum  de  Hida,  ac  Epifcoporum  Wvntonien- 
fium.  J  14. 

Quinetiam  in  hac  tabula  plures  occurrunt  Adnota- 
tiones  Hiflorica  ;  omifia  tamen  omni  menrione  Guidonis 
fabulofi  Comitis  Warwiceufis,  ac  duclli  inter  ilium  et 
Colebrondum  Gigantem  five  Pugilem  Regis  Dacorum 
commifli. 

1 1 .  Regifirum  quoddam  Cartarum  Abbatise  B.  Petri 

de  Hida  juxta  Wyntoniam  ;  in  cujus  initio  deliderantur 
duo  folia.  23. 

Tituli  Cartarum  exciffarum  habentur  in  3.  b. 

Hie,  inter  alia  curiofa,  leguntur, 

12.  Carta  Regum  Henrici  11.  ac  Avi  fui  Henrici  1. 

de  Libertatibus  ejufdem  Monallerij.  26. 

13.  De  I.ibertatibus  ejufdem  Abbatis  &  Conventus  in 

Muchel-dovere,  &  Auhone.  31. 

14.  Carta  Adelredi  induflrij  Anglorum,  aliarumq ; 

circumjacentium  Regionum  Bafilei;  qua  concefiit  cui- 
dam  fibi  opido  diiedo  Antilliti  Adelgaro  vocitamine,  ob 
illius  placabiliilimamfidelitatem  ;  quoddam  pratuinquod 
jacet  in  Aquilonali  parte  famofig  Urbis  qua:  fcibili  appel- 
larnine  Wyntonia  vocatur.  A.  D.  9^3.  33. 

15.  Evidencie  quod  Ahbatia  de  Hida  eft  extra  Liber- 

tatem  Civitatis  Wyntonie.  35. 

16.  Littera  Patentes  R.  Edwardi  .  .  de  Libertatibus 

nonnullis  Prioratus  S.  Swvthuni  Wynton,  fc.  quod  Prior 
habeat  potefiatem  Obedientiarios  domfis  fine  praficiendi 
Sc  amoveudi,  Confenlu  Dotnni  Epifcopi  Wyntonienfis 
minime  requifito.  Et  quod  idem  Prior  poll  Cefiionem 
vel  Deceffum  ipforum  qui  Serjancias  vel  alia  Officia 
feculiria  Prioratfis  facultatem  habeat  ilia  committendi 
vel  retinendi  pro  voluntate  fua.  Et  quod  cum  Priora- 
tum  illud  vacare  contigerit,  Capitulum  loci  ejufdem 
habeat  Cuftodiam  di£ti  PrioratCts,  et  Exitus  inde  tempore 
Vacationis  provenientes  recipiat,  in  Utiliratem  fui  Mona- 
fterij  convertendos.  Tefte  See.  28  die  Sept,  anno  regni 
12.  _  36. 

1 7.  Compofitio  inter  Reflorem  Ecclefim  de  Whcr- 

welle,  &  Abbatem  &  Conventumde  IIyda,fuper  Decimis 
Ecclefias  de  Whervvelle  A.  D.  1245.  36.  b. 

18.  Compofitio  inter  Prioriffam  &  Conventum  de 

Ambrefbury  Sc  Abbatem  Sc  Conventum  de  Hyda,  fuper 
Decimis  de  Wynterborne.  A.  1).  1223.  ibid. 

19.  Littera  Patentes  Johannis  Comitis  Warennm, 

quibus  quietum  elamat  Abbati  Sc  Conventui  de  Hyda,  ct 
omnibus  eorum  Hominibus  de  Suthefe  &  Tyteleicumbe 
omnimodas  Exaftiones  Sc  Demandas  quas  habuit  de  om- 
nimodis  Muris  claudendis,  et  omnibus  alijs  Claufturis  in 
Villa  fua  de  Lewes,  dat.  28  die  Decembris,  ann.  52  R. 
Henrici  m.  37. 

20.  Evidentia,  quod  ab  antiquo  infra  Portam  de 

Hyda  verfus  Boream,  fuerint  Tenementa  &  Donnis, 
contigua  Muris  et  Claulura  Abbatie,  que  non  fuerunt  de 
Libertate  vel  Franchifia  Civitatis  Wynton.  ibid. 

21.  Carta  Regis  Eadweardi  filij  iElfredi,  de  Funda- 

tione  Abbatke  S.mifti  Petri  Winton.  five  de  llyda  ; 
una  cum  binis  alijs  ejufdem  Eadweardi  Cartis ;  qua: 
omnia,  in  Monaftico  Anglicano  defiderantur.  47. 

22.  Placitum,  &  Litera  Patentes  R.  lldwardi  111. 

de  Libera- Warenna  quam  concefiit  Abbati  &  Conventui 
de  Hida,  in  Dominicis  eorum  Terris  in  Michel-devere, 
Strattone,  Laverftoke,  Wodmancote,  Abbotes-worthi, 
Abbotes-berton,  North-Stonham,  Abbotes-anne,  Fog- 
helertone,  Lccforde,  Wortinge,  &  Byketone.  63. 

23.  Pars  prior  Carta;  Cnutonis  Regis  Anglo-Saxonum, 
qua  reftituit  Novo  Monafterio  Civitatis  Wintonite  quinque 

3  G  Caffatos 


ill 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1761 


Caflatos  in  Draytone  ;  adnullans  Cartam  quam  prius  de 
eis  fecerat  adolefcenti  cuidam  Wintonienfi  :  et  quaf- 
cunque  alias  fi  alicubi  effenf.  64.  b. 

24.  OrJinatio  Vicarise  de  Muchel-devere,  per  Hen- 
ricum  Wyntonienfem  Epifcopum.  Anno  Domini  1308. 

66. 

25.  De  qilibus  Terris  Vicarius  de  Michel-devere 

percipiet  Decimas  Garbarum.  66.  b. 

26.  De  Finibus  fa£ti$  cum  Rege,  per  Abbatem  de 

Hiua,  pro  Bofcis  vaftatis.  67.  b. 

27.  De  Concordia  inter  Abbatem  de  Hyda  &  Hen- 

r:cum  Popham,  de  jure  Deccnnarij  de  Popham,  in 
Hundredo  de  Michel-devere.  75.  b. 

28.  De  Placito  inter  Domnum  Willelmum  Edyndone 

Wyntonienfem  Epifcopum,  et  Majorein  &  Communi- 
tatem  Civitatis  Wynton,  anno  23  R.  Edwardi  in.  de 
Bundis  Solo  Cimiterij  Ecclefia;  Cathedralis,  ubi  ali- 
quando  ftetit  Novum  Monafterium,  quod  poftea  tran- 
flaturn  eft  ad  locum  extra  Civitatem,  dictum  Hyda  ; 
cum  Bundis  Sc  Limitibuspreedittis.  ibid. 

29.  SucceftioEpifcoporum  Wyntonienfium,  a  Frith  ef- 

tano,  ufque  ad  Adamuin  de  Orletone.  76. 

30.  Nomina  Fundatorum  Sc  Benefattorum  Ecclefia: 

Wyntonienfi  (i.  e.  Cathedrali).  76.  b. 

31.  De  veteri  Statu  Ecclefia;  Cathedralis  Wynton. 

ibid. 

32.  Bulla  Johannis  Papa  .  .  ad  Eadgarum  Regem, 

pro  ejectione  Canonicorum  de  Ecclefia  Wyntonienfi.  (In 
Monaftico  Anglicano  defideratur  )  77. 

33.  Fcoda  Militum  qua;  tenentur  de  Epifcopo  Wyn¬ 
tonienfi,  infra  Epifcopatum  &- alibi.  77.  b. 

34.  Forma  ad  faciendum  Homagium.  Gallice 

78.  b. 

35.  Forma  ad  faciendum  Fidelitatem  Epifcopo  Wyn¬ 
tonienfi.  Gall  ce.  ibid. 

36.  Nomina  (cum  Taxatione,  &  vero  Valore  omnium 

Ecclefiarum  in  Epifcopatu  Wyntonienfi,  quas  Epifcopus 
Wyntonienfis  debet  conferre.  ibid. 

37.  Compofitio  pro  Ecclefia  de  Aultone,  cum  Ca- 
pellis  fuis  de  Haliboume  &  Beneftede.  Impf.  8 1 .  b. 

38.  Evidentia;  de  Byketon  (de  qua  nulla  fit  Mentio 

fupra,  No.  4.)  '  83.  85.  b. 

39.  Evidentia:  de  Draytone  (in  Parochia  de  Byketone.  J 

84/ 

40.  Evidentia;  de  Wortynge.  89. 

41.  Cultumarium  ejufdem  Manerij  renovatum  anno 
Abbatis  Simonis  undecimo  (i.  e.  A.  D.  1302.)  95.  b. 

lmperf. 

4?.  Fundacio  unius  Cantarie  in  Prioratu  Sandti 
Dionifij  juxta  Hamtone,  per  Gilbertum  filium  Gilberti 
de  Popham.  A.  I).  1296.  97.  (lmperf.) 

43.  Evidentia;  de  Chefeldene.  gS. 

44.  Confuetudinarium  de  Chefeldene.  114. 

45.  Nomina  Fundatorum  Novi  Cenobij  Wynton, 

quod  vocatur  Hyda  ;  cum  Privileges  que  eidem  Cenobio 
contulerunt.  I20.  b 

46.  Chronicon  breviculuin  de  Succeftione  Regum  An- 

glorum,  ab  iElfredo  ufque  ad  R.  Eadwardum  1 .  Ver- 
fibus  Hexametris.  ibid 

47-  Nomina  et  Valores  Beneficiorum  fub  Patronatu 
Ecclefite  de  Hyda  Wynton.  ,  2 , 

48.  Evidentia; de  Peuefeye.  222.  b 

49-  Carta  Regis  Eadmundi,  qua  conceflit  30  Manfas 
m  Puefeye,  Monafterio  B.  Petri  Wintonia:.  A.  D  040 
Indict.  1 4.  _  12*4.  2.  * 

5°.  Carta  Regis  TEthelredi,  qua  conceflit  cuidam 
yhthelwoldo  decern  Manentia  in  Maningeforde.  A.  D 

9^7-  j 2  - 

51.  Inquifitio  capta  fuper  Stok-felver,  ann.  -jc  R 

Edw.  111.  * 

52.  Inquifitio  ex  Officio,  capta  de  Manerio  &  Capella 
de  Pudele in  Com.  Dorfet.  ann.  4.  Henr.  iv.  1  eoib 

53.  Rentale  &  Confuetudinarium  de  Peuefev.  iW, 

54.  Evidentia;  de  Colyngbourne.  '  j , Q' 


Num.  1761. 

55.  Rentale  &c  Confuetudinarium  de  Colyngburne. 

145. 

56.  Examinatio  Teftium  de  Communa  Paftura:,  ad 
omnia  Averia  &  Animalia,  habenda  Abbati  et  Conventui 
de  Hyda,  Reftori  de  Muchel-devere,  pertinente  glebe 
Capelle  de  Norhamptone,  20  die  Junij  anno  1  R.  Hen.  v. 

147.  b. 

57-  Carta  de  Ordinatione  Vicaria;  de  Colvngburne, 
per  Robcrtum  Abbatem  de  Hida,  et  Frethericuin  Rec- 
torem  Ecclefia;  de  Colyngburne.  148. 

5S.  Confirmatio  Rogeri  Epifcopi  Sar.  fuper  Ordi¬ 
natione  de  Colyngburne.  ibid. 

59-  Succeflio  Epifcoporum  Sarifburienfium,  a  Ri¬ 
cardo  Poore,  ufq;  ad  Robertum  de  Wyville.  ibid. 

60.  Evidentia;  de  Wodemanecote,  et  Lanerkftoke. 

149. 

61.  Evidentia;  qutedam  de  Ecclefia  de  Heghton. 

150.  b. 

62.  Cuftumarium  de  Larkeftoke,  renovatum  anno 

17  R.  Rich.  11.  155.  b. 

63.  Evidentia: de  Aultone.  156.^158.  ijS.b.&c. 

64.  Evidentia;  de  Bedhamptone.  138. 

65.  De  fine  fadta  ad  appropriandam  Ecclefiam  de 

Aultone  ;  et  de  Solutione.  1 39. 

66.  De  Advocatione  Capella:  de  Chautone.  1 30.  b. 

67.  Copia  de  Domifday  de  Terris  Abbatia:  San&i  Petri 

de  Hyda  juxta  Wynton.  !60. 

68.  Compofitio  inter  Abbatem  de  Dureford  &  Ab¬ 

batem  de  Hyda,  fuper  fundatione  Cantaria;  in  Ecclefia 
Conventuali  de  Dureforde,  per  Willelmum  de  Dureforde. 
A.D.  13 -7*  162. 

69.  Carta  Confirmation^  F.dwardi  Tertij  poft  Con- 

queftum,  de  Libcrtatibus  Civitatis  Wyntonice,  et  de 
Feodi  firma  ejufdem  Civitatis  eifdem  concefla.  dat.  5 
die  Maij,  anno  Regni,  primo.  163.  b. 

70.  Carta  R.  Hcnrici  111.  de  Libertstibus  Epifcopi 

Wmtomenfis,  et  Prioris  Sanfti  Svvithuni.  dat.  20  die 
Januarij  anno  Regni  fui  16.  x  64.  b. 

71.  Evidentia;  de  Suthwerke.  ,  ^6. 

72.  Feoda  que  tenentur  de  Abbate  de  Hvda,  per 
fervitium  Militare ;  fecundum  Libros  de  Scaccario. 

73.  Adnotationes  de  Homagijs  factis  per  varios  A^ba- 

tibus  de  Iiyda.  173.  b. 

74.  Inftrumema  varia  de  feperata  portione  Terrarum 

Abbati  de  Hida  pertinentium.  j~~  b 

75.  Scutagium  Abbatis  de  Hyda  de  Tenentibus’  fuis 

levandum.  ,g,  ^ 

76.  Breve  R.  Henrici  v?  de  Libertatibus  Abbatia:  S 

Petri  de  Hida.  jgl 

77.  Breve  R.  Edwardi  in.  de  eodem  Argumento. 

78. '  Expofitio  Vocabulorum,  Sok,  Sak,  &c.  in  Cartis 

vetuftioribus  ufitatorum.  ,  g2>  b. 

79.  Juramentum  Elcaetoris  in  fuo  Introitu  ad  Gfficium. 

80.  Juramentum  Reftorum  vel  aliorum  ad  Ecclefias 
per  Abbatem  &  Conventum  hujus  loci  prtefentandorum. 

81.  Breve  Regium  pro  Narivis  excufandis  de  ^on- 
tnbutione  facienda  pro  Expenfis  Militum  in  Parliamento. 

82.  De  Contributione  concefla  in  Capitulo  noftro 

General,.  ibid. 

03.  Carta  Conventionis  et  Concordia:  inter  Thomam 
Abbatem  de  Hida  &  Magiftrum  Willelmum  Say  Decanum 
Capella;  Domini  Regis  ac  Prabendarium  Prebende  de 
Werewclle  in  Com.  Suthampton.  fuper  annua  quadam 
penfione  23  s.  Abbati  de  Hida  e  dicta  Prebenda  perfolvi 
folitis.  dat.  6  Novemb.  ann  33  Henr.  vi.  18  c.  : 

84-  Placita  de  Jure  &  Aflifis,  and  de  Quo  Waranto 
apud  Wyntoniam,  anno  8  R.  Edw.  ubi  Abbas  de 
Hyda  fummonitus  fuit  ad  oftendendum  Domino  Re?i 
quo  Waranto  clamat  habere  I.iberas  Furcas,  Emendas 

Aflila 


I 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse, 


207 


Num.  1761  — 1763. 

Affifa  Paiiis  &  Cervifie  in  Aueltone,  que  ad  Coronam 
Domini  Regis  pertinent,  fine  Aflenfu  et  Voluntate  Do¬ 
mini  Regis,  et  Predecefforuin  fuorum  Regum  Anglie, 
&c.  185. 

85.  Carta  Radulphi  Monachi  (Le  Moyne)  Militis  de 

una  Marca  de  Liuefcelne  perfolvenda  Monachis  de  Hida, 
ad  Operationem  ejufdem  Monafterij,  &c.  188. 

86.  Litera  Radulphi  Monachi  mifla  Dho  Galfrido 
Salvagio  Vicecomiti,  et  Baronibus  Comitatus  Hantefire  ; 
in  qu3  exorat  eos  11 1  Teftes  effent  Cartre  quarn  fecerat 
de  donatione  unius  Marcre  de  Redditu  ipfius  de  Liuefcelne, 
annuatim  perfolvendte  Abbati  &  Conventui  de  Hida. 

ibid. 

(Galfridus  Salvazius  fuit  Vicecomes  fupra-difti  Co¬ 
mitatus  annis  13.  14.  &  15.  R.  R.  Johannis.) 

87.  Finalis Concordia fafta coram  JulliciarijsDrii  Regis 

Itinerantibus  apud  Wilton,  anno  ’5  R.  R.  Henrici  111. 
de  una  Marca  anntiatim  folvenda  per  Robertum  le  Moyne 
de  Tenemento  fuo  de  Lydfchelve.  ibid. 

88.  Some  Godly  Ejaculations  &  Meditations,  in  Eng- 

Iiffij  by  a  later  hand.  190. 

1762. 

Codex  membranaceus,  antiquus.  ac  eleganter  fatis  ex- 
aratus  ;  quern,  caris  conditionibus,  e  D~no  Aymone 
in  Hollandia,  comparavit  Uluftriffimus  Dominus  meus; 
in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Magiftri  Ricardi  Canonici  San&i  Viftoris  Pari- 

fiacenfis,  Expofitio  fuper  illud  Yfaie,  Omne  caput 
languidum,  et  omne  Cor  merens,  a  planta  Pedis  ufque 
ad  Verticem;  non  eft  in  eo  Sanitas  :  five,  de  Statu  In- 
terioris  Hominis  poll  Lapfum.  1. 

2.  Tradatus  cujus  fupra  (i.  e.  Ricardi  de  San&o- 

Viftore)  de  Pfalmo  Afferte  Domino  filij  Dei,  afferte 
Domino  filios  Arietum  :  ad  Novitios.  iji. 

3.  Epiftola  Domni  Stephani  Abbatis  de  Monte  Sandae 

Genovefm,  ad  eos  qui  de  Ordine  Grandimontenfmm 
egrelfi,  ad  Ordinem  Ciftercienfein  in  Pontiniaco  con- 
fugerunt,  ad  Guillermum  &  Guidonem  Uidlerc  ?  Ro¬ 
berto  Pontiniacenfi  Monacho,  genere  fimul  et  conver- 
fatione  illuftri,  data.  75- b. 

4.  Queftiones  Theological  Magiftri  Odonis.  8  1 .  b. 

r763- 

An  Italian  Book  in  fol.  (faid  to  have  been  formerly  kept 
in  the  Valican-Library  at  Rome,  but  fince  then) 
bought  of  Monlr.  Aymon  in  Holland,  with  the  former 
&  feme  other  Books.  It  is  thus  entituled,  “Vita  e 
Gelli  di  Giovanni.  Pietro  Caraffa  ;  cio6  di  Paolo  iv. 
Pontiftcc  Mafliino  :  raccolti  dal  P.  Don  Antonio  Ca- 
racciolo  de  Chierici  Regolari,  Profeffione.”  It  may  be 
defcribed  in  the  following  manner. 

1.  The  Author’s  Preface.  1. 

2.  Arbors  de  Progenitori  di  Paolo  iv.  4.  b. 

3.  Arbore  del  Sigr.  Camponefchi.  3. 

Then  comes  on  the  Life  itfelf,  divided  into  Five 

Books  ;  which  being  very  curious,  &  not  yet  printed, 

I  fhall  putt  down  the  Contents  thereof,  asfubdivided  into 
feveral  Chapters. 

Libro  1. 

4.  Della  Stirpe  Caraffa,  e  Camponefca.  6. 

5.  Delle  Predittioni  fatte  da  Paolo  iv.  9. 

6.  Del  Nafcimento,  et  Educatione  di  Giovanni-Pietro 

Caraffa.  1  o.  b. 

7.  F11  fatto  Cameriero  Sccreto  di  Papa  Aleflandro  vi. 

e  Proto-notario  Apoftolico  ;  e  di  quei,  che  gli  auvenne 
in  quel  tempo.  16. 

8.  E’  fatto  Vefcovo  di  Chicti,  e  Nuntio  in  Napoli  a 

Re  Ferdinando  il  Cattolico.  19. 

9*  Ando  ^  Poffeffo  e  Ilefidenza  di  Chieti  ;  e  le  Cofe 
che  quivi  fece.  21. 

10.  I  rovafi  prefen  tc  al  Concilio  Lateranenfe  ;  e  di 
la  e  fpedito  Nuntio  in  Inghilterra.  23.  b. 


Num.  1763. 

11.  Paffa  in  Spagna ;  et  e  fatto  Regio  Configliero  e 

Vice-Capellano  Maggiore.  27. 

1 2.  Caufa  del  partirfi  il  Vefcovo  Theatino  dalla  Corte 
del  Re  Cattolico,  in  fieme  con  il  Reggente  Gazzella. 

...  34- 

J3-  Qu<dlo,  che  fece  in  Roma  ill  Vefcovo  Theatino  a 
tempo  di  Leone  x.  e  d’  Adriano  vi.  40.  b. 

14.  Geft i  del  Vefcovo  Theatino  in  Roma,  fatto  Papa 

Clemente  vii.  43.  5. 

Libro  11. 

15.  Il  Vefcovo  Theatino  nel  1524  infieme  col  Beato 

Gaetano  e  due  altri,  Fonda  la  Rcligione  de  Chierici 
Regolari.  _  .  47. 

16.  Raggioni  del  Nome  et  Inftituto  dell’Ordine  de 

Clerici  Regolari.  34.  b. 

1 7.  Gelli,  e  Succeffi  nella  Rcligiorte  de  Chierici  Re¬ 
golari,  fubito  doppo  la  Fondatione.  57.  b. 

18.  Gefti  da  quefto  tempo,  fmo  al  Sacco  di  Roma 

nel  1527.  6o.  b. 

19.  Gefti,  e  Pericoli  de  noftri  Padri  nel  Sacco  di 

Roma.  63. 

20.  Di  quel,  che  il  Vefcovo  Theatino  fece  in  Venc- 

tia,  et  in  Verona,  in  fino  all’anno  1529.  70. 

21.  Rjforma,  e -Conferma  l’Ordine  Eremitico  in 
Dalmatia  ;  et  ha  cura  di  fare  il  Nuovo  Breviario.  7  3.  b. 

22.  Gefti  del  1530.  77- b. 

23.  Gefti  del  Vefcovo  Theatino,  nel  1532.  &  1533. 

82. 

24.  Gefti  nel  1532.  in  fino  al  1535.  95.  b. 

25.  Gefti  in  Venetia,  et  andata  in  Roma  nel  1-735. 

per  Ordine  di  Paolo  nr.  99,  b. 

26.  Giuntoin  Roma  e  fatto  Cardinale.  103. 


Libro  111. 


27.  Atlioni  del  Caraffa,  nel  Principio  del  fuo  Car- 

dinalato.  1Qg_ 

28.  Ja  il  Trattato  de  Emenda  Ecclefie.  108. 

29.  E’  fatto  Protettore  dell’Ordine  di  S.  Domenico, 
&  e  Autore  de  Suppremo  Tribunale  de  Santo  Offitio. 

109.  b. 

30.  Frutti  del  detto  Suppremo  Tribunale  del  San¬ 
to  Offitio.  1 15.  b. 

3 1 .  Del  modo  offervato  dal  Cardinal  Theatino,  nel 

procedere  contro  gl’Heretici.  12s.  b. 

32.  Dei  frutti  del  Sant’Offitio  in  Napoli  nel  1 346. 

123. 

33.  Gefti  del  Cardinal  Theatino  nel  1544.  126.  b. 

34.  Del  Concilio  di  Trento,  e  della  Congregatione 

cio  fatta  in  Roma,  di  cui  per  qual  che  tempo  fu  Capo 
il  Cardinal  Theatino.  J34. 

35.  Si  profegue  l’ifteffa  Materia  ;  e  dell’  Interim 

fatto  di  Carlo  v.  e  de  i  Legati  per.  cio  mandati  in  Ger¬ 
mania  con  i  quali  ando  il  Padre  Don  Bernardino  Scotto 
Chierico  Regolare.  j  39.  b. 

36.  L’Unione  della  noftra  Religione  fatta  co  i  So- 
inafchi  col  Confenfo  de  Cardinale  Theatino,  et  altri  fuoi. 

145.  b. 

37.  Protezzione  del  Regno  dTlungheria,  et  altri 
Honori  e  Gelli  del  Cardinal  Theatino  lotto  Giulio  hi. 

1 51- 

58.  A  lire  azzioni  fatte  dal  Cardinale  Theatino  Decano 
del  Collegio,  fotto  Giulio  in.  1 33.  b. 

Libro  iv. 

39.  Del  Conclave  di  Marcello  it.  e  dell’Elezzione  di 

Paolo  iv.  ,  c-g. 

40.  Seguono  altre  attioni  de  Paolo  mi.  nel  principio 
del  fuo  Pontificate  ;  e  l’Origine  e  Caufe  della  Guerra. 

164. 

41.  Prinripij,  eProgreffa  della  Gueira  in  .;.  alia  Venuta 

del  Duca  di  Guifa.  ’  jy..  b. 

42.  Progreffi  della  Guerra,  e  fina  di  effa.  1 79. 

43.  Legatione  del  Cardinal  Caraffa  in  Fiandra,  e  fuo 

Retorno  in  Roma,  e  cacciata  di  lui,  e  de  fuoi  Fratelli 
da  Roma.  184.  b. 

44.  Attioni 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


2,0 


8 


Num.  1 76 j,  1764. 

44.  Attioni  di  Paolo  iv.  doppo  Scacciati  i  Nepoti. 

196.  b. 

44.  Del  concilio  Generale  convocato  da  Paolo  iv.  e 
dell’Indice  de  Libri  Prohibiti  publicato  da  lui.  202. 

46.  Attioni  di  Paolo  iv.  in  Materia  del  Santo  Offitio. 

206. 

4 7.  Di  quel,  che  in  Francia,  et  in  Spagna,  el’Impe- 

ratore  Carolo  v.  e  Ferdinando  in  Materia  del  Santo 
Offitio.  213.  b. 

48.  Della  repugnanza  fatta  da  Paolo  iv.  alia  Re- 

nunzia  dell’Imperio  di  Carlo  v.  a  Ferdinando  luo 
Fratello.  21S. 

49.  Delle  Provifioni  fatte  da  Paolo  iv.  contro  i  Giuder 

Marrani,  e  Pedanti  Semi  heret'ci.  220.  b. 

50.  Altre  Leggi  k  Provifioni  di  Paolo  xv.  fpettanti 

alia  Fede  C.attolica.  224. 

51.  Della  Creatione de  Cardinali  fatta  da  Paolo  iv.  e 

di  altre  cofe  loro  fpettanti.  _  227. 

52.  Delle  Riforme  pertinentl  alia  Chiefa  Univerfale. 

235. 

53.  Riforme  della  Chiefa,  Cittk,  e  Corte  Romana. 

238. 

54.  De  i  Sacri  Riti  Riformati  ;  e  delle  Chiefe  rif- 

torate  da  Paolo  iv.  242.  b. 

55.  Ritiramento  a  Vita  privata,  Morte,  e  Succeffi  in 

Roma  dopo  la  fua  Morte.  244.  b. 

Libro  v. 

Dell’  Oratione,  e  Divotione  di  Paolo  iv.  252.  b. 
Zelo  dell’  Honore  e  Culto  Divino.  256. 

Rettitudine,  e  Liberta.  _  259. 

Coftanza,  Magnanimita,  e  Autorita.  260. 

Severita,  e  Clemenza.  2 62. 

01.  Liberalita,  et  Elemofine  di  Paolo  iv.  26:.  b. 

62.  Altinenza,  P  ivertk,  et  Caftita.  267.  b. 

63.  Eloquenza,  Memoria,  et  Dottrina  di  Paolo  iv. 

270. 

64.  Predittioni  fatte  da  lui  in  varij  Tempi.  272. 

65.  Effigie  e  Statura  di  Paolo  iv.  273. 

The  book  being  ended,  there  followoth  a  fiiort 

Tratt,  written  by  the  fame  Hand,  as  an  Appendix  thus 
entituled, 

66.  Relatione  della  Morte  del  Cardinal  Carlo  Ca- 

raffa,  Duca  di  Paliano  fuo  fratello,  Conte  di  Aliffe,  e 
di  Don  Leonardi  de  Cardines :  fatti  morire  da  Pio  1  v.  in 
Roma,  1’ anno  1562.  275. 


56. 

57- 

58. 

59- 


1764. 

A  thin  Parchment -book  in  fol.  lately  given  (vvith  fome 
others)  by  Dr.  George  Hickes  ;  wherein  is  contained, 
An  Imperfect  Treatife,  in  old  Englilh,  containing 
Counfels  to  young  Ladies  &  other  Women  how  to  govern 
themfelves,  by  following  Vertue  k  elchewing  Vice. 
Made  by  a  Knight  for  the  more  particular  k  immediate 
Ufe  of  his  three  Daughters  :  in  this  manner,  Y  parted 
(faith  he)  and  yede  oute  of  the  Gardein,  and  fonde  in  my 
Way  twoPreftes  k  two  Clerkes  that  Y  had  ;  and  Y  faide 
to  hem  that  Y  wolde  nuke  Boke  of  Enfaumples  for  to 
teche  my  Doughters  that  thei  might  vnderftond  how  thei 
lhulde  governe  hem,  and  knowe  good  from  evelie,  And 
fo  Y  made  hem  extraie  me  Enfaumples  of  the  Bible, 
and  other  Bokes  that  Y  had;  as  the  Geflis  ofKinges, 
the  Croniclez  of  Fraunce,  Grece,  of  Inglonde  ;  and  of 
mani  other  firaunge  Londes :  and  Y  made  hem  rede  me 
everi  boke,  and  ther  that  Y  fonde  a  good  Enfaumple, 
Y  made  extraie  it  oute  ;  and  thanne  Y  made  this  Boke. 
But  Y  wolde  not  fette  it  in  Ryme,  but  in  Profe,  for  to 
abregge  it,  and  that  it  might  be  beter  &  more  pleinly 
to  be  underflonde.  And  Y  made  this  Boke  for  the  gret 
loue  that  Y  had  for  my  faid  Doughtres  ;  the  whiche  Y 
loued  as  Fader  aught  to  loue  his  Childe.  Halting  hertely* 
Joye  to  finde  Wayes  to  Here  k  turne  hem  to  gocdneffe 
A  worfhippe ;  and  to  loue  k  ferue  her  Creatoure  ;  & 
to  haue  Loue  of  her  Neigheboures  and  of  the  Worlde, 
&c.  i 


Num.  r  764, 1765. 

Hereby,  it  appeareth  that  the  defign  of  the  book  was 
good  ;  but  the  Legendary  Stories  are  fo  numerous  & 
idle,  as  much  to  impair  the  Reputation  of  the  Per¬ 
formance.  However,  one  Ufe  may  be  made  even  of 
them ;  they  ferving  to  make  one  laugh  at  the  extreme 
ridiculoufnefs  of  grofs  Popery  :  and  the  book  may  be 
alfo  farther  confulted  about  Habits  k  Fafiiions ;  and  the 
Significations  of  certain  Words  now  obfolete  k  not  cafiiy 
underftood. 

The  Title  of  the  Work  doth  not  now  appear  at  the 
beginning.  The  end  is  wanting  ;  as  alfo  lbme  leaves 
after  24.  A  32. 

The  Author  or  Compiler’s  Name  is  not  exprefied 
but  it  appeareth  that  he  was  a  Knight  (as  is  abovemen- 
tioned)  that  he  had  lerved  in  the  Wars  in  Poictou  ;  and 
that  he  began  his  Work  A.  D.  1371.  fo  that  in  that 
Progrelfe  thereof  he  might  well  write  (fol.  30.  b.  col.  1.) 
“  fin  the  Tyme  &  Journey  of  Crecy  the  which  is  26 
Wynter  agone  ;  ”  the  Battle  of  Crefly  being  foughten 
A.  D.  1346.  But  his  Effigies,  with  thofe  of  his  Three 
daughters,  in  their  Habits,  were  painted  in  *he  Principal 
Letter  of  the  Book,  but  now  (through  the  Negleft  of  for¬ 
mer  Owners)  very  much  damnified. 

His  Countrey  J'eemeth  to  have  been  France  which 
he  preferreth  before  England  not  onlv  in  the  place  above 
cited  from  fol.  1.  b.  but  alfo  in  fol.  53.  col.  2.  The 
Perfons  alfo  of  either  Sex  named  by  him  with  honor,  are 
french  ;  as  “the  Noble  PrincefTe  Johannenow  lateQuene 

of  Fraunce,”  fol.  50.  col.  2. - “  This  good  Ladiwaslhe 

BaroneHeD’artus,”fol.  50. b.  col.  1. - “  Two  Knightes 

that  were  in  that  Tyme,  which  were  called  Sir  Raoul 
de  Luge,  &  Sir  Piere  de  Luge;  and  they  were  bothe 
bretheren  k  Knightes  of  gret  Worlhipe,  the  whiche  as 
in  tho  dayes  defire  to  do  Armes  A  fought  Worfhip  in 
ftraunge  Cuntreies  ;  and  they  hadde  gret  Renoune,  as 
Charmylour,  Cicault,  or  Sarmitre  :  ”  which  (with  divert. 
French  words  occurring  here  k  there)  make  me  of  Opi¬ 
nion,  that  this  Book  was  not  originally  written  in 
Englifh,  but  i-ather  tranflated  from  French. 


1765. 

An  Office-book  in  fol.  on  the  cut-fide  thus  entituled, 
Bille  Signate,  et  Privata  Sigilla  de  Annis  36.  37. 
k  38  Henrici  Oftavi  :  i.  e  aKalender  or  Short  Regiflre 
of  the  faid  Bills  k  Privy  Seals.  But  this  Title  being  not 
fo  particularly  adapted  to  the  MS.  I  crave  leave  to  be 
fomewhat  more  particular,  in  enumerating  the  following 
Titles. 

x.  Privata  Sigilla  anno  R.  R.  Henrici  vm.  36to.  1. 

2.  Bille  Signate,  anno  3610  (Pars  1.  2.  3.)  11. 

3.  Bille  Signate  anno  37ino  Henrici  vm.  26. 

4.  Privata  Sigilla,  anno  37010  Henrici  viii.  35. 

5.  Bille  Signate,  anno  3SV0  Henrici  viii.  41. 

6.  Privata  Sigilla,  anno  3  8vo  Henrici  vm.  49. 

7.  Licencie  alienacionum  de  anno  3410  Henrici  viii. 

(Paten.  Pars  3.  4.  5.  7.  8.  9.  10.  11.  k  12.)  56. 

8.  Licencie  alicnandi,  anno  3610  Henrici  vm.  /Patent. 

Pars  1.  2.  3.  4.  7.  8.  13.  15.  ij.  18.  19.  20.  & 
21.)  62. 

9.  Licencie  alienandi,  anno  3510  Henrici  vm.  (Patent. 
Pars  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.  6.  7.  xo.  xi.  13.  16.  k  184 

73- 


1766. 

A  parchment  Book  in  fol.  all  written  in  Old  Englifh, 
wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  Table  of  the  Contents  to  the  following  Woik. 

■  1 . 

2.  Dan  John  Lidgate’s  Tranflation  (or  Paraphrafe)  of 
John  Boccace  de  Calu  Principum,  in  Englifh  Verfe ; 
done  by  the  Command  of  Duke  Humfrey  about  the  be- 

I  ginning  of  the  Reign  of  King  Henry  the  Sixth,  fol.  5. 
[  to  the  end,  i.  e.  265.  b. 

Although 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


2.09 


Num.  1766 — -1768; 

Although  the  written  Copies  of  this  Book  be  pretty 
numerous  ;  this  is  neverthelefs  more  remarkable  than  any 
of  them  that  I  have  yetfeen.  And  that  for  two  refpefls, 
Firft,  among  the  impertinent  Scribbles  at  the  end,  I 
find  thefe  words,  “  Thy  ys  pe  boke  callyd  Bokas,  tran- 
flatyd  owth  of  Latyn  in  to  Ynglyfch,  Amen  q.  D  1  Lyd¬ 
gate  Mownke  olFSeynr  Edmundys  Bury.  Amen.”  Which 
mud  have  been  written  either  by  Dan  John  himfelf,  or 
by  fomebody  that  perfonated  him,  becaufe  tlie  word  q 
(i-  e.  qu Oil  or  QUOtij)  in  thefe  Notes,  generally  fignifics 
a  Perfon  fpeaking  or  writing  of  himfelf,  and  perhaps 
Lydgate  might  put  this  Note  modeltly  at  the  end,  if 
this  Book  was  his  Prefent.  In  the  Second  Place,  this 
Copie  is  more  than  ordinarily  remarkable  for  the  Pictures 
painted  therein,  in  order  to  illudrate  the  whole  work. 
Which  (notwithdanding  the  Workmans  Ignorance,  and 
abfurd  reprefentation  of  Old  Hidories  in  the  Modes  & 
Fafhions  ufcd  at  the  Time  then  prefent,  that  is  of  K. 
Henry  vi.)  may  neverthelefs  be  ufeful  &  indruttive  to 
thofe  who  have  Occnfion  to  fearch  for  the  Habits,  In- 
druments,  & c.  which  then  obtained.  Such  in  my  Opi¬ 
nion,  may  be 

3.  The  fird  Pi&ure  reprefenting  Lydgate  &  another 

Black  Monke,  perhaps  his  Abbat.  kneeling  before  a 
Prince  or  Saint  (perhaps  St.  F.dmund  King  of  the  Ead 
Angles  Sc  Patron  of  their  Monaderv)  who  fitteth  on  a 
Throne,  under  a  State,  and  holdeth  an  Arrow  in  his 
left  hand.  ^ 

4.  Thofe  (among  divers  others)  at  fol.  18.  54  b.  63. 
63.  b.  64.  b.  65.  76.  -6.  b.  107.  hi.  132.  141.  b. 
where  is  a  Gallows  whim  deal  enough:  17  c.  230.  b. 
235*  2  59.  b.  which  I  mention  for  the  fake  of  the  En- 
glilli  Banner. 

176-. 

A  thin  book  in  fol.  relating  to  our  Laws  ;  wherein  the 
following  Tracts  are  contained, 

1.  Some  Noate  8-:  Obfervations  vppon  the  Stature  of 
Magna  Carta,  Chap  xxix.  and  other  Statuts,  con¬ 
cerning  the  Proceedings  in  the  Chauncery  in  Courfes  of 
Equitye  &  Confcyence.  t  olledted  by  the  Lord  Ellefmer 
for  the  Kings  learned  Counlells  Direction,  the  Month  of 
Septemb.  1615. 

2.  That  the  Courte  of  Chaunceryc  cannott  bee  inten¬ 
ded  within  the  Statute  of  27  Edw.  m.  Cap  1.  i..|. 

3.  The  Earle  of  Oxford  his  Caufe  in  Chauncery. 

Mich.  13  Jacobi  1.  29.  b. 

4.  Richard  Glanvilles  Cafe,  4  Jacobi.  37. 

5.  Allens  Caufe  in  Chauncery  ;  Aprill  1  Jacobi 

1.  Regis.  >  39> 

6.  The  Coppie  of  the  Lettre  which  the  Lordes  of  the 
Councell  writt  to  the  Kings  Majeftie  in  the  behalfe  of 
the  Lord  Cheiffe  Jultice,  Sir  Edward  Cooke.  44.  (26 
June  1616.) 

This  fheweth  the  Anfwer  given  by  that  great  Man, 
to  the  articles  alleadged  againd  him. 

7.  Proceedings  in  Council  againd  Sir  Edward  Cooke, 

1  3  June  1616.  who  (among  other  matters)  had  given 
Offence  by  affuming  the  Title  of  Lord  Chiefs  Judice  of 
England;  &  by  (cauling  or)  permitting  his  Coachman 
to  drive,  bare-headed,  before  him.  47 

8.  Ine  Kinges  Order  &  Decree  in  Chauncerye,  for  a 
Rule  to  bee  obferved  by  the  Lord-Chauncellour  in  that 
Courte;  exempliffyed,  and  inrolled  for  a  perpetual! 
Recorde  there,  Anno  1616. 

1768. 

A  Book  in  fol.  entituled  A  Paraphafe  in  Englifh  Verfe 
upon  the  Bookes  of  the  Pfalmes,  by  Sam.  Woode- 
forde  S.  R.  S. 

1  his  Book  was  the  Authors  Autographon ;  and 
may  be  thus  more  particulary  deferibed. 

1.  The  Authors  Letter  to  his  kinfman  Mr.  Charles 
Cat.  Hari,.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1768,1  769. 

Beale,  dat.  16  Dec.  1657.  whereby  he  prefenteth  this 
Book  unto  him. 

2.  The  Authors  Dedication  of  the  Work  (as  in  Print} 
to  George  Morley  Bifhop  of  Winch eller. 

3.  The  Prerace. 

.  4.  Another  fhort  Letter  from  the  Author  to  the  faid 
Mr.  Beale.  20  Dee.  1667. 

5  I  he  Authors  acknowledgement  to  God  (in  3 
Stanzas)  who  fird  put  this  Dcfign  into  his  Heart,  and 
gave  him  abilities  to  finifh  it. 

6.  A  Note  bf  the  Author  to  Mr.  Beale. 

7.  Dr.  Woodefordts  Paraph rafe  upon  the  Pfalmes; 
in  fbme  Places  different  from  the  Print. 

At  tile  end  of  each  Pfalm,  is  a  fhott  Note,  fhewing 
when  5c  where  the  fame  was  paraph rafed. 

At  the  end  of  the  lad  Pfalm  in  this  Note,  This 
Copy  of  the  Pfalms  was  tranferibed  at  A! brook,  about 
Sept.  1665.  Mr.  Stillingfleet  carried  it  to  the  Bp.  of 
Wintqn,  and  thence  to  Oxon,  whence  it  was  again  re¬ 
turned  rrle  about  the  end  of  Decemb.  the  fame  yeare. 
By  this  Copy  at  Albrook  about  January  1665-6. 1  tran- 
ferib’d  another  for  the  Prefs,  in  which  I  alter’d  fome 
things  as  will  appeare  by  the  printed  Books. 
t  8.  A  Pindaric  Ode  of  Dr.  Woodeforde,  called  The 
Voyage,  not  extant  in  the  printed  Book. 

O11  the  out-fide  of  the  Cover  of  the  Book,  is 

9.  A  Latin  Infcription,  dedicating  this  Book  to  the 
above-mentioned  Mr.  Beale. 

1  769. 

A  Book  in  fol.  lately  given  by  t he  reverend  &  learned 
Dr.  George  Hickes  ;  confiding  of  divers  lbole  Tiacls 
bound  up  together  in  the  Order  following. 

I.  The  Accuiation  &  Impeachment  of  John  Lord  Finch 

Barron  of  Fordich  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great  Seale  of 
England,  by  the  Gomons  in  the  prefent  Parliament  af-. 
fembled.  3 

.  2-  A  Bil1  preferred  in  Parliament  againft  the  ArcL 
bifiiopp  of  Canterbury  (Laude)  by  the  Fellowes  of  Mer- 
ton-College  in  Oxford. 

3.  Articles  preferred  in  Parliament  againft  Secretary 

Windtbanke,  A.  D  1 64a;  0  r  1 

4.  '1  he  Articles  of  a  Minifter  to  the  Commons  Hoivfe 
of  Parliament,  againft  Dr.  Peirce  Bifhop  of  Bath  5c  Weiis. 

5.  Di.  John  Baft  wick  s  Petition  to  the  Commons 

Howfc  of  Parliament  A.  D.  1640.  if;, 

6.  Mr.  Henry  Burton’s  Petition  in  Parliament  A  D. 

l64°-  24. 

7.  Mr.  John  Prynnes  Petition  in  Parliament  A.  D. 

'  64°‘  .  .  30. 

8.  Sir  George  Ratclifles  Charge  (or  Impeachment) 

29  December  1640.  A» 

9.  Articles  of  the  Commons  affembled  in  Parlyamcm 

agaynft  Thomas  Erlle  of  Strafford.  ’ 

1  o.  The  Earle  of  Straft'ords  Second  Charge  in  the 
Houfe  of  Commons,  5  December  if  40.  °  4 

I I .  Petition  of  the  fame  Earl  of  Stratford  to  the  Lords 
Houfe  of  Parliament. 

1  2.  His  Majefties  Letter  to  the  Lords,  on  the  behalfe 
of  the  Earle  of  Strafford  ;  lent  by  the  Prince. 

'3-  Naiiation  of  what  happened  upon  the  receipt  5c 
reading  of  that  Letter. 

14.  The  Earle  of  Strafforde  charaftcrifed  in  a  J.etrer 
lent  by  a  worthy  Gentlemen  in  the  C itrie,  to  hisFreind 
in  the  Countrie  :  before  the  Condemnation  of  the  faid 
Earle. 

15.  Part  of  the  Earl  of  Strafford’s  Anfwer ;  (bednr.inp- 

at  Article  22.)  6  6q  * 

16.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Names  of  the  Voters  for  the 
Earl  of  Strafford,  &  againft  the  Bill  of  his  Attaynder  in 
in  the  Houfe  of  Co'mons. 

17.  Dr.  Moulyn  the  Younger,  his  Opinion  (to  one 

of 


s 


_ 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Kum.  1769, 1 77°* 


■  of  the  Knights  of  the  Parliament  for  Lancafhire)  concern- 
inge  Enifcopacye,  1640.  ^5- 

j  8.  The  Report  of  the  Judges  Anfweares  to  the  Howie 
of  Commons  by  the  26  Gentlemen  appointed  by  the 
Howie  to  examine  the  Judges  in  what  fort  they  have 
becne  'foil-cited,  or  gave  theirVotes  concerninge  the 
Ship-money.  .  lor'' 

ig.  The  Argument  of  Judge  Crooke  in  the  Exche¬ 
quer- Chamber,  concerning  Shipp-money,  in  April  16  ;S. 

10  5; 

20.  A  breffe  Relation  of  fartein  fpecyall  Si  molte 

11 ;  i(feg  «  8c  fpeeches  in  the  Star-Chamber,  occa- 
lioned  <k  delivered  the  14  of  June  1637.  at  the  Senfeur 
ofthofe  3  famous  &  worthy  gentiilmen  Dockter  Baft- 
wicke,  Mr.  Burton,  &  Mr.  Pryne,  even  fo  as  it  hath 
bene  truly  8;  faythfully  rclatted’ik  gathered  from  tlieier 
ew.11  mothes  by  one  prefent  at  the  iuyd  Senfner.  1 16. 

Here  is  likewife  an  account  of  their  Behavior  & 
■Speeches  at  the  time  of  their  Suffering. 

21.  l‘he  Hi  IT.  '  ties  Speech  in  the  Parlia- 

,  1 6  z  3 .  1  2  s'  ■ 

22.  A  Declaration  of  the  Commons  houfe  of  Parlia* 

...  1  June  1620,  129. 

2  ;.  The  Voluntan  ConfefGon  of  John  Browne  (a 
Pi'pnli  Pried)  of  the  Age  of  72  yeares,  a  Prisoner  of  the 
Gate-hovvfe ;  twice  examined  by  a  Committee  of  Six, 
from  the  Honorable  i  Jowfe  of  Commons.  1 30. 

24.  The  Firft  Remonftrance  of  die  Commons.  157. 

25.  The  Second  Remonftrance.  172. 

2o.  Occurrences  in  the  Commons  Houfe  of  Parliament 

(perhaps  about  the  year  1639.  or  1640.)  about  the  Par¬ 
dons  granted  to  Bp.  Mountague,  the  Doctors  Coufins, 
1  .  .  .  Acton  Sheriffe 

of  London  his  being  fent  to  the  Tower  for  prevaricating 
with  a  Committee  of  the  Houfe,  ar.d  a  Precedent  offered 


by  Mr.  Selden;  with  Sir  Richard  Grofvenors  Speech  at 
the  Committee  of  Religion  to  Mr.  Pymme  then  in  the 
Chair;  with  fome  oilier  matters.  1  *7- 

27.  Speech  of  K.  Charles  1.  at  his  diffolving  the  Par¬ 
liament,  ...  of . A.  D .  205. 

28.  The  Vowe  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  in  Parlia¬ 
ment  ;  about  the  Articlej  of  Religion.  ibid. 

29  The  Proteftations  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  in 
Parliament,  again  ft  Popery,  Arminianifme,  &  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  Tonnage  &  Poundage,  before  the  fame  fliould 
be  granted  by  Parliament.  205.  b. 

30.  Notes  touching  the  Farmers  of  the  Cuftoms  at 
that  time,  and  their  hazing  Mens  Goods  by  virtue  of 
the  Kings  Letters  Patents  only  ;  the  abovementioned 
Duties  having  not  been  granted  by  Parliament,  ibid. 


1  77°- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fob  diverfis  manibus  feriptus 

(et  olim  Bibliotheca:  Monafterij  de  Kirkham  pertinens) 

in  quo  continentuv, 

1 .  Pftdterium  D.  Hieronymi,  quod  dicitur  Gallicanum; 

in  quo  unurquifque  Vcrfus  ordine  quintus,  numeralibus 
Litteris  notatur.  1. 

L  regione,  five  columnatim  (aliena  fed  taraen  anti- 
qua  nianu  feribuntur, 

2.  Plalterij  e]ufdem,Verfio  GuIIica. 

No  tarn’ uni,  in  initio  Codicis,  folium  primum  (ab 
iniprebo  quodam,  ut  videlur  puero  exefeiffum)  defide- 
rari. 

Imis  niarginibus  leguntur,  prima  manu  exaratas 

3.  Salulationes,  five  hymni  ad  B.  Virginem,  dextror- 
fuiu  ;  i.  e  fub  columnis  Latinis. 

4..  CoUcdhe  ad  Deuni  Patrem  finiftrorfum ;  i.  e.  fub 
columuis  Gallicis. 

Soquuiitur  Cantica  Sacra,  et  Latine  8c  Gall  cc  co¬ 
lumnatim  pofitre ;  fcil. 

C.anticum  Ifaite  f  Confitebor,  8cc.  If.  xii.  1.)  141. 

6.  Canlicum  Ezechite  Regis,  141b. 

7.  Cahticunixinr.ee  142.  b. 


Num.  1 770,  1771. 


8.  Canticum  Moyfis  (Cantemus.  Exod.  xv.  r.)' 

143.  b. 


9.  Canticum  Abacuc. 

<45- 

1 0.  Canticum  Moyfis  (Audite  cceli.  Dcut. 

XXXI  I.  1.) 

147. 

11.  Canticum  trium  Puerorum. 

150. 

12.  Canticum  Zacharice. 

15«- 

13.  .Camicum  Maria:. 

152. 

14.  Canticum  Symeonis. 

J  52.  b. 

15.  TeDeum  laudamus. 

ibid. 

16.  Quicunque  vulr. 

TS3‘  h- 

17.  Oratio  Dominica.  Imperf. 

Then  followcth,  by  another  hand, 

153.  b. 

iS.  The  Pfalter  tranflated  into  very  antient  Englifli 
Verfe;  from  the  Gallicanum  Pfalterium  of  St.  Hierome. 


156. 

Each  Pfalm  beginneth  after  a  Line  of  the  fame 
rfalm  in  Latin;  and  the  firft:  Words  of  each  Verfe  in 
the  Latin  Pfalter  is  written  in  the  Margin. 

At  the  end  of  the  firft  Pfalm,  is  the  Gloria  Patriin 
like  Englifli  Verfe. 

1 9.  Adnotatio  de  annis  Indulgentite  conceflisin  Terrain 
Herofolymitanani  peregrinantibus ;  et  Loca  Sandra  devote 
vifitantibus.  manu  recentiore-.  239. 

Pars  Prior  Adnotationis,  de  induftria,  confpicitue 
abrafa. 


1 771  ■ 


Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  quem  (in  Italia,  de  filia  D. 
Caroli  Patini  redemptum)  illufiriffimo  Domino  meo 
vendidir  D.  Alexander  Cuninghamius  Junior  Scoto- 
Britannus.  In  quo  quidem  continetur  Homeri  Ilias 
cum  Argumentis  &  Epigraphis  Grtece ;  additis  etiam 
Schfilijs  quamplurimis  tarn  marginalibus  quam  inter- 
lincaribus,  eiiamnum  (quod  feiam)  ineditis. 

Notandum,  Iliadis  prima:  (qua:  hoc  in  Codice  voca- 
bulo  AA$A  produdle  feripto  denotatur)  Argumentuin  de- 
fxderari. 


1.  >iicu  lAi.f  JlGr1  pTif  uAT  a! .  1. 

2.  'YzrofUtTH  ‘Opnpou  20. 

3.  ’'AAAwf.  ibid. 

Ouinet,  in  ipfis  Argumentis,  occurrunt  Ledtiones 
ab  editis  diferepantes. 

4-  ’iAioti©3  £  ' .  'Opofpou  pat$/ufi'cc(.  2  1. 

In  bina  quafi  poemata  dividitur.  Nam  port  ver- 
fum  493.  leguntur  htec  verba  literis  miniatis  feripta, 
Ts'a©j  tvs  £~\  'Cfj.roou  px^ySizs,  qua:  ftatim  ex- 

cipit. 


non  comparer  noviffimft  omnium  Homeri  Editione  p 
Jofuam  Barnefium  elaborata.)  36.  b 

6.  Numerus  Principum,  Navium,  ac  Bellatoru 


7* 

rr’  Bsiwncej  (Bt/iorrai/  IlWAtwj 

xai  An'mi 

?x"0 

37* 

8. 

'Tircitms  y 

t r, ;  OjUJifou  px-^/xiixs. 

49- 

9- 

’lA y 

‘OjUMjciu  jiaiJ/aJiaf. 

49.  b. 

10. 

'Y-rrofisais  "r; 

J1  '  'OjUTijs-j  px-^uiixs- 

64. 

14. 

”AAAa;. 

ibid. 

12. 

’iAiaJ^  r 

Of J.V0011  pail/aJiaf. 

64.  b. 

13‘ 

'TtTC&ST.J  T>i 

s  c'  '0/j..:oz  pzipuoix;. 

81. b. 

14. 

AAAWf. 

ibid. 

J5- 

’lAlaJ^  T 

'O p-vpa  paiJ/wJiar. 

82. 

16. 

'T7ro8’£<rif  tv;  £  '  'Ofiypis  pai^aJictc, 

1  xc.  b. 

>7- 

Kal  «AA«f. 

ibid. 

18. 

i" 

'Optima  pa'C-Jia;. 

ibid. 

1 9- 

’TncJciris  n 

■  s  jj  'Optnja  p«4'wJ<«s. 

x  27. 

20. 

"Aaa  «r. 

ibid. 

21. 

’Our, pi  p'aifwJistc. 

ibid. 

22. 

Ytt CSttris  6 

3  panj/'xJ.a?. 

141.  b. 

a3- 

“AAAfcf. 

ibid. 

24. 

’lA.aje-  r 

’Ofj-rpi  pxJjuSms. 

142. 

25. 

'TtoSicis  t- 

1  Op.va-J  pz^xotx;. 

159.  b. 

2(5. 

"AAAaf. 

ibid. 

s 

27.  ’iAia^t 

Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


1 1 1 


NUHII77I,  1772. 

27.  'lXidi®3  V  'OfMtox  pxipufizg.  1  60. 

28.  'Xvi^tait  tUj  'lAicci&  k'  O y-ri^u  paij/aJ/af.  l82.b. 

29.  ’'Aaaw?  (Hoc  argumentum  in  Editione  Homeri 

Barnefiantl  defideratur.)  ibid. 

30.  ’Do xS&  *'  patjsuflar.  ibid. 

31.  'TiroS’uns  rr,g  A7  'Oyjiga  payijSiag.  20  1. 

32.  ’'AXAwf.  ibid. 

33.  ’lAia-j'fgp  A*'  parpuXuf.  201.  b. 

34.  T?ro$i<nc  T»)f  ’lAia(i'©J  fx  '  Oyn^a  px^ySixg.  227. 

35.  vAaauj.  (deeft  etiam  hoc  Argumentum  in  Editione 

Barnefiana.)  ibid. 

36.  ’D.iiiJ©*  f'  'Oy.yoz  p'avj/ao/af.  227=  b. 

37.  'Y~c  ,-£<ris-  xris  ’IaiccJ'^  ^  Oyiffa  px^tfilzg.  242. 

38.  ’Aaa«?.  ibid. 

39.  243.  b. 

40.  'Tjto&wis  'DuaJljy*  ^  '  O, jj.no:-:  pxfyipSlxc.  269. 

41.  'AA/.af.  (ncque  occurit  hoc  argumentum  in  Edi¬ 
tione  Barnefiana.)  ibid. 

42.  ‘D  . .'.if??  £~'  'Oywjs  pu^'.-.Slxg,  ibid. 

43.  ‘itVofliOIJ  -  Af  &  p.X'U-alzf.  28  5.  b. 

44.  ’'Aaak,-.  (nequc  irivenitur  hoc  Argumentum  apud 

Barnefium.)  ibid. 

45.  ’iAiael^  '<!  'dy-rga  p'a^wJ'i'jsf.  286. 

46.  'YttoSiith  rriff  ’I\iao'©J  7r /  'Oy/ja  pxipyJix;.  308. 

47.  Tr^Oftrja  pctvJ/wJiaf.  306.  b. 

48.  lAiatlgy  p~'  ’Opm'fB  p'anJ/wJiV-f.  33^- 

49.  'TwoSe er»f  -m  'JAiaJ(^  {"'Oyn^a px^uStxg.  359. 

30.  ’lAt«^^  j7  ‘Oyr'^a  pcaJ/aJiaj.  360. 

51.  'Ttt&Seo-i;  t>ij  ,lAi«i‘©J  t7  'Oy»ja  pxtyuSlxg.  379* 

52.  ’.lAiaJf^  t7  'O/xflfJs  pxiptfiixg.  379-  b- 

53.  'YjrcS’wif  rnf  'JAiau^  •/ 'Opiijoa  p'ai|/a<har.  392.  b. 

54.  ’lAtctJ'^*  u'  ’Oy-fa  pxipaiixg.  393- 

33-  ’YircSstrig  r/|;  'IAijiJ©3  p' 'Ofx-n^x  pxipuJiag.  408.  b. 
30.  ’lAiaS'gr’  ip”  'OyJi'oa  px^uSlxg.  409. 

37.  TTro'S’Effif  tji;  p/  Oprnja  p*vJ/«Ji«r.  428. 

58.  vAAAwf.  ibid. 

59,  ’lAiciJ'©-’  j£7  'Opxjgx  pziptcJlctf.  428.  b. 

fo.  T;r ivETif  x.i;  'iAiae!©-’  if  '  'CtfAr.cn  p'ai J/uJizg.  444.  b. 

. .  Argumentum  aliud,  in  Bamefij  editione  defidera- 
tum  ibid. 

62.  ’D.iaJ©*  vj/  Opirifix  pectpyJixg.  44 5* 

63.  'i'wiirEs-is  ivir  w  Ofxri^x  pu<p::hxg.  4 73’ 

64.  ’rAiKi?©  u'  'OyrfB  pxipujixg.  473.  b. 

In  fine  defiderantur  folia  5.  aut  6. 


1772- 

Codex  ''oblongioris  forma;)  membranaceus,  in  fol.  min. 
quern,  caris  coilditionibus,  in  Hollandia  redemit  Illuf- 
triffimus  I  ominus  metis  a  Joh.  Aymone.  In  illo  com- 
ple&untur  Epiftols  Paulina;,  Epiftols  Catholics,  et 
Apocalypfis,  Latine,  cum  Arguments,  Capitulis,  &c. 
ante  nongentos  annos,  manu  Galica,  exarats ;  lit- 
terifq ;  principalibus  curiofiffune  variegatis,  de  more 
feculi  iftius  adornats. 

Codicem  diflinxit,  Textumq  ;  Sacrum  quam  plu- 
rimis  in  locis  (ad  aliud  quoddam  ac  longe  diverfum 
Exemplar)  emendavit  Antiquarius  Gall  us,  annis  abhinc 
forte  octingentus.  Veruin  quoto  tempore  vel  feculo 
Incendium  paffus  fuerit  (cum  ex  indicijs  certiflimis  con- 
ftet,  fummitates  foliorum  fere  mliverforum  exuftas  fuifle) 
me  prorfus  nefcire  fateor. 

Ut  autem  ad  hujufce  pervetufti  Codicis  contenta 
redeam  ;  primum  in  eo  locum  obtinet 

1.  Prefatio  Sanc'.i  Iiieronimi  in  D.  Pauli  Epiftolas 

(Ini/.  Primum  qusritur  quemadmodum.)  1. 

2.  Argumentum  folius  Epiftuls  ad  Romanos  (Init. 

Romani  funt  qtri  exjudsisj  2.  b. 

3.  Verfus  Danv.fi  Epifcopi  Urbis  Roms,  de  eadem 

Epiftola.  Init.  Jamjudum  Saulus  procerum  prscepta 
fecutus1.”  4. 

4.  In  X~pi  nomine  incipiunt  Capitula  ad  Romanos, 

numero  40.  4.  b. 

5.  Praefacio*  five  argumentum  brevs  in  eandemEpift- 

olam  (Init,  Rom  ini,  funt  partis  Italisj  6.  b. 


Nom.  1772. 

6.  lnfcriptio  Runica  pervetufta,  tarn  minlo  quam 
atramento  lineis  quinque  eleganter  fatis  exarata  j  in  qua, 
voces  quafdam  Latinas,  quali  divinando,  agnovimus. 

ibid. 

Ab  hac  Infcriptione  probatur,  Literarum  Runica* 
rum  ufum  apud  veteres  Francos  obtinuilfe. 

7.  Epiftola  D.  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Romanos.  7. 
(Habentur  Adnotationes  pauculs,  efldem  et  in 

fuperiore  pagina.  fol.  1  2.  b.  13.  &c.)  19.  b.  20. 

Verfio  hujufce  Epiftola!  et  reliquarum  plurimis  in 
locis,  diferepat  ab  editis  ;  videlicet  tarn  ab  hodierna 
Vulgata,  quam  a Hieronymiana  per  Joannem  Martiansum 
edita  Parilijs,  A.  D.  1693.  ubi  nulla  proferuntur 
Prsfatio,  Argumenta,  Capitula,  &c. 

Specimen  Verfionis  efto, 

Rom.  IV.  9.  Beatitudo  ergo  hsc  in  Circun- 
cifione  tantum  manet  ?  In  MS. 
deeft  tantum. 

V.  3.  Sed  et  gloriamur  in  Tribulation- 

ibus.  In  MS.  Tribulationibus  nojlris. 

8.  Secundum  tempus  Xps  pro  nobis 
mortuus  eft.  In  MS.  defunt  fe- 
cundum  tempus. 

VI.  3.  An  ignoratis,  Fratres,  In  MS.  deeft 

fratres. 

9.  Scientes  quod  Criftus  refurgens  ex 
mortuis.  MS./urgens. 

13.  Quid  ergo  ?  peccabimus,  quoniam 
non  fumus  fub  Lege,  fed  fub  gratia? 
In  MS.  defiderantur,  incuria  Libra¬ 
ry,  ut  videtur. 

21.  Quern  ergo  fruftum  habuiftis  tunc, 
in  iilis  in  quibus  nunc  erubefeitis. 
In  MS.  defunt  in  iilis 

VII.  4.  ut  fruftificemus  Deo.  In  MS.  fruc- 

tificaremur . 

VIII.  33.  'l'ribulatio  ?  an  anguftia  ?  an  fames  ? 

an  nuditas  ?  an  periculum  ?  an  per- 
fecutio  ?  an  glafius  ?  In  MS.  delunt 
an  perfccutio. 

IX.  6.  Non  enim  omnes  qui  ex  Circumci- 
fione  funt  Ifrael,  ij  funt  Ifraelits.  MS. 
qui  ex  Ifrael ,  hi  Cunt  Ifrabelifa. 

XL  3.  reliquis  fecundum  Eletftionem  gratis 
Dei  falvs  fads  lunt.  In  MS.  deeft 
Dei. 

9.  Fiat  menfa  eorum,  coram  ipfis,  in 
laqueum,  &c.  In  MS.  defunt  coram 
it/,,.  .  . 

23.  potens  eft  enim  Deus  iterum  inferere 
illos.  In  MS.  defideratur  Deus. 

XIV.  21.  neque  in  quo  fratcr  tuus  offenditur. 

MS.  offendit. 

XV.  2i.  et  qui  non aiulierunt  de  eo,  intelligent. 

In  MS.  defunt  de  eo. 

22.  et  prohibitus  fum  ufque  adhuc.  In 
MS.  non  coinparent. 

30.  ut  adjuvecis  me  in  orationibus  veftris 
pro  me  ad  Dcum.  in  MS.  defunt 
vejlris  pro  me. 

XVI.  5.  in  Crifto  Jefu.  MS.  deeft  Jefu. 

1 1.  Salutate  Apellcn  probum  in  X“po.  MS. 
Appellcn ,  i  t  Probum. 

Adnotatio  in  line ;  Epiftola  B.  Pauli  ad  Romanos 
habet  Verfus  91 1.  i.  e.  fecundum  divifionem  Verfionis 
D.  Hieronymi. 

8.  Capitula  prims  Epiftolcc  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Conn- 


thios  ;  numero  72.  24.  b. 

9.  Argumentum  ejufdem,  cujus  Init.  Corinthij 

funt  Achaici,  &c.  26.  b. 

10.  Numerus  Verfuum  in  hac  Epiftola.  S35.  ibid. 


(Numerus  Verfuum  in  veleri  Veriione  halica  1060. 
in  Veriione  Hieronvmiaua  980.) 


1.  Epiftola 


21  Z 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num,  1772.’ 

11.  Epiftola  prlma  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Corinthios.  27. 
Specimen  Verfionis. 

1  Cor.  III.  13.  Dies  enim  Domini  declarabit.  In 
MS.  defuieratur  Domini . 

IV.  16.  Rogo  ergo  Vos,  Imitatores  meieftote, 

ficut  et  Ego  Chrifti.  In  MS.  defunt 
Si  cut  et  Ego  X~pi. 

V.  11.  Si  is  qui  Erater  intur  Vos  nominatin' 

eft  fornicator,  &c.  In  MS.  defunt 
inter  Vos. 

VII.  39.  Quod  ft  dormierit  Vir  ejus,  liberata 
ell  a  Lege.  In  MS.  defunt  a  Lege.. 
XV.  25.  poft  ejus  ;  in  MS.  leguntur  Omnia 
cnim  fubjccit  pedibus  illitts ,  e  Coin- 
mate  forfan  27  defumpta  j  qua; 
tamen  ab  Amiquario  qui  Codicem 
emendaverit,  lubdutta  lincola  (quafi 
Obelo  jugulata)  damnantur. 

XVI.  12.  veniet  autem  cum  ei  vacuum  fuerit. 
In  MS.  tcmpus  vacuum. 

15.  noftis  domum  Stephana:,  et  For- 
tunati,  et  Aehaici,  In  MS.  defide- 
rantur  et  Acbaici. 

19.  Aquila  et  Prifcilla*  In.  MS.  legit ur 
P'rifca. 

12.  Capitula  ad  eofdem  fecunda.  i.  e.  Capitula  Se¬ 

cunda:  Epiftola;  D.  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Corinthios,  numero 
28.  44. 

13.  Argumentum  Epiftola;  {hit.  Poft  attain,  &c.) 

46. 

14.  Epiftola  D.  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Corinthios,  Secunda. 

ibid. 

Specimen  Verfionis 

2  Cor.  I.  6.  In  MS.  defiderantur  five  confo - 
Iainur  pro  veftra  confolatione. 
r3.  fed  eft  in  illo  eft.  In  MS.  ab  Anti¬ 
quario  delentur. 

IV.  6.  Ipfe  ilhixit  in  Cordibus  noflris.  in 

MS.  abeft  Ipfe. 

VI.  16.  et  inambulabo  inter  eos,  et  ero  il- 

lorum  Deus.  In  MS.  defunt  inter 
cos. 

VII.  3.  Non  ad  Condenmaticnem  veftram 

dico.  In  MS.  abeft  veftram. 

VIII.  18.  Mifimus  etiam  cum  iilo,  fratrem  nof- 
trum,  cujus  laus  eft  in  Evangelio.  In 
MS.  declt  nft rum. 

XII.  10.  placeo  mihi  in  Infinnitatibus  mcis.  In 
MS’  abeft  mcis. 

15.  Capitula  Epiftola;  D.  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Galatas  ; 

numero  37.  56.  b. 

16.  Piufacio  ejufdem  Epiftola:  Quit.  Galatie  funt 

Grteci.)  _  57.  b. 

17.  Numerus  Veifuum  in  hac  Epiftola,  292.  38- 

(Numerus  Verfunm  in  vet.  Verlione  Itala  330.  in 

Ilieronymiana.  213,) 

18.  Epiftola  D.  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Galatas.  ibid- 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

GaL  II.  2.  feorfam  autem  ijs  qui  videbantur  ali- 
quid  die,  ne  forte  in  vacuum  currerem. 

In  MS.  defiderantur  aliquid  ejfe. 

9.  ut  Nos  in  Gentes  ;  Ipfi  autem  in  Cir- 
cumcifionem.  In  MS.  ut  Nos  Evan- 
gelixaremus  in  Gen. 

HI.  6  ficut  feriptum  eft.  Abraham  credidit 
Deo.  In  MS.  defunt  feriptum  eft. 
i6.  Omnes  enim  Eilij  Dei  eftis,  per  Eidem, 
qus  eft  in  Chrifto  Jefu.  In  MS.  totum 
Comma  defideratur. 

V.  8.  Perfuafio  hfec  non  eft  ex  co  qui  vocat 

vos.  In  MS.  deeft  Isac. 

13.  per  Charitatem  Spiritus  lervite  invicem. 
lu  MS.  deeft  Spiritus. :  quam  Vocem 


Num.  1772. 

etiam  in  Verfione  veteri  Italica  defide* 
lari  teftatur  D.  Ricardus  Simon. 

16.  Dico  autem  in  Chrifto,  Spiritu  ambu¬ 
late.  In  MS.  defiderantur  in  X'po. 

22.  23.  Chariias,  gaudium,  pax,  patientia 
benignitas,  bonitas,  longanimitas,  man- 
fuetudo,  fides,  modeftia,  continentia, 
callitas.  In  MS.  Caritcs ,  gaudium , 
pax,  patientia,  longanimitas,  bonitas , 
benignitas,  fides,  modeftia,  continentia. 
VI.  17.  ftigmata  Domini  Jefu  corpore  in  raeo 
porto.  In  MS.  deeft  Jbefu. 

19.  Capitula  Epiftola;  ad  Ephefios,  numero  31. 

63.  b. 

2c.  Prcefat  10  ejufdem  Epiftolse.  64.  b. 

Infunt  etiam  et  fingulares  Lettiones  in  hujufee  Co- 
dicis  Capitulis  et  Praifationibus. 

21.  Epiftola  D.  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Ephefios. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

Ephef.  I.  3.  in  cceleftibus,  in  Chrifto.  MS.  in  X> 
ibu.  1 

9.  fecundum  beneplacitum  ejus.  In  MS. 
bo  num  placitum. 

21.  et  omne  Nomen  quod  nominatur.  In 
MS.  deeft  Ncmen. 

22.  et  ipfum  dedit  Caput  fupra  onlnem 
Ecclefiainj  vel  utinalijs  “i’uper  omnia, 
ipfi  Ecclefias.”  MS.  fupra  omni  Ec- 
clcfue. 

II.  I .  Et  vos  convivificavit  cum  efletis  mortui 
delittis  et  peccatis  veftris.  MS.  deeft 
convivificavit. 

5.  Et  cum  etfemua  mortui  peccatis,  con¬ 
vivificavit  nos  in  Chrifto,  cujus  gratia 
effcis  falvati.  Antiquarius  erafit  verba 
Et—  cujus. 

11.  quando  vos  qui  eratis  Gentes  in  Carne. 

In  MS.  defunt  qui  eratis. 

2;.  coasdificamini  in  habitaculum  Dei,  in 
Spiritu  fantto.  MS.  babitacuLo  Dei , 
Spiritu. 

III.  13.  qua:  eft  gloria  veftra.  In  MS.  gloria 

mea. 

IV.  1 3.  in  unitatem  Fidei,  et  agnitionis  Filij 

Dei.  In  ima  margine  Codicis  defidc- 
rata  verba  pofuit  Antiquarius,  et  ag- 
nicionem  Filij  Dei. 

V.  i8.  implemini  Spiritu  Santto.  MS.  deeft 

Sanflo. 

VL  4-  Et  vos  Patres.  MS.  deeft  Vos. 

22.  Capitula  Epiftola:  ad  Philippenfis,  Amen  ;  nu- 

mer°  *9;  _  (79.  h. 

(Philippenfis  feriptum  Iegitur  frepiufcule  pro  Philip- 
penfes;  ficut  et  fexcenta  alia  vocabuia,  de  more  fcilicet 
fequioris  a:vi  exarata  (porillimum  vero  Seculis  quarto, 
quinto,  &  fexto  obtinente)  quem  maxime  improbavit  M. 
Aurelius  Cafiiodorus  in  Libro  fuo  de‘  Orthographia- 

23.  Argumentum  five  1'raefacio  ejufdem  Epiftola;. 

(Init.  Philippenfis  font  Macedonia.)  70. 

24.  Epiftula  D.  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Philippcnfes.  ibid. 
Specimen  Verfionis. 

Philipp.  HI.  1 2- lequor  autem,  fi  quo  modo  com- 
preheudam.  In  MS.  defunt  quo  modo. 

25.  Capitula  Epiftola:  Primtc  ad  Theffalonicenfes, 
numero  25. 

26  PraTatio  ejufdem  Epiftola;  (hit.  Theffalonicenfes 
funt  Macedones.) 

27.  Epiftula  Pr.ma  Pauli  Apoftoli  ad  Theffalonicenfis. 

ibidw 

28.  Capitula  Epiftolse  Secunda:  ad  ThcfTalonicenles, 

numero  9.  g0> 

_  29.  Prologus  ejufdem  Epiftola:.  (hit.  Ad  Theffalo- 
nicenfesSecundam.)  80.  b. 

7  30.  Epiftula 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


ai  3 


Num. 


r  772* 


30.  Epiftula  ad  Tefalonicenfes  Secunda.  ibid. 

31.  Capitula  Epidola:  ad  Coloflenfes,  numero  29. 

s3- 

32.  Prsefatio  ejufdem  Epidola:.  (Init.  Coloflenfes  et 

hij.)  84. 

33.  Epidola  Pauli  Apodoli  ad  Coloflenfes.  84.  b. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

Coloff.  I.  12.  cum  gaudio  gratias  agentes  Deo  et 
Patri.  In  MS.  deelt  et. 

II.  23.  et  non  ad  parcendum  corpori.  MS  et 
ad  non  parcendum  Corpori.. 

III.  10.  qui  renovatur  in  agnitionem  Dei  fe- 

cundum  Imaginem  ejus  qui  creavit 
ilium.  In  MS.  deed  Dei — creavit 
eum.  Ubi  non  ed  Gentilis  et  Judaeus. 

IV.  18.  Gratia  D~ni  nodri  Jefu  Chridi  vo- 

bifeum.  In  MS.  Gratia  Di  Jhefu  vo- 
bifeum. 

34.  Capitula  Epidola:  Primas  ad  Timotheum,  nu- 

inero  30.  29. 

35.  Prasfacio  ejufdem  Epidola:.  90. 

36.  Epidola  Prima  Pauli  Apodoli  ad  Timotheum. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

1  Tim.  III.  14.  Htec  tibi  feribo,  fili  Timothee.  In 

MS.  defunt  fill  Timothee. 

V.  15.  converfas  funt  retro  pod  Satanam. 

In  MS.  retro  Satanan. 

VI.  17.  fed  in  Deo  vivo.  In  MS.  deed  vivo. 

37.  Capitula  Epidola:  Secunda:  ad  Timotheum,  nu¬ 
mero  25.  94  b. 

38.  Argumentum  ejufdem  Epiftolse.  (Init.  Item 

Timotheo  feribit.)  95.  b. 

39.  Epidola  Secunda  Pauli  Apodoli  ad  Timotheum. 

ibid. 

,  Specimen  Verfionis. 

2  Tim.  I.  3.  Gratias  ago  Deo  meo,  cui  fervio  k 

progenitoribus  meis.  In  MS.  defunt 
n.eo — meis. 

II.  12.  Si  fudinebimus.  In  MS.  fuftinemus. 


Num.  1772, 


III.  4.  tumidi,  cceci,  et  Voluptatum  ama- 

tores.  In  MS.  defidermtur  cceci  et. 

IV.  22.  Gratia  vobifeum.  In  MS.  nobifeum. 

40.  Capitula  Epidola:  ad  Titum,  nuijiero  10.  99.  b. 

41.  Argumentum,  five  Prologus.  Init.  Titus  com- 

monefacit.  1 00. 

42.  Epidola  D.  Pauli  Apodoli  ad  Titum.  ibid. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

Tit.  I.  5.  ficut  et  Egodilpofui  Tibi.  MS.  deed  Tibi. 
15.  et  Inftdelibus  nihil  ed  Mundum.  In  MS. 
deed  ejl. 

II.  4.  adolefcentulus,  ut  Viros  fuos  ament,  Filios 

fuos  diligant.  In  MS.  filios  diligant 

III.  1  E  et  dclinqu  t,  cum  fit  proprio  Judicio  con- 

demnatus.  In  MS,  defunt  cum  jn 

43.  Capitula  Epidola:  ad  Philemonem,  miniero  4^ 

102.  b. 

44.  Argumentum  ejufdem  epidola:.  ibid. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

Philem.  6.  in  agnitione  omnis  operis  boni.  In  MS. 
deed  operis. 

45.  Capitula  Epidola:  ad  Hebraeos,  numero  39. 

104. 

46.  Prasfatio  five  Prologus,  ejufdem  Epiflola:  (Init. 

Inprimis  dicendum  ed.)  105. 

Hasc  Praefatio  inexcufis  quibufdam  Biblijs  omittitur. 

47.  Epidula  ad  Hebraios.  ibid. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

Ilcb.  III.  11.  Quibus  juravi  in  Ira  idea.  In  MS. 
Sicut  jurav'i. 

IV.  16.  ad  thronum  gratice  ejus.  In  MS.  deed 
ejus. 

VI.  16.  Homines  enim  per  majorem  fui  jurant. 
In  MS.  ftium. 

IX.  24.  Non  enim  in  mnnu-fa&a  SanSa  Jefus 
introivit.  Iu  MS.  manufaHis  Sanctis 
X.  2.  cultores  femel  muhaati.  MS.  feme  l 
purgati. 


Ideo  ingrediens  mundum.  In  MS.  ingrediens  in  vrbem  ter'rae.  ■ 

et  pro  peccato  non  tibi  placuerunt — In  MS.  feccato  nec  deleclatus  es. 

6.  Dabo  leges  meas.  MS.  I  'ando. 

Fide  reliquit  Aegyptum.  MS.  dereliquit. 
non  veritus  animofitatem  regis.  MS.  timens furorem. 

XII.  12.  nubem  tedium:  deponentes  omne  pondus  et  circumdans  nos  peccatum,  per  patientiam  curramus 
ad  propofitum  nobis  certamen.  Afpicientes.  In  MS.  nubem ,  firriiamentum  tejlimentiorum ,  depo- 
fitis  omnibus,  ct  fragilem  peccatum ,  per  patientiam  curramus  ad  eum,  propofitum  ejt  nobis  certamen. 
Infpicisntes . 

in  dextera  fedis  Dei  fedet.  MS.  confcdit. 

,  qui  talem  fudinuit  a  peccatoribus  adverfum  femet  ipfum  contradiclionem  :  ut  ne  fatigemini,  animis 
vedris  deficientes,  nonduin  enim  ufque  ad  fanguincm  reditidis,  adverfus  pectatuin  repugnantes  ;  ct 
obliti  edis  confolationis,  qus  vobis  tanquam. — In  MS. — qui  tales  vos porlcfle  a  vobis  a  peccatoribus 
adverfus  femetipfum  contradiclionibus  fids ,  ne  fatigemini  animas  vejlras  deficientes ,  ufque  ad  fan- 
guinem  repugnantes,  adverfus  certamen  ccrtantes.  Ne  oblivfcamini  confolationis,  qua  -  nobis  tarn • 
quam. 

cadigat.  MS.  corripit. 

.  In  diiciplina  perfeverate.  MS.  In  doclrinam  pacicntcs  ejldte. 


5- 

6. 

16. 

xi.  27.  : 


3-  4.  5* 


Vulg. 

8.  Quod  fi  extra  diiciplinam  edis  cujus  par- 
ticipes  fafti  funt  omnes  ;  ergo  adulteri, 
et  nonfilij  edis. 

9.  Deinde  patres  quidem  carnis  nodra:  eru- 
ditores  habuimus.  et  reverebamur  eos  ; 
num  multo  magis  obtemperabimus  pa¬ 
tri  fpirituum  et  vivemus  ? 

j.  Et  illi  quidem  in  tempore  paucorum  die- 
rum,  fecundum  voluntatem  fuam  erudie- 
bant  nos  ;  hie  autem  ad  id  quod  utile  ed 
in  recipiendo  fan&ificationem  ejus. 

I.  Omnis  autem  difuplina  in  preefenti  qui¬ 
dem  videtur  non  effe  gaudij,  fed  mcero- 
ris  ;  podea  autem  fruclum  pacatiflimum 
exercitatis  per  earn,  reddet  judirise. 

ri.VRL.  Vol.  II. 


Ms. 

Si  autem  fine  correptione  edis  qua  participes  facli  funt. 
Omnes  ergo  adulteri  et  non  filij  edis. 

Deinde  quidem  carnis  nodra:  patres  habentes  eruditores 
reverebamur,  quanto  magis  obtemperavimus  patres  fpiri* 
tuurh  et  vivimus. 

. 1  .  .  .  fecunduin 

quse  videbantur  illis  corripiebant  fuam.  Dominus  autem 
ad  utilitatem  -perpetute  vitas  i5  tjus  dat.  difeiplinam 
autem  ut  percipiamus  honedatem  ejus. 

Et  omnes  quidem  difciplina  ad  prefens  videtur  non  efie 
gaudij,  fed  triflitias^  Podea  autem  fru&um  pacatiflimum 
eis  qui  per  earn  exercitati  funt  reddent  Juditise. 


31 


12.  erigite 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


zj4 


Nam. 

Vulg. 

12.  erigile. 

13.  Et  grefius  rectos  facite  pedibus  veftris,  ut 
non  claudicans  quis  erret,  magis  autem 
fanetur. 

14.  Sandtimoniam. 

16.  prophanus  ut  Efau. — primitiva  fua. 

1 7.  hasreditare. 

18.  ad  tradtabilem  montem,  &  acceflibilem 
ignem. 

20.  portebant  quod  dicebatur,  Et  fi. 

22.  23.  montem,  &  civitatem  Dei  viventis, 
Jerufalem  cceleftem,  et  multorum  milium 
angelorum  frequent iam,  et  ecclefiam  pri- 
initivorum. 

26.  movebo,  non  folum  terram,  fed  et  cce- 
lum. 

27.  qua:  funt  immobilia 

i.  8.  Itaque  regnum  immobile  fufeipientes. 

29.  Etenim  Deus. 

XIII.  1 .  Charitas  fraternitatis  maneat  in  vobis. 

5.  contenti  praefentibus. 

7.  quorum  intuentes. 

9.  flabiliri  cor,  non  efeis  qua:  non  profuerunt 
ambulantibus  in  eis. 

1  o.  qui  tabemaculo  deferviunt. 

1 1 .  pro  peccato  in  Sandta  per  Pontificent : 
horum  corpora  cremantur  extra  caltra. 

14.  Non  enim  habemus  hie  manentem  civi¬ 
tatem  fed  futuram  inquirimus. 

1  5.  Per  ipfum  ergo  ofteramus — 

1 0.  talibus  enim  hoftijs. 

17.  Ipfi  enim  pervigilant — et  non  gementes, 
hoqepim,  non  expedit  vobis. 

20.  qui  eduxit  demortuis  pafturem  magnum 
ovium. 

ii.  Aptet  vos — faciens  in  vobis— cui  eft  glo- 
na. 


1772. 

MS. 

erigite  vos. 

Et  grellum  veftrum  facite  pedibus  veftris,  ne  claudicans 
erret  magifque  fanetur. 

fandlitatem. 

quo  —  inquinatus  ficut  Efau — primicias  fuas. 
accipere. 

ad  ardentem  intredtabilem  ignem. 

fuftinebant  id  prseciebatur  di.  Licet. 

montem  Dei  vivi  Hieiufalem  ;  cceleftem  &  multorum 

milium  angelorum  nuntiorum  frequentem  ecclefiam 

primitivorum. 

movebo,  inquit,  non  tantum  terram,  fed  etiam,  See. 

qua:  non  moventur. 

Regno  itaque  inmobili  fufeepto. 
quoniam  Deus. 
defunt  in  vobis. 

contentiq;  in  praefenti  habetis. 
quorum  videntes. 

confirmari  Corde  quam  efca  qua:  non  profuit  ambu- 

lantibus  in  ea. 

qui  tabernaculisdes. 

-pro  peccato  in  Spiritu  Principcm  &  Sacerdotum  ;  horutn 
corpora  comburentur  extra  Caltra. 

Nec  enim . 

fed  futuram  querimus  per  ipfum. 

Ergo  ofteramus. 
hifee  enim  h - 

Quoniam  ipfe  peru  —  et  non  egentes,  hoc  enim  proderit 
vobis . 

qui  fufeitavit  ex  mortals  paftorem  ovium  ilium  mag¬ 
num. 

perficiat  vos — ipfo  fatiente  in  vobis — cui  gloria. 


23.  cum  quo,  ft  celerius  venerit.  qui,  fi  celerius  ven - • 

24.  Salutant  vos  de  Italia  Fratres.  deejl  Fratres. 

Hadtenus  de  Paulinis  Epiftolis ;  nunc  ad  eas  qua:  Catholica:  appellantur,  feftinemus  :  qua:  in  per-vetufto  Codice, 
line  Capitulorum  et  Argumentorum  five  Prasfationum  apparatu,  nude  leguntur  feriptte.  Abeft  igitur,  et  quidem 
redte,  Prologus  ifte  fuper  Epiftolas  C.anonicas,  D.  Hieronymo  falfillime  per  quofdam  tributus  (cujus  Initium,  Non 
ita  eft  Ordo)  qui  etiam  in  alijs  prifei  revi  Examplaribus  non  invenitur  ;  in  recentioribus,  fere  Temper  retentus. 

49.  Epillola  Bead  Jacobi  Apoftoli  in  20  Capira  divifa).  121. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

Jac.  I.  2.  Fratres  mei.  Fratres  mei  dilefti. 


1  o-  Sicut  flos  feeni  tranfib^t 
16.  Nolite  itaq ;  errare,  fratres  mei  dilec- 
tifliini. 

25.  et  permanferit  in  ea. 

II.  5.  dilettiffimi. 

7.  fuper  nos. 

14.  Quid  proderit,  fratres  mei,  fi  fidem  quis 
dicat  fe  habere. 

16.  quid  proderit? 

III.  9.  qui  ad  Imaginem  &  Similitudinem  Dei 

fadli  funt. 

1  t  .  emanat 

15.  Non  eft  enim  ifta  Sapientia  defurfum  de- 
feendens  a  Patre  luminum  ;  fed  terrena — 

IV.  2.  Concupifcitis,  et  non  habetis. 

1 3.  Hodie  aut  craftino. 

V.  1.  ululantes  in  miferijs  veftris. 

3.  Thefaurizaftis  vobis  Irani  in  noviflimis _ 

10.  Exemplum  accipite,  fratres,  exittlsmali, 
et  longanimitatis,  et  laboris,  et  patientice 
Ptophetas : 

11.  Ecce,  beatificamus  eos  qui  fuft.'nuerunt. 

12.  Sit  autem  Sermovefter  Eft,  Eft. 

13.  Triftatur  autem  aliquis  veftrum? 

20.  operiet  multitudinem  peccatorum 

.50.  Epiftula  Petri  Apoftoli  Prima  (Capitibus  xxi.)  12$. 


ficut — tranfijt. 

Nolite  errare,  fratres  mei  diledli. 

defunt  in  ea. 
diledti. 
fuper  nos. 

Quid  proderit,  fratres,  et  fi  fidem  quis  dicat  fe  habere. 

quid  proderit  vobis? 
defunt  Imaginem  et. 

manat. 

Non  eft  ifta  Sapientia  defurfum  defeendens  ;  fed  terrena. 

Et  non  concupifcitis,  et  non  habetis. 

Elodie  aut  eras. 
deejl  veftris. 

Thefaurizantes  in  noviflimis. 

Exemplum  accipite,  fratres,  laboris  et  patiently,  Pro- 
phetas 

Ecce  beatificati  qui  fuftinuerunt. 

Sit  autem  veftrum  Eft,  Eft. 

Alfligitur  aliquis  veftrum? 
cooperit  multitudinem  peccatorum. 


1  Pet, 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


Num.  1772. 

.  MS, 


'  Specimen 

1  Pet.  I.  9.  Salutem  animarum  veftrarum. 

19.  agni  immaculati  Chnfti  &  incontaminati. 

23.  per  verbum  Dei  Vivi  &  permanentis  in 
asternum. 

24.  omnis  Caro  ut  fcenum  ; — tanquam  flos 
foeni. 

II.  6.  pono — angularem  eledum,  probatum, 

&c. 

7.  lapis,  qucm  reprobaverunt. 

10.  Qui  non  confecuti  mifericordiam  :  nunc 
aufem  mifericordiam  confecuti. 

1 2.  detredant, — glorificent  Deum  in  die  Vif. 

13.  Subjedi  igitur  eflote omni  h'umanae  crea¬ 
ture, - quafi  prascellenti. 

15.  imprudenrium. 

18.  fubditi  eflote  in  omni  time  re,  Dominis. 

19.  fullinet  quis  triftitias. 

20.  colaphizati. 

.23.  nan  malediccbat, — tradebat  autem. 

24.  ut  peccatis  mortui,  juflitias  vivamus. 

25.  eratis  enim  ficut  oves  errantes. 

III.  1.  per  mulierum  convet iationem  fine  verbo 

lucrifiant. 

3.  capillatura,  aut  circundatio  atm,  aut  in- 
duinenti  veftimentorum  cultus. 

4.  Sed  qui  abfcondicus  eft  cordis  homo, 
in  cunfpedu  Dei  locuples. 

5.  fperantes  in  Deo  —  proprijs  viris. 

7.  vafculo  muliebri. 

8.  fraternitaris  amatores. 

10-  et  dies  videre  bonos. 

13.  Et  quis  eft  qui  vobis  noceat,  fi  boni 
amiulatores  fueritis  ? 

14.  Timorem — ut  non  conturbemini. 

15.  Saiisfadionem  — de  ea  qua:  in  vobis  eft, 
Spe  &  Fide. 

16.  detrahunt  vobis,  confundantur. 

1 8.  ut  nos  offerret  Deo. 

19.  his  qui  in  carcere  erant  Spiritu  ( al .  Spi- 
ritibus)  veniens. 

20.  quando  expedabant  Dei  patientiam. 

21.  per  refurredionem  Jefu  Chrifti  a  mor- 
tuis. 

IV.  1.  eadem  cogitatione  armamini. 

2.  Ut  jam  non  defiderijs  hominum — tem- 
poris. 

3.  ad  voluntatem  Gentium  confumman- 
dam,  his  qui  ambulaverunt  in  luxurijs, 
defiderijs,  vinolentijs,  commefiationi- 
bus,  potatiombus,  ebrietatibus,  et  illi- 
citis  Idolorum  cultibus. 

4.  In  quo  admirantur  non  concurrentibus 
vobis  * 

6.  fecundum  homines  in  Came  ;  vivant 
autem  fecundum  Deum  in  Spiritu. 

7.  prudentes,  et  vigilate  in  orationibus. 

8.  Ante  omnia  autem,  mutuam  in  vobif- 

met-ipfis  charitatem  continuam  haben- 
tes, — opei  it - - 

9.  invicem. 

10.  Unufquifque  ficut  accepit  gratiam. 

1 1.  quafi  fermones  Dei. 

cui  eft  gloria  et  imperium. 

12.  Chariflimi,  nolite  peregrinari  in  fer- 
vore  (qui  ad  tentationem  vobis  fit)  quafi 
novi  aliquid  vobis  contingat : 

13.  Sed  communicantes. 

14.  bead  eritis  —  honoris,  glorias,  et  vir- 
tuds  Dei 

requiefcet. 


Verfionis. 

deeft  veftrarum. 
agni  inmaculad  X  pt. 
defunt  in  asternum. 

omnis  Caro  fcenum  ; — quafi  flos  fceni. 

ponani — deeji  probatum. 

lapidem  quern  repr — 

Quorum  aliquando  non  mifertus  eft  ;  nunc  autem 
miferetur. 

detrahunt — magnificent  Deum  nrftrum  in  die  Vif. 

Subjedi  eftote  omni  humanas  Ordmatio.u  - tahiquam 

priecellend. 

infipientium. 

abaudite,  cum  omni  timove  Dominis  veftris. 
fuftinet  quis  in  trifticia. 

punimini  dcfu  t  fuftertis.  fed  fi  bene  facientes) 
non  remaledicebat — commcndabat  aut>.m. 
ut  a  peccatis  feparati,  cum  jufticia  vivamus. 
qui  ficut  oves  errabatis. 

per  u  mrum  fuarum  converfationem,  fine  verbo  lucri- 
ficentur. 

capillorum  inplicatio,  aut  auri  circuinpofitio,  aut  in 
habitu  veftimentorum  ornatus. 

Sed  ille  abfconfus  cordis  homo. 

ante  Deum  locuplex. 

qu^  in  Deum  fperaverunt—  fuis  viris. 

vafu  muliebri. 

fraternitatem  amantes. 

et  cupit  videre  dies  bonos. 

Et  quis  vos  nocebit,  fi  bonitatis  fueritis  fadores  ? 

Metum — neque  conturbamini. 

Refponfionem — de  Fide  St  Spe  qua:  in  vobis  eft. 

detrahunt  de  vobis  tanquam  de  malefadoribus,  con¬ 
fundantur. 
ut  vos  adducat  Deo. 

eis  qui  in  carcere  inclufi  erant  Spiritibus  adveniens. 

cum  fuftinerent  Dei  patientiam. 
defunt  a  mortuis. 

eadem  fcientiam  armamini. 

In  hoc,  ut  non  jam  hominum  defiderijs — tempus. 

ad  voluntatem  hominum  confummatum,  qui  ambulave¬ 
runt  in  libidinibus,  et  concupifcentijs,  et  ebrietate,  com- 
meffationibus,  potationibus,  et  inlicitis  Idolorum  fervi- 
tutibus. 

In  quibus  nunc  obllupefcunt  non  confurgere  vos. 

fecundum  hominem  in  Carne  ;  vivat  autem  fecundum 
Deum  Spiritu. 

prudentes  et  fubrij  in  orationibus. 

Ante  omnia  in  vos  invicem  caritatem  perpetuam  haben- 
tes, - cooperit - 

in  alterutrum. 

Unufquifque  qualem  acc.  gr. 

tanquam  eloquia  Dei. 

cui  eft  gloria,  et  poteftas,  et  virtus. 

Cariffimi  fratres,  nolite  expavefcere  in  fervore  qui  in 
temptationem  vobis  fit. 

Sed  ut  communicantes. 

deeji  eritis — honoris  et  virtutis  Dei. 

requiefcet.  quod  ad  illis  quidem  blafi'hematur,  a  vobis 
autem  -honorificatur. 


16.  Si 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


216 


Num.  1772. 

Vulg.  _  MS. 

16.  Si  autem  ut  Chriftianus.  Sicut  X~pianus. 

1 7.  Et  fi  juftus  quidem  vix  falvabitur.  deejl  quidem. 

V.  2.  providentes  non  coa&e.  providcntes  non  coach'. 

8.  tanquam  Leo.  quafi  Leo. 

51.  Epiftola  Bead  Petri  Apoftoli  Secunda  (Capitibus  xi.)  fol.  31. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 


coequalem  nobis, 
in  Cognitione  Domini  noftri. 
deijl  omnium. 
defunt  ipfum  audite. 

Sedas  non  metuunt  facile  blafphemantes, 

Sandoruqi  Prophetarum. 
ficut  fur. 


2  Pet.  I.  1-.  cocequalem  nobifcum. 

2.  in  cognitione  Dei. 

15.  ut  horum  omnium  memoriam. 

17.  in  quo  mihi  complacui ;  ipfum  audite. 

II.  10.  Sedas  non  metuunt  introducere  blaf- 

phemantes. 

III.  2.  a  Sandis  Prophetis. 

10.  ut  fur. 

Terra  autem,  et  quae  in  ipfa  funt  ope-  defunt. 
ra,  exurentur. 

1 5.  Et  Domini  noflri  Jefu  Chrilti  longani-  defunt  Jefu  Crifti. 
mitatem. 

52.  Epiftola  Sandi  Johannis  Apoftoli  Prima.  134.  b. 

Diverfis  manibus  exarata  ell  h$c  Epiftola;  quarum  prima  Capitum  diftindionem,  veterum  more,  adfecuta;  catena 

neglectarn.  .  . 

Specimen  Verfioms. 


1  Joh.  I.  2.  manifefla— apparuit  nobis. 

3.  quod  vidimus  et  audivimus,  annuntia- 
inus  vobis. 

4.  fcribimus— veflrum. 

5.  annuntiamus — in  eo  non  funt  ullae. 

6.  quoniam  focietatem  habemus  cum  eo. 

7.  in  luce,  bis — focietatem  habemus  j  ad  in- 
vicem. 

emundat. 

10.  Si  dixerimus  quoniam — mendaccm  fa- 


palam-fada — palam-fada  eft  nobis. 

quod  ergo  audivi.nus  et  vidimus  annunciamus  et  vobis, 

fcripfimus — noftrum. 

indicavimus— non  funt  apud  eum. 

nos  focietatem  habere  cum  Deo. 

in  lumine,  bis — focietatem  habemus  cum  Deo— 

— purgat. 

Quod  li  dixerimus  quod — mendacem  faciemus. 


cimus. 

II.  2.  propitiatio. 

4.  cuftodit. 

c.  Oui  autem  fervat. 

6.  ficut. 

g.  in  Luce. 

1 1.  nefeit  quo  eat. 

14.  adolefcentes — infantes  quondam  cogno- 
viftis  patrem. 

juvenes. 

1 5.  neque  ea  qua:  in  mundo  funt. 
inundum — Patris 

1 6.  in  mundo — fupeibia  vita:, 
ex  Patre,  fed  ex  mundo  eft. 

1 7.  mundus  tranfijt — manet. 

19.  prodierunt — utique - manifefti  fint 

quoniam  non  funt  omnes  ex  nobis. 

20.  noftis. 

23.  qui  confitetur  Filium,  et  Patrem  habet. 
28.  ut  cum'apparuerit,  habemus  fiduciam. 

III.  1.  Videte. 

mundus  non  novit  nos,  quia  nen  novit 
eum. 

2.  Chariflimi - aparuit  quid. 

11.  hmc  eft  annuntiatio,  quam — alterutrum. 

1 2.  et  propter  quid  occiJit  eum  ? 

13.  Nolite— mundus. 

13.  quoniam  tranflati  fumus — ad  vitam, 
quoniam. 

20.  fi  reprashenderit  nos  cor  noftrum. 

IV.  4.  vobis — in  mundo. 

5.  Ipfi  de  mundo  funt. 

1 cognofeimus. 

16.  credidimus. 

1 9.  quoniam  Deus  prior  dilexit  nos. 

V.  2.  cognofeimus. 

3.  cultodiamus. 

5.  quis  eft  autem  qui  vincet  mundum. 

7.  Quoniam  tres  funt  qui  teftimonium  dant 
in  ccelo ;  Pater,  Verbum,  et  Spiritus 
San&us,  et  hi  tres  unum  funt, 


exoratio. 

fervat. 

Nam  qui  cuftodit. 
quemadmodum. 
in  Lumine. 
non  feit  ubi  ambulat. 

juvenes — pueri  quoniam  cognoviftis  patrem.  Scribo 
vobis  patres,  qui  agnoviftis  eum  qui  ab  initio  eft. 
adulelcentes. 

nec  ea  qua:  funt  in  fasculum. 
fasculum — Dei. 
in  fieculum — fuperbia  fseculi. 
de  Patre.  fed  de  fteculo  eft. 
feculum  tranfiet — permanebit. 

exierunt — forfitan — palam  fiat,  quoniam  funt  omnes  ex 

nobis. 

feitis. 

defunt. 

ut  cum'  venerit,  fiduciam  habemus. 

Ecce. 

fseculum  ignorat  nos,  quoniam  et  ipfum  ignorabat. 

dee  ft — manifeftum  eft  quod. 

hoc  eft  mandatum,  quod - inviccm. 

et  ideo  occidit  eum. 

Et  nolite- - hie  mundus. 

tranfibimus— in  vita,  quia. 

fi  non  reprsehenderet  nos  cor. 

nobis — in  mundo  funt. 

defunt. 

intelligimus. 

credimus. 

quoniam  Ipfe  prior  dilexit  nos, 

cognovimus. 

fervemus. 

deejl  autem. 

Quoniam  tres  funt  qui  teftimonium  dant- 


/ 


8.  Et 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


21 


7 


Vu!g\ 


Nu-m.  1772. 


in  Filio  Dei— 
deejl  Dei 


8.  Et  tres  funt  qui  teftimonium  dant  in  terra  ; 

Spiritus,  Aqua,  et  Sanguis,  et  hi  tres 
unum  funt. 

10.  in  Filium  Dei— -in  teftimonium. 

1 1.  Qui  habet  Filium  Dei,  habet  vitam. 

53.  Epiftola  Santti  Johannis  Apoftoli  Secunda  :  fine  Capitibus. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

2.  Joh.  9.  recedit. .  preecedit. 

12.  Ecce,  prsedixi  vobis,  ut  in  die  Domini  defunt . 

non  confundamini. 

Defiderantur  Epiftola  Johannis  Tertia,  et  Epiftola  Judte ; 
rius  non  defcripferit. 

54.  Liber  Apocalipfis,  prima  manu  fcriptus.  et  in  Capita  diftin&us. 

Specimen  Verfionis. 

Apocal.  I.  3.  et  audit. 

11.  et  mitte  Septem  Ecclefijs  qua:  funt  in 
Afia,  Ephelb,  et  Smyrna:,  et  Pergamo, 
et  Thyatirae,  et  Sardis,  et  Philadelphia, 
et  Laodiceae. 

.  et  adoraverunt  viventem  in  fecula  fecu- 
lorunn 

VII.  13.  et  dixir. 

VIII.  3 .  ante  Thronum  Dei. 

,  ut  tuba  canerent. 

arborum  concremata  eft. 

,  qua:  habcbant  Animas  in  man. 

.  per  medium  Cceli - in  terra. 

,  ex  quatuor  eornibus  altaris. 

et  Ego  fcripturus  eram. 

.  Accipe  Librum,  et  devora  ilium. 

.  Et  accepi  Librum  de  manu  Angeli,  et 
devoravi  ilium  :  &  erat  in  ore  meo  tan- 
quam  Mel,  dulce. 

XI.  1.  etdi£tum  eft  mihi. 

2.  metiaris  illud. 

.  et  vincet  Illoiet  occidet  Eos. 

.  in  SeculaSecuIorum,  Amen, 
et  Qui  venturus  es. 

12.  habitatis. 

.  ficut  pedes  Urfi. 

.  aurem. 

.  habitantes. 

.  habitantes  in  terra - habitantibus  in 

terra. 

.  ante  Thronum  Dei. 

6.  per  medium  cceli. 

1 1 .  defcendet  (al.  afcendet.) 

1 5.  et  mete. 


Spiritus,  Aqua*  et  Sanguis,  et  tres  unum  iunt. 


—in  teftimonio. 


V.  14. 


6. 
7- 
9- 
*3- 

IX.  13- 

X.  4. 
9* 


7* 

XS- 

*7* 

XII. 

XIII. 


XIV. 


quas  forte  ob  membrana:  penuriam  Antiqua- 
138.  b. 


etqui  audivit. 

et  mitte  feptem  Ecclefijs,  Ephefum,  et  Smyrnam,  et 
Pergamum,  et  fhyatiram,  et  Sardis,  et  Filadelfiam,  et 
Laodiciam. 

et  adoraverunt; 

dicens. 
deejl  Dei. 

ut  tuba  canerent  in  Terra, 
arborum  conbu  fta  eft. 
defunt  in  mari. 

per  medium  Ccelum - in  terrain. 

deejl  quatuor. 
defunt  et  Ego. 
deejl  Librum. 

( 'babentur  in  imapagini ) 


dicens. 
meti'eris  eum. 

et  vincet  F.os,  et  occidit  Illos. 

deejl  Amen. 

defunt. 

inhabitatis. 

ficut  Urfi. 

aures. 

inhabitantes. 

habitantes  terram — habitantibus  in  terram. 
defunt. 

per  medium  ccelum. 

afcendit. 

defunt. 


Variantibus  hifce,  ex  infinitio  penenumero,  Leftio- 
nibus  (qua:  nec  Editioni  Hieronymiana;  neque  Vul- 
gatte  hodierna:  conveniant)  in  medium  produ&is  ; 
utecedem  unam  faltem  referret  (fi  non  Italam  illam 
veterem)  eorum  Exemplarium  Latinorum  ante  D. 
Hieronymi  Caftigationem  obtinentium,  omnino  mihi 
necefll*  vidcatur. 

Teftimonia  nonnulla  de  vetuftis  Latinorum 

Editionibus,  a  me  raptim  congefta. 

Hieron.  Prsef.  in  Jof. — “  maxima  cum'  apud  La¬ 
tinos  tot  fint  Exemplaria  quot  Codices  ;  et 
unufquifque  pro  arbitrio  fuo,  vel  addiderit  vel  fub- 
traxerit,  quod  ei  vifum  eft.” 

Ejufdem  Pra:f.  inParal. — “  idcirco  feci,  ut  inextri- 
cabiles  moras,  et  Sylvam  nominum,  qua:  Scriptorum 
confufa  funt  Vitio,  Senfuuinq;  barbariem,  apertius 
et  per  Verluum  Cola  digererem — ” 

Ejufdem  I’raef.  in  Job.“Caterum'  apud  Latinos,  ante 
earn  Tranfiationem  quarn  fub  aiterifcis  &  obelis 
nuper  edidimus,  feptinginti  ferme  aut  oiftingenti 
Verfus  defunt  ;  ut  decurtatus,  et  laceratus,  corrof- 
ufq;  Liber  feeditatem  fui  publice  legentibus  prse- 

beat. - Audiant  quapropter  Canes  mei,  idcirco 

me  in  hoc  Volumine  laborafie,  non  ut  Interpre- 
Cat.Hap.l.  Vol.  II.  1 


tationem  antiquam  reprashenderein,  fed  ut  ea  qua: 
in  ilia  aut  obfcura  funt,  aut  omifla,  aut  certe  Scrip- 
torum  vitio  depravata,  manifeltiora  noftra  Inter- 
pretatione  fierent.” 

Ejufd.  Prtcf.  in  Evang.  “  Si  enim  Latinis  Exempla- 
ribus  Fides  eft  adhibenda,  refpondeant  quibus  ; 
tot  enim  Exemplaria  pene  quot  Codices.  Sin  autem 
Veritas  eft  qumrenda  de  pluribus,  cur  non  ad 
Grtecam  originem  revertentes,  ea  qua:  vel  a  vi- 
tiofis  Interpretibus  male  reddita ;  vel  a  prmfum- 
toribus  impends  emendata  perverfius ;  vel  a  Librarijs 
dormitandbus  aut  addita  funt,  aut  mutata,  corri- 
gimus  ” 

Aug.  de  Doft.  Chr.  Lib.  11.  Cap.  11.  “  Qui  enim 
Sciipturas  ex  Hebrma  lingua  in  Gra:oam  verterunt 
numerari  polfunt ;  Latini  autem  Interpretas  nullo 
modo.  Ut  enim  cuiq;  primis  Fidei  temporibus, 
in  man  us  venit  Codex  Grtecus,  et  aliquantulum 
facultads  fibi  utriufq ;  Lingua:  habere  videbatur, 
aufus  eft  interpretari.  Qute  quidem  res  plus  adjuvit 
lntelligentiam  quain  impedivit,  fi  modo  kgentes 
non  fint  negligentes.  Nam  nonnullos  obfeuriores 
Sententias  plurium  Codicum  fa:pe  manifellavit 
infpeftio.” 


Ibid.  Cap.  is-  “Plurimum  hie  qiioque  juvat  In- 
terpretum  Numerofitas  collatis  Codicibus  infpccta 
atq;  dilcuffa  ;  tantum  abfit  Falfitas.  Nam  Codicibus 
emendandisprimitus  debut  mvigihre  Solcrtia  eorutn 
qui  Scripturas  Divinas  node  dtifiderant,  lit  Emen- 
datis  Non-emendati  cedant,  ex  Uno  duntaxat  In* 
terpretationis  genere  venientes.  In  Ipfis  autein 
Interpretationibus,  Itaki  cateris  prafertur,  nam  elt 
verboruin  tenacior,  cum  perfpicuitate  Sententia. 
Et  Latinis  quibuffibet  Emendatis,  Grmci  adhibeantur 
in  quibus  Septuaginra  Interpretum  (quod  ad  Vetus 

Teftamentum  at'inet)  excellit  Autoritas - Latin i 

ergo  (ut  dicere  ccepcram)  Codices  Veteris  Tefht- 
menti,  fi  neceffe  fuerit,  Gracorum  autoritate 

emeudandi  funt, - Librosautem  NoviTeftamenti, 

fi  quod  in  Latinis  vai-ietatibus  titubat,  Gratis  eedere 

oportere  non  dubium  eft - ” 

Aug.  cont.  Fault.  Lib.  xt.  Cap.  2. — •“  Ita  ft  de  fide 
Exemplarium  quatitiu  verteretur,  ficut  in  non- 
nullis  (qua  et  paucie  funt,  et  Sacra  rum  Literarum 
Itudiolis  notiflim*  Sententiarum  varietates)  vel  ex 
aliarum  Regionum  Codicibus,  unde  ipf.’.  Doftrina 
commeavit,  noflra  dubiratio  dijudicaretur  ;  vei(fi 
ibi  quoque  Codices  varinrtnt)  plures  paucioribus, 
aut  vetuftiorcs  recentioribus  praferrentur.  Et  fi 
adhuc  eiTet  incerta  varietas ;  praicedens  Lingua, 
unde  illud  interpratatum  eft  ;  confulerctur.”  (Et 
vide  Lib.  xxx  1.  Cap.  16.) 

Bed.  Praf.  Retract  in  Act.  Apoft.  “  In  quo  etiam 
quadam  qua  in  Graco  five  aliter,  leu  plus  aut  minus 
polita  vidimus,  breviter  commemorare  curavimus  : 
Qua  utrum  negligent ia  Interpretis  omifla,  vel  aliter 
dicta,  an  incuria  Librariorum  fint  depravata,  five 
relifta,  nondurn  feire  potuimus  :  Namq;  Gr&cum 
Exemplar  falfatum  fuiliv  fufpicari  non  audeo.  Unde 
Lcctorcm  admoneo,  ut  hac  qusccunq;  fecerimus, 

:  men  Volami 

velut  emendates  imerferat,  nil!  forte  ea  in  Latino 
Codice  face  Editionis  antiquitus  fic  iriterpretata 
repererit.  Nam  et  Hieronymus  pleraq;  tellimonia 
Veteris  Inftrumenti  ut  Hebraica  Veritas  habet,  edo- 
cet ;  nec  tamen  base  ita  in  noftris  Codicibus  aut 
ipfe  interpreter!,  aut  nos  emehdare  voluit.” 

in  plane  Sententiam  D. 
Iiieronymum,  cx  eifdem  veterum  Interpretum  Lati- 
norum  verbis  elicere,  cum  per  alienam  interpun- 
gendi  ac  diftinguendi  rationein  ;  turn  per  Ordinem 
vocum  immutatem  ;  ficut  diiigcnti  hujufee  Codicis 
Lectori  (ut  dc  alijs  taceam  Codicibus,  liquido  con- 
ftare  queat. 

Quinetiam,  quamplurima  confpiciuntur  Lectio¬ 
ns,  aut  varlantes,  aut  prjfeftaitti  Codici  quafi  pe- 
culiares,  quas  Antiquarius  dttm  Ccxlice  emendando 
infudaret,  non  penitus  deleverit,  fed  fubductis  lb- 
lummodo  lineolis  notaverit,  et  tanquam  obelis  jugu- 
latas,  fpectabiliorcs  ob  occu!<;3  pofuerit. 

Id  genus  fint,  hac  verba  in  I  jebr.  Cap.  xr.  inter 
Com.  28.  &  29.  “  Fide  praedaverunt  Aegyptios 
rx  -untes.”  qua  in  alijs  MSS  non  habentur,  etfi 
F.viti  ipfius  vindicem  adepia  fuerunt  S.  Auguftinum 
>  ontra  Fault um  Manichaum  fic  feribentem, “  Quid 
e:;-o  jam  de  cxpolhtis  /Egypt ijs  Fauftus  objicit, 
jidciens  quid  loquatur  ?  Quod  faciendo  Moyfes, 
ufque  adeo.  non  peccaVit,  ut  non  faciendo  pecaret, 

Ibferi  js  etiam,  pars  Comatis  31.  fic  legit ur  feripta, 
♦oMwkttf:  “  *  fatigavit  (deficict)  eniin  me  tem- 
-  fatiga-  pus  enarmntem,  de  Gcdeon,  Barac’-, 
Samfon,  Jepte”,  David,  et  Samuhel ;  et 
prophet ::i rum,  Ananias,  Azarins,  Mifahel,  Daniel, 
Hclias,  Helifaeus  quae  quidem  verba  in  dvnTe 
reports,  in  nova  Exeinplana  fuerint  relata. 

In  fupradictis  verbis  Barac'1.  Jcpte'1,  h  fupra- 
1  •:  intam  vidcs ;  quod  noacafu,  fed  de  veterum  more 


Num.  i772,  1773. 

fuifte  ;  jam  ante  plures  annos  (in  Catalogo  Codd. 
MSS.  Anglo-Saxcnicorummeo,  Oxor.ia  ty  pis  excu- 
lo)  obfervatus  fum.  Aulus  enim  Gellius,  five  (ut 
aljjs  magis  placet)  Agellius,  in  No£t.  Attic.  Lib. 
n.  Cap.  3.  ait.  “  H  Literam  (five  illnm  Spiritum 
magis  quam  I.ireram  dici  oportet)  inferebant  cam 
Veteres  noftri  plerifque  Vocibus  verborum  firmandis 
roborandifq;  ut  fonusearum  eflet  viridior  vegetiorq; 
atq;  id  videntur  fecilfe  lludio  &  exemplo  lingua 

Attictc. - Sed  quoniam  aheni  quoq;  exemplo 

11  ft  fumus,  venit  nobis  in  memoriam  Fidum  Op- 
tatum  multi  nominis  Roma;  Grammaticum,  often- 
difie  mihi  Librum  /Eneidos  Secundum,  mirand.e 
vetuftatis,  emtum  in  Sigillarijs  20  aureis,  queni 
ipftus  Virgilij  faille  credebat ;  in  quo,  duo  ill! 
verfus  cum  ita  feripta  forent, 

c  Veftibulum  ante  ipfum  primoque  in  limine 
‘  Pvrrlms 

4  Exfultat  telis,  et  luce  corufcus  aena. 
add  item  fupra  vidimus  h  litteram,  et  ahenafaftuin.  ” 
Eodemmodo,  et  in  38  alijs  hujufee  Codicis  locis,  b 
cernitur  fupra  pofita. 

Recenfitis  primarijs  antiqui  Codicis  partibus ; 
ad  ea  quae  reftant  minutiora,  tranfeamus. 

5;.  f  main  ora  foKj  3.  legit  ur  verbum  Aikluia ,  ve- 
tultioribus  nods  Muficalibus  infignitarH. 

5b.  Adnotationes  nonnullse  Litteris  majufculis  exara- 
ite;  probantes  earum  Ufum  ordinarium,  nondurn  (poft 
feriptum  Codicem)  exolevifle.  16.  b.  in  marg.  17,  b. 
in  inarg.  1 8.  in  marg.  18.  b.  in  marg.  19.  b.  in  marg. 
22.  b.  in  marg. 

57.  ^d  1  Cor.  xr.  xo.  Vox  Vclamcn,  in  marginej 
folo  Stylo,  fine  atramento  reperitur  feripta.  E~. 

58.  AlphabetumLiterarumminufcularum,  fcumlitera  k. 

38.  b. 

50.  1  itulus  Lectionis  Epiftclicae, cc  In  PafchaD'ni  le¬ 
gend  um.” 

Talibus  Titulis  gaudebant  Codices  Biblici,  non  tan¬ 
tum  Graectu  Ecclefim,  fed  et  Latina  :  teftes  funto  Codex 
Bezanus  Bibliotheca  Publics  Cantabrigienfis ;  Evangelia 
Anglo-Saxonica  inibi  ;  nec  non  in  Bibliotheca  Bodle- 
iana,  &c. 

60.  Vocula  quadam  vetuftis  Romanorum  Notis  ex- 
arata;-  50.  in  marg. 

b  1 .  Incantationes  aliquot,  in  ufum  Superftitioforuni 
praferipta,  “  AdPedanam ;  Contra malanum ;  AdSordisj 
.  (vid.  89.  b.  1 25.  b.  12 

oris.) 

62.  Pars  hymni,  vetuftioribus  Notis  Mulicis,  (fc.  fine 

lineis)  infigniti.  72.  marg. 

63.  Pidtura  rudiffime  delineate  ;  in  qua  reprafentatur 

Eccle-fia  cum  figaris  hominum.  yz.  b. 

64.  C.onfilium  contra  Sanguinis  minulionem,  jn:r  ires 

Anni  dies.  1 15.  b.  marg. 

65.  Ilymnus  de  B.  V.  Maria,  cum  vetuftioribus 

Not  nils  Muficis,  ut  fupra.  .  i 

bo.  Lift  one  nonnula  prineipaliores  reprafentationi- 
bus  Pifcium  et  Beftiarum  formats.  1  39. 

Ejulinodi  Litcras  vidi  in  Codicibus  MSS.  Gracis, 

Ar  Armeniacis,  (eas  etiam  in  impreilis  -Armenorum 
Ubiis  obfervavi)  et  in  antiquiffimo  Codice 
guftini  de  Sanaa  Trinita'te,  qui  in  Bibliotheca 
Bodleyana  apud  Oxonienfes  inferibitur,  LAVD.  L. 
3°- 


1 7  7  3  * 

Cardinally  de  Fleurv,  Abbat;>  de  Bignon,  Baronis 
Middleton,  et  aliorum  Epillola  D.  I).  Comiti  de 
Oxford  mifla  ;  ut  Codicis  Claromontani  foiia  qua¬ 
dam  dim  penes  eundem  Comitem,  regi  Gallia  de- 
mum  reftituerentur.  Clariflimi  autem  Wanleij 
foliorum  eorundem  deferiptio,  critica  quadam  non 
fpernenda  continens,  in  fuo  loco  jam  exhibetur. 

Codex 


Bibliothecae  HarleianaSs 


~J9 


Num.  1773. 

Codex  merabranaceus  et  miranda;  vetuflatis  in  4to, 
quern  (ingenti  dato  pretio)  e  D.  Joanne  Aymone  in 
Hollandia  redemit  Illuflriflimus  Dominus  mens. 
Conflat  folijs  tantum  4.  e  prasclarifiimo  Regi,s 
Francorum  Codice  CLAROMONTANO  nefaria 
manu  exfciflis,  ante  jam  paucos  annos.  Defcriptio- 
nem  Codicis  liabcs  in  doctiffimj  Joan.  Milij  Pro- 
legomenis  Graeco  fuo  Teflamento  prastniilia,  Ox- 
oniseq;  editis  A.  D.  1707.  fcil.  pag.  134. 

“  Jam  ad  alterum  Codicem  devenimus,  quo  ufus 
eft  lseza.  repertum  in  Claromontano  apud  Beilo- 
"vacos  Ccenobio,  adeoq;  Claromontanum  b  ipfo 

dittum. - Epiftolas  D.  Pauli  continet  Grreceej: 

Latine,  mutilatas  duntaxat  primo  folio,  five  F.pift- 
olae  ad  Rom.  texcus  •  •  rseci  Capitis  primi  verfictilis 
primis  fex,  cum  feptimi  parte,  ufque  ad  verba  xMto'i,- 
dy to n  duobufq;  infuper  folijs  Ep;  1.  ad  Cor.  cap.  14. 
five  omnibus  a  verfu  1  2  ad  22 ’iu,n.  (qua-  tamen  baud 
ineleganter  fupplevit  recentior  calamus)  et  Latinis 
extrema:  partis  Epiltolse  ad  Hebrasos,  a  media 
parte  verfus  cr".  Clap.  13.  ad  lincm  Epiftola:,  fcilicet 
ultimo  Codicis  folio.  E  cuftodia  Beza:,  five  etiam 
Monachorum  fupra-di&i  Cenobij,  elapfus  forte  hie 
liber,  in  manus  deveriit  Fratrum  Puteauorum,  qui 
lectiones  ejus  variantes  cum  cl.  Armachano,  uti 
omnino  videtur,  communicarunt,  ipfumqj  utendum 
Morino  mutuo  dederunt  ;  untie  poll  mortem  ejus, 
nefcio  quo  cafu  locum  forritus  ell  inter  MoS. 
Codices  bibliotheca:  Regia;  Parifijs,  numero  2245. 
le&iones  eju  :  variantes  ab  Ufierio  acceptas  repofuit 
Waltonus  noflcr  in  Appendice  fuorum  Bibliorum. 
Ipfe  Codex,  pari  ter  ac  Cantabrigienfis,  cujus  pars 
altera  a  Beza  alijfquc  dicitur,  majoribus  literis  «Je- 
feriptus,  et  quidem  a  Latino  Scnba  (id  enim  vel 
ex  eo  manifdtum  ell,  quod  interjedla poll  Epiltolam 
ad  Philemonem,  utriufque  Teflamenti  Librorum 
Stichometria,  diflermHietur  in  hoc  Codiice  Epiflola 
ad  I-L-brasos  a  reliquisScripturis,  quia  lcil  nondum 
apud  Latinos  audloritatem  Canonicam  obtinuerit) 
Grasca  ad  paginam  dextram  collocat,  ad  fiaiftram 


Latina  (hie  dhc  a  Grtccis  diverfa)  qualia  cxfbbant 
in  C.odd.  aliquibus  ante  tempora  Hieronymi.  Text  us 
autem  hujtts  longe  purior  efl,  reccptoq;  noltro 
congPuentior  ifto  Codicis  Cantabrigienfis.  Nullus 
fiquidem  Studiofis  locus  erat  Epiftolas  hafee  ex  ft: 
invicem  emer.dandi  ac  variandi,  prout  fadum  eft  in 
Fvangelijs,  neque  adeo  negUdm  jacebant  in  Ec- 
clefijs,  atq;  Afcluum  liber,  quern  dcdU  paflim,  uti 
fereoat  animus,  Hifloriolis,  r.ovifq;  particulis  inter- 
polarunt  •.  certe,  prater  vitia  Libris  fere  omnibus 
comniunia,  Gracahsec  haud  obfeuram  maxima  lui 
parte  imaginem  referunt  textus  illius  priinsevi,  ad 
quern  adornata  erat  Italica  Vet  fie:” 

Hifce  obfervatis  addo,  quod  Codex  Claromon- 
tanus  eandem  prse  fe  f'ert  Antiquitatis  fpecicm  ac 
Bo z anus  Codex  Bibliotheca  Publics;  Cas.tabri- 
gienfis  :  uterque  for  fan  Alexandrino  (pretiofiffinira 
lilo  bibliotheca  Regia;  thefauro)  haud  facile  locum 
ctdens.  Uterque  (perinde  ac  Alexandrinus)  feriptus 
luteris,  ut  aiuut,  IJncialibus,  fine  interflicijs  vocum, 
fine  punftis,  nec  non  fine  Accentibus  &  Spiritibus 
in  G raids.  Duos  Emendatores  jam  o&n  (utrecen- 
uores  taceam)  naclus  eft  Codex  nofter  C-laromonta- 
mis  ;  quorum  prior,  (cujus  manus  videre  eft.  2.b 
lm.  14.—  4.  b.  lin.  15.— 12.  b.  lin  ult.—  iy.  b. 
r;  •nnonin^S1-  9—23.  b.  ubi  titulum  oppo- 
fuit  I  II  OC  TITON,  ficut  et  in  fine  Epiflola  ferip- 
fit  AMHN)  longe  fultmodeftior.  Pofterior  autem, 
octingentis  abhinc,  ut  videtur,  minis,  Codicem  per 
totum  (ftiper-additis  Accentibus  ac  Spiritibus)  ad 
normam  lui  temporis  Exemplarium  c-mendavir,  Sa- 
emm  textum  in  qualibet  lore  pagina  delendo  ant 
nt  in  coni  1 

ca  qua  mferuit  aut  immutavit  Emendator,  pro  nulli/ 
habebantur  a  Domino  Bernardo  Montcfaucon,  qui 
lediones  ejufdem  variantes  ad  Clarifs.  Millium,  u 
accepi  tranfmiferit. 

In  fupra-memoraris  Codicis  Claromontani  foliis 
34.  conuiientur,fragmenta  varia,  lcil.  J 


1  Cor.  XI.  22. 

ufq;  ad  Com  33. 

1.  b. 

i  Cor.  XT. 

XII.  3. 

ufq;  ad  Com.  1 

4.  b. 

i 

XV.  26. 

ufq;  ad  Com.  35. 

5.  b. 

XV.  . 

5°- 

ufq;  ad  Cap.  XVI.  1. 

7-b. 

2  Cor.  V.  z. 

ufq;  ad  Com.  10. 

9.  b. 

2  Cor.  IV. 

Coloff.  I.  19. 

ulq;  ad  Cap.  II  16. 

n.  b4 

Colofl*.  I. 

Philipp,  II.  3. 

ufq;  ad  Com.  1  •}. 

38.  b. 

Philipp.  1.  , 

1  Theft*.  III.  10. 

ufq;  ad  Cap.  IV.  5. 

20.  b. 

1  Theft.  HI. 

1  Tim.  IV.  21. 

22. 

22.  b. 

2. Tim.  IV. 

Tit.  I.  1. 

ufque  and  finem  Epiftolte. 

b. 

Tit.  I. 

13.  ufq;  ad  Cap.  XII.  24. 

22.  ufq;  ad  vers.  30. 

44-  ufq;  ad  vers.  34. 

'  •  ufq;  ad  Cap.  V,  4. 

'•  ufq;  ad  Cap.  II.  12. 

.  ufq;  ad  Cap.  II.  i3. 

•  ufq;  ad  vers.  13. 

ufq;  ad  fincm  Epiftolae. 


4 

7 
9 
1 1 
iS 
20 

24 


Specimen  Verfionis  Italica,  prout  exhibetur  in  Codice  Claromontano,  et  ab  bodkrna  Volc  ,t. 
dilcrepat.  1 A 


Vulg. 

1  Cor.  XL  18.  ex  parte  Credo. 

34.  difponam. 

XII.  2.  feitis  quoniam  cum  Gentes  efletis. 
ad  Simulachra  muta. 

3.  ideo. 

quod — loquensi 
Dominus  Jefus. 

4.  divifiones  vero  gratiarum. 

XV.  22.  et  ficut. 

23.  Primitia:.  —  ij. 

qui  in  adventum  ejus  credidcrunt. 

24.  et  Poteflatem. 

25.  pofl  inimicos  fub  pedibus  ejus  ;  nihil. 


EXPARTEALIQLTACEliDO  (in  Codiee  foperiore 
ORDINABO. V0Cem  WB^eralit  Amiquarius) 

dccjl  cum. 

IDOLORUMSINEVGCE 

PROPTERQUOD. 

QUIA  —  DIGIT. 

DOM  .  IIIM  in  no.  1773.  (manu  print  feripta  ft. 
erunt  d  nm  ih  m)  ^ 

DIUISIONISAUTEMDONAHONUM 

SICUTENIM. 

INI  HUM — HI  (no.  177  3.  hi.) 

INADUENTUEIUS. 

ETOMNEMPOTESTATEM. 

OMNIAENIM.sUBIECITSUBPEDTBUSEIUS. 

(In  no.  1773-  verba  Omnia  enim  subjecit  pf- 
dibi  s  illius  linea  fubdufla  ab  illo  qui  Codicem  emeu- 
daverit,  quafi  obelo confofla,  reperiuntur 


44«  ficut. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


220 


Num.  1773 

Vulg. 

44.  ficut. 

47.  coeleftis. 

49.  igitur. — terreni. 

50.  autem. 

2  Cor.  IV.  16.  licet  is — tameu  is. 

17.  id  enim. 
fupra  modum. 

18.  non  contemplantibus nobis  qua;  videntur, 
temporalia  funt 

Coloff.  I.  16.  condita. 

II.  5.  perperam  a  IT  no  Millio  exhibit  a  ejl  Verf.  Lat. 
quod,  &c. 

Philip.  I.  28.  caufa — vobis. 

30.  audiftis  de  me. 

II.  1.  Societas. 

2.  idem — id  ipfum. 

1  Theft.  III.  6.  quoniam — quoque  vos. 

y.  ideo. 

in  omni  neceflitate. 
tribulatione  noftra. 

8.  ftatis. 

9.  in  omni  gaudio- 
ante. 

2  Tim.  IV.  1 7.  impleatur. 

1 8 .  cui  gloria. 

20.  Mileti. 


Clar. 


SICETLAM. 

daft. 

deft — TERRESTRIS  (no.  1773.  illivs  terrene 
ENIM  (no.  1773.  autem  fupra  ponitur) 

ETSI — SED. 

NAM. 

SECUNDUMEXC.ELLENTIAM. 
NONRESPICIENlESqUAEUIDENT. 
deeft  funt. 

CREATAE. 

in  Cod.  habetur  Ut  INQUOD,  &c.  non  : 


OSTENSIO — UESTRAE. 

— IN  ME  (et  fic  no.  *  773-) 

COMMUNICATIO. 

IDIPSUD— UNUM. 

QUIA— ETUOS. 

PROP  1'EREA. 

SUPF.  ROMNE  M  NECESSITATEM. 
TRIBULATIONEMNOSTRAM. 

STETERITIS. 

SUPEROMNEMGAUDIUM. 

CO  RAM. 

ADIMPLE  ATU  R 
CUISITGLORIA. 

MILE  TO- 

In  Subfcriptione  Epiftoke  Secundce  ad  Timotheum,  Voces 
SCRIBFNS  AROMA  funt  alius  manus. 


Porrode  Gnecis  hujufee  Codicis  prsftantiffimi ;  aliquant  inveni  diferepantiam  inter  eundem  et  Gracum  Tetomen- 
....  .  „  Millio  plahorafnm.  ubi  ftuDendum  plane  vanantmm  Leftionum  multitudmem  c  prmftantiffnms  fere 


turn  adoftiffimo  Millio  elaboratin'!,  ubi  ftupendum  plane  vanantmm  Lcftionum  rmltitudmem  c  pra  _ 

us  Europe  eeemplaribua  decerptam,  et  fpeciatim  e  Cod.ce  Claromontano  non  poffum.  non  mtran  In  embus 
inaerendis  (i  aliqute  Amicorum  fugerint  oculos,  td  &cde  acutlffimo  Mtlbo  condonandum,  cut  Angulos  aft 
_ :„r„;^;»T,^i  rUfMt-  feniltas.  Ecce  igitur,  Lettiones  qualdam  adhuc  vanantes,  quas  hmc  Donum 


tamen  conge - -  , 

memoratos  Codices  infpiciendi  defuit  facultas. 
mei  Claromontana  fuppeditabunt  folia. 


Clar.) 


Mill. 

I  Cor.  XI.  23.  ’ Air#  T-s  (irotft 
32.  U7T0  TB  Kuf»». 

XII.  to.  SvVX(*lUVw 

XV.  28.  JVas  «  0  0fOf  rx  hcivtx. 


MS. 


34. 

Atyu. 

52. 

55.  57.  ».*©»• 

2  Cor.  V.  4.  BttpsufuwH. 

Coloff.  I.  20.  A.'  aura.  deeft  Clar. 

tS  deeft  Clar.  . 

21.  rri  Sixvola.  (rr.f  Sixvotxs  a 
&  lat.)  ' 


i  Clar.  gr. 


IIAPAK“T  deeft  ergo'  t5. 
deeft  ts. 

ATNAMEH2  ut  alij. 
prftna  manu  feript.  rNACoEflANTA, 
ficut  et  in  Codice  Alexandrino. 
EKNITATE  cum  Clemen.  Alexandr. 
A  A  AH,  ut  alij. 

.POIIH,  ut  alij. 

NEIKOI,  ut  antea,  V  1 .  54. 
BAPTNOMKNOI  cum  TheophylaS. 
habentur  in  Codice,  et  Gr.  et  Lat. 
habentur  cum'  Gr.  turn  Lat. 

In  Codice  deeft  aur*. 


NTN. 


24. 


Philipp  II.  1 1 
1  Theff.  IV.  3 
a  Tim.  IV.  22 


(7W/A«T0?  OSUTB. 

>1  EXxXrjina. 

Aaooix.tia. 

tupaxxfim 

VSIVTX  7TA.8T01!. 

T>i  i  yvu<rtus. 
Xflirov  Iritroup  T6K 
of  tfiv  Ji  xtfxXr,. 

1 3xrrTnry.xn . 
su^owoAoynirrirai. 
6iAny.x  T8  ©£«. 

v  pd1'  W™' 
'Eppaoo  iv  tigwyv, 


'A/xviv.  Clar.) 


Subfcriptio  Epiftola;,  editis  fimplicior,  fic  fe  habet. 


Tit.  I.  5.  Auttovtx. 

En-i^iofdwK* 
10.  ex  TrEflTO/AJif. 
j  3.  /j.t/j.ix<rf*tvoiS» 

Tit.  II.  5.  eixovfoCf. 


ATTOT,  additur  per  priorem  Emendatorem. 

"H,  additur  per  fecundum  Corre&orem. 

A.^OAIKIA  ut  in  Cod.  Alex. 

EHPAKAN,  ut  in  Cod.  Alex. 
nANTATONDAOTTON. 
defuit  tkA. 

KNINXN. 

O  (Lat.  QUOD)  EXTINKE:I*AAH. 

BAnTISMfl  cum  Chryfoft.  &c. 
EHOMOAOrHIETAl,  cum  plur. 
defuit  t5. 

Emendator  Codicisfecundarius  fubftituit  I'-'T 

u>iv,  loco  ruv  EPPnSQENElPHNK.  Alia  quoque 
loca  extant  in  Codice,  ubi  ea  pro  variantibus  ha- 
bitse  fuerint  Le&ionibus,  qua;  ab  Emendatore  tan- 
quam  depravata  notabantur. 

nPOE  TFV1O0ON  if  EIlAHPflQH.  APXETAI  HPO? 
TITON. 

AinONTA,  cum  Cod.  Alex. 

EnANOPQHEHE. 

poft  ex  cernitur  lacuna  in  qua  legebatur  THE.  I 
MEMIAMMENOIX,  ut  Cod.  Alex.  &c. 
OIKOTPrOTE  cum  Cod.  Alex. 

7.  xfttxmu 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


221 


Quzeftio  Quarta. 
Salutem  neceffarium. 

3.  Quaeftio  Quinta, 
cialis. 

4.  Quseftio  Sexta. 
tise. 

5.  Quteftio  Prima. 
omnia  remitti  poffint. 

6.  QuEeftio  Secunda. 


Num.  1773,  1774* 

MS. 

defuit ;  ut  in  Cod.  Alex,  ac  alijs. 
additur  ab  Emendatore, 

MIXHTOI  primitus,  ut  videtur. 

I1EPI2TA20,  ut  alij. 

A1ITH,  ut  al. 

hxApistotk-t. 
a  priore  additur  Emendatore. 

Subfcriptio  eft,  nPOS  TlTONEITAHPnQH.  ApxETAIIIPOI  4>IAHMONA. 

Scripturse  Specimina  videfis  apud  Montfaulcon  in  Palaiograph.  p.  217. 

28.  QuEeftio  Quarta.  Quis  Proprius  SacerdoS  in 

Decreto  Lateranenli.  72. 

29.  Qua:ftio  Quinta.  An  fit  in  Ecclefia  poteftas  re- 

fervandi  Peccata  in  Foro  interiori.  73.  b. 

30.  QuEeftio  Sexta.  Quis  a  Refervatis  diredte  abfol- 

vere  poflit.  75.  b. 

31.  QuEeftio  Septima.  Quis  Jurifdidtionem  delegare 

poflit.  78. 

32.  QuEeftio  Odtava.  An  requiratur  in  Miniftro 

Poenitentise,  approbatio.  80. 

33.  Quasftio  Nona.  An  approbatus  ab  uno  Epifcopo 

cenfeatur  approbatus  pro quacunque Diocefi.  82.  b. 

34.  QuEeftio  Decima.  Quis  poflit  Confeflarium  eli- 

gere.  84.  b. 

35.  Qutcftio  Undecima.  Quanta  requiratur  Scientia 

in  Miniftro.  85.  b. 

Difputatio  Quarta :  de  Confeflionis  qualitate. 

36.  Quteftio  Prima.  An  fit  neceflarium  Peccata  omnia 

Mortalia  Uni  eidemq  ;  integre  confiteri.  86.  b. 

37.  QuEeftio  Secunda.  An  confitendte  fint  Peccato- 

rum  CircumftantiEe.  89. 

38.  Quteftio  Tertia.  An  Confeflio  non  integra,  fit 

aliquando  valida.  90.  b. 

39.  QuEeftio  Quarta.  An  fit  de  Necefiitate  Confcf- 

fionis,  ui  fiat  Voce  propria.  94.  b. 

Difputatio  Quinta :  de  Sigillo. 

40.  Queftio  Prima.  An  detur  piEeceptum  febvandi 

Secreta  in  Confeflione ;  Et  quinam  hoc  prEecepto  tene- 
antur.  97.  b. 

41.  QuEeftio  Secunda.  QuEenam  Materia  Sigilli. 


Mitt. 

Tit.  II.  7.  dtp$a.£<nav. 

12.  T«f. 

III.  3.  ru7*)Tei. 

9.  7rffii 

13.  AflTTW. 

15.  'H 

Ay.w 


1774- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  8vo,  de  Sacramentis  Romans  Ec- 
clefise  agens.  Initio  truncatur  ;  reftant  autem. 

1.  Pars  Solutionis  Queftionis  cujufdam  de  Sacramento 
Poenitentite.  1  • 

An  Sacramentum  hoc  fit  ad 
1.  b. 

An  Poenitentia  fit  Virtus  fpe- 
3.  b. 

An  Poenitentia  fit  Species  J  uni¬ 
s' 

An  per  Poenitentiam  Peccata 

7.  b. 

An  Peccatum  fine  Poenitentia 


remitti  poflit. 

7.  QuEeftio  Tertia.  An  per  Poenitentiam  remitti 

poflit  unum  Peccatum  fine  altero.  1 2.  b. 

8.  QuEeftio  Quarta.  An  Culp&  per  Poenitentiam 

remifla,  maneat  aliquando  aliquid  poeme.  <4-. 

9.  Quteftio  Prima.  An  Peccatum  Veniale  fine  Poeni¬ 
tentia  remitti  poflit.  1 8- 

10.  QuEeftio  Secunda.  Quomodo  per  Sacramentalia 

remittuntur  Peccata.  _  2 1  • 

11.  Quteftio  Prima.  An  Peccata  remifla  redeant  per 

fequens  peccatum.  22- 

12.  QuEeftio  Prima.  An  Virtutes  per  Mortale  Pec¬ 

catum  deperditte,  per  Poenitentiam  reftituantur.  25.  b. 

13.  Quteftio  Secundo.  An  Opera  five  Merita  per  Pec¬ 
catum  mortificata,  revivifcant.  26.  b. 

Sequitur  Difputatio  Prima  ;  de  Contritione. 

14.  Qutrftio  Prima.  Quid  fit  Contritio.  28.  b. 

1 5.  Quteftio  Secunda.  An  Contritio  debeat  efle  Mor- 

talium  omnium.  32 

16.  QuEeftio  Tertia.  An  Contritio  debeat  efle  Summa 

Deteftatio.  34-.  b. 

17.  QuEaftio  Quarta.  An  PrEeceptum  Contntioms 

obliget  ftatim  pod  commiifum  Peccatum.  38.  b. 

18.  QuEeftio  Quinta.  Quid  fit  Attritio.  44. 

19.  QuEeftio  Sexta.  An  Attritio  aliqua  cum  Sacra¬ 
mento  fufficiat ;  et  qutcnam  ea  fit.  46-  b. 

Difputatio  Secunda :  de  Confeflionis  Necefiitate 
poll  Baptifmum.  50. 

20  Quteftio  1.  An  lapfis  poft  Baptifmum  in  Pec- 

cato  mortali,  Confeflio  fit  neceflaria  jure  divino.  50.  b. 

21.  Quteftio  Secunda.  Quinam  obligentur  prteceplo 

divino  Confeflionis.  53- 

22.  Quteftio  Tertia.  Quo  tempore  obliget  hoc  prte- 

ceptum.  J>5‘  b\ 

23.  QuEeftio  Quarta.  An  prseceptum  Conleihoms 

Ecclefiafticum  detur ;  &  quando  obliget.  57-  b. 

24.  Quseftio  Quinta.  An  Prteceptum  Confeflipms 

annute  obliget  pro  determinate  tempore.  Et  qua  ratione 
computandus  Annus.  6 1 . 

Difputatio  Tertia.  Dc  Confeflionis  Miniftro. 

25.  Quseftio  Prima.  Quis  fit  Confeflionis  Minifter. 

26.  Quteftio  Secunda.  An  Poteftas  Jurifdidionis  ab 

ordine  diftincta  fit.  _  65.  fi. 

27.  Quteftio  Tertia.  An  Sacerdotes  in  Confecratione 

accipiant  Jurifdidtionem  ad  remittenda  Venialia,  et  ad 
abfolvendum  in  Articulo  Mortis.  7°* 

Cat.  Harl.  V01..II, 


42.  Verumne  eft  latum  quod  diximus,  diredte  vel 

indirefte  peccatum  quod  auditum  eft  in  Confeflione 
revelare.  Queftio  Tertia.  102.  b. 

Difputatio  Sexta  :  De  Satisfadtione. 

43.  QuEeftio  Prima.  An  homo  poflit  fatisfacere  Deo 
pro  Culpa  vel  pro  Poena  debita,  ratione  Peccati.  106. 

44.  Queftio  Secunda.  An  Sacerdos  debeat  injungere 

Satisfadtionem  pro  Peccatis.  1 13. 

45.  QuEeftio  Tertia.  An  Anima;  aliqute  expientur 

in  Purgatorio.  1 1 5. 

46.  An  aliquid  temporalis  Pccnte  per  Indulgentias 

remitti  poflunt.  1 1 9. 

De  Extrema  UndHone. 

47.  Qumftio  Prima.  An  fit  Sacramentum.  125.  b. 
4S.  Quinam  fint  Partes  eflentiales,  five  Materia  et 

Forma.  127. 

49.  Quishujus  Sacramenti  EfFedtus.  130. 

Quis  hujus  Sacramenti  capax.  131.  b. 

Quis  hujus  Sacramenti  Minifter.  1 32.  b_ 

De  Ordine. 

An  fint  Ordines  in  Ecclefia.  133.  b. 

Quot  fint  OrdinesEcclefiaftici.  135. 

54.  An  Ordo  five  Ordinatio  fit  Sacramentum.  137, 

55.  Qure  fingularum  Ordinationum  Materia  et  Forma. 

M3- 

56.  Quis  fit  Ordiaationis  EfFedtus.  147. 

57.  Qute  requiratur  in  Sufcipiente,  Difpofitio.  i49.fi. 

58.  Quis  hujus  Sacramenti  Minifter.  152.  b. 

59.  An  poteftas  Epicopalis  fit  Jure  Divino  major  Sa» 

rdotali.  1 55.  b. 

60.  Utrum  Ordo  impediat  Matrimonium,  vel  ejus 


50. 

51 


52' 

53- 


Ufum,  et  qua  Lege. 


3^ 


158.  b, 

De 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Ntim.  1774,  1775. 

De  Matrimor.io. 

61.  An  Actus  Matriinonij  licitus  fit.  163.  b. 

62.  An  Matrimonium  fit  verum  Sacramentum..  166. 

63.  Quis  Matriinonij  Minifter. 

04.  Qua;  fit  Materia  et  Forma  hujus  Sacramenti. 

1 7 1.  b. 

65.  An  licita  fit  Polygamia.  172. 

66.  Qua  ratione  Matrimonium  fit  infolubile.  1 7 5.  b. 

67.  Quis  Confenfus  de  Efientia  Matrimonij.  181. 

68.  An  Matrimonium  initum  fub  Conditione  futura 

vel  impoflibili,  fit  validum.  jgg, 

69.  Qua  ratione  Matrimonium  invalide  contra&um, 

reddatur  validum.  ,g^  ’ 

70.  An  fufficiat  Confenfus  Clandeftinus.  188.  b. 

71.  An  Matrimonium  ex  metu  initum,  fubfiftat. 

191.  b. 

73.  Quomodo  Matrimonium  dirimunt  Error  et  Con- 

<k®°*  J93-b. 

73.  An  Votum  &  Ordo  Matrimonium  dirimant,  et 

qU°  ^l'o'  t>  *  .  i95-b. 

74.  Qua  Ratione  impediant  Confanguinitas,  Affinitas, 
aliaeq;  Cognationes. 

7 S’  Quid  de  ceteris  Impedimentis  dirimentibus,  cen- 
fenduin.  202. 

76  Quas  fit  obligatio  Conjugum  ad  ufum  Matri- 
moniJ-  207. 

'775- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4 to,  craftiore,  quern  una  cum 
-alijs  nonnullis,  (ingenti  dato  pretio)  a  D.  Joanne  Ay- 
inone  in  Hollandia  redemit  Illuftrifiimus  Dominus 
meus.  Compledit  in  fe  Quatuor  Evangelia  Verfionis 
Hieronymianas,  cum  apparatu  neceflario  ;  In  Italia, 
Mille  et  Centum  abhinc  Annis  (uti  ex  manu  conjicere 
!icet)Litteris,  quod  aiunt,  Uncialibus,illoq;  qui  fequitur 
Ordine  eleganter  fatis  exaratus. 
t.  Fragmcntum,  five  Pars  pofterior  Prsefationis  D. 
rneronymi,  feu  Procemij  Commentariorum  quos  fcripfit 
m  D.  Matthaei  Evangelium  (Init.  “  Plures  fuilfe  qui  Evan- 
gelia  fcripferunt.”)  I# 

NB.  in  Codice  dicitur,  PraeFatioincanones. 
2.  ProLogus  in  Mattha;um  (hut.  “  Matthseus  ex 
Judaea,  ficut  in  Ordine  primus.”) 

3-  Canones  Evangelici  x.  ad  fingulas  SS.  Evange- 
Jiorum  pencopas  indigitantes  ;  confonantiam  Evan- 
geliftaium,  ac  loca  fingulisPropriafeu  peculiaria  demon- 
ftrates. 

De  his  Canonibus,  fic  in  Prafatione  ad  Damafum 
Papam,  D.  Hieronymus,  “Canones  quos  Eufebius  Epif- 
copus  Ctelanenfis  Alexandrinum  fecutus  Ammonium 
m  Decern  Numeros  ordinavit,  ficut  in  Gncco  habentur 
expreflimus.”  Quin  et  de  Ufu  eorundem,  confulas  ean- 
dem  Prsfationem,  Eufebij  Epiftolam  ad  Carpianum 
et  Joannis  Milij  Prolegomena. 

4-  Evangelium  fecundum  D.  Matthteum.  1 

5.  PraeFatioEvangeLumarci.  j-g 

Intip.  “  Marcus Evangelifta  Dei.” - Expl.  “qui 

autem  incrementum  prteftat  Deus  eft.” 

6.  Evangelium  fecundum  D.  Marcum.  ,42. 

7.  ProLocvs  in  Lucam.  „  ’ 

Incip.  “Lucas  Syrus  Antiochenfis,  arte  Medicus.'” 
—Exp!.  “  quam  faftidientibus  prodidiil'e.’’ 

8.  Evangelium  fecundum  D.  Lucam.  2,Q 

9.  Prologus,  fivePraefatio  in  Johannem.  Incip.  “Mile 

dp  Johannes  Evangelifta,  unus  ex  Difcipulis  Dei”- _ 

Expl.  “  doftrinafervetur.” 

10.  Evangelium  fecundum  D.  Johannem  (ultimo  folio 
vetuftate  confumpto,  definit  in  verfu  20.  Capitis  21.) 

Prolog!  fupra-memorati,  five  Praifariones,  habmtur 
«  m  al.js  txeinplanbusvelnftis;  puli,  in  prreclaro  illo 
hujplce  Bibliothecas  Codice,  qui  inferibitur  34  B.  16. 

]p  regione  TextusSacri,  comparent  Nuineri  Capitum 
cujuique  Evangelij,  cum  alijs  Nolls  Numeric!,  ad  Canones 
prtecedentes  refpondentibus. 


anam  •dfdV,SDnem  Erangelloruin  attinet  Hieronynn- 
anam  ;  ipCum  Hieronymum  audi  in  Prtefallone  ad  Da- 
malum  1  apam  fic  diflerentem,  “  Igitur  hasc  prafens 
run/nT*1 la  polbceiur  quatuor  tantum Evangelia,  quo- 
ne  ■  ?r„d°  n  e’  Mit,hiE"s-  Marcus,  Lucas,  Johan¬ 
nes.  Codicum  Gnecorum  emendala  Collatione,  fed  et 

dll  nT:  qua:  nc.multum  a  Leftionis  Latina;  confuetu- 
tum'  ITT’  ltaCalam°  lempevarimus,  ut  his  ran- 
m  quae  fenfum  videbantur  mutare  corrcilis,  reliqua 

libenverr^m  Ut  N“m  f-m 

beraverit  doMmus  rile  inter  Latinos  Pater,  Theologis 
prsfemm  Critic, s  ipfc  Laicus  adjudicandum  cenfeo. 
ftri  ’  “  £b  °',m,bus  qui  hac  infudarunt  pate- 
p  ,  PJO  confeifo  eft,  temporrbus  fcilicet  Gregorii  Magni 
v,pn  f  ,5'am  m“.,tls  citcrioribus  Seculis)  exemplaria 
Verhoms  Hieronymiante  in  Scrinijs  Ecclefiarum  ac  Mo- 

Veter1;  °t,T  fee  reperiri’  in  <illib“s  quamplurimtr 

'  ereris  Italic  Verfionis  ante  D.  Hieronymum  ab  Ecclefia 

cp  ",na,  ",f,tat!c’  „tunc  retinebantur.  E  quibus  forte  ffi 
St,*  qualem  qualem,  in  medium  pro- 
lerre  fas  fit)  foper-addms  Corretfionibus  Alcuini  Prelby. 

0“"“.  Archiepifcopi  Cantuarienfis, 
TSenati  difl,  Bravomj,  Prions  Eccleliae  Wigornienfis 
ufus^ff  1He.nnco  "■  (qui  in  corrigendis  Biblijs 
ufus  eft  Exemplar]  vetuftiffimo  quod  Oflk  Merciorum 
Regi  imfit  Pontifex  Romanus,  ficuti  in  Prafatione  ad 

rum  mT  Ct  aBJS  nonul|isi  permixta  ifta  Latino- 

rum  Bibhorum  Editto,  quK  hodie  VVLGATA  nuncu- 
patur,  emanavit. 


*Elogmm  Lanfranci,  quod  citat  Cl.  Millius  (Prolog, 
pag.  1 04.)  ex  Anonyino  Vitae  ejufdem  auftore  per  Lucam 
Dachenum  edttoi  ipfiffiims  verbis  extat  in  Sigeberti 
Gemblacenfis  Chromco,  ad  Ann.  Mnxxxtxi 

.  t  Ipfum  forfan  Senati  .uWf....,  jam  ante  14  anno,  in 

enfeT^ffibTth  °lleEii-?°rPOnS  Chriffi  apmi  Can>abrigi- 
fervat’um  ,r  ’  ^  Codiees  Parkerianos  con- 
e  Pl  ueca  dihgentiftimo  Millio,  nee  ab  alijs  do 
SS.  Bibhorum  Latinorum  Correftione  feribentibus  (quod 
lciamj  memoretur.  1 

Sed,  ut  ad  praefentem  venerandte  vetuftatis  Codicem 
redcamus;  per  totum  habita  Colis  et  Commatibus  ratione 
confpicimr  exaratus.  Hoc  modo  in  feribendis  Evangel 
lijs  iplum  D  Hieronymum  fuiffe  ufum,  haud  temere 
dicam  ;  licet  fimilem  ill  alijs  mirse  antiquitatis  Codicibus 
obfervatus  fum  ;  mfuper  prtefationis  ejufdem  ad  Paulam 
et  Euftochium  m  tranftanonem  Efaitc  haud  omnino  im 
memor;  emu.  Exordium  eft,  ••  Nemo  cum'  Prophet. is 
Verfibus  vident  elfe  defenptos,  Metro  eos  exftlimet  apud 
Hebratos  ligan,  et  aliquid  fimile  habere  de  Plalmis  vel 
openbus  Salomon, s;  fed  quod  id  Demofthene  &  Tullio 
folet  fieri,  ut  per  Coia  lcnbantur  &  Commata,  qui 
utique  Profa  et  non  Verfibus  confcripferunt.”  Emenda 
tores,  diuturn.tate  temporis,  naeftus  eft  Codex  binos, 
patria  (ut  videtur)  Francos  ;  quorum  Vetuftiori  Literal 
quas  vocant  Unciales  five  Majufculre,  ordinario  et  com- 
mum  fuerunt  ufui :  Recentior  autem,  ut  ex  manu  ipfius 
liquet,  ante  feptingentos  annos  vixerit  j  plus  laboris  im- 
penfus  m  dividendis  Syilabis,  ill  Elemento  /rfupra  Voces 
quafdam  addendo  et  alijs  ejufmodi  minutijs,  quam'  in 
extu  Sacro  ad  fidem  praeftantiffimorum  Exemplarium 
emendando  :  adeo  ut  Grammatici  fere  vices  fupplevilTe 
potius  videatur.  ■  c 

QuiCodicon  defcripfitAntiquarius,  omni  procul  dubio 
ndelem  navavit  operam,  ut  Exemplar  fuum  (quoad  fieri 
potuit)  Accurationis  caufd  ubique  bene  audiret.  Verurii' 
tale  fun  ei  Mrtyafo*  ut  (prater  Errores  omnibus  ferine 
Libianjs  communes)  ingens  in  illo  cernitur  Ledionum 
mefiis  ab  hodierna  Vuuoata  diferepantium ;  e  quibus 
nonnullas  heic  quafi,  verbi  gratia,  lubens  adnotabo. 

MattH, 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


Matth.  II.  1 1 
HI.  g 
VII.  i 


Vuig. 


Num. 


vm.  25. 

IX.  25. 

XIX.  20. 
XXIII.  14. 
XXVII.  32. 

46. 

Marc.  IV.  32, 

V.  ii. 

vm.  1. 

X.  6. 

XIV.  14. 
XVI.  14 

luc.  I.  35. 

nr.  38. 

XV.  j. 

lb'. 

VII.  31. 

XI.  2. 

XII.  21. 

X,  $ 

XVI.  2  1. 

XX.  39. 
Johan.  I.  21. 

III.  6. 

VI.  1 3* 
VTII  10. 

XI.  45. 

XIII.  2. 

32* 

XIV.  I. 


Maih.  X.  '9. 

35- 

XII.  42. 
45- 

XIII.  34. 

55- 

XXVI.  31. 
Marc.  I.  1 . 

32- 
X.  10. 

29. 

Luc.  V.  24. 
VI  19. 

VII.  50. 
XXII.  61. 

xxur.  56. 
Job,  in.  3 
v.  4. 


.  cum  Maria  matre  ejus. 

.  in  Jordane. 

-  nolite  condemnarej  et  non  condemna- 
bimini. 

et  accefierunt  ad  eum  difcipuli  ejus. 
etdixir,  Puellaj  furg. 
a  juventute  mea. 

totwu  defiderantitr  comnia ;  fed  hoc  forfan 
poll  CYRENASUM. 

Eli,  Eli,  lamrna  fabacthani,  hoc  eft. 

in  arborem. 

in  agris. 

cum  Jefu. 

pojl  Deus. 

ante  refectio. 

pojl  RESURREX1SSE. 

exTe. 

pojl  Dei. 

in  montem  excelfum. 
fanare  contritos  corde* 

.  Ait  autem  Dominus 
.  defunt. 
dcfunt. 

•  primum — et  Jufticiam  ejus. 

.  in  manibus  veftris. 

.  in  Domo. 

.  et  nemo  illi  dabat. 
quidam  Scribarum  dl'xerunt  ei. 
et  dixit. 

.  pojl  Caro  est. 
pojl  Spiritus  est. 
et  duobus  pifcibus. 
qui  re  accufabant. 
et  Martham. 
mifiUetin  Cor. 

Si  Deus  clarificatus  eft  in  Eo: 

Et  ait  Difdpulis  fuis. 

Quod  attinet  ad  alte-memoratos  Codicis 
•vctujlior,  uti  ex  fequcntibus  facile  patcbit, 
Dabitur  enini  vobis  in  ilia  hori  quid 
loquamini.  * 

Et  nurum  adverfus  Socrum  fuam. 

Et  ecce  plus  quam  Solomon  hie. ' 

Sic  crit  et  Generationi  huic  peffimre. 

Et  lineParabolis  non  loquebatur  eis 
Nonne  hie  eft  Fabri  filius  ? 

In  Ilta  Nodie. 

Jefu  Chrifti. 
et  Demonia  habentes. 
de  eodem. 
aut  Patrem. 
in  Terra, 
de  Illo. 

Fides  tua  te  falvam  fecit 

quia  priufquam  Gallus  cantet,  ter  me 

negabis. 

Aromata  et. 

Amen,  amen  dico  tibi. 

Angel  us  autem  Domini,  he. 


*775- 

fTooamee:7as 

defunt. 


MS, 


Antiquariorum  pofterior,  uti  fupra  mo- 
nui,  non  tot  Loca  caftigavit  ac  ifto  in 
opere  fuus  antecelfor.  Ex  ijs  autem 
qua  calamo  ipfius  confpiciuntur  adno- 
tatas,  opera:  pretium  duxi,  ft  unam 
ialtem  aut  alteram  Correctionem  menio- 
rarem. 

Ad  yerfum  igitur  18  Capitis  primi  Evan- 
gclij  fecundum  Matthamin,  adpofuit  hsc 
^ba,  genealogice  hucuiq 


defunt. 

access  e-RUNr 

defunt. 
defunt. 

felt  anti  a  Librarij  tribuendum. 

e?^re.  o  r  u  ta  cn  ct  r  r 

defunt. 

defunt. 

erdjxir. 

ei  a  ens  or.7  u  m  coeum 

SCNCJO370NM 

defunt. 

defunt. 

defunt. 

Nos-ieiiq  im  ci&Us&s 

Fja.'taoi.oNrasTaa. 

dejunt. 
defunt. 
defu  t. 
defunt. 

guia^ecaoweNaromest 

defunt. 

defunt. 

i<ncni57sseTsenvcoRd» 

dejunt. 

defunt. 

Cmndaor",  plurima  ^  ^ 

Infuperiorc  ora  adduntur. 

In  ima  ora. 

hfuperiore  martini  adpor,ta. 

Similiter. 

Inter  tine  at  a. 

Similiter. 

Infer iore  ora. 
fuper  addita. 
in  margine  leguntur. 
interiineata. 

Similiter 

Iterum. 

rurfus. 

In  fumma  ora. 

Ima  margine. 

Interiineata. 

Similiter 

Supnma  arafniUtur  Mum  comma. 

Jnc/p  eu^fg^setdcpaLPTb 

P!“f  fhi  dicenda  funto, 

^  a  lud-  ?an£!onim  Evaageliorum 
i-xemplar  Lauuc  quidem  ejtaratim,  led 
Hybemorum  charadteribus,  perventutn 

Malh.SXI.  31.  Prima  manus  feripfit  N OZVSSJ- 
U3C1S,  quam  vocem  retinebat  Verfio 
vu.us  Itala;  h.c  autem  earn  immutavit 

■n  PRZWqs,, 

13  Matth. 


1  24 

Math.  XXI. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  1775. 

2i.  Hadenus  de  Codicis  prceclariflimi  con- 
tentis  &  editione  ;  nunc  de  Manu  Scrip, 
toris  ac  Emendatorum,  paucis  difl'e- 
rendum  eft. 

Scriptor  primarius,  in  fine  Line®,  et 
nonnunquam  Finem-verfus,  jugatis  I.  it 
teris  ufus  eft,  de  more  fcil.  feculi  in  quo 
Codicem  defcripferit  ;  quas  inter  &  et 
&  coalefcentes  in  ^  fepicul£  videre  eft 
Atqui  ne  quis  inde  Codicem  Novitatis 
arguat,  cum  diphthongum  2^*  in  uni- 
verfis  fere  Codicibus  majul'culis  Litteris 
Latinis  calamo  fcriptis,  immo  ipfis  mar- 
moribus  Romanis  infculptum  licet  in¬ 
venire. 

Qui  prior  emendavit  Codicem  Anti- 
quarius,  Compendijs  hifce  Vocum 
&  )7(5  in  demonftrandis  Sententijs  vel 
Sententiarum  membris,  quas  marginibus 
adfcriptas  in  Textum  Sacrum  omnino 
referendas  cenfuit,  viciflim  ufus  eft. 
Hinc  fit,  ut  ijdem  C.haraderes  quce  fol. 
49.  b.  forfan  fignificent  hcec  deficiunt, 
hie  fuppleas,  aut  tale  quid  ;  fol.  166.  b 
ut  videtur,  legendi  hie  deficit ,  hcec  fup- 
p  I  end  a. 

Porro,  dum  Codicem  curiofus  per- 
volverem,  plures  mihi  occurrebant  ex 
Notis  Romanorum  (quas  et  in  alijs  Co¬ 
dicibus  cernuntur  antiquiffimisj  tarn  pri- 
ma  quam  novifiim4  manu  appofitce  ; 
quarum  Ufum  indicant  Colledio  in  fine 
Infcriptionum  Gruterianarum,  Ifidorus 
Hifpalenfis  in  Libro  primo  Etymologia- 
.  fum  Joannes  Mabillonius  Lib.  v.  de  Re 
Diplomatica,  Tab.  lvi.  alijq;.  Id  genus, 
me  judice,  funt  illce  quas  prim&  Manu 
effigiatas invenio,  fcil.f^  qu*- 

bus  fic  Ifido'rus. 

f •  Paragrafus,  ponitur  ad  feparandgs  Res 
a  Rebus  quas  in  connexu  concurrunt, 
quemadmodum  in  Catalogo,  Loca  a 
Locis,  Regiones  a  Regionibus  ;  in  Agone 
Proemia  a  Proeraijs,  Certamina  a  di- 
verfis  Certaminibus  feparantur,  ne  Unum 
fiat  de  Duobus.  Duplicem  hcec  Nota 
in  Codicem  obtinuit  ufum;  primo,  in 
monftrando  numero  Quaternionum  five 
Odenionum,  uti  videre  licet  in  fine  fo- 
liorum  22.  30.  38.  46.  8tc.  nec  non 
Capitum  in  quas  prioribus  Chriftianifmi 
feculis  diftinguebantur  Sanda  Evangelia. 
vid.  fol.  40.  b.  41.  &c.  nonnunquam 
etiam  ponitur,  pro  demonftrando  Initio 
Ledionis,  ut  fol.  44.  b.  &c. 

■7D1PLE.  Hanc  Scriptores  noftri  appo- 
nuntinLibris  Ecclefiafticorum  Virorum, 
ad  feparandavel  demonllrandaTeftimonia 
Sandarum  Scripturarum.  Flunc  ufum 
Notce  fecutus  eft  Librarius,  cum  aliquid 
de  veteri  Inftrumento  citatum  ell'et,  uti 
fol.  17.  b.  20.  21.  24.  b.  &c. 

&  C.risimon.  Hcec  fola  ex  voluntate  uniuf- 
cujufq;  ad  aliquid  notandum  ponitur. 
Hcec  Nota  (a  Grascis  forte  XfirS  mpiTov 
dida)  in  Codicibus  Anglo-Saxcnum  fre- 
quens  occurrit  ;  qui  earn  Jcjvin-imoji 
vocaverint,  et  duplici  modo,  per  fei- 
licet,  et  k  exprefierint.  Casterum,  in 
codice  prasfenti,  taliter  earn  depinxerit 
Librarius  $  ut  fol.  32.  b.  fol.  2  <6  et 
^  fol.  454.  35  • 


Num.  1775. 

qp  Ancora  Svperior  ponitur  ubi  aliqua 
res  magna  omnino  eft.  Hanc  formatn 
prifccc  illius  Notas  haud  omnino  aflE- 
cutus  eft  Librarius  nofter,  qui  illam  ad 
I. oca  nonnulla  maximi  momenti,  po- 
tius  Hedcracei  folij  ligura  candem 
expreffifle  videatur.  videfis  folia  1 36. 
393.  b.  413.  462.  Rase  interim  forma 
haud  adeo  a  primitiva  defledit,  ac  ho- 
diemus  pingendi  modus Parac.raphum 
fuperiorem  fic  in  Biblijs  et  Liturgijs 
noftris  Anglicanis ;  aut  ft'  in  Juriicon- 
fultorum  Rotdlis  et  Membranulis  ;  qui 
quidem  Juridici  eandem  vulgo  vocant 
Scilicet,  nulloprorfus  fignificatu. 

Superiores  Hifpalenfis  Ifidori  Citationes,  non  e 
Libris  Imprefiis,  non  e  recentioribus  Codicibus  de- 
fumpfi  ;  fed  ex  Anonymo  tradatu  (ubi  nulla  de 
Ifidoro  habetur  mentio)  in  prasclaro  Cottoniance 
Bibliothecce  Codice  hafee  pras  fe  ferente  notas 
Caligvla.  A.  15.  cujus  potifiima  pars  manu 
Gallic^  feripta  fuit  Anno  poll  Chriftum  natum 
688. 

Hadenus  de  Notis  Sententiarum  qilas 
manu  prim&  Codici  infertas  repperi  :  nunc  de  No¬ 
tis  ut  dicebantur  Vulgaribus,  quas  invene- 
runt  Tyro,  Seneca,  Cyprianus,  alij ;  perpauca  ref- 
tant  obfervanda.  Eas  adpofuit  Emendator  Codi¬ 
cis  pofterior,  cujus  tempore  Ufus  earum  adhuc  vi- 
gebat.  Id  conftat  ex  Prrefatione  Claudij  lJrefbyteri 
( qui  Nono  feculo  floruerit)  in  edito  Commentario 
fuo  in  Matthceum  preemiflb  (Cod.  MS.  Bibliothecce 

Regice,  no.  1048.)  ubi  hcec  leguntur  verba - 

*  Quod  vero  queedam  minus  ordinata  quam  decet 
in  hoc  Codice  multa  reperiuntur,  non  omnino 
tribuas  imperitice  :  fed  quaedam  propter  Pauper- 
tatem,  quardam  ignofee  propter  Corporis  Infirmi- 
tatem,  et  meorum  Oculorum  Imbecillitatem  ;  quia 
non  fuerunt  in  Tabellis  excepta,  vel  Scedudis 
digest  a  ;  fed  ut  a  me  inveniri  vel  difleri  po- 
tuerunt i.  e.  fi  fas  fit  me  vel  femel  Paraphraf- 
tis  vicem  fupplere,  Quia  non  fuerunt  conduditio 
Notario  a  me  didata,  qui  confuctus  Notis  Vulga¬ 
ribus  &  Vocum  Compendijs  Excepta  quam-ocyofii- 
fime  referret  in  Tabellas  Cereas,  cadem  denuo  in 
Schedis  Membraneis  produde  ddcripturus  ;  fed  ut 
a  me  raptim  inveniri  vel  fine  preuneditutione  difleri 
poluerunt. 

•  Dehujufmodi  Notarijs  et  eorum  Notis,  plurimuiu 
ex  Veterum  fcriptis  in  unum  quafi  fafciculum  jam 
ante  multos  annos  coegi,  quce  non  tanti  aitnno  ut 
hie  proferrem.  Verum  ne  dubij  aliquid  oriatur 
de  luperiore  Paraphrafi,  Teftimoniuui  unum  atq; 
alterum  fupponendum  arbitror. 

Ifidor.  Hifp.  Etymolog.  Lib.  1.  Cap.  25.  De  Notis 

Vulgaribus. - Notarum  ufus  erat,  ut  quic- 

quid  pro  Concione,  aut  in  Judicijs  diceretur,  Li¬ 
brary  feriberent :  cum  plures  fimul  ftantes  diverfis 
inter  fe  partibus,  quot  quifque  Verba,  etquo  Ordine 

exciperet,  annotaret: - Notae:  autem  didst, 

eo  quod  Verba  vel  Syllabas  preefixis  Caraderibus 
notent,  et  ad  notitiam  Legentium  revocent.  Quas 
qui  didicerunt  propriejam  Notarj;  appcllantur. 

Hieron.  Prcef.  in  Tobiam. - Et  quia  vicinum 

eft  Chaldaxirum  Lingua  Sermoni  Hebraico,  ufri- 
ulque  linguce  peritiflimum  loquacem  reperiens,  unius 
diei  laborenr  arripui :  et  quicquid  illeinihi  Hebraicis 
verbis  expreffit,  hoc  Ego  (accito  Notario j  fermo- 
nibus  Latinis  expofui. 

Hifce  videtur  quadrare  vetus  ilia  Infcriptio  quam 
in  diverfis  ixemplaribus  MSS.  Hoiniliarum  B.  Au- 
gultini  in  D.  Joannem  vidi :  quee  quidem  in  Regio 
Codice  no.  1021.  fic  fe  habet. 

I  r 


Avrelii 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


225 


Num.  1775,  1  776. 

Avrelx.ii  Avgvstini  Doctoris  Omelia- 
rvm  Liber  In  EvcEiv  IT n i  N"ri  I  'hvX'pi 
ScTdm  Ioh’em  Explicit.  Qvas  Ipse  Col 
i.Qqvendo  Privs  Ad  Popvlvm  Habvit. 

Et  Inter  Loqkndvm  A  Notariis 
Exceptas.  Eo  qvo  Habitae  Svnt  Ordine 
Verbvm  Ex  Verbo  Postea  Dictavit. 

Deo  Gratias.  Amen. 

Gregorius  i.Prol  inxL.Homil.  ad  Secundinum. — 
Et  quarandiun  quiJem  dictata  Expofitio  aflifl- 
enti  plebi  eft  per  Notar ium  recitata  ;  quarundam 
vero  F.xplanationem  coram  populo  Ipfe  locutus 
Ium;  atq;  ita  ut  loquebar,  ita  except  a  eft. 
Hieronymus  in  Matthacum.  Edit.  Mariani  Vic- 
torij  Parif.  1609. 

- Igitur  omifTa  auclorltate  Veterum,  quos  ncc 

legendi  nec  fequendi  mihi  facultas  data  eft ;  Hif- 
toricam  interpretationem  (quam  prtecipue  poftulafti) 

digefli  breviter - perfeftum  opus  refervans  in 

polterum.  Si  autern  mihi  vita  largior  fuerit - - 

pulcherrimum  culmen  imponam,  ut  feias  quid  in- 
terfit  inter  fubitam  dictandi  audaciam,  et  elu- 
cubralam  Scribendi  diligentiam.  Certe  nofti — 
quod  praefens  opufeulum  dictaverim,  ut  aliena 
magis  Iegere,  quam  mea  condere  me  putares. 
Pracf.  ad  Eufeb.  Cremonenf. 

liarum  iufuper  Notarum  Vulgarium.  Relliquite 
in  diverfis  antiquioribus  C.odicibus  cernuntux-  ; 
cum  primis  autem  in  exemplari  iEneidos  Virgilij, 
circa  tempora  Caroli  Calvi  Imperatoris,  manu  Gal- 
Iica  exarato,  quod  nunc  in  Bibliothecae  Bodlejana 
inter  Codices  c  Mufeo  defuncti  D.  Edwardi  Ber- 
nardi  Aftronomiae  Profeflbris  Saviiiani  emptos,  re- 
ligiofiftime  confervatur. 

Prtcfente  etiarn  Codice,  ficuti  fuperius  innui,  con- 
fpiciuntur,  hinc  inde,  nonnull  at  Romanorum  Notae 
Vulgares  ab  Emendatore  pofteriore  pofitze ;  eo 
fcilicet  animo,  ut  Loca  magis  notatu  digna  faci- 
liusinvenirentur,  v.  g. 

f-  feu  Spiritus  Afper,  initium  Ledlionis  ftcpinime 
monftrat,  QuA  quidem  Nota  ut  e  Tabulis  Gru- 
terianis  colligo,  fubintellexerunt  vocem  hic.  vide 
foil.  35.  b.  66.  b.  72.  73.  b.  &c. 
b  me  judice,  fignificabat  bonum.  313. 

qua:  fere  paflim  in  marginibus  cernitur,  ut  vi- 
detur,  fignificabat  Gratiofum.  Et  denotat  be- 
nignius  aliquod  Di&um  aut  Factum  j  ratione  tarn 
Dei  Patris,  Jefu  Chrifti  Salvatoris,  quam  hominum 
quorumeunque.  v id.  folia  19.  40.  b.  41.  b.  43.  b. 
70.  b.  71.  b.  74.  75.  8 1 .  be. 
l-V*  fol.  82.  b.  hoc  fplendidum. 

£^7  fol.  2 66.  forte  fignificabant  fplendide  dictum 
hoc. 

'1V£  fol.  296-  inipfo  Textu  i.  e.  BO~ABUN  - 
BABTT  quae  verbain  Sacro  Textu defiderabantur. 
fol.  241.  b.  habentur  et  alite  Notat,  e  quibus  pri- 
ores  a  moderno  Bibliopcgo  exfeindebantur. 

1776. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  4to,  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  A  Copie  of  the  prefident  of  the  moft  Honourable 

Order  of  the  "Garter,  for  the  Lyvery  of  the  faid  Nobel 
Order,  founded  in  the  Caftle  of  Windfor  by  the  moft 
excellent  Prince  King  Edward  the  Third,  late  King  of 
England.  1. 

2.  The  Nomber  of  Knights  limited  to  the  Orders  of 

St.  George,  St.  Michell,  &  the  Toyfone.  2. 

3.  Thinges  to  be  prepared  for  the  Inftallation  of  a 

Knight  of  the  Garter.  1.  b. 

4.  Dewtyes  to  be  paide  by  the  Knights  of  the  Garter 
at  theire  Inltalacion  at  Windfor,  after  their  Eftates.  3. 

5.  Dewtyes  to  be  paide  by  every  Knight  of  the  Garter 

at  his  firft  entry.  3,b. 

Cat.  Har.i„  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1776. 

6.  Dewties  to  be  paid  for  the  Soules  Healthes  of  every 
Knight  of  the  Garter  after  there  degree.  3.  b. 

7-  Charges  belonginge  to  the  Kings  Liftennant  at  the 
Feaft  of  St.  George.  4. 

8.  Order  of  K.  Henry  vm.  touching  the  Collar  of 

this  Order,  annoregni.  36.  ibid. 

9.  Agreement  made  by  the  Soveraign  &  Companions 

ofthe Garter,  at  Greenwich,  23  April  ar.n.  19R.  Hen.vni. 
that  the  Kings  Lieutenant  &  his  Affiftants  attending  at 
the  Feaft  of  St.  George  kept  at  Windfor  one  Year,  Ihould 
be  excufed  as  to  the  like  Attendance  during  the  next 
year.  4.  b. 

xo.  ALetter  by  theKinge  to  the  Knightnewe  eleifted.5. 
it.  The  Knights  Oath  new  eleded.  ibid. 

12.  ALicenfe  fora  Knight  of  the  Garter,  for  being 

abfent  from  the  Feafte.  5,  b. 

13.  The  Order  to  be  obferved  &  kept  by  the  Knights 

of  the  noble  Order  of  the  Garter  from  the  Royal  1  Ma- 
jeftie  uppon  St.  Georges  day.  ibid. 

14.  The  profefs  done  at  the  Coronacon  of  Richard 
the  Second,  after  the  death  of  Edward  the  Third.  6. 

15.  Lift  of  Hereditary  Great  Offices,  as  it  doth  ap- 

pearc  by  diverfe  Records.  6.  b. 

16.  Ordinances  &  Reformacons  of  Apparrell  for 

Princes  &  Eftates,  with  other  Ladies  and  Gentle-weomen, 
for  the  time  of  Mourning  ?  made  by  the  right  high  & 
mighty  and  excellent  Princefs  Margarett  Countefs  of 
Richmond  ;  ann.  8  Hen.  vn.  7.  b. 

17.  Order  for  Placinge  of  Lords  &  Ladyes  according 

to  theire  Degrees.  9.  b. 

18.  The  Oath  of  Garter  Cheeife  King  of  Armes,  the 

Seryve  taking  the  fame  before  the  Soveraigne  &  Com¬ 
panions.  j  r  _ 

19.  Articles  which  Garter  King  of  Armes  of  the  hon¬ 
orable  Order  ought  truly  to  be  fworne  unto  1 1 .  b. 

20.  The  Manner  of  the  Creation  of  a  Herauld  of 

Armes.  I2m 

21.  Order  for  placing  of  Lordes  &  Ladies  according 

to  their  Degrees  (as  alfo  their  Children.)  1 2  b. 

22.  The  Order  of  all  Eftates.  1 3.  b. 

23.  Service  belonging  to  Eftates.  iQ, 

24.  Queftions  for  the  Day  of  Eftate,  &  fuch  like. 

16.  b. 

25.  Services  to  be  performed  by  the  Great  Officers  at 
the  Coronations  of  Kings  &  Queens  of  England,  &c. 

18. 

26.  The  Defynition  of  an  Efquire;  and  the  feveral 

Sortes  of  them  accordinge  to  the  Cuftomcs  and  Ufage 
of  England.  This  is  iubferibed  by  Robert  Glover, 
Somerfet.)  2o. 

27.  Orders  of  Knighthood  in  England,  elfewhere. 

21. 

28.  The  Order  r\f  Sword-bearing.  22. 

29.  Orders  in  the  Feilde  for  difplaying  of  Banners  & 

Standards.  22.  b. 

This  is  Iubferibed  by  Edmond  Knight  Noryc. 

30.  The  Proportion  of  Banners,  Standards,  Guid- 

hommes,  Enfigns,  &  Penons.  24. 

I  believe  this  is  not  well  adjufted. 

31.  The  Placinge  of  Great  Officers  according  to  the 

Act  of  Parliament  made  in  Anno  31  of  King  Henry 
the  vm.  _  24.  b. 

32.  The  Placinge  of  Knights  of  the  Privy-Councell 

in  the  Counccll-Chamber.  A.  D.  1585.  25.  b. 

33.  Cafes  of  Baronyes  (i.  e.  touching  the  Succeffion 

to  them)  2g_ 

34.  Services  to  be  done  by  Great  Officers  at  the  Co- 
ronac  on  of  Kings  &  Queenes  of  England.  27.  b. 

35.  Precedence  of  Noble-Weomen.  29. 

36.  Precedence  of  Noble- Men.  29.  b. 

37.  Defcription  of  the  feveral  forts  of  Crowns.  3c. 

38.  The  Signification  of  Swords  and  other  things  at 

Coronations.  3 1 . 

3  M  39.  Apparell 


Catalogus  Librorum 


-0.  Apparell  for  the  Heads  of  Gentleweomen  & 
Ladles  3  i.  b. 

40.  Rules  for  Bearing  Armes.  This  is  fubfcribed  by 

Edmond  Knight  Norye)  vid.  44.  b.  32- 

41.  The  Queenes  Majelties  I  ides  to  diverfe  Honours 

&  Dignities.  37* 

42.  Orders  made  when  the  Earle  of  Huntingdon  & 

the  Lord  Cobham  were  eleCled  Knights  Companions 
of  the  Order  of  the  Garter.  45- 

43.  Ordinances,  Statutes,  &  Rules  made  &  enaCted 

by  John  (Tiptoft)  Earl  of  Wofler  &  Conflablc  of  Eng¬ 
land,  by  the  Kings  commandment,  at  Wind  for,  the 
6th  Yeare  of  Edward  the  Fourth :  for  Julies  &  Tri¬ 
umphs.  fS-  b- 

44.  Of  the  Creation  of  the  Marquis  of  Exeter  &  other 

Peers  the  fame  Day  &  Time.  47- 

45.  Ceremonies  at  the  Creation  of  Walter  D’  Evereux 

Vifcnunt  Hereford,  to  be  Earl  of  Eflex;  and  Edward 
Lord  Clinton,  Earl  of  Lincoln,  14  May  1572.  48. 

46.  Ceremonies  ufed  when  Thomas  Sackvill  was  cre¬ 
ated  Baron  of  Buckhurlt.  S  June,  anno  8  Eliz.  ibid. 

47.  A  Briefe  (touching  Ceremonies)  for  the  Order 

of  every  Ellate  at  his  Creation.  49* 

4S.  The  Names  of  all  the  Nobclls  with  there  ftiles, 
as  they  were  in  King  Edward  the  Sixth’s  days,  and  as 
they  fat  in  Parliament.  5°-  b- 

This  Lid  includeth  many  of  the  Nobles  created  by 
Queen  Elizabeth. 

1 777* 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo,  longiori,  in  quo  conti- 
nentur. 

1 .  Billa  Expenfarum  Leguleij  cujufdam,  fur  un  Capias, 
Si c.  folio  primo. 

2.  Tabula  C.ontentorum  Codicis.  2. 

Sequitur  Colledtio  Formularum  Juridicalium  :  inter 

quas  invenire  licet, 

3.  Modus  obfervandi  Curiam  cum  Leta,  five  Vifu 

Franci-plegij.  7- 

Habetur  etiam  inibi,  Modus  tenendi  Curiam  Ba- 
ronis. 

4.  Forms  of  Letters,  with  reference  to  the  Compel- 

lation  of  the  King,  Queen,  &  allEdates.  26. 

5.  Rotulus  Hundredi  de  Colecedre  tend  anno  Sexto 
R.  R.  Edwardi  iv. 

6.  La  Form  d’Olfice  d’un  Clerke  de  Peas.  36.  b. 

7.  Indenture  fur  l’affignement  des  ColfeClours  D  ni  de 

Taxe.  52- b- 

This  is  an  Indenture  made  the  10th  of  Julye  in  the 
<tth  of  K.  Henry  vii.  bytwyn  Maifter  Rychard  Skypton 
Clerke  of  the  1  ety  Bagge,  and  Sr.  Robert  Broughton 
Sc  Sr.  William  Carne  Knychtts,  &  chofen  Knyghtts  of 
the  County  of  Sufi',  for  the  lalt  Pzrlyament ;  touching 
their  appointment  of  ColleCtours  for  the  fyrll  halffe  of 
Quvndecym  graunted  over  to  the  King  by  the  Parlya- 
rnent  aflorefeide. 

8.  Carta  Johannis  Prioris,  et  Convenes  S.  Jacobi 

de  Tanrigge  in  Com.  Surr.  de  Corrodio  concefio.  54. 

9.  Petition  of  T.  S.  to  the  King,  for  reimburfement 

of  1 9  -;l-  8s.  7d.  which  he  had  lent  for  the  advancement 
of  his  Service  in  Calais  &  Guifnefs.  59. 

10.  Petition  of  the  Widow  of  E.  B.  (who  was  putt 
to  death  by  Richard  hi.)  to  K.  Henry  vii.  that  fhe  might 
not  be  opprefled  by  the  I.ord  Matravers,  who  had  gotten 
the  Lands  of  her  Hulband  into  his  poffeffion.  59.  b. 

11.  Lett  res  Patent  de  1’ Office  del  Senefchalle  de  la 
Duchee  de  Lancaftre  (au  Jehan  Radclyffe  Chevalier, 
Seigneur  Fitz-Walter,  Senefchall  d’Hollell  du  Roy) 

61. 

1 2.  Warrant  fait  par  le  Roy  Henry  vii.  pour  le  Regard 

(vizt.  iocl.)  au  Robert  Drury  Efquyer  Spekar  de  Par¬ 
ly  ament.  75- 

13.  Serement  del  Roye,  a  fon  Couronnement.  75.  b. 

14.  Officium Efcatoris,  Anglice.  78. 


Num.  1777 — 1782. 

15.  The  Office  of  Jultices  of  Peas.  80. 

16.  Forms  of  Bills  of  Cofts,  on  divers  occafions. 

112.  b. 


A  thin  book  in  8vo,  written  in,  and  entitled, 

1 .  Lettre  de  Monfieur  de  Gatine  Intendant  de  Marine, 

a  Monfieur . De  Vigo  ..... 

Septembre  1702. 

It  gives  a  fort  of  Hiftory  of  thfe  Voyage  of  Monfr. 
de  Chateau-regnault  from  Brefl  to  Weft  Indies,  and  fo 
back  again  to  Vigo,  for  about  a  twelvemonth  :  and  cen- 
fures  his  conduct  very  much. 

At  the  end  is,  A  Table  entituled, 
a.  Lifts  des  Vaiffeaux  du  Roy  qui  compofent  V Ar¬ 
med  Navalle  commandce  par  Monfieur  Le  Compte  de 
Chateauregnault,  Vice-Admiral  de  France  ;  avec  un 
Abrege  des  Eftats  d’Armements  des  Navires. 

1  779- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  8vo,  recenti  rnanu  Icriptus,  in  quo 
1  continentur, 

Ai uvo-xeowKoy!?. :  five,  Difputatio  unica  de  DiftinClione 
Specierum  Durationis.  In  qua,  iEternitatis  Eflentia, 
Ratio  formal  is  2Evi,  et  Quidditas  Temporis,  expli- 
cantur. 

Authore  Francifco  Boughey,  Collegij  Balliolenfis. 

1  780. 

A  thin  Book  in  fmall  410,  wherein  is  contained, 

A  fabulous  Pedigree  of  Oliver  Cromwell ;  with  his 
Arms  at  the  end  in  Colors;  done  by  an  Arms-Painter. 

This  Pedigree  is,  in  one  refpeCl,  modeller  than 
fome  other  Wellh  Pedigrees  that  I  have  feen  ;  for  it  goes 
no  higher  than  Adam. 

I  78  J. 

Abreif  Compendium  of  Geography  &  Hiftory  ;  written 
about  the  beginning  of  the  Reign  of  K.  Charles  1. 


1782. 


A  thinParchmentBook  in  fmall  4to,  given  (among  others) 
by  Mr  Anftis :  wherein  is  contained  a  Poem  in  the 
Coniifh  I.anguage,  with  fome  rude  Pictures  at  the 
bottom. 

Of  this  Book  the  learned  Mr.  Edward  Lhwyd 
deceafed,  in  his  Archteologia  Britannica,  pag.  265.  gives 
the  following  account.  Tertium  C.odicem  ipfemet  habeo 
munificentia  V.  CL.  D.  Joannis  Anftis  Ar.  cui  et  longe 
plura  debeo  ;  mihi,  ob  expertam  omni  occafione  bene- 
volentiam  Sc  tequanimitatem,  fumma  obfervantia  colendi. 
Poema  exhiDet  de  Domini  Noftri  Jefu  Chrifti  Paifione 
&  RefurreCtione,  in  membranaferiptum  ;  at  quando  vel 
quo  Authore,  cuni  et  Titulo  et  Fine  careat,  omnino 
incertum;  quamvis  hoc  Exemplar  feculo  Decimo-qumto 
ex  Chirographo  tribuendum. 

I  have  heard  Mr.  Anftis  fay,  that  he  procured  this 
Poem  to  be  tranflated  into  Englilh  ;  and  that  he  lent  the 
fame  Tranflation  to  Mr.  Lhwyd,  who  did  not  return  it. 

This  Book,  although  perhaps  uot  confiderable  for 
the  matter,  is  a  Rarity,  becaufe  of  the  language;  wherein 
few  written  books  do  now  remain.  I  have  ieen  no  more 
than  thefe,  befide  this. 

1.  Three  Interludes  written  upon  Parchment,  in 
the  Bodleyan  Library.  B.  40.  Art. 

2.  Another  Interlude  written  upon  Paper  A.  D- 
1611.  in  the  fame  Library.  Arch.  B.  31. 

3.  A  Vocabulary  Cornifh  &  Latin,  near  600  Years 
old,  in  the  Cottonian  Library,  Vesp.  A.  14  er- 
roneoufly  entituled  Vocabularium  Latino-Wal- 
licum. 

4.  A 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae.  227 


Num.  1782 — 1786. 

4.  A  recent  Copie  of  the  Interlude  abovementioned 
(No.  2.)  collated  with  the  Bodleyan  Book  by 
Mr.  Edward  Lhwyd ;  whereunto  is  added  ail 
Englilh  Verfionof  the  lame  by  Mr.  JohnKeigwyn, 
lately  given  by  Mr.  Mofes  Williams.  No.  1867. 

1783- 

A  Book  in  4to,  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Maximes  of  the  Lawe,  written  by  Sir  Francis 
Bacon  ;  and  by  him  inferibed  to  Queen  Elizabeth, 

8  January  1596. 

2.  Some  other  Obfervations  relating  to  the  Law,  at 
the  end  of  the  Book. 

1784. 

A  modern  Book,  in  4to,  containing  Ab (tracts  of  Four 
Sermons  preached  by  Mr.  (Cotton  ?)  Mather  in  De¬ 
cember  1693.  &foon  after.  (I  fuppofe  he  might  be 
an  Independant  or  Brownift.) 

1785. 

A  parchment  Book  in  8vo,  written  by  divers  han^s 
partly  in  Englilh,  Sc  partly  in  Latin  ;  wherein  are 
contained. 

1.  Opufculum  Kalendarij  ad  Meridiem  Univerfi- 

tatis  Oxon.  compofitum  a  Fratre  Johanne  Somers 
Ordinis  Minorum  :  circa  A.  D.  1443.  1. 

Herein,  1  find  written  by  Robert  Robynfon  Ci¬ 
tizen  of  London  (befides  leffer  notes) 

2.  To  know  the  tru  Age  of  the  Mone.  3.  b. 

3.  To  know  the  Pa£t  (i.  e.  Epa£t.)  4. 

4.  Regula  de  Mutacione  Lune.  4.  b. 

5.  Quo  tempore  claudetur  Alleluja.  5.  b. 

6.  Ad  feiendum  diem  Pafce  cujullibet  anni.  6. 

7.  The  Value  of  dyverfe  Coyny6  of  Golde,  goyng 

in  Spayne.  16.  &  16.  b. 

8.  The  Statute  of  the  Forreft  of  Waltham,  for  thofe 

that  have  Free-hold  in  the  Purlwfe.  16.  b. 

9.  Figure  (or  Table)  for  to  knowe  in  what  Sygne 

the  Mone  is  every  day,  &c.  1 7. 

10.  Directions  for  fetting  of  Trees.  18. 

1 1 .  The  more  perlitt  good  Table  to  know  what  Signe 

the  Mone  is.  18.  b. 

1 2.  Tabula  indicans  locum  Lune ;  fcilicet  in  quo 
Signo  Cirauli  Zodiaci  Luna  fit  omni  die  ;  et  in  qua 
parte  Humani  Corporis  ipfa  Luna  dominatur  in  Signis 
correfpondentibus  illis  membris  corporis.  19. 

Then  follow, 

13.  Tra&atus  Godfridifuper  Palladium.  20. 

This  is  an  Englilh  ExtraCt  from  Palladius  Rurilius 

de  Agricultura;  and  is  found  in  other  Libraries  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  following  TraCt. 

14.  TraCtatus  Nicholai  Bollarde.  46. 

This  is  alio  in  old  Englifh,  and  treateth  concerning 

the  Ordering  of  Trees. 

Now  follow  feme  other  Notes  of  the  above-men¬ 
tioned  Robert  Robinfon,  viz. 

15.  About  ordering  Saffron.  53.  b.  &  54. 

16.  Whentocutt  Vines.  54. 

17.  To  take  Fifli.  54- b. 

1  b.  Short  Memorandums  of  his  Life  Sc  Old  Age. 

ibid. 

1 9.  To  lay  Rofes.  ibid. 

20.  To  plant  a  quick-fett  Hedge.  ibid. 

21.  To  know  the  time  of  the  Moon’s  changing.  In 
the  infide  of  the  Cover. 

1786. 

A  Book  in  Svo,  (which  formerly  belonged  to  Sir 
Edward  Harley)  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  Copie  of  a  Tract  written  by  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax 
General  for  the  Parliament  again!!  King  Charles  x.  & 


Num.  1786 — 1795* 

by  him  entituled,  Short  Memorialls  of  fome  things  to 
be  cleared  during  my  Command  in  the  Army.  1. 

2.  Copie  of  another  Tract  written  by  the  fame,  & 
entituled,  A  fhort  Memoriall  of  the  Northern  Actions 
during  the  War  there,  from  the  Year  1642.  till  1643. 

31. 

3.  An  Epitaph  made  by  his  Grace  George  Villiers 
Duke  of  Buckingham,  on  the  deceafed  Thomas  Lord 
Fairfax. 

1787. 

Codex  pergamenus  in  8vo,  diverfis  manibus  feriptus ; 
in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Summa  Raimundi  de  Penna — forti  de  Cafibus 

Poenitentialibus  ;  five  de  Poenitentia  ct  Matriinonio, 
Libris  4.  1 . 

2.  Tra&atus  Magiltri  Hugonis  de  SanCto-Victore,  de 

Meditatione.  jgi. 

3.  Liber  ejufdem  Hugonis  de  Virtute  Orationis. 

182.  b. 

4.  Tituli  Decretalium,  cum  aliquibus  Expofuionibus 

eorundem,  fecundum  Gaufrcdum.  186. 

Gaufredus  ilte  forfan  fuit  Calfridus  de  Trano,  qui 
Summam  feripferit  in  Titulos  Decretalium. 

5.  Axiomata  Juris  Canonici  ;  cum  e:>plicationibus. 

»94-b* 

6.  De  34  Caulis  quibus  vitiatur  Elcctio.  109. 

7.  Index  Materiarum  in  fuperiore  Summa  Raimundi 

de  Penna-forti  contentarum.  200. 

1788. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  Svo,  in  quo  continentur, 

Summa  Raimundi  de  Penna-forti  vie  Cafibus  Poeni- 
tentialibus,  et  de  Matrimonio  ;  calce  mutila. 

1789. 

A  thin  Book  in  Svo,  thus  entituled, 

1.  A  Lift  of  the  Knights,  Citizens,  &  Burgeffes  of 

the  Parliament  began  at  Weftminfter,  die  Sixtli  of  Fe¬ 
bruary  and  diffolved  1 1  November  1701. 

2.  And  of  the  Parliament  began  at  Weftminfter  the 
30th  Lecember  1701. 

The  Honble.  Robert  Harley  Efq;  Speaker. 

179°. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  8vo,  in  quo  feribuntur, 

1 .  Oratio  in  laudem  Rhetorical  ;  habita  Oxonij  3 
die  Decembris  Anno  1657.  ab  ejufdem  Prade£tore  Ri* 
chardo  Byfield. 

2.  Ejuldem  Colle£tanca  e  Marfilio  Ficino,  Plotino, 
Arriano,  Maximo  f  yrio,  Plutarcho,  Platone,  ix  Timreo 
Locro. 

1  791* 

A  thin  Book  in  Svo,  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Lift  of  the  Knights,  Citizens  & 
Burgeffes,  &c.  of  the  Parliament  began  at  Weftminfter 
the  6th  of  February  1701.  'Ihe  Honble.  Robert  i  I  al  ley 
Efq;  Speaker. 

2.  An  Alphabet  of  the  Places  that  have  thp  Pi  ivilege 
of  Election ;  with  the  Names  annex’d  of  the  Knights, 
Citizens,  &  Burgeffes  of  the  Parliament,  began  at  Weft¬ 
minfter  the  6th  day  of  February  ■  701. 

3.  Number  of  Places  for  each  County  that  have  the 
Privilege  of  Election  ;  together  with  the  Number  of 
Perfons  ele&ive. 

4.  Members  elefled  by  virtue  of  the  Speakers  War¬ 
rants,  &c.  fince  the  fixth  of  February  1701.  to  fill  up 
fuch  Vacancies  as  happen  during  this  prefent  Parliament. 

7  *  An 


2  2.8 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.1792 — 1797- 
r792- 

An  Italian  Mufick  Book  in  long  4(0,  (bought  of  me) 
and  thus  entituled. 

Inter  medio  a  cinque  con  Inftromenti;  Rinaldo, 
Armida,  Ubaldo,  Carlo,  eNinfa:  Mufica  del  Signor 
AlefTandro  Melani,  Parole  del  Sigr.  Pietro  Cenciani. 

The  Mufick  is  finely  compofcd,  Melani  having 
been  a  great  Mailer  in  his  time.  The  book  is  well 
written,  by  an  Italian  hand,  and  is  illuminated  at  the 
beginning. 

1793- 

Codex  membranaceus.  in  .[.to,  min.  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  SS.  Biblia  Vulgata:  Kditionis  (excepto  Pfalterio,  et 
initio  Libri  Parabolarum  Salomonis,  qua  defiderantur. 

2.  Interpretatio  Nominum  Propriorum  Biblicorum.) 
In  1  Joh.  v.  7.  verba  “  Et  hij  tres  unum  funt,”  poll 

«  Pater,  Filius,  et  Spiritus  Sau&us,”  defunt. 

1  794- 

Codex  chartaceus  (ac  fere  recens)  in  8vo,  in  quo  con¬ 
tinentur, 

Difputationcs  varim  Theological,  feflinante  calamo 
feriptm,  et  Capite  truncataa. 


1  795- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  8vo,  manu  cujufdam  Thomas 
Cautoni  deferiptus  A.  D.  1656.  in  quo  compleftun- 
tur  traclatuli  infequentes  Rabbinici  Hebraice,  & 
Latine.  fell. 

1.  i»an  rDDD  Traaatus  jugis  Sacraficij,  cum  ver- 

fione  Robert!  Sheringhamij.  1.  b. 

2.  N'OV  nDDD  Tractatus  Diei  Expiationis,  exverfione 

ejufdem.  20.  b. 

3.  rri."LS  Capitula  Patrum,  ex  VerfioneFrancifci 

Tayleri  Angli.  42.  b. 

4.  p-nn;0  fDDO  Codex  Sanhedrin,  five  de  Synedrijs 

et  Judicijs  Capitalibus  Hebrzeorum  ;  ex  verfione  Johannis 
Coch  Bremenfis.  85.  b. 

5.  rri  rDD2  Codex  Maccoth,  cum  Verfione  ejufdem. 

1 18.  b. 

1:796. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  Svo.  quern  Illuftriflimo  Do¬ 
mino  meo  dono  dedit  Rcverendus  in  Chrifto  Pater 
Willelmus  Nichollonus  Epifcopus  Carliolenfis.  In 
illo  continentur, 

1.  Notitia  quinque  Exemplirium  Legum  Flowelis 

cognomento  Dha  Wallenfium  Regis,  in  Cottoniana 
Bibliothecae  confervatorum  ;  e  quibus,  quatuor  Wal- 
iicc  feribuntur,  Latine  unicum  :  manu  ejufdem  dotliflimi 
Prsefulis.  1 . 

2.  Nomen  prifei  poflefforis  prsefentis  C.odicis.  2.  b. 

3.  Adnotationes  brevicuke  de  duodecim  Apoftolis  ; 

manu  recentiore.  3.  b. 

4.  Voces  nonnulls  Wallies,  in  Legibus  Howelis  oc- 

lem  manu.  3,  b. 

5.  Compendium  Legum  Ilowelis  Boni  filij  Kadell 

riptum. 

In  illo  cernuntur  quam-plurima  verba  Wallica,  quo¬ 
rum  multa  glofiantur  Latine. 

6.  Nomen  egregij  Viri  Joannis  Davidis  Rhtefi,  cui 

Codicem  dedit  Thomas  Powell,  menfe  Augufto  A.  D. 
1600.  23.  b. 

1797- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  quo  continetur.  Libri 
Miflalis  five  Portiforij  fecundum  Ufum  Salilburien- 


Num.  1797 — i8or. 

fis  Ecclefia:  Pars  Prior,  feu  Temporale,  cum  Pica  fivg 
Rubricis  ampliflimis. 

Secundum  Ufum  Sar.  dico,  eo  quod  inibi  fit  men- 
tio  de  eadem  Ecclefia  et  ejus  Ufu.  v.  g.  fol.  15.  b.  col. 

2. — fol.  20.  b.  col.  2. — fol.  39.  col.  1. — fol.  47.  b.  col. 
2. — fol.  182.  col.  1. — fol.  197.  col.  1. — fol.  251.  b. 
col.  2. — 

Canon  Miflas  incipit.  256. 

In  finehabetur  Calendarium  (quodforfan  fronte  Vo- 
luminis  infequentis  redlius  pofuilfet  Bibliopegus)  in  quo, 
recentiore  manu  notantur  dies  Sanftorum  David  &  Cedde, 
S.  Johannis  Beverlaci,  S.  Etheldrede,  S.  Fredefwide, 
S.  Wenefrede,  S.  Ofmundi,  &c. 

(Ilunc  Codicem  una  cum  infequenti,  pluribus 
ab  hinc  annis  de  me  redemit  Illuflriflimus  Dominus 
meus.) 


179s. 

Codex  priori  confimilis,  utpote  ejufdem  pars  pofierior. 
Continet,  Pfalterium  D.  Ilieronymi  Galiicanum, 
cum  Caniicis  Sacris  ufitatioribus,  Precibus,  Litania, 
nec  non  Milfis  in  diebus  Sanftorum  ;  et  inter  alia, 
Ordo  celebrandi  Fellum  Reliquiarura  Sarifburi. 
enfis  Ecclefia:.  $6e. 


1  799- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  Svo,  in  quo  continentur  (empt.  a 
D.  Petro  lc  Neve). 

1.  Statuta  et  ordinationes  Ecclefia;  Cathedralis  Chrifii, 
Beate  Marie  Virginis  Dunelmenfis ;  per  RR.  Philippani 
&  Mariam  fundata:.  Exemplar  vetus. 

NB.  Caput  fere  totum  De  Celebratiuiie  Di vino- 
rum  (quod  etiam  penitus  omifit  Defcriptor  Exemplaris 
ejus,  hae  in  Bibliotheca  notati  No.  1594.)  Caput 
integrum  De  communi  iErario,  et  de  Sigilli,  et  Mu- 
nimentorum  Cuftodia ;  nec  non  initium  Capitis  De 
Computis  Quotannis  reddendis,  nequiter  avulfa,  de- 
fiderantur. 

In  fine  Codicis  habetur. 

2.  Index  rerum  prsecipuarum  qua:  in  hoc  Libello  con¬ 
tinentur. 


I  800. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  Svo,  recenri  manu  feriptus  ;  in  quo 
continentur, 

1.  Proverbia  ac  Sentcntia:  Gallica: ;  Latine  aut  Ger- 

manice  explicate,  r 

2.  Proverbes,  Sentences,  et  Mots  d’Orez.  Gallice 
&  Germanice. 

3.  Les  Fleurs  de  belles  Paroles,  Sentences,  Proverbes 
Maximes,  Reigles  Morales  et  Politiques.  Gallice  tan! 
turn,  fed  Ordine  Alphabetico. 

4.  Meflange  de  plaifantes  Joyeufctez  des  ennuyeuies. 

6l. 

1 8or. 


Codex  membranaceus  in  Svo,  diverfis  manibus  feriptus  5 
in  quo  continentur, 

1.  The  Newtons  Armes,  with  quarterings,  in  the 
firfl  fpare  Leaf. 


3.  Excerpta  ex  Epiftolis  Seneca:. 

4.  Adnotationes  Theologies: ;  ex  Gregorio  Magno 

Sidonio  Apollinari,  &c.  °2 

.5-  Opufcula  qus  confcripferit  Hugo  Parifienfis  Sanriti 
Vicloris  Canonicus. 

6.  Excerpta  alia,  e  Seneca  ad  Lucilium.  ibid. 

7.  Ex  Auguftino  de  Commendatione  Caritatis.  2.  b. 

8.  Difta  elegantiora  Philofophorum  multorum,  viz. 


Socratis,  Platoi  is,  et  aliorum. 
Sequuntur  manu  vetuftiore, 


.  b. 


9.  De 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


2  29 


Num.  s8oi. 

g.  De  Inventione  Sanguinis  Crifti,  in  Ecclefia  Fif- 
canenfi  per  Ricardum  i.  Ducern  Normanniae.  4.  b. 

Hanc  Legendariam  Narrationem  memini  me  alibi 
le  ifle  ;  ctfi  Hiftorias  Francorum,  et  N  ormannorum, 
immo  Fifcanenfe  Chronicon  denuo  pervolventi  nequa- 
qu.i  m  occurreret. 

Narrationis  Exordium  fie  fe  habet,  “  Defuncto  Wil- 
lehno  Rollonis  filio  Duce  Normanorum,  remanfit  Ri- 
cardus  filius  funs,  qui  per  multas  tribulationes  per 
Franciam  atq;  Normanniatn  in  Infancia  fua  fibi  illatas, 
in  Patris  fui  fucceflit  haereditatem,  feil.  in  Ducatum 
Normannke.  Oui  cum  aliquandiu  in  rcgimine  Ducatus 
floruiflet,  Fifcannenfem  Ecclefiam  a  Patre  fuo  fundatam 

diligent  i  affedu  fe  vifere  propofuii” - 

His  autem  Verbis  clauditur — “  Pars  autem  pur- 
purei  Sanguinis  Agni  illius  benignifiimi,  qui  veteris 
piaculi  caucionem  pio  cruore  deterfit,  a  Clemente  tunc 
Ecclefia;  Norwicenfis  Praecentore  (qui  Sacre  Inventioni 
apud  Fifcampum  A.  D.  1 171.  interfuit)  Sandle  Nor- 
vvicenfi  Ecclefia;  in  Vafculo  Argenteo  illata  eft,  ui  fit  ibi 
Mundi  Pretium,  Salus  prefencium  et  futurorum  :  lar- 
giente  fummo  Pontifice  qui  per  proprium  Sanguinem 
introivit  femel  in  San&a.  Cui  cum  Patre  et  Spiritu 
S.infto  Laus  perpetua  manet  &  Jubilatio  per  infinita 
fecula.  Amen.” 

10.  Nota  de  Pafiione  Crifti,  e  primo  Libro  Ricardi 

deSto.  Vi&ore  de  Tr inflate.  8.  b. 

11.  Breviloquium  Pauperis  de  Septem  partibus  Theo- 

logia;,  per  Bonaventuram.  9- 

12.  Meditacio  five  Contemplatio  Fratris  Bonaventure, 

deD.  N.  J.  C.  62.  b. 

13.  De  Annuntiatione  B.  V.  r$aria;,  IlomilicC  tres. 

73; 

14.  Meditacio  Bead  Bernardi  de  Pafiione  Beate  Vir- 
ginis,  in  Pafiione  Filij  fui  pendentis  in  Cruce.  88. 

Tractatulum  hunc  Bernardo  adjudicavit  Joannes 
Mabillonius. 

15.  Dochina  Beati  Bafilij.  91. 

Init.  t:  Audi,  fili,  ammonilionem Patris  tui.” 

16.  Liber  Magiftri  Hugonis  de  San&o-Victore,  de 

Arra  Anime.  98.  b. 

17.  Ouidam  Traclatus  de  Penis  Inferni.  105.  b. 

Init. t£  Ignis,  et  Algor,  Stridor,  et  Horror,  Lacrima, 

“  Vermis, 

“  Malleus,  et  Fetor,  Spes  perdita.  Vincula, 
“  Fames, 

“  File,  carrereDeo,  Tenebrc,  Vox,  Mors  fine 
“  morte.” 

18.  Liber  Bead  Attguftiui  de  duodecim  Abufionibus 

Seculi.  108. 

Traftatum  adjudicaverunt  S.  Patricio  Ilybernenfi 
D.  Jacobus  Wara;us,  Francifcus  Junius  F.  F.  alij. 

19.  Meditadones,  five  DiSa  Bead  Bernardi.  113. 

Init.  “  Multi  multa  fciunt,  et  feipfos  nefciunt.” 

20.  “  Exortacio  Sanfli  Bernardi  de  diligendo  Deo. 

Sequuntur  manibus  varijs  &  recenrioribus, 

21.  Difta  bona  Senece  ad  Lucilium.  126. 

22.  Poema  vetus  Gallicum,  dequatuor  Sororibus,qua- 
rum  Nomina,  “  Merci,  Verite,  Juftife,  et  Pes.”  126.  b. 

23.  Monita  quEedam  Ethica  fol.  128.  b.  et  130.  et 

recentiore  manu.  134.  b. 

24.  Meditacio  Beati  Anfelmi.  ibid. 

2  c;.  Summa  Beatiflimi  Auguflini  de  Vita  Crifiiana ; 

cui  deficit  prohemium.  130. 

Tra&atum  Faftidio  Britanno  tributus  eft  Lucas 

Holftenius. 

In  fine,  neotericus  quidam  hos  fcripfit  verficulos,  ex 
alio  forfan  Ccdice  depromptos, 

“  Jlic  Liber  eft  feriptus,  qui  fcripfit  fit  bene- 
“  di£lus, 

“  Oui  culpat  manum  feriptoris,  bafiat  anum. 

Cat.  Harx.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1802.' 

1802. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minori,  quem  a  Joanne 
Aymone  in  Ilollandia  redemit  Illuftrifiimus  Domi- 
nus  meus.  Verum,  antequam  ad  ilium  deferibendum, 
de  more,  memet  accingam,  quid  circa  eum  in  me¬ 
dium  protulerit  Vir  Cl.  Ricardus  Simonius  Libello 
fuo  Gallice  edito  (cui  Titulus  Bibliotheca  Critic  a, 
Tom.  1.  pag.  271.)  omnino  perpendere  duxi  neceiT- 
arium.  Citato  itaque  loco  hxc  inveniuntur  verba, 
Cap.  xviii. 

“  D’un  Exemplaire  Latin  des  quatre  Evan- 
“  giles  ecrit  en  vieux  Carafteres  Saxons. 

“  Reflexions  fur  les  diverl’es  ecritures 
“  des  Livres  Manufcrits.” 

“  On  trouve  dans  la  Bibliotheque  du  Roy  un 
beau  Manufcrit  Latin  des  quatre  Evangiles  ecrit 
il  y  a  pour  le  moins  800  ans  en  vieux  Carafteres 
Saxons.  Le  Copifte  qui  etoit  un  Moine  Benedi&in 
prend  le  nom  de  Dom  iElbrigte,  &  il  ajoute  k 
la  fin  de  foil  Exemplaire  plufieurs  Lignes  en  lan- 
gage  Saxon.  Outre  le  Texte  des  Evangiles,  cet 
exemplaire  contient  de  petites  Glofes  interlineaires 
en  Latin  fur  de  certains  mots,  avec  quelques  Notes 
marginales  qui  compofent  une  efpece  de  petite 
Chainerecueillie  de  Saint  Hilaire  de  faint  Ambroifei 
de  Saint  Jerome,  de  Saint  Auguftin,  de  Gennadius, 
et  ce  me  femble  de  Bede,  qui  eft  indique  par  la 
feule  lettre  B.  conime  Saint  Jerome  eft  indique  par 
la  Lettre  H.  Ces  notes,  dont  il  y  en  a  quelques 
unes  fort  Impertinentes,  et  qui  font  apparement  du 
Compilateur,  vienneiit  de  deux  mains  ;  car  les  unes 
font  en  Cara&eres  Saxons,  et  les  autres  en  Cara&eres 
Latins  :  celles-ci  font  beaucoup  plus  recentes. 

“  Apres  le  Prologue  de  Saint  Jerome  on  lit 
‘  Matthteus  ex  Judaiis,  ficut  in  ordine  primus,’  &c. 
Sur  le  mot  de  Matthaus  on  a  ecrit  Donatus  qui  eft 
la  Signification  de  ce  nom  Hebreu.  On  a  fait  la 
meme  chofe  fur  plufieurs  autres  noms.  Mais 
l’Autcur  n’eft  pas  toujours  heureux  dans  fex  ex¬ 
plications.  Par  exemple,  fur  cx  puplicaths,  car  e’eft 
ainfi  qu’il  lit  au  lieu  de  publicanis ,  il  a  mis  cette 
glofc  :  Id  efl  Regalibus.  comme  fi  Publicanis  etoit 
la  meme  chofe  que  Royaux  :  puis  &  la  marge  on 
lit  pour  expliquer  cette  glofle  interlineare  :  Les 
Puplicainstirent  leur  Nom  du  Roy  Puplus,  comme 
les  Herodiens  prenoient  leur  Nom  du  Roi  Herode, 
&  le  Chretiens,  de  Chrift.  Puplicani  a  Puplo 
Rege,  tit  Herodiani  ab  Herode ,  ct  Chrijliani  a 
Chri/to.  Les  Saxons,  autrement  les  Anglois  Saxons 
prononcoient  apparement  P.v/licains,  au  lieu  de 
P/rMicains.  Neanmoins  dans  le  texte  de  Saint 
Matthieu  on  lit  Publicani ;  et  on  remarque  en 
meme  terns,  que  les  Publicains  etoient  ceux  qui 
exigeoient  les  tributs  publics,  Publicani  qui  publico, 
vefliga/ia  exigunt.  Cet  ouvrage  quant  aux  notes, 
eft  une  compilation  qui  eft  bonne  lorfque  le  Com¬ 
pilateur  cite  de  bons  Auteurs  :  mais  quand  il  parle 
de  de  fon  chef  il  dit  quelque  fois  de  grandes  Im¬ 
pertinences. 

“  Quant  au  fond  du  texte  des  Evangiles,  il 
differe  peu  de  notre  Vulgate,  fi  l’on  excepte  un 
tres  petit  nombre  d’endroits.  La  principale  diver- 
fitc  confifte  dans  une  glofe  ou  addition  d£s  le  com¬ 
mencement  de  Saint  Matthieu  dans  la  Genealogie 
de  Jefus-Chrift.  Apr^s  ces  paroles  du  chap.  1.  v. 
17.  ufque  ad  Chriftum  generationes  xiv.  on  a  ajoute 
celles-ci :  0 vines  itaque  generationes  ab  Abraham 
ufque  ad  Ghrijlum  generationes  funt  xlii.  Et  ce 
qui  prouve  que  ces  Mots  ont  ete  inferez,  comme 
s’ils  etoient  vcritablement  du  Texte  de  la  genealogie, 
e’eft  qu’on  adjoute  immediatement  apres,  firiit  ; 
ceft-adire  que  la  genealogie  finit  en  ce  lieu.  Les 
autres  diverlitez  font  peu  importantes.  On  remar- 
3  N  quera 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num,  1802. 


quera  feulement  que  cette  genealogie  eft  feparee  du 
Texte  de  Saint  Matthieu  :  car  apres  la  genealogie 
fuit  un  petit  Didtionnaire  de  l’explication  des  noms 
Hebreux  qui  font  dans  le  nouveau  Teftament  ;  et 
il  a  pour  tit  re,  De  Interpretaticne  Ebr.  nominum. 
On  lit  en  fuite  les  Prefaces  qui  ont  etc  publiees 
fous  le  nom  de  Saint  Jerome  pour  chaque  Evan- 
gelifte.  Et  en  fin,  a  la  tete  des  Evangiles  on  ex- 
plique  pourquoi  il  y  en  a  quatre  ;  parce  que  les 
Evangiles  reprefentent  une  feule  Eglife  qui  devoit 
fe  repandre  dans  les  quatre  parties  du  monde.  On 
ajoilte  encore,  que  les  Evangiles  font  comparez 
auz  quatre  liqueurs,  Evangelia  quatuar  liquoribus 
comparantur.  Saint  Matthieu  eft  compare  au  Miel, 
Matthaus  nielli  ;  Saint  Marc  au  Vin,  Marcus  Vino  ; 
Saint  Luc  au  lair,  Lucas  lafti  ;  Saint  Jean  al’ 
huile,  Johannes  oleo.  L’on  donne  en  fuite  des  raifons 
miftiques  &  allegoriques  de  ces  comoaraifons. 

“  Pour  ce  qui  eft  des  caraderes  Saxons,  dans 
lefquels  ces  quatre  Evangiles  font  ecrits,  ils  font 
trcs  beaux,  et  different  de  ceux  que  le  Pere  Ma- 
billona  reprefentez  dans  fa  Diplomatique.  L’Ortho- 
graphe  I.atine  eft  en  quelques  endroits  differente 
de  celle  d’aujourd’hui,  On  y  confond  quelque  fois 
les  lettrcs  o  &  u.  On  lit  par  exemple  parabula , 
diabulus ,  &c.  Les  dipthongues  etoient  en  ufage 
des  ces  terns- la  parmi  ces  Saxons,  car  on  trouve 
rc  &  e.  Et  ce  qui  merite  encore  plus  d’etre  obferve 
e’eft  que  la  lettre  h  qui  eft  plutot  efprit,  comme 
parlent  les  Grammairiens,  q’une  veritable  lettre, 
y  eft  ecrite  en  eft'et  fur  de  certains  mots  au  deffus  des 
lettres,  comme  on  marque  Its  efprits  dans  la 
langue  Grecque  :  par  exemple  au  lieu  de  phares, 
on  lit  dans  le  manufeript  p  'arcs,  au  lieu  d’ Abraham, 
on  lit  Abraham,  au  lieu  de  horrea,  *orrea,  &c.  il 
eft  certain  que  cette  figure  F  eft  la  marque  de 
l’efprit  2pre,  non  feulement  dans  plufieurs  anciens 
manuferits  Grecs,  mais  aulli  dans  quelques  livres 
Grecs  imprimez  :  l’efprit  doux  y  eft  marque  par 
cette  figure-)  De  ces  deux  figures  jointes  enfembleb 
&  d  a  ete'  formee  notre  lettre  h.’ 

So  far  Father  Simon,  whom  common  Fame  re- 
porteth  to  be  the  Editor  of  this  Book,  and  ttie  Au¬ 
thor  of  moft  of  the  Tracis  contained  therein.  A- 
mong  them,  there  are  indeed  Two  which  relate 
more  particularly  to  England,  vizt.  Capp.  xvn.  & 
xix.  which  together  with  this  Cap  xvm.  he  faith 
(Pag.  270.)  were  found  in  England  among  Monfr. 
Juftel’s  Papers.  However,  the  Editor  not  affirm¬ 
ing  that  they  were  of  Mr.  Juftel’s  compofure  ;  nor 
denying  them  to  have  been  written  by  himfelf ;  but 
judging  them  to  be  valuable  Pieces,  as  appeareth 
by  his  Character  of  the  whole  Collection  in  his  Ad¬ 
vertisement  at  the  beginning  ;  their  Subject  being 
in  his  way  of  Learning ;  and  the  handling  thereof 
like  his  manner  :  1  hope  he  will  not  take  it  ill,  if  I 
believe  what  1  have  been  allured  to  be  true,  namely 
that  He  (Father  Simon)  did  draw  up  the  above- 
written  account.  Upon  which,  having  the  fame 
individual  Manufeript  here  before  me,  I  crave  leave 
to  make  fome  Obfervations,  in  order  as  the  French 
Account  leadeth  me. 

1.  Un  beau  Manuscrit  Latin  des  iv  Evan¬ 
giles,  ESCRIT  IL  Y  A  POUR  LE  MOINS,  800 
ANS. 

1  will  not  quarrel  with  his  Term  beau  as  applied 
ta  this  Manufeript,  although  here  in  England,  it 
may  not  look  fo  fair  or  fine  as  multitudes  of  others. 

JJut  as  to  its  being  at  leaft  800  years  old,  I  muft 
beg  his  pardon.  When  Mr.  Toland  firlt  fpake  of 
it  to  me  (for  I  had  the  firft  Notice  of  this  &  the 
other  MSS.  bought  of  Mr.  Aymon  from  him)  he 
faid  it  was  900  years  old  :  and  upon  the  large  ac¬ 
count  he  gave  of  its  rarity,  joined  to  900  years 


Num.  1802. 

Antiquity,  I  prefently  offered  20  Guineas  for  it. 
As  I  remember,  Mr.  Aymon’s  Catalogue  (which 
was  drawn  up  bv  Mr.  Toland)  reprefented  it  as 
800  or  900  years  old  :  but  when  1  faw  the  book 
itfelf,  I  knew  well  by  the  Charadter  (having  before 
feen  much  of  the  fame  fort)  that  it'  could  not  be 
near  fo  antient.  In  fome  other  Converfations  I 
had  with  Mr.  Toland  (concerning  divers  foreign 
libraries,  and  the  chief  MSS,  in  them)  he  told  me 
that  he  could  prove  this  MS.  to  be  900  years  old, 
by  fome  Notes  at  the  ends  of  the  Evangelifts, 
w  hich  fhew  it  to  have  been  written  A.  D.  805.  to 
which  I  could  in  no  wife  confenr,  becaufe  i"  Jaw 
the  Hand  was  far  newer  than  that  Time.  After¬ 
wards,  when  I  faw  Mr.  Toland  again,  he  confef- 
fed  that  his  Memory  had  failed  him  as  to  the  An¬ 
tiquity  of  the  book,  inafmuchas  Cormac  Mac  Car- 
thaig  (or  the  Smith’s  fon .  was  not  killed  A.  D. 
805-  but  A.  D.  905.  Id  that  the  Book  was  but 
800  years  old  :  but  to  this  I  could  not  alfent,  for 
the  reafon  above  mentioned. 

Among  the  Reguli  whofe  Names  appear  in  the 
faid  Notes,  I  found  (fol.  6c.)  mention  of  Tair- 
delbach  lma  Briain  (or  Tirlough  o  Brian)  but  could 
not  eafily  believe  that  this  was  that  Prince,  (men¬ 
tioned  by  O  Flaherty)  who  died  A.  D.  1086.  be¬ 
caufe  in  my  eie  the  Hand  feemed  yet  newer  T 
therefore  refolved  to  fatisfie  myfelf  about  its  Anti¬ 
quity  ;  becaufe  if  I  could  afeertain  the  Date,  it 
would  be  a  Standard  to  judge  of  other  Books  by. 
The  Refult  of  this  Enquiry  will  appear  lower,  and 
the  Proofs  ffiall  be  brought  forth,  whereupon  1 
ground  my  opinion,  That' this  Book  was  written  in 
or  about  the  year  139. 

2.  “  En  vieux  carafteres  Saxons.”  The  Father  was 
miftaken  here :  for  thefe  Old  Letters  are  not  Saxon, 
but  IRISH.  I  fuppofe  his  having  feen  fome  of 
our  Saxon  Printed  Books,  &  a  few  Specimens  of 
Saxon  Hands  in  Pure  Mabillon’s  Diplomatique, 
made  him  take  them  for  Saxon.  For  the  re  is  forne- 
what  of  a  refemblance  between  the  antient  iriffi  & 
the  Saxon  writing,  in  many  Letters;  both  coming 
from  the  fame  Font,  to  wit,  the  Roman. 

3-  “  Le  Copifte,  qui  etoit  un  Moine  Benedidlin,”  It 
doth  not  appear  by  the  Book,  that  the  Scribe  or 
Copift  was  a  Benedictine  Monk. 

4.  *•  Prend  le  nom  de  Dorn  iElbrigte.”  fie  doth 
doth  take  that  Name ;  but  wrote  himfelf  Mael- 
Bngte,  (about  which,  more  in  due  time)  but  the  Fa¬ 
ther  not  knowing  how  to  diftinguifh  the  Iiiffi  words 
thought  that  the  Prepofition  bo  with  m  the  firft 
Letter  of  the  next  word,  would  make  a  very  good 
Title,  and  the  reft  would  be  iElbrigte  of  courfe  ; 
which,  by  the  way,  was  no  Name  amongft  our 
Enghfh-Saxons  that  I  knew  of.  And  here  the  Fa¬ 
ther  might  better  have  remembered  that  800  years 
ago,  Djmnvs  was  a  Title  not  fo  much  appro¬ 
priated  to  the  Benediiftines,  as  it  is  now  ;  fince,  at 
that  time,  &  before,  &  after,  great  Perfonages  in 
the  State  as  well  as  in  ihe  Church,  even  Emperors 
&  Popes,  were  faluted  Domni. 

5.  “  Et  il  ajoute  k  la  fin  de  fon  Exemplaire  plufieurs 
lignes  en  Language  Saxon.  ”  Thefe  Lines  (which  are 
now  but  thirteen  in  Number,  the  reft  being  erafed ) 
are  net  in  the  Saxon  Language,  but  IRISH.  I  fup¬ 
pofe  the  Father  believing  the  Hand  to  be  Saxon 
thought  the  Language  fo  too. 

6'~  ia7eCquelque!No":sMilrS!nalcs'  I1"  “mpofent 

une  Efpece  de  pvtiteChaine  recuellie  de  S.  Hilaire 

5.  Ambroife,  de  S.  Jerome,  de  S.  Auguftin,  de 
Gennadius,  et  ce  me  femble  de  Bede.”  1  am  afraid 
that  il  any  body  fliould  come  hither  to  fcarch  (upon 
the  nod  Father’s  words)  for  material  ox  curious 
quotations  from  any  of  the  Gennadij  ;.  hat  he  will 

5  go 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


23  r 


Num.  1802. 

go  hear  to  lofe  his  Labour.  For  in  the  Iri/h  or 
more  antient  Hand,  I  have  hitherto  found  nothing 
of  any  Gennadius  :  although  in  the  Newer  or  En¬ 
glish  hand  I  meet  with  the  Name  Gennadius  five 
times,  viz.  at  foil.  28.  122.  b.  130.  130.  b.  & 
1 45.  and  perhaps  fome  of  the  Notes  entered  by 
the  fame  newer  hand  may  have  been  taken  from 
the  fame  ignoble  Writer.  The  bed  of  thefe  his 
notes  (in  my  Opinion)  is  the  firft,  and  that  is  in- 
different  enough  in  all  confcience.  It  is  upon  the 
words,  Nonneayfypaffcres ajfc  veeneunt;  Matth.  x.  29. 
Here,  in  the  bottom  of  the  Page,  comes  the  learned 
Note.  As  nsminitavus ,  ajfts genitivus.  Gennadivs, 
AJJis,  numvius  parvus.  Idem,  paulo  pojl,  hie  As, 
/jujus,  ajjis,  dimedia  pars  denar],  fc.  obolus.  Inflead 
of  this  Gennadius  (who  ever  he  was)  the  Father 
might  better  have  added  Gregory  the  Grear,  of 
whom  here  are  many  Places  of  his  Homilies,  marked 
with  the  common  Maik  for  his  Name  gr.  Pril'cian 
who  is  cited,  fol.  22.  b.  Leo,  cited  fol.  22.  b.  k 
perhaps  at  fol.  55.  Cyprian,  cited  fol.  21.  b.  Ifidore, 
cited  fol.  13.  21.  39.  b.  &  54.  b.  Eufebius,  cited 
lol.  4.  b.  &  perhaps,  fol.  24.  b.  Origen,  cited  fol. 

7.  b.  fol.  10.  &  10.  b.  and  above  Mancanus  or  Man- 
chanus,  it  that_washis  Rime  (for  he  is  denoted  by 
thefe  Marks,  m,  nia,  man,)  cited  fol.  20.  b.  44.  b. 

&  49.  in  both  which  lad  pages  he  mixeth  liilh  with 
his  Latin:  fol.  47.  b.  48.  48.  b.  49.  49.  b.  50.  ^2.  b. 
53*  54-  55-  t>.  56.  and  perhaps  ell'ewhere,  efpeciallv 
in  fuch  places  where  the  bookbinder  hath  cut  too 
clofe.  As  for  St.  Hilary,  I  can  find  as  little  of  him 
as  of  Gennadius. 

7.  de  BEDE,qui  ed  indique  par  la  feule  Lettre  b. 
conimeS. Jerome  ed  indique  par  laLettreH.”  It  the 
Father  wrote  this  to  fhew  his  Sagacity,  it  might  have 
been  fpared  for  a  better  occafion.  Becaufe  ‘in  citing 
Bede,  the  vTiter  ufeth  thefe  abbreviations,  befides 
the  b,  viz.  be  as  fol.  8.  b.  27.  b.  37.  40.  b.  61  b 
62.  6(.  87.  &c.  bea  fol.  12.  b.  13.  b.  &c  and  even 
h.s  Name  at  length  beafca.  fol  26.  b.  30.  k  I  think 
cl  fe where.  The  fame  method  is  taken  in  expreding 
St.  Hierom  ;  as  befides  the  Single  letter  b,  we  find 
3R.  fol.  62^  62.  b.  k  64.  biji  occurs  very  often  as  in 
fob  2.  4.  &c.  and  this  becaufe  the  annotator  when 
he  wrote  his  own  words,  wrote  him  thus  at  length 
bijionmmf  as  appeareth  by  fol.  2.  lin.  2. 

8.  As  to  the  Impertinence  of  the  Notes’  I  fhall  not 
now  meddle.  Nor  do  I  underdand  what  the  Fa 

ther  means  when  he  faith - “  font  apparemment 

du  Compilateur,  k  viennent  de  deux  mains ;  car  les 
unes  fot  en  carafteres  Saxons,  et  les  autres  en  carac- 
teres  Latins.”  I  will  only  obferve  that  the  Letters 
he  agam  calls  Saxon,  are  IRISH;  and  that  thofe 
he  calls  Latin,  are  ENGLISH,  or  an  Englifh  Hand. 
NoTr-  'S,‘nllu  Ua,  fo  find  things  written  by  Irifh-men 
in  Enghfli  Hands.  I  have  leen  divers  things  written 
even  in  the  Into  Tongue,  in  Englilh  Hands  :  and 
have  found  that  in  divers  Ages  the  Welfli  &  Cornifh 
have  u!ed  the  EngliQi  Hand  of  the  Times  then  pre- 
lent,  when  they  wrote  in  their  own  Language 

9.  “  Mats  1’  Auteur  n’ed  pas  toujours  heureux  dans 
fes  Explications  ’  Par  exemple  fur  «  pupUcanis 
care  ed  ainfi  qu  1  lit  au  lieu  de  publicanis,  Ac  ”  The 
writing  of  Puplicani  for  Publican!,  was  according 
to  the  corrupt  ufage  which  crept  in  about  the  time 
of  the  Lower  Roman  Empire  ;  fome  of  the  Relicks 
of  which  ufage  continue  to  this  day.  As  for  the 
Marginal  note “Publicani aPuploRege &c.”(fol.O 
After  the  multitudes  that  I  have  feen  in  MSS.  of 
other  Nations,  even  of  the  French,  which  have 
been  to  the  full  as  grofs  as  this :  I  can  eafily  forgive 
it,  and  alfo  fufpecl  that  it  was  tranferibed  from  fome 
other  Book. 


Num.  Il02. 

10.  “  Les  Saxons,  autrement  les  Anglois-Saxons  pro- 
noncoient  apparemment  fuplkaim,  au  lieud e  pub- 
beams.  I  am  afraid  that  this  is  more  than  the 
learned  father  Simon  can  prove.  For,  in  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  Gofpels  where  we  have  their  own  words 
we  find  Pub!icanur,  Matth.  x.  3.  and  Publicanum 
Luc.  v.  27.  although  they  for  the  mod  part  rendered 
it  by  man-pul  or  man-pulla;  and  fometimes  by 
beojr-ppmg.  as  Luc.  xix.  2.  I  think  I  need  not 
mention  many  very  antient  Copies  of  the  Gofpels 
written  by  Englifh-Saxons  in  divers  Centuries 
wherein  I  have  condantly  found  Publicanur,  becaufe 
here  his  affertion  mud  be  applied  to  the  Irifh  •  who 
with  the  Roman  Letrers,  retained  the  corrupt  way 
of  writing  Latin,,  which  obtained  not  only  in  the 
tunes  of  the  Saints  Palladius  &  Patric,  but  long 
both  before  k  after  them.  Thus  in  Gruters  Infcrip- 
tions,  we  find  many  words  where  p  is  corruptly  put 
for  b  :  as  for  indance,  pag.  150.  no.  6.  (vet.  Edit.) 
m  the  word  Poplico  for  Pvblico.  And  the  word 
1  uplicus  for  Publicus  is  extant  in  fo  many  books 
written  in  France,  Italy,  Germany,  &c.  as  is  need- 
lefs,  and  indeed  would  be  too  tedious  here  to  enu¬ 
merate. 

1 “  Neanmoins  dans  leTexte  de  Saint  Matthieu  on 

lit  publicans , - Publicani  qui  publica,  8tc.”  Tis 

drange  that  the  Learned  Father  fhouldbe  out  here- 
for  the  place  he  fpeaks  of,  is  in  fol.  24.  lin.  1  c. 

(1.  e.  Matth.  IX.  I o .)  where  any  body  may  fee  the 
words  pupbedm  &  puplica.  I  fay  no  more. 

12.  As  to  the  comparifon  of  the  Four  Evmgeiifts  to 
Four  Liquors  (at.  fol.  9.)  I  can  fcarce  believe  it  to  be 
particular  to  this  Book,  or  of  the  Scribes  Inven¬ 
tion  ;  although  I  do  not  think  it  worth  the  while  to 
earch  whence  he  might  have  taken  it ;  or  the  fol¬ 
lowing  Companions  (which  perhaps  might  have 
been  mentioned  if  the  Father  had  read  a  little  far- 
ther)  viz.  to  the  Four  Elements;  to  the  Four  Seafons 
of  the  hear;  tilth  toe  following  Conclufion,  His 
quatuor  Temponbus,  Annus  Domini  acceptabilis 
cum  duodeno  Apoftolorum  numero,  quafi  duode. 
cun  Menfibus  completur."  Becaufe  I  can  remember 
iome  other  Companions  made  by  Great  Men  -  as 
w  1/  Irenaeus  to  the  Four  Quarters  of  the 
World  ;  the  Four  Wmds  ;  Four  Pillars  ;  and  fwhat 
he  took  from  Ezek.  ,.  10.  &  Revel,  tv  ,7.  being 
therein  followed  by  Hierome,  Sedulius,  &  others  ) 
the  Four  Animals  ;  nor  Ven.  Bedes  Rings,  & 
Wheels  ;  nor  the  many  different  Reprefentations 

1  have  feen  of  them  in  old  Books. 

13.  “  Pour  ce  qui  elides  Caradteres  Saxons  dans  lef- 
quels  cesiv  Evangi  Ie  font  dcrits,  ils  font  treibeaux  ’■ 

I  grant  the  Firft  Hand  to  be  well  enough  ;  but  no 
rarity.  At  the  fame  time  I  take  leave  to  fay,  that 

I  have  fen  numbers  of  Saxon  MSS.  (which  the 
Father  here  doth  not  mean)  and  many  Books  writ¬ 
ten  in  Ireland  (where  this  Book  was  written)  fo  far 
exceeding  it  with  reference  to  the  beauty  of  the 
Ihem  ’  aS  th“  “  WiH  "0t  bear  2  ComParif™  with 

1 4.  “Et  different  de  ceux  que  le  Pere  Mabillon  a  renre- 
fente  dan  fa  Diplomatique.”  This  is  true  :  and 
might  very  well  be,  fince  Pere  Mabillon  in  his  whole 

imth  not  given  one  Specimen  of  Irish  writing. 

Jdiff,.L?”  Tr  P  ^  uLati"e>  “  endroits 

diflcrente  (I  fuppofe  here  a  miftake  of  the  Prefs 

and  that  it  fhouldhave  been/'L’Orthographe  Latine 
en  ouelques  endroits  ell  differente)  de  celle  d’au- 
jourd  hui.  This  is  no  News  to  thofe  who  often  read 

fnllvT7  °/d-Kat,1r  MSS,;  or  center  Copies  faith¬ 
fully  tranferibed  from  them. 

16  “  On  y  confond  quelque  fois  les  Lettres  o  &  u. 

On  lit,  par  Exemple,  parabula,  diabulus,  &c.” 
nere,  and  with  what  follows  I  own  I  am  almofl: 

amazed. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


31 


Num.  1802. 

amazed.  I  could  hardly  have  believed,  that  the 
Learned  Father  Simon  had  fo  little  Experience  in 
old  MSS.  as  to  make  fo  trivial  Obfervations.  Surely 
Mr.  Juftel  above  mentioned  muft  needs  have  known 
better  :  fince  he  brought  a  good  parcel  of  exceeding 
Antient  Sc  Valuable  Manufcripts  into  England,  part 
whereof  do  now  adorn  the  Bodleyan  Library  at 
Oxford  ;  and  others  I  have  feen  in  private  Hands  : 
among  which  books  I  have  feen  this  change  of  o 
for  u  often  enough.  The  truth  is,  this  was  one 
particular  of  the  corrupt  way  of  fuelling  Latin e 
( whereof  Caffidore  &  others  complain)  It  frequently 
occurs  in  old  Infcriptions,  and  fas  I  remember)  in 
all  the  very  old  Latin  Books  that  I  ever  faw. 

17.  “  Les  Diphtongues  etoient  en  ufage  dtfs  ecstems- 
la  parmi  ces  Saxons,  car  on  trouve  a;  &  e.”  Here 
1  fuppofe  another  Typographical  error,  and  that 
e  (which  is  another  way  of  exprefling  te)  is  meant 
by  the  laft  Letter.  To  be  fure  the  Diphthong  te  ex- 
prefled  conjunctly  by  wayof  Jugation  or  Monogram, 
was  ufed  by  the  Saxons  when  they  wrote  Latin  or 
Saxon  with  Roman  Letters;  and  fometimes  alfo 
when  they  wrote  with  Runic  Letters.  Now  the 
Irish  had  the  fame  Pattern  to  follow  as  the  Saxons 
had,  namely  the  Roman  Writing,  wherein  the 
Diphthong  JE  did  often  appear,  as  is  plain  by  their 
Books,  &  the  Marble  Infcriptions. 

1 8.  “  Et  ce  qui  merite  encore  plus  d’etre  cbferve,  e’eft 
que  la  Lettre  h — y  eft  ecrite  eneffet  fur  des  certains 
mots  au  deflus  des  Lettres,  comrae  on  marque  les 
Efprits  dans  la  langue  Greque.” — Really,  this  is  no 
new  difeovery,  though  not  mentioned  by  Mabillon, 
as  1  can  fee.  They  are  commonly  feen  in  Latin 
Books  of  great  Age.  Thus,  many  years  ago,  find¬ 
ing  the  fame  Letter  or  Spirit  h  in  our  Saxon  MSS, 

I  took  occafion  in  my  printed  Catalogue  of  Anglo- 
Saxon  MSS.  fpag.  156.)  to  mention  the  way  of 
writing  «•  for  h ,  which  I  think  I  fufficiently  {hewed 
to  be  antient.  I  alleged  the  Authority  of  aim  oft 
all  the  antient  Grammarians  whofe  works  are  in 
Print,  and  would  take  up  too  much  r  om  to  have 
cited  particularly  ;  from  Ifidore  ofSevil,  who  as  to 
this  Mark,  gave  the  antient  ufage ;  front  Aulus 
Gellius,  whoisfaid  to  have  flourifhed  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  Second  Century  ;  and  from  Quintilian 
who  is  affirmed  to  have  written  in  the  Firll.  And 
this  is  high  enough  I  think  :  unlefs  people  will  fet 
me  upon  difeourfmg  of  the  Greek  Spirits  &  Ac¬ 
cents  ;  which  perhaps  I  may  be  able  (when  occafion 
fliall  offer)  to  run  up  higher  Now  the  Afper  Spirit 
|.  being  ufed  by  the  Romans  from  whom  the  Irish 
received  their  Letters :  no  wonder  if  the  Irifh  re¬ 
tained  it.  And  indeed  they  did,  and  do  (till  retain 
it  in  common  ufe,  only  deviating  in  the  Figure : 
for  in  their  old  MSS.  they  draw  it  right  |-,  but  in 
their  modern  MSS.  &  Printed  Books,  for  more 
eafe  ,x  conveniency,  they  exprefs  it  thus  *  by  a 
point  only,  the  Force  8c  Sound  being  the  fame. 

19.  “  Des  ces  deux  figures  jointes  enfemble  (-&-1  ,  a 
cteformeenollreLetter  11.”  This  I  doubt  very  much. 
Every  body  knows  that  h  is  a  Roman  Letter  and 
that  the  Roman  Letters  werederived  from  the  Greek. 
Now  why  may  not  thefe  two  Spirits  h  &  -[  have  been 
derived  from  the  Greek  h,  from  whence  the  Roman 
h  llvmith  to  have  had  its  Original?  This  indeed 
may  look  fomewhat  New:  but  let  us  try  a  little. 
In  the  late  Dr.  Edwaid  Bernard’s  Sheet  of  Alpha¬ 
bets,  publifhed  at  Oxford  A.  D.  1688.  fwherein 
fume  things  are  done  with  good  Judgement)  in  the 
Oldelt  Greek  or  Ionian  Alphabet,  we  find  the  Po- 
tcflas  of  11  to  be  h,  c,  &  ch.  In  G  rulers  Infcriptions 
(vet.  Edit.  pag.  27.)  we  have  the  forms  of  the  Old- 
el  L  Greek  Characters,  as  they  were  found  engraven 
on  two  Pillars  in  the  Appian  Way,  which  were 


Num.  1802. 

afterward  carried  to  the  Farnefian  Gardens.  Here 
(among  divers  other  Letters  borrowed  of  the  Greeks 
by  the  Romans)  we  find  the  Letter  H  in  full  poffef- 
fion  of  the  power  of  the  Afper  Spirit,  as  in  the  words 

HO  o’.  HO  Da  I  io’V  :  HERODO  'HMJc.  :  ENHOP I A  for¬ 
merly  ( as  it  fh< >ul  vritten  iyoStk :  &  hoi  01. 

This  is  fo  antic-.;  as  to  precede  the  Invention  or 
Dilfinftion  of  Long  &  Short  Vowells  among  the 
Greeks.  Jofeph  Scaligtr  in  his  Animadverfions 
upon  Eufebius  (Edit,  1658  pag.  1  to.)  gives  a  Copie 
of  thefe  Infcriptions,  with  v  ry  learned  Notes,  from 
whence  I  fliall  burrow  a  few  lines.  “  Exemplum  tibi 
damus  prifearum  Ionicarum  Literarum,  quas  Hero¬ 
dotus  fnniles  Phoenicijs  efledixit. — Atqui  Herodotus 
tanquam  rem  vetuftiflimam  nsrrans,  fein  quibufdam 
locis  Literas  Ionicas  vidifle  feribit,  qua:  Phoenicijs 
limillitnas  eflent. — et  pag  113.  hta — dim  fuit 
Izn'trvfAoii  apud  prifeos  Jonas,  ut  hodie  h  apud  Lati¬ 
nos,  fungens  Afpirationis  munere. - Sed  tamen 

idem  poteft  dici  de  hta  Epifemo  Ionico,  quamdiu 
ipfa  Afpirationis  tantum  nota  fungebatur  ;  ut  ha£te- 
nus  Latini,  &  Iones  folum  £  tam  pro  Longo  quam' 
Brevi  habuerinL — Igitur  quae  prius  erat  Afpirationis 
nota  xx'i  E7no-«p.oi<  duntaxat,  ea  ccepit  effe  Litera, 
quod  diftum  eft  zt*  J* n'roi^ov  ™  E;  hoc  eft,  op- 
pofitum  no  E  n* ixff.  Eft  enim  e  longum. —  Sed 
quemadmoduin  lublata  confufione  Longa;  &  Brevis 
e,  multum  lucis  et  Leflioni  et  Orthographic  accef- 
lit:  ita,  qua;  an  tea  erat  commoditas  Afpirationis,  hac 
novatione  fublata  eft.  Quia  vero  hekaton  pro 
exccTov  feribebant,  propterea  h  veteribus,  erat  nota 
Centenary  numeri.”  I  remember  that  Bernard  Mont- 
falcon  in  his  Palseographia,  exibits  the  above-men¬ 
tioned  Infcriptions,*  with  feme  others  of  the  likef 
Antiquity  &  Chara&ers  ;  together  with  his  J Obfer¬ 
vations  to  this  Piirpofe  :  but  not  having  the  Book 
now  by  me.  I  can  only  mention  it.|| 


*  l»g-  135- 

ibid,  er  pag.  12?. 

^  e — indiferiminatim  pro  e  &  pro  h  ufurpabatur.  pag.  127.  I 
n — olim —  pro  alpiratione  tantum'  ufu  veuiebat ;  atque  ;  I 
tam  correptum  quam  extenfum,  per  l  cxprefTiun  obtervauir  in  J 
Ionicis  Infcriptioi.ibi  s,  tl  -  of  H  iyjl , -.-O,  »;  i.  si  ir.quit  I 

in  Cratylo,  &c.  pag.  1  ->u. 

Plato  utique  in  Cratylo  narrat  h  pro  z  exprefftim  antiquitus  1 
fuifle  ;  ita  ut  diceretur  i/ti/u  pro  Scio  dixifle  quoque  Pla- 

touem  h  etiam  per  1  pronuntiatum  olim.  Verumquidii.de?  nifi  I 
Vocaletn  11,  nec  e,  rec  1,  quoad  fonum  valuiPe,  fcdaliud  munus  I 
in  vocalibus  cxplevifle  •  quod  nos  ultra  fatemur :  alias  enim  fruftra  I 
inveflum  fuiflet  h,  li  cuudem  ipfum  quern  n  aul  1  fonum  habuiffet  * 
— Sonum  quippe  ut  et  literx  nomen  antiquitus  fervahant  Grxci :  I 
fiquidem  Phcenices  &  Syri  Hetha,  quemadmoduin  et  prifei  I 
Grxci,  ut  liquet  ex  fupradidl is.  pag.  139. 

Hand  equidem  inficiamur  e:t  quorumdam  vetcrum  fentcutia,  11  I 
antiquitus  non  proprie  literam  fuifle  fed  afpirationis  notam,  Vcrura*  I 
alios  etiam  novimus,  et  quidem  non  infimi  nominis  Gramrr.aticos,  I 
qui  1.  h  veram  clfe  literam  alTeverare  non  dubitarunt,  Velius  Eon-  ■ 
gusde  Orthographia.  pag.  2217  -  “  h  litera  tanquam  loans  magis  1 
fit  quam  litera,  &  aceid.  as  litera  ....  (Male  diffimulant  I 
editi  lacunam  hie  fubefle)  Et  utuntur  au&oritate  Grxcorum,fl 
apud  quos  ut  fupervacua  fublata  eft.  Fuifle  tamen  Sc  apud  illos,  I 
tnanifcllum  eft  ex  veteribus  feriptis,  &  ex  eo  quod  hodie,  quuml 
apud  illos  Numeri  prima  Temper  litera  nominis,  quo  figiiificantur,  J 
notentur,  ut  aha  A,  co-t, xv.t  I  ,  fic  H  .  R  j  ON,  h  notetur. 
Unde  apparct  hanc  literam  loco  afpirationis  non  fuifle  :  alioquin 
per  e  notaretur.”  Differt.  de  prife.  Gicec.  Sc  Lat.  literis,  in  fine 
Palatograph,  pag.  566.  col.  b. 

||  -  Sic  h  apud  vetuftibres  Grxcos,  non  Litercc  (quod 

eruditis  notum)  fed  Adfpirationis  SignumextitifTe.  adfpiratis  proj 
inde  Vocalibus  vulgo,  Romanorum  more,  priepolitum,  proban 
etiamnum  Nummi  antiquifllmi  Sicilia-  urbis  Himerje,  in  quibu* 

11  illo  officio  fungitm  ;  inferiptis  utique  himeraion  Sc  himermB 
quum  alij  rurfus,more  fcilicct  poftea  recepto  FMEl'A  Sc  iMEPAintfl 
prsferant.  Nec  aliter  in  Nummis  Selinontiorum  ejufdem  Inf  lire, f 
liTTAX  pro  TV  -T. — Eodem  referenda  Scriptura  in  Niimmo  lill'-l 
MENU!..  apud  Goltzium  ;  quam  ignoratione  vetulli  hinus  morisl 
frufta  refingere  voluit  Noniiiusj  et  ex  qua  liquet  adlpirandaffS 
hanc  Voccm  apud  A 118 ores,  Stepbanum  aliofq  ;  qutcl 

cum  leni  vulgo  in  ijs  occurrit.  Ezech.  Spannein.  de Prseft.  &  Ufu  . 
Num. 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


2 


33 


Num.  1802. 

By  what  is  above  written,  it  may  appear,  that  the 
H  had  the  Sound  of  the  Afper  Spirit,  and  being  with 
other  Greek  Letters  borrowed  by  the  Romans,  con¬ 
tinued  to  have  the  fame  Poteftas  among  them  in  all 
ages,  as  it  doth  among  us  to  this  day,  in  as  much 
as  our  Anceftors  borrowed  the  Roman  Letters.  But 
among  the  Greeks,  the  matter  went  otherwife  ;  for 
in  procefs  of  time,  when  certain  of  the  Greek  Vow¬ 
els  were  diftinguilhed  into  long  &  Ihort,  the  Let¬ 
ter  e  which  before  had  been  ufed  both  as  long  & 
Ihort,  was  now  to  be  ufed  as  a  Short  Vowel  only  : 
and  theH  which  before  was  no  Vowel,  was  for  the 
future  to  denote  the  Longer  e.  After  this,  it  may 
be  eafily  conceived  that  the  Lofs  of  the  Afpirate  was 
apparent,  and  that  therefore  the  Grammarians  di¬ 
viding  the  h,  applied  the  Right  hall  of  it  p  to  fuch 
Letters  where  an  Afpirate  was  neceffary,  and  the 
Left  half  or  -j  where  no  fuch  Sound  was  required  ; 
6r  where  the  f.  might  have  been  put  in  a  wrong 
place.  This  1  think  may  fuffice  to  (hew,  that  in  all 
probability,  the  Spirits  \-  Sc  were  taken  from  h,  & 
not  h  from  them. 

The  remaining  part  of  the  Chapter  not  relating  to 
the  Book  in  hand,  1  forbear  any  confideration  upon  it. 

So  far  with  regard  to  Father  Simon  &  his  Re¬ 
marks  on  this  Book :  Now  I  (hall  proceed  to  give 
fome  Ihort  account  of  it,  waving  tliofe  few  parti¬ 
culars  which  have  been  obferved  by  him.  It  be- 
ginneth  thus, 

1.  Orditur  Prologus  Canonum  quatuor  Evangelio- 

rum  decern  minuationibus,  vel  articulationibus  dif- 
tinftorum.  fol.  2.  lin.  1.  quos  llironimus  Damafo 
flagitante,  conftruxir.  1. 

Incip.  “  Novum  opus  facere  me  cogis.” 

In  this  Page,  and  in  divers  others  that  follow,  fome 
of  the  Notes  are  rafed  off  the  Parchment : 

2.  Argumentum  Evangelij  Matthei.  3. 

Incip.  e‘  Matheus  ex  Judeis.” 

Nota  in  fuperiore  margine.  Argumenta  dicuntur 
quae  caufas  oftendunt,  et  ex  brevitate  Sermonum 
Senfum.  Argumentum  nunquam  Teftibus,  nun- 
quam  Tabulis  dat  probationem,  fed  fola  inveftiga- 
tione  invenit  veritatem.  Argumentum  argutum 
inventum  :  Argumentatio  argutte  mentis  ratio. 

3.  Genealogia  D.  N.  J.  C.  five  Initium  Evangelij 

fecundum  Matthaeum  ;  cum  Notis.  3.  b. 

This  is  written  feparately  from  the  reft  of  the  Gof- 
pel,  and  amongft  other  Prefaces  ;  as  being  looked 
upon  but  as  a  Preface.  I  have  feen  other  antient 
Copies  of  the  Evangelifts,  written  in  Ireland,  or 
coming  from  Books  written  by  Irilh  men,  wherein, 
although  this  Sacred  Genealogy  was  not  rtje&ed,  or 
mifplaced,  there  would  neverthelels  appear  a  great 
diftin&ion  between  it,  and  what  followed ;  the  words 
X"pi  autem  Generatio  being  illuminated  again,  as 
if  the  Gofpel  had  begun  there. 

4.  De  Interpretation  Ebraicorum  nominum.  4  b. 
This  is  an  Explication  of  fuch  Names  as  occur  in 
the  Gofpels,  as  well  Syriac  as  Hebrew ;  perhaps 
taken  from  St.  Hierom. 

5.  Gloffariolum  quoddam  Hebrteo-Latino-Iiyberni- 

cum.  5.  b.. 

6.  Two  Notes  ;  the  former  faid  to  be  taken  from 
Gregory  ;  the  latter  (which  follows')  from  St.  Hie¬ 
rom,  “  Augeant  Sacerdotes  Scientiam  magis  quam 
divitias ;  et  non  erubefcant  difeere  a  Laicis  qui  nove- 
rant  qua:  ad  officium  pertinent  Sacerdotum.”  This, 
perhaps,  may  be  one  of  the  Notes  called  Impertinent 
by  Father  Simon.  The  truth  is,  in  looking  into 
St.  Hieroin’s  Works  I  could  not  find  it  :  But  the 
Father  doth  fay,  on  different  occafions,  what  may 
be  almoft  tantamount, 

7.  The  Prologue  or  Preface  commonly  put  before 
St.Mark,beginningthus,  MarcusEvangeliftaDei.  6. 

Cat.  Hari,.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1802. 

Of  this,  Erafmus  in  his  Index  OperumDivi  Hiero* 
nymi,  faith,  “  Non  eft  Hieronymi,  licet  fit  erudita  ; 
apparet  e  Gra-co  verfam  ;  et  in  vetuftiflimis  Codi- 
cibus  Manufcriptis  non  erat  afferiptum  Hieronymi 
nomen.” 

8.  The  Preface  commonly  put  before  S.  Luke,  be¬ 
ginning  thus,  Lucas  Syrus  natione.  6.  b. 

Of  this  Erafmus  faith,  “  Ipfa  fatis  arguit  ab  Interprete, 
non  optimo,  verfam  effe  e  Grteco  ;  ficuti  docuimus 
pleniiis  Tom.  hi.”  51. 

9.  The  Preface  frequently  written  before  S.  John’s 
Gofpell,  beginning,  “  Hie  eft  Johannes.”  7.  b. 
Erafmus  writes  of  this,  &  the  former,  “  Falfo  inferi- 
bitur  Hieronytno,  cujus  nomen  non  erat  afi'criptum 
in  vetuftiflimis  Codicibus,  quetnadmoduin  nec  in 
fuperiore.” 

10.  Notes  taken  from  Gregory,  Bede,  &  Hierom. 

8.  b. 

11.  Notes,  wherein  the  Gofpels,  or  the  Writers  of 

them,  are  compared  to  Liquors,  Elements,  &c. 
abovementioned  by  me  (§  1  2.)  y. 

12.  An  old  Irilh  Poem  concerning  the  Twelve  Apof- 

tles.  9-  b. 

1  3.  The  Gofpel  of  St.  Matthew  (beginning  at  “  Crifti 
autem  generatio”)  with  a  fort  of  Interlineary  Glofs, 
and  a  Catena  Pat  rum.  10. 

I  was,  at  firft,  fomewhat  of  opinion  that  this  Catena 
was  not  taken  from  the  Authors  themfelves,  but 
from  Claudius  Prelbyter’s  Comment  on  Matthew, 
where  many  places  which  I  had  read  in  this  Catena 
are  to  be  found,  as  being  taken  from  the  fame 
Authors  (Not  to  mention  that  Claudius  is  by  divers 
learned  men  deemed  to  have  been  an  Irifhman  by 
birth,  and  therefore  was  called  Scotvs).  Part  of  the 
Account  this  Claudius  gives  of  his  Work  (which  is 
not  yet  in  Print,  and  the  written  Exemplars  fo  rare, 
that  I  know  of  but  two  or  three  in  England)  is  this, 

in  his  Preface  to  Julius  the  Abbat. - “  Cumqs  ad 

aliud  feribendum,  ex  pnecedenti  jam  tempore  mea 
teneretur  Voluntas,  ad  id  quod  jufferas  meam  con- 
tinuo  ftudui  dirigere  voluntatem,  et  Evangelium 
fecundum  Matthasum  ex  opufeulis  Sanclorum  Pa- 
truin  ;  licet  non  ad  pur  urn  (quod  etiarn  difficile  eft 
fieri)  tamen  ut  valui  inquirere  atep,  explanare  cona- 
tus  fum,  ex  tra&atibus  Doflorum  &  Majorum  nof- 
trorum,  qui  nos  in  Audio  hujus  Operis,  ficut  Sci- 
entia  ita  et  Tempore  prtecefferunt :  Id  eft,  Orige- 
nis,  Hylarij,  Ambrofij,  Ieronimi,  Auguftini,  Rufini, 
Johannis,  Fulgentij,  Leonis,  Maximi,  Gregorij,  tk 
Bedae. — multis  etiam  in  locis,  ubi  horum  defuit 
Senfus  vel  Verba,  hoc  utcunque  valuit,  explere 
ftuduit  mea  Paupertas — legat  et  alios  ipfius  Evan¬ 
gelij  Latinos  expofitores  Hylarium  et  Fortunatunj; 
etjuxta  Hyftoiite  ordinem  omnis  fenfus  Phyficos, 
Allegoricos,  atq,,  etiam  Ethicos  requirat  diligenter 
ad  purum,  et  tunc  nolle  poterit  utrum  Ego  otiofe 
an  devote,  fuperflue  an  neceffarie,  in  hoc  opere  la- 
boraverim.” — but  what  convinced  me  to  the  con¬ 
trary,  was  the  confideration?,  1 .  Here  are  paffages  of 
Claudius’s  Authors,  either  not  cited  by  him,  or  at 
leaft  cited  in  different  words.  2.  Here  are  many 
Quotations  from  Authors  not  ufed  by  Claudius, 
namely  from  MANCHANUs(moieof  whom  prefently, 
God  willing).  3.  The  lame  fort  of  Catena  in  the 
fame  older  Hand,  extendeth  itfelf  to  the  beginnings 
of  Mark  &  Luke,  upon  which  Claudius  wrote  no¬ 
thing  that  I  can  find. 

I  have  obferved  that  the  fame  Paffages  cited  by  Clau¬ 
dius  &  by  the  compiler  of  this  Catena,  do  differ  : 
I  lhall  now  give  one  Inftance  of  many,  of  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  a  Paffage  as  cited  in  this  Catena,  &  as  extant 
in  Print;  being  St.  Hierom’s  Note  on  the  words  et 
eunaticos,  Matth.  iv.  24. 


.b.  Non 


*54 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num. 

MS.  Catena. 

.h.  Nonvere  lunaticos,  fed  qui putabantur  lunatici,  ob 
demonum  fallaciam  ;  qui  demones  lunaria  tempora 
obferbabant  creaturam  infamare  ut  in  Creatorem 
inducerent  blasfemiam. 

Here  is  a  great  difference  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
Citation  ;  wherein  the  Printed  book  feemeth  to  me 
to  be  much  moie  accurate  than  this  MS.  and  if  this 
Print  be  juftified  by  written  Books  older  than  this 
Catena,  I  Ihall  believe  them  to  be  of  better  Autho¬ 
rity  than  this.  And  fo  in  other  places. 

14,  The  Gofpel.  of  St.  Mark  (with  a  Picture  of  a 
Lion  before  it,  made  by  one  who  never  faw  the 
Creature)  beginneth  at  fol.  61. 

The  little  Catena  above  mentioned,  goes  no  farther 
than  feven  pages. 

1  S'  The  Gofpel  of  St.  Luke  (with  a  rude  pifture  of 
an  Ox  before  it)  o 

The  old  Catena  at  the  beginning  of  this  Gofpel 
breaks  of!  after  two  Leaves.  ‘ 

16.  St.  John’s  Gofpel  (deflitute  of  an  Eagle,  as  St 
Matthew's  of  an  Angelj  beginneth  at  fol.  128. 

This  hath  no  Catena  in  the  antient  Irifh  hand:  and 
eijdeth  with  fol.  r  56. 

Before  1  difmifs  this  antient  Irifh  Hand,  I  take  Leave 
to  obferve  that  thewriter  of  the  Notes  in  fol.  7.  lin. 
antepenult,  calls  St.  Luke  lucunuj-,  according  to  the 
antient  Cuffom  of  the  Irifh  ;  and  of  many  of  our 
antient  Englifo  Saxons,  who  derived  their  Learning 
from  them.  I  have  feen  divers  antient  Copies  of 
the  Gofpells,  where  the  fame  name  hath  occurred  : 
and  fpoken  at  large  concerning  it  in  my  defcription 
of  the  Cottonian  Gofpels  Nnno  D.  4.  Printed  in 
Dr.  Hickes’s  Thefaurus. 

In  the  Notes  written  in  the  Newer  &  Englifo  Hand 
I  find  cited, 

1.  S.  Hierom.  as  af  fol.  1.  1.  b.  &c. 

2.  Gregorius  Magnus  ;  as  fol.  27.  45.  b.  06.  Sec. 

3.  The  Milfal ;  as  at  fol.  137.  b. 

4.  TheBreviary ;  at  fol.  103.  b. 

5.  Capitulate  Arrovafienfe.  ibid. 

6.  Johannes  Beleth  (who  is  laid  to  have  flourifhed 
about  A.  1).  1162.)  ibid. 

7.  IlilLoria  Scliolaflica  of  Petrus  Comeffor,  who  died 
A.  D.  1 198.  fol.  153.  b. 

8.  Galfridus  Babion,  or  Babienfis.;  who  made  a  Glofs 
upon  S.  Matthew,  &  perhaps  upon  the  other  Evan- 
gelilts.  fol.  39.  8t.  io5.b.  1 1 5.  b.  .24.b.  134.  &c. 

9.  Gennadius.  fol.  28.  122.  b.  130.  130.  b.  145. 

&  perhaps  at  fol.  45.  This  man  feemeth  to  have 
been  a  mere  Grammarian. 

10.  There  are  feme  Notes,  fliewing  the  LelTons 
to  be  read  in  the  Church ;  as  at  fol.  34.  34.  b. 

The  Perfon  who  wrote  thefe  more  modem  Notes, 
hath  often  rafed  off  the  Old  Notes,  that  he  might 
put  the  Number  of  the  Chapters  in  their  pLce 
asatfol.  12.  b.  ,4.  15.  ,8.  b.  20.  b.  fee. 

Sometimes  the  Paid  old  Marginal  Notes  have  been 
raled  off,  upon  odter  Occafions,  as  fol.  28.  21  b 
&c.  0 

I  have  before  mentioned  MittcHssus  as  one  of 
the  Authors  who  makes  the  little  Catena  upon  St 
Matthew.  He  is  cited  under  the  Marks  &  ,,,3  & 
nittit  And  plainly  appeareth  to  have  been  an  Irifh. 
mart  by  Ins  Notes,  tome  of  which  are  partly  in  the 
Infh  longue  (as  in  the  lower  Margin  of  fol.  4„. 
fo  other  places)  As  to  his  Opinions,  it  feemeth 
that  he  thought  as  other  Chriflians  of  his  Time  & 
Nation  did  ;  and  therefore  could  not  believe  in 
rrunlubffamtauon.  Thus  for  Example  he  writes 
,SV  “  1’™°  q^tirur  r.  hate  alfumptio  Pauls 
rt  Celias,  Fignra,  an  Hilloria,  an  Senfus  ?  Figure 


1802. 

Hieron.  in  Matth. 

Non  vere  lunaticos,  fed  qui  putabantur  Lunatici,  ob 
dmmonum  fallaciam  ;  qui  obfervantes  Lunaria  tempora, 
creaturam  infamare  cupiebant,  ut  in  Creatorem  blaiphe- 
mite  redundarent. 

eff  j  fraftio  enim  Panis  figurat  Corpus  ejus  fia&um 
a  Militibus  in  Cruce  ;  et  in  omnibus  San&is  iteratur 
Paflio  ejus  dum  patiuntur,  a  Crifto  ufque  ad  finem 
Mundi  ;  fed  tamen  non  ut  fiebant  Figuras  Legis 
quae  ceffaverunt :  fcuec  veroFigura  codidie  iterat  .r,” 
See.  (which  lad  words  relate  to  the  Cuff  -me  of  Re¬ 
ceiving  the  Holy  Euchariff  daily  ;  a  Cuitome  that 
prevailed  in  other  Churches  betide  that  of  Ireland). 
Mr.  Poland  told  me,  that  this  Manchanus  was  a 
Monk,  or  religious  Perfon,  living  in  or  near  the 
Town  of  Monaghan  in  Ireland,  which  in  Latin,  he 
faid,  was  called  Monaca.  Indeed  if  a  conjecture  of 
mine  upon  one  of  his  Notes  be  right,  he  ihould 
have  been  an  Anchorite  or  Ctildee,  as  many  of  the 
Old  Irifh'  Saints  and  learned  Men  were  ;  for  upon 
thefe  Words  of  Matth.  xxiv.  26.  (pag.  49.)  “Si 
ergo  dixerint  vobis  Ecce  in  Deferto  eft,”  he  writeth 
thus,,  fol.  48.  b.  “Si  autem  dixerint,  &  reliqua  : 
ecce  in  Deforto,  id  eff,  ut  fiunt  Anchoritte.  ”  Mr. 
'Poland  (I  think)  laid  farther,  that  he  had  read  fome 
account. of  him  in  Boffon  of  Bury,  a  MS.  of  which 
he  faw  in  a  Library  at  I.ovain  ;  and  of  which  we 
have  but  one.  antient  MS.  and  one  modern  tran- 
feript  of  it,  in  England,  both  in  private  hands  ; 
fo  that  I  can,  at  prefent,  fay  nothing  to  it.  I  have 
however  made  fome  Enquiry  after  him  ;  the  refult 
whereof  is,  that  I  find  none  that  certainly  have  feen 
any  of  his  W orks  ;  nor  do  I  find  any  of  his  Works, 
that  is,  fuch  as  are  certainly  known  to  have  been 
his,  any  where  extant,  hut  only  fo  much  as  is 
preferved  in  this  individual  Book. 

The  Notes  which  1  thought  might  relate  to  him 
are  thefe, 

Warams  de  Scriptor.  Hibern.  Dubl.  1689  Lib.  r. 
pag.  27.  “  Henricus  Fitz-Simon  Manchinanum 
authorem  afferit  Libri  De  Mirabilibus  Scripture, 
qui  ex  tat  in  Toma  hi.  Operum  S.  Auguffini,  cui 
etiam  perperam'  a  quibufdam  tribuitur.  Man- 
chinum  intelligit  opiuor,  de  quo  Annales  Ultoni- 
enfes  ad  ann.  651.  (qui  nobis  eff  652,)  Dprmitatio 
Manchin  Abbatis  Maonadroiot.  Et  Tigernatus  ad 
eundem  annum,  Dormitatio  Mancene  Abbatis  Mene- 
drocaid.  In  libro  eo  de  Mirabilibus  Scripture,  fit 
meni.io  temporis  Obitus  Manich^i  Sapientis’lli- 
bermenfis,  Manchini  (ut  opinor)  noffri  ;  non 
abhorret  Nomen,  et  tempora  exafte  conveniunr. 
Unde,  Manchino  (vel  Manchinano)  Authori 
perperam  tribui  non  poffltm  non  autumare”. 

In  a  MS.  formerly  belonging  to  Sir  James  Ware 
and  now  in  the  Library  of  the  Honorable  James 
Brydges  Efq;  Vol.  xxxtx.  in  a  Catalogue  of  [riff, 
Saints,  toward  the  end,  is  this  Note.  Manchinus 
ob.  2.  Januarij  A.  D.  652. 

.  In  the  fame  Book,  in  a  Calendar,  at.  ianvar.  ij 
is  the  foUowmg  Irilh  Note,  Manchino  aiice  1.  abuii 
fil.  hulaicheis  { \  lats)  ii  artair  Laigen  7  airer  a  bann 
7  ab  eo  nonunatus.  Juxta  ilium  Ecclelia  conffrutf  a 
e.  n  ,  ,™eic  c  lurn»  npmen  ejus  Scoithune 
u.  lig.  Scoth  hi  Slew  marge. 

.  ^ilip  O  Sullevan’s  Hifforicte  Catholicte 
lbernias  compendium,  fol.  45.  b.  in  the  Calendar 
of  Info  Saints,  is  “  Ian.  t.  S.  Munch  bus.’ ’  The 
lame  is  allb  in  Sir  James  Ware’s  Book,  now  in  the 
pofleflion  of  the  Honble.  James  Brydges  Efq-  Vol 
xliv. 

&em  “  re,!lte  Prc!tr  ',el1 10  one  perfon. 

1  he  following  Note  feems  lo  beion-T  to  another 
A  MS.  in  Mr.  B.-ydge  ’»  Ubr  ny,  Vol.  xxix. 
temg  Coheclions  from  the  Ulffer  Annals.  fol.  26. 

7  Monchinus 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


Monchinus  Difcipulus  S.  Dertani  (at  in  Vita  Dertani 
habetur)  Epifcopus  Limericenfis. 

I  find  yet  mention  of  one  Mancenus,  who  was 
contemporary  with  St.  Patric,  Jocelinas  de  Fumefio, 

Cap  59.  of  his  Life  of  St.  Patric  (as  printed  in 
1  horn.  Meflingham’s  Florilegium)  hath  thefe  words, 
"Mancekum  virum  Religiofum,  et  optime  in 
Script uris  Santtis  exercitatum.” — Which  are  alfo 
cited  by  the  mod  learned  Primate  Ufher,  in  his 
Brit.  Ecclef.  Antiq.  Dublin  1639.  pag.  864. 

Ihe  fame  Author  in  his  Index  Chroncl'ogicus  to 
the  book  lad  mentioned.  A.  D.  434. — “Palricius — 
duodecim  hominum  milia  ad  fidem  Chridi  con¬ 
vertible,  ct  Septem  filios  Regis  Amalgithi  uno  die 
baptizavifie,  populoq,,  noviter  converl'o  magidrum 
Mancenum  prsefecifie,  nieiuoratuT”  fi.  e.  by  the 
above-written  Jofceline  of  Fumes,  j. 

In  the  fame  Book,  pag.  969.  are  thefe  words, 

“  S.  Lugido  five  Molvae,  qui  Gregorio  1.  Romanum 
Pontificatum  adminidrante  obijt,  fuperdites  fuiffe 
in  Vita  ejus  memorantur,  Cronanus,  in  Infula  Cre 
tunc  habitans,  S.  Scellanus — &  vir  famdus  &  lapiens 
nomineManchenus.”  And  then  returning  again  to 
ourMANCHANUs,he thus proceedetn,  “A  Richardo 
Armachano  Archiepil'copo  feripta  effe  diciturVita 
Sanpi  Manchani  feptem  Ecclefiarum  patroni,  Ca- 
nonici  Rcgularis  I).  Augudini ;  qui  exemplo  fua: 
fanftitatis  multos  ex  varijs  Hibernia:  partibus  ad 
Chridi  fidem  convertit ;  ubi  per  ipfum  primo 

In  fine  Mattlue 


aedifiedtum  effe  traditur  Monaderium  Canonicorum 
Regulariutn  de  Mohill  apud  Monterolis ;  cui  dotatte, 
donatte,  dedicate  funt  multse  &  variae  glebee,  terra, 
feudi,  vafalla,  defima,  primitia,  reditus,  fruftus, 
proventus,  oblationes,  &c.  qua  omnia  &  lingula 
cum  confenfu  Cleri  &  Populi  rata  &  confirmata  funt, 
&  m  omni  tempore  &  atate,  ab  anno  fexcentefimo 
oftavo  (quo  floruit  S.  Manchanus)  Prioribus  Mo- 
naderij  de  Mohill  fponte,  libere,  &  pie  conferun- 
tur  &  dotantur.”  Archbifliop  Ufher  goes  on  with 
fome  other  citations  from  the  Ulder  Annals,  &c. 
which  being  taken  notice  of  before,  I  fliali  here 
omit. 

So  far  with  relation  to  Manchanus,  who  is 
frequently  cited  in  the  Catena  upon  St.  Matthew’s 
Gofpel,  as  is  above  mentioned.  It  now  remaineth 
that  I  fay  fomewhat  touching  the  Antiquity  of  this 
Exemplar,  which  is  bed  to  be  known  by  the  Notes 
written  at  the  end  of  each  of  the  Golpels.  But 
thefe  being  written,  for  the  greated  part  in  the 
Irifli  Tongue,  I  procured  a  Tran  flation  of  them 
from  Mr.  Poland,  which  he  readily  gave  me  from 
the  book  itfelf.  I  afterward  fhewed  this  Tranfia¬ 
tion  to  one  Mr.  Conry  an  Irifli-man  then  in  Eng¬ 
land,  who  had  fome  knowledge  of  the  Antient  Irifli, 
&  having  compared  Mr.  'Poland’s  Verfion  with  the 
MS.,  did  not  altogether  approve  thereof,  but  at  my 
Requed  gave  me  another  Verfion  of  the  fame  words: 
both  which  Versions  follow. 


— - — - -  fol.  60. 

Oji  t>o  Cfitelbjujre  i)  pejnbpr  b~c  bbjnf. — 

]S  moji  mjfhm  Connie  me  Cajirhaij 
Do  mujibab  o  ‘Cajibelbacb  •  h  .  bjnam.— 

Mr.  John  Toland's  Verfion.  Seaan  o  COaolcone  <Ji.e.  Mr.  John  Conry. 

Orate  pro  Brigidismo  (Maol-Brigdte)  qui  feripfit  Op  Bo  CDael  bjlijre  qui  lcripSt  Iiunc  librum.  ' 
hunc  librum  Lilmoriae,  quando  Cormacus  Cardaigi  Cormacum  Mac  Gartheum  mteremptuni  Terdelvacho  o 
occidebatur  a  Tirdelvaco  filio  Briani.  Brian  magnum  ed  facinus. 


Mr.  Poland  upon  his  turning  CDcelbjujte into  Bri- 
gidianus,  gave  me  this  following  Note. 

“  There  are  no  Words  that  (in  the  Irifli  Tongue) 
enter  oftner  into  the  Compofition  of  Proper  Names 
than  Maol  and  Gilla,  efpecially  fince  Chridianity  : 
the  lad  word  figniiying  Slave,  and  the  fird  Retainer. 
In  the  Times  of  Learning,  the  Irifli  knew  how  to 
render  thefe  into  Latin,  tho  they  afterwards  forgot 
it.  Thus  Maol-Muire  is  Marianus,  Gilla-Criofd 
Chriflianus  ;  Maol  BrigdteBrigidianus,  Maol-vanaig 
Monachius,  Gill-Eafpuig  Epifcopius,  Gilla-Coluim 
Columbanus,  &c.” 

Mr.  Conry  approved  of  this  Note  ;  to  which  I 
fubjoin  another  in  the  late  learned  Mr.  Edward 
Lhwyd’s  Archasol.  Britan.  Tit.  x.  pag.  431. 
“  Maol  a  Servant.  It  was  antiently  (out  of  Re¬ 
verence  to  Saints)  prefix'd  lo  their  Names  in  Ghrif- 
tening,  as  Maol-Coluim  St.  Columbus’s  Servant, 
Maol-Seachi.uin,  St.  Secundin’s  &c.  In  the  fame 
manner  as  Gila  (now  written  Giolla)  in  Gii.a- 
cholum,  Gilabki,  Gil a-phadru  1  ce,  Gileon, 
Gileojain,  &c.” 

Mr.  Poland  tranflated  the  two  fird  words  of  the 
-fecond  Line  Lismoriak,  fuppofing  it  to  fignifie  the 
Town  or  City  of  Lilinore  ;  and  that  the  Principal 
Letter  L  was  left  out  in  order  to  its  being  entred  at 
large,  and  with  a  different  Color  by  the  Illumi¬ 
nator.  To  this  Mr.  Conry  laid,  that  the  Words 
are  fignificative  as  they  are,  and  without  any  rela¬ 
tion  to  Lifmore  :  and  that  there  are  two  Sentences 


in  the  three  Lines,  as  may  be  plainly  perceived  by 
the  punctuation  ;  the  fird  Line  being  an  intire 
Sentence  of  itfelf.  lo  this  I  beg  leave  to  add,  that 
lately  in  the  Ilonble.  Mr.  Brydges’s  Library,  in 
divers  of  his  Irifli  MSS.  I  have  leeii  the  fame  words 
written,  in  the  fame  manner,  at  the  beginning  of 
Paragraphs,  when  I  havefuppofed  the  Subject  could 
have  no  relation  to  Lifmore.  In  the  Irifli  MS.  of 
this  Library  N“  432.  being  an  antient  Tranfcript  of 
the  Book  of  Cloin,  in  Munfler,  with  a  Golledion  of 
Laws,  as  Mr.  Corny  told  me,  the  word  :S  fo  written 
beginneth  veiy  many  Paragraphs,  the  next  word 
(like  that  above)  being  always  written  in  a  finaller 
hand  :  and  in  fol.  12.  I  n.  5  or  0.  I  find  IS  nfy  which 
comes  fomewhat  near  the  fame.  In  another  of  my 
Lord’s  Irifli  MSS.  viz.  No.  546.  being  a  Medicinal 
book,  in  a  Chapter  concerning  the^Adhina,  fol. 
30.  tin.  8.  I  find  the  contcded  words  written  at 
the  beginning  of'  a  Sentence  in  the  fame  manner 
IS  mujV 

Mr.  ’Poland  told  me  that  the  Words  above, 
Caprbdij,  which  he  tranflated  Cardaioi,  do  not 
here  figniiy  Mac  Carty  a  great  Family  in  Ireland  ; 
but  rather  Filius  Fabri,  l'ilius  Opificis,  or  Filius 
Aurifabri.  But  Mr.  Conry  was  of  opinion  that  it 
was  the  Sur-Name  of  a  Family,  and  that  the  per- 
fon  there  mentioned  was  properly  written  Cormac 
mac  Carty. 


At  the  end  of  St.  Mark  is  this  Note  following, 
which  caufed  no  difference  in  Opinion.  * 

Ojf  bo  mcelbjRgte.  qui  yc/ubpr  Ifc  libjf ;  fol.  86. 

In  fine  Lucre,  fol.  12.  b.  is  this  Note, 

Oji~  bo  mcelbjnjce  4  h.  1.  m  xxvui.  anno 

erany  yuae,  IJS)  bajid  bhatiaT  tdp  joerhaij  muiji  yei 
Of  which,  Mr.  Toland  gave  me  the  following  Explication,  afterwards  approved  by  Mr.  Conry. 

Orate  pro  Brigidiano  qui  fcribfjt  hunc  librum  in  vicefimo  tftavo  anno  aetatis  fu<e,  fecundoanno  ; 
magna:  dom.us,  See. 


If 


-i 


3<S 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1 802. 

At  the  end  of  St.  John’s  Gofpel  j  that  is,  at  the  end  of  the  Book,  is  the  longeft  and  moft  remarkable  Note  of 
them  all ,  written  in  thefe  words, 

.  Ojx  bo  COtrlbjnjre  hua  COoelucmm^  i|  j-cjubpt  h~c  lib 
*  pum  •]•  m  NajtOmacha.  Oc;  m  mapp  Oonnchatha  •'ua 
CejvbaiU  <Iftt>ju3  4ip^iall  jio  pcpibao  -1-  im  bhdbam^ 
t>a“  pe  pibeac  p  kP  erf  -i-  ij-m  bba  jto  mdjibaO  Copm cmc 
Capbdij  m3  epcop  COuman  1  ftepenn  ap  chend  in  aa~pjt.— 

4rear  po  h'  p'ijpd  foeperm  ipm  ndmpip  pei  .i-  CCupceprdct 
nfc  Mel  ud  lochlamb  4ibuch.  Cuuldb  me  Concbobuip 
pi '3  Uldb.  COupcdrh  ud  COcclpechlafb  pi~3  COiOe.  fciajuna 
ir  nfc  COupcbdba  P13  ld3en.  Concbobop  ud  bjnam 
P13  COuman.  Cdijibelbdch  ud  Concbobdip  P13  Connacht 
31IU1  nfc-  lidc  nfc  nf  Qudbpi1  hi  comapbap  "paTjuiic. 
bndch  dpcech  6en  le3pdp  ppipf  lebuppa  3e.i:e,D  pji  dp  dnmai 
m  pepibaeba  udip  ip  mop  hacf  erfep  enp  copp  7  ^erdb  tc 


Mr.  Tola  /id’s  Verfion  of  the  preceding  Note. 

Orate  pro  Brigidiano  Monachij  filio,  qui  feribfit 
hunc  librum 

Ardmachiae,  Tempore  quo  Domnacus  (Donnac- 
had) 

Carvilij  filius  erat  Hiberniae  Archi-rex,  anno- 
que 

decimo  fexto  ejufdem  regni,  annoque  quo  Cor- 
macus 

Cardaigi,  Epifco-rex  Momoniae  et  Hiberniae  oc- 
cidebatur. 

Temporeque  horum  Regum  Hiberniae,  fcilicet 
Murchertacr 

filij  Nielli  Balochi  (i.  e,  lentiginofi)  Sczevi,  Cuuladi 
Concovari  filij 

regis  Ultoniae,  Murchadi  Nielli  Seachladi  filij  regis 
Mediae, 

Diermatij  Murchardi  filij  regis  Lageniae,  Conco- 
varij  Briani 

filij  regis  Coimatiae — 

Gilla  mac  Ruari  Praepofitus  Ecclcfiae  S&i.  Pa- 
tricij 

librum  hunc  feribi  fecit  propter  Salutem  corpo¬ 
ris  ct  animae  luae. 


By  what  hath  been  above  written,  it  appearing 
that  Mr.  Toland  &  Mr.  Conry  did  not  take  the 
fame  Words  of  their  own  Language  in  the  fame 
Senfe,  but  differing  in  their  Judgment  both  as  to 
Time,  Perfons,  and  Places  ;  I  will  here  add  fuch 
little  paffages  as  I  have  lately  picked  up  here 
there,  as  may  feem  to  favour  either  of  their 
Verfions;  premifing,  that  I  might  have  had  better 
Succefs,  if  1  could  have  feen  fome  Books  now  in 
Oxford,  Cambridge,  Sc  Dublin;  or  even  have 
procured  the  late  Edition  of  Sir  James  Ware’s 
Works. 

But  before  I  bring  thefe  fcattered  Notes  together, 
1  think  it  not  improper  to  advertife,  that  the  Irifh 
Office  fas  is  likely  enough  to  have  been  appertaining 
to  St.  Patric’s  Church  at  Armagh)  which  Mr.  Toland 
tranflated  by  Propositus,  Sc  Mr.  Conry  by  Vica- 
rius  (although  here  they  mutually  approved  each 
others  Terms}  yet  feem  not  to  me  to  have  been  the 
Latin  Title  of  the  Office  at  that  Place  ;  but  rather 
Oeconomus,  or  fome  fuch  word.  Thus,  I  find 
in  fome  Collodions  from  the  Ulfter -Annals  in  Mr. 
Brydges’s  Library,  Vol.  xxix.  fol.  1.  b.  A.  D.  837. 
Fcirdalach  'Tairdalvach  ?)  Oeconomus  Ardmaccie 
obijt.  In  the  next  place,  whereas  Mr.  Conry  for 
filius  ufed  both  u  Sc  o  ;  that  is  no  fault ;  for  in  Irifh 
MSS. of  different  Ages  I  have  found  f)uam,hud,ud, 
x,  L  o,  all  ufed  in  the  fame  Signification,  although 


Mr.  Conrie’s  Verfion  of  the  fame  Note. 

Date  preces  Brigidiano  O  Mulveany  qui  hunc 
librum 

feripfit  Armachize,  tempore  quo  Doncadus  fi¬ 
lius 

Kervalli  Argiallorum  rex  extitit,  feribebatur,  an- 
noch 

MCXL.  id  eft,  eodem  anno  quo  Cormacus  mac 

Carthegus  Archiep~us  Momoniae,  Sc  Rex  Hibernia: 
fuo  tempore  occidebatur. 

Hi  interea  funt  Hybernite  reges,  nempe  Murcher- 
tachus 

filius  Neilli,  filij  Loghlini,  Olichias.  Cuuladius 
Conchauri  filius 

rex  Ulidize.  Murchadus  filius  Malachite,  rex  Mi- 
dkc.  Diermitius 

filius  Murchadi,  rex  Lageniae.  Gonchaurus  u 
Brianus 

rex  Momoniae.  Toirdelvachus  o  Conchaurus  rex 
Connaftize. 

Gillus  filius  Liachi  ....  vicarius  Patricij 

. quifquis  hunc  librum  legerit,  re- 

petet  Orationem 

Dominicam  pro  anima  Scriptoris - 

the  laft  doth  now  moft  obtain.  In  like  manner  in 
Welfh  MSS.  I  have  feen  IJuab,  Uab,  ab,  Sc  ap, 
which  laft  is  now  moft  in  fafhion.  Of  thefe,  the 
firft  of  each  fettfeems  to  come  from  one  common 
Parent. 

But  to  begin  with  the  Proofs  for  Mr.  Toland’s 
Verfion,  and  of  his  Opinion  that  Cormac  mac  Car- 
thaig  (whom  he  will  not  allow  to  be  fo  called)  was 
killed  about  A.  D.  909,  I  find, 

1.  A.  D.  900.  Cor  mc  dobf  rig  ^  Caffel.  1.  Cormac 
mc  Cuilinan,  written  in  the  infide  Cover  of  one  of 
the  Volumes  of  Sir  James  Wares  Adverfaria,  now 
in  the  Library  of  the  Honble.  James  Brydges  Efq. 

2.  “  The  Danes  about  the  yeare  905  entred  into 
Ireland,  Sc  fought  with  the  Irifh-men,  Sc  flue  Carmot 
King  Sc  Bifhop  of  all  Ireland,  and  the  Sonne  of 
Cukeman,  a  Man  both  Godlie  Sc  Religious  ;  and 
Kyrnalt  lonne  ofMurgan  King  of  Lagines.”  Hum- 
frey  Lloyd’s  Chron.  as  augmented  by  David  PoweL, 
Lond.  1584.  (NB.  in  Humfr.  Lloyd’s  Original, 
now  in  the  Cotton-Library,  the  Name  is  rightly 
written  Cormac.) 

3.  From  the  Book  of  IJergeft,  otherwife  called  the 
Book  of  Margan  ;  tranflated  out  of  Walfli.  1 13. 

“  A.  D.  905.  Died  Cormoc  King  &  Cheefe  Buifliop 
of  Ireland,  a  verie  religious  man,  full  of  Aimes  cc 
good  woorks.  then  C.ulennan  was  flayne.’  Mb.  Bryd¬ 
ges  Vol.  XLVII. 

9 


4.  “  A.D. 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


Num.  1 8o2. 

4.  “  A.  D.  905.  The  Danes  in  reviving  of  the  former 
Slaughter  of  Turgefius,  came  now  agayne  into  this 
land,  Sc  killed  in  a  battaill  C.ormachus  the  Monarch 
&  Bufhop  ofEreland,  togither  with  Cockeman's 
foil  a  religioufe  &  godly  man,  Sc  King  Murigan  of 
Laymfters  foil  named  Kirnaltun.”  ColleclaneaThad- 
daei  Doulingi,  penes  D.  Jac.  Brydges.  Vol.  xxxix. 

5.  A.D.  906.  Sc  907.  I  found  much  mention  of 
“Cormac  m‘Culinen  RiCafiell,”  in  the  Annales  In  - 
isfallenfes.  fol.  86.  MS.  Brydges  Vol.  xxxvi.  which 
I  would  not  tranfcribe  here,  becaufe  they  will  be 
prefently  cired. 

6.  “  Mine  ad  preelium  Mugna,  et  Cormaci  Epifcopi 
et  Regis  Momonia:  necem.  1 7  Kalendas  Septem- 
bris,  feria  3,  feu  16  Aug.  anno  908.  anni  28. 
menf.  8.  dies  27."  O  Flaherty  Ogyg.  pag.  422. 

7.  “  Notandum  Regulos  five  Reges  Provincite  alicu- 
jus,  vel  particularis  Regionis  in  Hibernia,  apud  eos 
aliquando  Reges  Hibernian  falfo  dittos.  Sin  in  Chro- 
nico  Caradoci  Lhancarvanenfis,  circa  A.  D.  905. 
Cormacus  Culinani  filius,  Rex  &  Epifcopus  CafTe- 
lienfis,  appellatur  Rex  Sc  Epifcopus  totius  Hiber¬ 
nia:.”  Waraeus  de  Antiquitatibus  Hibernia:,  Lond. 
1658.  pag.  20. 

8. — “  Bellum  between  Monnfter  8c  Lechlain  with 
Leinfter,  where  Cormack  mac  Cuilennan  King  of 
Cafiill,  cum  alijs  Regibus  przeclaris  occiderutit.” 
Recent  tranfeript,  or  tranflation  of  the  Ulller  Annals, 
at  A.  D.  907.  In  Mr.  Brydges’s  Library.  Vol.  xlix. 

9.  Ex  MS.  quodam  Abbatite  Buellen.  ut  opinor. 
(alia  manu  “Annales  Conac.”) 

“  A.  D.  907.  Cath  Belaig  Mugna  Ria  Laguib  &  Ria 

Leth  cumd  for  fail  mil  man,  in  quo  cecidit . 

Culennan  Ard  Ri  Cafhell,  Sc  Ard  vafall  Herend. 
Fland  mc  Mxil  Sechvail  &  Cerball  mc  Murigean,  8c 
Cathal  mc  Concubar  Ri  Conacht,  Vittores  fuere.” 
MS.  Brydges  Vol.  xliv.  which  feemeth  here  to  cite 
the  Cottonian  MS.  Txtvs,  A.  25. 

10.  Anuales  Lagenienfes.  tol.  19. 

“  Cath  belaigmunai  fo  feraid  8c  Laig  &  Munefcu, 
in  17  Kal.  Sept,  in  quo  interfetti  hint  Conn.  mc 
Culinan  Rex  Mom,  Scriba  opt.  et  Epifcopus  et 
Anch.  et  Sapientiflimus  Scotia:  lingua:.”  8cc.  MS. 
Brydges  Vol.  xlvii. 

11.  Ex  Libro  Balinrotenf.  fol.  39. 

“  Cormacus  Cuilenani  filius  Provincia:  Momonia: 
Rex  et  Archiepifcopus  feptem  annos  feliciter  Pro¬ 
vincia:  illius  tenuit  gubernaculum  ;  et  ab  agminibus 
Lagenorum  pollea  in  preelio  interfettus  eft.  Fuitq  ; 
de  Stirpe  Angufij  filij  Nadfrych  Regis  quondam 
Momonia:  Sc  de  progenie  filiorum  Fleber  fiis  Ere- 
moni.  Deejus  Praftaturaatq  ;  Regimine  feribit  Jo¬ 
hannes  O  Dubhagain  vulgo  Sena  mop  ODubhagani 
dittus,  quiq  ;  Rerum  Hibernarum  obtimus  extitit 
Archi-chronicus,  in  Carmine  fuo  Hiftorico  de  Gene- 
logijs  et  Rebus  geftis  Momonienfium,  incipiente. 

“  Caipol  Ca‘r  ^  ^clam  fmobha  idq;  Dif- 
“  ticho  fequenti  fic  exprimit, 

“  COdc  cyil^nam  cojmfc  mtji.  dip'oeppoj  1 

“  a'F’P’S  ,  , 

“  d  j*eaji  r?4  loit  jiot  nagaill.  5  *rr  r  dn  hoc  jie 
“  laijnibk 

“  quod  Latine  fic  exprimi  poteft, 

“  Rex  fuit  et  Primas  Culenani  culta  propago 

“  Septennemq ;  Ducem,  turba  Lagena  pre- 
“  munt.”  MS.  Brydges.  Vol.  xlix. 

12.  This  fame  Place  is  cited  in  another  of  Mr.  Bryd¬ 
ges’s  MSS.  Vol.  xv.  fol.  65. 

13.  E  Waraft  Antiq.  Hibern. — “  Cormacus  Culiani 
(f.  leg.  Culinani)  filius,  Rex  8c  Epifcopus  Caflelien- 
fis,  in  proelio  occifus  An.  Dom.  908.’’ 

14.  Ibid  pagg.  105.  106. - “  Atqui  Cormacus  Cu- 

linani  filius,  de  quo  nunc  loquimur,  et  Rex  fuit  fi- 
mul  et  Epifcopus  C  aftelienfis.  Is  ftemma  fuum  duxit 
(ut  alibi  dixinius)  ab  JEngufa  Nafrachi  filio  Caffeli- 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


2  37 


Num.  1802. 

enfium  Regain  primo:,  qui  Chriftianam  Religioneui 
amplexus  eft.  Regnum  inijt  Cormacus  A.  I).  901. 
et  (quod  mireris)  Epifcopi  etiam  muniis  obivit. 
Morem  eum  apud  Hibernos,  illo  tevo  viguifle.  Scrip- 
tores  Patrij  luculenter  oftendunt.  Speciatim,  inter 
Cormaci  pradeceftbres,  Olchobarus  qui  obijt  anno 
851.  et  Cenfeladus  qui  anno  deceftit  872.  fimuj 
Reges  fuerunt  Caflelienfes,  et  Antiftiteslmelacenfes.’y 

15.  Ibid.  pag.  107.  “  Meminit  Cormaci  hujus  Carado- 
cus  Lhancarvanenfis  in  Chronico  fuo  Cambria:,  ceu 
pijviri,  fedCARMOruM  filium  Cukhmani  Regem 
&  Episcopum  Hibernia,  five  is,  five  qui  Anglice 
edidit,  perperam  appellat.  An.  906.  Flanus  Mel- 
fechlini  filius  Rex  Hibemiie,  coatto  exercitu,  in 
Momoniam  irruit,  eamq  ;  Provinciam,  ad  Limeri- 
cum  (al.  Lumniacum)  ufq;  diripuit  et  vaftavit.  Cte- 
terum  Cormacus,  qui  tempori  cedens,  fuga  evaferat; 
hac  injuria  irritatus,  annoq  ;  infequenti,  Midiam  cum 
copijs  ingreffus,  Flanum  preelio  fudit,  eumq;  ad  cone 
ditiones  quafdam  obfervandas,  fibi  obfides  tradere 
cbegit,  ijfq  ;  acceptis,  Cafleliam  reverfus  eft.  Anno 
vero  908.  (al.  907.)  Flanus,  ut  cladem  nuper  ac- 
ceptam  ulcifceretur  (pattis  8c  obfidibus  traditis  non 
obftantibus)  cum  Lagenienfi  et  Conatienfi  Regibus 
egit,  ut  conjunttis  viribus  Momonienfes  adorirentur, 
e6q  ;  fucceflu,  ut  maximis  copijs  inftrutttis,  Signa 
advtrfus  Cormacum  extulerit.  Momonienfium  ex- 
ercitui  in  loco  ditto  Mog-albe  obviam  fattus  eftj 
ubi  Augufti  die  16,  poft  longam  8c  cruentam  pug- 
nam,  ceflit  ei  Vittoria,  Cormaco  Regeib  dein  occifo; 
— Sic  Annales  Hibernici.  Creterum'  Caradocus 
Lhancarvanenfis,  Cormacum  fub  hoc  tempore  a 
Danis  in  preelio  occifum  tradit.  Memini  etiam  me 
legiffe  in  Codice  quodam  MS.  bibliotheca:  Cottoni- 
ange,  eum  a  bubulco  quodam  occifum,  ad  Beanree 
prope  Leghlinam,  dum  idem  pro  exercitu  fuo  tunc 
pugnante,  ad  Deum  preces  fundens,  in  genua  pro- 
cumberet.  Tanta  eft  de  ejus  cosde  dil'crepantia. 
Ego  vero  non  poflum  non  aflenfri  tarn'  Annalibus 
Ultonienfibus,  quam'  ijs  Coenobij  Inis-fallana:  in 
agro  Kerriano,  qui  a  ditto  Flani  Exercitu,  vittuin 
eum  Sc  occifum  tradunt. — Vir  fuit  eruditiis  &  Anti- 
quitatum  Hibernicarum  feientiflimus.  Scripfit  lin¬ 
gua  fua  patria,  Hiftoriam  Psalter-Cashell  vulgo 
dittam,  quge  etiamnum  exftat,  et  magno  habetur 
in  pretio. — Notandum  hiccoronidis  loco,  Cafteliam 
fedem  fuifleolim  prgecipuam  Regum  Momonias.” — 

16.  Corm~c  m~c  Cule~nan  ardri  Cafil  8c  ardvafal  He¬ 
rend.  Fland  m~c  Meil  Sec^naill  8c  Cerball  nfc  Mu- 
rigefl,  &  Cat^alm'c  Conc^uber  ri  Cormatt  vittores 
fuerunt.  Ab  Adam  ufque  ad  Cornfc  fluxerunt  anni 
6110.  Annales  de  Buellio,  MS.  Cotton.  Titus. 
A.  25.  fol.  16.  b. 

In  all  the  above  mentioned  Citations,  that  Cormac 
is  never  called  Mac  Carthaig,  as  in  the  prefent  MS. 
of  my  Lord's  ;  but  always  the  Son  of  Culeinan  (a 
Name  fomewhat  miftaken  by  the  Welfh,  8c  thofe  who 
followed  them)  whereby  it  feemeth  plain  to  me  that 
Cormac  mac  Culeinan  Sc  Cormac  mac  Carthaig 
could  not  have  been  the  fame  man.  But  Mr.  Toland 
faid  they  were,  and  that  mac  Carthaig  was  only  a 
Sur-name  applied  to  Cormac  mac  Culeinan.  This 
I  cannot  well  agree  to,  becaufeSir  James  Ware  writes, 
that  Surnames  are  not  fo  amient  among  the  Irifh. 
“  Regnante  tandem  fupraditto  Brieno  (i.  e.  circa 
annum  Dom.  millefimum)  Hibemorum  Cognomina 
five  familiarum  Nomina  cceperunt  efle  fixa,pofterifq; 
tradita,  cum  prtepofita  vel  afpiratione  b,  vel  voce 
ua,  qua:  poftea  mutata  eft  in  vocalem  Oet  fignificat 
unum  e  pofteris  viri  alicujus  Primarij,  ut  O-Brienj 
O-Connor,  See.  Non  paucre  tamen  familia:,  per 
aliquot  poftea  annorum  Centurias  quod  fatendum) 
fixa  Cognomina  non  afTuinpferunt.”  War.  Antiq. 
Hibern.  pag.  45. 


According 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  t8o2. 

According  to  this  Rule,  Tirlough  O  Brian  (as  I  may 
write  him)  cannot  be  properly  faid  to  have  killed 
Cormac  mac  Carty  about  the  beginning  of  the  Tenth 
Century;  but  the  expreflion  may  be  agreeable 
enough  to  the  Ufage  about  the  middle  of  the  i  .ah, 
viz.  about  A.  D.  1 140. 

Moreover,  in  all  the  faid  Citations,  he  is  never  faid 
to  have  been  killed  by  a  Tirlough  O  Brian  :  to  this, 
Mr.  Toland  faith,  that  he  can  fufficiently  demon- 
ftrate  that  he  was  killed  by  a  Tirlough  O  Brian.  I 
fhall  be  glad  to  fee  the  Proofs. 

Nor  can  I  find  any  mention  of  any  of  the  Irifli  Kings 
mentioned  in  this  Mb.  as  Contemporaries  to  Cor- 
mac.  Mr.  Toland  faith,  he  found  them  all,  in  the 
Ulfter  Annals,  Dr.  Keating,  &  other  Irifli  Chroni¬ 
cles,  as  living  about  A.  D.  909.  1  fhall  be  glad  to 

fee  the  fame. 

Mr.  Toland  faith  that  Maolbrigte  who  wrote  the 
Book  was  Archbifliop  of  Armagh  in  his  more  ad¬ 
vanced  age.  Indeed,  in  a  Lift  of  thofe  Arch-bilhops, 
in  Mr.  Brydges’s  Library  Vol.  xliv.  I  did  find 
one  MEelbrigidius  holding  that  See  from  the  year 
884.  to  the  year  913.  when  he  was  fas  the  Lift 
fliews)  fucceeded  by  Jofeph.  But  Mr.  Toland  faith 
that  his  Brigidianus  fat  uniill  (asl  remember)  A.  D. 
927.  then  dying  above  60  years  of  Age.  In  the 
fame  Book,  I  find  cited  from  the  Ulfter  Annals  the 
following  paflage. 

1139.  “  Maribrigti  o  Brolcan  Ep~us  Armac.  primus 
optin  peniteniiam  ;  obijt  4  Cal.  l'ebr  ” 

Thus  we  have  each  of  us  a  Brigidianus  fuitable  to 
our  different  times  :  but  I  doubt  neither  of  ihefe  will 
do  the  bufinefs,  becaul'e  Mr.  Conry  faith  the  Sur¬ 
name  of  the  Brigidianus  in  my  Lords  M~'.  was  O 
Mulveany  (as  may  be  feen  above  in  the  Verfion  of 
this  Note  at  the  end  of  St.  John’s  Gofpel) 

Befide  the  Brigidianus  Arch-bifhop  of  Armagh ;  I 
muftalfoown,  that  I  have  met  with  another  Coimac 
the  Son  of  Culeinan,  in  the  Annales  Inisfallenfes  in 
Mr.  Brydges’s  Library.  “A.  D.  919.  Cormac  mc 
Culinan  Ep~  &  Serv  ap  Lifmore  &  Abb.  cille  mola- 
iffe,”  &c.  but  he  can  do  little,  not  only  becaufe  he 
is  fomewhat  too  late,  but  becaufe  it  doth  not  appear 
that  he  was  a  King,  as  the  Irifli  ufed  to  call  die 
Chiefs  of  their  Clans  who  had  great  Dependencies. 

In  Roderic  O  Flaherty’s  Ogygia,  &  divers  other 
books,  I  have  found  a  Tordelvach  O  Brian.  But 
although  he  was  King  of  Munfter,  I  cannot  allow 
him  to  have  been  the  perfon  who  flew  Cormac  mac 
Carthaig,  becaufe  he  (being  a  Prince  of  great  Notej 
is  known  to  have  died  about  A.  D.  1086. 

In  feveral  Converfations  I  had  with  Mr.  Toland, 

I  perceived  that  the  chief  Argument  which  induced 
him  to  believe  his  Cormac  the  Son  of  Culeinan  to 
be  the  Cormac  mac  Carthaig  mentioned  in  my  Lord’s 
MS.  is  his  having  been  both  King  &  Bifhop  of 
Munfter  ;  characters  which  he  would  not  allow 
ever  to  have  met  in  any  other  Cormac  than  the 
Son  of  Culeinan  only.  Befides,  he  would  by  no 
means  grant  that  Bifhopricks  were  ever  hereditary 
among  the  Irifli  ;  for  then  it  might  poflibly  happen 
that  two  Perfons  of  the  fame  Name  &  Family  might 
the  one  fucceed  the  other  in  the  fame  Preferment. 
As  to  this  matter,  I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  deter¬ 
mine  ;  but  will  rather  cite  fome  few  Authorities 
which  have  lately  come  into  my  way,  and  leave  the 
fame  to  be  decided  by  others.  Firft  it  appeareth  that 
fome  of  the  Irifli  were  Clergy-men  hereditarily, 
namely  the  Herenachs,  &  the  Corbre,  Corbani  or 
Comorbani,  by  the  account  which  Arch-biftiop 
TJlher  gave  of  them  to  Sir  Henry  Spelman,  who 
inferted  the  fame  into  his  Gloffary,  at  the  word 
Corba  ;  from  which  take  what  follows. — 

“  His  Terris  atq;  ipfis  Colonis,  praffeftus  eft  ex 
alfignatione  Epifcopi  Herenachus  :  qui  et  munus  ' 


Num.  1802. 

obtinuit  Archidiaconi  &  nomen. — non  autem  fu- 
perioris  generis,  qui  hodie  fub  Epifcopo  jurifdic- 
tione  fruitur  :  fed  antiqui  illius,  qui  Prefbytero 
inferior,  Pauperes  &  Xenodochia  (Diaconias  inde 
appellata)  curabat.  Ecclefiafticorum  igilur  pars 
eft  Herenachus,  fed  qui  primam  Tonfuram  non 
deprehenditur  tranfijffe. — Coalefcere  jam  turn  ccepit 
Herenachus  fuo  Officio,  fatifq;  pro  Imperio  ex- 
ercere  in  Colonos  fubjeCtos  praffertim  :  dum  Ec- 
clefia  (pia  Domina)  Natos  Nepotefq;  facile  fufei- 
peret  in  parentum  Minifteria,  ut  Levitarum  in 
Tabernaculi.  Sic  enim  hasreditarium  in  Hibernia 
fit  munus  Herenaci,  non  minus  quam  in  partibus 
tranlinarinis,  Vice-Domini.” 

“  Corba  eminentioris  loci  fuit,  atq;  idem  qui 
Dscanus  Ruralis,  Plebanus,  Archi-prefbyter,  feu 
Chorepifcopus  :  a  quo  et  nomen  (barbara  con- 

tradtione)  videtur  fortitus. - Munus  itidem  huic 

(Corbano)  ut  Herenacho  gentile  eft,  puerofq;  ideo 
fucceffuros  Latine  imbuunt,  ne  paternte  funclionis 
incompetentes  videantur.  Nec  miraberis  Corbanos 
&  Herenachos  Minifteria  et  patrimonium  Ecclefue 
hsereditarie  ingreffos,  aut  fuis  fretos  uxoribus  : 
cum  ipfum  Archiepifcopatum  Armachanas  Ecclelias 
Primatumq;  Hibernia;,  una  familia  decursis  jam 
in  hac  malitia  (ut  Bernardi  utar  verbis)  quasi 
generationibus  quindecim  ha;reditaria  Succef- 
fione  obtinuerint.” 

Of  the  Herenachi  &  Corbani,  Sir  James  Ware  in 
his  Antiq.  Hibern.  above-mentioned  hath  thefe words, 

Pag.  93. — “  Mortuo  aliquo  Erenarcho,  ceteri 
ejufdem  Stirpis,  qui  Terras  eas  (i.  e.  Termonlands) 
poffederunt,  talem  e  fua  famiiia  ad  hoc  munus  fuf- 
cipiendum  elegerunt,  qualem  ob  etatem  k  mores, 
idoneum  judicarunt.  Is  uxoratus  plerumq-;  fed  qui 
primam  habuit  Tonfuram,  Epifcopo  prefentatus, 
ab  eo  admiffus  eft  &  confirmatus,  ac  fub  introitu, 
fubfidium  folvit :  fin  ob  juftas  aliquas  rationes  re- 
jectus,  alium  in  ejus  locum  elegerunt.  Si  difereparet 
de  Eleclione  familia,  tunc  ab  Epifcopo  &  Clero 
eleCtus  eft  Erenarchus,  at  ex  eadem  ftirpe.  Si 
porroStirpscadeficeret,  tunc  ab  Epifcopo  &  Clero, 
ad  munus  illud  fubeunduni,  alia  eleda  eft  familia, 
fub  conditionibus  olim  ufitatis.” 

Pag.  91.  “  Ceterum'  hoc  loco,  loquimur  tan- 
tum  de  Comorbanis,  qui  I.aici  fuerunt  et  plerumq; 
uxorati,  licet  ex  ijs  aliqui  improprie  appdlabanlur 
Abbates,  et  alij  Priores.  Illis  eorumque  Familijs 
aflignate  funt  Terre  quedam  libere,  vulgo  Termon¬ 
lands  dide.” 

Here  by  the  way,  I  am  doubtful  whether  (as 
Sr.  Janies  faith)  the  Comorbani  were  Lay-men  & 
improperly  called  Abbats  or  Priors  ;  becaufe  in  the 
Annals  of  Ulfter  with  Mr.  Brydges  Vol.  xlix. 
at  the  year  1129.  I  find  thefe  words,  “  Kellagh 
Coarb  Patricke,  Cheife  &  Archbuihop  of  the  Welt 
of  Europe — died  in  the  24th  yeare  of  his  Abbot- 
fliip,  &  in  the  50th  year  of  his  Age — Murtagh  Mc 
Donell  chofen  in  Patricks  Coarbfliip.”  (Qu.  whether 
this  is  not  the  Office  mentioned  in  the  laft  line  but 
two  of  my  Lord’s  MS.  &  above  in  this  Catalogue, 
in  the  Note  concerning  the  Irifli  Office  appertaining 
to  St.  Patrick’s  Church  at  Armagh. 

But  to  (hew  here  that  (at  leall)  the  Archbifli- 
opric  of  Armagh  was  hereditary,  I  ffiall  put  down 
the  words  of  St.  Bernard  as  I  found  them  in  the 
I.ife  of  Malachias,  in  the  Edition  printed  at  Paris 
1632.  col.  *937.  before  I  perceived  that  Sir  Henry 
Spelman  had  referred  to  them  as  above  noted. 
“  Verum  mos  peflimus  inoleverat  (in  Hybernia) 
quorundam  diabolica  potentum,  Sedem  fanctam 
obtentum  iri  hereditaria  Succeflione  Nec  enim 
patiebantur  Epifcopari  nifi  qui  effent  de  Tribu  & 
Familia  fua.  Nec  parum  procefferat  execranda  Suc- 
ceflio  dccurfis  jam  hac  malitia  quafi  Generationibus 
*5  quindecim. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


2jp 


Num.  1802. 

quindedm.  Et  eo  ufq;  firmaverat  fibi  jus  pravum  ; 
imo  oinni  mortc  punii-ndam  Injuriam  Generatio 
mala  &  adultera ;  ut  etfi  interdum  defeciffent  C.lerici 
de  Sanguine  illo,  fed  Epifcopi  nunquam.  De- 
nique  jam  ofto  extiterant  ante  Celfum  viri  uxorati, 
et  abfq;  Ordinibus.  Literati  tamen.  Inde  tota  ilia 
per  univerfam  Hyberniam  (de  qua,  multa  fuperius 
diximus)  diffolutio  Eccleliafticx  Difciplinte,  Cen- 
furas  enervatio,  Religionis  evacuatio.  Inde  ilia 
ubique  pro  Confuetudine  Chriftiana,  f<eva  fubin- 
trodutta  Barbaries,  imb  Paganifmus  quidam  induc- 
tus  fub  nomine  Chriltiano,  &c.” 

Thus  far  with  relation  to  Mr.  Toland’s  Verfions 
of  the  Irifh  Notes,  which  I  have  fett  down  faithfully 
from  his  own  hand-writing,  and  brought  whatever 
I  have  found  that  might  any  way  feem  to  counte¬ 
nance  the  lame.  I  now  come  to  Mr.  Conry’s  Ver¬ 
fions  of  the  fame  Notes,  which  are  given  above, 
and  demonftrate  the  Antiquity  of  this  MS.  by  the 
following  Circumftances. 

1.  Mad-Brigte  or  Brigidianus  wrote  this  Book  at 
Armagh,  in  the  28th  year  of  his  Age  ; 

2.  the  fame  Year  wherein  Cormac  mac  Carthaig  was 
/lain  by  Tirlough  o  Briain  ; 

3.  being  the  fecond  Year  after  the  building  of  the 
Great  Houfe ; 

4.  and  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  1140. 

5.  When  I'onchad  o  Kervall  was  King  of  Argiall  ; 

6.  Murchad  the  Ion  of  Neil,  the  fon  of  Loghlin, 
King  of  Olichia ; 

7.  Cuulad  o  Connor,  King  of  Ulidia  ; 

8.  Murchad  the  fon  of  Malachias  Kin?  ofMeth; 

9.  Demiot  the  Son  of  Murchad  (or  Mac-Morough) 
King  of  Leimfter ; 

o.  Connor  O  Brian,  King  of  Munfter  ; 

1 .  Tirlough  O  Connor,  King  of  Connaught  ; 

2.  Gilla  the  Son  of  Liach  .  .  .  was  Vicar 

or  a  noted  Officer  or  Dignatary  belonging  to  the 
Metropolitical  Church  of  Armagh. 

Now  if,  upon  examination  of  the  fame,  mod 
of  thefe  Circumftances  fhall  be  found  plainly  to  con¬ 
cur  ;  fuch  Kingdoms  to  have  been  exifting  at  that 
Time  ;  Sc  fuch  Perfons  to  have  been  contemporaries, 
and  the  far  greateft  part  of  them,  if  not  all,  now 
to  be  proved  to  have  been  alive  about  A.  D.  1139. 
or  1140.  I  mult  believe  Mr.  Conry’s  to  be  the 
more  accurate  tranflation,  and  alfo  (fince  the  Hand 
alfo  concurs)  that  the  Book  was  written  at  that 
time,  and  not  about  A.  D.  908.  according  to  Mr. 
Toland’s  Opini .  n. 

1.  As  to  Msel-Brigte,  I  have  faid  fomewhat  be¬ 
fore.  I  fuppofe  him  to  have  been  a  young  Religi¬ 
ous  man,  who  writing  a  tolerable  Hand,  was  em¬ 
ployed  fperhaps  by  Gilla)  to  copy  out  this  Book. 
It  is  no  wonder  therefore  if  I  can  not  find  any  thing 
particularly  relating  to  Him  ;  fince  his  Station  feems 
to  have  been  but  mean  eH'bbfcure  :  at  leaft,  about 
that  Time. 

2.  When  Cormac  mac  Carty  was  flam  by  Tir¬ 
lough  O  Brian  (Copm~c  m“ cCoprhcugor  Capt>cn  j, 
and  Ccupbelbach  •  h  •  ^piGm.)which  Cormac  at  the 
end  is  faid  to  have  been  King  &  Bifhop  of  Munfter 
(two  Offices  eafily  underftood  to  be  compatible  in 
Ireland  after  what  have  been  noted  from  St.  Ber¬ 
nard  above)  It  is  of  this  man  that  I  underhand 
the  words  of  Sr.  James  Ware  Antiq.  Hibern.  pag. 
228.  where  he  mentions  the  Foundation  of  the 
Monaftery  at  Cork,  Corcagia.  “  Cormacus  Rex 
Momonke  (alijs  Defmoniac)  conftruxit  Canonibus 
S.  Auguftini  circa  Annum  1134.” — 

In  Continuatione  Annalium  Tigernaci,  MS.  Vet. 
penes  Jac.  Brydges  Armig.  Vol.  in.  fol.  23.  ad 
Annu  1138.  Cope”  rrf  nfc  caijrcb”  T>o  majib~  bo 
tenp"  obiai-i-ba  cliamuT  q  ba  ccipbEc  cp’.  q  T>a 
al£.ib~  a  pi  11  •!■  mbpaig  ’’treac1'  ep~uile  q  .jv  leir^e 


Num.  1  802. 

mogd  coco~lan.  icob~  o  bjitdidii  dtpbpigi  nfa". 
“  Cormac  Mac-Carty  was  killed  by  Tirlough  O 
Brian  ;  that  is,  his  Son  in  Law,  &  Goffip,  &  Fofter- 
Child  ;  .  .  .  ,  a  King  of  Leithe  mogat  (i.  e. 

the  Half  of  Ireland  Southwards)  intirely.  Connor 
O  Brian  then  Chief  King  of  Munfter.”  I  am  forry 
that  I  am  not  able  to  interpret  this  whole  Note. 
But  by  the  former  part  hereof,  compared  with  the 
Note  at  the  end  of  St.  Matthew’s  Gofpel,  it  plainly 
appeareth,  That  in  that  Year,  viz.  1138.  Cormac 
mac  Carty  was  killed  by  Tirlough  O  Brian.  Thefe 
are  the  very  Names ;  and  the  laft  of  them  I  could 
never  find  mentioned  with  Cormac  the  Son  of  Cu- 
leinan.  As  to  the  difference  of  the  Year  1 140.  in 
Mr.  Conry’s  Verfion,  from  this,  it  weigheth  not 
much  with  me.  Bee  ufe  firft  the  Irifh  Computa¬ 
tion  differed  (in  general,)  a  Year  from  ours  ;  as 
may  be  feen  by  manifold  Inftances  in  the  Works  of 
Arch-bifhop  Ufher,  &  Sir  James  Ware,  &c.  Se¬ 
condly,  there  is  an  incertainty  in  the  Irifh  Hiftories 
themfclves  ;  the  fame  matter  of  Fa£l  being  laid  by 
different  writers  in  different  Years.  And  this  in 
the  third  Place  may  proceed  from  an  indifereet 
method  ufed  by  divers  of  the  Old  Irifh  Annalifts, 
of  omitting  the  Number  of  the  Year,  to  figniiy 
the  fame  by  a  k  ((landing  I  fuppofe  for  the  Kalends 
of  January)  fo  that  fometimes  the  fame  letter  is 
written  in  the  middle  of  a  Line  ;  &  repeated  (when 
there  was  want  of  matter)  to  20,  30,  or  40  times 
together,  here  a  k  might  eafily  be  miftaken  in  count¬ 
ing  ;  and  where  a  k  was  carelefly  omitted  the  oc¬ 
currences  of  Two  Years,  are  therefore  repeated  in 
one.  So  that  if  I  can  make  their  matters  bear  to  a 
Year  or  two,  I  think  it  fufficient. 

In  the  Annals  of  the  Monaftery  of  Boy  1  in  the 
County  of  Rofcommon  (an  antient  Cottonian  MS. 
(Titvs.  A.  25.)  I  find  thefe  words,  “  Cormac  m~ic 
Cartaic1  Ri  DefmuniS,  occifus  tft  o  Tordelbuc’  u 
Btiain.”  'I  he  year  as  I  guels  by  counting  the  k  is 
1 1  -  P,  or  1 139.  And  here  Cormac  is  ltyled  King 
of  Delmond,  as  was  juft  now  intimated  from  Sir 
James  Ware.  This  Place  1  alfo  find  cited  in  Mr. 
Brydges  MS.  xliv. 

His  Death  is  alfo  remembred  to  have  been  at 
A.D.  1139.  in  a  Copy  of  the  Ulfter  Annals,  with 
Mr.  Brydges. 

In  the  fame  Annals  of  Boyl,  about  the  Year 
1152.  I  find  that  Vengeance  met  with  the  Mur¬ 
derer,  his  own  bloud  being  fhed  by  Tirlough  o  Con¬ 
nor  (mentioned  alfo  at  the  end  of  the  Gofpels)  as 
appeareih  by  the  following  Note,  “Tordelbac*  ua 
Briain  do  in  narbad  u  Tordel.  u  Concfub.  & 

went  upon  it  raflily. 
adul  is  in  tuafeiurt.” 

3.  The  Second  Year  after  the  Building  of 
the  Great  Houfe.  I  fhould  be  extremely  rafh 
if  I  fhould  pretend  to  be  pofuive  about  this  Houfe. 
But  fince  this  Note  is  found  at  the  end  of  a 
Gofpel,  written  by  a  Religious  perfon,  perhaps 
this  Great  Houfe  might  have  been  a  Church. 
Now  much  about  this  time  I  find  in  Sir  J.  Ware 
that  the  Church  of  Down  was  built  or  repaired  ; 
pag.  195.  “Dun — Ecclefiam  hanc  refixit  S  .Ma- 
lachias  Morgairus,  Epifcopus  primus  Conneren- 
fis,  dein  Armachanus  Archiepifcopus,  ac  demum 
Archiepifcopatu  abdicato,  Antilles  Dunenfis,  anno 
1137.”  And  by  the  by,  you  fee  that  Malachy 
who  made  this  Building,  had  been  Archbifhop 
of  Armagh,  where  this  individual  MS.  was  writ¬ 
ten,  and  muft  therefore  have  been  known  to  our 
Mtelbrigdte. 

4.  And  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1 1 40.  This 
Interpretation  of  Mr.  Conry,  muft  Hand  or 
fall  by  what  has  been  already,  or  will  foon  here¬ 
after  be  alledged.  But  hitherto  (if  1  may  be  al¬ 
lowed 


1-|0 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nurn.  1802. 

lowed  to  fay  foj  it  feemeth  not  to  have  been  in 
great  danger. 

15.  When  Donchad  o  Kervall  was  King  of 
Argiall.  '  0;  nncbarha  hua  Cepbaill 
jiall)  He;e,  before  I  meddle  with  the  Man,  I  muft 
prove  the  exiftence  of  fuch  a  Kingdom,  as  to 
which  Mr.  Toland  told  me  that  Mr.  Conry  was 
utterly. miftaken. 

Mr.  Conry  faid  that  Airgillia  did  include  the 
Counties  of  Monaghan,  Cavan,  and  Louth  ;  or, 
at  lead  part  of  them. 

Of  this  fame  Territory,  I  find  much  mention  in 
Rory  O  Flaherty’s  Ogygia,  but  by  the  name  of 
Orgicllia,  which  makes  no  great  difference.  I  will, 
however  putt  down  but  this  one  Note  concerning 
it  from  him.  Ogyg.  pag.  361.  “  Poft  Achaleth- 

derg  prcclium,  uuod  Collaorum,  &  Trium  C.ol- 
laorum  prcelium  vocatur ;  Viffores  fabadtis 
ultra  Glenrigeam  &  Neachum  lacum  Ultonijs^ 
am  pi  am  d'tionem  quam  Orgielliam  dixerunt 
(uv.de  Antlis  Uriel  &  Orj-el  fcribitur)  inComi- 
tanbus  I.ou th,Ardmach,  et  Monacha n ,  avorum 
Memoria  defcriptam,  compararunt.  Unde  Ccl- 
laorum  Trium  fcecunda  eft,  ac  late  propagata 
Soboles.” 

I  could  putt  down  more  quotations  from  antient 
&  modern  urhors,  but  I  purpofely  omitt  them, 
as  thi  iking  thefe  two  which  follow  may  fuffice. 

In  the  Cottonian  MS  Domitian.  A.  18.  where¬ 
in  is  a  fhort  account  of  Ireland,  drawn  up  about 
the  time  of  K.  Edward  vi.  mention  is  made  of  Mac- 
Mahound,  as  Lord  of  Irilh  Uriel  :  and  Uriel  is 
alfo  mentioned  as  a  part  &  divifion  of  Ireland  in 
other  places  of  the  fame  Treatife,  as  The  *  Countie 
of  Uriel  paieth  tribute  to  O  Nele,  called  Black 
Re  f.  40I. 

In  Camden’s  Britannia,  Edit.  Gibfon.  col.  ior-y. 
“The  County  of  Louth  in  old  Books  called  Luda 
&  l.ouda  ?  in  Irifh  Iriel  or  Uriel  Marginal  Note, 
“  in  Latin  Urgali  a”)  if  that  is  not  rather  a  part  of 
this  County,”  &c. 

So  far  for  the  Territory,  which  proveth  not  to 
depend  upon  Mr.  Conry’s  fancy  alone.  Now  for 
Donchad  o  Kerval  or  O  Carrol,  whom  he  finds  to 
have  been  King  of  it. 

War.  Antiq.  Hibern.  page  204.  “  Mellifons,  in- 
figne  Monafterium  Ordinis  Ciftercienfis  — funda- 
tur  a  Donato  O-Carrol  regulo  Ergalliae  five  Urielis, 
anno  1 142.” 

Ibid.  pag.  203.  “Loutha  —  Donatus  O-Carroll 
Rex  Ergalia;,  &  Edanus  O  Kelly  Epifcopus  Clo- 
chorenfis — fundarunt,  anno  1  148.” 


Num.  1802, 

Ibid.  pag.  29.  “  Mauritius  alias  Mwiertachus 
Nelli  filius  Loghlini  Nepos,  fed  vulgo  di&us  Mau¬ 
ritius  Mac-Loghlin,  cognomento  ab  avo  dufto, 
regnavit  annos  plus  minus  9.  occifus  a  Donato 
O  Carroll  Rege  Ergallia:  five  Urielis,  Anno 
1166.” 

In  the  annals  of  Boyl  above-mentioned,  about 
A.  D.  1 1 6 ;.  I  find  this  paffage,  “Affide  cordroc*  et 
af  tacora  rigadhe  oDondcftud  u  Cerbaill  &  Orgial 
hub.*” - 

‘  From  Aflide  to  Drogheda  the  Rcyal  Eftate  of 
Donchad  O-Carrol  King  of  Uriel  lieth.’ 

And  in  the  fame  book,  about  A. D.  1 167.  ltDond- 
cfad  ua  Cerbaill  ri  Orgiall,  moritur.” 

6.  Murchad  the  fon  of  Neil  (or  perhaps 
O  Neal )  the  Son  of  Loghlin  King  of  Olichta  j 
Mupcejrtach  nfc  Nel  ua  [ocblamb  4>huch. 

This  Ailiuch,  Mr.  Conry  faid,  was  a  Kingdom 
containing  almoft  the  whole  Northern  part  of  Ire¬ 
land  ;  being  the  Chiefeft  of  the  two  Kingdoms  into 
which  Ulfter  was  at  that  time  divided  j  the  other 
being  Ulidia,  of  which  more  anon. 

In  proving  the  exiftence  of  fuch  a  Kingdom,  I 
need  go  no  farther  than  the  Ulfter-Annals,  where 
(to  be  fure)  mention  thertof  may  be  eafily  found. 
In  that  imperfeS  Copy  with  Mr.  Brydges,  (Vol. 
xlix.)  at  the  year  1124.  are  thele  words  “  Ardgar 
the  Sonne  of  Mac  Hugh  o  Mel  Seaghlyn  who 
Ihould  be  King  of  Ailegh,  was  flame,  &c.”  which 
Territory,  foon  after  the  Conqueft  of  Ireland  feems 
to  have  been  joyned  to  Ulidia,  and  fo  to  have  been 
again  united  into  the  one  Province  of  Ulfter. 
Thus  Jofceiine  de  Furnefio  in  the  Life  of  St.  Palric, 

Cap.  31. - “  applicuit  in  finibus  Ulagh,  quae 

modo  Ulidia  dicitur” - unL-fs  there  be  feme 

miftake  here,  in  the  printed  Books. 

In  Mr.  O  Flaherty’s  Ogygia,  pag.  372.  this  King¬ 
dom  feemeth  to  be  plainly  intended,  though  it  be 
not  mentioned  by  name,  when  he  writeth —  “  et 

non  ita  diu  poftea,  a  Nielli  Magni  Regis  Hibern'ae 
fiiijs,  univerfa  fere  Ultonia  manu  potenti  elfet  fub- 
ada  :  Rudricift  gente,  ac  Dalfiatachia, — intra  unius 
pene  Comitatus  Dunenfis  terminos  quam  priii  Uli- 
diam  dixerunt  conclufts.  Hinc  igitur  huju'  Ditionis 
Principes  non  Ultonke,  fed  Ulidiae  Reges,difcriminis 
ergo  in  pofterum  dicemus.”  The  meaning  of  the 
former  of  thefe  Words,  is  that  the  O  Neals  feized 
upon  the  far  greateft  part  of  Ulfter,  where  they 
reigned  in  Aliuch  or  Ulagh  ;  their  Enemies  keeping 
pofl'eflion  of  Ulidia  the  remaining  part  of  that  Pro¬ 
vince,  under  the  Government  of  the  O  Connors. 


*  That  Uriel  enjoyed  fome  particular  Privileges  and  Immuni¬ 
ties,  after  it  was  taken  as  a  County,  may  partly  appear  from  the 
following  Grant  of  K.  Edward  111.  which  I  find  in  the  .Liber 
Niger  de  Wigniore  in  the  Harleyan  Library,  marked  67.  C.  4. 
fol.  permit,  in  thefe  words;  Edwardus  Dei  gratia  Rex  Anglic, 
Dominus  Hibernic,  et  Dux  Aquitanie.  Archiepifcopis,  Epifcopis, 
Abbatibus.  Prioribus,  Comitibus,  Baronibus,  Julliciarijs,  Viccco- 
mitibuE,  Prcpofitis,  Miniftris,  et  omnibus  Ballivis,  et  Fidclibus  fuis 
•S.ilutem.  Sciatis  quod  cum  Dominus  Edwardus  nuper  Rex  Anglic, 
Pater  noiter,  per  I.itteras  fuas  Patcntes  conccfliiret  Johanni  de 
Byrmirgham  nuper  Comiti  de  Luth,  jam  defundlo,  cognitionem 
omnium  Placitorum  et  omnimodam  jurildidtioncm,  et  Libertates  Re¬ 
gal 's  i.i  Comitatu  de  Uriel  in  Hibernia ;  exceptis  quatuor  Placi- 
tis  ;  videlicet,  de  Incendio,  Thefauro  in  veil  to,  Raptu,  et  Forllall. 
h. abend  ad  tetam  viti-.m  fuam.  prout  in  Litcris  prxdidtis  plenius  con- 
tinetur  :  Nos.  pro  bono  firvitio  quod  diledlus  Confinguineus  et  Fidelis 
miller  Rogerus  de  Mortuo-n-.ari  Comes  Marcbie  nobis  haffenus 
inipendit  m  luturum,  conceflimus  pro  nobis  et  hxredibus  noltris, 
et  liac  1  ’arta  nollra  eonfirmavimus  eidem  Comiti  et  Johanni  uxori 
ej  is,  quod  Ipfi  et  HxrrJes  l'ui  imperpetuum  babeant  totam  Ter¬ 
rain  de  Doitagbmayne  cum  pertinentijs,  et  omnimodam  Jurifdic- 
tioeem  Regulcm,  et  Cogniti  iiem  omnium  Placitorum,  tarn  (videlicet) 

■  1  ■’  lucentiio,  Thefauro  invento,  Paptu,  et  Forllall.  quam  alioruin 
l'i  vitorum  ijiioi  .uncunque  ia  didlo  Corr.itatu  de  Uriel  emergencium. 


Et  quod  babeant  Canr.ellariam  et  Scaccarium,  et  propria  Sigilla  fua, 
et  omnia  alia  ad  hujufmodi  Officia  pertinencia  imperpetuum.  Et 
quod  Cancellarium,  Thefaurar.  Barones  de  Scaccario  Vicecomites 
in  didlo  Comitatu  de  Uriel,  et  al  os  Minillros  pro  predidlis  Officijs 
faciendis  et  cxercendis  in  eodem  Comitatu  deputare  et  conftituere 
valeant,  quociens  et  quando  voluerint  expedire.  Quare  volumus  et 
firmiter  prxeipimus  pro  nobis  et  hxiedibtis  noftris,  quod  przdidli 
Comes  et  Johanna,  et  hxredes  fui  imperpetuam  habeant  Terram  pre- 
didlam  cum  pertineneijs,  et  omnimodam  Jurifdit'lionem  Regalem, 
et  Cognicionem  omnium  Placitorum  tam  (videlicet)  de  Incendio, 
Thefauro  invento,  Raptu,  et  Forfta  1.  quam  aliorum  Placitorum  quo- 
rumeunque  in  didlo  Comitatu  de  Uriel  emergencium.  Et  quod 
habeant  Cancellariam,  et  Scaccarium,  et  propria  Sigilla  fua,  et  omnia 
alia  ad  hujufmodi  Officia  pertinentia  imperpetuum.  Et  quo!  Can- 
cellarium,  ct  Thefaurar.  et  Barones  de  Scaccario  Vicecomites  in 
prxdidlo  Comitatu  dc  Uriel  et  alios  Minillros,  pro  prsedidtis  Officijs 
faciendis  5 :  cxercendis,  in  eodein  Comitatu  deputare  et  conftituere 
valent,  quociens  ct  quando  voluerint,  et  libi  videriut  expedire,  ficut 
pnedidtum  ell.  Hijs  Teftibus,  venerabili  Patre  H.  Lincolnienll 
Epifcopo,  Canccllario  noftro  ;  Johanne  de  Eltham  Comite  ornubie, 
Fratre  noftro  cariffimo ;  Olivero  de  Ingliam  ;  Willelmo  de  Moute- 
acuto  ;  et  Johanne  Mautravers  Senefcaiio  Hofpicij  noftri ;  et  aujs. 
Datum,  per  manum  nollram  apud  Glouceftre,  vicefimo-tercio  die 
Junij,  anno  Regni  noftri  quarto. 


In 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


241 


Num.  1802. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  Sentence,  Mr.  O  Flaherty 
is  not  fo  clear  as  might  have  been  expected. 

As  to  this  man  Murcertach  or  Mauritius  O  Neal, 
J  have  (hewed  the  time  of  his  Death  already  from 
Sir  James  Ware;  who,  when  he  addeth  in  the  fame 
place,  “  atqui  is  (i.  e.  Murcertachusj  Regnum  non 
inijt  ante  annum  1157-”  muft  be  underftood  with 
referve  Sc  caution,  becaufe  in  the  fame  book  pag. 
an.  fpeaking  about  the  Foundation  of  the  Mo- 
naftery  of  Newry,  he  faith  immediately  “  Mauritius 
Mac  -  Loghlin  Rex  Hibernia  fundavit  —  anno 
H53.” - 

In  the  Annals  of  Bovl  I  find  mention  of  him 
about  A.D.  1165.  “  Eo  choid  mi'c  mi'c  Duindfiebi 
ri  Ulad  do  dallad  la  Murcl’ertacv  mi'c  mi'c  Lac *- 
laind.”  And  a  little  after,  namely  about  A.  D. 
1 167.  conformable  to  Sr.  James  Ware,  “  Murc*er- 
tace  mac  Neill  inac  mic  LacMaind  Ri  Erend, 
occifus  ell.”  This  Prince  was  in  his  time  ftyled 
King  of  Ireland,  as  appeareth  by  the  laft  Citation  ; 
but  is  not  fo  called  in  my  Lords  MS.  which  fquareth 
with  what  O  Flaherty  writes,  Ogyg.  pag.  44°- 
“A.D.  11^6-  Murchertus  Mag  Loceluin  Nielli 
filius,  Tordelvacho  O  Conor  fuccefiit  Regno 
Hyberniae,  See.  which  may  unfold  the  Myftery  in 
the  lad  Paragraph,  where  Sr.  James  Ware  afferts 
that  he  was  not  King  (i.  e.  chief  King,  or  Monarch 
of  thelrilh)  before  A.D.  1 15?.” 

7.  Cuuald  O  Connor  King  of  Ulidia ;  Cuulab 
Trfc  Concbobuiji  pig  Ulclb.  We  have  already  had 
fome  mention  of  this  Kingdom,  to  which  I  think  I 
need  not  add  many  Citations  from  Giraldus  Cam- 
brenfis,  &  others,  who  make  frequent  mention 
of  the  fame  &  of  its  Princes  Only  one  I  think  I 
may  take  notice  of  from  another  Author  which  will 
flievv,  that  after  the  Conqueft  thereof  by  the  Eng- 
lifli,  (or  the  Submiffion  of  the  Irifti)  the  Name  {till 
remained.  For  Jofceline  of  Furnes  in  his  Prologue 
to  the  above-cited  book  faith, — “  Illuftriflimi  nihilo- 
minus  Joannis  de  Curfi  Ulidia  Principis  fuper 
hac  re  petitio  adjungitur.” — 

As  to  the  Extent  of  this  little  Kingdom,  Mr. 
Conry  differed  fomewhat  in  Opinion  from  Mr.  Rory 
O  Flaherty  ;  when  he  affured  me  that  it  compre¬ 
hended  no  more  than  aPart  of  the  County  of  Down, 
with  fome  other  Towns. 

Nor  will  it  be  a  wonder  that  fo  fmall  a  Portion 
of  Ireland  IhoulJ  be  called  a  Kingdom ;  fince  (as 
it  was  hinted  before)  the  Chiefs  of  numerous  Clans, 
were  generally  fo  ftyled.  This  may  be  very  eafily 
proved  from  the  writings  both  of  Irifh  Natives, 
and  of  Foreigners.  I  will  therefore  bring  no  more 
than  two  Inftances.  The  one  from  Bentdifrus  Pe- 
troburgenfis  MS.  Cotton.  Jvlivs.  A,  11.  fol.  39. 
— “  Venerunt  itaq;  ad  eum  (i.  e.  R.  Henricum  11.) 
Rex  Corcenfis,  ec  Rex  de  Limeric,  et  Rex  de 
Oxereia,  et  Rex  de  Mida,  et  Kaghenaldus  de 
Waterfordia,  et  Omnes  alij  de  Hybernia  prater 
Regem  Cogna&ac.”  The  other  is  in  a  MS.  in  the 
Archiepilcop.d  Library  at  Lambeth  (no.  xx.  fol. 
172.  b.)  where,  among  divers  Notes  out  of  the 
Lord  of  Hethes  Chronicle,  is  this  that  followeth. 
“  Mac  Moroughe  King  of  Leinfter,  Dermot  mac 
Cartie  King  of  Corke,  Donald  O  Breen  King  of 
Limerike,  O  Carroll  King  of  TJriell,  Mac  Shaglin 
King  of  Ophalie,  O  Rwrke  King  of  Methe,  O 
Neale  King  of  TJlfter,  and  Rory  O  Connor  Dune 
King  of  Connaght  and  Monarche  of  Irland,  fur- 
rendred  all  then-  Titles  to  the  Kingdomes  of  Ir¬ 
land  unto  K.  Henry  11.  and  became  his  Vaffalls.” 
— (This  feems  to  have  been  taken  from  Giraldus 
Cambrenfis,  &  is  alfo  cited  in  Camden’s  Britan¬ 
nia  edit.  Gibf.  pag.  973.  where  a  Note  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  declares  (but  whv  I  know  not)  that  O  Rorke 
Was  not  King  of  Meath.) 

Cat.  Harl.  Von.  II. 


Num.  1802. 

Of  this  Cuulad,  I  have  not  hitherto  found  any 
thing,  as  I  remember  :  which  want  of  fuccefs  I 
do  not  fo  much  attribute  to  the  obfeurity  of  the 
Man,  as  to  my  want  of  proper  books,  and  the  Im- 
perfeftnefs  of  feveral  that  I  faw,  efpecially  in  the 
Library  of  the  Honourable  Mr  B  idges,  where 
four  or  five  (principal  bo.  >ks  for  this  occafion)  were 
imperfect  in  the  very  places  where  I  wanted  their 
help.  However,  in  the  Annals  ol  Boyl  I  find  men¬ 
tion  of  Duinfiebi  Ri  Ulat>  about  A.  D.  1165.  and 
in  the  fame  Book,  about  AD.  1171.  “Magnus 
m’c  Duinflevi  Ri  Ulad  moritur.” 

8.  Murchad  the  Son  of  Malachias  King  of 
Meath;  COupcirh  ucl  QQcelj-ecblcnb  pig  CDit>e. 

Of  this  man  I  find  mention  as  followeth. 

In  the  Annals  of  Boyl,  about  A.  D.  1143. 

was  taken  by 

Murchad  ua  Mailfec'  dergabail  la  Tordelbacf 

the  Kingdom  of  was  given  to 

ua  Concuber  Sc  Rigi  Midi  dutabairt  du  Concuber 
his  Son 
da  mac. 

War.  Antiq.  Hibcrn.  pag.  192.  Be£tif.  “  Sunt 
qui  fundatum  tradunt  anno  1146.  14  Januarij  ; 
alij  anno  1148.  et  alii  anno  1151.  fed  non  magna 
eft  differentia.  Fundavit  et  dotavit  Murchardus 
O  Melaghlin  Midiac  Regulus.” 

In  the  Annals  of  Boyl,  about  A.D.  1152. 
Mure  fad  ua  Mailfec"  Ri  Media;  Moritur. 

In  the  Convention  between  K.  Henry  n  &  Rory 
o  Connor  King  of  Connaught,  A.D.  1175.  re¬ 
corded  by  Benet  of  Peterburgh  (MSS.  Cotton.  Jvl. 
A.  11.  &  Vit.  E.  17.)  as  alfo  in  Roger  Hoveden 
from  Benet ;  mention  is  made  of  this  man,  in 
thefe  words  in  the  Copie  firft  cited, — “  etMida,  cum 
omnibus  pertinentijs  fuis,  ficut  unquam  Mure!  at 
ua  Maileth  lachlin  earn  melius  &  plenius  tenuit.” 
The  Name  being  a  hard  Name,  no  wonder  if  it  was 
written  corruptly  by  anEnglifti  Monk.  But  in  Mr. 
Rymer’s  Fccdera  Vol.  1 .  pag.  41 .  (where  the  Con¬ 
vention  is  given  from  this  MS.)  it  is  printed  yet 
more  corruptly. 

I  think  1  need  not  mention  (having  already  omit¬ 
ted  divers  notes  of  this  kind)  that  his  Son  did  not 
long  furvive  him.  For  in  the  Annals  of  Boyl, 
about  A.D.  1154.  is  this  Entry,  “En  Macl  Se- 
cfnaill  m"c  Mure faid  u  Mail  Sectnaill  Ri  Midi, 
moritur.” 

9.  Dermot  the  Son  of  Murchad  (or  Mac- 
Morough)  King  of  Leimfter ;  ftidpmair  me 
ODupcbaba  pig  Idgen.  Of  this  Prince  (from  whom, 
as  I  remember,  my  Lord  is  defcended)  there  is 
mention  enough  in  the  Englifh  &  Welfti  writings, 
as  well  as  in  the  Iiilh.  From  them  all  I  fhall  tran¬ 
scribe  only  thefe  that  follow. 

In  the  Annals  of  Boyl,  about  A.D.  1141. 
“  MathiLagen  doi'pod  ar  DiarmaitnTc  Murcada.” 

War.  Antiq.  Hibern.  pag.  176.  “  Baltinglas. 
Dermitius  Murchardi  filius,  Rex  Lageniac,  anno 
1148.  (alijs  1-151)  Monachis  Ordinis  Ciftercienfis 
conftruxit,  Sc  praidijs  dotavit.” 

Ibid.  pag.  167.  “  Dermitius  Murchardi  filius  Rex 
Lageniac,  fundavit  juxta  Dublin,  Ccenobium  Moni- 
alium  Ordinis  Aroacenfis  circa  A.D.  1 146.  Cui 
fuppofuit.  A.D.  1 1 5 1 .  cellas  duas.”—  (vid. ibid, 
pagg.  183.  &  185.) 

In  the  fame  page,  he  fheweth  that  this  fame 
Prince  did  alfo  found  another  Monaftery  of  the 
fame  Order,  about  A.  D.  1 166. 

In  the  Aiinals  of  Boyl,  about  the  year  1151.  or 
Wife 

1152.  is  this  entry,  “  Deborgail  ben  Tigemaim  u 
was  taken  away  by  with  hint 

Ruaire  du  breit  du  Diarmait  mac  Murcada  Leis.” 

30.  10 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1802. 

Girald.  Cambrenf  de  Expugn.  Hib.  Cap.  1. 
Mac  Morthit  36.  A.  7. 

‘  Dermicius  itaque  Murchardi  filius  Lagenienfium 
Princeps,  et  Quinta;  illius  portionis  Hibernia;  Re&or, 
Orientalia  Infuke  maritima — nofiris  temporibus 

poffidebat, - O  Roricho  itaq;  Medenfium  Rege 

remotas  in  partes  Expeditionis  cujufdam  causa 
praifefto ;  uxor  ipfius,  O  Malachlini  filia,  quam  in 

Infula  quadam  Media;  reliquerat” - , 

Annal.  Hibern.  MS.  Cottorr.  Domit.  A.  1 8. 
1167.  "Dermicius  fdius  Murchardi  Princeps  La- 
geniorum,  O  Rorico  Rege  Midia;  e  patria  longe  pro- 
fecto,  Uxotem  ejus  volemem,  et  ad  id  eum  pro- 
vocantem,  rapuit.  Qua  injuria  motus,  O  Roricus 
domum  reverfus,  auxilium  a  Rotherico  Conaccio 
fufcipiens,  Dermitium  Lagenia  expulit.” 

Girald  Catnbr.  de  Mirab.  Hib.  Cap.  xliv.  “  Igi- 
tur  a  tempore  Fedlimidij  Regis  &  Obitu  Turgelij, 
Rotherici.  Cona£tenfis  Regnum.  Qui  ultimus  de 
hac  gente  Monarcha  fuit,  et  ufq;  hodie  Connaftio 
prsfidet.  Gujusetiam  tempore,  et  per  quam  Rex 
Lagenia;  Deremetus,  fcilicet  Murchardi  filius  a 
Regno  expulfus  fuerat,  feptendecim  Reges  in  Hi¬ 
bernia  regnaverunt.” 

Collectanea  cx  Annal.Dlton.  MS.  Brydges.  Vol. 
xxix.  A.D.  1 162.  “Argain  gall  atarliath  laDermat 
mc  March" u  1  mor  dogab".  fa"  airrna rogab  .  rerm 
ocfem  f  moire.” 

Annal.  Buillienf.  circa  ann.  1165.  “  Ruadri  ua 
*Con"  &  Diarmait  u  Mail  Sec^,  &  Tigernan  ua 
Ruairc,  &  Lagin  &  Giall  at’a  cliat *  dinarba  Diar- 
mata  m‘  Murctada  darmuir.” 

Annals  of  Ireland,  MS.  Brydges,  Vol.  xv.  fol. 

1 5* - Anno  1  1 66.  “  Dermot  m‘  Murragh  landed 

in  Ireland,  &  with  him  a  great  Englifh  Army.  He 
tooke  the  Command  of  Kenfelie.  The  King  of 
Ireland  Sc  O  Ruarck,  Sc  O  Mul  Secklyn  came  to 
Figh  dorcha :  M  c  Murragh  came  to  the  Kings 
houfe,  and  gave  him  his  owne  defire  of  Pledges, 
and  gave  to  O  Ruairk  in  lue  of  his  Wife,  25  Nobles 
in  Gold.” 

Annal.  Buil.  circ.  A.D.  1171.  “  Diermait  mac 

Munriada  Ri  Lagen  Sc  Gall,  moritur.” 

10.  Connor  O  Brian,  King  of  Munlter  ;  Con¬ 
ch  obon  ua  [sniam  jug  COumdn. 

Of  him  I  have  hitherto  found  only  this  Note, 
befide  that  abovementioned  (in  pag.  7.00. j  from  the 
Continuation  of  Tigemach’s  Annals,  v\hich  fhew 
him  to  have  been  Chief  King  of  Munfter  A.  D. 
1x38 

Annal.  Buil.  circ.  A.  D.  1142.  et  Concuber  ua 
Brian  Ardri  Muman,  mortuus  eft.” 

1 1.  Tirlough  O  Connor,  King  of  Connaught  ; 
TTaipbeibacb  ua  Concbobaijr  pig  Connachr. 

Of  this  Prince  there  is  more  Evidence,  viz. 

In  the  Annals  of  Ulfter,  (with  Mr  Brydges,  Vol. 
xxix.)  at  the  years  1127.  ii*8.  See.  mention  is 
made  of  Tirlagh  O  Connor,  Gil-Chrift  O  Hegni 
King  of  Fermanagh  &  Arch-King  of  Argialli :  Ti- 
ernan  O  Roirk,  &c. 

Annal.  Ulton.  MS.  Brydg.Vol.  xxix.  “Caftell— 

Athlone  fundatur  per 

Athaluan  dodenam  la  Terdelbach  h.  Concober.” 

Rod.  O  Flah.  Ogyg.  pag.  439.  A.  D.  1136. 
1  oroelvachus  magnus  O  Connor  (Combelbdc  6 
Concabaip)  Rex  Connaclia;— Rex  Hibernia;  cum 
refragantxa  ;  annos  viginti” - 

Battle 

Annal.  Bull.  circ.  A.D.  1146.  “Efi  Bualad 

_  w  _  by  the  prote&ion  or  help 

Tignai  u  Ruairc  treoflac1’  Tordelbaic1-  u  Confcub".” 

War.  Antiq.  Hib.  pag..  334.  Tuam - “circa 

annum  Dorn.  1152.  Ecclefiam  Cathedralem  denovo 
condidtt,  a  lirdelvaco  O-Conner  Rege  Hibernia; 


Num,  I  802. 

adjutus,  Edanus  O-Hoifin  primus  Archiepifcopus 
Tuamenfis,  faltem  qui  primus  Pallio  ufus  eft.” 

Annal.  Ulton.  MS.  Brydg.  Vol.  xxix.  fol.  4. 
A.  D.  ii  53.  “  Terdelbach  h.  Concub".  Airdr 
Coiij’  &c.” 

Flahertach 

Annal.  Buil.  circ.  A.D.  1152.  “Flat*  bertac* 
O  Canav  King  of  th-  Sept  of  Convail 
ua  Canam  Ri  Cenoil  comail,  merfus  eft  cum 
filia 

uxore  fua  in  mari,  fcilicet  ingen  Tordelba  c*u 
Conc*uber.” 

Ibid.  circ.  A.  D.  1155.  “  Taerdelbact  ua  Con- 
Dublinix 

chiber  Ri  Connacht  &  Midi,  &  aftacliaR  &  Le- 

juvenis  eximus 

trim  oga  nuadat  .  .  .  .  .  tor  Erend,  mor¬ 

tuus  eft.” 

Warsei  AdverfaV.  MS.  Brydg.  1156.  “ Tirdel- 
vacus  O  Conner  Rex  Conacia;  k  Hibex-nim,  anno 
tetatis  fuse  68.  regni  fui  50.  in  pace  quievit.  ;  et 
fepultus  eft  juxta  altare  S.  Ciarani.  Cui  fucceffit 
Rodericus  filiu:  Tirdelbaci  O  Conner.” 

Warari  Antiq.  Hibern.  pag.  29.  “Tirdelvacus 
O-Conner  Rex  Ccnatia-  Monarchiam  (i.  e.  totius 
HyberniseJ  adeptus,  earn  tenuit  ulque  ad  annum 
1157.  quo  mortem  obijt,  setatis  fua;  6S.  fepultus 
Clonmucnoifa,  in  Ecclefia  Cathedrali,  prope  fum- 
mum  Altare  S.  Ciarani.”  Some  account  of  his 
Funeral  may  be  feen  in  O  Flaherty,  which  was 
not  material  for  me  to  tranlcribe. 

t2  Gilla  the  SonofLiach  ....  was 
Vicar,  or  a  Noted  Officer,  or  Dignitary  belonging 
to  Armagh;  gilla  nfc  [tec  nfc  m'c  Qudbpi  In 
comdpbap  parpatc— . 

The  words  in  my  Lords  MS.  which  express  th:s 
Dignity  or  Office,  are  Comapbap  parpatc,  which 
(as  above  Is  fhewn)  Mr.  Toland  tranflatea  by  Pise- 
pofitus  Ecclefia;  Sti.  Patricij  (Praspolitus  was  an 
Officer  in  Benedittin  Monalleries)  and  Mr.  Conry 
by  Vicarius  Patricij.  Now  if  St.  Patiic’s  Vicar  at 
Armagh,  was  the  chief  Perfon  in  the  Place,  as  St. 
Peter’s  Vicar  at  Rome,  then  our  Gilla  was  Arch- 
bilhop  of  Armagh.  And.  it  feems  to  me  that  the 
fame  Perfon  might  be  both  Archbilhop  of  Armagh, 
Sc  Comorb  or  Corb  of  St.  Patric,  as  well  as  Dr. 
Fell  was  Biffiop  of  Oxford,  a  d  Dean  of  Chrift- 
Church  at  the  fame  time.  This  might  be  no  dif- 
paragemtnt  to  an  Arch-bifhop,  con  ft  dering  what 
a  learned  Irilh-man  f cited  by  Sr.  Hen.  Spelman 
from  Arch-lip.  U filer)  faith,  “  Corbana  us  five 
Plebanatus,  Dignitas  efi  ;  et  inodo  ad  Regem  per- 
tinet,  fed  antea  ad  Papam.  In  Matrice  Ecclefia 

debet  necefiario  efle  ; - ornnefq;  Decimas  per- 

tinenres  ad  hanc  debet  habere.  Et  Beneficia  ad- 
jundta  huic,  ipfius  funt ;  eorumq;  Confereniiam 
habet  et  praefentationem.  Dictum  hoc  nomen  quia 
populo  et  plebi  Ecclefiaitica;  Matricis  Ecclefia; 

praftuit. - Primum  Stallum  in  fua  Ecclefia  habet : 

habet  etiam  Stallum  vacuum  in  Ecclefia  Cathedrali 
epVocem  in  omni  Capitulo  tarn  publico  quam 
privato.  Infcribitur  Romano  Regifiro,  idtoq;  Dig¬ 
nitas  eft.”  And  by  w  hat  I  have  before  cited  (Catal. 
fe£t.  19.)  Kellegh  was  Coarb-Patric,  &  is  alfu  fiyled 
at  the  fame  Time  Arch-bilhop  of  the  Weft  of 
Europe. 

But  to  return  to  our  Gilla,  whom  Mr.  Conry 
calls  the  fon  of  l.iach,  &  Mr.  Toland  (from  his 
anceftor)  Mac  R'.  r.i’ri  ;  I  find  thus  much  of  him. 

In  the  Annals  of  Boyl,  about  A.D.  1 174.  “Gilla 
mic  Liacc  qarba  Patric,  quievit”. 

In  Monaft  Angl.  Tom.  11.  pag.  1031.  Gilla 
mac  Liag  2  Arch-Bp.  of  Armagh,  is  witi.efs  to  a 
Grant  of  Mauritius  mac  I.oclain,  King  of  Ire¬ 
land. 


In 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


2-  4  3 


Nam.  1802. 

In  the  Ulfler  Annals,  MS.  Brydges  Vol.  xxix. 
It  is  written,  that  Gelafius  mac  Ruadri  (who  was 
Arch-bifhop  of  Armagh)  obijt  6  Kal.  Aprilis 
i  174- 

Now  if  the  Irifh  (according  to  their  fancy  in 
turning  of  Names)  ufed  to  tranilate  Gilla  into  Ge- 
lalius,  it  may  feem  that  thefe  may  be  the  fame  Man  : 
for  as  was  flic  wed  before  from  Sir  James  Ware, 
fometimes  perfons  were  named  from  their  Anceflors 
by  fome  ;  at  the  fame  time  from  their  Fathers 
by  others. 

Moreover  in  Mr.  Brydges’s  MS.  Vol.  xliv.  I 
find  that  Kelleck  nr  Gellafius,  was  Archbifhop  of 
Armagh  A.  D.  1136.  and  was  fucceeded  by  Gil- 
bertus  O  Caran  A.  1).  1175  If  our  Gilla  was  the 
fame  with  this  Gelafius,  I  can  eafily  find  matter 
enough  concerning  him. 

Thus  have  I  gone  through  the  Evidence  for 
Mr.  Conry,  after  that  for  Mr.  Toland,  with  like 
Candour  &  Sincerity,  and  according  as  things  oc¬ 
curred  unto  me.  1  might  have  put  them  better 
together,  &  fett  forth  my  poor  Meaning,  all  along, 
in  more  proper  Language.  But  when  it  fhall  be 
confidered  that  what  is  here  done,  is  only  a  Firfl 
Draught ;  and  even  that  for  the  mod  part,  putt 
down  in  the  midlf  of  hurry  &  difturbance  ;  and 
without  my  ever  Reading  over  what  I  have  at 
any  time  before  written  :  I  hope  to  be  excufed  for 
all  Irregularities  either  as  to  Phrafe  or  Method. 
The  Sum  of  the  whole  differtation,  is  this. 

1 .  That  whereas  Father  Simon  thought  this 
Book  800  Years  Old,  and  endeavoured  to  deferibe 
it  as  an  Antiquary  :  He  feemeth  to  have  employed 
his  Time  &  Pen  to  fmall  purpofe,  for  lack  of  Ex¬ 
perience  in  fuch  Matters. 

2.  Whereas  Mr.  Toland  endeavours  to  prove  it 
of  the  fame  Age  by  the  Notes  :  I  believe  he  muff 
prove  alfo  that  a  Cormac  mac  Carty,  and  all  the 
other  Perfons  &  Kingdoms  did  exifl  at  that 
Time,  by  plain  &  undeniable  authority  of  Hiftory  ; 
or  elfe,  the  Aflertion  will  not  pafs  with  me.  Which 
when  he  fhall  have  done,  I  fhall  finile  at  the  odd- 
nefs  of  the  Thing,  viz,  that  fo  many  Perfons,  of 
fuch  different  Governments,  of  fo  differing  Cha¬ 
racters,  Families,  &  Names,  with  fuch  an  Oc¬ 
currence  as  Mac  Carties  S'aughier  (not  forgetting 
the  great  Houfe)  fhould  all,  by  a  Sort  of  Platonic 
Revolution,  be  brought  upon  their  Old  Stage  in 
about  235  years  after.  I  fay  again  this  will  be 
a  pleafing  Scene  to  me ;  but  I  add,  that  my 
Mirth,  in  this  refped,  mull  be  refpited  until  this  be 
done. 

3.  Mr.  Conry  underffanding  the  Irifh  Notes  in  a 
Senfe  different  from  Mr.  Toland,  difeovered  Three 
Kingdoms  &  fome  Perfons  not  mentioned  by  him, 
as  alfo  a  pofitive  Date  of  the  Year  1140.  That, 
upon  Examination,  I  find  his  Three  Kingdoms  to 
have  exiffed  about  that  Time  ;  and  a  remarkably- 
Great  Houfe  to  have  been  builded  or  repaired 
within  the  Space  limited.  I  find  a  Cormac  mac 
Carty  to  have  been  killeu  by  a  Tirlough  O  Brian, 
&  within  the  Year,  as  the  Irifh  Year  is  under¬ 
flood.  Of  no  lefs  than  Seven  other  Irifh  Kings  or 
Princes  who  are  mentioned  by  Name,  I  find  (in  my 
poor  Searches)  that  the  Six  chiefeft  of  them  flou- 
rifhed  at  or^ibout  that  very  time.  The  Scribe 
indeed  I  am  not  fo  well  apprifed  of,  nor  can  it  be 
expeded :  but  the  Perfon  who  (according  to  Mr. 
Tolands  own  Opinion)  employed  him,  I  have  alfo 
difeovered.  So  that,  the  Hand  concurring  as  it 
doth,  I  mufl  believe  that  the  book  was  written  A.  D. 
1  *39- 

I  had  indeed  much  rather  to  have  found  it  800 
years  old,  which  would  undoubtedly  have  railed 


Num.  1802,  1804. 

its  value ;  but  as  it  is,  it  is  a  Standard  for  the 
Irifh  Hand  of  that  Age  ;  as  alfo  one  of  the  mufl 
authentic  Copies  of  the  Latin  Gofpels,  which  they 
have  fent  forth  from  thatlfland. 

1803. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  8vo  (quern  a  me  redemit  Illuft- 
riflimus  Duminus  meus)  pariim  Typis  excufus,  partial 
varijs  manibus  exaratus  ;  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Maxitni  Epifcopi  Cytherenfis,  brevis  de  Pr$- 
ceptis  atq;  Concilijs  Evangelicis  Tradatus.  In  quo  S. 
Scripturre  Veteris  ac  Novas,  &  fandorum  Dodorum, 
tain  Greecorum  quam  Latinorum  audoritatibusoflenditur, 
hcec  inter  fe  efie  diftinda :  nec  non  confilia  nun  efie 
abfolutel  neceflaria  ad  Salutem  (quas  Prasceptorum  ob- 
fervatione  acquiritur)  quamvis  ad  hanc  facilius,  plenius, 
atq;  gloriofius  confequendam  conferant.  Grasce  &  La- 
tine,  Impreffus  Venetijs  A.  D.  1602.  £7rip*fA£i'a  xxi 

SlOg^UtTlI  NfOpUTOU  jJ.QVX-/ji  PiilHS  T8  Ku7Tfl3,  | UO.3r.TZ  T8 
■&topD.£raTou  xai  trcpurxrou  iirirxoiroii  K"pi ov  Majijuou 

t3  M apyovn'ou.  (defideratur  Tilulus,  cum  iniiio  Epifloke 
GrasCcE  dedicatoria:  ad  Georgium  Hegumenum) 

3.  Ejufdem  Maximi  Margunij  fpifeopi  Cytherenfis 
Epiflola  Dedicatoria  r sT?  ’tna-ficn  Xgiri*vo7ff  Enchiridio 
fuo  prsemiffa.  Grasce,  litteris  miniatis.  3  2. 

3.  Ejufdem  in  fequens  Opufculum,  Prasfatio.  33. 

4.  Ejufdem  Enchiridion,  five  Sermo,  de  difcrepantia 
inter  Evangelica  Prascepta  &  Concilia,  ut  videtur. 

35- 

De  hujufmodi  Sermonibus  fuis  verba  fecit  Max¬ 
imus,  in  Epiflola  ad  Georgium  Hegumenum.  1. 

5.  Majjijuou  Txvtivj  tirio-xoVs  dvxtrxsfin  (f.  leg. 

uvftirxsur)  TWV  KVCIWTipUlV  £1TI*£El{  1|(UAT J1V  TtfJ  yiVOfAlVItC 

to  xvtx  'Eypgfift'Aov  dwof.cylxf  86.  b. 

In  fine  legitur  hasc  Adnotatio,  qua:  tempus  abfoluti 
Tradatfis  ob  oculos  ad  amuflim  ponit.  ’Et£A£»o9>i  tv 
Bevetixi;,  xxtx  tm  xy^xx,  tv  per, vi  Mxpri'ju  Sixain  tvvxir.y 
£i{  ix;  xf'  ugxt  r»f.  mtji  nf*:par.  n/xigx  ftVTigx  iuv  Bxiuv 
njiwv  ccjj.ni/ .  T.Afgp  xal  TU  fifw  So£x  I  — 

6.  MaoounAs  i i  Moiyi utom  X<.y&  aVoAoyriTix.'f  ir^l f  r'|/ 

Af’yoi/raf  jJ.it  tytiv  ’A vxyxnv  iuv  Xfir»am,-  xai  ixf  (3ouXxf  t» 
irwTt-fOf  cuirgixv  puXxiltiv,  aAA «  SvvxirSxt  trjj^taS’xi 

TSTWV  fuXxrlofAlVUV  -  I  32. 

7.  Ta  tv  clylo if  irxT^t  njxuv  Ma^ijuou  irtgi  ayxirni  txx- 

TOVTxStf  S  .  t49* 

8.  Ta  4>iA?i  r‘X0i  iroXtrixot  xxtxvvxtixoi  : —  200.  b. 

g.  Tx  xuiZ  (uj  ipairl)  tx  AoiV^ia  irv'ovros.  201. 

10.  Zuvroptof  ugxyjxxitlx,  xxi*  ’IxSxiuv,  iv  xttXyi  Stx* 

Aextw*  nx^x  ts  trotpuTXTov  'AXsfcxvSpuxf  xuffeu  Kupi'AAa  ra 
Aouxa^f^*  Qoyygxq>i7<rx  7tx^xxavtix  ti vis  %jmcljM\i  p^fir*«vs 
ivoftxrt  xu p  Ttupyiov  IIxpyxTx  Kusrpiou  : —  202. 

Locum  et  Tempus  Operis  confcripti,  monffrat  ad¬ 
notatio  qu3s  in  fins  confpicitur,  fcil. _  283.fi. 

'Ev  ’Aiyuwjw  £T£A£i£o$>i  to  irx^ovf  C,  f  A  r,  Stxijj.  013  Si¬ 
xain — Annus  autem  Grascorum  vulgaris  71 30.  incidit 
in  annum  D.  N.  J.  C.  1628. 

1804. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  i2mo,  quern  (una  cum  alijs 
nonnullis)  dono  dedit  IUuftriflimo  Domino  ir.eo  Vir 
clariff.  Georgius  Hickefius  Litterarum  Anglo-Saxoni- 
carum  Inflaurator  fummus.  In  illo  continentur, 

1.  Kalendarium  ;  in  quo  notantur  Dies  Feftivales 

Sandorum  quorundam  e  partibus  Anglias  Borealibus, 
put&,  Ofwyni  Martiris,  Guthiaci  Prefbyteri,  Wilfridi 
Archiepifcopi,  Johannis  deBeverlaco,  Godrici  Heremitas, 
Bedas  Prefbyteri,  Willelmi  Archiepifcopi,  Botulfi  Abbatis, 
Karilefi,  Bofili,  Ofwaldi  Regis  et  Martyris,  Ofwyni  Regis, 
Ebbce  Virginis,  Aydani  Epifcopi,  Cuthberti  Epifcopi, 
Hildas  Virginis,  &c.  >• 

2.  Obituarum  Ecclefize  Dunelmenfis.  13. 

Sequitur  Manuale  Precum,  in  quo, 

3.  Oracio  ante  Miflam  dicenda.  16. 

Oracio 


4- 


244 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1804,  1805. 


4.  Oracio  devota  poll  Miflam  dicenda.  x6.  b. 

5.  Alia  Oracio.  _  17.  b. 

6.  Horse  beatse  Maria;  Virginis.  1 8. 

7.  Septein  Pfalini  Poenirentiales.  8a  b. 

8.  Litania,  in  qua  precatur  ad  Sanftos  Anglicos  va- 

rios,  fc.  Ofwaldum,  Elphegum,  Albanum,  Ol'wynum, 
Cuthbertum,  Auguftinum,  Aidanum,  Ceddam,  Wilfri- 
dum,  Dunftanum,  Johannem  de  Beverlaco,  Willelmum, 
Edmundum,  Swythunum,  Carilephum,  Benediftum, 
Bedam,  Guthlacum,  Godricum,  Etheldredam,  Hildam, 
Ebbain,  &c.  90.  b. 

9.  In  Vigilia Mortuorum,  Preces.  xoo.  b 

1  o.  Oratio  de  S.  Cruce.  1 34 

11.  Oratio,  de  Septein  verbis  quse  Dominus  dixit 

Cruce.  135 

12.  Oratio  de  Nomine  Jefu.  I37 

13.  Alia.  13S.  b 

I  805. 

A  Paper-book  in  4to,  (bought  of  me)  written  by  a  Ro- 
manift,  in  order  to  encourage  Novices,  who  had 
entred  into  a  Religious  Life.  Herein  are  handled 
thefe  Points  following, 

x.  The  Bafenefs  of  all  Temporall  thinges.  7. 

2.  Wherin  confifteth  Mans  true  Nobilitie  Sc  Honnour. 

I3-b- 

3.  The  Dignitie  of  Religious  Povertie.  17. 

4.  The  Excellencie  of  Religious  Chaftitie.  28. 

5.  The  Dignitie  of  Religious  Obedience.  38. 

6.  That  Religious  are  above  all  Earthly  things;  & 

howe  glorious  a  things  it  is.  44.  b. 

7.  The  Prehemynence  that  Religious  have  by  for  fak¬ 
ing  their  Carnal  frindes.  52.  b. 

8.  That  the  Religious  have  forfaken  themfelves  alfo, 

which  is  the  greateft  matter  of  all.  57.  b. 

9.  That  all  Vertues  meete  together  in  the  Religious 

Eftate.  61. 

10.  Howe  great  the  Perfection  of  the  Religious  Eftate 

is.  70.  b. 

11.  Of  the  Dignitye  of  Religious  life,  for  the  likelihood 

it  hath  to  Chrifte,  and  to  God  himfelfe.  79. 

1  2.  That  Religion  is  a  kind  of  Martyrdome.  86.  b. 

13.  Religious  are  Frindes  unto  God,  and  are  his  Chil¬ 
dren  &  Spowfes.  92. 

14.  Religious  are  the  Temple  of  God,  becaufe  they 

bee  confecrated  to  God.  99.  b. 

1 5.  Religious  by  their  oblation  of  themfelves,  are  a 

perpetual  Sacrifice.  105.  b. 

if.  The  Comparifon  of  Religious  Dignitie,  with  that 
of  Kinges.  108. 

17.  Of  the  Judiciall  Power  that  Religious  fliall  have. 

1  13.  b. 

18.  Of  the  Glorye  that  Religious  lhall  have  in  Heaven. 

19.  The  Antiquitie  of  Religious  Eftate:  and  firft  howe 

it  was  figured  in  the  oldeLawe.  130.  b. 

20.  That  Religious  Eftate  was  inftituted  by  Chrifte, 

and  was  firft  in  the  Apoftles.  136.  b. 

21.  Religious  Inftitution,  howe  it  flourifhed  in  the 

Apoftles  tyme.  j  ^D. 

22.  Howe  Religious  Orders  did  fpread  afterwards  and 

came  to  our  very  tymes.  148. 

23.  Of  Religious  Orders  in  Clergie  men.  158. 

2  4.  The  exceeding  multitude  of  Religious  perfons,  & 

Religious  Orders.  j^, 

25.  Men  of  finguler  Holynes  &  Learning  that  have 

beene  Religious.  iji.  b. 

26.  Princes  that  have  beene  Religious.  179.  b! 

27.  Of  certeine  principal  Wocmen  that  have  entred 
ReKgion. 

28.  Of  Popes  that  have  beene  chofen  out  of  Religious 

Oiders.  192. 

29.  Of  the  Prelates  that  have  come  out  of  Religion. 

205. 


Num.  1805,  1806. 

30.  The  Fruictes  that  have  bene  brought  forthe  by 

Religious  in  Gods  Churche.  211. 

31.  Caufes  why  the  Religious  Eftate  is  of  all  other, 

the  fitted  to  bring  forth  fuch  fruictes.  223. 

32.  That  many  Religious  have  excelled  both  for 

Learninge  &  Eloquence.  230. 

33.  Caufes  why  Religious  havefo  profitted  in  Learn¬ 
ing.  _  240.  b. 

34.  A  threefold  Bewty  Sc  Dignitie  of  Religious  Or¬ 
ders.  243.  b. 

35.  Religious  Orders  have  the  Forme  of  the  perfect¬ 
ed  Common-wealthe.  24 9.  b. 

36.  Howe  great  an  Ornament  Religious  Orders  have 

brought  to  the  Churche.  257. 

37.  The  Honour  which  even  in  this  Life  alfo,  is  done 

to  Religious.  261. 

I  806. 

A  parchment  Book  in  large  4to,  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  Poftills  upon  the  Pfalter,  &  Cantica  Sacra  in  Old 
Englilh. 

The  Pfalter  is  of  that  Tranllation  of  St.  Hierom, 
which  is  commonly  called  Gallicanum,  and  prevailed 
at  length  here  in  England  more  than  either  of  the  01  hers. 

The  Method  ufed  is  thus  all  along  ;  firft  a  Latin 
Verfe  ;  then  a  Verbal  Tranflarion  of  the  fame  in  Old 
Englilh  ;  then  the  Poftill  or  Explanation  of  the  fame, 
which  is  figurative  enough.  The  Firft  Leaf  is  wanting. 

After  the  Halter,  follow  the  Cantica  Sacra ;  as  I 
faid  before,  being, 

2.  Canticumlfaiae. “ Confitebor  tibi Domine.”(If.xii.  1.) 

1SZ- 

3.  Canticum  Ezechia;.  “Egodixiin  dimidio  dierum.” 

(If.  xxxviii.  10.)  152.  b. 

4.  Canticum  Annas.  153.  b. 

5.  Canticum  Moyfis.  “Cantemus  Domino  groriofe.’* 

(Exod.  xv.  1.)  134.  b. 

6.  Canticum  Abacuc.  156. 

7.  Canticum  Moyfis.  “  Audite  cceli  qure  loquor.’* 

(Deut.  xxxii.  1.)  158. 

8  The  Hymn  “  Te  Deum  laudamus.”  i6r. 

9.  Canticum  trium  puerorum.  162. 

10.  Canticum  Zacharke.  165. 

1 1 .  Canticum  Maria;.  1 66. 

12.  Canticum  Symeonis.  167. 

13.  The  Creed  “  Quicunque  vult.”  167.  b. 

So  far  concerning  the  Pfalter,  Cantica  Sacra,  and 

the  Poftills  upon  them.  The  author  of  thefe  fame  Poftills 
feemeth  to  have  been  John  Wycliile  in  his  younger 
Years.  In  the  Work  he  generally  followeththe  Doctrine 
ot  the  Roman  Church  then  received  ;  but  yet  with  fome 
diflike  of  particular  Matters  or  Perfons.  Thus,  for  ex¬ 
ample  he  fpeaketh  againft  Falls,  &  Wakes,  fol.  1.  col.  2. 
Againft  the  Monks  &  Friers,  fol.  1 66.  Againft  the  S| 
Couvetoufnefs  of  Priefts  &  Prelats,  fol.  86.  col.  2.  & 
fol.  87.  col.  2  and  alfo  concludeth  the  whole  work  with  ] 
a  touch  upon  the  fuperior  Clergy,  fol.  1 70-  b.  This  may  j 
ftiew  that  he  was  then  fomewhat  difgufted  at  the  Clergy 
in  general,  and  at  their  Proceedings.  What  Opinion 
he  had  ofhimfelfat  the  fame  time,  may  be  gathered  from  I 
this  Hint,  fol.  86.  b.  col-  1.  “  Et  mandavit  nubibus  defu- 

per,  etjanuas  celi  aperuit. - pat  is:  He  bad  toFIolyPre- 

chours  pat  has  of  Him  pat  pei  Preche.  And  poo  zatis  of 
Heven,  pat  is.  Holy  Writ  he  opynde  to  poo  pat  Preches 
or  Writes  ;  not  to  othre  pat  are  tedier  to  chalange  opre 
Mennys  Dedys  pen  to  do  homfelf  oght  pat  goode  is.” 

In  the  Kings  Library  at  Cotton-houfe,  is  a  Work 
of  this  kind,  feeming  pretty  agreeable,  the  Preface  where¬ 
of  bears  the  Name  of  Richard  Hampole. 

Then  follow  in  Latin,  by  another  Hand, 

14.  Traclatulus  de  Informatione  fimplicium  Sacerdo- 
tum.  fol.  170.  b.  (i.  e.  Conftitutio  Joh.  Pecami  Arch- 
Cant.) 

5*  15.  Tefta- 


5 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


Num.  1806,  1807. 

15.  Teftamenlum  Johannis  Hixon  de  Elyngton  m 
Com.  Huntyndon.  dat.  A.  D.  1462.  I,\,- 

16  Teitamentum  Margente  Colynge.  dat.  I  Mai] 

A  u  j  ibid. 

Being  difturbed,  I  forgot  to  add,  That  this  Book 
evidently  appears  to  have  lain  long  in  the  Water.  1  hits 
the  famous  Durham  Gofpels  in  the  Cottonian  Library 
Nero  D.  iv.  were  recovered  from  the  Sea.  So  alio  the 
Comment  of  Johannes  de  Lathbury  in  Hieremiam  in  the 
Library  at  Sion  College  were  taken  from  the  bottom  ot 
the  Sea.  And  the  Works  of  Mr.  Frith  found  m  the  Belly 
of  a  great  Fifb,  &c. 

1807. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  majori,  diverts  mambus 
feriptus  ;  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Abbreviatio  Cartte  qua  Walter  us  Moyle  unus  Juf- 
ticiariorum  Dm  Regis  de  Communi  Banco  &  Robertas 
Woode,  dederunt  Thomrc  Mufchamp  &  alijs  Medietat. 
Maneriorum  de  Camerwell  &  Bredynghurlt  m  Com. 

2.  Tra&atus  Juridicus,  cui  Titulus,  Lez  Tenures. 

2. 

3.  Kalendare  Traftatyi  cui  Titulus  Curia  Baroms. 

4.  Curia  Baronis,  Normanno-Gallice.  i2.b. 

c.  Kalendare  de  Natura  Brevium.  34- 

6.  Tra&atus  de  Natura  Brevium,  Normanno  Gallice. 

36.  b. 

7.  Tabula  Materiarum  in  diverfis  Anghci  Regm  Sta- 

tutis  contentarum  ;  Normanno-GallicS.  1 06. 

8.  Magna  Carta  Regis  Henrici Tertij.  122. 

q.  Ejufdem  Carta  de  Forefta.  1 2S* 

xo.  Sententia  lata  fuper  Cartas,  A.  D.  1253.  126.  b. 

11.  Provifioncs  de  Mertona.  I27- 

12.  Statutum  de  Marleberghe.  IJ9- 

13.  Statut.  Weftmonafterij  Prim. 

14.  Statutum  Glouceftrie.  194.  b. 

15.  Explanations  ejufdem.  197.  b. 

16.  Statutum  Religioforum. 

17.  Statuta  Weftmonafterij  Secunda.  19R.  b. 

18.  Statutum  de  Emptoribus  Terrarum.  anno  18  Edw. 

Primi'  2i7-b. 

19.  Statutum  de  conjun£tim  Feoffatis. 

20.  Statutum  deFinibus.  219,- 

21.  Statutum  de  Bigamis.  2201 

22.  Confuetudines  k  Affife  de  Forefta.  221. 

23.  Tradatus  de  Corona.  22  2- 

24.  Prerogariva  Regis.  224- 

25.  Difiniciones  Tenementorum.  225.  D. 

26.  Statutum  de  Hibernia.  _  22  7- 

27.  Statutum  de  Defenfione  Juris.  227.  b. 

28.  Statutade  Mercatoribus.  22°* 

29.  Novum  Quo  Waranto.  229-  b- 

30.  Statutum  de  quo  Waranto  Primum.  230. 

31.  Statutum  de  Prohibitionibus.  231.  b. 

32.  Statutum  de  vocatis  ad  Warrantum.  23 1 .  b. 

33.  Statutum  de  Wardis  et  Relevijs.  232. 

34.  Modus  facieRdi  Homagium&Fidehtatem.  232.  b. 

3  c.  In  quibus  Caftbus  in  andquis  Donumcis  Coronm 

capicnda  eft  Aflifa,  &c.  233- 

36.  Statutum  de  Juratoribus.  233.  D. 

37.  Statutum  de  Confpiratoribus.  2 34* 

38.  Breve  de  eodem.  lbld* 

30.  Statutum  de  Jufticijs  affignatis.  ibid. 

40.  Statutum  de  Magna  Affifa  jungenda.  234.  b. 

41.  Statutum  de  Effonijs  calumpniandis.  235. 

42.  Articuli  fuper  Cartas.  23°* 

43.  Statutum  de  Articulis  Clericorum  239.  b. 

44.  Statutum  de  Forincefis  vocatis  ad  Warrantum  in 

Huftengo  London.  ,  ,  2,^]'  ?' 

45.  Statute  de  Gavelkynde  (al.  Gavelette)  vel  de  ha- 

bentibus  Tenementa  in  London.  242- 

46.  Statutum  de  Appellatis.  242.  b. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num,  1807. 

47.  Statutum  Lincolnke ;  de  Vice-comitibus  et  Hui> 

dredarijs.  243- 

48.  Statutum  de  Anno  Bifcxlili,  faftum  apud  Wyn- 

defore.  2  4  3  .b 

49.  Statutum  de  Champartie,  editum  apud  Berwyke. 

ibid. 

5c.  Statutum  ne  quis  ponalur  in  Aflifis.  244. 

ci.  Statutum  de  Attornatis  recipiendis,  et  Finibus. 

ibid. 

52.  Statutum  F.xonise  (five  Modus  inquirendi  de  Co- 

ronatoribus.)  244.  b. 

53.  Articuli  fuper  Statutum  Exonite  de  Coronatoribus. 

246. 

54.  Statutum  de  Militibus  faciendis.  .  247*  b. 

55.  Statutum  de  Hibernia,  de  Terra  data  in  liberum 

Maritagium.  248* 

56.  Statutum  de  Religiofis,  apud  Karliolum  editum. 

ibid. 

57.  Statutum  de  Libertate  perquirenda.  249.  b. 

58.  Statutum  quodvocatur  Willelmus  le  Botiller  ( al « 

De  A&ione  vafti  fa&i  tempore  alieno)  2  50. 

59.  De  Prilonam  frangentibus.  ibid. 

60.  Statutum  de  Prifonibus.  _  _  251. 

61.  Statutum  de  Protectionibus  calumpniandis.  ibid. 

62.  Statutum  de  Officio  Coronatoris.  25  Kb. 

63.  Placita  Coronas.  252.  b. 

64.  Statutum  de  Extenta  Manerij.  _  255.  ^. 

65.  De  Sacramento  Vice-comitis  et  aliorum  Minif* 
ftroium  Domini  Regis  in  Principio  Itineris.  236.  b. 

66.  Compoficio  Monetae.  238. 

67.  De  Tonfura  Monetze.  258.  b. 

68.  Expoficiones  proprietatum  Regalium  Anglia 

(Sokne,  Sak,  &c.)  _  259.  b. 

69.  Expoficiones  Vocabulorum  in  Cartis  Liberiatum. 

2  59* 

Sequuntur, 

70.  Capitula  Statutorum  de  Regno  R.  Edwardi  TerUj. 

260. 

71.  Capitula  Statutorum  de  Regno  R.  Richard!  Se- 

cundi.  73’  i5*. 

72.  Capitula  Statutorum  de  Regno  R.  Henrici  Quarti. 

281. 

73.  Capitula  Statutorum  de  Regno  R.  Henrici  Quinti, 

285. 

74.  Nove  Narraciones  (herein  are  divers  Cafes  taken 

from  the  Year-books.)  288._ 

7 Capitula  Tratlatus  infequentis  ;  cum  additamentis 
recentioribus.  .  392, 

76.  Colle&io  C.afuum,  ut  aiunt,  Juridicalium.  394* 

77.  Entrances  of  the  Births,  Ac.  of  divers  perfons  of 
both  Sexes,  of  the  Family  of  Mufchamp  of  Peckham  in 
Com.  Suit,  to  whom  this  Book  formerly  belonged, 

410. 

1808. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  (ex  diverfis  Traftatibus 
firnul  compadis  conftansy  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Chronologia  a  Chrifto  nato  ufque  ad  A.  D.  1122. 
ubi  maxime  agitur  de  rebus  in  Britannia  geftis.  1 .  b. 

2.  Totius  Britannia;  Tabula  Chorographica.  9.  b. 

•3.  Cronica  fa&a  fub  Compendio  (vid.  inlra.  §  46  ) 
0  10. 

A  Noacho  fcilicet,  ad  mortem  ufq;  Regis  Henrici 
Quarti ;  nonnulla  tayien  inibi  leftu  digna. 

4.  Arma  Adze  de  Stavelay ;  cum  notulis  de  ftirpe 

ejufdem.  .  . 

5.  De  Genealogia  Ducum  .Britannia;  ;  nimirum  e 

Beatrice  filia  R.  Henrici  in.  ‘  .  ijw1* 

6.  Adnotatio  de  Raptu  ac  Incarceratione  Cormtiflk  d« 
Lancaftre,  per  Comitem  de  Warenna  A.  D.  1316. 

ibid. 

7.  Cognomina  Magnatum  Angliam  intrantium  cum 

Willclmo  Cahqueftorc.  *9* 

SK 


14  6 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1808. 

De  fuo  qui  in  Codice  fequitur  Catalogo,  fie  prte- 
fatus  eft  Auftor. 


“  Vous  qui  defirez  a  favoir, 

Les  Noms  des  Grauntz  dela  mer 
Qi  vindrent  oue  Ie  Conquerour,  ’ 

William  Baftard  de  graunt  vigour, 

Lour  Surnouns  iffi  vous  ay  devys,  * 

Come  je  les  trovay  en  eferys,  ’ 

Car  dcs  Propres  nous  force  ny  a 
Pource  qils  ion  changez  cea  &  la. 

Come  de  Efmonde  en  Edwarde 
De  Baudewyn  en  Bemarde, 

De  Godard  en  Godwyn, 

De  I  lys  en  Edwyn. 

Et  iflint  de  touz  autres  Nouns, 

Comme  ills  font  levez  du  founs. 

Pour  lour  Surnouns  come  font  ufez 
Et  ne  font  pas  fouvent  changez 
Vous  ay  efeript ;  ore  eftotez.  »* 

8.  Hiftonola  de  Fundatione  Monaderij  per  Akariam 
filmm  Bardolfi  magnum  PoffeiTorem  Terrimm  in  ™ 
Abbatia  de  Fors  i  pottei 

f  cSSte  •  “dyda'e  !  dcind=  AbLt.ua 

tandem*  lUM  proprietatem  Loci  « 
Aqua  currentis,  vocabatur  de  Jorevaile  num  una  cum 
Cards,  typis  legitur  excuia,  in  Monad.  Ang.  Tom. 

9.  Genealogia  Comitum  Leycedrie.  Mg' 

I0‘  DMPar?r!0lle  Haereditatis  eorundem  inter  Sv- 
monem  Moundford  &  Saerum  de  Quincy  •’ cum  enu" 
meratione  Pofterorum  ab  utroq;  ortomm.  ibid 

/ I-  -Adnotatio  de  Comitibus  de  Ferrariis  ner  O  ' 
““  a  Malcolmo  Rege  Scotorum  rtirpenf  Zen £& 

1 2.  Genealogia  Comitum  Lancadrie.  *7 

fec^dumT^“drUre  deEfe“"  Conte  de  Lancadre, 

! t  Del  GFenea'“«!a  d=  La<T  Comit.  Lincoln,  ibid! 
Chedre?  E”Sen<W  d“  Fill“  Randolf  Conte  de 

rl6i  2el  FnE“d™«  de  lez  Filles  de  Roy  Edw'arfe 

Seco7nd?2emSnFra  Phit/e 

taffavoir  Mergarete.  PP  7  de  * raunce»  cefc 

meduc  SenefcaH^Epifcopi ^unehnenfis6  A^D* 
per  D  nm  Robertumde  Neville  Cotrnamm  r  '  ^ '  V*8’ 

b-d»^5£;:p^r 

Hocetiamin  Tractate,  agitov  *  H,do7  R  2+' 
rum  Anglim  Sc  Scotia  ■  r-  •  T.6  „t  na  Regno- 

NobilioriLscarundcm;  dePraft  "m8’-  nndpibuS  & 

Augiite  Borealibus  commiffis L  T’ltT partibus 
Religionis  Ordinum  ■  F “  l„V  In,"itut,one  diverforum 
clefiarum,  &c  ’  Fundat,°ae  Monaderiorum,  Ec- 

vSis  Ver ab  Urba™ 

eontritis,  in  fine  Salutation^  S^Mar '“"v^  ■  •' 
Jhefum  nominantibus  •  den-  j-  Mana2  Virgmis 
idem  dicendbuH Ir  JoSl *?“  d,ert™  Relaxation 
ill  Sermone  ad  populum  Avi  •  apaiJ?  XXI1-  fuperaddita, 
Sanftorum  A.  D  f3 7  A'"Wem.  die  Omnium 

dcC’l"«dSeNOThuSS“sCcTte'  ib"'« 

apud  Homyldoun-hilie.  P  S  tos’  1U1  deviedi  font 

ibid. 


Num.  1  8o8. 


rabul5  i73?  :i1  qua  rePradentantur  Invalio  Bri- 
tann  m  five  Albioms,  ocrifio  Gigantum,  ac  adificafo 
Civitatis  Londonienfis,  per  Brutum  Regem.  o0  u 

cams.'  fc7deBm°'  e‘de  Seflis  Angiorum,  melrifi- 

“  Anglorum  Regum  cum  geftis  Nomina  feire, 

Oui  cupit,  hos  Vcrfus  legat  et  poterit  reperire.”  •?  r. 

Chronicon  hoc  Metricum,  a  Bruto  progreditur 

SmOTtT  regis  Ri‘-dlardi  Secundi ;  adnotation- 

rion H  !r."rs  (rrc’  ,a  t,uid£m  Littiis  ‘ni,,;a'is = 
gione  pofins)  paflim  locupletatum. 

clefiai-umfSo^i, 

Primi  F“nda,i0ne  E^'  C- 

Sal.  Tedimonia  dcfiimpta  ex  Operibus  Galfriiii 
Monumetenfis  Vcnerabili,  Bcdat,  Henrici  Archidia 
con,  HunnngJomenfis  Willelmi  Malmeiburienfis,  Mar- 
tim  Polom  et  Alfndi  Beverlacenfis  Thefaurarii. 

27.  Eu  la  beat,  Gregorij  Papa,  Primi. 

Extat,  paulo  fciior,  in  Beds:  Ecclefi  Hid.  Lib47' 
c.ap  29. 

28  Bulla  Honorij  Papa  , 

ESaJ|  aPgd  Bedam.  Ecclefi.  Hid.  Lib.  , ,.  Cip.  ,'7. 

belt  r  ,  ?  S  n- commons  Sentemiam  pro  Li- 

defi7c»E  ,C  C’fa  Pboracen‘is>  ab  °mm  Subjedlione  Ec- 
cleiiat  Cantuanenfi.  dat.  A.  D.  1  ,  20.  ,0 

Non  exist  in  Monad.  Angl.  Tom  m 
30.  Pnvdegium  deferendi  Cructm,  &  Rcgem  co 
ronand,  Eboracenfibus  Aichiepifcops  conceiTum,  per 
ALxandruniPapam  (Jc.  Abdraftom.!  ,v  E 

Non  extat  m  Monad.  Angl.  Tom  lit 
Papte), SupCr  e0dem  CM  Abbreviata  Bulla  Honorij 
Extat  integer  Monad.  Angl.  Tom.  m.  pag.'^y 

ce£^.Ht7Um-  **<»*»« 

“  HREbmaoonfis  Tempi!,  Metropolis  Urbls. 
Eccleftaq;  ftatum,  prafens  pandit  tabulatum.” 

mutilSr-  M°naft'  Abg,-T“m.m.pag.  ,47.SL 

34.  Bulla  Papa  Adrian!,  direfla  omnibus  Epifconia 
Scocnc,  in  Ipecie  &  nominatim  :  cis  mandamis  m  of. 

dientiam  debitam  deferrent  Rorrern  i,-  t  ’  ,,  e* 
fob  poena  Excommunicatfonis.  S  ArahleP'f“l>'>  ^or. 
Non  extat  in  Monad.  Angl.  Tom  in  lbld' 

Extat  in  Monaft.  Anglic  Tom  .r,  1  lbld‘ 

verum  non  fine  mendis.  g  *  n>  adPag-  M7- 
37.  Recogfiitio  Regis  Scotim  fuper  Subieflinne  rnT 

s=riS“7rfi  ^ 

TomE7tpag074fin  ®  Monad,  ‘tag,. 

(4  “bSSSTS 

Ang|E?„lUm"^d°fe  edita  “ 

miuki'  rS“PP'icalio  C,avi  R'gis  Orcadum,  Decano  &  Ca 
CandidScafcf0  Conrecranu“e  Nicholai  eiecti  Epifcopi 

me  fa7t7tegrior  qu!jtm  in  Angl.  Tom  m 

PaS-  i4J.  fed  tamen  mendodfluni-  impreifia.8 

^o-  Recognicio. 


Bibliothecas  HarleianaC. 


Num.  1808. 


^eCTCT  C°mitis  °™lM*n«si  fell.  Petitio,  ut 
Epifcopus  per  Archiepifcopum  Ebor.  con- 

Omittitur  in  Monad.  Angl.  Tom.  til. 

Carta  Regis  Athrlftani.  j^id 


Mon“ianTTom.T,di“  Cart*>  «“  habetm  in 

41.  Compendium  Carta:  Regis  F.dwii  S' 

MonaftaAnUgLT'TUI(f‘  Termi"°S  ‘erranim 

43-  Compendium  Carta:  Edgari  Regis.  S 

lnte8ra  Cexceptis  lerrie  terminis)  Monad. 

Angl.  1  om.  hi.  128 

44-  Compendium  Cams  Knut  Regis.  ;b;d' 

Legitur  pen,-  integra,  Monad.  Angl.  Tom:  mi 

Cot.iirnr°mi’endi“m  Carte  Sar,ai  Edwardi  Regifct 

Exdat  in  Monad.  Angl.  Tom  m.  ,  if* 

9hr?Ilic.‘'n  b«w  de  Brum  et  Succciforibus  fuis 
Biitannim  Regibus  ufque  ad  Cadwaliadrum  :  deq;  Suc- 
ceffione  Regum  Anglo-Saxonum  (per  totam  Heptar- 
cun  ™  ad  Egberhtum  >  et  =xhtde  ad  Regem  Henri- 

.  S'.fine  cemitur  htec  Adnotatio,  iitteris  minimis 
bcripta  Jic  fintt  Regnum  Saxonum  et  Anglorum.”  Si 
quis  acta  Danoruin  &  Normannorum  legerc  defider.lt 
lnlpiciat  m  primo  quaterno  huju,  Libri,  incipiendo  ad 
Knutonem  Danicum,  qui  cor.mobatur  Anno  Gratia 
1027.  ut  patet  m  dido  Libro  qui  intitulatur,  Cronica 
iub  C.ompendio. 

47-  De  Origiue  Scotorum  &  Pi&orum.  56.  I 

Sal.  Succeflio  Regum  Scotorum  a  Fergufio,  ufque 
ad  Coronationem  Robeiti  Bruys. 

Sequunt  r  alienis  inanibus, 

Ben^diaiPaP«  xii-  Conflirutio. contra  Vifitantes 
debitor?  ^  Regulatl°  P™curationu  m  Vifitantibus 

49-  De  Procuracipnibus,  que  racione  Vifitacionis  de- 
bentur,  non  recipiendis  ab  Archidiaconis,  vel  aliis  inferi- 
onbus  Pnelatis,  nifi  cum  vifitent.  6n.  b 

reftat^XC1^S  ^'S  ^U'bu^dam’  Exordium  folummodo 

SO.  Part  of  a  Legendary  Letter,  written  in  old 
French  to  fome  Prince.  It  feemeth  to  deferibe  the 
FabL^atI°n  °f  IhC  S°“  dlers  of  the  T1>eban  Legion.  A 

5V  L^.rTnanfcrit  de  ,a  Letrc  ,e  Counte  de  Warwyke 
mande  a  Noflre  Seigneur  le  Roi.  ib'jd 

.  -This  ,1s  !aid/°  have  been  written  A.D.  1240.  upon 
occafion  of  the  King  of  Spain’s  overcoming  the  Moors 
in  a  great  Battle.  (Imperfect.) 

Roide^Sfe!  llBulle  inles 

A  fpurious  Letter  fathered  upon  the  Calipbof  Ba¬ 
bylon,  enjoymng  the  Invafion  and  Dedruaion  of  Chrif- 
tendome,  beginning  with  Spain.  (Imperfca.) 

,  S3-  Copie  de  la  Letre  noilre  Seigneur  Ie  ,<oy  mand4 
DEnPg°le°e"e,  1“  GraCe  ^  347-  et  d=  *>““  Regne 

This  is  not  in  Mr.  Rymer’s  Fmdera,  at  that  Year 
5 4-  Conitttutiones  Domni  Johannis  de  Stratforde  Can- 
tuanenfis  Archiepifcopt,  A.D.  1342. 

55.  Formula  quaidam,  f.ve  Adnotationcs,  in  Jure 

Canomco  ufitandte.  k 

56.  Copia  Liters  Domni  Benedifti  Pap*,  miffe  ad 

ivegem  Anglic  Edwardum  m.  g0 

Exflat  apud  I  horn.  Walfingham,  p.140.  V 
57-  Copia  Litere  Domni  Benedicti  Papa;  direclte  ad 
eundem  Regem  Anglias.  g ,  ^ 

Exllat  apud  Thom.  Walfingham,  p.  144.  ° 

t  5?;Rrfponfio  Regis  ad  Literam  Domni  Papa.  S4.  h 

Exitat  apud  Thom:  Walfingham.  i4J. 


Num.  1808,  r  80 Q: 


«PKrnli0  Gallice  ^ 

vt  TrivEtiflfr  DTni  Paprc  vidtt‘  r  Clemen* 
dlt  Avemkfn  fw'a  " 4  Pucem  exhonatoria. 

dat.  Avemon.  i  j  kal.  April,  anno  tertio:  86.  b, 

manm  ST  *  g“  EJ*ariii’  miffi.  Curia  Ro. 

de  re„nd  J  %fu'’  h.“=rcmtafio  iu  Regnum  Frantia  j  et 
de  tieugis  non  fervatis.  gg 

Ex  fiat  apud  Rymerum.  Tom.  v.  p.  439; 
adReJS  EitereJmifl'=a  Domno  Papa  Clemente  vt. 
Jerltof  g  la::  dat-A,emon'  1°  kal.  April,  anno 

63.  Copia  Litere  Regie  direfte  Epifitopo  Londtfnienft, 
A.D.  t3+o.  (Imperf.)  r  ,  b  * 

Exfiat  apud  Walfinghamum,  p.  1  34; 

64-  Copia  Bulla  Domni  Gregorij  Papa  lx.  fuper 

Confirmatttme  omnium  Jurium,  5  edam  de  EmptCne 
Novahum,  et  de  Nutnmentis  Animalium  Monarterio 
I  horneyenfi  ubicunque  fpedantium.  dat.  e  idus  Febr 
A.  JJ.  1  239. 

65.  Confifmatio  Domni  Ricardi  (leg.  Robert!  Graft- 
heved)  Eptfcop,  Lmcolmenfis,  fuper  eadem  re.  dat. 
12  39  ^eccmbns  Pomificatus  fui anno  quinto,  i.e.  A.D. 

66.  Confirmario  Domni  Robert!  Kilwarby,  A, -chi- 
epiici'pi  Caniuarienfis  fuper  eadem  re.  dat.  7  idi  s  De- 
cembns  A.D.  1277s 

|  6;  Confirmatio  Mchoiai  .  .  .  .  D  cani  et  Caphtli 

A  ““s  f“Per  eadCm  re'  dat‘  6  kal.  Oaobris, 

68.  Confirmatio  Domni  Walter!  Ravnold-.Areo'e- 

pilcopi  Cantiiarietlfis,  fuper  eadem  re.  dat.  6  kal.  Fe- 
bruanj,  A.D.  1319.  c 

69.  Confirmatio  Domni  Thoma  Bek  Lined, tieufis 

Epifcopi,  fuper  eadem  re.  dat.  6  kalendas  Novcmbris 
A.1J.  1343.  96  b  * 

Inftruinenta  Sex  noviffime  recenfita  in  Monaltico 
Anglicano  defiderantur. 

Sequitur  aliena  inanu. 

:  ?0.’  Eragmentum  Annalium  de  Rebus  Anglicis :  quod 
tncipit  ab  Anno  Gratia  primo,  et  abrupte  deiinit  in  amid 
5,‘  9S. 

i8oy. 

A  thin  Vellum-Book  neatly  bound  in  large  4to,  fent  at 
the  end  of  the  Year  1712,  with  aLetter  (n™  fallened 
at. the  1  eginnmg)  to  my  Lord,  with  a  Defire  of  bring 
-preferred  m  this  Library;  by  Mr  Jolm  Bowack  ) 
then  &  Hill  Writing-mailer  to  Weftminfter-School. 

A  Petfon  of  a  good  Charader,  &  reputed  an  able 
Mailer.  It  containeth, 

r.  Two  DrawingSj  done  with  Indian  Ink  in  To  htfnd- 
forne  a  manner,  as  not  to  mifbefeem  any,  whofe  Em¬ 
ployment  doth  not  depend  upon  the  conftant  pfadtice  of 
Deligning. 

Divers  Specimens  of  our  Englilh  Wrifing  &  Ptint- 

ing-Hands;  as  the  Alamode,  Italian  ;  the  Square-Text 
E..j;lilh,  Roman,  k  Italic  Letters  :  which  although  they 
mav  not  come  up  to  the  CharabLer  he  once  gave  me  of 
them,  viz.  That  they  are  written  as  well  as  Hand  &  Peri 
can  do  them  :  are  yet  written  well  enough  ;  and  plainly 
lhew,  that  his  Genius  led  him  to  Letters,  as  well  as 
Figures. 

All  that  I  obferve  upon  this  part  of  his  Performance 
is,  that  it  might  have  come  forth  betfer,  if  he  had  before 
fiudicd.  what  it  is,  in  general,  that  makes  Writing  look 
beauuiul  :  and  if  in  his  Imitations,  he  had  kept  more 
JtrjcUy  to  the  eflential  pans  of  his  Letters;  &  without 
ru/ning  riot* 


1 S  1 01  Code£ 


**rtn iWy  mfi’jifc 


\ 


Catalogs  Librorum  MSS; 


Num.  1810. 


CV,det  ex  parte  longe-raaxima,  membranaceus  in  4to’ 
per  totum  verb  Grams  manibus  fcnpras  et  inlumma- 
tus  ;  in  quo  continentur,  ^ 

,  Tradatulus  explanatorius  de  Lediombus  Evange- 
licis,  et  Evangeliftis  ;  cujus  hsc  eft  Rubrica, 

r,\  t5  t«v  tvayyfAuov  •%*>««»; 

rnv  ™»  tJayysAirwn  woS«  te  app^ovrai, 

xwTaXwyoixri.  ^  t  ,  1  ‘  _ 

2.  Ar'Xw-rif  xa&’  ttapiv  KfpaXa»w»  r« 

Zxov  p'oovou  rx  ’EvayyeA.V  afXtyi*"  T« 

K.f.oxii,  ejl  Dies  Dominieus  Sacra  Refur- 
redionis.  Dm  CSw*£.  ;  „  _ 

3.  MjiyoAoyiov,  xal  Sfamn t  r3v  fu«yycX>uv  r»»  tofm.  9- 
Menologia  apud  Grscos  non  _  alia  lunt,  quam 

qua;  Latinis  Martyrologia  vel  Calendaria.  Leo  Allot,  et 
lx  eo  Suker.  Hinc  igitur  pateat  Traftatulum  fuprame- 
moratum  (N°  2.)  Menologlj  etiam  nomine  refte  nunqu- 
pari.  De  id  genus  fcripto,  in  Libro  quodam  Epiltola- 
rum  invento  audi  Leonem  Allatium,  fic  diiTeientem, 
“Epiftolis  adneaiturMENOLOGiUM,in  quo,  ab  initio Sep- 
tembris,  nomina  Sanaorum  fingulis  diebus  recenfentur 
illifq;  Epiftola  propria”  (ut  hie  Evangehum)  “  in  Officijs 
tecitanda  fubjungitur.”  52- 

Quod  autem  attinet  ad  primum  Tradatum ;  apud 
Grscos  vocari  videtur  Evangeliftarium.  SicLeoAllat. 
de  Libris  Ecclefiaft.  Grsc.  /  34- 

Poll  Evangeliuni,  additur  ’EuayyiAirafov 
rr,v  roil'  EuayyfXirwi'  iixio^r.v,  troStv  t*i,  xxt  71-3 

x«r«A»ry'outri»’  x.  r.  X.  4-5* 

Deinde  fequitur  Exemplar  Grscum  quatuor  Evan- 
geliorum,  antiquum  ac  bone  Nots  j  cum  Prsfationibus, 
Piauris,  et  Typico,  &c.  hoc  ordine. 

4.  Prsfatio  in  Evangclium  D.  Matthsi,  defumpta  cx 
Opere  Cofms  Egyptij,  “  Indicopleufts”  cui  Titulus 
“  Chriftianorum  Opinio  de  Mundo,  five  Topographia 
Chriftiana.”  I4-- 

Nec  CoCma:  noftri  Scripta  integra,  nec  Codicem 
prsefenteni,  dnquam  vidit  D.  Joannes  INJillius ;  alioquin 
proculdubio  Prsfationes,  ut  ica  dicam,  ejufdem  in  fin- 
gula  Evangelia,  cum  inlinitis  fere  e  Libris  Biblicis  cita- 
tionibus,  in  Teflamentum  fuum  inferuiffet.  Ipfius  emm 
tempore,  preter  fragmenta  ejufdem  nonnulla  Hiftorica 
atq;  Geographica  in  Apographo  Voffiano  laiitantia  (a 
Thevenotio  tandem  edita)  nihil  omnino  in  univerfis 
Anglis  Bibliothecis  extabat :  folam  fi  excipias  Praefati- 
onem-(ex  opere  fupra-dido  decerptam)  in  Pfalterium, 
quod  quidem  habetur  in  Codice  illo  Bibliotheca;  Bod- 
leians,  qui  inter  Baroccianos  locum  obdnet  decimum- 
quintum.  Totum  autem  Cofms  Opus,  una  cum  alijs 
quibufdam  Eufebij  et  Athanafij  ineditis,  magno  erudito- 
rum  beneficio,  publici  Juris  fecit  Parifijs  A. D.  1706. 
Bemardus  de  Montfaucon,  Benedidinus  e  Congrega- 
tione  S.  Mauri  Monachus  per-eruditus. 

5.  nxoxyoxipri.  fcil.  ejufdem  Cofms  locus  priori  inhs- 

rens.  fvid.  Lib.  v.  pag.  245.)  15-  b. 

6.  Prsfatio  alia  de  Evangelijs  et  quatuor  Evangeliftis, 

ex  Irenso.  1 6- 

Locus  extat  in  Libro  hi.  adverfus  Hsrefes :  i.  e. 
Editionis  Feu-ardentianae.  pagg.  258.  &  229.  ubi 
Verba  Graeca  defiderantur 

7.  'Tirobtvi<;  xxvoiiuii  Tr,(  r wj  EuayytAirku  ffup.pionaf. 

Sell.  Eufebij  Caefarienfts  notiffima  ad  Carpianum  Epif- 
‘-1-  j6.b. 


10.  Effigies  D.Matthaei  ceu  Minio  fcribentis,  Cracdo 
more  elaborata,  cum  Infcriptione  eO  £ !y*©* 

25.  b. 

1 1 .  Precatiuncula  ad  D.  N.  Jefum  Chriftum,  Gxdtcb, 

litteris  Coccineis,  in  fuperioribus  oris.  2  .  . 

is.  Pidura,  in  qua  reprefentatur  Natmtas  Domini 
SalvatoKs  noftri.  _  ; 

Tium  MaT^aioK  olytev  ’EuayyiXr.v.  Ibid. 


101a.  j  u.  u. 

8.  Canones  Eufebiani  Litteris  aureis  (feu  potius  coc¬ 

cineis  deauratis)  ac  caeruleis  exarati ;  cum  varij  generis 
Inluminationibus.  1 8.  b. 

9.  TS  xxtx  ’EuayytXfa,  tx  xrpaXaia.  23. 

Scripta  prim  it  us  fuerunt  Littcrae  quamplurium  Ru- 

bricarum  hujufee  Codicis,  liquore  Coccineo,  quas  poftea 
Auro  fulgentes  adhibito  rediderunt.  Ad  hunc  modum 
Capitula  memorata  leguntur  exarata. 


Superioribus  ac  inferioribus  Oris,  confpiciuntur 
tox'mt  MxyyuFfx  lruv  per  totum  Codicem  _  Evangel io- 
rum,  e Typico  forfan  defumptae,  Utterifq;  mmiatis  fenpta: 
perinde  atq;  Voces  Iintia  ac  Fines  ea- 

rundem  Ledionum.  _ 

Infuper  fuperioribus  marginibus,  cernur.tur  _  ipja 
Ki<pxXx,x:  nec  non  in  lateralibus,  Numeri  Eufebiams 
Canonibus  correfpondentes,  Litteris  Coccineis  deauratis. 

14.  Pidura  Transfigurati  Jefu,  cum  Moyfe  &  EliS  ; 
ac  Apbftolis  tribus  :  madore  laefa.  6 1 . 

1  c.  Alia,  qua;  Ccenam  Dominicam  ob  oculos  pcn:t. 

^  ^3- 

16.  De  Sando  Marco,  ex  Opere  laudato  Cofmae  I11- 

dioopleullae.  ?*• 

17.  nxpxygxfr.  Ex  eodem.  lb,d-_ 

18.  Praefati uncula  in  D.  Marci  Evangclium,  in  Edi- 

tione  Millianft  deliderata}  charaderibus  Coccineis 
deauratis.  /  ,  9r-  b- 

19.  Kt^aXai*  tS  x*t«  Mcepxov  Ivx yytXia,  Litteris  con- 

fimilibus.  , 

20.  Verfus  Iambici  de  S.  Marco,  eifdem  Charaderi- 

bus.  92.  b. 

21.  Effigies  Evangeliftce,  cum  Epigraphe  O  iyify 

Mxpx<&.  '  93*  b* 

22.  To  xar«  M xpxov  ayioo  'EoxyyiXiov:  94. 

23.  Pidura  qua  figuratur  »  (3 «n-1.r<r.  _  95- 

24.  Pidura  Decollationis  D.  Johannis  Baptiftae. 

107.  b. 

25.  Pidura  Afcenfionis  D.  N.  J.  C.  J35-  b. 

26.  De  D.  Luca,  Teftimonium  Cofmac  Indicopleuftac ; 

ex  Opere  fupradido.  1 3b- 

27.  Ejuldem  iragctyfxtp*.  I3.  ;  b‘ 

28.  Preefatiuncula  in  D.  Lucam  ;  apud  Millium  itidem 

deliderata.  |3?; 

29.  KfpstXaise  r«  xeUx  Aovxxv  ’EuayytXix  ;  coccineis  lit¬ 
teris  deauratis.  ,  t  ^bid. 

30.  Imago  Divi  Lucae  Scnbentis,  cum  Titulo  'O  «y.^» 

Asxaf.  139-b- 

31.  To  xxla  Avxxv  ayiov  ’EuayysX'ov.  140. 

32.  Effigies  B.V.  Mariae,  cum  Angelo  Gabriele  de 

Conceptione  ejus  annuntiante.  _  142- 

33.  Pidura  qu&  adumbratur,  preefentatio  pueruli  Jefu 
Symeoni  &  Anns,  per  Maiiam  et  Jofephum,  in  Templo. 

146.  b. 

MB.  Genealogiam  Jefu  Chrifti,  hoc  in  exemplari, 
(fcil.  fol.  1 49.  b.  &  150.)  perperam  (hand  fecus  ac  in 
alijs  quampluribus)  exhiberi ;  de  quibus  fic  D.  Millius 
pag.  155.  col.  1.— — Atque  hinc  poftea  fadum,  ut 
Nomina  in  Columellis— e  regione  fibi  invicem  oppofita 
Calamo  reda  per  tranftuntes,  ut  ita  dicam,  ac  continuis 
Lineis  excipientes  feioh  Scribs,  mifere  omnia  milcuerint 
atque  turbarint. 

34.  Piclura  Dormitionis,  ut  Graeci  volunt,  B.  V. 

Maria  jam  demortus,  cum  D.  N.  J.  C.  Am'inam  ejus 
geftante,  adftantibus  plurimis  lugentibus,  &c.  cum  In¬ 
fcriptione  H  Koifwia-iy.  l7 4- 

K«W»t.  Fedum  Dormitionis  B. Virgins  voci.tur 
■apt  T«I  dies  IJ  Aueufri,  quo  tam  Ro. 

mana  quam  Orientalis  Ecclefia  hoc  f  eft um  r  elebrat. 
Ladni  fepius  A  sumptionem^  vocant,  Graa  xotfwi* 
Dormitionem  :  quod  eo.'em  die  moituam  et  afiumtam 
in  Coelis  B.Virginem  credebant ;  vel  faltem  uttumq  rd 
eundem  diem  refe<ebant.  Suicer. 

35.  Pidura  Crucifixions D.  N.  J.  C.  cum  B.V.  M  , 
et  D.  Johann e  Apoftolo  adftantibus. 

“ 


Bibliothecas  Harlejanae. 


Num.  I  8 


r6.  Piclura  Refixionis  Chrifti  (ut  aiunt  Graci)  qua 
videlicet  a  Cruce  fuit  exemtus  :  nec  non  Sepulturae  ejul- 
deni,  cum  Titulo,  AiroxocSvXu<ri(,  brapiapo'j  20$.  b. 

-7.  Piclura  Refurreftionis  Dominica: ;  ubi  repraien- 
tur  ( Ihriftus  quafi  Adamum  ab  Inferis  reducens.  206. 

2 8.  Locus  Cofmas  Indico-pleultas  de  D.  Joanne  Evan- 
g  liita.  ■  ,  v  ?°9- b- 

30.  Prasfatiuncula  in  Evangelium  D.  Johanms  ;  qua: 
(perinde  atq;  alia:  omnes  alte-memoratas,  in  D.  Joannis 
IV,  iliij  Tcltamenti  Graci  Editione)  defideratur.  210.  b.^ 

40.  Kt<pa\0Lix  T2  xanx  'ludnvnv  'EuayyiAia,  Characte- 
ribus  coccineL  deauratis.  lbl<*’ 

4  1 .  Effigies  D.  Joannis  binx  ;  Evangelifta:  fcilicet,  et 
Theologi  Apocalypfeos  AuQoris.  211.  b. 

42.  To  xxr a.  'ludvvnv  ayion  E\ia.yyi\iov.  _  21 2" 

43 .  Piftura.  in  qua  repraefentantur  Duodecim  Apoftoli 

fedentes,  fuper  quos  defeendit  Spiritus  Sanftus  velut 
Ignis :  cum  Titulo,  'H  wtoTTixorfl.  .  23°* 

n»THxopi,  fcilicit  ;  quinquagefimus  dies.  Sic 

appellatum  eft  a  Gracis  Feftum  quoddam  in  Ecclelia 
Judiiica  celebrari  folitum,  Adi  11.  1.  &  xx.  16.  1.  Cor. 

xvi.  8.  in  memoriam  promulgate  Legis  in  Monte  Sinai 
quod  celebratur  quinquegefimo  a  Pafchate  die.  Suicer . 

44.  PidluraExpergetadlionis  Lazari,  ut  Graci  volunt ; 

et  Chrifti  fufeitantis  eum  ;  cum  Infcriptione  ’'Ey^e.f 
A «£«/>«.  .  r  ?39* 

45  Pidura  Chrifti  in  Afino  fedentis,  et  Hierofolymas 
proiicilcentis.  .  243- 

46.  Pidura  C.hiifti  Apoftolorum  Pedes  lavantis.  246. 

47.  Piclura  Chrifti  Apoftolis  fe  poll  Refurredionem 

oftendentis  ;  inter  quos,  Thomas  digitum  in  latus  ipfius 
miltit.  .  ,  „  26.1'  b- 

48.  Iambici  verfus  nonnulli  in  laudem  Evangeliorum. 

264. 

40.  "On  a  J'lapwi'Sfl-iv  ol  T£(7<r«f£f  vjxyyi\is-xi  nip  1  -rr,v  ra 

Xf/riii-,™.  ,,  -  2«4-b- 

50.  "Ot.  ot  d/xipinp-M  pir*  run  ccnxrneiv,  roif  pxx- 

SnTa~f  0  Xpirof.  .  . 

In  folio  chartaceo  ad  finem  rejeditio,  legitur  Adno- 
tatio  Idiomatc  Gitcco-barbaro  feripta.  qua  mnuitur  Co- 
dicem  jam  olim  cuidam  Monafterio  pertinuiffe,  quod  ab 
Elia  Propheta  Appellationem  aflumebat. 

18  I  I. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  quern  una  cum  quamplu- 
rimis  alijs,  quos  Illuftriftimo  Domino  meo  egregius 
Vir  Ilenricus  Worfeleius  dono  -dedit  a  me  in  hoc 
Volumine  fingillatim  rccenfitis.  In  illo  manibus  vanjs 
exarato  continentur. 

1.  Opufculum  quoddam  Aftronomici  argumenti,  exhi- 
bens  fcilicet  Calendarium  cum  Tabulis  alijs  Aftrono- 
micis,  per  fingulus  anni  menfes.  Accedunt, 

Tabula  proFeftis  mobilibus  inveniendis.  27.  b. 
Tabula  Eclypftum  Solis  abA.D.  1387.  ufque  ad 
A.  D.  1462.  cum  Phafibus  eorundem.  28. 

Tabula  Ecclypftum  Luna:  ab  A.  D.  1387.  ufq;  ad 
A.  D.  1462.  cum  Phafibus  fuis.  - 9 • 

Tabula  ad  inveniendum  locum  Luna:  &  moram  ejus, 
fub  quolibet  Signo.  3** 

Tabula  ad  feiendum  qua:  planeta  regnat  in  qualibet 
hora  intequali  diei  &  noftis.  .  31*  k* 

Axiomata  qusedam  Aftronomica,  &c.  r32- 

Inul  margine  folij  29.  feripfit  non-nemo  (h  Tho¬ 
mas  A’llenus  Aula:  Glouceftrienfis  apud  Oxonicnfes 
Principalis)  hanc  qua:  fequitur  Adnotationem,  “  Hoc 
j,  Tjjunum  fecit  Nicolaus  dc  Linea  (f.  redms  Lynna) 
Ordinis  B.  Dei  Genitricis  Maria:  de  Monte  Carmeh,  inter 
Ledores  Sacra:  Theologim  unus  ?  A.  D.  1386.  ad  peti- 
tionem  et  complacenriam  Illuftriffimi  Prrocipis  Dni  Jo- 
hannis  Ducis  Lancaftrise,  incipiens  a  fine  Kalendarij 
Reverendi  Magiftri  Waited  Elvenden.”  Ouibus  ve.bis, 
ex  alio  forte  Codice  ddcrintis,  hand  mihl  conftat  qmc- 
quid  feriptorum  utriufq;  in  pradenti  Libro  repenri. 

Cat.  Haul.  Voe.  II* 


Num.  1 8 1 1 — 1815. 

Porro  in  partibus  paginarum  pridem  vacuis,  ha- 
bentur  Adnotationes 

2.  De  Planetis.  31*  b. 

3.  De  tranfitu  Luna:  per  Zodiacum.  32.  b. 

4.  Prognoftica  de  Anno  future,  per  Diem  Nadvita- 

tis  Domini.  34-  b- 

5.  Prognoftica  per  tranfitum  Luna:.  35. 

6.  Planifuhaerium,  fecundum  Syftema  Ptolemaicun. 

38.  b. 


Codex  chartaceus  in  quart,  quem  itidem  Dono  dedit 
Illuftriftimo  Domino  meo,  Vir  ftrenuus  Henricus 
Worfeley  Armiger  ;  in  quo  continentur. 

Formula:  Libellorum  Supplicum  et  aliorum  Inftru- 
mentorum  in  Curia  Ecclefize  Cathedralis  Atrebatenfis 
ufitatorum,  circa  A.  D.  1634.  cum  Refcriptis. 

Accedunt  Epiftolm  et~alia  Scripta  ad  Nunciaturam 
Belgicam  pertmentia. 

1813. 

A  paper  Book  in  4to,  at  the  beginning  whereof* 

I  find  the  following  Title, 

1.  A  Relation  or  Memorial!,  abftraded  out  of  Sir 
Jerom  Horfey  his  Travells,  Implements,  Services,  and 
Negociations,  obferued  &  written  with  his  owne  hand, 
wherein  he  fpent  the  mod  part  of  Eighteen  Years  time. 
Firft  dedicated  to  that  worthye  and  of  Right,  Honno- 
rable  of  Memorie  Sir  Francis  Walfingham  Knight,  Prin- 
cipall  Secrtetarie  of  Eftate,  and  to  other  his  woorthye 
lovinge  Frends  &  Allies  that  did  defire  an  account  of 
the  fame.  And  by  them  fince  thought  not  un-worthye 
the  publifhinge  to  fuch  others  as  take  delight  to  Read 
forren  Iliftories. 

Jer.  Horfey. 

This  Treatife  is  undoubtedly  of  SirJeroms  own 
Hand- Writing. 

At  the  end,  in  the  fame  hand,  is, 

2.  A  little  Collection  of  Moral  Sentences,  in  divers 
Languages  ;  as  Ruffian,  German,  Latin,  Englifh,  &c. 

1814. 

Codex  chartaceus  et  tenuis  in  4to  (Grace  vero 
feriptus)  quem  haud  ita  pridem  emit  Illuftriflimus  Do- 
minus  meus  de  D.  Alexandro  Cunmghamio  Juniore, 
Scoto-Britanno  :  in  quo  continentur. 

1.  Aio*vo-13  AteZotnSptus  Oixuuinm  nipivyrnrif.  I. 

Non  folum  gaudet  hoc  Exemplar  interlinearibus 

Scholijs  prima  manu  confcriptis ;  verum  etiam  alijs,  una 
cum  Emendationibus,  et  Notis  marginalibus  Viri  cujuf- 
dam  perdofti,  fuperioris  (ut  videtur)  feculi,  quK  nondum 
quod  feiam,  lucem  viderint. 

2.  De  Dionyfio  Periegete  de'q;  inter  Geographiam 

et  Chorographiam  diferepanlia  43* 

Exftat  hsec  Adnotatio  in  Bibliotheca:  Bodlejana:  Co¬ 
dice  Laudino,  cujus  Notte  funt  C.  31,  uti  colligo  ex 
Editione  Dionyfij  noftri  Tlnvaitefiana. 

o.  De  duodecim  Vends,  cum  eorum  Nominibus. 

■*’  ibid. 


Codex  chartaceus  in  4to,  quem  (cuna  cum  alijs) 
emit  Illuftrilfimus  Dominus  meus  de  D.  Joanne  Ay- 
mone. 

Totus  eft  aut  Arwbicus  aut  Turcicus :  quin  et  in 
fine  legitur  hsec  Adnotatio, 

Ilic  Liber  Formularum  Charaflere  Kirma  dido 
conflatuseft.  Curiofa  molta  contiaet ;  et  qua:  in  illo 
verfantur  Epiftolx,  ftylo  elegantiffimo  elaborata  funt. 
(?uaa  mifit  Turcarum  Imperator  Soleimanns  ad  Chah 
Tainas  Perfarum  Regent  prevalent  alijs,  et  Relpon- 
fiones  ejnfdem  Regis  ad  Sokinlanum  anaiime  exilti- 

maIltu,'•  3  5  “  Qaartutu 


I 


- 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1 815 — -1819. 

Quartum  Scriptur  •  Arabics:  genus  KirMA,  cujus 
ufus  icre  tantum  eft  in  Tabulis  accepti  Sc  expenfi  I111- 
peratoris  Tuicarum.  Hoc  minus  attente  confideratum 
.fimilius  vidctur  efle  Scripturs  Vulgari  Judsoruin  quani 
t jj  Nisciii  :  literis  cnim  conftat  exiguuis,  nec  invicem 
connexis.”  Use  dodiffimus  Thomas  Erpenius  in  Gram. 
Arab.  Lib  1 .  ubi  Scptem  Arabics  Scripturs  recenfet 
genera;  omilla  tamen  omnino  mentione vetuftiflirnorum 
illorum  Charaderum,  quos  Arabes  vocant  Kuphi, 
quibus  primitus  feriptus  fuit  A1  Coranus,  perinde  atq; 
Poemata  Gentilium  Araburn,  8cc. 


816. 


Codex  chartaceus,  tenuis,  et  Italics  manu  feriptus,  in 
4to,  quo  continentur, 

1.  Confultatio  de  Calice  I.aicis  porrigenda,  durante 

Concilio  Iridemino,  et  quidem  A.  D.  1562.  con- 
feripta  ;  et  fortaffis.  in  eodem  recitata.  1. 

2.  Forma  Decreti  faciendi  fuper  Ufum  Calicis  petiii. 

46.  b. 

3  Refponfio  ad  propofitum  Decretum.  47.  b. 

4.  Decretum  fuper  Pctitione  Conccffione  Calicis,  pub¬ 
lication  in  eadem  Seflione  Sexta  Tridenti,  fub  Sanc- 
tiflimo  Domino  Noftro  Pio  iv  die  17  Septembris  1562. 

49.  b. 

5.  Refponiio  ad  hoc  Decretum.  30. 

T  8  I  7. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to,  quern  (una  cum  plu- 
liinis .  alijs)  HJuflrilli mo  Domino  meo  dono  dedit  Joannes 
Anftifius  Armiger.  In  illo  continentur, 

1.  Statuta  Regis  Ricardi  Secundi  poll  Conqueflum 

Anghs,  imperf.  t 

2.  Ca/itula  Statutorum  R.  Henrici  iv.  46. 

3’  Quedam  Ordinacio  de  Anno  ir.  habita  inMemor. 

inter  Recorda  de  I  ermino  Saudi  Hillarij,  anno  1  2  R. 
Henrici  iv.  Rotulo  v.  ex  parteRememeratoris Regis.  53. 

4-  Quedam  Ordinacio  de  Anno  8  R.  Henrici  iv. 
adta.  luper  Fine  Statuti  de  Anno  Septiino  didi  Regis 

Henric'-  54 ■  b. 

5 ■  btatuta  de  Anno  1  R.  R.  Henrici  iv.  rfi. 

6.  Statuta  de  Anno  2  R.  Regis  ejufdem.  64. 

7-  Quedam  Ordinacio  de  Anno  1 1  Regis  Iienii’ci 

Quartu  0 

d.  Statuta  de  Anno  it.  R. Henrici  iv.  74’ 

1818. 

Codi  x  tenuis  et  chartaceus  in  410,  quo  continetur. 
Liber  Alchemicus  qui  vocatur  Rofarius  Philofo- 
phorum ;  adjudicandus  forte,  cuidain  Arnoldo  de  Villa- 
IN  ova. 

1819. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to.  quern  a  me  redemit  Illuf- 
triilimus  Dominus  meus ;  in  quo  continentur. 

Collectanea  Joannis  Balsi  Carmelits  Norwicenfis 
poflmodum  Lpiicnp,  OfTorienfis  ;  de  Religione  Carme- 

L™'  rTr’bUi  fuB  manu  con- 

n  ripta,  atq;  adhuc  inedita.  fcil 

jeiS  “°"?Chi  d=Villa-Dd  Bd  r«m  Marcum 
™!,um  Carmelitam,  DoAnmii  Theologim  , 

noSorcm  Theologum  Ma- 
CZtoT™  d=FUnI0  ta™dita‘"-  rcuiPratenf,, 

oi:ommTl“rd  Mi,i0ne  Rat“”a'ls 

0  :  '  SB# 


Num.  1 8 19. 

6.  Diftichon  ejufdem  ad  Virginis  Prolem.  2. 

7‘  Vifitatione  Conventus  Coventrise  per  vene-* 
rabilem  Virum  Magiftrum  Fratrem  Laurentium  Bur- 
rellum,  Vicarium  Magiftri  Generalis.  A.  D.  1494.  ibid. 

8.  De  Scriptis  Domni  Godfiidi  Greneraye  Epifcopi 

Daguenfis,  &  Carmelits.  ’  2.  b. 

9.  De  Obitibus  Euflacij  Counri,  et  fratris  fui  Petri. 

•  •  ibid. 

10.  De  Obitibus  Provincialium  Francis  Johannis 
Buhot ;  Jacobi  Hanalt ;  Arthuri — nec  non  et  Nicolai 
de  Callro  Dodoris  Parifienfis ;  Joannis  Coffin,  &c. 

ibid. 

1 1 .  De  Sepulturis  Raymundi  de  Infula  ;  Gerardi  de 
Bononia  ;  Petri  de  Maffa  ;  Johannis  Baliftarij.  ibid. 

12.  De  Obitibus  Bernardi  Olerij,  Raymundi  Naquerii. 

ibid. 

13.  De  Eledionibus  Petri  Terraffe  Hifpani ;  Baptifts 

Mantuani ;  Bernardini  de  Senis ;  de'q;  Fratre  Helio- 
doro  Provinciali  Neapolitano.  ibid. 

14.  De  Obitu  Henrici  Potini  Epifcopi  Philadelphia:, 

Suflraganei  Archiepifcopo  Rothomagenfi.  ibid. 

15.  De  Obitibus  Petri  Hodenej  et  Stephani  Kanou 

Prioris  Rothomagenfis.  Jbij, 

1 6.  De  Scriptis  Symonis  de  Spira.  ibid. 

1 7.  De  Scriptis  Eveni  Boich  vel  Bovich.  ibid. 

1 8.  De  Scriptis  Johannis  Soreth.  3. 

1 9.  De  Scriptis  Fratris  Aufberti  vel  Ofberti.  ibid. 

20.  De  Scriptis  Guidonis  de  Perpiniano.  ibid. 

2 1 .  De  Scriptis  Stephani  Canon  vel  Kanon.  ibid. 

22.  De  Scriptis  Pauli  de  Perufio.  ibid. 

23.  De  alijs  Scriptis  prsfati  Fratris  Guidonis.  ibid. 

24.  De  Obitu  Johannis  de  Vernone.  ibid. 

25.  De  Scriptis  Johannis  Golain  Prioris  Rothoma- 

Senf’s-  nl  ibid. 

26.  De  Pnmo  Carmelitarum  Conventu,  in  Novo  Tef- 

tamento,  i.  e.  poll  Chriftum  natum.  ibid. 

27.  De  tempore  quo  floruerit  Philippus  Riboti  Provin- 

cialis  Cathalonis.  ^id 

2S.  De  Obitu  Nicolai  Galli,  Generalis.  ibid. 

29.  De  Scriptis  Johannis  de  Chineto,  et  Johannis  Ba- 

choms.  ^ 

30.  Quod  Rufinus,  fuit  Monachus  Montis  Carmeli  : 

deq  ;  Johanne  Hierofolymitano.  ibid. 

3 1 .  Quod  bini  fuerunt  Cyrilli  Hierofolymitani.  ibid! 

32.  Quod  Dionyfius  Papa  fuerit  Monachus  Montis 
Carmen,  ex  Johannis  Cerundenfis  Epifcopi  Chronico. 

-r,  t-  t  ibid. 

33.  De  Fratre  Laurentio  Crucifixi  Priore  Rothoma¬ 
genfi,  Francisq  ;  Vicario. 

34-  De  Obitu  Antonij  Beneventi  Epifcopi  Hebronen. 
its  et  Suffraganei  Pifiavenfis  ;  cui  in  Epifcopatu  et  Suffra- 
ganeatu  fucceffit  Johannes  Mafon,  Provincial!,  quondam 
Narbonenlis. 

3j.  In  Fratrem  Eligium  Dionifium  Parilii  fepultum 
carmen.  r  ibid. 

36.  Epitaphium  Prat.  lodoci  Benvelet  Parifiani  Con- 
ventus  filij. 

37.  De  Obitu  Egidij  Mainnet  Dodoris  Parifienfis. 

n  -r-  -  ,  .  r  ibid. 

38.  Epitaphium  prsfati  Dodoris  Egidij  Mainnet  4  b 

39.  Epitaphium  Fr.  Petri  Hifpani,  Conventos  Magna; 

Valentis.  •,  v, 

xt  •  <-  ibid. 

40.  Nsma  fuper  morte  Fr.  Ludowici  de  Copperio, 
Conventus  Molmenfis. 

41-  De  Tempore  quo  floruit  Matheusde  Parifio  Prior- 
rrovincialis  Francis.  g 

42.  De  Obitu  Petri  de  I.alen  Prioris-Provincialis  Fran¬ 
cis. 

43.  De  Obitu  Thoms  Vitecoc  Epifcopi  Decadenienfs. 

,  ++',  Pe  °bi,u  Gerardi  Cizors  iipifeopi  Othavenfis 
cx  Uctnleemitanus  ;  una  cum  Epitaphin  ejufdem.  ibid. 

-  4r5‘  duobus  a,iJs  Prcefulibus,  in  Chore  Conven¬ 
tus  Parifienfis  fepultis.  m 

46.  De 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse, 


25r 


Num.  1819. 


46.  De  Fratre  lohanne  de  Hondelencuria.  6. 

47.  Epitaphium  Fr.  L  mrencij  Burelli  junioris;  ibid. 

48.  Fpitaphium  Frat.  Johannis  Marchant.  ibid. 

49.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Johannis  de  Alta-Villa.  6.  b. 

5 «>.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Guidonis  de  Perpiniano.  ibid. 

5 1 .  De  Scriptis  Brinquilis  Carmelitte.  ibid. 

52.  De  tempore  quo  floruit  Johannes  de  Chemineto 

Prior  Metenfis.  ibid. 

53.  De  Scriptis  Eliphat  Minorita?.  ibid. 

54.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Jacobi  de  Brugis.  ibid. 

55.  De  Scriptis  cujufdam  Fratris  Carmelita;  Romani. 

ibid. 

56.  De  Scriptis  Petri  deNongento,  Carmelita;.  ibid. 

57.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Johannis  Nobler.  ibid. 

58.  De  Scriptis  Johannis  Bachonis.  ibid. 

59.  De  Scriptis  I'rancifci  Baconis.  ibid. 

60.  De  Scriptis  Pauli  de  Perufio.  ibid. 

61.  De  Scripts  Goleini.  ibid. 

62  De  Scriptis  Plandij,  vel  Pelon  Carmelitte,  vel  Petri 

Pelaton  Leodienlis.  ibid. 

t’3-  De  Scriptis  Hanibalis  Dodtoris  valde  antiqui  Car- 
melitarum.  ibid. 

64.  De  Scriptis  Michaelis  cujufdam.  ibid. 

65.  De  Scriptis  Guidonis.  ibid. 

66.  De  Scriptis  Johannis  Noblet.  ibid. 

67.  Deprariato  Hanibali,  didtum.  7. 

68.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Johannis  Golein.  ibid. 

69.  De  Scriptis  Johannis  Bachonis.  ibid. 

70.  De  Scriptis  Michaelis  de  Bononia.  ibid. 

71.  Dc  Scriptis  cujufdam  alius  Carmelita;.  ibid. 

72.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Johannis  de  Marchinellis.  ibid. 

73.  De  Scriptis  Gerardi  de  Bononia.  ibid. 

74.  De  Scriptis  Guidonis  de  Perpiniano  Epifcopi  Ma- 

joricenfis  &  Elvenfis.  ibid. 

75.  De  Scriptis  Johannis  Bachonis.  ibid. 

76.  De  Scriptis  Guidonis  praefati.  ibid. 

77.  De  Scripiis  Petri  de  Cafa  Patriarchal  Hierofolymi- 

tani.  ibid. 

78.  Epitaphium  Fr.  Johannis  de  Vemone  ibid. 

79.  Epitaphium  Fr.  Johannis  de  Ypra.  ibid. 

80.  Pars  i'pitaphij  cujufdam  Carmelitte.  ibid. 

81.  Pars  Epitaphij  alterius  Carmelita;.  7.  b. 

82.  Pars  alterius  Epitaphij.  ibid. 

83.  De  Fratrum  de  Monte  Carmeli  prima  in  Scotiam 

intrufione ;  ex  Hiftoria  Majoris  Britanniae,  Scotia;  et 
Anglia;  Magiflri  Johannis  Dodtoris  Parifienfls.  ibid. 

84.  De  eadem  re,  Ex  Scotorum  Hiftoria  Iledtoris 

Boethij.  ibid. 


85.  De  Carmelita  quodam  quern  fecum  in  Scotiam  ad- 

duxit  Rex  Edwardus  11.  eo  fcil.  animo,  ut  poll  partam 
Vidtoriam,  Anglorum  Laudes,  Scotorhmq ;  Deftruc- 
tionem  Latinis  canerct  Verflbus :  qui  eodem  in  proelio 
apud  Bannok-burnam  captus,  converfo  Stylo,  Scotorum 
Vidtoriam  Pofteritati  coinmendare,  per  Robertum  Scoto¬ 
rum  Regem  ftatim  fuit  coadtus.  ibid. 

Carmelitano  Metrifta;  Nomen  fuit  Willelmus  Baf- 
toun,  five  Baftoue  ;  Ipfum  quoque  Poema  extat  in  Additt. 
ad  Joannis  Fordoni  Scoti-chronicon.  fcil.  Lib.  xii. 

86.  De  Fr.  Laurentio  Burello  Dodtore  Parifienfi, 

Francorum  Regi  Ludovico  xii.  Confefiario.  ibid. 

87.  Epitaphium  ejufdem :  prout  extat  in  Conventu 

Aurelianenfi.  8. 

88.  Aliud  adhuc  Fpitaphium  ejufdem  ConfelToris. 
ReRij. 

8q.  In  Fratris  Mathei  Marmeron  Aurelianenfis  Car¬ 
melita;  mortem,  Nicholai  Cathaignes  Humanarum  Dif- 
ciplinarum  in  Carmelitano  Aurelior.  Coenobio  Interpre- 
tis,  Trenos  five  Nenia.  ibid. 

90.  Fratris  Johannis  de  Cruce  Carmelitse,  in  ejufdem 

Matthau  obitum.  Carmen.  9. 

91.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Maturini  dementis.  9.  b. 

92.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Johannis  Baconis.  10. 

'■  93.  De  Scripiis  prrefati  Fr.  Maturini  Courteys  de¬ 
mentis.  ibid. 


Num.  1819. 

94.  De  Fr.  Henrico  Potini,  Conventus  Rothomagenfis. 

10. 

95;  De  prafato  Fr.  Maturino  dementis  Filio,  Priore- 
Provinciali  Francis.  ibid. 

06.  De  Obitu  Fr.  Mathei  Courteys,  Priore-Provin* 
ciali  Franciae.  ibid. 

97.  Epitaphium  Magiftri  Fratris  Maturini  dementis 

ibid. 

98.  De  Scriptis  ejufdem.  ibid. 

99.  Didtum  Fr.  Berengarij  Carmelita;,  Prioris  Dre- 

panenfis.  ibid. 

100.  De  Fr.  Alberto  Carmelita.  ibid. 

_  101.  Quod  idem  Albertus,  fadtus  fuerit  Sicilise  Pro- 
vincialis,  setati9  fum  anno  27.  ibid. 

102.  Alberti  didtum  parentibus  fuis.  ibid. 

1 03.  De  Scriptis  M.  Fr.  Maturini  dementis  prte- 

difti.  ibid. 

104.  De  Fr.  Petro  Verelij.  ibid. 

105.  De  Fr.  Petro  de  Pratis.  ibid. 

106.  De  Frr.  Andrea  Patini,  Johanne  Coffin,  & 

Johanne  Lorget.  ibid. 

107.  De  Hiftoria  SandliPatris  noflri  Alberti,  ibid. 

108.  De  M.  Fr.  Maturino  dementis  Primo  Decano 

&  Fundatore  Univerfitatis  Bituricenfis.  ibid. 

109.  De  Fr.  Johanne  Bryas  Priore  Conventus  Sandli 

Amandi.  1  ( . 

xic.  De  Sandto  Avertano,  Oratio.  ibid. 

1:1.  Elenchus  mortuorum  Carmelitarum,  Ex  Capi- 
tulo  Braccareti  in  Provincia  Francite.  ibid. 

1 1 2.  Carmina  in  quendam  Sacerdotem,  qui  Biblio- 

tecam  fecit  in  Conventu  Sandli  Amandi.  ibid, 

1 13.  De  Confecratione  Ecclefite  Fratrum  Carmelita¬ 
rum  in  Sandto  A mando.  n.b. 

114.  De  Locis  quibus  fepulti  funt  Tuflanus  Racemi 

Epifcopus,  Archiepifcopi  Remenfis  Suffraganeus,  et  alij 
nonnulli  ejufJem  Religionis  Epifcopi.  ibid. 

1 15.  De  prariato  Fratre  Tuflano.  ibid. 

1 1 6.  Epitaphium  ejufdem.  ibid. 

1 1 7.  In  mortem  Exclamatio  exingenti  mentis  anguftia, 

fuper  Obitu  Fratris  Toflani  Carmelita;,  Filij  quondam 
Conventus  Carmelitarum  Molinis.  ibid. 

1 18.  De  eodem  Fr.  Tofiano  de  Villa-nova.  1  2.  b. 

1 1 9.  De.  M.  F.  Petro  de  Nongento.  ibid. 

120.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Philippi  Barraudi  Carmelita;, 

Conventus  Molinenfis.  ibid. 

i2t.  De  M.  F.  Laurentio  Burelli,  Provinciali  Nar- 
bonte.  ibid. 

122.  Teftimonium  B.  Cyrilli  Alexandiini  de  Nitore 

Beatte  Virginis.  ibid. 

123.  De  Beato  Paulo,  ex  Vita  Sandlte  Ttcke.  ibid. 

124.  De  M.  F.  Toflano  de  Villa  No^a,  et  Scripiis 

ejus.  _  _  ibid. 

125.  Tituli  quorundam  Dodlorum  ex  Ordine  Carmeli¬ 
tano,  Locus  L  aurentij  Divianenfis.  13. 

126.  Teftimonia  ejufdem  L.aurertij,  de  pra;cipuis  Car- 

melitana;  Religionis  fautoribus ;  lcil.  Sandto  Ludovico 
Francorum  Rege  ;  Sandto  Fdwardo  Anglia;  Rege  ; 
Sandto  Eufebio  Sandli  Cyrilli  frcio  ;  Sandta  Johanna 
natione  Tholofana  ;  Sandta  Angela  Regis  Bohemia;  filia  ; 
et  Sandto  Henrico  Primo  Duce  Lancaftrite.  ibid. 

127.  De  Ulultribus  Carmelitis,  Carmina  a  Laurentio 

Burello  edita.  13.  b.  et  fol.  65. 

Illuftres  hi  Carmelita;  fuerunt,  Delias  Monarcha 
Carmeli  ;  Helifmus  Incola  Carmeli  ;  Filij  Prophetarum 
in  Monte  Carmeli  ;  Cirillus  Carmelita;  Beatus  Angelus 
Martir  ;  Beatus  Nicholaus  Confeflor  ;  Sandtus  Albertus 
Carmelita;  Magnus  Guillelmus  de  Sandto  Vico  ;  Ge¬ 
rardus  Primus  Dodtor  Carmelita;  Sibertus  Geldrenfis 
Dodtor  Infignis  ;  Johannes  Maligrava  vel  Walfyngham  ; 
Guido  Carmeli  Dodtor  clariffimus  ;  Johannes  de  Bachone 
Dodtor  Refolutus ;  Paulus  de  Perufio  Dodtor  Argutus 
Sc  Acutus  ;  Guillelmus  de  Saviniano  Dodtor  Extenl'us  ; 
De  Sandto  Petro  Thome ;  Sardlus  Andreas  Floreniius 
Epifcopus  Pbcfulanus — 63.  Johannes  Baliftarius  Dodtor 

Copiofus 


Catalogus  Librorain  MSS. 


Copiofus ;  Philippus  Riboti  Carmeliographus ;  Arnoldus 
Doctor  Gravis,  Epifcopus  Galtelienfls ;  Simon  deSpi- 
ra.  Doctor  Subtilis ;  Albertus  vel  Ofbertus  Anglicus, 
Dodor  Devotus;  Johannes  Golein  Rothomagenfis ; 
Johannes  Hildefhemenfis  Doctor  Elevatus ;  Francifcus 
Martini  Doctor  Solempnis  ;  Johannes  Hornebius,  Doctor 
Magnanimus;  Johannes  Full  Suegegni,  Prmdicator 
Dilertus  ;  Francifcus  Bachonis,  Doctor  Inventivus  vei 
Inveftivus  ;  Johannes  Nobletus,  Doftor  Famofus ;  Jo¬ 
hannes  Gluel,  Prredicator  Ardens ;  Robertus  de  Mon- 
llreolo  Doctor  Illuminatus ;  Philippus  de  Ferrara  Doctor 
Suavis  ;  Johannes  Titlefhale,  Dodor  Apertus  ;  Nicho- 
laus  Durham,  Doftor  Inclitus ;  Michael  Angrianus, 
Doctor  Lucidus;  Johannes  Brammart,  Moralis  Doctor; 
Thomas  Walden,  Doctor  Au&enticus ;  Nicholaus  Ricfo, 
Doctor  Solidus  ;  Jacobus  Regius,  triplicis  Lingua  In- 
terpres  doctiffimus  ;  Johannes  Soreth,  Ordinis  maximus 
Reformator  ;  Petrus  Garvengny,  Ordinis  fervidus  ze- 
lator  ;  Gofwinus  Hex,  Prteful  Hieropolitanus  ;  Walterus 
Float,  Dodtor  Infignis;  Johannes  Beets  Dodtor  Illuflris  ; 
Johannes  Confobrinus  Portugalenfis,  Difputator  acer- 
rtmus;  Mathias  Emich,  Orator  vehemens;  Johannes 
Mylvertoa,  Dodtor  Probatus  ;  Maturinus  dementis  Pro- 
vincialis  Francias ;  Hubertus  Leonard  us,  Antilles  Da- 
r.-nfis  ;  Johannes  de  Arundine,  ampliffimus  Commen¬ 
tator  ;  Baptiita  Mantuanus,  Omnium  Diflertiflimus  ;  Jo¬ 
hannes  Crellonus  Placentinus,  Latinus  Sc  Grtecus  Ora¬ 
tor,  Martinus  Pcrfona  Ligurigena.  Poeta ;  Johannes 
Andreas  Ferahos,  Laureatus  Poeta;  Toflanus  de  Villa 
nova,  Parifienfts  Thcologus.  &c. 

•  128.  Hii'oria  vetuftilfima,  et  Vita  fatis  admirabilis 
Sandtiflimse  Matris  Anna;  ;  cum  autentico  Sancti  Cirilli 
Tdtimonio.  _  _  *7* 

but.  In  Concilio  Ephefino  quod  fuit  Virginei  partus 
anno  428.  ubi,  loco  Celeftini  Papce  Primi  rdidebat 
Chillus  Patriarcha  Alexandrinus  Ordinus  Patrum  Glo- 
riofiflimrc  Dei  Genitricis  Marias  de  Monte  Carmeli,  ju- 
bente  eadem  Dei  Genitrice,  ut  in  Annalibus  reperitur, 
Veterum  Patrum,  fuperato  Neflorio  Hteretico  per  eun- 
dem  Cirillum,  qui  dicebat  Virginem  Mariam  folum 
Hominem  peperiffe :  idem  Cirillus  protulit  in  Medium 
Genealogiam  antiquiffimam  de  Progenie  Virginis  Marias. 
Pro  cu jus  Victorie  recommendacione  ibi  diflinituin  fuit, 
quod  Fratres  fui  Ordinis  Carmeli,  mcrito  Fratres  Beatas 
Dei  Gentricis  Marie  de  Monte  Carmeli  nuncupari  debe- 
ront:  erat  autem  Genealogia  hanc  conlinensSentenciam. 
“  Ante  X"pi  Incamacionem  anno  circiter  7omo,  erat  in 
Judasa  Civitate  Sephor,  non  longe  a  Nazareth,  Puella 
quredam  Deo  multum  devota  Nomine  Emerenciana,  orta 
de  Tribu  David.  Flee  in  timore  Dei  vivere  latagens, 
fuper  omnes  virtutes  caflitatem  Corporis  et  Animte  ftu- 
diofe  fervabat.  Confuevit  itaque  crebo,  de  parentum 
Licentia  Sanctorum  Helie  &  Helifei  difcipulos  qui  in 

Monte  Carmeli  celibem  vitam  ducebant,  vilitare.” - 

Diltinctus  efl  Tradtatus  in  Capita  52.  et  definit  pod 
Mortem  S.  Annte  filize  prasfatae  Emerentiante,  ac  Matris 
B.  V.  Mari/h.  Ouinetiam,  per  totum  omnino  conllat 
putidillimum  elfe  Commentum,  ab  improbulo  quodam 
Antiquitati,  prorfus  rudi  Falfario,  e  Proto-Evangelio  S. 
Jacobi,  atq  ;  ex  id  genus  Furfure  Legendario,  in  l.audem 
Gloriol.tmq ;  Religionis  Carmtlitanre  confarcinatam. 
In  fine  hanc,  quae  fequitur,  Adnotationem  pofuit  Balaeus, 
‘‘Nefcioan  lit  plus  adhuc  de  hue  Vita;  nichil  amplius 
habebatur  in  antique  Exemplan.” 

.  .  ntur  q  ed  m  femiliares  Epiftolse  Fratris 
Matbie  de  Andernaco  Carmelita;,  pro  tempore  LeCtoris 
Colonienlis,  fc. 

129.  Honorahili  viro — Dno  Ludovico  Canonico  Mo- 

nafterii  Efiluas.  4c. 

130.  Fpiltola  R  fponfiva  Dhi  Ludovici.  41.  b. 

i',  1.  Epiltola  Fratris  Mathie  Ledtoris,  Patri  Pantha- 

leoni  Magiltro  Studij  Conventus  Colonienfis,  Ordinis 
Fratrum  Minorum.  42.  b. 


Num.  1 819. 

132.  F.pidola  Refponfiva  Ludovici  Canonici.  43. 

133.  Epidola  Refponfiva  Fratris  Mathie  Carmelite 

43.  b. 

134.  Epidola  Refponfiva  D~ni  Ludovici.  44.  b. 

135.  Epidola  alia  Ludovici  Canonici  ad  eundem. 

45- 

136.  Refponfiva  Epidola  Fratris  Mathie  ad  eundem. 

45.  b. 

127.  Sequuntur  quedam  Exordia  Epidolarum  per 
eundem  Fratrem  Mathiam.  46.  b. 

138.  De  Sandto  Avertano,  et  loco  fepulturte  ejufdetn. 

,49- 

l'g.  Enumeratio  Sandtorum  Ordinis  Carmelitanas, 
in  Pidtura  quadam  repredentatorum.  ibid. 

140.  Defignatio  temporis  quo  obijt  M.  F.  Poncius 

Rainardi  Prior  Generalis  Ordinis  Carmeli.  itid. 

141.  De  Obitu  &  Sepultura  M.  F.  Egidij  Burgefij 

Priuris  I’rovincialis  Provini  im  Pp-ovinci.- .  _  ibid. 

142.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Guidonis  de  Pcrpiniano  ibid. 

143.  De  Scriptis  F.  Amoldi  de  Epifcopali  ibid. 

144.  De  Scriptis  Ledtons  F.  Johannis  Diophilacis. 

ibid. 

145.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Bariholomei  Portenlinquij  de 

Luca,  F.pifcopi  Troianenfis.  50.  b. 

146.  *  e  Obi.u  &  Sepultura  M.  F.  Johannis  Phacij 

vel  Facij  Epifcopi  Regenfis.  ibid. 

147.  Enumeratio  virorum  clariorum4n  Conventu  Car- 

melitarum  Avinionenfi  fepultorum.  ibid. 

148.  De  Conventibus  Carmelitarum  apud  Florentiam. 

ibid. 

149.  Oratio  pcdediis  fuper  Oratione  Dominica  Fra- 
tis  Johannis  Diophylacis  Gandcnfis  Carmelicoltc.  51. 

150.  Carmen  Elegiacuin  Carmelitarum  Nemaufenfuim 

in  B.  V.  Mariam.  ibid. 

1 51.  Oratio  Dominica,  praemiflfo  de  Sanctiflima  Trini- 

tate  Symbolo ;  edita  a  Fr.  Johanne  Diophylace  Gan- 
denfi  Carmelicola.  ibid. 

152.  Modulacio  Parthenica  Fratris  Johannes  Diophi¬ 
lacis  Carmelitre  Gandenlis.  52. 

153.  De  Obitu  &  Sepultura  F.  Raimundi  Tabule  Pri- 

oris  Provincial^  Narbonae.  53. 

1  i4.  De  F.  Johanne  Egidij  vel  de  Afperis  Conventus 
Nemaufi  ;  et  obitu  iplius.  ibid. 

1 55.  Similiter,  de  F.  Johanne  de  fonte,  ejufdem  Con¬ 
ventus.  ibid. 

156.  Similiter,  de  F.  Guillermo  Exfapati,  ejufdem 

Conventus  Ledloris.  ibid. 

157.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Johanne  Trifle  Dodtoris  Puri- 

fienlis,  ac  ejufdetn  Conventfts  ibid. 

158.  Similiter  deM.  F.  Raymundo  Chavalario,  Priore 

ejufdem  Conventus.  ibid. 

159.  Similiter,  de  F.  Johanne  Mafcleto  Provinciali  Pro¬ 
vincial  PROviNCiiE.  ibid. 

160.  Similiter,  de  EFno  Michaele  de  Becro,  Romanic 

Ecclefuc  Cardinale-Prefbytero  53.  b. 

161.  De  alio  Cardinale  in  eodem  Conventu  lepulto. 

ibid. 

162.  De  feriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Trifla.  ibid. 

163.  De  F.  Gerardo  de  Bononia  primo  Priore  Gene¬ 
rali,  de  obitu  et  feriptis  ejus.  ibid. 

164.  Similiter,  de  Secundo  Priore  Generali  Symone 

de  Corbeia.  ibid. 

165.  Similiter,  de  Tertio  Guidone  de  Pcrpiniano. 

ibid. 

166.  Similiter,  de  Ouarto,  Siberto  de  Colonia  54. 

167.  Similiter,  de  O.uinto,  Augerio  de  Spuento. 

ibid. 

168.  Similiter,  de  Sexto,  Johanne  deBachone.  ibid. 

160.  Similiter,  de  Septimo,  Johanne  de  Alerio.  ibid. 

170.  Similiter,  de  Octavo,  Barthelino  de  Papia. 

54.  b. 

17.'.  Similiter,  de  Nono,  Petro  de  Cafis.  ibid. 

172.  Similiter,  de  Decimo,  Johanne  de  Clarano. 

ibid.  I 
1 73.  Similiter 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


2S3 


Nuin.  1819. 

1  ;  3.  Similiter,  de  Undccimo,  Petro  PoHgij.  54.  b. 

174.  Similiter,  de  Duodecimo  Mathia  de  Colonia. 

ibid. 

175.  Similiter,  deTercio  decimo,  Raymundo  Duranti. 

.  5 5; 

176.  Similiter,  de  Quarto  decimo,  Petro  Olle.  ibid. 

177.  Similiter,  de  Quinto  decimo,  Jacobo  de  Valle- 

braria.  ibid. 

178.  Similiter,  de  Decimo  fexto,  Henrico  de  Aquila. 

ibid. 

179.  Similiter,  de  Decimo  feptimo,  Hugone  de  Ver- 

neto.  ibid. 

1 80.  Similiter,  de  Decimo  octavo,  Jacobo  de  Auzo. 

ibid. 

181.  Similiter,  de  Decimo  nono,  Johanne  Vogolon, 

ibid. 

182.  Similiter,  de  Vicefimo,  Petro  Raymundi.  ibid. 

183.  Similiter,  de  Vicefimo  primo,  Petrus  de  Flo- 

rencia.  55.  b. 

184.  Similiter,  de  Vicefimo  fecundo,  Roberto  de 

Montlreolo.  ibid. 

185.  Simileter,  de  Vicefimo  tertio,  Amelia  de  Saxo- 

nia.  ibid. 

1 86.  Similiter,  de  Vicefimo  quarto,  Henrico  Dolen- 

dorp.  ibid. 

187.  Similiter,  de  Vicefimo  quinto,  Petro  de  Luper- 

ciaco.  ibid. 

188.  Similiter,  de  Vicefimo  fexto,  Petro  Maymeti. 

ibid. 

1 89.  Similiter,  de  Vicefimo  feptimo,  Nicholao  de 

G.mdavo.  ibid. 

190.  Similiter,  de  Vicefimo  oftavo,  Johanne  Godoner. 

ibid. 

19  r.  Similiter,  de  Vicefimo,  nono  Johanne  de  Veneta. 

.s«- 

192.  Similiter,  del ricefimo,  Vitali  de  Artigola.  ibid. 

193.  Similiter,  de  Tricefimo  primo,  Johanne  Belini. 

ibid. 

194.  Similiter,  de  Tricefimo  fecundo,  Petro  Thome. 

ibid. 

195.  Similiter,  de  Tricefimo  tercio,  Petro  de  Turri- 

bus.  56.  b. 

196.  Similiter,  de  Tricefimo  quarto,  Deodato  Bar- 

reyne.  ibid. 

1 97.  Similiter,  de  Tricefimo  quinto,  Thoma  de  Padua. 

ibid. 

198.  Similiter,  de  Tricefimo  fexto,  Johanne  de  Regno. 

ibid. 

199.  Similiter,  de  Tricefimo  feptimo,  Tilmanno  de 

Alto  Lapide.  ibid. 

200.  Similiter,  de  Tricefimo  oftavo,  Berengario  Mo- 

nachi.  57. 

201.  Similiter,  de  Tricefimo  nono,  Johanne  Balil- 

ftarij.  ibid. 

202.  Similiter,  de  Quadragefimo,  Marco  deFlorentia. 

ibid. 

203.  Adnotatio  Balad,  “  De  ceteris  nichil  adhuc  vidi, 
neque  de  hij^s  qui  ab  Anno  Domini  1360,  ufque  ad  Nos 
floruerunt :  quia  qui  hos  feripfit,  torpore  vel  accidia  cete- 
ros  prEetermifit.” 

Sequuntur,  Priores  Generales  Ordinis  Carmelitani, 


ab  anno  Dom.  1271.  ufque  1361.  fc. 

204.  De  Radulpho.  ibid. 

205.  De  Petro  de  Amiliano.  ibid. 

206.  De  Raymundo  de  Infula.  ibid. 

20 7.  De  Gerardo  de  Bononia.  ibid. 

208.  De  Guidone  de  Perpiniano.  ibid. 

209.  De  Johanne  de  Alerio.  ibid. 

210.  De  Petro  de  Cafis.  ibid. 

211.  De  Raymundo  de  Infula.  58. 

212.  De  Johanne  Balifterij.  ibid. 

Adnotatio  Baltei,  “  Hec  que  fequuntur,  funt  Fratris 

Johannis  de  Pratis.”  fcil. 

213.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  Faci.  ibid. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1819. 

214.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  Soreth.  5®" 

215.  De  M.  F.  X~pofero  Lombardo.  _  _  58.  b. 

a  1 6.  De  Priore  Generali,  qui  tunc  in  vivis  fuit.  fcil. 

A.  D.  1302.  ibid. 

217.  Syllabus  Capitulorum  Generalium  Ordinis  Car¬ 
melitani,  ab  A.  D.  1259.  celebratorum  ufq;  adA.D. 
1361.  compilatus  per  M.  F.  Johannem  Triflam.  59. 

218.  De  Capitulo  Generali  celebrato  A.  D.  1498. 

Narratiuncula  Johannis  de  Pratis.  6 1  ■ 

219.  De  Obitu  &  Sepultura  M.  Poncij.  ibid. 

220.  De  M.  F.  Michaele  Parini.  ibid. 

221.  De  Vifione  faftaDno  Johanni  Papas  xxii.  tem¬ 

pore  fute  Perfecutionis  per  Beatem  Virginem  Mariam 
commendando  Sibi  Noftrum  Ordinem.  61.  b. 

De  putidulo  commento,  infequentem  in  fine  pofuir 
Notam  Balasus.  “  Scripfi  prasfatam  Vifionem  de  Verbo 
ad  Verbum,  ut  fuit  in  Exemplari ;  quod  Scriptoris  primi 
IgnorantiA  pluribus  fcatet  mendis.”  Attendatq;  diligeifs 
Leftor,  ut  circumfpeftus  fit  in  Judicio  dando,  &c. 

222.  De  Propagatione  Religionis  Carmelitanas ;  Ex 

Martilogio,  ad  Natale  S.  Ludovici  Francorum  Regis,  et 
Confelforis.  62. 

223.  De  Obitu  de  Sepultura  D‘ni  Roberti  Lardon. 

ibid. 

224.  De  M.  F.  Stephano  Januenfi,  qui  eleftus  fuit 

Prior  Generalis  A.D.  1524.  ibid. 

223.  Oracio  venerandi  Left  oris  F.  Gabrielis  Regane 
Prioris  Conventus  Lunelli,  habita  in  Capitulo  Generali 
Montis  Peffulani,  A.D.  1524.  ibid. 

In  ilia  agitur  de  Vetuiiate,  fimul  atq ;  de  Claritate 
Religionis  Carmelitani. 

226.  Carmina  ejufdem  venerandi  Pairis  de  Virgine 

Gloriofa.  64. 

227.  DeScriptisM.  F.  Anthonij  Gainon.  ibid. 

228.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Laurealis.  ibid. 

229.  De  Conventu  Aquilataram  five  Agalaidos,  prope 
Maffiliam  :  primo  Carmiletanorum  in  Gallia,  Conventu. 

ibid. 

230.  De  Obitu  F.  Nichalini.  ibid. 

231.  De  S.  Manahen  Herodis  Tetrarchas  collaftaneo 

ex  Martilogio,  ad  9  kal.  Jun.  64.  b. 

232.  De  S.  Thimone  Diacono  de  Septem  Primis ;  ex 

Martilogio  ad  13  kal  Maij.  ibid. 

233.  Hympnus,  cum  Exordio  Legends,  de  S.  Alberto. 

ibid. 

234.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Bernardi  de  Cafa  majori. 

ibid. 

235.  De  F.  Petro  Boneti.  ibid. 

236.  De  Obitu  Leftoris  F.  Dionifij  Waver.  ibid. 

237.  Oracio  de  Sanfto  Anthouio  Martire  Ordinis  Car- 

meli.  ibid. 

238.  In  Laudes  Poncij  Reynaudi  tocius  Ordinis  Car- 

melia  Generalis  digniflimi,  Fratris  Laurencij  Burelli  Pari- 
fienfis  Theologi  Doftoris,  Narbonici  Provincialis,  Pane, 
giricum  Carmen.  68.  b. 

239.  Carmen  Gellij  Bernardini  Marunte  Parmcnfis 

Poete  Laureati,  ad  Theologum  Doftorem  Parifienfem 
F.  Laurcncium  Burellum,  See.  A.  D.  1492.  70. 

240.  Carmen  Arnoldi  Bofcij  Carmelitani  Gandenfis. 

ibid. 

241.  Carmen  Pauli  Emilij  Bourbonij  Cardinalis  Se- 

cretarij,  ad  Laurentium  Burellum.  70.  b. 

242.  Carmen  Johannis  Audmoti  Artium  Parifienfis 

Interpretis,  ad  Laur.  Burellum.  ibid. 

243.  De  Doftore  Johanne  de  Bachone.  71. 

244.  De  M.  F.  Stephano  Gillet.  ibid. 

245.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  Rami,  vel  Ramufculi,  vel 

Palmitis.  ibid. 

246.  DeM.  F.  Petro  Chanardi.  .  ibid. 

247.  De  Obitu  et  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Laurealis. 

ibid. 

248.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Thoffam  de  Villa  Nova. 

ibid, 
ibid. 

250.  De 


249.  De  Obitu  Michaelis  Parini. 

3T 


Hi  j 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


250.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  de  Coperio,  et  obitu  Ipfius. 

71.  b. 

2 si.  F.ulogium  M.  F.  Michaelis  Parini.  ibid. 

252.  De  Obitu  et  Scriplis  M.  F.  Claudij  Jaqueti. 

ibid. 

253.  De  M.  F.  Natalis  Prifcherij,  et  obitu  Ipfius.  ibid. 

254.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Gaioti.  ibid. 

255.  De  M.  F.  Godfrido  Strabone.  ibid. 

256.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  Sanxicr.  ibid. 

257.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  Lathomi.  ibid. 

258.  Oracio'nes  fuper  Amiphonas  de  O,  quas  F.cclefia 

facro  Adventiis  tempore  falubriter  cant  at  ;  per  Theolo- 
gum,  Doctortm  Fratrem  Johanncni  Laurealis  apud  Cabi- 
lionem  predicate  (iinperf.)  ibid. 

259.  Oracio  feu  Exortacio  Synodalis,  habita  in  Cla- 

romonte,  in  Eile  Majori,  Anno  Domini  1509.  72.  b. 

260.  Alia  Oracio  ejufdem  (Johannis  Laurealis  in 
Die  Aflumpcionis  Beatilliime  Virginis  Maria;.  (Iinperf.) 

79.  b. 

261.  Diftychnn  Diophylaceum  in  illud  “  Induite  Ga- 

lcam,  Spem  Salutis.”  8 1 . 

262.  Diftychon  Diophylaceum  in  illud,  “  In  multilo- 

quio  non  deerit  peccatum.”  ibid. 

263.  Diftichon  in  illud,  “  Sine  Fide  impoflibile  eft  pla- 

cere  Deo.”  ibid. 

264.  Diftichon  in  illud,  “  Vere  Dominus  eft  in  Loco 

•fto.”  ibid. 

2 65.  Diftichon  in  illud,  **  Terribilis  eft  Locus  ifte.” 

ibid. 

266.  Diftichon  in  illud,  “PlenitudoLegis  eftDileftio.” 

ibid. 

267.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  Chaferandi.  ibid. 

268.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Imberto  Rauderij.  ibid. 

269.  I  e  Obitu  M.  F.  Michaelis  Natalis.  ibid. 

270.  De  Scriptis  F.  Aluifij  de  Legnano.  ibid. 

271.  De.  M.  F.  Bartholomad  Portemlinquij  Lucenlis. 

ibid. 

272.  De  Conventu  Carmclitarum  Neapolitano.  ibid. 

273.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Lauren cij  Burelli.  ibid. 
Inter  htec,  “Qutedam  Carmina  in  Laudem  Infignio- 

rum  InvictiiTimi  Regis  Anglia:  Henrici  Septimi.” 

274.  De  Raymundo  Burcenu  Cardinale  Ord'nis  Car¬ 
meli.  8 1.  b. 

£75.  De  Scriptis  M.  I’.  Stephani  Gilleti.  ibid. 

276.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Lamberti  Burelli. 

ibid. 

277.  De  loco  ubi  quiefcunt  M.  F.  Johannes  Faci,  et 

M.  F.  Guido  de  Perpiniano.  ibid. 

278.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Blafij  Lorini.  ibid. 

279.  De  Epifcopo  quodam  H ungaro  Ordinis  Carmdi- 

tani-  ibid. 

280.  De  Scriptis  F.  Johannis  Diophylacis.  ibid. 

281.  Initium  Orationis  in  Laudem  Sancti  Pauli,  quam 

fecit  M.  F.  Johannes  Laurealis.  8_>. 

282.  lercia  Egloga  M.  F.  Blafij  Lorini  Carmelitas 
Prioris  Viennenfis,  de  Prtefidencia  Ordinis  Carmelitarum 


ibid. 

.  85- 
ibid, 
ibid, 
ibid. 


ad  cteteros  Mendicantes. 

283.  De  aliijs  ejufdem  Scriptis. 

284.  De  Scriptis  F.  Johannis  Diophilacis. 

285.  De  F.  Stephano  de  Vinea  Sola. 

286.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Bachonis. 

287.  De  San <fto  Johanne  Patriarcha  Hierofolimitano 

Cinnelita.  ibid. 

2b 8.  Ubi  quiefcunt  Corpora  San&arum  Virginum 
Carmelitiffarum  Johanna;  &  Anna;.  ibid. 

289.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Claudij  Girbodi.  ibid. 

290.  Ubinam  celebrata  fuerint  Capitula  General’ia 
Ordinis  Carmehtani  ab  A.  D.  1287.  ufq>  ad  A.  D.  1351. 

.  291.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  de  Pratis,  et  Scriptis  ipfius. 

,  *9*.  De  M-  F.  Egidio  Burgefi;  M.  F.  Salvatore 
de  Coliamiha  ;  &  M.  F.  Ludowico  de  Cania.  86. 

293.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Francifci  Brunaudi. 

*7 


Num.  1S19. 

294.  Ubi  requiefcit  Beatus Pater  Jacominus  de  Crepa*. 

corio,  Laicus  Frater.  ibid. 

295.  De  Obitu  B.  P.  Alberti  de  Monte  Calerio 

ibid. 

296.  De  Confecratione  Ecclcfite  B.  Maria;  de  Mi- 

fericordia  (quod  Ccenobium  Carmelitis  fundavit  P.  F. 
C  irillus  de  Pantacis)  per  Bernardinum  de  Prato  de 
Ripa  Cherienfi,  Archiepifcopo  Athiinienfi.  ibid. 

297.  De  Magiftris  Fratribus  Bede,  et  Auguftino, 

Aftenlibus.  ibid. 

298.  De  M.  Anthonio  Paulini.  ibid. 

299.  De  Obitu  IVl.F.  Nicholai  Audet.  ibid. 

300.  De  Fundatione  Conventus  Rippolenfts  in  Lum- 

bardia,  per  P.  F.  Cirillum  de  IJantacis.  86.  b. 

301.  Quod  Diomlius  Cardinalis  Ordinis  Cannelita- 

rum  fuit.  ibid. 

302.  De  Libro  Singulari,  Amor  Divina;  Majeftatis, 

edito  a  quodam  Carmelita.  ibid. 

303.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Angeli  de  Barbavarijs  Prio¬ 
ris  Mediolanenfis.  ibid. 

304.  De  F.  Caffiano  Ymolenfi.  ibid. 

305.  Loca  ul'!  mortui  funt  Petrus  Terafle  ;  Bemardi- 

nus  de  Senis  j  Anthonius  Paulini ;  et  Anthonius  Ave- 
rarij.  ibid. 

306.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  Crifoftomo,  Priore  Conven¬ 
tus  Vercellarum.  ibid. 

307.  De  B.  P.  F.  Jacomino,  Laico,  Portarum  Cuftode 

quondam  in  Conventu  Vercellarum.  ibid. 

308.  De  B.  P.  Alberto  de  Chandelis,  de  Monte  Ca¬ 
lerio  Prefbiter.  87. 

309.  Ubi  quiefeit  B.  Zaninus  Frater  I.aicus  et  Porta- 

rum  Cuftos.  ibid. 

310.  Ubi  quiefcunt  Beata;  Archangela  de  Tridino, 

Martha  Galla,  et  Johanna  de  Regio.  ibid. 

3 1  1 .  Dc  M.  F.  Johanne-Angclo  Coradello,  et  Strip- 
tis  ipfius.  ibid. 

312.  De  M.  F.  Johanne-  Petri  de  Rivorolis.  ibid. 

313.  DeM.  F.  Johanne  Baptifta  Gravello  Mantuano. 

ibid. 

3T4-  De  M.  F.  Benedi&o  de  Brixia.  ibid. 

315.  De  F.  Vincencio  Mantuano,  et  Scriptis  Ipfius. 

ibid. 

316.  Nomina  Carmelitarum  diverforum,  qui  Cardina- 

litium  refutabant ;  inter  quos,  M.  Johannes  Milverton, 
Anglus.  87.  b. 

317.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Baptiftae  Mantuani.  ibid. 

318.  Nomina  quorundum  Cardinalium  de  Ordine 

Carmeli.  ibid. 

319.  De  Vaticinijs  S.  P.  Angeli,  ac  Cirilli,  Carmeli¬ 
tarum.  ibid. 

320.  Quinam  fuerint  Fundatores  Ccenobiorum  Pi- 

neu,  ac  Vici  Novi.  ibid. 

321.  Antiphona,  quam  edidit  F.  Johannes  Beleus 

Carmelita  Nor, vicenfis,  Anno  Domini  1526.  in  Capitulo 
Hichie  in  Anglia,  in  laudem  Carmelitarum.  ibid. 

322.  Epitaphium  Uluftriffimi  Domini  de  Morle,  per 

eundem.  gg# 

323.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Bertrandi  Vaquerij.  ibid. 

324.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  I  heodorid  dc  Aquis.  ibid. 

325.  Oracio  (i.  e.  Collegia)  De  San£Io  Symone  Stock. 

ibid. 

326.  Alia  Oracio  de  Eodem.  ibid. 

327.  Oracio  de  Sandto  Andrea  Epifcopo:  88.  b. 

328.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Raimundi  Vacherij.  ibid. 

329.  De  Obitu  F.  Johannis  Boquerij  Epifcopi  Vaprcn- 

fis,  Ordinis  Carmeli.  ibi  I. 

33c.  De  Deftru&ione  Monafteriorum  Biterricenlium, 
&c.  .  ibid. 

331.  Tempus  quo  floruit  M.  F.  Johannes  Boquerij 

Epifcopus  Vaprenfis.  ibid. 

332.  De  Conventu  Carmelitarum  Narbonenfi.  ibid. 

333.  Enumeratio  plurium  Ordinis  Carmeli  Epifcopo- 

funi.  ibid. 

334.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Johannis  Aydonis. 

335-  Ce 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


255 


Num.  1 8 ip. 

335.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Bertrandi  Chandelerij.  ibid. 

336.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Humber ti  Randtrij.  ibid. 

337.  De  M.  F.  Poncio  Bordi,  et  loco  quo  requiefcit 

Corpus  ejus.  ibid. 

338.  Nota,  quomodo  Fratres  Carmelitse  Ortum  ha- 

buerunt,  per  Quern,  &  Ubi,  See.  ibid. 

339.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Berengarij  Monachi.  89.  b. 

340.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Petri  Durandi.  ibid. 

341.  De  Vaticinijs  feu  Prophecijs  Santti  Patris  Cirilli. 

ibid. 

342.  De  Obitu  M  F.  Johannis  Giberti.  ibid. 

343.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Johannis  de  Fabro.  ibid. 

344.  De  Ymagine  Sanctte  Johanna:  Tholofanas. 

ibid. 

345.  Vota  ad  Eandem.  ibid. 

346.  Oracio  ad  Eandem.  ibid. 

347.  Miracula  in  die  Tiansfiguracionis  Domini  fafta 
in  Dorno  Tholofe  Fratrum  Ordinis  Beatte  Marias  de 
Monte  Carmelo ;  in  quo  Conventu  fequenti  die  fit 
Feftum  Miraculorum  Virginis,  totum  Duplex,  ibid. 

Legenda  eft,  ineptilfimis  mendaeijs  repleta. 

348.  De  B.  Silveft/o,  qui  S  Tiinotheum  Difcipu- 

lum  Beati  Pauli,  holpitatus  eft  :  ex  I.egenda  Santfi 
Timothei.  97. 

349.  Laus  Baptiftas  Mantuani,  ti  D~ni  Simphoriani 
Champerij  Lugdunenfis  opere  de  Quadruplici  Vita. 

ibid. 

350.  Ex  Eodem,  De  prasclaris  Gallia:  Scriproribus, 

de  Scriptis  Carmelitarum  Johannis  de  Alerio,  Johan¬ 
nis  de  Regno  Petri  de  Cafa,  i'etri  Paymundi,  Ro- 
berti  Ordine,  Johannis  Gol.  in,  Nicolai  Ritzonis,  Philippi 
Ferrarienfis,  Johannis  Grofti,Blafij  Andernarij,  Johannis 
Noblet,  Johannis  Soreth,  Laurencij  Burelli,  et  Arnoldi 

Bofcij.  97.  b. 

351.  De  Scriptis  F.  Angeli  deDuccis.  98. 

352.  De  M.  F.  Baptifta  Mantuano  ibid. 

353.  Laus  Laurencij  Burelli,  ex  Epiftola  Humberti 

Fournerij  ad  Simphorianem.  ibid. 

354.  Officium  Santti  Symonis  Stoch.  98.  b. 

355.  Oracio  de  San&o  Gerardo  Epifcopo  et  Martire, 

23  die  Februarij.  qg  b. 

356.  Sandti  adumbrati  in  Arbore  Carmeli  Tholofe. 

ibid. 

357.  Defcriptio  Effigiei  San&i  Petri  Martiris  Comitis 

de  Portugalia.  ibid. 

358.  De  duobus  fratribus  Magiftris  Raymundo  Du¬ 
randi,  et  Guillermo  Durandi ;  deq  ;  obitibus  eorum. 

ibid. 

359.  DeSeptem  Epifcopis  in  Carmelitarum  Conventu 

Parifienfi  requiefeentibus ;  inter  quos  fuit  Scriptis  clarus 
Symon  Hutin,  &c.  ibid. 

360.  De  M.  F.  Bartholomasus  de  Bofco.  ibid. 

361.  In  obitum  clarilTmiorum,  religiofiftimorumq  ; 

Palrum  P.  Ade  Reginaldi  Do&oris  Theologi,  hujus  in- 
cliti  Conventus  quondam  Prioris  meritiflimi,  Patris  Jo¬ 
hannis  Cornu  id  S.  Theologia  prrefentati,  P.  Henrici  de 
I^emborcq  Loctoris,  et  aliorum,  qui  A.  D.  vigefimo  pri- 
mo  fupra  millefimum  et  quingentefimum  hoc  in  Conven¬ 
tu  Pelte  extincti  funt,  Threnos.  100. 

362.  Oracio.  lOi.b. 

363.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Petri  de  Crofo.  ibid. 

364.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  de  Alerio.  ibid. 

365.  De  Scriptis  F.  Gerardi  de  Culfaco.  ibid. 

366.  De  Scriptis  F.  Lavedani  Jandonis.  102. 

367.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Guillermi  de  Saminhaco. 

ibid. 

368.  De  Scriptis  Domni  F.  Arnoldi  de  Biflalis  vel 

Bibalis.  ibid. 

369.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  de  Regno. 

370.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Philippi  Riboti:  deq;  tem¬ 
pore  quo  floruit.  ibid. 

371.  Terapus  quo  floruit  M.  F.  Bemardus  Ariolus. 

ibid. 

372.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Jacobus  de  Abtfa.  102.  b. 


Num.  1819. 

373.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Galhardi  de  Rupe,  et  tempore 

quo  floruit.  ibid. 

374.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Arnoldo  de  Infula.  ibid. 

375.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Petro  de  Peyto.  ibid. 

376.  De  M.  F.  Angelo  Galli.  ibid. 

377.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Fabri  ibid. 

378.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  de  Vafcato.  ibid. 

3 79.  De  Sandto  Patre  Petro  Thome,  Agarenorum 

Apoftolo.  ibid. 

380.  De  Scriptis  et  tempore  quo  floruit  M.  F.  Johan¬ 
nes  de  Bachonis  op'ido,  Anglus,  ibid. 

381.  De  iV .  F.  Maturino  Clemente.  ibid. 

382.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Laurencij  Burelli.  ibid. 

383.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Brifeloti.  ibid. 

384.  De  Scriptis  cujufdam  Fratris  Carmelite  Tholo- 

fani.  ibid. 

385.  De  Scriptis,  Obitu,  et  Sepultura  Simonis  de 

Spira.  103. 

386.  De  Obitu  Henrici  Dolendorp  ibid. 

387.  De  Scriptis  Johann  s  de  Hildenfheim.  ibid. 

3S8.  De  Scriptis  Johannis  Fuft,  Prioris  Argentinen- 

fis.  ibid. 

389.  De  Operibus  San&i  Cirilli  Patriarchs:.  ibid. 

390  De  Scriptis,  &  Laudibus  Johannes  Sonneman: 
quin  et  tempus  quo  floruerit.  ibid. 

391.  Similiter,  de  Gerardo  de  Caftris.  ibid. 

392.  Ex  Hilloria  Hierofolymitana  ;  nonnulla  quas 

Bafeo  videbantur  ad  Carm  litas  fpeftare.  ibid. 

393.  De  Paulo  de  Perufio,  et  Scriptis ipfi us.  ibid. 

394.  De  F.  Calvero  Tholofano.  ibid. 

395.  De  Scriptis  Guidonis  de  Perpiniano.  ibid. 

396.  L^e  Scriptis  Gerardi  de  Bononia.  ibid. 

397.  De  Scriptis  cujuldam  venerabilis  Ledtoris,  filij 

Conventus  Th"li>fani.  ibid. 

398.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Laurentij  Crucifixi.  ibid. 

3  1 9.  De  viris  Religiofis  Ordinis  Teatiflima:  Dei  Genii 

tricis  Maria:  de  Monte  Carmelo,  qui  in  Conventu  Tho¬ 
lofano  florentes,  fuis  Ingcnijs  Provinciam  Tholofanam 
gloriofe  illuftrarunt.  fcil.  de  Raymundo  de  Infula.  Jo¬ 
hanne  de  Alerio,  Johanne  Grufly,  Jacobo  de  Noguerijs, 
Bartholomeo  de  Roquerali,  Cualhardo  de  Rupi  Ar¬ 
noldo  de  Infula,  Angdo  Galli.  Petro  de  Peyto,  Johanne 
de  Fabro,  Guillermo  de  Samuco. 

400  E<  eodem  Libro  de  Geftis  Dodlorum  Tholofe, 
Narratio  Legendaria  de  S.  Sufanna  ;  et  Daniele  Propheta 
habi'u  Carmelitarum  veftito,  Prefbytero  cuidam  Johanni 
deBofco  apparentibus  A.  D.  1478.  propter  quod,  teftum 
S.  Sufanna:  Tholofe  fuit  inftitutum.  itid. 

401.  Ex  quodem  Libro  antiquo  Tholofe  in  Con¬ 

ventu,  De  Inftitutione  Provinca:  Carmelitarum  Neapo¬ 
litans.  105. 

402.  De  Epiftola  Raymundi  Baquerij  ad  quendara 

Apoftatam  data.  ibid. 

403.  Quod  Ordo  Carmeli  fuit  confirmatus  ante  Au- 

guftinenfes,  per  diverfos  Summos  Pon  ifices.  ibid. 

404.  De  Colleftoribus  C.onftitutionum  Carmeiitana- 

rum,  Johanne  Baliftario,  Siberto  de  Beka,  et  Johanne 
Grofli.  ibid. 

405.  De  Mitigatione  &  Corredione  Regufe  Carme¬ 
litarum.  105.  b. 

406.  De  pra:fato  M.  F.  Siberto  de  Beka.  ibid. 

407.  Syllabus  Capitulorum  Generalium  Ordinis  Car¬ 
meli,  ab  A.  D.  1264.  ufqe  ad  A.  D.  1389.  celebratorum. 

ibid. 

408.  Syllabus  Priorum  Generalium  Ordinis  Carmeli 

de  quibus  aliqualiter  conftabat  F.  Johanni  Grofli ;  licet 
plures  alij  pra:ciflerint.  107. 

409.  L)e  M.  F.  Johanne  Grofli  Priore  Generali  Car¬ 

melitarum  deq;  Succeflbribus  fuis  Bartholoma:o  de  Re- 
qualli,  et  Johanne  Soreth.  107.  b. 

In  fine  hujufee  Paragraphi  habentur  hsec  Verba. 

“  Cujus  (i.  e.  Johannis  Soreth)  tempore  pofita  Juit 
Obfervantia  in  multis  C.onventibus  Ordinis  ;  ere&aq;  fue- 
runt  multa  Monafteria  Sororum  Ordinis,  turn  in  Bri¬ 
tannia, 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nutn.  i-8 1  9. 

tannia,  turn  alibi  ;  in  cujus  tempore  Francifc'a  Ducifia 
Britanime  Habitum  fumpfit.  Plures  l'ratres  ob  intro- 
duiftionem  Regularis  Obfervaritia;  dicefierunt  ab  Ordine  ; 
ulures  ydiotas,  et  extra-ordinari j  Bachalaurei  promoti  ; 
I.e&ores  Kxtra-vagantes,  et  Afini  Le&orati.” 

410.  Fundacio  Congregacionis  Albienfis.  108. 

Ccenobium  Albienfe  primum  habetur  in  Francia,  in¬ 
ter  Reformatos  Carmelitas. 

41 1.  Ad  Dominum  Simphorianum  Champerium  Lug- 

dunehfem. - Fratris  Angeli  de  Duccis  Ordinis  Carme- 

litarum,  Brixienfis,  Apnlogeticon.  110. 

i.  c.  Defenfio  Scriptorum  hominum  Italorum,  fpe- 
ciatim  Fr.  Baptidce  Mantuani  Carmelita:,  et  Antonij  Sa- 
bellici  Hiftoriographi  Veneti,  contra  Gallorum  fugilla- 
tiones.  A.  D.  1 507. 

412.  Antonij  Gingini  Divinone  Domini,  Jurifconfulti 

8c  Pra-fidis  primarij  Divi  Cefaris,  Sabaudix,  Epithala- 
mion  ;  in  publica  Carmelitante  Religionis  Concione,  Sa- 
baudiane  Baronic  Gaij,  habitum.  113.  b. 

In  eo  agitur  de  Laudibus  Ordinis  Carmelitani  ;  re- 
oitataq;  fuit  hxc  Oratio  in  Capitulo  Provinciali  cele- 
brato  in  Conventu  Gaij,  A.  U.  1 5 1 1 . 

413.  Epiftola  Magiftri  Generalis  Fr.  Baptiftx  Man¬ 

tuani,  ad  Fratres  de  Congregatione  Albienfi.  dat.  die 
27  O&obris  A.  D.  1513.  117. 

414.  De  SS.  Johanne  et  Anna,  diftis  Tholofanis  117. 

415.  Quod  Miracula  fierent  in  Conventu  Rothoma- 
genfi,  circa  Sepulchrum  M.  F.  Thomte  Walden,  ibid. 

416.  De  Sandlitate  cujufdam  fratris  Johannis,  de 

Conventu  Mechlinix.  ibid. 

417.  Legendaria  Narratio  de  Imagine  Argentea  e  Con¬ 

ventu  Carmelitarum  Iholofano  furata  ;  quam  poftea  in 
Aquis  natantem  (amiiTo  pondere)  acceperunt  Raymundus 
&  Guillermus  Durandi,  tunc  pueri.  ibid. 

418.  De  temporibus  quibus  floruit,  ac  fatis  ceflit  M.  F. 

Petrus  de  Peyto.  1 1 7.  b. 

419.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Johanne  Fabri.  ibid. 

420.  De  M.  F.  Guillermo  Gregorij,  et  Scriptis  Iplius. 

ibid. 

421.  De  Obitu  Fr.  Willelmi  Wyle  Scoti,  atq;  Bacca- 

laurij  Pariflenfis.  _  _  ibid. 

422.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Mathei  Chantonis,  Carmelita:, 

Do&oris  Tholofani.  118. 

423.  Similiter,  de  F.  Johanne  Egidij  Minatenfi.  ibid. 

424.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Michaelis  de  Bononia. 

1 18.  b. 

425.  Quod  Fr.  Johannes  de  Rupecifla  Ordinis  Fra- 

trum  Minorum,  fcripfit  Commentum  fuper  Prophetias 
Sancti  C.irilli  Carmelite.  ibid. 

426.  De  Epiftola  quam  ad  quendam  Guillermum 

Romane  Ecclefie  Prelatum,  fcripfit  quidam  Prior  Gene¬ 
ralis  Ordinis  Carmeli.  1 1 9. 

427.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Mathei  Chantonis.  ibid. 

428.  Ex  Thrithemio  de  Laudibus  Carmelitarum 

Cap.  20.  Correccio  Juliani  Hafart.  ibid. 

429.  De  Scriptis  Baptifte  Mantuani.  119.  b. 

430.  De  Scriptis  prxfati  Prioris  Generalis  (vid  §. 

428.)  Johannis  Baliftarij.  ibid. 

43  r.  Extracta  a  quodam  Sermone  Fratris  Johannis 
Egidij.  ibid. 

432.  Tranfacta  in  Capitulo  Carmelitarum  Generali, 

quad  celebratum  fuit  Albia.  A.  D.  1393.  122.  b. 

433.  De  Scriptis  M  F.  Mathei  Schanton.  ibid. 

434.  De  Scriptis  ac  Obitu  F.  Johannis  Egidij.  Prioris 

Generalis.  ibid. 

435.  De  Scifmate  in  Ordine  Carmelitarum,  quod  per- 

duravit  ab  A.  D.  1524.  ad  ann.  1527.  ibid. 

436.  Ex  additionibus  Jofephi,  de  Eflenis.  123. 

437.  Adnotatio  Balari,  de  Codice  quodam  Opera  Philo- 

nis  Judxi  continente.  ibid. 

438.  De  Befiarione  Cardinale,  et  Scriptis  Ipfius. 

ibid. 

439.  De  Baptifta  Mantuano  Carmelita.  ibid. 

440.  De  Nichoiao  Papa  v.  ibid. 


Num.  18  f  9. 

441.  De  Vita  et  Scriptis  M.  F.  Rogerij  Cannelure. 


123. 

442.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Gerardi  de  Bononia.  ibid. 

443.  De  ft'.  Johanne  Egidio,  qui  fingulariter  a  Deo 

Signatus,  Crucem  vilibilem  in  Capitis  fuperficie,  Garni 
infeperabiliter  imprefl'am  detulit-  ibid. 

444.  Beneficia  Religionis.  ibid. 

445.  De  M.  F.  Guillermo  Gregorij  Carmelita.  ibid. 

446.  De  Vita  F.  Nicolai  Defiderij  Carmelitrc.  ibid. 

447.  Laus  F.  Herafmi  Colonienfis  Carmelitre.  ibid. 


448.  Narratio  (veriflima  proculdubio)  de  Sanclitate 
Ecclefiae  Carmelitarum  Tholofanorum,  deq  ;  Miraculis 
imbi  fadlis  ;  una  cum  Carta  Teftimoniali  plurium  Viro- 
rum  Clarillimorum,  dat.  A.  D.  1264.  Indulgentiaq  ; 
dementis  Papai  v.  omnibus  eandcm  devote  Vifitantibus. 

1 24* 

449.  Narratio  Legendaria  de  Miraculofo  Apparitione 
B.  V.  M.  cum  filiolo  fuo  &  Angelis,  cuidam  Regi 
Fran ci re,  et  Paribus  fuis  ;  cujus  occafione,  Mifia  Regis 
dicla  in  Ecclefia  Carmelitarum  Thololre,  fundata  eft. 

126. 

450.  Enumeratio  plurimarum  Benefaftionum,  quas 

clariflimi  quidam  Viri  Conventui  Carmelitarum  Tholo¬ 
fanorum  contulerunt.  126.  b. 

45 1 .  Nomina  Illuftrium  quorundain  Virorum  de  Con¬ 
ventu  Tholofre.  ibid. 

452.  De  Scriptis  Le&oris  Fr.  Roberti  de  Tholofa. 

127. 

453.  De  Scriptis  Fr.  Bernardi  de  Abbatia.  ibid. 

454.  De  Sermonibus  Philippinis ;  qui  putantur  efle 

cujufdam  Carmelita;.  ibid. 

455.  Qudd  Clemens  Papa  v.  Miflam  celebraverit  in 

altememorato  Conventu;  magnas  Indulgentias  Vifitanti- 
bus  Locum  dederit ;  Feftuinq ;  Miraculorum  ibidem 
inftituerit  atq;  confirmaverit,  A.  D.  1306.  ibid. 

456.  Legendaria  Narratio  de  S.  Johanna  Virgine  Car- 

melitifla,  ibid. 

457.  Ex  Colle&orio  Hiftorico  Guidonis  deFontenayo, 

de  Efleis  ;  deq;  Baptifta  Mantuano.  ibid. 

458.  De  Tranflatione  Corporis  S.  Johann$,  perDom- 

num  Bernardum  de  Rofergio  Archiepifcopum  Tholo- 
fanum.  ibid. 

459.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Angeli  Galli  Prioris  Provin- 

cialis  Tholofa;.  127.  b. 

46c.  De  Obitu  F.  Hugonis  Tabernarij.  ibid. 

461.  Tempus  quo  floruit  M.  F.  Arnoldi  Tarrida, 

Prioris  Tholofani.  ibid. 

462.  De  Scriptis  F.  Bertrandi  de  Salinis.  ibid. 

463.  De  M.  F.  Galhardo  de  Rupe,  Priore  Provinciali 

Tholofa;.  ibid. 

464.  De  Obitu  &  Sepuhura  M.  F.  Petri  de  Peyto. 

ibid. 

465.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Guillermo  de  Cumba.  ibid. 

4 66.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Henrici  de  Angelo.  ibid. 

467.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Petri  Johannis  de  Baflilhano. 

ibid. 

468.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Johannis  de  Caftro  Pungeno. 

ibid. 

469.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Pafchafio  de  Infula,  Priore 

Provinciali  Vafconia;.  ibid. 

470.  Scripta  Hiftorica,  per  Bala;um  qu:erenda.  ibid. 

471.  Argumenta  Humberti  Montis  Moretani,  in 

Eglogas  Mantuani.  ibid. 

472.  Argumenta  Andrea:  Vaurentini  Serrani  Tho- 
lofatis,  in  Decern  Eglogas  Fratris  Baptifta;  Mantuani. 

128. 

473.  De  Ele&ione  M.  F.  Helia;  Deurgardi  in  Provin- 

cialem  Vafconia.  128.  b. 

474.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Bernardo  de  Tapia.  ibid. 

475.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Menaldo  de  Rofarijs.  ibid. 

476.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Bernardo  de  Cafa  Majori. 

ibid. 

477.  Similiter,  de  Obitu  M.  F.  Helix  Dugardi  pras- 

fati.  ibid. 

478.  Si- 


“3 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


a57 


NuiA.  1819^ 

478.  Similiter,  de  M.  F.  Pafchafij  de  Infula.  1 18.  b. 

479.  Vita  SandH  Symonis  Stoch,  quam  compofuit  Fra- 

ter  Menaldus  de  Rofarijs,  anno  statis  fute  quadrage- 
fimo ;  qui  fait  annas  Domini  Millelimus  &  Quingente- 
fimus.  l~9: 

480.  Officium  ejufdem  Sanfti ;  per  eundem  Magif- 

trum,  ut  videtur.  x3®* 

481.  DeScriptisM.r.Menaldide  Rofarijs.  132.  b. 

482.  Ex  Libro  M.  F.  Gulielmi  Pepin,  Ordinis 
Fratrum  Prtedicatorum,  de  Imitatione  Sandtorum.  ibid. 

483.  Ex  ejufdem  Sermone  de  Sandto  Dominico.  1  33. 

484.  Ex  ejufdem  Sermone  de  San&o  Ludovico. 

133.  b. 

48  e.  Ex  ejufdem  Sermone  de  Sanfto  Franciico. 

ibid. 

486.  Divi  Marti'ris  Angeli  Officium.  1 33-  b* 

487.  De  Magiftris  Guillelmo  Coftalli,  I.aurencio 

Canterij,  Delia  Deugardi,  Bernardo  de  Tapia,  et  Menal- 
do  de  Rofarijs,  Carmelitis.  l35*  b- 

488.  DeScriptis  M.F.  Arnoldi  de  Sonis.  ibid. 

489.  DeM.F.  Johanne  Sanxiere,  &  M.  F.  Gliverio 

Epifcopo  Cirenenfi.  _  ‘bid. 

490.  Ouoto  tempore  intraverint  Fratres  Carmelite  in 

Conventum  Civitatis  Pidtavenfis.  ,r  ‘bul. 

491.  De  Obitu  M.F.  Antonij  Viennenfis Epncopi. 

492.  De  Effigie  SandY  Johannis  Cardinalis  Ordinis 

Carmcli,  in  Conventu  Piaavenfi  depiaa.  ibid. 

403.  De  Scriptis  M.F.  Martini  Marcoux.  ibid. 

494.  Laus  M.F.  Maturi  Fuaerclli.  13^ 

40  c.  Carmina  quredam  edita,  ab  ignoto  quodum. 
^  ibid. 

496.  Mirabilis  Hiftoria  de  Lauretano  Sacello  (in 

quo  Salutis  Humana;  annunciatuin  fuit  Exordium)  per 
F.  Baptiflam  Mantuanum  notata.  imu- 

497.  Baptifta:  Mantuani  Narrado  de  Conft.udaone 

Nova;  Ecclefia:  Lauretana:  ■,  deq;  Carmelitarum  in  ean- 
dein  introdudtione.  x37*  b- 

498.  Ejufdem  Lauretana:  Veteris  Ecclefia;  Laudaiio 

per  parellum  (f.  leg.  Parallelum)  *39- 

499.  Ad  Marcellinum  Flaiflium,  Francifci  Bebfli 

Carmina.  x4°* 

300.  Ad  Julianum  GrofTum  Divienfem,  Francifci 
Belofli  Carmina,  in  Laudem  Sacra:  Leftionis.  14®-  b*  . 

501.  Ad  Petrum  Rocaflium  Divienfem,  Francifci 

Belofli  Decafticlion.  1 4 '  • 

502.  Ad  Barthulomeum  Rufl'um  \fprenfem,  Fran¬ 
cifci  Belofli  Decafticlion. 

503.  Ad  Georgium  StaifBufn  Divienfem,  de  amore 

Diicipulorum  erga  Prasceptorein,  Francifci  Belofli  \  er- 
ficuii.  ...  jbia; 

504.  Ad  Poncium  Laidetum,  Francifci  Belofli  Je- 

traflichon.  .  ‘bid. 

505.  Ad  Francifcum  Fontaronum  Ciflercienfem,  de 

caufis  breviflime  honiinunr  Vite.  .  1 4 1  -  b- 

506.  Ad  Honoratum  Redonorium  Mannafcenfem, 

Carmina  de  brevitate  Vitc.  ibid. 

507.  Ad  Cupidum  Vite,  Francifci  Belofli  Carmina. 

508.  Anthonij  Guiramundi  Divie  Epifcopi,  Epita- 

phium,  per  Francifcum  Beloflum.  _  M-2*. 

509.  Jeiuidos  Diophilacee  Fratris  Johannis  Diophilacis 

Carmelite  audloris  Diflichon.  ibid. 

510.  Jefuidos,  de  Cafa  Natalicia  Domini  <i.  e.  Ecclefia 

Lauretana)  in  plurcis  dictincta  Odas,  Authore  F.  Johanne 
Diophilace  Gandenfi,  Ordinis  almi  gloriofiflime  Crilto- 
fere  Virginis  Marie  de  Monte  Carmelo.  ibid. 

511.  Epiftola  Metrica  Humberti  Montis-moretani 

Publici  apud  Montem  Brifonem  Poetarum  Interpreiis,  ad 
Johannem  Calnetum  Eledum  Regium,  Poetarumq; 
Mecenatem.  ‘43* 

512.  Ad  Eundem,  de  ejus  Armis.  1 44  • 

513.  In  Antonium  Soverium,  Nebulonum,  Furum, 

Cillonum,  Invidoruinq  Principein.  ibid. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  18  rg. 

3»4.  Petri  Bertarij  ad  Parerites  Tefrafticrion.  144.  b. 

515.  Epitaphium  Fratris  Johannis  Wyck  de  Trajedto, 

Preibiteri  Conventus  Madenburgenib,  Ordinis  Carmeli  ■, 
per  Baleum.  ibid. 

516.  Diflichon  Balei  ad  Beatem  Virginem.  ibid. 

ci  7.  Votum  Balei  ad  Beatam  Johannam  Virginem. 

ibid. 

518.  Ex  Orationibus  &  Epiftolis  F.  Mathie  de  Ander- 
naco  Carmelita,  Ledloris,  pro  tempore  Colonienfis.  1 45. 

519.  Oratio  Demoftenis  ad  falvandam  Urbem  Ather.i- 

enfium,  quando  Maximus  Alexander  Orbis  Monarcha 
earn  devaflare  propofuerat,  eo  quod  Thebanos  devidtos 
tuendo  fufeeperunt  Athenienfis.  148- 

520.  Humbc.ru  Montis-moretani  de  ingenuis  Adu- 

lefcentum  Moribus  ad  Dominum  Johannem  Calvetum, 
Regium  apud  Montem-Brifonem  Eledtum,  Libellus. 

149. 

521.  Lcgenda  Sandte  Cirille  Virginis  et  Martiris,  Or¬ 
dinis  Carmeli.  _  _  _  1 5 1  • 

522.  Ex  Homelia  S  Johannis  Chrifoftomi.  152.  b. 

523.  De  l7.  Petro  Geraldi.  153- 

524.  Tituli  l.ibrorum  quorundam  per  Balamm  qute- 

rendorum.  ibid. 

525.  De  Obitibus  MM.  FF.  Guillermi  Garroti,  & 

Pafchafij  de  Infula.  ibid. 

5:6.  De  M.  F.  Salvatore  de  Quercu.  ibid. 

527.  De  Scriptis  M.F.  Johannis  Bachonis.  ibid. 

528.  E  Petro  Abbate  SandY  Remigij  de  Difciplina 

Clauftrali.  ibid. 

.529.  E  Scriptis  M.  F.  Nicholai  Cantelowe,  de  C.ar- 
mclitis.  1 53  •  b* 

530.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Zorke  Oxonienfis. 

in  extrema  ora  '57* 

531.  Opus  Faftorum  cuju.fdam  Angli  (fcil.  Alexan- 

dri  Prioris  de  Eflebye)  in  Vitas,  Agones,  feu  Sandtorum, 
Legendas,  per  tociiis  anni  circuitum.  156.  b. 

53 2.  Poema  Hiftoricum,  cui  tituius  Concordia  fadta 

inter  Regem  Ricardum  Secundum  port:  Conqueflum,  et 
Gives  Londonitnfes :  per  M.F.  Ricardum  Maydiftone 
Carmelitam,  A.  D.  1393.  lS3* 

153  .:.  Quoto  tempore  floruit  Pileus  Titulo  Sandta: 
Praxeuis  Prelbiter-Cardinafs.  in  interiore  marg.  1 9 1 .  b. 

t;  74.  Ouedam  Figure  Eiblie  moralizate,  per  appli- 
cadonem  Exemplorum  Novi  'leftamenti.  .  191.8. 

535.  Index  omnium  in  praefenli  opere  (i.  e.  Codice) 

contentorum.  x93* 

536.  Figurarum  Biblie  moralizatarum  (de  quibus 

paullo  fuperius,  $  534)-  Pars  altera.  ‘9b* 

537.  Tenor  Epiltola:  M.  F.  Nicolaus  Kentor.c  Pro- 

vincialis  Anglia:,  ad  Epifcopos  Sc  Praflatos  Hibernia; 
fuper  Fama,  Opinione,  Vita,  et  Moribus  F.  Thome 
Bradley,  quondam  Anachoritae  Norwicenfis  ,  tunc  vero 
Epifcopi  Doincrenfis,  A.  D.  1448.  196.  b. 

ci8.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Willelmi  Vicarij  Generalis. 

}97- 

r 39.  Laus  Magiflri  Nicolai.  ibid.. 

540.  De  Rumora  circa  Canoriizationem  S.  Alberti, 

vel  S.  Andree.  ibid. 

541.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  Milvertone.  .  ibid. 

542.  De  Obitu  F.  David  Chyrbury  Epifcopi  Dome- 

renfis  ‘bid* 

543.  De  Magiftro  Milverton.  ibid. 

544.  De  MM.  FF.  Johanne  Walton,  &  Johanne  Gow. 

ibid. 

54  c.  De  Inflituta  Canonizatione  S.  Angeli  Martiris. 

197.  b. 

546.  De  MM.  FF.  Johanne  Walche  &  Johanne  An- 
keleum.  .  ‘b‘d* 

^47.  De  F.  Thoma  Glowcefter  Oxomenfi  ;  &  Wal- 
tcro  Cavone.  ‘bid* 

548.  Dc  his  qua  paffus  eft  M.  F.  Johannes  Milver¬ 
ton,  pro  Evangelica  Vcritate.  jbid. 

s4Q.  De  M.  F.  Johanne  Bacunthorpe.  ibid. 

J  3  U  55°*  De 


CataTbgus  Librorum  MSS; 


258 


Num.  1819,  1820. 

550.  Dc  MMM  FFF.  Thoma  Ketyngham,  Gal- 

frido  Aylffiam,  et  Thom?.  Aylfliam.  197.  b. 

551.  De  MM.  FF.  Thoma  Colby,  et  Johanne  Swaf- 

ham.  198. 

552.  Anni  quibus  fundati  fuerunt  Convcntus  Eurne- 

hammije,  Norwici,  et  Suitterlai.  ibid. 

553.  De  Magiftro  F.  Ricardo  Dcpedale  j  et  Bac- 

calaureo  F.  Johanne  Folfham.  ibid. 

554.  De  Conventu  Carmelitarum  Norwicenfi.  ibid. 

555.  Quando  Carmelila:  ingrefli  funt  Angliam.  198. 

556.  QuandoPriedicatores  ingrefli funt  Angliam.  ibid. 

557.  Quando  Minores  ingrefli  funt  Angiiam.  ibid. 

558.  De  Fratribus  Conventus  Burnehammia:  ;  ex  an- 

tiquo  Regiftro  ejufdem.  ibid. 

559.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Langton.  ibid. 

560.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Johannis  Haynton.  ibid. 

561.  DeCoronationeHenrici  vi.  Regis  Anglia:,  ibid. 

562.  De  Obitu  M.  F.  Thoma:  Walden.  198.  b. 

563.  De  Dedicatione  Ecclefia:  Conventus  Gippif- 

wici.  ibid. 

564.  De  Obitu  D.  Henrici  Epifcopi  Wintonienfis,  An¬ 
glia;  Cardinalis.  ibid. 

565.  Anno  quo  R.  Henricus  vi.  Conventum  Gippif- 

wici  ingreflus  eft.  ibid. 

566.  De  ( >bitu  M.  F.  Johannis  Barnyngham.  ibid. 

567.  De  Obitu  Sororis  Ordinis  Carmeli  Alicia:  quon¬ 
dam  uxoris  Johannis  Graunfere.  ibid. 

56  '.  Ex  Itinerario  Btrnardi  Breydenbach  Decani  Ma- 
guntinenfis.  ibid. 

569.  Quod  Robertus  Cantuarienfis  Archiepifcopus  et 

Rogerus  l.pifcopus  Norwicenfis  fufceperunt  Carmelitas 
Anglis  in  eorum  proteftionem.  199. 

570.  De  Dedicatione  Area:  Fratrum  Linnea:.  ibid. 

571.  De  Indulgentia  conceffa  Linnenfem  Ecclefiam 
Vifitantibus,  per  Marcum  Manniee  Epifcopum.  A.  D. 

1 276.  ibid. 

572.  De  M.  F.  Andrea  Felmyngham  Priore  l.inee. 

ibid. 

573.  De  Waltero  Quyeqware.  ibid. 

57a.  De  Scriptis  Michaelis  Bononic-nfis.  ibid. 

575.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Roberto  Yvory.  ibid. 

576.  Yaria  circa  Conventum  Carmelitarum  Linnen- 

fem,  quem  fundavit  M.  F.  Walterus  Quyeqpare  quon¬ 
dam  Archiiliaconus  Norwici ;  deq;  Benefa&oribus  eidem 
Domui.  199.  b. 

577.  De  Obitu  Domini  Milonis  de  Stapylton  Funda- 

toris  de  Yngham.  ibid. 

578.  De  Obitu  Henrici  v.  Anglia:  Regis.  ibid. 

579.  De  Obitu  &,  Sepultura  M.  F.  Adalberti  de 

Pryefl,  Sigifmundi  Imperatoris  Capellani.  ibid. 

580.  Similiter  de  Johanne  Veres  Armigero  Hungaro, 

de  Curia  ejufdem  Imperatoris.  ib  d. 

581.  De  Reformation:  Conventus  Califia:,  perM.  F. 

Robertum  Love  Provincialem.  ibid. 

502.  Ex  CronicaMundi;  de  Johanne Hyrcano.  200. 

583.  De  deftructione  Monafteriorum  quorundam, 

tempore  Huflitarum.  ibid. 

584.  De  F.  Willelmo  Appyltonc  ConfelTore  R.  Ri- 

cardi  11.  quem  decapitavit  Jac.  Straw.  ibid. 

585.  De  Obitu  I*.  W  illelmi  Bachelare  Epifcopi  Car- 

nahagonenfis,  ibid 

586.  Ex  Epiftolis  M.  F.  Nicolai  Kentone,  de  Numero 

Fratrum  Carmelitarum  in  Anglia ;  de  F.  David  Chyr- 
bury  Epifcopo  Domerenfi  ;  de  Bacchalaureo  F.  Ricardo 
Myfin.  ibid. 

507.  De  Scriptis  M.  F.  Nicolao  Kenton.  ibid. 

588.  De  Eugenio  Pa  pa  tv.  etPatre  Thoma  Gallo,  ibid. 

589.  De  plurimis  alijs  Carmelitis,  preefertim  Anglicis. 

1  820. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  4to,  written  &  putt  toother 
in  a  very  confufed  manner.  It  contains,  ° 
r.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  Families 
m'-uioned  therein.  At  the  beginning. 


Num.  1820 — 1822. 

2.  Armes  of  the  Suftolk-Gentry  (with  the  Quarter- 

ings  &  Crefts  of  divers)  haftily  tricked  by  Mr.  John 
Gough  the  Painter-Stainer.  Together  with  fhort  Notes 
fhewing  by  what  Officers  of  Armes  many  of  them  were 
granted.  , 

Among  thefelalfo  find, 

3.  An  Abflract  of  the  Grant  of  Armes  to  Robert 

Waryne  of  Long  Melford  in  Suffolk,  by  Thomas  Haw¬ 
ley  Clarentius.  28  June  1538.  "  5.8:44. 

4.  Bill  of  Painters  Goods  bought.  5.  b. 

5.  Trick  of  Sudbury  Towne-Seal.  0.  b. 

6.  The  Vifitation  of  Suffoi.k  taken  (narratively) 

by  John  Raven  Richmond-Herald  for  William  Camden 
Clarenceux,  A.  D.  1611.  ,, 

Herein  I  alfo  find, 

7.  The  Armes  of  the  Town  of  St.  Edmundes-Bury, 

as  granted  by  the  fame  Will.  Camden.  ibid. 

8.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft  to  John  Jackfon, 

|  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick  Garter,  dat.  1  June  26  Eliz. 

c.  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Thomas  Chefton 
of  Mylden-hall  in  Suffolk,  by  Robert  Cooke  Claren- 
cieulx.  dat.  30  November  1 587.  4s. 

!o.  Arms  (haftily  tricked)  belonging  to  divers  anti- 
ent  Families  of  other  Counties  befides  thatofSuffolk.  5  5. 

1 1.  Pedegree  of  Hobart,  in  Scheme.  63! 

12.  Coat  &  Creft  as  granted  to  Thomas  Malby  of 

Dover-court  inEffex,  by  Will.  Camden  Clarenceux,  20 
May,  j  612.  y 

13.  Grant  of  Armes  to  Malfter  Thomas  Bai-row 

Clerk,  by  Yrlande  Kynge  of  Armes.  dat.  6  Januar! 
ann.  16  Edw.  iv.  71b* 

14.  Grant  of  a  Difference  to  the  Armes  of  Mr 
Thomas  Barrowe  Clerk,  &  his  Brother  Richard  Barrowe 
or  Wynthorpe  Merchaimte  of  the  Staple,  by  John  Wrv- 
the,  Garter,  dat,  22  O&obre,  ann.  1 1  Hcnr.  Septimi. 

I  have  feen  the  name  of  tin’s  John  WrytheVwhofe 
Family  afterwards  wrote  themfelvcs  Wriothefiev  >  written 
thus,  Wryght.  Now  by  our  Anceftors  ib  'was  pro¬ 
nounced  as  /  (as  amongit  Foreigners  at  this  day)  and 
tlierefore  the  old  Pronunciation  might  continue  in 
Wrygthe. 

15.  Confirmation  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  William 

Barowe  of  Wynthorpe  in  Norfolk,  by  William  Dcthick 
Garter,  dat.  20  April  1596.  b. 

16.  Defcent  of  Lucas,  written  by  Mr.  Mundy  the 
Painter-Stainer. 

17.  Painters  Goods  bought,  for  the  Funeral  ofMr 

Mountacute.  _  , 

7.  b. 

1821. 

A  modern  Book  in  4to,  thus  emituied,  “  The  moft  Re- 
markable  Htllory  of  Joseph,  mylir'callv  expounded 
&  interpreted,  according  as  it  is  laid  domic  in  the  Hole 
Scripture  ;  beginning  at  the  36th  Chapter  of  Gendis 
and  continuing  to  the  end  of  that  Book  ;  wherein  is 
repreiented  Sr  pourtrayed,  the  extra  &  lively  Patterne 
of  a  true  refigned  Chriltian  ;  together  w  ith  the  whole 
rroceiie  of  a  Regenerate  Man  according  to  theMyfte.-v 
of  the  New  Birth  in  Chrift,  both  inhisTryall  &  Perie- 
verance,  as  alfo  in  his  Honor  8c  Exaltation.  Writ- 
ten  by  Jacob  Bohme,  Teutonicus.  Tranflatcd  out  of 
the  German  l'oungue.  Anno  Domini  1644.” 

1822. 

Codex  chartaceus  nc  per-tenuis  in  4to,  cui  Titulus 
Latinus  eft, 

Extemporanea  ExercitatioViam  expeditiffimamconj- 
planatura,  Noltris  (qui  Verfus  componendi  in  utraque 
Lingua  rationem  cupiunt  attingerej  Epiftola  quadam, 
qua:  a  Paulinis  ad  Laurentianos  milfa  eft,  caufam  obiter 
fub-nnniftrante,  ut  ha:c  Carmine  deferiberentur.  fc. 

1.  Eius 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


2$  9 


Num.  1822*  1823. 

1 .  Eius  qui  fecit  hmc  Carmina  (i.  e.  cujufdam  R.  M. 
Laurentiana:,  apud  Londinates Scholae).  ad  fuos 

.-o&sr.KiV  _  r.  b. 

2.  Epiftola  Paulini ;  five  in  Moncafterienfes  Carmen 

Inveftivum  (per  Richardum  Clercum  Scholar  Paulinas 
ftudiofum)  2.  b. 

3.  Refponfio  Laurentiani ;  five  'Arro^oyla  cujufdam  e 
Laurentianis  pro  Schola  fua,  contra  quendam  Paulina 
Scholar  Ihidiofum,  qui  prior  earn  petebat  Epiftola  quam 
iple  fnvectivam  nominat,  et  fibi  refponderi  poftulabat.  3. 

4.  Paul  ini  gynmafij  zrporuTroTrmtx,  qua:  de  noltris  Capi- 

talcm  pronuntiat  Sententiam.  13. 

5.  Scholar  Laurentianse  ad  Paulinam  zr^a-uTro-rroLix 

cvy.CtJAlVTiKn  y.i^cyXiyunx.  ibid. 

6.  Paulini  Grteca  Carmina ;  quibus  fubjicitur  Latina 

adVerbum  Tranflatio,  infcripta  r5  cIvtZ.  15.  b. 

7-  Be  ru>  rivoj  y.  rrxfAirxv  xp’jyq,  uq  Sokh 

itta.uiry.n.  tvs  tui/  Actugii/Tiayi'v  <r^o\iiq  uTrcgxtrm'fcci/Toq  xvtx- 
y-CtiGii,  zrot/q  tivx  Tr,v  Tlxv\‘liuv  Sid  Tifir.q  y.x  1  tpiklxq 

rrv.pa.  xxTeiXti^xf/.fv  flan iy.xfuq  uq  xyoi/ra.  1^. 

8.  ’lxfApiy.ee.  j8. 

9.  Prascedentium  Interpretatio,  Mixtum-gliconium  fo- 

livagum.  18.  b. 

10.  Iambicorum  Tranflatio.  20.  b. 

1 1.  lambica  Latina  iTnXoyiy.d.  21.  b. 

12.  Ad  fuperiorem  Epiilolam  Refponfio  Brevis,  T Zv 

b.tytixyuv.  ibid. 

13.  Laurentiani  Gynmafij  m^oTUTrem-oi'ix  ad  Paulinam 
Latine. 

14.  Ta  d-jTs.  Grascc. 


23- 
23.  b. 


>823. 

Codex  chartaceus  (et  male  habitus)  in  4to,  manu  D~ni 
Joannis  Burrus  in  Arce  Londinenfi  Recordorum 
Cuftodis,  &c.  per  totum,  ut  videtur,  exaratus.  In 
illo  continentur. 

1 .  Poemata  varia  e  Pancharide.  Johannis  Bonefonij 

deferipta.  1 . 

2.  Burrufij  noft.i  Carmen  Epiftolare  ad  D.  Francif- 

cum  Baconum.  3.  b. 

3.  Ejufdem  ad  Eundem  Strena.  4.  b. 

j.  Ejufdem  ad Philippum  Baconum.  Epiftola.  6.  b. 

5.  A11  Italian  Sonett,  amorous.  7. 

6.  Burrufij  Poema  ad  Intimioris  Pedloris  amicum 

Philippum  Baconum.  7.  b. 

7.  To  Mr.  Peter  Jackfon,  upon  the  Front  of  Owen 

the  Welfh-maKS  Epigrams  which  I  (i.  e.  Mr.  Burrus) 
lent  him.  9. 

8.  Ejufdem,  ad  Philippum  Baconum,  Epiftola:  qua- 

tuor.  9.  b. 

9.  Ejufdem  ad  N.  N.  Poema.  13.  b. 

10.  Two  Sonnets  in  Englilh  ;  the  latter  being  tran- 

flated  from  Ronfard.  14. 

11.  In  mortem  leciiflitnas  feminas  S.  B.  qute  duos  maf- 

c ul o,s  enixo,  ftatim  una  cum  prole  expiravit.  1 5. 

12.  Eadem  Carmina  Anglice  ad  Verbum  fere  reddita. 

ibid. 

13.  Votum  Solenne  quod  fpectatiflimo  Domino  fuo 
D.  1‘rancifco  Bacono  Burrus  repetit  et  facruin  dicat. 

’5-  b. 

14.  Adolefcentis  Burrufij  Epiftola:  Ties  vel  Quatuor. 

16. 

15.  Ejufdem  Epiftola  ad  Joannem  Bradfliaw.  18. 

16.  Ejufdem,  ad  Phillipum  Baconum.  20.  b. 

17.  Ejufdem,  ad  Ilenricum  Spelmannum  Equitem 

Auratum.  21. 

18.  D.  Henrici  Spelmanni  Refponfio.  21.  b. 

19.  Ejufdam  ad  Thoman  Farnabium.  22. 

so.  Refponfio  Farnabij.  23. 

21.  Tituii  (five  ut  aiunt  Heraldi,  Stylus)  Thomas 

Howard  Arundellia:  Comitis.  23.  b. 

22.  Benjamino  Johnfono  Poetas  fui  fcculi  Palmari, 

Burhuflj  Invitatio  ad  Prandium.  24. 


Num.  1823 — 1 825 . 


23.  Ejufdem  ad  Johan nem  Bradlhavium,  Epiftola:  jo- 

cularis.  24.  b. 

24.  Ejufdem  ad  Filium  fuum  Thonlam  Coppin.  29. 

25.  Cafus  Juridicus,  per  eundem  pro  quibufdam 

Wallenfibu',  deferiptus;  3^ 

26.  Eju'dem  ad  Thomam  Farnabium  Epiftola.  34. 

27.  Farnabij  Refponfio.  33.  b. 

28.  Inftrumentum  fuper  Declaratione  quam  per  Wfl- 

lelmum  Ryley  Procuratorem  fuum  fecit  Johannes  de 
Bin-go  (i.  e.  Burrus)  Miles,  coram  D.  Willelmo  Noye 
Regio  Attomato  Generali  Judicialiter  fedente,  fe  Furti 
plane  Reum  effe,  quandoquidem  Ipfe  Copias  A&orum 
quorundam  in  Curia  Militari,  in  Ul'um  &  Gratiam  prte- 
fati  D.  Willelmi  Noye,  clam  &  infeio  Gilberto  Dethick 
dictee  Curia:  Regiftrario,  lufturatus  eft.  dat  io  die 
Menfis  Martij  A.D.  1631.  38. 

29.  Ejufdem  Johannis  de  Burgo  (ita  enim  iple  fe 

appellat)  ad  Gulielmum  Elphingftone  Pocillatorcm  Re- 
gium,  Epiftolas.  39. 

3:.  Ejufdem  Literas  ad  Joannem  Maplet,  Oxonise. 

4i- 

31.  Literas  do&iflimi  viri  Joannis  Maplet,  quibus 

fupra  refponfum  eft.  41.  b. 

32.  Infignium  Armorum  Mufaso  Minerva:  dedicatio  ; 

five  D.  Joannis  Burrufij  Garterij  Carta,  qua  ufum  Ar¬ 
morum  Societati  conceflit  Fascialium,  dat.  8  Aug.  A.  D. 
l635-  .  43-  b. 

33.  Refcriptum  Heraldorum,  quo  grates  Burrufio 

reddunt.  44.  b. 

34.  Burrufij  Colleftanea  nonnulla  de  P.  Virgilio  Ma- 

rone.  46. 

35.  Apographum  cujufdam  Epiftola:  Commendatoria;. 

_  5°- 

36.  Some  pieces  of  the  Firft  Book  of  Paulius  Jovius’s 

Hiftory,  turned  by  Sir  John  Burrus,  out  of  Englilh  inta 
Latin  ;  perhaps,  by  way  of  Exercife.  51. 

37.  Sententiolas  paucuke.  93. 

38.  A  Divine  Poem.  94. 

39.  Carmina  ex  Operibus  Seneca:,  ac  aliorum  defump- 

ta-  ...  .  .  95'  98- 

40.  Intimiori  Pettoris  amico  T.  G.  ob  infperatam 
unici  fui  Filij  mortem  plus  asquo  dolenti,  Carmen.  96. 

1824. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  4to,  written  &  tricked  by 
the  Hand  of  Thomas  Knight,  who  was  firft  Portcullis, 
and  afterward  Chefter-Berald  :  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  Imperfect  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Families 
whofe  Arms  or  Pedigrees  are  entred  into  this  Book. 

At  the  beginning  &  end. 

2.  Arms  of  the  Kentifli  Gentry.  2. 

3.  Arms  Quartered  by  fome  Kentifli  Families  14. 

4  Pedegrees  of  the  Kentifli  Gentlemen,  regiftered 

at  the  Vifitation  of  that  County,  taken  Anno  DT11  1 574. 
by  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  15.  g. 

5.  Armes  of  Ancient  Kentifli  Families,  out  of  an 
Olde  Booke  of  Clarencieulx  Harvyes.  43.  b. 

1825. 

Codex  chartaceus  et  male-habitus  in  4to,  in  quo  conti¬ 
nentur  Colle&anea  quasdam  eruditiflimi  viri  Patricij 
Junij,  manu  fua  propria  deferipta.  fcil. 

1 .  Contenta  Codicum  nonnullorum,  in  quibus  exarata 

fuerunt  opera  plurima  D.  Auguftini.  j. 

2.  Adnotationes  Hiftoricas,  e  Scriptis  Grascorum  de- 

fumpta:.  3.  b. 

3.  Excerpta  e  veteri  quodam  Grasco  Chronico  MS. 
quod  in  plurimis  cum  Chronico  Alexandrino  convenit. 

4.  Excerpta  e  Codice  MS.  D'ni  Seldeni  de  Regibus 

Cypri.  26. 

Ipfe  Codex  Idiomate  Greeco-Barbaro,  Annoq;  poll 
Chriftum  natum  1545.  deferiptus,  etiamnum  ferva- 
4  -urt 


2  6o 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1824 — 1830. 

tur  in  Bibliotheca  Bodleyana,  infcriptus  SeLD.  su1*ra 
no.  14. 

5.  Series  Regum  Cypri,  ex  ecdem  MS.  Seldeni. 

3*- 

6.  Curriculi  Pauhni  diffinfti  Serie  annorum  quail 
Tabella  ;  ex  Autographo  D  ni  Andrea;  Melvini.  34. 

Verfo  Codice :  confpiciuntur,  aliena  ac  feftinantif- 
fima  manu 

7.  Excerpta  e  Cajetani  Summa  Theologiae. 

1826. 

A  paper-Book  in  4to,  badly  written,  and  thus  enti tilled, 
A  Defcription  of  Cambria  now  called  Wales  ; 
drawne  firft  by  Sir  John  Price  Knight :  &  afterward  aug¬ 
mented  &  made  peffefl;  by  Humfrev  Lhoyd  Gentleman. 

On  the  oirtfide  are  alfo  thefe  words.  “  Corrected,  aug¬ 
mented,  &  amended,  with  a  Continuation  out  of  the 
Records  &  bell  approved  Authours  by  David  Powell 
Doctor  in  Divinity. 

1P27. 

A  paper-Book  in  410  (tranflated  out  of  Latin,  as  I  gefs) 
and  thus  entituled, 

iv  .A  Revelation  of  the  Troubles  of  our  Times  about 
the  'Reformation  of  the  Catholick  Church  of  God,  and 
of  the  Converfion  of  Turks  Sc  Infidels  to  the  Chriftian 
Faith  ;  shewed  by  God  for  to  come  to  pafs  fpeedily  ; 
by  J  ome  of  Ferrara  (i.  e.  Savonarola)  the  meaneft  Ser¬ 
vant  of  Jefus  Chrift  ;  who  after  being  divers  times  tor¬ 
tured  in  Prifon  by  the  Procurement  of  Pope  Alexander 
vi.  was  burned  to  Death  the  23  May  1498.  1. 

2.  The  Preface  of  Jerome  Bonaventur  Citizen  of 

Florence,  to  the  abovementioned  Book.  ibid. 

3.  An  admirable  Epiftle  lately  brought  from  Rome  to 

Paris,  written  to  a  Learned  Man  concerning  fome  New 
divine  Revelation ;  and  of  the  Irife  of  a  Friar  of  the 
Minorics.  Likewife  of  two  Girles  ;  out  of  the  One 
Chrillfpeaketh,  and  ■;  Virgin  Marie  fpeaketh  out  of  the 
other.  pag.  139. 

4  Of  the  Seales  of  the  Croffe,  on  the  very  Garments 
of  the  Jewcs  :  in  the  Book  of  The  Strong  Hold  of  Faith. 

pag.  146. 

5.  An  Extract  of  a  Letter  of  the  mod  Illuftrious  King 
of  Hungarie  Lodowic,  to  Pope  Leo  the  Tenth,  2  July 
1521.  Craving  aid  from  the  Potentates  of  Chriflen- 
dome,  againll  the  Turk.  pag.  152. 

1828. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to,  recenti  manu  exaratus  ;  cui 
Titulus, 

Mofes  et  Aaron :  five  Typi  et  Umbra;  Domini 
Noftri  Jefu  Chrifti,  in  Veteri  velati,  in  Novo  Foedcre, 
revtlati ;  illuftrati  et  applicati  Studio  et  Opere  Thoms 
Taylorij  Sacraje  Theologia;  Do&oris.  Nunc  primuin 
ob  infignem  utilitatem,  ex  Anglicano  Idiomate  in  Lati- 
num  verfi,  Lahore  &  Induftria  Wenceflai  Libani  Moravi, 
Sacri  Miniflerij  Candidati,  See. 

1829. 

Codex  chartaceus,  recens,  et  per-tenuis  in  4to,  in  quo 
continetur, 

Methodus  procedendi  in  Curk  Admiralitatis ;  cum 
formulis  lnftrumentorum. 

1830. 

Codex  chartaceus  et  pcrtenuis,  m  4to,  quo  tamen  con- 
tinentur. 

1 .  Genealogia  Dominorum  Conftabulariorum  Ceftrie  • 
cum  Adicione  Dominorum  de  Lacy.  ’ 

Extat  e  Cottonianse  Bibliotheca  Codice  MS.  q'ui 
inferibitur  Cleof.  C.  hi.  evulgata,  in  Monaftici  An¬ 
glican!  Tom.  11.  pag.  187. 


Num.  1830 — 1832. 

i.  De  Fundatione  Ecclefiae  de  Whalley,  et  Capellas 
Caftri  de  Cliderhowej  et  de  Genealogia  Dominorum 
de  Lafcy.  1 1 .  b. 

1831. 

A  paper-Book  in  4to,  written  by  different  Hands ;  one 
part  whereof  is  thus  entituled, 

1 .  A  Regifler-booke  made  by  us  the  Burgefies  Sc 
Afliftants  whofe  Names  hereafter  followe,  chofen  Sc 
appointed  for  the  Citty  &  Borrough  of  Weftminfter  8c 
the  Libeities  of  the  fame  :  of  all  Matters  &  Actions  done 
by  us  the  laid  Burgefies  or  anie  of  us  at  ante  tyme  here¬ 
after,  in  the  Court-houfe ;  agreeable  with  the  Towne- 
Clai'kes  Booke  granted  unto  us  from  Her  Majeftie  by 
Act  of  Parliament,  for  the  good  Order,  Reformation, 
and  Government  of  the  faid  Citty  or  Burrough  aforefaid. 
and  the  Liberties  of  the  fame,  for  the  Punifhment  of 
Wickednefs  &  Vice  there,  by  Vertue  of  a  Statute  made 
Sc  provided  in  the  27th  ycefe  of  the  Raigne  of  our  moft 
gracious  Soveraigne  Lady  Elizabeth,  &c.  Anno  Doth. 


1585. 

Herein,  among  other  matters,  I  find, 

2.  Sacramentum  de  le  Capital  Burgeffe.  13..  b. 

3.  Sacramentum  Burgenfium.  14. 

4.  Sacramentum  Afiiltantium.  14.  b. 

5.  Sacramentum  Conftabularij.  15. 

6.  Sacramentum  Sub-Conftabilarij.  1 5.  b. 

7.  Scavengers  Oath.  16. 

8.  Annoyances  (an  Oath)  ibid. 

9.  Wardmotts  Inqueft  (an  Oath)  16.  b. 

10.  A  Jurors  Oath.  ibid, 

n.  The  Searchers  Oath,  for  unwholfome  meate. 

12.  The  Penn-Keepers  Oath.  ibid. 

13.  The  Beadles  Oath.  17.  b. 

14.  The  Jurors  Oath.  ibid. 

15.  The  Towne-Clearkes  Patent.  18. 

16.  The  Pound-Keepers  Patent.  18.  b. 


Turning  at  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

1 7.  The  State  of  the  Difference  between  Francis  Ruffel 
Earl  of  Bedford  Sc  Mr.  William  Bray  Vicar  of  the  Paro¬ 
chial  Church  of  St.  Martin  in  the  Fields,  touching  the 
Right  of  prefer.!  ing  to  the  Chapel  of  Covent-Garden, 
then  newlv  erected  ;  as  it  appeared  unto,  &  was  com- 
pofed  by  His  Majefty  in  Council,  6  April  1638.  i. 

18.  Articles  of  Agreement  thereupon;  ex  Regiflro 

principali  D~ni  Epifcopi  London,  extra&i.  4. 

19.  The  Aft  of  the  Earle  of  Bedfords  Donation  of 

the  Chappie,  &c.  in  Covent-Garden :  extracted  from 
the  fame  Regiftcr.  6. 

20.  The  A£t  of  Confecration  of  the  Chappell,  See.  in 

the  Covent-Garden  ;  extracted  from  the  fame.  7. 

21.  The  Charge  of  Building  the  laid  Church,  before 

the  Alteration.  9. 

22.  A  Warrant  for  the  Difcharge  of  Richard  Harris 

&  Jofias  Feudal!  from  the  Office  of  Overfeers  for  the 
Poore  of  the  Parifli  of  Sc.  Martins  in  the  Feilds,  Sc  for 
the  appointing  of  others.  1  o. 

23.  A  Petition  to  the  Ivinge  by  Mr.  Withers,  Harris, 

k  Feudail,  in  the  name  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Covent- 
Garden,  without  their  Confents  :  with  the  Proceedings 
thereupon.  n.b. 

24.  The  Commifiion  to  fell  the  Pewes  in  Covent- 

Garden  Church.  14. 

25.  The  Commifiion  to  Rate  Sc  Gether  for  Veftments. 

I5- 

1832. 

A  thin  Book  in  4to,  written  by  Mr.  John  Cufacke  an 

Irifh  Gentleman  (who  had  gotten  into  the  Fleet) 

and  by  him  dedicated  to  the  King ;  with  this  Title, 
De  folfo  Imprifonamento  :  A  briefe  Difcourfe  dil- 
coveringe  the  Nature  of  falfe  Imprifonment,  and  the 

proper 


Bibliotheca;  Harleiance. 


z6[ 


Num.  1832 — '839. 

proper  Remedies  thereof;  and  the  Privileges  of  the 
Kings  Command  by  Common  &  Statut  Lawes. 

1  833.  ’ 

A  very  thin  Book  in  4to,  being 
A  Rentall  of  the  Priory  of  St.  Gregory  in  Canter¬ 
bury  ;  flicwing  what  Quit-Rents  reft  due  to  the  fame  at 
Michaelmafs  1648. 


A  paper- Book  in  4to,  given  by  the  learned  Antiqua¬ 
ry  Dr.  Matthew  Hutton  tleceafed,  and  written  by 
Natthaniel  Fienes,  who  was  a  Colonel  in  the  Parlia- 
menr-Army,  againft  K.  Charles  1.  It  is  entituled, 
Mifcellanea,  concerning  the  Name  &  Familie  of 
Fiennes. 

This  Colle&ion  is  made  chiefly  from  printed  Au¬ 
thors. 

i  835- 

A  paper-Book  in  4to,  given  by  the  above-mentioned  Dr. 
Hutton,  and  written  by  the  fame  Colonel  Fienes, 
containing, 

Notes  taken  chiefly  from  the  Public  Records,  all 
relating  to  his  own  Family. 

1836. 

A  very  thm  paper-Book,  wherein  are  contained  a  Sett 
of  Engliih  Epigrams,  with  this  Title. 

“  Epigrams:  like  Buckminfters  Allmanacks fervinge 
generallie  for  all  England  ;  but  eipeciallie  for  the  Meri¬ 
dian  of  this  famous  Citie  of  London. 

1837- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to,  diverfis  manibus  fcriptus  ;  in 
quo  continentur, 

1.  ’Ex  [3i[3\io-j  ra  *'Egx<rc/piit,  'T  oScmt  Of  r«f  TIx^oi- 

(*tus  Exx/.T)(T(ar»i8,  '  Arpa  avptx.Tui/,  Tutpixv 

ZaAw/xioi'Tof,  xssl  tIu  ’lw£.  I, 

*  “  Sex  Librorum  Sapientialium  ( e  quibus  Pfalterium  hie 
deeft  )'  Nota  marginalis  manu  Jacobi  Uflerij  Amiachani. 

2.  Variantes  Le&iones  Novi  Teftamenti  ex  Codice 

MS.  Bibliotheca;  Regis  Britanniarum,  qui  Thedse  fuifle 
credirur ;  omiflis  plerumque  differentijs  in  Articulis  et 
Verborum  tranfmutationibus.  qua;  tamen  frequenter  oc- 
currunt,  et  Elegandam  quandam  et  Perfpicuitatem  ha- 
bent.  40< 

Inferius  notatur  “  Ordo  Librorum  Novi  Teftamenti 
fecundum  Exemplar  Alexandrinum,  per  fumma;  Eru- 
ditionis  Virum  Jacobum  Ulferium  Archiepifcopum  Arma- 
chanum.” 

1838. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  -4to,  diverfis  manibus  fcriptus ;  in 
quo  reperiuntur, 

1.  Nctarum  et  Scholiorum  in  Hugonem  Grodum  de 
Jure  Belli  et  Pacis  :  Pars  Secunda. 

Turning  to  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

2.  Copies  of  divers  Letters  written  by  one  Mr.  Wil¬ 

liam  Dickins  ;  who  appears  to  have  had  a  Pen  flowing 
enough.  6 

i839- 

A  thin  Book  in  4to,  formerly  written  (as  it  may  feem) 
at  the  Office  of  Ordnance  ;  and  containing, 

1.  Proportions  of  Gun  powder  allowed  to  each  fort  of 
Great  Ordnance. 

2.  Accompt  of  Powder  received  &  delivered  at  the 

Tower  &c  at  Portfmouch,  from  June  1636.  to  May 
1638.  1 


Num.  1840 — 18+5. 


1 840. 

A  thin  Modern  Trafl,  in  4to,  thus  entituled. 
Neceflary  Confiderations  touching  the  Eleftion  of 
Members  to  ferve  m  Parliament;  offer’d  to  all  true 
Church-of-England  Men,  &  all  Modeft  Proteftant  Dif- 
lenters,  who  intend  to  live  quietly  under  the  Prefent 
Government, 

1  841. 

A  thin  modern  Tratt  thus  entituled, 

Propofals  for  the  better  Reftoreing  of  Publick  Cre- 
dn  and  more  eafy  Payment  of  the  National  Debts,  by 
Sethng  A  fund  of  not  lefs  than  18  per  Cent,  per  Ann. 
from  the  Firft:  Day  of  February  1701,  to  the  Firft 
Day  of  Auguft,  which  fliall  be  in' the  Year  of  our  Lord 
1710. 

1  842. 

A.  thin  Tl'a&  in  4to,  thus  entituled, 

1  he  Copie  of  a  Letter  fent  by  the  Lords  of  the  Coun¬ 
cell  to  the  High-Shef  tiffs  of  the  feverall  Counties  here- 
af!rr/rnamedr’  ?'lth  lnftruaions  for  the  Levyinge  & 
Alfeffinge  of  the  Counties  towards  the  fettinge  out  of 
45  Shipps  and  theyre  Charge;  bearing  date  the  1  ah  of 
Auguft  Anno  1635.  Togcather  with  the  Names  of 
the  laid  Counties,  Number  of  Shipps;  Burden  Men  & 
Charge  thereof,  and  his  Majefty’s  Writt,  &c.  *  * 

1 843- 

A  thin  Tradt  in  4to  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  Lift  of  the  Perquifites  &  Privileges  enjoyed  by 
the  former  Mailers  of  :he  .Tmvel-houfe,  given  in  by  Sir 
Henry  Mildmay,  fince  the  Reftoration  of  K.  Charles  11. 

2.  Remarks  on  the  faid  Lift;  whereby  the  Encroach¬ 
ments  which  have  been  made  on  the  above-mentioned 
Office,  are  fett  forth,  by  Sir  Gilbert  Talbott  Mafter  & 
Trealurer  of  the  Jewell-Houfe,  A.  D.  1680. 

1844, 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to,  cui  Titulus  pramittitur,  “  Hif- 
toria  Ecclefiaftica  Rontana  ;  autore  pereximi^  Viro 
I  ho m a  III  L/belio  Malmefburienfi  :  ”  fermone  ftridbo 
compilatus. 

1845. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo  Iongiori,  quern  (etfi  peflime 
habitum)  una  cum  alijs  nonnullis,  haud  ita  pridem 
HaRleIana  i'ibliothecfe  contulit  Vir  luinmus  Geor¬ 
gius  Hickefius,  adhuc,  Gratia  divina,  fuperftes.  In  eo 
continentur,  inter  alia, 

1.  Calendarium.  r 

2.  Oratio  fidentis  in  Virtutem  Septem  illorum  facra- 
tiffimorum  Verborum  qua;  noviffime  pronuntiavit  Jefus 
Chriftus  in  Cruce  pendens,  contra  Septem  Peccata 
Mortalia. 

3.  Officium,  prccari  folitum,  ad  Bonum  Angelum.  it. 

4.  R  aphaelis  Archangcli  ad  Beatum  Rucchum,  Anti- 

phona;,  &c.  ,  2 

5.  Oratio  Sancti  Achafij  Sociorumq;  cjus.  1  2.  b. 

6.  Officium,  de  eifdem.  13- b*. 

7.  Septem  Pfalterij  Verfus,  quibus  praffiritur  hjec 

Rubrica,  “  Legitur  in  Vita  S.  Bernardi  Abbatis  Clare  vallis, 
quod  Demon  fibi  femel  apparuit,  dicens  fe  feire  Odfo 
Verfus  in  Pfalterio,  quos  qui  cotidie  diceret,  tanii  meriti 
acquireret  ac  ft  totum  Pfalterium  David,  um  decantaffet. 
Et  cum  Beatus  Bernardus  inftaret  ut  fibi  eofdem  Verfus 
oftenderet,  file  vero  hoc  facere  recufaret ;  tunc  Beatus 
Bernardus,  Scio  inquid,  Faciam ;  nam  quotidie  legarn 
totum  Pfalterium  deinceps,  ficq;  pitcdiaos  Verfus  non 
obmittam.  Quod  cum  audiflet  Demon,  ne  tantum 
Bonum  laceret,  podus  fibi  ho s  Verfus  offend  i.  Sunt 
autem  qui  fequuntur.  j 

3  X  8,  Oratio 


Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


,6i 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  >845 — 1848. 

8.  Oratio  dicenda  port:  hos  Verfus.  1 5-  b. 

9.  Item  alia  Oratio.  *6- 

jo.  Hora:  B.  V.  Marias,  uti  videtur  (Imperf.)  17. 
xi.  Officia  pro  Mortuis  (Imperf.)  _  68. 

12.  The  Form  of  Confeflion  of  Sins ;  in  Old  Englifh. 

123.  b. 


I  846. 

A  modern  Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  Sir  Dudley  Diggs  his  Introduction,  made  in  the 
Houfe  of  Peers,  touching  the  Liberty  of  the  Subject.  1 . 

2.  Mr.  Littleton’s  Argument  made  by  the  Command 

of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  out  of  ACts  of  Parliament  & 
Authorities  of  Lawes  Expoundeing  the  fame  at  the  firft 
Conference  with  the  Lords  concerning  the  Libertie  of  the 
Perfon  of  every  Free-man.  3* 

3.  The  Objections  of  the  King’s  C-ouncell,  with  the 

Aunfwers  made  thereunto  at  the  Two  Conferences, 
touching  the  fame  matter.  13. 

4.  The  true  Coppies  of  the  Records  not  Printed,  which 
are  ufed  on  either  fide  of  that  part  of  the  Debate  20. 

5.  Mr.  Selden’s  Argument,  which  by  Commaund  of 

the  Houfe  of  Commons  was  made  at  the  Firft  Confe¬ 
rence  with  the  Lords,  touching  the  Libertie  of  the  Per¬ 
fon  of  every  Freeman  ;  out  of  Prefidents  of  Records  & 
Refolutions  of  Judges,  in  former  times.  29. 

6.  The  whole  Coppies  of  the  Prefidents  of  Record 

mentioned  in  one  of  the  Arguments  made  at  the  firft 
Conference  with  the  Lords,  touching  the  Liberties  of  the 
Perfon  of  every  Freeman.  56. 

7.  Sir  Edward  Cooke’s  Speech.  79. 

8.  The  Subfiance  of  the  Objections  made  by  Mr. 
Attorney-Generall  before  a  Committee  of  both  Houfes, 
to  the  Argument  that  was  made  by  the  Houfe  of  Com¬ 
mons  at  the  firft  Conference  with  the  Lords  out  of 
Prefidents  of  Record  &  Refolutions  of  Judges  in 
former  times,  touching  the  Liberty  of  the  Perfon  of  every 
Freeman  ;  and  the  Awnfweres  Sc  Replies  then  prefently 
made  by  tire  Houfe  of  Commons  to  thefe  Objections. 

84.  b. 

9.  Sir  Edward  Coke’s  Speech  at  the  end  of  the  Con¬ 
ference.  1 1 2. 

1  o.  The  Remonftrance  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  to 
K.  Charles  1.  113. 

11.  A  Kalender  or  Schedule  of  the  Shipping  of  this 
Kingdome,  which  have  been  taken  by  the  Enemy,  and 
loft  at  Sea  within  the  Space  of  three  Years  paft.  123. 

This  is  referred  to  in  the  Remonftrance. 

12.  The  Commons  Second  Remonftrance.  125. 

13.  Sir  Dudly  Diggs  his  Speech,  reported  by  the 

Lord-Prefident,  8  May  1626.  129. 

14.  Mr.  Harberte  his  Speeche,  reported  by  the  Lord 

Chamberlaine.  134.  b. 

1 5  Mr  Seldon  his  Speech,  reported  by  the  Earle  of 
Dorfett.  140.  b. 

j  6.  Mr.  Glanville  his  Speech,  reported  by  the  Earle 
of  Bridgwater.  151, 

17.  Mr.  Sherland  his  Speech,  reported  by  the  Earle 
of  Devonfhire.  181. 

1847. 

Codex  chnrtaceus  (fed  tainen  antiquus,  el  fortaffis  in 
Italia  deferiptus)  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Thomas  Walenfis,  Angli,  traftatus  de  Formis 

Veter  urn  Deorum.  j, 

2.  F.jufdem  Moralitates  in  Ovidij  Metamorphofes, 

Libris  15.  16. 

1 848. 

A  Book  in  fol.  lately  given  by  John  Beaumont  M.  D. 

(Author  of  fome  Books  concerning  SpeClres,  Appari¬ 
tions,  &c.)  and  written  A.  D.  1393,  by  the  Hand  of 


Num.  1848 — 1850. 

P.  B.  i.  e.  Peter  Beale,  a  famous  Writing-Mailer  at 
that  time  ;  who  hath  given  it  the  following  Title, 

1.  A  General  Collection  of  all  the  Queens  Majefties 
Offices  and  Fees,  in  all  her  Courts  at  Weftminfter,  both 
of  Juftice  &  Revenewes. 

2.  And  alfo  all  the  Offices  &  Fees  of  her  Highnes 
moft  honorable  Houfhoulde. 

3.  And  all  the  Fees  belonging  to  Capteynes  &  Soul- 
diers  having  Charge  of  Bulwarkes,  Caflles,  and  For- 
t  relies. 

4.  And  all  the  Offices  &  Fees  of  her  Majeflies  Parks, 
Ilowfes,  Chafes,  and  Forrefts,  within  the  Realme  of 
England. 

5.  And  alfo  the  valuation  of  all  Bisfhoprickes  & 
Deaneries  :  with  the  Nobilitie  cf  England  according  to 
their  feverall  degrees :  and  manye  other  thinges  me¬ 
morable. 

“  Omnia  cum  retines  manibus,  mirabile  fi  non. 

“  Officium  obtineas  multi-;  e  millibus  unum.” 

Si  NON  TIBI,  SALTEM  AMICIS. 

This  Mr.  Beale  ufed  fo  good  Ink,  that  all  his  writ¬ 
ing  in  the  prefent  Book,  after  an  hundred  &  twenty 
Years,  continueth  quite  black. 

1849. 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  bought  of  Mrs.  Whitlock,  and 
entituled, 

Obfervations  concearninge  the  Nobilitie  of  Eng¬ 
land,  auntient  &  moderne,  by  Sir  John  Borough  Knt. 
Keeper  of  the  Recordes  in  the  Tower  of  London. 

Ou.  If  this  Title  is  not  of  Sir  John’s  own  Hand¬ 
writing  ? 

rS^o. 

Codex  chartaceus  (eximiae  tamen  Raritatis)  quern,  una 
cum  infequeatibus  binis,  alijfq;  nonnullis  a  me  fupri 
deferiptis  &  recenfitis,  in  Ilollandia,  de  Johanne 
Aymone,  ingenti  dato  pretio,  redemit  Illuftriffimus 
Dominus  meus  Eft  enim  Regeftum  eorum  qua: 
Curia:  Romans  Obedientiarijs  atq;  Clericis  maxime 
feitu  videbantur  necefiaria,  circa  Expeditionem  Bul- 
laruin,  Brevium,  aliarumq;  Literarum  Papalium  in 
omne  genus  Caufis,  v.  g.  Criminum,  Beneficiorum, 
&c.  fcil. 

Circa  Expeditiones  Beneficiorum  Confiftorialium. 

1.  De  duobus  Vijs  Janute  nimirum'  ac  Lombardiae, 

per  quas  Gallis,  Germanis,  Anglis,  &c.  Romam  eundem 
eft ;  cum  Enumeratione  Poflarum  five  Station um  earun- 
dum,  et  Taxatione.  j. 

2.  Memoranda  fuper  expediendis  Ecclefijs  Archiepif- 

copalibus.  1 .  b. 

3.  Inftrumentum  Epifcopi  Oftienfis  Cardinalis  SanCti 
Georgij,  quo  recitatur  Tenor  Motus  proprij  five  Man- 
dati  Leonis  Papa:  x.  de  Retentione  unius  Floreni  Auri 
pro  quolibet  Centenario  (fine  aliqua  ReduCtione)  in 
omnibus  Expeditionibus  tarn  per  Confiftorium,  quam 
per  Signaturum,  aut  alias  faciendis,  tarn  Ecclefiarum  Me- 
tropolitanarum  quam  Monafterialium  juxta  Taxationem 
earundem ;  etiam  antequam  ad  Plumbum  Literas  mit- 
tantur  Apoftolica:.  dat.  10  die  Martij,  A.  D.  1520. 

ibid. 

4.  Motus-proprius  five  Mandatum  Leonis  Papa:  x.  de 

circa  Taxationem  perfolutionem  pro  Commendis,  Patri- 
archis,  Archiepifcopis,  et  Epifcopis,  in  pofterum  conce- 
dendis.  dat.  die  fexta  February  A.  D.  1514.  2. 

5.  Memoranda,  fuper  Taxationibus  in  Curia  Romana, 

five  Camera,  perfolvendis.  2.  b. 

6.  SummtE  Taxationum  perfolvendarum  pro  Bullis 

Monafteriorum,  Ecclefianun  Cathedralium,  Metropoli- 
tanarumve  impetrandis.  3. 

7.  De  Taxationibus  alijs,  Officinlibus  &  Famulis  Ro¬ 
mani  Pontifices,  perfolvendis.  3.  b. 

8.  Re- 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


263 


Num.  1850. 

8.  Regeftum  Taxas,  in  impetrandis  Ecclefijs  Patri- 
archalibus,  Metropolitanis,  Cathedralibus,  ac  Conven- 
tualibus  (immediate  Romance  Sedi  fubjedtis)  per  totum 
Orbem,  perfolvendte  ;  Alphabetico  Ordine,  (ofcitantur 
tamen  quoad  plurima  Locorum  Nomina)  defcriptum.  1. 

Recenfendis  exemptis  Monafterijs  per  Diocefim  Ro- 
manam  conftitutis,  orditur ;  prxmiffis  his,  qui  fequun- 
tur,  verbis,  “  Romana  Ecclefia  Abbates  infrafcriptos  iub 
fecontinet ;  et  ideo  in  hoc  Opufculo  prxponitur,  Ordine 
Alphabeti  prxtermiflb,  quia  omnium  Ecclefiarum  Mundi 
Caput  eft  et  Magiftra.’’ 

Ex  hoc  Regefto,  ea  qua;  ad  Anglia:  Regnum  fpec- 
tare  videntur  heic  in  medium  proferre,  operx  pretium 
duxi.  Sunt  autem, 

g.  Aflaven.  (fol.  11.)  Floren.  Auri  — 


10.  Barthonien.  &  Vellen.  unit.  (22.  b.)  43°° 

11.  Bangorens  in  Anglia,  (ibid.)  -  -  47° 

Donuis  de  Rocha  3.  Cafliani,  Ordinis 

S.  Benedi&i.  (ibid  )  4° 

12.  Ciceftren.  (30.)  ^  -  -  !433 

13.  Cantuarien.  (30.  b.)  -  -  10000 

Augufiini  Cantuarien.  Ordinis  ejufdem 

Sancti  (leg.  Ord.  S.  Benedifti)  ibid.)  .  -  1300 

14.  Conventren.  &  Lichefelden.  (34.)  -  35°° 

15.  Dunelmen.  (41.  b.)  -  -  8000 

j  6.  Elien.  (44-  b.)  -  -  75°° 


17.  Exonien.  (ibid.)  -  -  1800 

‘  (*alibi  500) 

Unita  fuit  Menfx  Epifcopali  Exonienfi 
Parochialis  Ecclefia  Comowodi  E'Onienfis 
Diocefis,  Valoris  40  Librarum  Sterlingorum 
Debet  augeri  Taxa  ad 

18.  Eboracen,  (45.)  -  *  10000 

Marie  de  Fontanea  (Fountains)  Ordinis 

Ciftercienfis. 

Unita  fuit  Monafterio  Beate  Marie  Ebo- 
raci  Ecclefia  Parochialis  Ilornllr.  Eboracenfis 
Diocefis  folvit  pro  annata  ejufdem  Florenos 
Item  unita  fuit  ditto  Monafterio 
.  .  Clarenfis  Diocefis..  Non  exprimitur 

Fruttus. 

19.  Exovien.  in  Anglia  (annon  his  hallu- 
cinatum  eft  in  Regefto  ?)  ibid. 

20.  Flerefordei).  in  Anglia  ^54.  b.) 

21.  Karleonen.  (57.) 

Marie  Magdalene  de  Shappa,  Ordinis 

Premonftratenfis 

22.  Londonien.  (62.) 

Wafti  monafterij  (Weft-monafterium)  Or¬ 
dinis  S.  Beneditti 

Crucis  Waltaline  (Waltham)  Ordinis  S. 
Auguftini  480  Marcas  Argenti,  ad  5  Florenos 
pro  qualibet  Marcha  (i.  e.  Flor.  2400.) 

Waleham,  Ordinis  (f.  idem  ac  Waltham.) - 

23.  Lincol'inen.  (62.  b.)  -  -  5000 

Albani  Ordinis  Santti  Beneditti  -  45 00 

Monafterium  de  Ofnei,  Ordinis  S.  Auguf¬ 
tini  (cum  tertia  parte  Floreni)  -  -  133. 

Marie  de  Parcho  Lude,  Ordinis  Cifter- 


3° 

}- 

6000 
1800 
1  000 


3000 


tienfis  -  -  266 

Unita  fuit  Monafterio  Santte  Marie  Paro-'J 
chialis  Ecclefia  de  HerbefwelLincolnienfis  Dio-  >  33 

cefis.  Debet  augeri  Taxa  ad  J 

24.  Lichefelden.  &  Conventren.  (ibid.)  -  3500 

Uerburge  Cefterie  Ordinis  S.  Beneditti  -  500 

25.  Landaiien.  (63.  b.)  -  -  700 

26.  Meneven.  (71.  b.)  -  -  1500 

27.  Nonvicen.  (77.)  -  _  -  5000 

Sebaudi  (f.  S.  Edmundi)  Ordinis  S.  Be¬ 
neditti  -  -  -  2500 

28.  Ruffen,  in  Anglia  (92.)  -  a 3 00 

29.  Sarelbrien.  in  Anglia  (99.  b.)  -  4500 

30.  Wintonien,  (112.)  12000 


Num.  1850. 

Sequuntur, 

31.  Adnotatio  de  Herode  Judxroum  Rege;  deq;  pof- 

teris  ipfius.  1 1 5.  b- 

32.  Defignatio  Temporum  a  quibus  computatur  Incar- 

natio  D.  N.  J.  C.  ibid. 

Sequuntur  etiam, 

33.  Taxa  Sacre  Penitenciarie.  117. 

Scil.  Taxatio  Bullarum  in  Curia  Romana  impetran* 

darum,  atque  in  Camera  Pcenitentiaria  perfolvenda,  fuper 
Caufis  Matrimonialibus,  Compatemitate,  Defettu  Nata* 
lium,  Promotionibus,  cujufcunque  generis  Licentijs,  Ho" 
micidio,  Declaratione  Juris,  Confeffionalibus,  Lattidnijs’ 
Altaribus  Portatilibus,  Commutationibus  Votorum  etUlti’ 
marum  Voluntatum,  lielaxalionibus  Juramcnti,  Simonia’ 
Sodomia,  Apoftafia  (i.  e.  evagatione  Religioforum  per  Se" 
culum)  Perjurijs,  Falfationibus,  Fornicationibus,  Adul" 
terijs,  Raptibus,  et  id  genus  horrendis,  etiam  per  Re" 
ligiofos  perpetratis,  qui  Abfolutionem  plenariam  (cum 
Retentione  Beneficiorum)  a  Santt&  fimul  et  Apoftolica 
Sede  Romana  petierint. 

De  his  inluper  audiendus  eft  Joannes  Aymon,  in 
ipfa  Curia  haud  ita  pridem  Prothonotarius  Apoftolicua 
(qui  praefentem  cum  duobus  infequentibus  Codicem,  ex 
ejufdem  Curiae  Archiv!  ,  demortuo  Innocentio  Papa  xn. 
clam  abftulerit )  in  Gallico  fuo  Libro  Hagse-Comitis  edito 
A.  D.  1707.  cui  Titulus  Tableau  de  la  Cour  de 
Rome.  pag.  186. 

“  Nous  avons  fait  voir  au  Chapitre  vn.  de  quelle 
maniere  on  taxe  par  ce  Brefs  les  Autels  ou  l’on  dit  que 
les  Mcfles  ont  plus  de  Virtu  ed  d’Efficace  pour  lefs  Vivans 
&  pour  les  Morts,  a  Proportion  que  le  Privilege  d’un 
plus  grand  Nombre  d’Indulgences  a  fon  fonds  compofe 
d’un  plus  riche  Trefor.  II  ne  fera  pas  hors  d’ceuvre  de 
faire  maintenant  remarquer  ici,  qu’il  y  a  plufieurs  de  ces 
Brefs  tax^s,  qui  contiennent  lei's  Difpenfes  de  Maiiage 
pour  tous  les  Degres  de  Parent^,  depuis  le  premier  juf- 
ques  au  quatrieme  inclufivement ;  ou  l’on  comprend  une 
certaine  Affinite  Spirituelle  entre  les  Parrain*  &  les 
Marraines  ;  le  Mariage  entre  ceux  qui  font  Parens  au 
Premi  r  &  Second  Degre  eft  defendu  par  la  Loi  Divine; 
cependant,  on  en  Difpenfe  pour  de  l’Argent.  II  y  a  des 
autres  Brefs  taxees  pour  la  Legitimation  des  Enfans 
Naturels ;  pour  ceux  qui  veulent  recevoir  les  Ordres 
Sacr£s  avant  l’Age  requis  par  le  Droit  Canon  ;  ou  qui 
ont  quelque  Membre  mutile,  ou  quelque  Diiformite, 
comme  feroit  d.etre  Borgue,  ou  Manchot,  Boiteux,  ou 
Boflu.  On  taxe  aufii,  par  des  Brefs,  les  Ecclefiaftiques 
Bigames,  les  Moines  Batards,  ceux  qui  dilent  la  Meife 
fans  etre  Pretres,  et  ceux  qui  battent  le  Clercs.  II  y 
a  d’autres  taxes  pour  les  Homicides  Volontaires  & 
Cafuels,  pour  les  Enchanteurs  &  Sorciers  ;  pour  les  He- 
retiques,  et  les  Apoftats ;  pour  les  Sacrileges,  &  les 
Parjures  ;  pour  les  Simoniaques,  et  les  F.xcommunies  ; 
pour  les  Adulteres  and  les  Paillards ;  pour  les  Voleurs 
&  les  Brigands.  Touts  ces  Taxes  varient  felon  la  Dif¬ 
ference  de  C.as  &  des  Perfonnes,  qui  augmente  ou  dirfii- 
nue  le  Prix  des  Brefs. 

“  S’il  eft  ctonnant  de  voir  tous  les  Crimes  les  plus 
atroces  permis,  ou  du  moins  tolere  pour  de  l’Argent, 
on  ne  doit  pas  etre  moins  furpris  de  ce  qu’il  y  a  aum  des 
Brefs  taxes  pour  des  Bonnes  Oeuvres  &  des  Exercices 
de  Piete,  qu’il  n’eft  pas  permis  de  faire  fans  Difpenfe  ; 
comme,  par  Exemple,  de  dire  la  Meife  fur  des  Autels 
Portatifs ;  de  reciter  les  Prieres  qui  font  a  la  Fin  d’un 
Office  le  premieres,  &  celles  qui  font  au  Commencement 
les  derniers  ;  comme  qui  diroit  lefs  Pfeaumes  de  Vepres 
avant  ceux  de  Matines.  II  faut  auffi  paier  la  Confirma¬ 
tion  des  Statuts  d’une  Eglife  Cathedrale ;  la  Permiffion 
de  conftruire  une  Chapel  le  ;  d’y  faire  le  Service  Divin, 
adminiftrer  les  Sacremens,  enterrer  les  Morts,  &  y  ap- 
porter  les  Reliques  de  quelque  Saint.  On  ne  peut  auffi 
porter  en  Proceffion  le  Sacrament  de  l’Autel  qu’on  ap- 
pelle  le  Corps  de  Jefus  Chrift  plus  d’une  fois  l’annee,  fans 

une 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1850. 

une  Permiffion  fpeciale,  qui  come  chaque  jour  davan- 
taqe,  a  proportion  que  la  Pompe  Sacree  devient  plus 
Magnifique.  C’ell  auffi  par  des  Brefs  taxes  que  le 
Pape  donne  la  Permiffion  aux  Juifs  d’erigerdes  Synago¬ 
gues  Publiques,  &  aux  plus  Riches,  d'en  avoir  dans  leurs 
Maifons  particulieres  moiennant  quelque  bon  Tribut. 
Sans  cela,  aucun  d’eux  ne  peut  auffi  exercer  la  Medicine, 
ni  tiafiquer.  On  peut  dire  enfin,  q’uil  n’y  a  chofe  ou 
monde  qu’on  n'accorde  pour  de  l’argent.  On  fait  re 
trancher  les  Meffes,  qnand  le  Revenu  eft  trop  petit ;  on 
fait  drefler  des  Boutiques  dans  Alices  des  Eglifes,  pour 
les  loiier  ;  on  fait  tranfporter  &  vendrc  des  Merchandifes 
de  Contrebande  par  tout,  contre  les  Deffenfes  des  Seig¬ 
neurs  Temporels,  en  fruftrant  les  Rois  &  les  Empereurs 
de  leurs  Droits,  autant  qu’on  le  peut :  et  tout  cela  fe 
fait  en  Vertu  des  Brefs  que  le  Pape  accorde  pour  s’enri- 
cherau  prejudice  de  toutes  les  Puiflances  de  la  Terre.” 
Sequuntur, 

34.  Taxe  Cancellarie  Apoftolice,  cum  Cafis  Notabi- 

libus  probatiffimis.  121;. 

Pula  de  Abfolutionibus,  Conceffionibus  &  Confir- 
mationibus,  Sitnplicibus  Provifionibus,  Provifionibus  pro 
Monachis,  Provifionibus  Regularium,  Novis  Provifio¬ 
nibus,  Commendis,  Novis  Commendis,  Beneficijs  vacan- 
tibus  per  Dilfolutionem  Unionis,  Unionibus,  Applicatio- 
nibus,  Provifionibus  ex  Caufa  Pcrmutationis,  Penfio- 
nibus,  Difpenfationibus,  Indultis,  Derogationibus,  Pe- 
rinde  et  etiam  Valere  cum  Subrogationibus.  Derogati¬ 
onibus  Stajutorum,  Difpenfationibus  de  Contrahendo, 
Confervatorie,  & c. 

35.  De  Expeditionibus  Bullarum,  &c.  in  Francia. 

1 37. 

36.  Difpenfationes  per  Cancellariam,  et  ad  quam 

Summam  veniat  quasque  Expeditio.  137.  b. 

37.  Expeditions  Bullarum  per  Cancsllaneam. 

!38.b. 

38.  Confirmatio  Alienationis  Bonorum  Ecclefiafti- 

corum.  _  ,  4o. 

Sequuntur  Materie  Compofitionum,  fcil. 

39.  De  Gradibus  Compofitionum.  140.  b. 

40.  Facultates.  ibid. 

41.  De  Abfolutionibus.  141. 

42.  Sequuntur,  Expeditions  Litterarum  Jufticie. 

142.  b. 

43-  Taxe  Indulgentiarum  per  Cameram  Apoftolicam. 

143. 

44-  Sequuntur,  Difiinfte  Taxe  Scriptorum,  Procu- 
ratorum,  et  Sigilli  Officij  Sacre  Penitenciarie  Apoftolice. 

144.  155. 

45.  Alie  Taxe  Penitenciarie  noviter  fade,  in  Con- 

cilio  Lateranenli.  1 ^ 

46.  Taxe  Contradi&arum.  162.  b. 

47.  Expeditions  per  Breve.  163.  b. 

Sequitur,  de  Signaturis,  fcil. 

48.  De  Signatura  Grade.  16  e. 

49.  Provifiones.  [165.  b. 

50.  Claufula  de  Confenfu  medietatis  Conventus  pro 

Moniali.  ,  gg 

51.  Brevia  Cathedralium  Regularium.  166.  b. 

52.  Derrogationes.  167.  b] 

53*  Nove  Provifiones.  jgg. 

54.  Refignationes.  j  7c‘ 

55.  Ceffiones.  170.  b! 

56.  Gratie,  ft  neutri. 

57.  Subrogations.  i7i.b! 

58.  Penfiones.  /  ' 

59.  Privationes.  i72h 

60.  Perinde  Valere.  ' 

6 1 .  Gratie  expe&i've.  171b' 

62.  De  Difpenfationibus.  ' 

63.  Si  in  Evidentem. 

64.  Altare  Portable.  ,‘n* 

65.  Confeffionale.  178  b* 

66.  De  Sacramentis  et  Sepultura.  ,’-q’ 


Num.  1850,  1851. 

67.  De  Stationibus  Urbis.  179.  b. 

68.  De  Licenrijs.  ibid. 

69.  De  Licentia  Do&orandi.  i  80.  b. 

70.  De  percipiendo  Fructus  in  Abfentia.  1 S  1 .  b. 

71.  De  F.re&ionibus.  ibid. 

72.  De  Refervatione  Juris  Patronatus.  182. 

73.  De  Prorogationibus.  182.  b. 

74.  Moratorie.  is-. 

75.  Confirmatione?.  183.6. 

7b.  Promotiones  ad  Ordmes.  j,v4< 

77.  De  Signatura  Jufticie.  185. 

78.  Notabilia  fuper  Vaccaif.  Non  Refervatis.  189. 

79.  Claufula,Non  Obftan.  i8y.  b. 

80.  C.laufula,  Ceterifq;  Contrarijs  quibufcunque.  191. 

81.  Notabilia  fuper  Vacantibus  refervatis.  198. 

82.  De  Beneficijs  generaliter  refervatis.  199. 

(abrupte  definic  Codex  ) 

I  8  5  i . 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  (Superioris  fcil.  quafi  Pars 
altera)  partim  Latine,  partim  italice  fcriplus  ;  in  quo 
continentur, 

1 .  1  axae  in  Curia  Romana  perfolvcnda:,  pro  Suppli- 
cationibus  impetrandis  au:  expediendis. 

I-xtremis  oris  Notulas  aliquot  adpofuit  Joannes  Ay- 
monius. 

2.  Motus  Proprius  I.eonis  Papa:  x.  dat.  6  die  Fe¬ 

bruary  A.  D.  1514.  ijfdein  verbis  ac  ille  qui  in  fupe- 
riore  Codice  habetur  (de  quo  videris  huiufce  Cataloei 
No  1850.  §  4.)  j_ 

3.  Obfervanda  fuper  memorata  Motu-proprio,  five 

Conftitutione  Papali.  ibid. 

4.  Taxe.  2 

Ihefe  are  notes,  in  Italian,  ffiewing  the  Ufage  of 

the  Roman  Chancery,  in  demanding  &  receiving  their 
Fees  :  together  with  feme  marginal  Obfervations  of 
Monfr.  Aymon  touching  the  Valuation  of  the  Monies 
at  Rome. 

5.  Materie  di  Bolle  minute.  2.  b. 

6.  Le  Materia  de  Penitentiaria.  3. 

The  Bufinefs  of  this  Holy  Office,  is  branched  out 

into  the  following  Heads, 

7.  In  Cognatione  Spirituali.  ibid. 

8.  In  Publica  Honeftate.  ibid. 

9.  De  Contra&o  per  Vim.  ibid. 

10.  De  Promovendo  ;  con  altri  Cafi  fimili.  4.  b. 

1 1.  Abfolutione  di  piu  forte.  6. 

This  Head  is  but  fhort ;  &  includeth  but  thefe  Pec¬ 
cadillos,  Perjury,  Forgery,  \\  horedom  and  Murder. 

12.  Indulgence  di  Cardinal!.  8. 

13.  Licence  con  diverfe  &  infinite  altre  cofe  8. 

14.  Brevi  di  piu  forte.  IO 

Then  follow 

15.  RemilTorie,  et  altre  ccfe  apertenento  alio  Auditore 

dela  Camera.  ,  2 

16.  Revocatio  Procuratorum  in  Camera  &  Cancel- 

laria’  ...  ■  =■  b. 

17.  Materie  Contradi&arum.  13. 

18.  Compofition  con  el  Datario  del  Pape  1 5. 

19.  Indulgence  de  piu  forte.  19. 

20.  Monafteria.  22. 

21.  Difpenfationes  pro  Clericis  Scolaribus.  23. 

12.  Diipenfationes pro  lllegitimis  27. 

23.  Diipenfationes  pro  Mendicantibus,  et  alifs  Reli- 

giofis.  28. 

24.  Rehabilitationes.  29. 

25.  Provifiones.  30, 

26.  Provifiones  per  Obitum.  33. 

27.  Nove  Provifiones.  33.  b. 

28.  Commende.  36. 

29.  Penfiones.  38. 

30.  Uniones,  Dilfolutiones,  et  A.pplicationes,  41. 

31.  Si  in  Evidentem,  per  Bullani.  43. 

32.  Indulta,  Privilegia,  et  Derogationes.  44. 

*4  33.  Per 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


Kum.  1851. 

33  Per  inde  valere.  47- 

a 4.  Eredliones. 

Sequuntur, 

Compofitinum  materie  folvendarum  Datano. 

Et  primo,  circa  ca  que  concernunt  diverfas  Facul- 

ates.  ,  . 

fc.  de  Abfolu  lombus, 

35.  A  Symonia. 

36.  De  Honucidio.  b 

37-  Coadjutorie.  W. 

38.  Eacuftates. 

40.  [nreMa”rimoniaUbus  Cauf.s  ;  viz.  De  Grafflms 

orohibitis.  „  .  .  ..  C2  b 

41.  I11  Cognatione  Spmtuah.  5ibid* 

42.  Legittimatio.  ibid; 

43.  Indulgenue.  ..  :b;d. 

44.  De  utendo  La&icimjs. 

,  -  De  Permutationibus.  5)' 

46!  De  Refcrvationibus  pro  Cedentibus  feu  Mg- 
nantibus.  _  34. 

%  Deduobus  Buliarum  Generibus.  «3- 6S- 

40.  De  Obligationibus  &  Annatis.  i-  • 

to.  Officia  in  Annatis  participantia.  J>4. 

De  Permutationibus  Benefictorum. 

£  Buile  Ceffionis  pro  tUo  qui  ceffit,  vel  relignavu. 

Sequuntur  Materie  Confiftoriales. 

De  Monafterijs.  ;bid 

e4.  De  Communt  Pape.  ,  , 

s5.  De  Sacra  Subdiacon.  fbid 

56.  DeMinutis.  ;b;d'_ 

57.  De  Quietantijs.  66 .b. 

c8.  De  Cedults.  6 

eg.  De  Beneficijs  Urbis  Rome. 

60.  De  Epifcopis  Titulartbus.  6g' 

Si:  **•"*"«”" 

^==5=^  Jt 

64.  Taxe  Sollicitatorum  qui  vocantur  Gemce  . 

Secmuntur  ali®  Materie  Confiftoriales,  his  Tituhs. 
6sSpri«ilegium  Regis  Francie,  circa  Monaftem^ 

EC66.f'iixemplum  in  Expedition  Monafterij  redact!. 

80. 

67.  Epifcopatus.  81.  b. 

68.  Archivefcovado.  ;b;d> 

6g.  Pallio.  g2  b. 

7°-  Compu.t0dTefpaffioEpifcopi  Anici.nfis  Taxatus 

in  Llbro  CaLrie,  ad  aooo6  l  cum  Taxattontbus  qna- 

MeSus  Taxationis,  five  Syllabus  Taxarum  per- 
foWendarum  iu  Confiftorialibus  ab  everftone  U  b 

3,10  fer°No»  dae  quanto  ft  paga  per  el  Commune  por 

to,  cW  liano  in  Partibus  reduais  -,  e.  m  che  Modo, 
et  a  qui.  9S. 

75’  Genmles  Summe  Materiarum  Sacre  Poemten- 

“76.  Taxe  Expeditionum  Sacre  Penitentiarie  Apofto- 
lice.  ...  ,  5  n 

77  Taxe  Sacre  Penitentiarie.  '  zy- 

78.  Taxe  in  diverf.s  Materijs  Confiftorialibus.  137- 
L  Taxeexigende  pro  reverendiffimo  Cardinab  Vice- 
car.cellano. 

Cat.  IIarl.  Vol.  11. 


Num.1851,  1852. 


80.  Modus  Solvendi  Regalia  Officialibus  five  Famulis 
&  Familiaribus  Pape,  pro  Monafterijs  et  Ecclefijs. 

141. 

8 1 .  De  Expeditione  Buliarum  in  Caficellaria  et  Ca¬ 
mera  Apoftolicis.  .  *4  3* 

82.  Alius  Tra&atus  fuper  Taxis  Cancellane  Apolto- 

lice  ;  cum  certis  notabilibus  juxta  Stillum  modernum 
Romane  Curie.  . 

83.  Alia  Rubrica  fuper  Expeditionibus  &  Taxis  Li- 

terarum  Apoftolicarum.  . .  *5® 

84.  Modus  Exponendorum  circa  Expeditiones  tarn 
Cathedralium  qu  un  Metropolitanarum  Ecclefiarum 

162.  b. 

85.  Taxatio  Buliarum  in  Plombo.  16 3* 

86  Taxe  Expeditionum  que  communiter  hunt  per 

Cancellarium  &  t  ameram  Apoftolicas.  104. 

87.  Modus  Sollicitandi  Bullas  five  Expeditiones.  170. 

88.  Notabilia  fuper  Expeditionibus  prediftis.  173. 

89.  Circa  Materias  Regum  Francie.  J74-  b. 

qo.  Leftionarium  omnium  Expeditionum.  *7 5* 

01.  Expeditiones  Buliarum  per  Cancellariam.  176.  b. 

92.  Taxe  Indulgentiarum  per  Cameram  Apoftoncam. 

03.  Officium  Contradiaarum.  _  *79- 

9^.  Computum  fuper  eo,  quo  videbis  omnes  Taxas, 
et  fic  non  poteris  decipi.  .  xeo.  b. 

q  c.  F.xped  riones  Literarum  Juititie.  l82/ 

q6.  Taxa  Literarum  Apoftolicarum  in  forma  Brevis, 
que  vigore  Signature  per  Secretariam  Apoftolicam  expe- 
diri  folent.  1  3* 

1852. 

Codex  chartaceus  ac  pertenuis  in  fol.  prxeedentibus 
binis  quafi  Audarium  ;  in  eo  quippe  continents  ejul- 
dem  fa- in®  fragmenta  nonnulla,  ex  alijs  Roman® 
Curi®  Regiftris,  per  Joannem  Aymonium,  ut  videtur, 
avulla.  In  illo  tradantur,  - 

1.  Tax®  in  Caufis  ad  San£h-moniales  fpettantibus, 

perfolvend®.  I.nperf.  ...  * 

2.  Dg  ProvifionibusRegulanum.  1D1U* 

3. ’  De  Novis  Provifionibus.  *’ 

4.  De  Novis  Commendis.  .  . * 

5.  De  Beneficijs  vacantibus  per  Diffolutionem  Umo- 

nis.  .  „ 

6  De  Unionibus.  «.■}* 

|  7.  De  Applicationibus.  .  . 

I  8.  De  Provifionibus  ex  CaufaPermutaaonxs.  ibid. 

9.  De  Penfionibus.  3-  • 

10.  De  Difpen fationibus .  4‘  • 

11.  De  Indultis.  .b^* 

12.  De  Derogationibus.  .  n" 

!  3.  Perinde  Valere,  Surrogationes,  Creationes,  Con- 

firmationes,  et  alle  Materie  diverfe.  ’“k 

14.  Altare  Portatile.  .  n  <- 

15.  De  Difpenfationibus  fupenus  omiins.  «• 

16.  Confervatorie. 

,7.  Modus  folvendi  Taxas.  7* 

1 8.  Circa  Expeditiones  materiarum  Regm Francie.  9- 
lo.  Contradiaarum.  .  .  .  , 

1  20.  Refcripta,  et  illorum  Expeditio,  fecundum  Com¬ 
putum  Mercatorum  five  Bancharij.  * 

21.  Refcripta,  &c.  per  C.arlinos. 

22.  Expeditio  certarum  Buliarum  Per  Pepxtentunam, 

et  earum  Valor  fecundum  computum  Solicxtatons  five 

Bancharij,  in  totum.  .  j 

Per  Carlenos  Cancellane,  in  totum.  ibid. 

24.  Certe  Expeditiones  circa  Monaftena  et  alia  Con- 
fiftorialia  et  Non-Conf.ftorialia  fecundum  Computum 

^"^“Ltin  Cancellaria  fuper  Bui- 
lamm  Enpeditumes  apud  Domnum  A.  de  S"bbre. 

Literarum  Apoftolicarum  majoris 
viatoris ;  qui  in  eadem  Cancellana  et  Pa  x  5. 

miffusfuitdiepenultimaJulij  1488.  sequuntur. 


z  66 


Catalogus  Librotum  MSS. 


Num.  1852. 


Sequuntirr,  Taxe  Cancellarie,  cum  certis  Notabi- 
libus,  de  anno  1513.  fc. 

26.  De  Abfolutionibus.  .  16. 

27.  De  Conceffionibus.  16.  b. 

28.  De  Confirmationibus  fimilium  Conceflionum. 

ibid. 


29.  De  Simplicibus  Provifionibus.  1 7. 

30.  De  Provifionibus  pro  Monialibus.  Imperf.  17.  b. 

Sequitur  Tra&atulus,  manu  Italica  longe  recentiore, 

defcriptus  :  cui  Titulus, 

31.  Taxa  Mercedum  Cancellaria;  Epircopalis  Fer- 

raris,  pro  Caufis  tam  Civilibus  quam  Criminalibus ; 
tarn  Ordinarijs  quam  Extraordinarijs.  18. 

N.  B.  Ducatus  FerrarienfisDominus,  etiam  in  Tem- 
poralibus,  eft  Pontifex  Romanus.  Cum  in  prjefenti, 
fimul  ac  in  duobus  Codicibus  fuperioribus,  plurima  de 
PcEnitendaria  Caneellariaq;  Curia;  Romans;  habeantur 
fcripta ;  de  eifdem  etiam  audi  Joannem  Aymonem,  in 
Gallico  fuo  Libro  cui  Titulus,  ‘  Tableau  de  la  Cour  de 
Rome,’  his  verbis  differentem,  pag.  172. — “  Nous  ne 
parlerons  pas  des  abus  quy  s’y  commettent,  ni  des  profits 
cafuels  du  Tour  du  B&ton,  ou  de  la  Baguette  du  Grand 
Penitencier,  car  tout  cela  eft  fuffifament  connu,  par  la 
Taxe  fi  Scandaleufe  de  la  Chancellerie,  qui  a  ete  impri- 
mee  en  diverfes  langues,  &  envoyee  par  toute  la  Chre- 
tiente,  dans  laquelle  on  voit  que  l’Abfolution  des  plus 
giands  Crimes  contre  la  Loy  de  Dieu,  ne  coute  pas 
grand  Chofe  ;  mais  que  la  moindre  Contrevention  con¬ 
tre  les  Statuts  des  Papes,  &  les  Difpences  de  quelque 
Reglement  de  la  Difcipline  Ecclefiaftique,  ne  font  accor- 
dees  qu'a  ceux  qui  ont  le  moien  de  paier  de  groffes  fom- 

-  tellement,  que  pour  de  1’  Argent,  on  obtient  devant 
ce  .tribunal,  la  Permiffion  de  faire  tout  ce  qu’on  veut. 
Le  Mai,  par  ce  moien  eft  change  en  bien,  et  le  bien  en 
mal  Ces  etranges  Metaraorphofes  valent  autant  il  la 
Chancellerie  (dont  nous  allons  parler)que  feroit  la  Tranf- 
mutation  Metallique  de  la  meilleure  Pierre  Phi lofophale 
qu  on  puilfe  avoir  dans  le  Monde,  puis  qu’un  petit  Sceau 
de  Plomb,  rend  plufieurs  Millions  d'Or.” 

rum  et  etiam  alte-memoratorum  facinorum  Ufus 
ac  Exercitatio,  folo  Plenitudinis  Papalis  Poteftatis  Fun- 
damento  conftrui  videatur :  de  qua,  ea  qua;  fequuntur 
1  e/nmonia,  nullo  fere  adhibito  Labore,  flatim  collegi. 
r  uj  J°hannis  Paps.  “  Imperatores  Criliiani 

fubdere  debent  Executiones  fuas  Ecclefiafticis  Prefulibus, 
non  prererre.”  Decret.  Gratian.  Diftinft.  96. 
r  -A.  em,~“  Ponrificibus  obfequi  folere  Principes 
Criftianos,  Deere  1  is  Ecclefie  non  fuam  preponere  poteft- 
atem  ;  Lpifcopis  caput  fubdere  Principes  folitum  eft,  non 
de  eorum  Capitibus  judicare.”  ibid. 

Refcript.  Gregorij  Papa;  a(l  Gelafium _ “  Nam 

qualefcunque  Pontifices  fint,  etfi  Errore  Humanitus  acce. 
dentc,  non  tamen  contra  Religionem  ullateims  excedentes 
nullatenus  v.denmr  a  Secnlari  Poteflate  pofl'e  procelli.” 

p  Crl(liani  bnperatores  pro  Etemil  Vita 

Pomincibus  mdigerent ;  et  Pontifices  pro  curfu  Tempo- 
ralmm  tantummodo  rerum  Imperialibus  Levibus  uter- 
entur  ;  quatenus  Spimualis  Aftio  a  Carnalibus  diftaret 

imnlS?  “  De0.^i,itans  fe  negntijs  Secularibus 

iraplicaret.  ac  viciffim,  non  Ille  rebus  Di.inis  prefidere 
vtderetur,  qui  eflit  Secularibus  negotijs  impUcatus.” 

“  n„i!‘dC'ipt'  Go‘g-  PapX  ad  Herem-  Metmr-  Ep'um. 
Quisdubitet  Sacerdotcs  Crifti  Regum  A-  Principum 

Ommumq;  Fidebum  PATRES  &  MAGISTROS^en- 

Pa^ren^n’f"1*”1’,;5  I.n„liu!ie  effe  cognofeitur,  fi  Filius 
Patreru  Difcipulus  Magiftrum  fibi  conetur  lubiugare  et 
iniquis  obligation, bus  Ilium  fue  potellati  fubiieerc  a  ouo 
in  T™  M  »  oTk  ligari 

brofiu?(fr,“,S  SPa'«  Ana'la'i°  In,P— etiam' Am- 
brofius  (licet  Sanflus,  non  tamen  Univerfalis  Ecdlefie 
Ipifcopus)-  circa  Prmclpium  fui  Palloralis  feribens 


Num.  1852. 


Honor,  Fratres,  &  fublimitas  Epifcopalis  nullis  poter: 
Comparationibus  adequari.  Si  Regum  fulgori  compare 
&  Principum  Diademati,  longe  erit  inferius  quam  I 
Plumbi  metallum  ad  Auri  fulgorem  compares  :  quipp 
cum  videas  Regum  Colla  &  Principum  fubmitti  genibu 
Saccrdotum,  et  ofculata  eorum  dextera,  Orationibu 
eorum  fe  communicari  vel  muniri.”  ibid. 

“  Sed  videtur  quod  Papa  Major  fit  Imperatore,— 
nam  Jura  Celeftis  Imperij  &  Terreni  Petro  commilfa  ; 
Deo  funt.— Ipfe  enim  utrumq;  Gladium  habuit,  ut  dici 
Evangelifta  Ecce  duo  Gladij  funt  hie  :  quam  Poteftateir 
fuis  Succefforibus  tranfmifit,— verum  Executionem  Gla¬ 
dij  Temporalis  Imperatoribus  &  Regibus  commiflit  Ec. 
clefia,  et  tamen  Jurifdidionem  Caufarum  Civilium  ali- 
quando  per  Sacerdotes  exercuit.”  Decretal.  Gree.  ix 
Cap.  13.  in  Gloff. 

“  Sed  Ala nus  &c  T&ncredus  dixerunt  quod  Impera- 
tor  (licet  Imperium  a  folo  Deo  dicatur  proceflifie)  Exe¬ 
cutionem  Gladij  Temporalis  recipit  ab  Ecclefia.  Ecclelia 
enim  eft  Unum  Corpus,  ergo  unum  folum  Caput  dicitur 
habere.  Item,  Deus  utroq;  Gladio  ufus  eft— Item 
Moyfis  utrumq;  Gladiuin  habuit  ;  cujus  Succelfor  eft 
Papa  :  prteterea,  Papa  ipfum  confirmat,  &  confecrat,  & 
coronat,  et  eumdeponit.”  ibid.  Lib.  iv.  Cap.  7.  in  Gloff. 

.  ^  fi  vel  let  (Papa)  bene  poffet  difpenfare 
contra  Concilium  ;  qui  Auctor  illius  Concilij  imparem 
non  habuit  Poteftatem, — et  Papa  major  eft  quam  Conci¬ 
lium.”  ibid.  Lib.  in.  Cap.  3.  in  Gloff. 

“  Nam  contra  Apoftolum  difpenfat  Papa— et  contra 
Canones  Apoftoli — Item  contra  Vetus  Teftamentum,  in 
Decimis  non  dandis.— Item,  in  Voto— Item,  in  Jura- 
mento.”  ibid.  Lib-  m.  Cap.  4.  in  Gloff. 

Innocent  hi.— ct  qUi  fecundum  plenitudinem  po- 
reftatis,  de  jure,  pcflumus  fupra  Jus  difpenfare.”  ibid. 
Lib.  111.  Tit.  8.  De  Prebendis. 

“  Cum  Dominus  Papa  fit  Judex  Ordinarius  fin. 
gulorum.’  ibid.  Lib.  11.  Tit.  2.  in  GlofT. 

“  Quia  Peccatum  Paganitatis  incurrit,  quifquis  Sedi 
Apoftol.ee  obedire  contemnit.”  ibid.  Lib.  in.  Cap.  0  in 
Glofl.  r  y 

Nicholaus  Papa  Mediolanenfibus,  — “  Non  ergo 
quelibet  Terrena  Sententia,  fed  illud  Verbum  quo  con- 
ftruftum  eft  Coelum  &  Terra,  per  quod  denique  Omnia 
condita  funt  Elementa,  Romanam  fundavit  Ecclefiam.” 
Gratian.  Part.  1.  Diftin(3:.  22. 

Decretal.  Greg.  ix.  Lib.  I.  Tit.  De  Tranflat.  Epi. 
Lap.  g.  ad  Verba  “  Non  enim  Homo  fed  Deus  fenarat 
quos  Romanus  Pontifex  (qui  non  puriHominis,  fed  veri 
Dei  vice,,,  gem  in  Terris)  Ecclefiarum  Neceffitate  vel 
utilitate penfata,  non  Humana  fed  Divini  potius  auft- 
ornate  diffolvit.”  in  Gloff.  Icgitur,  Veri  Dei  vicem. 

Unde  dicitur  habere  C  elefte  Arbitrium,— et  ideo  Na- 
turam  Rerum  immutat,  Subftantialia  unius  Reiapplican- 
do  ahj,-ctde  Nullo,  poteft  Aliquid  facere,— et  Senten- 
tia  que  Nulla  eft,  facit  Aliquam — quia,  in  his  que  vult, 
Li  eft  pro  ratione  Voluntas — Ipfe  enim  poteft  fupra  Jus 
dilpenfare,  de  Injuftitia  poteft  facere  Juftitiam,  corri- 
gendo  Jura  et  mutando,  — et  plenitudinem  obtinet  Potef- 
ratis.” 

Nicholaus  Papa  1.  ad  Michaelem  Imp.  A.  D.  86e 

“  Satis  evidenter  oftenditur  a  Secular!  Poteftate  nec  ligari 

prorlus,  nec  folvi  polle  Pontificein  ;  quern  conflat  a  Pio 
Principe  Conitantino  (quod  longe  fuperius  memoravimus) 
Dcum  appellatum  ;  ncc  pofle  Demn  ab  Hominibus  judi- 
can,  manifeftum  eft.”  Grat.  Decret.  Part.  1.  Dift.  96. 

Csterum  miilis  Romans:  Curia;  omne  genus  Ex- 
adionibus  ac  OpprefTione  phis  quam  Tyrannica  ;  prius 
de  Monetis  (hifee  in  Codicibus  fere  paffim  pra;dicatis) 
quam  ad  infequentem  feftinemus,  paucula  reftant  in  me¬ 
dium  proferenda. 

1.  De  Hilce  Monetis  Adnotationes  nonnullas  manu 

fua  diverfis  in  locis  poll  las.  Nobis  reliquit  Joannes  Ay- 
monius,  quas  heic  quafi  in  unum  Fafdculum  coadas,  ob 
oculos  ponere,  opella;  noftrse  pretiuin  duxi. 

No.  18  ci.  I 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


267 


Num.  1852. 

No.  1851.  fol.  2.  Carlini  8  de  Cancellaria,  ne 
vanno  al  ducati  1 2  di  Camera. 

Ibid.  Voies  la  page  175. — ou  il  y  a  la  Valuation 
du  Ducat  de  la  Chambre,  a  raifon  de  10  Jules  par  Ducat; 
Pour  ce  qui  eft  des  Carlins,  ils  valent  33  Quatrins  chacun. 

Ibid.  Vide  paginam  146.  ubi  invenies  ducatum 
unum  valere  14  Groffos. 

Ibid.  Vide  paginam  173.  ubi  Carlinus  unus  dici- 
tur  valere  35  Quatrinos. 

Ibid.  NB.  ibi  quoq;  explicantur  Notulte  Taxte 
fic  appofita;  folio  83  verfo,  &  fequentibus,  viz. 

X  I  X  V  i  V  1  (vid.  etiam  fol.  35.  b.  36.  &c.  25.  b.  26. 
27.  28.  29.  b.  30.  30.  b.  31.  &c.) 

Ibid.  Vide  quid  fit  Taxa  redudta  five  dimidiata,  in 
partibus  Infidelium,  qua;  notatur  in  Taxis,  fic,  2 1 
vel.  22. 

Fol.  146.  Nota  hie,  quod  14  Grofii  faciunt  unum 
Ducatum. 

Fol.  173.  Vide  quid  fit  Taxa  Dimidiata  vel  Redudta 
in  pagina  98.  x 

Ibid,  unus  FBOC  vel  *  folviter  (i.e.)  Carlini  duo. 

No.  1852.  fol.  7. — ad  rationem  33  Ouatrenorum 
pro  Carleno. 

Ibid,  (in)  Julijs,  videlicet,  decern  pro  Ducato. 

Ibid.  Grofii  qui  que,  conftituent&r  Carlinos  Sex. 

fol.  16.  Vide  modum  folvendi  l'axas  fol.  175.  (i.e. 
praefentis  Codicis,  juxta  veteran  foliorum  adnumeratio- 
nem )  ubi  Monetarum  Valor  exprimitur. 

Ibid.  Vide  Librum  Ligatum  de  Taxis,  pagina  2. 
(Liber  Li gatus,  eft  No.  >857.) 

Hue  pertinere  videntur  ea  quse  in  Cotton  iana;  Bi¬ 
bliotheca;  Codice  MS.  cujus  Nota;  funt  Vitellivs. 
E.  xn.  171.  leguntur  fub-obfeure  Scripta.  fcil. 

“  Ad  cognofcendum  alicujus  Bulle  Apofiolice 
Valorem,  eft  notandum  quod  novem  funt  Car¬ 
lini,  qui  feribuntur  fic  —  =  ==v  v  V  V  V; 
et  quod  Decern  Carlini  faciunt  Decern  Grof- 
la  Anglicana,  five  Unum  Ducatum  de  Ro- 

X 
X  X 
XXX 

ma.  Qui  Ducati  feribuntur  fic  X  X  X  X 
&c.  Et  aliquando  Ducati  feribuntur  cum  Carlinis 

— =F 

V  X  X 
V  xXX 

lupra  Capita  eorundem  fic  XXXX  Et  feiendum, 
quod  Carlini  &  Ducati  predidto  modo  afeendendo, 
caufa  Multiplicationis  Numerorum,  qua;  aliquando 
fignificant  feipfos ;  tantum,  quociens  intelliguntur 
fimpliciter  pro  taxacione  alicujus  Bulle.  Et  aliquando 
fignificant  quinquies  feipfos,  quociens  mulliplican- 
tur  ;  et  tunc  intelliguntur  pro  omnibus  Coftagijs  ejufdem 
Bulle.  Excepto,  quod  quilibet  Ducatus  non  habens 
aliquem  Carlinum  fibi  fupraferiptum,  quando  multipli- 
cantur  per  Quinque,  habebit  unum  Carlinum  fubintel- 
leiStum  fcil  multipUcatum.  Excepto,  quod  fimiliter 
de  ultimo  Quinario  Carlinorum  multiplicatorum  capiendi 
funt  ad  Ducatos,  tot  Carlini  quot  funt  Ducati  non  mul- 
tiplicati ;  et  refiduum  Carlinorum  ejufdem  Quinarij  eft 
delendum.  Item,  quociens  aliqua  Bulla  habet  Taxacio- 
nem  fuam  feriptam  fub  Plica  ejufdem  verfus  Siniftram  ; 
antequam  Taxacionem,  feribitur  Litera  vel  fillaba  pro 
Nomine  Taxatoris  ;  tociens  talis  Bulla  eft  de  Cancellaria, 
et  Taxatio  ejus  multiplicands  eft  per  Quinque.  Item, 
quociens  non  habetur  aliqua  Litera  vel  Sillaba  feripta 
ante  Taxacionem  pro  Nomine  Taxatoris,  tociens  talis 
Bulla  eft  de  Audiencia  Contradidlarum,  et  Taxacio  mul- 
tiplicanda  eft  per  3.  Item,  quociens  non  habetur  aliqua 
Taxacio  fub  Plica  verfus  Siniftram,  fed  tantum  Nomen 
Secretarij  lub  Plica  verfus  Dextram ;  tociens  talis  Bulla  | 
2* 


Num.  1852 — 1854. 

eft  de  Camera  Apoftolica,  et  ejus  Taxatio  non  poteft  re* 
cognofei.  Item,  quociens  aliqua  Bulla  eft  Refcripta,  to¬ 
ciens  folvetur  medium  Taxacionis  Bulle  Principalis  pro 
qualibet  Bulla  fic  Refcripta.” 

In  alio  quoque  ejufdem  inftrudtiflima:  Bibliotheca: 
Codice  MS.  qui  inferibitur  Vitellivs.  F.  11  nonulla  con- 
fpiciuntur,  qua;  recenfuit  D.  Thomas  Smithus  (Catal. 
MSS.  Cotton,  pag.  102.  col.  1.  §  9.)  verbis  infequend- 
bus,  “  Taxatio  Chartarum  feriptarum  et  Regiftdrum  in 
Curia  Romana.”  Nec,  forte,  abs  re  erit,  ilia  in  hunc  Ca- 
talogum  referre,  qua;  in  fupra-laudo  Joannis  Aymonij 
Libro,  de  Papalibus  Monetis  invenienda  funt.  fcil.  (pag. 

1 12.)  “  La  plus  petite  de  toutes  les  Efpeces  de  Monnoie 
que  le  Pape  fait  battre,  eft  le  Quatrin.  C’eft  une  piece  de 
Cuivre  aux  Armes  du  Pape,  plus  petit  que  le  Double  de 
France.  Cinq  Ouatrins  font  une  Bajoque.  II  y  a  des 
Bajoques,  &  des  Demi-Bajoques  en  Efpece  de  Cuivre. 
Dix  Bajoques  font  un  Jule,  ou  un  Paul ;  ces  Pieces  font 
d’Argent.  II  y  a  des  Demi-Jules  &  de  Quarts  de  Jules 
aufli,  d’Argent.  Trois  Jules  font  un  Tefton :  on 
voit  aufli  des  Demi-Teftons.  Dix  Jules  font  I’E.cu- 
Romain  ;  qui  eft  une  maniere  de  Compter ;  car  il 
n’y  en  a  point  d’Efpece ;  mais  is  il  y  a  des  Piaftres, 
valent  dix  Jules;  &  des  Demi-Piaftres.  Ces  Efpeces 
font  bien  Marquees,  et  ont  fort  peu  d’Alliage.  La  Mon¬ 
noie  d’Or  Romaine,  n’eft  que  d’une  forte ;  ce  font  des 
Ecus,  que  valent  quinze  Jules  piece. — Les  Efpeces  d’Or 
&  d’Argent  de  toutes  les — Puiflances  de  l’Europe  font 
regues  a  la  Chancelerie  &  a  la  Daterie,  felon  le  Prix  que 
le  Marc  d’Or  &  d’Argent  duTitre  de  cesEfpeces  y  eft  lva¬ 
lue.  Il  n’y  a  point  de  Bureaux  de  Recepte  dans  les  Gene- 
ralites  desSoverains  de  l’Europe,  aient  desTarifs  fi  bien  re¬ 
gies  pour  toutes  fortes  de  Monnoies  que  le  font  ceux  de 
la  Chambre  Apoftolique,  ou  l’on  regoit  de  l’Or  &  de 
1’ Argent  de  toutes  les  Nations  and  Pais  du  Monde.” 

1853- 

A  Book  in  fol.  confi fling  of  divers  Law  and  other  Trea¬ 
ties  ;  namelv, 

1 .  The  F.ffedt  of  the  Firft  Argument  of  the  Kings 
Solicitor-Generall  (Sir  Francis  Bacon)  in  maynteyninge 
of  the  Councell  of  the  Marches  over  the  Fowr  Shires.  1 . 

2.  The  Effeft  of  that  which  was  fpoken  by  Mr.  Ser¬ 
jeant  Hutton,  &  Mr.  Serjeant  Harris,  in  Anfwere  of  the 
former  Argument  ;  and  for  the  excludeing  of  the  Ju- 
rifdiclion  of  the  Marches  in  the  Fowr  Shires.  7.  b. 

3.  The  Replie  of  the  Kings  Solicitor  to  the  Arguments 

of  the  Twoe  Serjeants.  10.  b. 

4.  The  Third  &  laft  Argument  of  the  Kings  Solicitor, 

in  the  Cafe  of  the  Marches  of  Wales  :  in  Replie  to  Mr. 
Serjeanr  Harris.  1 9.  b. 

5.  Obfervations  Politlcke  &  Civill,  of  a  Kingdome : 
written  by  Sir  Francis  Bacon  Knight  &  Baronett.  39. 

I  believe  the  laft  Title  is  wrong,  and  that  he  was 
not  a  Baronet. 

The  infide  of  fol.  39.  is  prettily  marbled,  according 
to  the  Turkifh  Manner. 

6.  Lectura  Francifci  Bacon  unius  ex  Confilio  Dominse 

Regina;  in  Legibus  Eruditis,  Duplicis  Ledloris,  Super 
Statutum  ediftum  27  FI.  8.  Cap.  to.  de  Ufibus  in  Pof- 
feflionem  transferendis.  In  Englifh.  90. 

1 854. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  (deferiptus  ut  in  fine  teftatur, 
A.D.  1541.)  cui  Titulus, 

Confilium  Theologicum,  in  cujufdam  Viri  Gratiam, 
privatim  confcriptum,  quo  authoritate  Sacrarum  Litera- 
rum  oftenderet,  An  &  Quatenus  Chriftiani  in  Ecclefijs 
Pontificia  Tyrannide  adhuc  prefiis  degentes,  illarum  Ri- 
tibus  &  Pera&ionibus  communicare  poflint.  Quis  quo¬ 
que  uniufcujufque  Ritu1,  fit  Fons  verus.  Ulus,  atq; 
Abufus.  Authore  fan&iffimo  &  celeberrimo  Sacrarum 
Literarum  Profelfore  Martino  Bucero. 

Tn  Initio  &  Fine  cernitur  hmc  Adnotatio  recentiore 
manu  feripta,  “Hie  Tradtatus  M.  Buceri  non  extat  (In 
impreffo  Catalogo  MSS.  Anglia;,  Oxonite  edito  A.  D. 


268 


Catalogs  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.T  854 — 1856- 


Kum  8710.  hunc  Codicem  ntanu  Mar- 
tini  Fotfierb/ Epifcopi  Sar.  enratum  fuiffe  affirmatur. 

i8.5S- 

A  vellum  Book  in  fmall  fol.  (bought  of  me)  wherein 
are  contained, 

1.  The  Names  of  all  thofe  that  are  admitted  to  be  Free 
of  the  Soeietie  of  Merchants  of  Ettglat.de  mdmg  into 
Spain  &  Portugall  ;  whole  Names  are  fpeafied  in  the 
Charter  graunted  by  King  James,  Anno  Dom.  1605. 
Wherein  the  Five  Honorable  Earles  that  were  Commi  - 
fi oners  in  the  Treatie  of  Peace,  and  divers  others  fpecia 
Officers  &  Servants  to  the  Kinges  Majeftie  who  are  by 
the  Charter  made  Members  of  the  faide  Soeietie  are 
placed  together  as  they  are  named  in  the  (:har‘er.’. 
all  other  Knights  &  Merchaunts  are  Alphabetical^ 
collected  &  placed  accordinge  to  the  Letters  of  their 

The  Number  of  Freemen  named  in  the  faide 
Charter.  IP' 

V  The  Names  of  the  Firft  Afliftants.  13-  b- 

4.  The  Copie  of  a  Charter  graunted  by  our ^moit 
Gracious  Soveraigne  Lord  King  James,  to  the  President, 
Afliftants,  and  Fellowefhippe  of  Merchaunts  of  Fnglaunde 
tra  lynge  to  Spayne  &  Portugall.  dated  31  May,  Anno 
terdo  Jacobi  16  5.  ,  „ .  .  I,4'  r  , 

c.  A  Kal lender  of  the  matenall  Thmges  in  the  faid 
Charter.  .  35'  • 

The  Leaves  of  this  Book  are  regift ered  in  a  man¬ 
ner  fomewhat  unufual  ;  namely  by  the  letters  of  the 
Hebrew  Alphabet  ;  as  may  be  feen  at  every  fecond  Leaf, 
in  the  lowed.  Margin. 

1856. 


A  Book  in  fmall  fol.  relating  to  the  Prafticeof  our  Com¬ 
mon-1  aw.  &  containing, 

1.  A  Colleftinn  of  Writs  &  other  Law-Precedents 
(moftly  of  the  time  of  K  Henry  vm.)  made  &  difpofed 
Alphabetically  by  one  Rouland  Shakelady,  whofe  Name 
appeareth  at  the  end.  . 

The  Precedents  are  fo  many,  Sc  fo  ranged,  that  it 
may  not,  perhaps,  very  improperly  be  called  Regiftrum, 
Brevium  de  Tempore  R.  Henrici  vm.  although  there  be 
feme  of  the  preceding  Reign  written  by  the  firft  Hand 
Sc  fome  Additions  made  in  the  Reigns  fubfequent. 

’  Tis  plain  that  Books  of  this  Nature  indruft  their 
Readers  not  only  in  the  Praftice  of  the  Law  ;  but  in  the 
Private  Hiftory  Sc  Occurrences  relating  to  Perfons  & 

Places.  .  ,  1  r 

Moreover,  in  this  Book  (which  was  bought  of 
me)  are  fome  curious  Matters,  not  belonging  to  the 
main  Colle&ion  ;  as  for  Indance, 

2.  K.  Henry  vmth’s  Warant,  whereby  Bartholomewe 
Helketh,  for  divers  Infirmities  which  he  haihe  in  hys 
hede,  cannot  convenyently,  withoute  greate  Daunger  be 
dif-couered  of  the  fame  ;  was  licencyd  to  vfe  &  were  hys 
Bonet  vpone  hys  hede,  afwelle  in  his  Prefence  as  ellif- 
where,  at  hys  Libertie.  Yevin  the  1 5th  of  Novembre 
in  the  .  8th  yere  of  his  Reigne.  _  7*  *3- 

Such  a  Warrant  as  this  was  obtained  before,  of  the 
fame  King,  by  Stephen  Tucker  ;  as  may  be  feen  by  the 
Original  Vifitation-book  of  Cornwal  inferibed  (in  this 
Library)  66  B.  17.  at  fol.  68.  upon  which  the  Defcen- 
dants  of  the  faid  Stephen  have  l'ecmed  to  value  them- 
ftlves,  as  if  their  Ancedor  had  received  an  Honor  Equi¬ 
valent  to  that  of  a  Spanifh  Grandee  pf  the  Fird  Rank 
(vid.  Catal.  Brev.  Vol.  III.  p.  342-) 

2.  Warrant  from  the  fame  King,  for  certain  Gentil- 
men  during  their  Lives  to  kepe  Crofbowes  in  their 
Houfes,  and  to  occupie  Sc  fhote  in  the  fame,  at  their 
Pleafure.  Yeven  .  .  Novembre,  the  x  8th  Yere  of  his 
Reigne.  7-  b. 

4.  The  Style  of  mod  Cities  &  Corporations,  as  accuf- 
tomed  to  be  inferted  in  the  Royal  Writs.  9.  206. 


Num.  185  6 —  1 B  5  8 . 

5.  Breve  de  Scandalis  Magnatum  ;  pro  ThontaFenys 

Milite  Domino  Dacre.  •  •  „  T‘ 

6.  Breve  de  Apoftata  Capiendo  ;  cum  Peutione  Jo- 
hannis  Prioris  S.  Johannis  Bapulle  de  Looda,  Ordimt,  S. 

L^m,  Concefllonum,  Perdo,;. 
tionum,  ct  aliarum  Literarum  Patencum. 

i857- 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  collefled  (&  perhaps  written  by 
Abraham  Wallis '  entituled, 

A  Survaye  or  Boolte  of  Offices  as  well  of  His  Ma 
Courtes  ol  R«orde,  as  of  His  to”  moll  Hon  Hoof 
hould  ;  the  Counfells  of  the  North  of  Wales,  &  the 
Marches,  the  Admiraltye,  the  Mynte,  *e  Armoriie, 
Officers  ait  Annes,  the  Towns  of  Warre,  Cadies,  BuU- 
warkes,  A  Fortreffes,  &  the  Iflandes ;  with  his  Ma 
Howfes,  Parkes,  Forreds,  &  Chales  ;  collected  a.  Anno 

The  abovementioned  Abraham  Wallis  prefented  the 
fame  to  Sir  Chriftopher  Hilliard,  as  appeareth  by  his 
Letter  annexed  to  the  Book  :  at  the  end  whereof  thofe 
peifons  have  feti  to  their  Name-  who  were  by  when  Mr 
Wallis  brought  it  to  Sir  Chridopher.  How  it  came  out 
of  his  Family  I  know  not ;  but  John  Beaumont  M.  D. 
gave  it  to  this  Library. 

1858. 

A  paper  Book  in  fmall  fol.  wherein  are  contained  divers 
Political  Trails.  Their  Titles  are, 
j.  A  briefe  Abdraft  of  the  Quedion  of  the  Prece¬ 
dency  betweene  Englande  &  Spaine.  Occafioned  by  Sir 
Henry  Nevill  the  Queene  of  England’s  Ambaffadour,  Sc 
the  Ambaffadour  of  Spaine,  at  Calice ;  before  Commif- 
fioners  appointed  by  the  French  Kinge,  who  had  moved  a 
Treaty  of  Peace  in  the  42  yeere  of  the  fame  Queene.  Col¬ 
lected  by  Sir  Robert  Cotton  att  her  Majefties  Command- 
ment.  .  1  ’ , 

2.  Inftru£tions  for  Our  right  trufty  &  wel-beloved 
Servants  Sir  Henry  Nevill  Knight,  Our  Ambaflador-Re- 
fident  with  the  French  Kinge  ;  John  Herbert  Efq;  one  01 
Our  Secretaries,  &  One  of  our  Privy  Councell ;  Robert 
Beale  Efq;  One  of  the  Clerks  of  Our  Privy  Councell,  & 
Secretary  of  Our  Councell  at  Yorke  ;  and  1  homas  Ed¬ 
monds  Efq;  one  of  the  Clerks  of  Our  Privy  Corniced, 

&  Secretary  for  the  French  Tongue  ;  appointed  by  Us 
to  treate  with  the  Commiflioners  for  the  Kinge  ot 
Spain  Sc  Arch-Duke  of  Burgundy.  1 1‘ 

Thefe  Inftrutions  bear  no  Date  ;  but  are  find  to  be 
fubferibed  by  Mr.  Secretary  Cecill. 

3.  Part  of  the  Plein-pouvoir  of  the  Arch -Duke  Albert, 
in  French  :  wherein  was  included  that  of  K.  Philip  the  111. 
of  Spain,  in  Caftilian. 

4.  Latin  Letter  of  the  Englifh  Commiflioners  fent  to 

the  Heer  Verrezykin  ;  wherein  they  in  very  civil  &  mo- 
deft  Terms,  fett  forth  their  Objections  again  ft the  Plem- 
pouvoirs  as  well  of  his  Catholic  Majefty,  as  of  the  Arch- 
Duke  &  the  Infanta  his  Contort.  They  alio  promile  an 
Anfwer  to  the  Arch-Duke’s  Exception,  who  in  the  Englifh 
Plein-pouvoir  was  (tyled  Illuftriflimus  as  his  Anceftors 
were  ;  and  not  Screniflimus,  as  he  expected,  dat.  20 
Maii  1600.  , 

5.  The  Queene’s  Letter  of  the  24th  of  May  1600,  to 

the  Commiflioners  at  Boloigne.  3 1  • 

Herein,  Her  Majefty  difpenfeth  with  the  lack  ot  the 
neceflary  Formalities  in  the  Plein-Pouvoirs  on  both  Sides; 
authorized  them  to  go  on  to  the  Treaty ;  fheweth  her 
Unwillingnefs  to  agree  to  a  Cefl'ation  of  Armes ;  and  fen- 
deth  them  a  Letter  from  his  Catholic  Majeftie  to  the 
Irifh  Rebells,  encouraging  them  to  perfift,  at  the  fame  time 
as  He  would  treat  of  Peace  with  Her. 

6.  Latin  Letter  of  the  opanilh  Sc  Archiducal  Commi!- 

fioners  ;  in  Anfwer  to  the  Scruples  or  Doubts  railed  by 
the  Englifh  touching  their  Plein-pouvoirs.  37r 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


Nutii.  1858,  1859; 

7.  Latin  Letter  of  the  Englifli  Commiffioners,  wherein 
they  aflert  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Right  to  Prsecedency  over 
Spain.  With  aPofticript,  defiring  that  this  Affair  may  be 
dropped  on  both  Tides,  dat.  26  May,  S.  Vet.  1600. 

40.  b. 

8.  Refponfio  Comniiflariorium  Regis  Catholici,  ad 

replicationem  Nodrorum  exhibita,  29  Maij  1600.  S.  V. 
This,  neverthelef's,  is  da.ed  7  Jun.  1600.  43. 

9.  Quedions  Tent  by  the  Englifli  Commiffioners  at 
Boloigne,  20  June  1600.  to  the  Lords  of  the  Oueens 
Privy  Council ;  touching  their  future  Proceedings  in  this 
Treaty. 

10.  The  Councells  Anfwer  to  the  faid  Queflions  ; 

dated  the  30th  of  June  1600.  47.  b. 

1 1.  A  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  Her  Majedics  Coun- 
ccll  to  the  Commiffioners  at  Boloigne.  Dated  the  25th  of 
July  1600.  touching  the  Treaty  of  Peace  betweene  the 
Kinge  of  Spayne  &  Oueene  Elizabeth  ;  vpon  which  they 
flood  vpon  point  of  Precedency  with  the  Queene.  50.  b. 

12.  A  Letter  from  Sir  Robert  Cecill  to  the  Comniif- 

fioners  at  tfoloigne.  Dated  the  25th  of  July  1600.  57. 

13.  A  Relation  of  the  Proceedings  againft  Ambaf- 

fadors  that  exceeded  their  Commiflion.  Written  by 
Sir  Robert  Cotton  Knight  &  Baronett,  vpon  Command 
from  King  James.  (A.  D.  1624.)  58. 

14.  A  Treatife,  how  Kinges  of  England  have,  from 
tyme  to  tyme,  fupported  &  repayred  theire  Edates;  col¬ 
lected  out  of  the  Records  of  the  Tower  by  Sir  Robert 
Cotton  Knight  &  Baronett,  Anno  nono  Regis  Jacobi. 

7°. 

15.  A  Treatife  of  Sir  Robert  Cotton,  {hewing,  That 

the  Soveraigne  Perfon  is  required  in  the  Great  Counfells 
or  Affemblies  of  the  State,  as  well  at  the  Confutations, 
as  at  the  Conclufions.  97- 

1 6.  Confiderations  for  the  Repreffing  of  the  Increafe 

of  Priefts,  Jefuits,  &  Recufants,  without  draweing  of 
Blood:  written  by  Sir  Roberte  Cotton.  109. 

17.  A  breife  Dicourfe  proveinge,  That  the  Howie  of 
Commons  hath  equall  Power  with  the  Peers  in  point  of 
Judicature.  Written  by  Sir  Robert  Cotton  Knight  & 
Baronet,  to  Sir  Edward  Mountague,  anno  Domini  1621. 

15°- 

18.  Sir  Robert  Cotton’s  Relation  of  the  Proceedings 

againlt  Ambalfadors,  &c.  1 56. 

This  is  another  Copie  of  that  mentioned  above 
at  §  13. 

1859. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  minori,  diverfisManibus  exa- 

ratus,  et  perMauiitium  quendam  Cognomento  Staf- 

fordum  t^uti  ex  folij  fecundi  primsi  conflet  facie) 

probe  inluminatus  :  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Sacramentum  Servientis  ad  Legem  (in  fol.  primo 
rejeftaneo) 

2.  The  Proportions  in  Meafuring  Ground  ;  taken 

from  a  Taillours  Yard.  1 . 

3.  Regidrum  Brevium  de  Cancellaria  Regis  Ri- 

chardi  ir.  2. 

In  principali  Littera  cernitur  Imago  Sceptrigeri  Re¬ 
gis  in  Solio  fedentis  ;  ad  Effigiem  forte,  Regis  Edwardi 

1.  aut  2.  delineatam. 

Finito  Regiftro,  confpiciuntur, 

4.  Conceffio  Indulgence  Quadraginta  Dierum,  om¬ 
nibus  qui  ad  Sudentationem  feu  Relevamen  Fabric® 
Ecclefire  B.  M.  de  Willefdone  Londonienfis  Diocefis 
aliquid  donaverint ;  vel  qui  pro  Radujpho  Roberds  de 
Willefdone  et  Johanna  Uxore  fua  oraverint,  &c.  per 
Nicholaum  Chridopolitanum  Epifcopum,  ac  Sar.  Dioce¬ 
fis,  Sede  Epifcopali  ibidem  vacantc  Sufflaganeum  fuf- 
ficienter  deputatum.  dat.  i.die  Februarij  A.  D.  1395. 

218.  b. 

5.  Adnotationes  de  Temporibus  quibus  quidam  de 

Gente  Robertfiorum  de  Willefdone,  (jam  tunc  hujufee 
Codicis  Domina)  admilfi  fuerint  in  Societates  Juridico- 
rum  Londonienfium.  ibid. 

Cat.  FIarl.  Vol.  II. 


2  69 


Num.  1859,  i860. 

6.  Signa  Diem  Judicij,five  Finem  Mundi  pr®cedenda; 
fecundum  eorum  Relationem,  quam  a  Domino  acceperit 
Johannes  Evangelifta.  a  1 9. 

i860. 

A  paper-Book  in  fmall  Fol.  wherein  are  fairly  written 
divers  of  the  Tranflations  made  by  Mrs.  Mary  Clarcke 
from  Eufebius  ;  and  by  her  dedicated  to  the  then 
Lady  Mary,  afterward  Queen  Mary  1.  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  Order, 

1.  A  Py file  to  the  Ladye  Maryes  Grace,  thus  inferib- 
ed,  To  the  mode  Noble,  Vertruoufe,  and  Prudent  Pryn- 
ces,  Ladye  Marye,  Doughter  to  owr  late  Soveraigne 
Lord  of  mode  famoufe  memorye,  Kyng  Henry  the  Eight 
and  Syfter  to  owr  mode  dreade  Soveraigne  Lorde  Kyng 
Edwarde  the  Syxt.  Mary  Clarcke  her  Gracts  moll 
humble  Oralryce  Wydowe,  and  Doughter  to  Wyllyam 
Rooper  Efquyre,  wysflieth  encreafe  of  all  honour,  Welth, 
and  Felycyte.” 

2.  Contenta  Prooemij,  necnon  fingulorum  Capitum 
Libri  Primi  Ecclefiadicze  Fliftorire  Eufebij  Pamphili. 

9* 

3.  Eufebij  Pamphili  Epifcopi  Caefariafi  Palaedinae 

Ecclefiadic®  Hidorise  Liber  Primus  ;  Maria  Clarcke 
Interprete.  10. 

Then  follow  her  Englifli  Tranflations  from  the 
Greek,  viz. 

4.  The  Contentys  of  the  Fyrfle  booke.  59. 

5.  The  Fyrft  booke  of  th’Ecclefyadycall  Hyflorye  of 
Eufebius  Pamphyly  Bysflioppe  of  Casfarea  in  Paleityne. 

b  1. 

6.  The  Contentys  of  the  Seconde  Booke.  114. 

7.  The  Seconde  Booke,  &c.  1 1 6. 

8.  The  Contentys  of  the  Thyrde  Booke.  J70. 

9.  The  Thyrde  Booke,  &c.  172. 

10-  The  Contentys  of  the  Fourthe  Booke.  243.  b. 

11.  The  Fourthe  Booke,  &c.  246.  b. 

12.  The  Contentes  of  the  vth  Booke.  306. 

13.  The  vth  Booke,  &c.  308.  279. 

1'his  Book  is  bound  in  a  Cover  of  Purple  Velvet, 

Gilt  on  the  Edges,  &c.  Seemetb  to  have  been  the  Preient- 
Book  to  the  above-mentioned  Princefs ;  &  was  bought 
of  Me. 

TheTranflation  including  but  Five  Books  ;  it  may 
feem  that  no  more,  in  Greek,  were  then  printed. 

This  Mrs.  Mary  Clarcke  being  a  perfon  of  rare 
Learning  &  other  Endowments  ;  I  fliall  take  Leave  to 
make  fome  little  mention  of  her  Family  ;  and  the  rather 
becaufe  She  is  omitted  (as  alfo  the  learned  Works  of 
her  Mother)  in  the  Firfl  Volume  of  my  late  indudrious 
Friend  Anthony  Wood’s  Athena:  Oxonienfes  ;  although 
he  might  eafily  have  introduced  them  both  under  the 
Title  of  this  Maries  Giandfather. 

That  l  may,  therefore,  in  fome  fmall  degree  contri¬ 
bute  toward  preferving  the  Memory  of  two  learned  & 
deferving  Englifli  Gentlewomen;  It  may  be  remembered 
that  this  Mary  was  firfl  married  to  Mr.  Stephen 
Clarcke  ;  and  afterward,  to  Mr.  James  Ballet  of  Blone. 
She  was  the  eldell  Daughter  of  William  Roper  of  El- 
tham,  Secundary  of  the  Kings  Bench  in  the  time  of  K. 
Henry  vm.  by  Margaret  the  elded  Daughter  of  the 
Famous  Sir  Thomas  Morf..  Which  William,  was 
Son  to  John  Roper  of  Eltham,  Attorney-Generall  & 
Principali  Clerk  of  the  Pleas.  He  was  alfo  Unkle  to 
that  Sir  John  Roper  who  was  created  Baron  of  Tenham 
the  4th  of  July  A.  D.  1616. 

Concerning  Margaret  the  Mother  to  our  Maty,  not 
a  little  may  be  gathered  from  the  Life  of  Sir  Thomas 
More,  a  MS.  in  this  Library  inferibed  68.  C.  6.  (whether 
the  fame  was  compiled  by  Mr.  1  homas  More  her 
Nephew,  or  by  any  other)  and  from  other  books  :  all 
which  may  be  much  better  &  more  handfomely  done 
by  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Elstob,  a  Virgin  who  hath  trod¬ 
den  in  the  unfrequented  Paths  of  thdfe  aijd  other  Perfon - 
3  Z  ages 


K  1 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  i860,  1861. 

ages  of  her  own  Sex  ;  and  (as  they  did,  to  their  great 
Glory  &  lading  Reputation)  hath  added  Learning,  the 
foundation  of  folid  Wifdom  &  Judgment,  to  Natural 
Modefty  &  Sanftity  of  Manners. 

But  to  return;  in  the  faidMS.  68.  C.  6.  fol.  165. 
I  find  this  following  Paffage,  “  This  blefled  Couple 
(William  Roper  &  Margaret  More)  had  a  Daughter 
whofe  Name  was  Marie.  Full  learned  She  was  in  the 
Liberall  Sciencis.  Firft  She  was  married  to  Mr.  Clarke  ; 
afterwards  She  was  married  to  Mr.  Baflet,  one  of  the 
Privie-Chamber,  in  Queene  Maries  tyme  ;  and  She  hir- 
felfe  was  one  of  the  Mayds  of  Honour.  This  Gentle¬ 
woman  very  hanfomelie  tranflated  the  Ecclefiafticall 
Hiftorie  of  Eufcbius  out  of  Greeke  into  Latyn ;  and 
after,  into  Englilh  ;  yet  extant,  to  the  Shame  of  the 
Herincall  Tranflation  of  Meridith  Hanmer.  Which,  for 
that  Chriftopherfone  Bilhop  ot  Lincolne  his  Tranflation 
was  then  famos  &  extent,  Hers  came  not  to  Printe  ;  the 
Englilh  may  hereafter.  She  tranflated  the  Hiftorie  of 
Socratis,  Theodoretus,  Sozomenus,  and  Euagrius  :  thefe 
of  her  Modeftie  they  caufed  to  be  fupprefled.  She  alfo 
tranflated  a  Treatife  of  hir  Grandfather  Sir  Thomas, 
made  upon  the  Paflione  ;  &  fo  elegantlie  hath  penned  it, 
that  a  man  wold  thincke  it  were  Originallie  writ  in  the 
Englilh  Tongue  by  Sir  Thomas  himfelf.” 

1861. 

Codex  membranaceus  et  per  vetuftus ;  in  fol.  min.  quern 

a?te  fuo  redeinit  a  me  Dominus  meus  Excellentiflimus. 

In  ulo  continentur, 

Pentateuchus  Moyfis,  Hebraice  cum  punftis  ;  in 
mtenore  ork  confcribitur  Onkcli  Paraphrafis  Chaldaica 
cum  punctis  ;  quinetiam  in  oris  exterioribus  adduntur 
Commentarij  R.  Salomonis  Iarchi,  manu  Germanorum 
Kabbmica.  Hoc  modo  exarati  incipiunt. 

1.  Liber  Genefeos.  r 

2.  Liber  Exodi. 

3.  Liber  Leviticr'. 

4.  Liber  Numeri.  j  ’ 

5.  Liber  Deuteronomij.  T  _  „ _  b. 

Sequuntur  Quinque  Megilloth  ;  Commentarijs  R. 

Salomonis  Iarchi  e  regionepofitis ;  hoc  ordine.  foil. 

6.  Canticum  Canticorum.  21c.  b 

7.  Liber  Ruth.  ~  2 ' 

8.  Lamentationes  Jeremfe.  221' 

9-  Ecdftfn.  226.  b 

10;  E,fth'r-  234.  b 

In  duas  partes  dtviditur  Liber  Eflher,  qdarum 
poltenor  mcipit.  ^  b 

Prteterea  monendum,  quod  Lamentationuin  Librum 
ltatim  excipiunt, 

1 1.  Verficuli  Hebraici,  peradlis  Thronis  Canondi  (Pfal- 

mus  137.  et  Precatiuncula.)  22'  b- 

Adhuc  fequuntur  Hebraice, 

12.  Sepher  Haphtaroth  :  ordinarfe  fcilicet  Leftiones 

putoTgendT  LibrfS  deC'rPt“'  “:q>  “SWP'PO- 

In  initio  fcribuntur  Commentarij  nonnulli  R.  Salo¬ 
monis  Iarchi,  litteris  Rabbinicis. 

13.  Haphtaroth  Extraordinarise ;  in  Novi-luniis,  anni 

Pnncipio,  See.  recitandae.  J  2g 

?.4-  Haphtaroth  Extraordinary  alia:,  cum  Comma. 
dSce,eh°nathimiS  B™  U22‘d  C  rCSl°ne  adfcripns  Chal- 

15.  Continuatio  Haphtaroth  Extraordinariarum  ^cuin 
Commentano  Chaldaico  ejufdem  Filij  Uaaielis.  ’  o 

16.  Liber  Job  Hebraice;  cum  Commcntario  R  Sa 

lomonis  Jarchi,  litteris  Rabbinicis.  28a  b 

_,!7-  Nomina,  Figurx,  ac  PoteRates  Notarum  Mnfi. 
ca.ium,  five  Accentuum  Hebraicorum. 

^.8.  GratianunAaio,  Ante  &  Poll  recitarum 

19.  Hittoria  de  Antiocho  Epiphane  et  de  3r°t'  b' 
Hio  Mattathiat,  Hebraice  ;  Charateibi  R*b  “”e 
Germanorum  groffioribus.  bbimcis 

6  3°4-  b. 


Num.  t86i,  1862. 

Hate  Hiftoriola  (ur  accepi)  folummodo  per  Judreos 
Luiitanos,  in  Libra  quodam  Precum,  habetur  Typis 
excufa.  }l 

Denique,  in  folijs  Chartaceis  ad  Calcem  Codicis 
rejettaneis,  dantur, 

20.  Rationes  quasdam  Nunimarfe  cujufdam  Judtei  • 
litteris,  ut  ita  dicam,  Mercatorum  feu  Epiftolicis.  * 

1862. 

A  parchment  Book  in  fmall  fol.  (or  large  4to)  bought  of 
me  :  wherein  are  contained,  in  old  Englifli, 

1.  )>e  Table  vpon  Jie  Temporal;  &  vpon  Jie  Propre 

Sanctorum  ;  &  vpon  J?e  Comyn  Sanctorum  ;  of  GoL 
pells :  J?at  ben  raad  in  ]>c  Chirche  Jioruz  J>e  zeer  :  and 
houz  J>ei  fchulle  be founde  in  pis  Booke.  j. 

2.  Numerus  Capitum  uniufcujufque  Novi  Teftamenti 

Llbri-  3.  b. 

.  3-  A  Note,  perhaps  inferted  by  the  Abbat  of  Taviftock, 
in  thefe  words,  “  The  Agreement  of  the  1111  Evangylys 
after  Saynt  Jerame.  Seech  the  Concordant  ofSaynt 
Jerame  in  the  Latyne  Bybylls,  of  that  Work.”  4. 

Hitherto  all  is  written  on  Paper  fattened  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  Parchment  Book. 

4.  Another  Table,  fhewing  Houz  a  Man  may  fyndein 
this  Book  pe  Dominicall  Gofpelles  aftir  Salelbury  Ufe. 

5.  A  Treatife  thus  entituled  at  the  end.  “  Oon  of 
Foure  ;  Jiat  is,  o  Booc  of  alle  Jie  Foure  Gofpeleris,  <ra. 
dered  fhortli  into  o  Storie  bi  Clement  of  Lantony.”  7. 

Before  the  Treatife,  is  a  Prologue  ;  and  alfo  the 
Contents  of  the  Chapters  in  each  of  the  Twelve  Books. 

.  Although  I  remember  to  have  formerly  feen  divers 
Copies  of  Clement  of  Llanthonies  Harmony,  yet  not 
having  any  convenience  of  confulting  any  of  them  at  this 
Inftant  of  time,  I  cannot  pronounce  whether  this  be  a 
Tranflation,  or  an  Abridgement  of  Him.  John  Leland 
writing  of  this  Clement,  Sc  of  his  Concordia  Evangelift- 
arum,  affirmeth  that  it  beginneth  thus,  “  Quceris  qua  fre- 
tus  automate.”  Pit  feus  faith  not  the  fame,  but  that  thofe 
words  did  begin  his  Commentary  upon  the  Evangelifts  in 
Four  Books.  The  Concordia  Quatuor  Evange.'iftarum 
in  1  welve  Books  (which  anfwereth  to  the  prefent  Work ) 
he  calleth  Opus  Impel  feclum,  andaferibes  this  Beginning 
u”t0  *r»  “  Nujus  Operis  fibiChariftime;”  adding  moreover 
this  Remark,  ‘  Supremam  Operi  manum  impofuit,  longo 
poll  tempore,  Guilhelmus  Nottinghamus.’  In  this  MS 
the  Prologue  beginneth  with  thefe  Words,  “  Clement  a 
Preeft  of  jie  Chirche  of  Lantony  gaderede  alle  pe  Senten¬ 
ce  ?fr*?UrGofpeleris  in  to  0  Storie.”  TheBegining 
of  the  Worke  usfelf,  is  that  of  St.  Johns  Gofpel  ,  and 
neither  of  thele  are  congruous  to  the  others. 

However,  the  late  learned  Mr.  Henry  Wharton  In 
the  Appendix  to  the  firft  part  of  Dr.  Cave’s  Hifloria 
ti,tefar“’  P?S-  54-  gi'  ing  a  Lift  of  the  Works  of  John 
Wyclyfie  whtch  he  hinrfelf  had  feen,  hath  thefe  words 
Harmonia  Evangelica,  a  ClementePrefby tero  Lara 

tnontenn - Latino  Sermone  contexta,  a  Wiclefo  An- 

gltce  converfa,  MS.  penes  Ilichardum  Chifwell  Biblio- 
polam  Londmenfem,  4to,”  (Now  I  know  that  the  prefent 
MS.  was  formerly  in  the  poffeflion  of  the  faid  Chifwell  • 
and  that  what  Mr.  Wharton  immediately  after  llyleth 
Commentanus  in  Selefta  S.  Scriptune  loca,  Annlice. 
™S-4*?'  aP,ud  mndem,  is  that  Book  of  Pollills  'upon 
the  Flafms  &  Cantica  Sacra,  now  in  this  Library  In- 
fcribed  No.  1806.  (but  this  by  way  of  Digreffion  only) 
^"•Wharton  doth  not  declare  his  Reafon  for  aferibing 
the  Work  to  J.  Wyclyfte,  although  he  might  have  a 
very  good  one,  and  I  not  know  it.  And  it  may  have 
been  done  by  that  great  Man  (who  laboured  very  much 
in  making  the  Holy  Scriptures  intelligible  to  the  Common 
people)  for  ought  that  I  can  fay  to  the  contrarv.  It 
plainly  appeareth  by  two  feveral  places  (viz.  upon  the 
mfide  of  the  firft  fpare  Leaf ;  and  by  fol.  7.)  that  in  the 
Year  1 566,  it  belonged  to  Francis  R  uifel  Earl  of  Bed  ford- 
and  by  his  putting  his  Name  &  Title  twice  in  the  fame 
2  Book, 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse 


27x 


Num.  1862,  1863. 

Book,  it  may  feem  that  he  had  more  than  an  ordinary 
Value  for  it.  The  like  he  did  by  two  Books  of  Saxon 
Homilies  which  the  fame  year  1566.  Mr.  Ferrar  one 
of  his  Servants  found  in  the  Library  of  the  Monaf- 
tery  of  Taviftock ;  which  books  ftill  remain  the  one  in 
th  e  Umverfity-Library  of  Cambridge,  the  other  in  Cottons 
Library  at  Weiiminlter ;  &  are  both  defcribed  in  my 
Printed  Catalogue  of  Anglo-Saxon  MSS.  Moreover,  that 
this  fame  Francis  Earl  of  Bedford  had  divers  of  Wyclyffes 
Works,  is  plain  from  the  Extraft  of  his  Will,  in  Dugd. 
Bar.  iom.  it  pag.  379.  col.  2  wherein  it  is  recited  that 
he  bequeathed  to  the  Lord  Burleigh,  then  Lord  High 

Treafurer  of  England - all  his  antient  Manufcript- 

Books  of  Wicliffs  Works ;  and  how  the  Cecilian  Library 
Was  afterwards  diffracted ;  how,  many  of  the  MSS.  were 
bought  by  Bruce  Earl  of  Ailfbury  ;  how  Ailelburies 
Library  was  publicly  fold,  and  (as  to  the  MSS.)  to  whom 
and  at  what  rates  ;  is  flill  known  by  fome  people  now 
living.  So  that  upon  the  whole,  I  can  eafily  believe 
this  prefent  MS.  &  No.  1806.  to  have  been  two  of  the 
Wicklivian  Books,  formerly  belonging  to  that  Noble 
Earl.  But  to  return  to  the  Contents  of  this. 

„  After  the  Harmony  of  the  Gofpels  above-mentioned, 
follow, 

6.  The  Contents  of  a  large  Theological  Treatife,  as 
divided  into  1 66  Chapters. 

7.  The  Treatife  it  felf,  being  Theological  Common- 
Places,  all  taken  from  the  Holy  Scriptures  (or  Vulgar 
Latin  Bible)  or  a  Summe  of  Scripture,  and  anfwering  to 
the  Contents  of  the  Chapters  aforefaid.  A  work  worthy 
of  John  Wyclyffe,  in  my  poor  Judgement,  or  any  other 
Englifh  Divine  of  that  time. 

Laflly,  it  may  be  obferved  the  Language  &  Style 
ufed  in  this  Book,  is  fuitable  to  Mr.  Johji  Wycliffe  fo 
often  above-mentioned. 


1863. 

A  long  Mufical  Book  in  large  Quarto,  almofl  wholly 
written  by  the  hundof  that  eminent  Mafter  Mr.  Bernard- 
Martin  Berenclow ;  and  bought  of  me  :  It  containeth 

1 .  Regiftro  del  libro  prefente  (this  is  by  Dr.  Berenclow’ 
father  to  the  former) 

2.  Spiega  unvolo  cofi  altiero  :  a  due  Vod:  del  Sitrr 

Luigi  Roffi.  2 

3.  Occhi  quei  vaghi  azuri,  onde  1’havefte ;  a  due  : 

del  medefimo.  g 

4.  Tu  farai  fempreil  mio  bene:  a  due  ;  del  medefimo. 


5.  O  Cieli  Pieta,  et  l’alma  Sanita :  a  due ;  delm’e- 

defimo.  2  j 

6.  O  mifcra  Dorinda  ;  del  Sigr.  Pietro  Reggio.  25! 

7.  Sorcorretemi  per  Pieta,  Occhi  belli ;  a  due,  del 
Sigr.  Giacomo  Chariffimi. 

8.  Vorrei  fcoprirti  undij  A  due:  del  Sigr.  Luigi  Roffi. 


9.  SeDardo  pungente  ;  a  due.  4^' 

_  10 •  Coil  fi  tratta  oh  Dio  j  del  Sigr.  Giovanni  Opfg- 
niani.  J06 

1 1.  O  quanto  e  dolce  la  Liberta  ;  del  medefimo.  53! 

12.  Del  famofo  Oriente  ;  del  Sigr.  Cefti.  rn. 

13.  Sofpiri  o  la  che  fate.  g2’ 

14.  Vieni  per  mia  Liberta.  gg’ 

15.  Safli,  hor  qua  tra  le  Ruine  j  del  Sigr.  Pietro 

Reggio-  75. 

ib.  Nel  adirato  Seno  Vedova;  del  Sigr.  Carlo- Am- 
brofio  Lunatti.  g2> 

17.  Hor  che  del  Ciel  nelle  Stellate  piaghe  ;  del  Sigr 

Pietro  Reggio.  _  9J.* 

18.  Occtii  belli  ch’  adorati  non  mi  fate  piit  languir. 

.  J°i. 

19.  Un  Genio  fatale  misforza  ad  amarti.  i©4. 

20.  Quanta  poco  durate  o  Contend  in  amore  ;  del 

Sigr.  Paulo  Laurenzano.  , 0- 

21.  Lafciatemi  Speranze  io  vo  Morire.  1  j  4. 


Num.  1863*  1864. 


22.  Sotto  vedovo  Cielo  privo  de  Rai  del  fuo  bel  Sol 

vagante  ;  del  Sigr.  Cefti.  1  t 

23.  Afpettate  ad  eflo  Canto  ;  del  tnedefimo.  127. 

24-  Perche  piangete  Amanti.  i4r. 

25.  Tu  m’  afpettafti  al  Mare  (del  Sigr.  Cefti.)  140.’ 

26.  Quando  Amor  mi  darai  Pace.  icp. 

27.  Qual  fpaventofa  Tromba;  del  Sigr.  Giovanni. 
Baptifta  Draghi. 

This  G.  B.  Draghi,  was  Mufic-Mafter  to  Her  Moft: 
Excellent  Majefty  Queen  Anne. 

28.  Non  dorme  mio  Cuore. 

29.  Pih  tacernon  ft  pud. 

30.  Alphi  nevofe  e  dure. 

31.  Datd  Pace,  o  Fileno. 


165. 

16S. 

175' 


Ambrofio  Lonati.  '  (a  due)  187. 

33.  Vedi  Lilli gentil ;  del  Sigr.  T.  M.  R.  ,g,. 
34;  Son  difperato,  abbandonato  Amante;  k  due: 
del  Sigr.  Giov.  Franc.  Tenaglia.  2oi. 

35.  Da  Antro  Magico  j  del  Sigr.  Cavalli.  206. 

R  *ffi '  m’*namor°5  li  o  >  del  Sigr.  Luigi 

37‘  Sera  alquanto  addormentato.  219. 

_  3.8>  Piange  Filli,  c  con  Sofpiri ;  del  Sigr.  Giacomo 
Canffimi.  _  &  234> 

39.  Che  mi  giova  in  alto  Scoglio.  246. 

40.  Fin  all’  uldmo  Refpiro.  249. 

41.  E  tu  refti  mia  Vita  ;  et  io  non  moro.  254. 

42.  Fileno  Idolo  mio,  dove  lungi  da  ma  ft  ftai ;  del 

Sr.  Abbate  Melani.  a6a.  . 

43-  Guarda  ben  mio  Cor  che  fai  a  fcherzar  con  la 


269. 

275- 

281. 


belli  j  a  due. 

44.  Cieco  Dio  che  vuoi  da  me  ;  a  due. 

45.  Nel  adirato  Scno  vedova  de  fuoi  parti.  2a 

46.  Anime  !  voi  che  fiete  da  le  Furie  d’  Abiflo.  201. 
(del  Sigr.  Luigi  Roffi) 

47.  Pieta  fpietate  Lumij  a  due  :  (del  Sigr.  Luigi  Roffi) 

2  98. 

48.  Lasta  Dies,  Cara  Lux  :  Mottetta,  a  due.  r. 

49.  Vidi  Luciferum  fuperexaltatum.  Mottetta  del  Sigr. 

Bonifacio  Gratiani.  ' 

Thefe  two  Mottettas  are  written  at  the  other  end  of 
the  Book. 


I  864. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  oblongo,  quern  Kalendis 
Januarijs  anni  poll  Chriftum  natum  (juxta  Stylum 
Anglicanum)  1588.  Triumphanti  Reginas  Elizabeths: 
obtulit  Willelmus  Dethick  Principalis  Rex  Heraldo- 
rum  a  Perifcelide  Garterius  nuncupatus.  Scriptum 
ilium  credo  manu  Petri  Beale  tunc  apud  Londinates 
Calligraphic  Profeflbris  Puhlici :  quis  autem  Auro 
fulgido,  Coloribufq;  vidiffimis  tarn  eleganter  ac 
egregrie  inluminaverit,  omnino  (ut  verum  fatear)  me 
latet.  Ccterum,  hoc  habeo  pro  certo ;  in  eodem 
nempe  prceclariffima  omnium  id  genus  Artis  Graphics 
quc  apudHeraldos  obtinet,F.xempla  dari,  qua:  unquam 
ocellis  hi  fee  meis  vidi ;  excepto  folo  Codice  penes  Illuf- 
triflimum  Dominum  Vice-Comitem  de  Weymouth,  in 
quo  exhibetur  Stemma  Genealogicum  Roberti  Sutton 
alias  Dudley,  Comitis  Leyceftrenfis ;  quod  tamen  ab 
eadem  manu  adeo  infigniter  fuiflq  ornatum  facillime 
judicaverim.  In  Illo  continentur, 

1.  Dedicatio  Codicis  Llizabethc  Regina,  per  D.  Gull. 

Dethick ;  cum  depidis  Perifcelide,  Dethickiana  Gentis 
Infignibus  ac  Tymbris.  j .  b. 

2.  Infignia  Regis  Henrici  Quinti;  cum  Coronatis  Rofis 

tarn  Rtibris  quam  Albis,  infulfiffime  adpofitis.  2, 

I‘\  fuperiore  pagina:  margine  cernitur  nomen  W. 
Batho-n.  quo  forte  fignificetur  Willelmus  Laude  qui 
quondam  fuit  Epifcopus  Bathonienfis  &  Wellenfis.  Ouin- 
etiam,  hunc  Codicem  una  cum  alijs  nonnullis,  haud 
ita  pridam  quidem  a  quodam  ....  Hancock? 
enj,  et  Honorabili  Viro  Henrico  Worfleyo  Armigero 

vendidi  j 


i74 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


im.  1864 — 1867. 

Vendidi ;  qui  eos  omnes  Harleyanas  huic  Bibliotheca: 
ftatim  contulit  aeternitati  conlecrandos. 

3.  Nomina  e  >ru:n  qai  N.  biliflimi  Ordinis  Perifcelidis 
Com-Milites  fuerunt,  anno  Primo  Regni  Regis  victorio- 

•Jiflimi  IT-ndci  v.  cum  1  fignibus  eorundem.  2.  b. 

4.  I  ilignia  Iinperatons  Sigifmundi,  Regum,  Ducum, 

Comitum,  &c  qui  poitea  iii  eundem  Nobiliffimum  Or- 
dinem  per  R,  Henricum  v.  cooptati  fuerunt.  3. 


l8  J5. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  longio'ri,  huperq;  ex  Italia 
advecfus  ;  in  quo  conrinentur, 

Marci  Annsei  Lucani  Pharfalise  Libri  x.  Imperf.  cum 
fcholijs  vetuftioribus. 

Codicem  petenti  viro  per-erudito  Thomce  Tickello 
Reginenfis  Collegij  apud  Oxonienfis  Socio  (qui  novam 
Lucani  Editionem  molitur)  humaniffime  commodavit  pro 
fumrno  fuo  Candore,  atq;  crga  Litei  as  Favore  et  Bene- 
volentia,  Dominus  meus  Excellentiflimus  Literatorum 
nunc  fere  Maecenas  unicus.  Et  quidem  haud  frulbra. 
Tickell.is  enim  mihi  refcripfit  fe  indc  Variantium  LeCti- 
onum  meffera  collegilTe,  (inter  quas  plures  maximi  pon- 
deris)  quas  neque  in  alijs  Codicibus  calaino  feriptis,  neque 
in  prceltantiffiinis  Libris  typis  excufis  ullatenus  com- 
parebant. 


1  866. 

A  thin  Velum-book  in  large  Quarto,  written  by  the  hand 

of  Mrs.  Elizabe  i  h  Elstob,  and  by  her  given  to  this 

Library. 

To  the  formef  part  of  it  She  hath  prefixed  this  Title 
Judicia  JEthilbirhti,  Hlotharij,  Eadrici,  &  Wihtraadi 
Regum  Cantianorum,  e  celeberrimo  Textu  Roffenfi 
defcripta.  i.  e. 

1.  Da  bomap  pc  iEiSelbijaht  Cymnj  aperce  on 

Aguprinup  ba:ge.  ( . 

2.  Da  bomap  cSe  JJloJihcejie  -j  Sabpic  Canrpapa 

Cyntnyp  apetron.  3.  b. 

3.  Fihrprebep  bomap  Lanrpapa  Eymnjep 

The  Second  Part  is  by  this  learned  Virgin  entituled, 

Specimen  Pattis  alterius  Roffenfis  Textus:  in  qua, 
CJiartiE  et  Privilegia  Ecclefue  Roffenfis  continentur. 

Herein  is  only  given, 

4.  K.  Ethelbert’s  Charter  of  the  Foundation  or  En¬ 
dowment  of  the  Church  of  Rochester;  bearing  Date 
4  kal.  Maias,  Indictione  7  ;  which  (I  think)  anfwers  to 
our  28  April  A.  D.  61  3. 

In  thefe  Tranfcripts,  Mi-s.Elstob  hath  finely  imi¬ 
tated  the  Hand-writing  of  the  abovementioned  Textus 
Roffenfis. 


Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  min.  diverfis  manibus  feriptus, 
et  a  doCto  Viro  Mofe  William  Bibliotheca:  donatus  ;  in 
quo  conni  ftuntur. 

1.  Epillola  doCtiflimi  Edwardi  Lhwyd  (haud  ita  pri- 

dem  hujufee  Codicis  Domini)  ad  Nathanielem  Lloyd 
LL.D  ipfius  Edwardi  manu  defcripta.  1. 

2.  I  he  Creation  of  the  World  :  being  a  Cornifh 

Play  or  Opera,  written  by  Mr.  William  Jordon ;  and, 
for  the  better  undemanding  of  that  Language,  tranllated 
into  Englilh  Verbatim,  by  Mr.  John  Keigwyn  of  .VI ob- 
fliole,  of  the  Lower  idoufe ;  at  the  Requefi:  of  the 
Right  Reverend  Father  in  God  Jonathan  Lord  Bilhop 
of  Exon,  1691.  * 

f  his  Copie  (as  to  the  Cornifh)  Mr.  Lhwyd  hath 
collated  with  the  Bodleyan  MS.  Arch.  B.  31.  and  haOi 
amended  it  in  all  places  requifite. 

3.  The  large  Collection  of  Wrlfh  Proverbs  by  Dr. 
John  Davies,  with  Explications  in  Latin,  &c.  rn/ 

This  Collection  is  not  only  larger  than  that  which  he 
printed  ;  but  alfo  far  exceedeth  that  in  this  Library  jn- 
fenbed  No.  541.  which  he  wrote  with  his  own  Hand  & 
fent  to  Sir  Simonds  D’Ewes,  from  Mailoyd  in  Aierionaii- 
fhrre  A.  D.  1640. 


Num.  1867- — 18  75. 

The  prerent  Collection  is  alfo  of  the  hand-writing 
of  the  fame  learned  DoCtor ;  and  they  both  may  be 
eafily  proved  to  be  fo,  by  comparing  them  with  his  Ori¬ 
ginal  Letter  to  Sir  Simonds  D’Ewes,  extant  in  this  Li¬ 
brary  at  No.  374.  jyg. 

4-  Some  Additional  Proverbs,  Welfh  &  Latin  ;  written 
by  Mr.  Edward  Lhwyd.  133. 

Some  other  Welfh  Proverbs,  Phrafes  and  little  Notes; 
Collected  by  Mr.  Samuel  Williams  Rector  of  the  Parifh 
of  Llan  Gynllo  in  the  County  of  Cardigan,  Father  to  my 
Friend  Moles  Williams  abo^ ementioned.  136.  b. 

I  868. 

Codex  Grtecus  in  4to,  ampliori,  chartis  bcmbycinis 
feriptbs  ante  quad  ringer,  tos  annos,  quern  a  me  redemit 
Illuftriffimus  Dominus  meus :  in  quo  continentur 
r mctchkA  pars  magna ;  ft  il  a  Cap.  35  Libri  11.  ufque 
ad  Cap.  35.  Libri  vn.  cum  Scholijs  uberritnis  adhuc 
ineditis,  Litteris  minitatis  paflim  adferiptis. 

l  86 q. 

An  Italian  Paper-book  in  fhort  fol.  thus  intituled 
Giuftifkatione  de  Veniiiani,  per  la  Pace  fatta*  col 
Turco. 

This  was  written  after  the  Battel  of  Lepanto. 

1870. 

Another  like  Italian  Book  thus  entituled, 

Rifpofia  allt  Giuflificationi  ddla  Sercnillima  Sig- 
noria  di  Vcnetia,  per  la  Pace  faita  col  Turco. 


1871. 

Another  like  Italian  Book  thus  entituled. 
Relatione  ddlo  Stato  de  Milano,  faita  i’anno  1 589. 

1  872. 

Another  like  Italian  Book  thus  entituled 
t  Relatione  dello  Stato  nel  quale  fi  riuuova  il  Govcrno 
dell’  Imperi.)  Tuichefco  qu  ft'  anno  1^94.  Et  ddla 
Caufa  p.rch’egli  habbia  volto  I’Armi  al  prefente  nelle 
parti  di  Ungaria. 

iS/3 

Another  like  Italian  Book  thus  entituled, 
Relatione  di  Polonia:  fatta  nel  ar:no  1583. 

I874. 

Another  like  Italian  Book,  entituled, 

Relatione  di  Perfia,  I’anno  ij3o. 


1875. 

A  thick  Book  in  fol.  bought  of  me  ;  wherein  are  entred 
all  Papers  relating  to 

Sir  Charles  Cornwallis  his  Negotiations  in  Spayne 
Ann.  Dorn.  1605.  &  1606.  viz. 

1.  The  Kings  Inflections  fi  r  Charles  Howard  Fade 

of  Notmgham,  Lord  High  Admiral!  ofEngland,  i.noloyed 
by  his  Majeflie  to  the  King  of  Spaine  for  taking  his  Oath 
for  Obfervation  of  the  Ikace  lately  concluded  between 
England,  Spain,  and  the  Ar,;h-Duke  Albert.  A  D 
1605.  J‘ 

Herein  that  Noble  Lord  was  infiruCled,  arnon^- 
other  points,  that  foralmuch  as  the  performeing  of  that 
Ceremonye,  of  likelyhood  would  bee  dune  in  the  Kings 
Chappell,  he  fhould  have  a  fpeciali  care  that  it  fhould 
not  b:  done  in  the  Forenoon  att  the  tyme  of  Maffe,  to  the 
Scandal!  of  the  Proteflant  Religion  ;  but  rather  in  the 
afternoone,  at  what  tyme  theire  fervice  is  more  free  from 
Note  of  Superflition. 

2.  The  Kings  InffruCtions  for  Sir  Charles  Corn  walk's 

Knt.  fent  as  his  Amballadour  to  refide  wi.h  his  good 
Brother  the  Kir.ge  of  Spaine.  4.  b. 

Then  fbHoweth  a  good  part  <  f  the  Book,  with  this 
Title  Hispanja,  A"  16^5.  Copies  of  Lettres  written  by 
Sir  C  harles  Ccn  wallis,  in  the fii ft  p  ear  of  his  Erabaffage 
in  Spaine,  vizf.  Ann©  Domini  1605.  being, 

7 


3-  A 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


273 


Num.  1875. 

3.  A  Lettre  to  my  Lord  of  Cranborne  (Robert  Cecill) 

the  16  of  Aprill  1605.  from  the  Groyne.  10. 

Setting  forth  the  great  Joy  of  the  Spaniards  for  the 
Peace,  See. 

4.  A  Lettre  to  Henry  Howarde  Earle  of  Northampton 
written  from  the  Groyne  the  1 8th  of  Aprill  1605.  10.  b. 

Complaining  of  the  Envy  of  fome  of  his  Countrymen 
towards  him. 

5.  A  Lettre  to  the  Vifcount  Cranborne  Principall  Se- 

cretarie  to  His  Majeftie,  written  from  the  Groyne  the 
2cth  of  Aprill  1605.  n.b. 

Seeming  fomewhat  to  reflett  upon  the  Earl  of  No- 
tingham’s  Conduct,  as  endeavouring  rather  to  Court  the 
Count  de  Carafena  Governor  of  Galicia,  than  to  be 
courted  by  Him. 

6.  A  Lettre  to  the  fame,  written  from  the  Groyne, 

27  April  1605.  i2.b. 

Upon  Occafion  of  the  Incident  which  had  hap¬ 
pened  by  the  Deceafe  of  an  Engliih-man,  whom  the  Spa¬ 
niards  would  not  permit  to  be  buried  in  their  Ground : 
whom,  notwithftanding,  the  Earl  of  Notingham  had 
caufed  to  be  buried  there  privately. 

7.  A  Lettre  to  the  Earl  of  Northampton  from  Vaile- 

dolid,  29  May  1605.  14* 

Importing  that  the  Conftable  of  Caftile  had  not 
hitherto  (hewn  him  much  Courtefie  or  Refpett.  That  the 
Spaniards  fpake  honorably  of  Ilis  Lordfliip,  the  Lord 
Cranbourne,  &  the  Earl  of  Suffolk  :  that  he  defired  his 
Lordfliip  to  be  a  meane  to  continue  him  in  the  Lord 
Cranbourne’s  good  Opinion  :  and  hinting  as  if  his  Allow¬ 
ance  was  too  (hort  in  a  dear  Countrey,  efpecially  while  he 
continued  in  Debt. 

8.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Councell,  written  from  Valle- 

dolid,  31  May  1605.  «6. 

Defcribing  the  Public  Entry  which  the  Earl  of  No¬ 
tingham,  his  Majefties  Ambaflador  Extraordinary  made 
into  that  Citty  ;  and  the  Reception  they  both  had  from 
the  King  &  Queen  of  Spain  &  Conftable  of  Caftile,  &c. 
The  Conference  with  the  Conde  de  Olivarez,  and  the 
Reafons  he  gave  why  it  would  not  be  convenient  that 
his  King  fhould  fwear  to  the  performance  of  the  Treaty 
in  his  Chapell ;  and  why  they  could  not  be  admitted  to 
dine  with  Him,  which  was  an  Honor  he  had  always  refufed 
not  only  to  Ambafl'adorc,  but  to  Cardinals,  &  Popes  Nun¬ 
cios  being  Cardinals  ;  nay,  even  to  the  Duke  of  Savoy 
a  Sovereign  Prince  &  his  near  Kinfman.  An  Account  of 
the  Dinner  of  Honor  they  had  at  the  Duke  of  Lerma’s 
(where  the  King  &  Queen  faw  all)  and  there  were  Two 
Marquiffes  &  Two  Earls  (a  thing  very  extraordinary  in 
Spaine)  who  waited  at  the  Table  :  Of  a  Religious  Pro- 
ceflion  whereat  the  King  and  Court  aflifted,  and  where 
there  was  a  remarkable  mixture  of  things  prophane  with 
facred  matters.  For  in  the  fame  were  feen  Counterfeit 
Dragons,  Giants,  &  difguii’ed  Moris-dancers  who  danced 
&  fang  within  the  Ranks  of  fome  of  the  Fryars.  The 
Ceremony  of  the  Kings  taking  the  Oath  abovementioned 
&  Signing  the  Treaty.  How  the  King  invited  them  to 
the  Sight  of  the  Jurgo  de  Torros,  &  the  Jurgo  de  Cannas 
with  other  matters. 

9.  To  the  Lord  Ellefmer  Lorde  Chancellour  of  Eng¬ 
land,  from  Villadol  id,  1  Jun.  1605.  30.  b. 

10.  To  the  Lord  Vifcount  Cranbourne  Principal  Secre¬ 
taire  to  his  JVJajeftie,  from  Villadolid,  1  June  1605.  31.  b. 

Shewing  how  well  the  Earl  of  Nottingham  had  de¬ 
fended  himfelf  againft  the  Duke  of  Lerma  who  had  endea¬ 
voured  to  fift  him  ,■  &  complaining  of  the  great  Charge 
he  was  put  to  there. 

1 1.  To  the  fame,  from  Villadolid  2  Junij,  1 605.  33.  b. 

Giving  the  Sum  of  what  he  had  heard  concerning 

the  Spaniards  being  fond  of  the  new-made  Peace,  and 
•  the  Reafon  of  it,  viz.  their  Inability  to  continue  the  War 
two  Years  longer.  That  the  Jefuits  have  been  bufy  in 
.  corrupting  divers  of  their  Followers.  That  the  Spaniards 
were  in  fear  of  the  Moors  both  within  &  without  their 
•  Cat.Harl.Vol.II. 


Num.  1875. 

Kingdome.  That  it  was  talked  as  if  the  King  intended  to 
'go  to  the  Low-Countries,  &  try  if  he  could  by  fair  means 
reduce  the  United  Provinces  to  his  Obedience.  That  the 
Dearth  is  fo  great,  that  he  cannot  fupport  his  Ordinary 
Charges  there  under  50 1.  weekly. 

12.  To  the  fame,  from  Villadolid,  6  Junij  1605.  38.  b. 

Concerning  the  great  Honors  done  to  the  Earl  of 

Notingham  at  his  taking  leave  of  the  Spanifli  Court ; 
when  the  King  gave  him  in  Jewels  to  the  Value  of  20000 
pounds.  That  his  Lordfliip  had  deferved  well  of  the 
Spanifli  People,  to  whom  he  had  occafionally  given  about 
3500  Pounds.  And  that  the  Spaniards  began  to  expeft 
the  good  effefts  of  their  Treaty  with  England,  in  regard 
to  the  Hollanders. 

13.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Councell,  from  Villadolid, 

9  Junij.  40. 

Concerning  the  State  of  the  Spanifli  Court ;  &  that 
the  Council  were  well  afl'edfed  to  the  King  of  England,  & 
refpeclful  to  himfelf;  fo  that  he  hoped  he  fhould  be  able 
to  procure  redrefs  to  the  Complaints  of  our  Merchants. 
That  the.dilatorinefs  of  theSpanifh  Counfels  hindred  them 
from  laying  hold  on  proper  Opportunities  ;  and  that  their 
chiefeft  Virtue  is  their 'Secrefie. 

14.  To  His  Majeftie,  from  Villadolid,  9  Julij,  1605.  42> 

Giving  a  CharaQer  of  the  Spaniards,  and  of  their 

good  affection  toward  his  Majefty.  That  there  was  a 
rumor  as  if  the  French  endeavoured  to  procure  a  Marriage 
between  the  Dolphin  &  the  Infanta  ;  and  to  play  fome 
game  in  Scotland. 

15.  To  the  Earle  of  Northampton,  from  Villadolid, 

9  Julij  1605.  44.  b. 

Shewing  the  Joy  which  the  Spaniards  took  from  the 
Kings  being  angry  with  the  Dutch,  who  had  been  fo  in- 
folent  as  to  aflault  the  Spaniards  in  his  Port  of  Dover. 

16.  To  the  Lord  Vifcount  Cranbourne  Earle  ofSalif- 

burie.  Principal  Secretarie  to  his  Majeftie,  from  Villa¬ 
dolid,  9  Julij  1 605.  46. 

Sending  him  a  Lift  of  the  Scots  Nobility  &  Gentry 
who  had  Penfions  from  Spain ;  &  promifmg  another  of 
the  Irifh  in  the  fame  circumftance.  That  fome  Scots 
there,  had  evil  Intentions  toward  their  own  King  &  Coun¬ 
trey.  That  the  Duke  of  Savoy  having  a  defign  againft: 
Geneva,  much  defired  the  Service  of  one  Captain  Gray  a 
verie  cunning  Engineer  St  an  Englifhman. 

17.  To  Sir  Henry  Wotton  His  Majefties  Ambaflador 

Leiger  in  Venice,  11  Julij  1605.  48.  b. 

Setting  forth  the  Honors  (hewn  in  the  Spanifli  Court 
to  the  Earl  of  Notingham,  &  Refpefts  to  himfelf;  with 
the  daily  apparent  marks  of  the  Spaniards  Love  &  good 
Affection  to  our  King. 

18.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Councill,  from  Villadolid, 

15  July  1605.  49.  b. 

Purfuing  what  he  before  wrote  to  the  King  ;  that  he 
is  advertifed  that  the  French  Ambaflador  had  written  to 
his  Court  by  way  of  Complaint  againft  Him,  for  which 
he  had  given  no  Occafion  unlefs  it  might  be  once  in  the 
Punctilio  of  a  Ceremony.  That  a  Marriage  having  been 
agreed  upon  between  the  Prince  of  Mantua  &  thefecond 
Daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  which  might  poflibly  pro¬ 
duce  fomewhat  prejudicial  to  the  Spanifli  Intereft  in  Italy  ; 
the  King  had  written  to  the  Duke  :■ :  (in  a  fort  Mandatory) 
to  relinquifh  the  Treatie ;  which  he  took  in  verie  evil 
part,  fince  he  might  not  difpofe  of  his  own  Children,  or 
have  leave  to  performe  his  Word.  That  one  Captain 
Atkinfon  had  been  in  Conference- with  the  Conde  de 
Villa-longa  one  of  the  Spanifli  Secretaries  of  State  ;  and 
was  willing  to  impart  fome  proje&s  unto  them  for  dis¬ 
turbing  the  Hollanders  Fifliing  on  oiir  Coafts,  if  our 
King  did  not  employ  him  ;  and  that,  in  the  mean  time 
they  had  given  him  a  Chaine  of  1 60  pounds  value. 

19.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifbury,  from  Villadolid,  17  July 

1605.  53. 

That  by  the  Death  of  Sir  Thomas  Palmer  (who  had 
been  reconciled  to  the  Church  of  Rome  before  lie  died)  a 
4  A  good 


I 


good  Ward  was  come  to  his  Lordlhip.  And  that  he  had 
allured  unto  him  two  fereral  Perfons  in  the  Spanifli  Court, 
who  had  promised  to  give  him  Intelligence  of  matters 
for  the  Reward  of  200  Crowns  apiece. 

20.  To  the  fame.  54.  b. 

Giving  an  Account  of  the  tottering  condition  of  the 
Spaniih  Monarchy.  That  many  Penfions  were  given  to 
Englifh,  Scots,  6c  Irifh,  who  yet  would  willingly  get 
into  their  own  Countreys,  if  they  could.  That  a  Spaniih 
Lady  had  undertaken  a  journey  to  England,  in  order  to 
convert  the  Queen.  That  if  the  King  of  Spain  could  be 
at  Peace  with  the  Hollanders,  he  would  turn  his  whole 
force  againft  the  Moors  of  Africa.  That  himfelf  had  an 
Humour  fallen  into  his  Feet  ;  and  lived  at  exceflive 
Charges. 

ai.  To  theEarleofNorthampton,  27  Julij,  1605.  58. b. 

Referring  to  other  Letters;  in  the  Merchants 
Caufes,  complainetb  at  large  of  the  Intricacy  and  Delayes 
ufed  in  the  Spaniih  Court ;  and  returneth  his  Thanks 
for  Favors  received. 

22.  To  the  Earle  ofSalilbury,  from  Villadolid,  28 

July  1605^  16. 

Relating  feveral  Proje&s  of  the  Spaniards,  in  Or¬ 
der  to  a  clofer  Amity  with  England  ;  as  calling  a  Gene¬ 
ral  Council,  for  fettling  all  difputable  points  in  Religion  ; 
marrying  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  their  Infanta,  who 
might  have  part  of  the  Low  Countries  to  Her  Portion  ; 
giving  to  the  King  a  Yearly  Penlion  of  fome  Millions  of 
Ducats,  and  fecurity  for  it,  &c.  He  alfo  expatiates  upon 
the  Difcommodities  which  may  accrue  unto  England  by 
a  long  Peace  ;  as  the  Deftruction  of  the  Navy  Royall, 
Lofs  of  Mailers,  Pilots,  Mariners,  &c. 

23.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Council,  from  Villadolid, 

28  July  1605.  65.  b. 

Relating  his  Anfwer  upon  the  Expoflulation  made 
unto  him  by  the  Kings  Order,  that  he  had  Englilh  Pray¬ 
ers  read  in  hisHoufe,  and  the  Calvinian  Religion  openly 
preached  there,  to  the  Scandal  of  good  Catholics,  & 
the  endangering  the  Kings  fubje&s  :  as  had  been  vehe¬ 
mently  fett  forth  by  a  Dominican  in  his  Sermon  :  with 
other  Mercantile  affairs. 

24.  To  Sir  Thomas  Parey  His  Majefties  Ambaffador 
Refident  in  Fraunce  :  from  Villadolid,  5  Augufl  1605. 

71. 

Concerning  the  projefted  match  of  the  Dauphin 
with  the  Infanta. 

25.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Councell :  from  Villadolid, 

7  Augufl  1605.  _  .  7  2. 

That  the  King  of  Spain  intended  to  move  the  King 
of  Denmark  to  forbid  all  Commerce  with  the  Hollanders  ; 

&  to  recompence  him  the  Lofs  to  be  fuflained  in  his 
Cufloms  thereby.  That  the  French  were  endeavoring 
to  have  a  Cardinals  Hat  &  divers  Epifcopal  Miters  be¬ 
llowed  upon  Englifhmen  ;  which  was  oppofed  by  the 
Englifh  Jefuits,  who  defired  rather  to  pleafe  &  not  to 
offend  his  Majeflie.  That  there  was  a  Report  as  if  the 
younger  Son  of  the  Earl  of  Tyrone  (then  in  Spain)  bare 
a  malignant  Humour  to  our  Nation.  He  complaineth 
much  of  the  extreme  delays  &  protraflion  of  Time  ufed 
by  the  Spaniards,  and  of  the  Dearth  of  Corn  at 
Villadolid  through  the  idlenefs  and  carelefnefs  of  the 
Government :  and  that  the  Jefuits  keep  a  ftritt  but  fecret 
Correfpondence  with  the  Catholics  in  England. 

26.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Councell  from  Villadolid 

18  Augull  1605.  76.  b.’ 

That  the  Earl  Bothwell  &  others  were  endeavoring 
to  difturb  Scotland  ;  but  that  their  Offers  were  reje&ed 
by  the  Spaniards.  That  the  faid  Earl  is  like  to  be  clap¬ 
ped  up  in  the  Inquifition,  having  lately  brought  his  Con¬ 
cubine  to  the  Church  &  there  took  the  Sacrament  with 
her,  which  Aft  was  deemed  to  proceed  from  Irreligion 
or  at  lead  from  Irreverence  ;  that  by  dealing  in  Allro- 
logical  matters,  he  had  incurred  the  Sufpicion  of  a 
Sorcerer. 


Num.  1875. 

27.  To  the  Earl  of  Salilbury,  from  Villadolid,  iS 
Auguft-  .  '  78.  b. 

Concerning  the  Ill  will  of  fome  Scotts ;  that  the 
Condede  Villa-Moriana  had  created  fome  diftafle  againfl 
himfelf,  as  not  appearing  to  be  fo  able  a  Polititian  as  he 
was  thought  to  be.  That  fome  in  his  Houfthoid  leemed 
fomewhat  inclined  to  Popery,  being  induced  thereunto 
by  the  Pomp  of  their  Ceremonies.  Among  others,  he  is 
in  much  fear  of  h:s  own  Chaplain,  Mr.  Wadfworth  a 
Bachelor  in  Divinity  of  the  Univerlity  of  Cambridge, 
&  a  learned  man  ;  whom  therefore  he  meaneth  to  fend 
into  England,  where  he  may  be  well  looked  after.  That 
his  family  is  very  fickly  ;  and  among  the  reft,  four  have 
the  Difeafe  called  Taberdilio. 

To  the  fame,  from  Villadolid,  20  Augufl  1605. 

.  ■  82. 

Adverting  him  of  the  Arguments  he  ufed  with  the 
Spaniards,  in  Order  to  induce  them  to  redrefs  the 
many  Grievances  complained  of  by  our  Merchants. 
That  this  might  be  furthered,  if  the  Lords  of  the  Council 
would  write  a  Letter  to  him,  reprehending  him  as  if  he 
had  been  negligent  in  that  affair,  &c. 

29.  To  the  Earle  of  Suffolke (Thomas  Howard)  Lord 

Chambcrlaine  to  His  Majeflie.  8 

A  Letter  of  Compliment  &  Thanks. 

30.  To  the  Earle  of  Salilbury,  from  Villadolid  24 

Augufl  1605.  85.  b. 

Complaining  of  Sir  Thomas  Southwells  Ingratitude 
to  him.  That  the  Spaniards  ftill  continue  jealous  of 
his  Lordfhip,  as  it  he  was  not  well  affefted  to  them. 
That  the  French  labor  much  to  procure  a  ftridler  Amity 
with  the  Spaniard.  That  Carre,  brother  to  the  Lord  of 
Newbotle,  is  fending  an  evil  Inftrument  into  Scotland, 
whom  he  will  endeavour  to  intercept. 

31.  The  Contents  of  a  Lettre  written  to  the  Earle 

of  Notingham  Lord  High  Admiral  of  England,  from 
Villadolid  2  September  1605.  88.  b. 

Concerning  fome  reflecting  Speeches  which  the 
Earl  had  ufed  concerning  him  ;  whereupon  Sir  Charles 
wrote,  That  his  Lord/hip  having,  by  favour  of  the 
Prince  he  ferved,  atteyned  Tytles  of' Honor,  would 
have  in  Memorie  that  he  was  borne  onely  Mr.  Charles 
Howard,  and  that  He  was  berne  Charles  Cornwallves. 
That  his  Lordfhip  was  extract  of  the  mod  Nobie  Houfe 
of  Norfolke  ;  and  that  it  might  be.  He  could  prove  him¬ 
felf  was  defeended  from  the  beft  Houles  of  England. 
That  whereas  his  Lordfhip  had  proffered  unto  him  his 
Honorable  Love  &  Favour,  lie  accepted  of  the  fame. 
And  whereas  His  Lordfhip  had  faid  that  if  His  Majeflie 
would  not  lend  unto  him  the  5000I.  he  defired  that 
himfelf  wmuld :  Sir  Charles  is  willing  to  borrow  5 ool. 
and  give  him  Security  for  it. 

32.  To  the  Earle  of  Salilbury.  90.  b. 

Concerning  the  Bearer  (w'hom  I  fuppofe  to  be  his  Ion) 

to  whom  he  gave  200  Pounds  per  ann.  upon  his  Manage, 
and  within  two  Years  after  did  pay  all  his  Debts  ;  who’ 
having  fpent  &  fold  all.  Sir  Charles  upon  his  Lord- 
fhips  Recommendation,  doth  now  give  him  2co  Pounds 
per  ann.  more,  and  a  good  Character. 

33.  To  the  fame,  from  Villadolid,  4  September  1605. 

Complaining  of  the  unwholefome  Air,  which  hath 
brought  the  Countrey-Diftemper  upon  him.  Thanks 
his  Lordfhip  for  procuring  an  Increafe  of  his  Allowance. 
Shewing  that  the  Spaniards  give  good  Words,  but  abufe 
our  Merchants  by  their  Delaies  6c  other  Injuries,  to  the 
Difhonor  of  our  King.  '1  hat  the  Conde  de  Villa  Longa 
fpake  largely  of  the  Defil  e  had  there  of  a  Marriage  be- 
tweene  the  Prince  of  Walts  &  the  Infanta  ;  and  wilhed 
him  neither  to  truft  the  French,  nor  Venetian  A mbaf- 
fadors  ;  which  Counfel  Sir  Charles  imputeth  to  the 
Spaniih  Jealoufie. 

34.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Counfell,  frem  Villadolid, 

6  September  1605.  98.  b. 

Sending 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


2  75 


Num.  1875. 

Sending  the  Anfwer  of  the  K.  of  Spains  Council  to 
his  Two  Memorials  in  behalf  of  the  Engliih  Merchants, 
whofe  Bufinefs  he  begins  to  hope  he  may  at  length  draw 
into  fome  Conclufion,  although  not  fuitable  to  the  Juftice 
of  their  Caufe.  All  this  he  imputeth  to  the  villany  of  the 
Spanifh  Officers,  which  is  fo  exorbitant,  that  our  Merch¬ 
ants  had  better  bear  with  the  lofs  of  their  Goods  at  the 
fii  ft,  if  not  too  great,  than  to  lofe  more  time  Sc  money, 
with  the  hazard  of  their  Healths  Sc  Lives  in  Peeking  for 
Redrefs.  He  here  giveth  two  Inftances  of  the  Spanifh 
Injuftice,  one  is,  briefly,  A  Scots  Ship  and  Cargo  was 
feized  &  confifcated  divers  years  fince,  as  belonging 
to  the  Engliih  ;  1  efkimonies  were  produced  from  the 
Kings  Council  in  Scotland,  as  alfo  from  His  Majefty 
himfelf  under  his  Seal,  that  no  part  thereof  did  belong  to 
any  Englilhmen,  which  Royal  Teftimony,  by  the  Laws 
of  Spain,  ought  to  be  received  without  exception.  The 
Spaniards,  to  evade  the  fame,  alledged  that  the  King  not 
being  under  the  Obedience  of  the  Pope,  nor  in  the  Union 
of  the  Catholick  Church,  no  Credit  could  be  given  to 
his  Teftimony.  However,  the  Advocate  for  the  Scotf- 
man  urged,  that  this  Exception  was  invalid,  fince  there 
was  no  Excommunication  or  other  Public  Denunciation 
againft  the  King.  He  could  do  no  good.  That  the  Spa¬ 
niards  being  advertized  from  England  that  fome  diflike 
had  arilen  between  the  King  Sc  the  Parliament,  and  that 
His  Treafury  was  exhaufted ;  began  to  fett  lefs  Value 
upon  the  Peace  than  before  ;  but  upon  his  Anfwers  were 
brought  into  better  Order. 

35.  Tranflarion  of  the  Memorial  which  Sir  Charles 

Cornwallis  lent  unto  the  King  of  Spain  by  Mr.  Oufley 
his  Secretarie  for  the  Spanifh  Tongue,  at  Burgos,  in 
behalf  of  the  Engliih  Merchaunts  Tradeinge  into  Spain ; 
with  the  anfwer  of  that  Kings  Councill  apoftilled,  14 
September  1605.  104.  b. 

36.  1  he  Contents  of  a  Letter  to  the  Earle  of  Salifbury, 

from  Villadolid,  8  September  1 605.  1 1 0. 

That  upon  Advertizement  out  of  England  that  his 
I.ordfhip  is  a  great  Enemie  to  Spaine,  fome  of  the  Spanilh 
Counfel  wifhed  there  fhould  be  a  prefent  Denuntiation  of 
his  malignant  Humour  to  the  King  ;  and  if  therewith  not 
amended,  that  then  a  fhorter  Courfe  be  taken  with 
him.  That  the  Duke  of  Lerma  Sc  Conde  de  Villa-Lon- 
ga  mifliked  thofe  Motions,  and  would  by  no  means 
there  fliould  be  any  violent  Courfe  ufed.  That  Mr. 
Carre’s  fending  his  Man  now  into  Scotland,  is  with  no 
good  Intent.  That  Secretary  Prada  hath  promifed  him 
quicker  Difpatch  for  the  future.  He,  however,  advifeth 
that  by  fome  general  Mufters,  in  themfelves  by  reafon  of 
their  long  omiffion,  not  unneceflary  ;  by  preparation  of 
Ships,  or  fome  other  way,  the  Spaniards  may  be  brought 
to  mufe,  though  not  to  miftruft.  That  he  found  good 
ufe  of  Crefwell,  Superior  of  the  Englifh  Jefuits  there,  who 
although  he  be  defirous  to  propagate  his  Religion,  re¬ 
tained!  neverthelefs  a  faithful  &  loving  Difpofition  to 
our  King  and  Countrey  :  That  his  Family  holdeth  firm 
to  their  Religion,  except  his  Chaplain,  of  whom  how¬ 
ever  he  hopeth  the  belt,  fince  he  hath  fent  no  Meflage  to 
the  Iloufe  of  late.  That  Henry  O  Neal  fonne  to  the 
Earle  of  Tyrone  is  defigned  for  a  Colonell  to  a  Regiment 
of  Iriih  in  the  Low-Countreys,  which  he  mifliketh,  al¬ 
though  the  fame  O  Neal  hath  given  proofs  of  his  good 
affection  to  our  Nation. 

37.  To  the  Earle  of  Southampton  (Henry  Wriothefley) 

from  Villadolid.  1 ,4. 

Recommending  his  Son  unto  him,  in  the  firft  place; 
Sc  then,  (hewing  how  they  both  might  get  Money  by 
tranfporting  Corn  from  England  to  Spain,  where  it  was 
much  wanted. 

38.  To  Sir  George  Bucke  Knt.  from  Villadolid.  H5.b. 

Hinting  as  if  the  King  of  Spains  not  giving  him  a 

Medal,  was  occafioned  by  the  Earl  of  Notingham,  againft 
whom  Sir  Charles  was  fomewhat  piqued ;  although  he 
takes  great  Comfort  that  he  hath  ever  avoided,  as  to  all 


Num.  1875. 

men,  revenging  Refolutions.  That  fince  the  Earls 
Departure  from  Spaine,  God  A-  Tyme  hath  made  Paulcs 
Steeple  known  to  be  but  a  Steeple  ;  and  poore  White- 
Chapel  a  Church  ;  which  though  low  Sc  little,  is  yet  in 
its  Meafure,  not  unfitt  for  the  Ufe  it  is  putt  unto.  He 
heareth  not  of  any  Book  written  of  the  Entertaynement 
of  my  Lord  Admirall  (i.  e.  the  Earl  of  Notingham)  He 
came  (fays  Sir  Charles)  He  was  here  ;  He  is  gone  ;  Sc  fo 
is  his  Memory,  fave  onely  in  the  Shoppes  of  this  Cittie, 
where  the  Spanifh  Gallants,  wiil  continue  it  yet  for  a  Year 
or  two. 

39.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Councell ;  from  Villadolid. 

That  the  King  of  Spain  hath  had  the  Flux,  but  is 

well  ;  that  the  Queen  hath  laboured  of  the  dangerous 
Difeafe  of  the  Taberdillfo  (which  I  take  to  be  the  fame 
with  Purples,  or  rather  Plague-fpots)  and  remains  yet  in 
Gods  balance  ;  alfo,  that  there  have  beenfolem  u  Procef- 
fion  Sc  Prayers  for  her  ;  Sir  Charles  Sc  his  Family  pray¬ 
ing  at  the  fame  time  for  her  in  his  Iloufe.  '1  hat  the  Indian 
Fleet  came  not  well  back,  and,  as  it  was  laid,  brought 
but  half  a  Million  ofTreafure.  '1  hat  36  Ships  are  going 
from  I.ilbon  to.  Holland.  That  it  was  reported,  as  if 
the  King  of  Spain  was  about  to  raifa  the  Value  of  his 
Coin,  whereby  he  would  gain  1 5  Millions.  Defireth 
further  Directions  how  to  proceed  in  the  Merchants  Af¬ 
fairs  ;  and  advertizeth  his  proceedings  with  relation  to 
the  Conteftable  Articles  of  the  Treaty,  which  he  is  afraid 
he  fhall  not  be  able  to  go  through  without  Bribes  ;  for 
money  was  grown  fo  fcarce  at  Court,  as  it  was  faid,  that  at 
the  Kings  laft  Remove,  they  had  much  adoe  to  defray 
the  Ordinarie  Charge  of  his  Journey. 

40.  To  the  Earl  of  Salifbury,  from  Villadolid,  1 5  Sep¬ 
tember  1605.  t2t.b. 

That  advertifement  had  come  hither  from  England, 
that  a  revolted  Popifh  Prieft  had  a  Warrant  for  faying 
Prayers  according  to  the  Popifh  way  (if  I  underftand  the 
Expreflions  aright)  from  the  Archbifhop  of  Canterbury 
Sc  his  Lordfhip.  That  there  had  been  a  working  to  remove 
the  Englifh  Jefuits  from  thence  to  Salamanca ;  &  that 
Parfons  the  Jefuit  had  a  mind  to  come  from  Rome  thither, 
&  fend  Crefwell  to  Rome  in  his  (tend  ;  which  Exchange 
Sir  Charles  liked  not:  That  at  Villadolid  there  is  a  Conn- 
trey-man  of  his,  one  Walpole  a  Jefuit,  a  hot-headed  Fel- 
lowe,  &  as  full  of  Pradtize  as  he  is  of  Learning  :  that  he 
had  laid  fome  Baites  for  him,  to  drawe  his  Tongue  to 
witnefle  the  Malice  of  his  Hearte  ;  wherein  if  he  could 
prevaile,  he  doubted  not  to  obtain  his  Removal  from 
thence.  That  his  Chaplain  had  revolted  ;  and  as  it  was 
fecretly  faid,  was  to  go  to  Rome,  and  that  the  King 
had  given  him  a  Penfion  of  40  Duckets  the  Month.  He 
defireth  that  his  poor  Son  may  be  no  Step-child  to  the 
Kings  Grace  &  Bounty,  fince  a  Matter  of  no  great  Value 
would  cleare  the  Eftate  to  Him. 

41.  To  the  fame,  from  Villadolid.  124.  b. 

Gives  his  Lordfhip  the  certain  Number  of  Ships  & 

Gallies,  which  went  from  Liibon,  under  Command  of 
Don  Lewes  de  Flixado.  That  the  Spaniards  were  again 
grown  ftiffe,  as  to  the  Difpatch  of  our  Merchants  Suits, 
upon  a  falfe  Report  as  if  Juftice  had  been  denied  to  them 
here.  But  upon  advertifement  that  our  King  had  lately 
caufed  3  or  4  principal  Pyrats  to  be  executed,  their 
Minds  are  made  fomewhat  more  benevolent,  &  they 
promife  fpeedy  Difpatch. 

42.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Councell,  from  Valiodalid. 

126. 

Advertifeth  the  Imprifonment  of  fome  Engliflimen 
at  St.  Jehan  de  Luz,  upon  a  falfe  Accufation,  as  if  they 
had  defign  to  take  the  Town  of  Bayonne.  And  that  many 
lying  Rumours  having  been  fpread  as  if  the  Kings  of 
Great-Britain  Sc  Spain  had  a  Defign  to  attack  France,  he 
had  a  Conference  with  the  French  Ambaflador  thereupon, 
who  had  promifed  Satisfadfion  fliould  be  made  to  the 
King. 

43.  A  Letre  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma  ;  mentioned  in 

another 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  1875. 

another  to  the  Lords  of  the  Councell,  bearing  date  the 
15  th  of  September;  a  Copie  thereof  being  lent  unto  them. 

128. 

Complaining  of  the  grievous  delays  of  the  Spanilh 
Courts,  in  redrelUng  the  Wrongs  committed  by  the  Spa¬ 
niards,  Sicilians,  &  Portugefe  upon  the  Englilh  ;  and 
tacitly  threatening  a  Rupture  between  the  two  Crowns  if 
Satisfaction  were  not  foon  made  for  what  was  pad,  and 
a  Stop  put  to  fitch  Proceedings  for  the  future. 

Here  followeth  the  Coppies  of  fuch  Letres  as  were 
written  to  Sir  Charles  Cornwallyes  Knight,  his 
Majefties  Ambaffadour-Leiger  with  the  King  of 
Spaine  during  the  tyme  of  his  Ambaffage  ;  both 
from  England,  and  alfoe  from  His  Majellies  Ara- 
balfadours,  vizt.  of  France,  Venice,  &  Flaunders. 

44.  From  the  Lords  of  the  Councell,  31  May  1605. 

Requiring  him  to  follicit  the  Caufes  of  the  Mer¬ 
chants  who  had  fullered  by  the  Spaniards  ;  particularly 
that  of  JohnEliIred,  &c.  who  had  laded  the  Ship  Tryal 
with  Merchandize  to  the  value  of  40C00  Duckets.  This 
rich  Ship  was  taken  by  the  Vice- Roy  of  Sicilie’s  Ships 
or  Gallies,  upon  pretence  that  it  was  a  Man  of  War, 
which  had  taken  the  Goods  by  Pyracy.  They  tortured 
therefore  the  Merchant,  Mafter,  &  Purfer,  to  make  them 
confefs  this  pretended  Piracy,  fo  that  they  all  died  in 
Prifon  :  and  the  meaner  fellows,  in  order  to  efcape  the 
like  inhuman  Treatment,  had  confelfed  what  they  knew 
to  befalfe. 

45.  From  Henry  Howard  Earl  of  Northampton  & 

I.ord  Warden  of  the  Cinque  Purts.  1 36. 

Recommending  the  Caufe  of  the  Sicilian  Merchants 
abovementioned  ;  and  exhorting  him  to  tranfaft  the 
Affairs  entruffed  to  him,  with  Diligence  &  D  xterity. 

46.  From  the  Earl  of  Salilbury,  Principal  Secretary  of 

State,  20  June  1605.  138. 

Concerning  the  Hollanders  attacking  the  Spaniards 
within  the  Limits  of  the  Ports  of  Dover,  where  they  were 
defended  by  our  Cannon.  With  InftruCtious  how  to 
anfwcr  to  all  Demands  of  the  Spaniards  arifing  from  that 
Accident ;  which  feented  to  have  been  (as  to  their  coining 
into  our  Harbour)  projected  by  themfelvcs ;  who  now 
alfo  defired  Our  King  to  fett  their  Souldiers  fafely  on 
l’hoar  in  Flanders,  out  of  danger  from  the  Hollanders,  &c. 

47.  From  Sir  Thomas  Parry,  his  Majefties  Ambaffa- 
dour  in  France, 

48.  From  the  Lord  Thomas  Howard  of  Effingham. 

146. 

49.  From  Thomas  Howard  Earle  of  Suffolk,  Lord 


Chamberleine. 


147. 


This  is  a  very  kind  Letter,  and  flieweth  the  Heart 
of  a  truly  noble  Perfon. 

50.  From  Charles  Howard  Earle  of  Nottingham,  Lord 
High-Admiral  of  England. 

Recommending  the  Caufe  of  one  George  Strawyn 
a  Scots-man,  whofe  Ship  and  Lading  to  the  burthen  of 
140  Tons  in  the  late  War  was  feized  by  the  Spaniards, 
&  divers  of  the  Men  cruelly  burned  by  the  Inquifition. 
The  lofs  of  the  Goods  amounted  to  40000  Ducats. 

51.  From  Sir  Thomas  Parrey,  his  Majefties  Ambaffa- 


dorin  France. 


148.  b. 


Recommending  the  Suit  of  Mr.  Kadilhe  unto  him. 

52.  From  the  Earle  of  Salifbury. 

Concerning  Sir  Charle’s  domeftic  Affairs,  and  de¬ 
firing  him  to  add  to  the  Provifton  he  had  already  made 
for  his  fon  William.  That  the  Spaniards  here  had  fo 
far  infilled  upon  Our  Kings  tranfporting  their  Souldiers 
from  Dover  to  Flanders,  as  that  he  had  lent  to  defire  the 
Dutch  to  give  their  Confent  unto  it. 

53.  From  Sir  Thomas  Edmunds,  His  Majefties  Am- 

baffador  refident  with  the  Arch-Duke.  153.  b. 

That  the  Dutch  would  not  confent  to  our  Kings 
tranfportationofthe  Spanilh  Souldiers  remaining  atDover 
to  Flanders.  That  the  Lord  Arundel  of  Wardour  was 


Num.  1875. 

expected  to  be  Colonel  of  the  Englilh  Regiment  in  the 
Service  of  the  Arch-Duke,  which  was  already  encreafed 
to  1500  men.  That  the  Lord  Humes  Scotch  Regiment 
was  not  yet  come.  And  that  the  Marquis  of  Spinole  went 
onprofperoufly  againftthe  Hollanders. 

54.  From  the  Earle  ot  Northampton.  156.  b. 

A  long  Letter  ;  reflecting  on  the  Pride,  Ambition, 
Sc  Deceitfulnefs  of  the  Earl  of  Notingham  Lord  High 
Admiral,  his  kinfman,  &  the  Conteft  between  him  & 
Sir  Charles,  whom  he  had  not  been  able  to  hurt.  That 
at  a  proper  time  He  would  Hand  Sir  Charles’s  friend,  in 
the  matter  of  augmenting  his  Allowance.  He  advifeth 
Sir  Charles  to  cultivate  the  Amity  fo  newly  eftabliflied 
between  the  two  Crowns  ;  and  tacitly  blameth  Sir  Francis 
Walfingham,  who  by  inflamingMatters,  partly  occafioned 
thatWarre,  which  was  then  thcQuinteflenceof  hisDelight, 
and  is  now  the  Torment  of  his  Tranfgreffion.  On  this 
occafion,  the  fame  Noble  Earl  proceedeth  in  a  manner 
not  unfuitable  to.  thefe  Times.  Amongft  other  Toyes 
(faith  He)  we  looke  for  fome  Straines  in  the  Parliament 
for  the  renewing  of  a  Warre ;  and  the  more  violent  in 
refpeCt  of  the  late  Reports  of  Scarcity,  of  Penurie,  & 
Weaknes  in  thofe  parts.  For  though  it  be  true  that  by 
Warre  we  were  as  poore  as  they  ;  that  the  Realme  would 
give  no  more  ;  the  Revenue  could  afford  noe.more  ;  and 
that  the  Oueene  fold  her  Land  by  Lumpes :  yet  all  are 
now  perfwaded  that,  without  a  Peace,  the  King  of  Spaine 
would  have  religned  upp  unto  the  Kings  Elands  his 
whole  Dominion.  Such  is  our  aptnefs  to  be  puffed  upp 
with  Toyes,  and  thinke  all  loft  that  is  not  undertaken 
outofHumouf  without  ground,  according  to  the  Propor¬ 
tions  that  are  likewife  holden  in  graviffimis  by  fundrey 
Perfons  in  this  State,  whofe  Judgments  are  diftraCted, 
and  their  Heads  diftempered.  He  advertizeth  alfo  Sir 
Charles,  that  his  unkind  brother  Southwell  had  made 
many  attempts  to  work  him  prejudice ;  both  with  the 
King  Sc  others :  but  that  the  Earl  of  Salifbury,  himfelf, 
&c.  had  baffled  A  difappointed  the  fame  ;  but  that  how¬ 
ever,  he  would  advile  him  to  fettle  his  Eftate,  &  make 
fome  good  Allowance  to  his  Son,  whereupon  he  might 
fubftft,  untill  the  Kings  favor  fhould  be  extended  to  him. 

55.  From  Sir  Henry  Wotton,  his  Majefties  Am- 

baffadour  refident  with  the  States  of  Venice.  (October 
A.  D.  1605.)  _  168. 

Defiling  to  keep  a  continued  &  regular  Correfpon- 
dence  with  him,  as  well  in  order  to  promote  the  In- 
tereft  of  the  King  their  Mafter,  as  to  improve  their  former 
Acquaintance.  For  which  end  he  would  (in  his  next) 
fend  Sir  Charles  a  Cyfer  with  fome  Abbreviations. 

56.  Sir  Charles’s  Anfwer  to  the  foregoing  Letter,  in 
very  civil  6c  frendly  Terms.  Advertifing  him  moreover 
of  the  departure  of  the  Spanilh  Ficet.  That  it  was 
thought  that  the  Conftable  fhould  prefently  be  fent  into 
Germany,  to  negociate  an  Election  of  the  King  of  the 
Romans  ;  and  that  the  Duke  of  Seffa  fhould  goe  for  an 
Ambaffador  Refident  in  Rome.  He  fendeth  Sir  Henry 
therewith  a  Difcouife  of  that  Dukes  concerning  the  late 
ftirring  of  Humours  in  Italy  by  the  Counte  of  Fuentes  ; 
and  writeth  kindly  of  Mr.  Wotton,  Nephew  to  Sir  Henry, 
who  was  then  with  him  in  Spain. 

57.  A  Difcourfe  upon  the  Citation,  by  Order  from 
the  Governor  ofMillan,  the  firft  of  July  1605.  171.  b. 

This  feemeth  to  be  the  Difcouife  mentioned  in  the 
laft  Letter  ;  and  ftriketh  againft  the  Judgment  of  thofe 
who  were  for  the  King  of  Spains  reviving  his  Pretenfions 
to  many  Places  or  Fiefs  in  Italy,  and  among  the  Grifons, 
&c. 

58.  A  Letter  from  the  Earle  of  Salifbury  to  Sir  Charles, 

12  Sept.  1605.  176. 

Advertifing,  that  the  King  was  returned  fa fe  from 
his  Progrefs,  and  about  a  Month  after  the  Terme,  would 
hold  a  Parliament,  in  which  Seffion,  hisLordfhip  hoped, 
thofe  things  would  be  concluded,  which  might  bee  an 
Occafion  to  deferre  anie  of  thofe  Affemblies,  for  fome 
1 1  good 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


277 


Num.  187^. 

pood  Space  ;  the  two  principal  PropofitionS  to  be  de¬ 
bated  therein,  being  matter  of  the  Unyon  &  Subfidie. 
That  although  Spinola  had  gotten  Reputation  in  the 
Netherlands  ;  yet  there  was  likely  to  be  lefs  alteration 
there,  than  either  of  the  contending  parties  had  promifed 
to  themfelves.  That  the  Scots  had  fpurned  againft  his 
Majefties  defign  of  adorning  that  Kingdom  with  Bifliops  ; 

&  had  in  fome  Paris  of  that  Realme  prefumed  to  hold 
their  General  Affenibbes  contrarie  to  his  Commandment. 
That  thereupon,  divers  Lords  had  been  cyted  before 
the  Council,  cenfured,  &  fent  to  Prifon.  He  anfwereth 
to  divers  of  the  Advertifements  fent  formerly  unto  him 
by  Sir  Charles;  and  (amongft  others)  to  that  about  his 
Chaplains  turning  Papift  ■,  that  a  Prieft  belonging  to  the 
Count  de  Villa-Mediana  here,  is  now  become  converted, 

&  defyeth  all  Romane  Corruption.  That  his  Majeltie 
had  approved  his  anl'wer  to  Don  Blafco,  and  had  willed 
him  to  tell  him,  that  when  it  {hall  not  be  as  free  for 
him  (Sir  Charles)  ufing  it  has  he  had  done,  to  te- 
ceive  the  Comfortable  Foode  &  Exerche  of  Prayer  Sc 
Preachinge  in  his  Familie,  as  it  is  for  the  Spanifli  Ambaf- 
fadour  on  this  fide,  He  is  refolved,  without  Difpute  or 
Delay,  to  revoke  him  home.  That  the  Dutch  had  refo- 
lutely  denied  their  Confent  to  the  quiet  Pallage  ot  the 
Spanifh  Souldiers  in  Dover,  to  Flanders,  and  therefore  he 
dire&eth  him  how  to  anfwer  tliofe  in  Spain  who  fhould 
believe  that  Our  King  ought  to  have  exerted  himftlf  fur¬ 
ther,  with  re!pett  to  the  Hollanders,  on  that  occafion. 
And  that  the  Lord  Arundel  of  Wardour,  who  had  dif¬ 
obeyed  his  Majefties  Command  by  going  into  Flanders 
in  a  manner  contrary  to  his  Pleafure,  of  which  his  Lord- 
{hip  had  been  apprifed  ;  was  commanded,  after  the  Cam¬ 
paign  fhould  be  over,  &  the  repartition  of  his  Regiment 
fettled,  to  render  his  perfon  before  the  Council,  and  foe 
to  abide  his  Majeflies  farther  Cenfure. 

59.  The  Kings  Letre  or  Difcourie  concerning  the  un¬ 

lawful  Affembly  or  Cour.ccll  lately  held  by  the  Minillers 
of  Scotia  d;  fent  into  Spaine  to  my  Lord  AmbafTadour 
Cornwallyes,  by  the  Earle  of  Salifbury,  with  the  Former 
Letre  A.  D  1605.  8  .  b. 

60.  A  Propofition  made  by  Mr.  W  r.wood  from  his 

Majeftie  unto  the  States  of  th.  D  we-Counueys  touching 
the  Tranfportaticn  of  the  Spaniards  that  arrived  for  Suc¬ 
cour  at  Dov  r,  into  Flanders  ;  and  the  aunfwere  made 
from  the  otates  untu  His  Majeltie.  19-  b. 

Thtfe  Pieces  are  bah  in  French ;  and  .he  laft  beareth 
date,  2  Augult  1605. 

61.  A  Letter  from  Sir  Thomas  Edmondes  lbs  M.ijef- 
ties  Ambalfadour- Refident  wiih  the  Arch-Duke  in  Han¬ 
ders,  to  Sir  Charles  Cornwallyes  20  cptembei  16  7. 

19  !  b. 

Of  the  Ill  Succefs  attending  the  Enterprile  of  a 
French  Officer  named  Monfieur  de  Terraile,  who  would 
needs  attempt  the  taking  of  Berghen  op  Zoom  by  Sur¬ 
prize.  That  the  Count  de  Villa-Mediani  was  arrived, 
very  well  fatisfied  with  his  Reception  at  the  Court  of 
England  ;  and  that  the  Spaniards  at  Dover  were  refolved 
to  Heal  into  Flanders  by  Night,  in  hope  ofpaffing  thither 
undilcovered  by  the  Dutch.  Finally,  that  the  Piinces 
were  newly  returned  from  the  Pilgrimage  they  had  de¬ 
voutly  made  to  the  Lady  of  Sichem  (who  had  great  Re¬ 
putation  there)  in  hopes  of  obteyning  of  Iffue  by  her 
means. 

62.  Sir  Charles  Cornwallyes,  to  the  Earl  of  Salifbury 

Principall  Secretary  to  his  Majefty,  from  Valiodalid, 
18  Ottober  1605.  200.  b. 

Advertifing,  that  Sir  Anthony  Shirely  &  Sir  Edward 
Riche  (who  had  ffiaped  their  Religion  to  the  Spanifli 
State,  &  to  each  of  whom  the  K.  of  Spain  givetli  200 
Crowns  a  Month)  being  attended  with  1  en  Servants  had 
hired  a  Ship  at  Cales,  to  pafs  over  into  Barbary.  That 
17  young  men  were  lately  received  into  the  College  of 
the  Englifli  Jefuits  at  Sevil.  That  the  Spanifli  Councils 
were  very  intent  upon  fome  great  matter,  and  were  extra- 

CAT.  Harl.  Vol-  II. 


Num.  1875. 

ordinarily  affembled.  That  they  were  grown  mighty  up 
pilhwith  refpedt  to  England,  (from  whence  they  had  too 
many  advertifements  j  and  were  refolved  to  amufe  him 
with  Hopes  of  Difpatch,  &  yet  to  do  little  or  nothing  in 
his  Bufmefs.  He  wiflieth  therefore,  that  the  Parliament 
would  make  fome  Motions,  backed  by  found  Reafons, 
for  breaking  the  Peace,  and  fupporting  the  King  in  a  new 
War  with  them ;  which  would  furely  bring  them  back 
to  a  better  1  emper. 

63.  Another,  to  the  fame  :  from  Valiodalid.  202.  b. 

Advertifing,  that  the  Spanifli  Ambaflador  in  England 

being  judged  unapt  for  his  Employ,  it  was  propofed  to  fend 
him  an  Affiflanr,  whom  fome  thought  would  be  a  Scot. 
He  enlargeih  much  upon  the  Pride,  Lazinefs,  &  dilatory 
Humour  of  the  Spaniards,  which  had  hitherto  held  them 
from  doing  any  thing  in  the  Caufes  of  the  Englifli  Mer¬ 
chants,  who  were  aimoft  ruined  by  the  delay.  That 
therefore  he  thinketh  a  fliort  C.ourfe  with  them  would 
have  the  bed  effeft,  and  probably  awake  them  from  their 
Lethargy.  That  when  things  have  been  confulted  upon 
&  determined  in  the  Councils,  all  the  Papers  are  fent  to 
the  Duke  of  Lcrma  ;  and  if  there  be  a  Bird  to  be  (hot  in 
the  Woods,  an  Hare  in  the  Field,  or  Rabbit  in  the  Borow 
they  lie  dead,  though  they  concerne  the  Life  or  Soule  of 
the  Poore,  or  the  Greatelt  Good  whatfoever  of  the  Com¬ 
mon.  That  he  hopeth,  by  the  next,  to  give  his  Majefty 
a  good  foundation  of  the  Projects  mentioned  above  at 
§  22.  which  have  been  fince  confidered  by  the  Duke  of 
Lernia,  &c.  and  approved,  That  the  Lord  Wotton’s 
Son  was  dead,  &  honorably  buried  (Sir  Charles  laying 
down  the  Money,  fince  the  Young  Gentleman  had  been 
difappointed  of  his  fathers  Remittances^/  but  died  a  Papift 
being  feduced  by  Walpoole  the  Jefuit. 

64.  To  the  Earl  ofNorthampton,  from  Valladolid.  209. 

Complaining  of  the  different  Ufage  he  mceteth  with 

in  Spain,  from  that  given  to  the  Spanifli  Ambaflador  in 
England  ;  although  he  feeth  that  the  Spaniards  (notwiih- 
ftanding  the  Earl  of  Notinghom’s  browbeating  him  there) 
continued  to  fhew  him  a  much  better  countenance  than 
they  did  to  ethers  ;  and  had  promifed  to  compound  with 
the  greatdl  part  of  the  Petitioning  Englifli  Merchants. 
That  his  Majefties  Gracious  Ufage  of  the  Spanifli  Ambaf- 
fador  in  England,  only  encreafeth  their  Pride  &  Vanity, 
they  attributing  whatfoever  is  done  to  the  merit  of  their 
G -catties,  &  fear  of  their  Power,  their  Humor  being  to 
over- value  themfelves  &  to  abafe  others.  Thus  others 
can  peiforme  noe  more  than  what  is  due  to  foe  fuper- 
cminent  a  Monarchy  ;  and  what  they  did  to  the  Lord  Ad¬ 
miral,  was  (as  they  fay )  to  fhew  their  Greatnefs.  That, 
for  his  part,  he  is  very  plain  with  them,  and  is  the  better 
efteemed  for  it ;  the  general  Rule  for  managing  a  Spa¬ 
niard  being  to  leeme  to  make  fome  good  Efteeme  of  a 
Mans  felte,  &  but  little  of  them  farther  than  Offices  of 
Complement  &  Courtefie  do  require.  That  the  Spa¬ 
niards  generally  fay  thatthey  will  break  their  Stile  for  noe 
man.  This  Stile,  in  fliort,  is  to  doe  onely  what  is  plea- 
finge  to  themfelves,  and  that  alfoe  in  theire  owne  tymes 
&  feai'ons.  Hee  that  preffeth  them  on  too  faft,  makes 
them  refty  ;  he  that  follicits  them  not  at  all,  makes  him- 
i'elfe  forgotten.  The  beft  Courfe  therefore,  is  to  deale 
with  them  in  their  owne  fafhion  ;  and  if  their  Ambaflador 
was  not  treated  with  fo  much  Refpe£t  in  England,  and  it 
were  faid  that  it  was  done  fo,  in  Imitation  of  the  treatment 
he  had  in  Spain,  it  would  much  avail  the  fuffering  Mer¬ 
chants,  and  alfo  Himfelf  in  the  moll  important  Negotia¬ 
tions.  That  to  haften  their  dull  Spirits,  He  had  entered 
into  a  more  flreight  Friendfliip  &  Fatniliaritie  with  the 
French  and  Venetian  Ambaffadors,  of  both  whom  the 
Spaniards  are  exceeding  jealous ;  and  advifeth  that  his 
Majeftie  for  a  while  fliould  .  fliew  a  better  Countenance 
than  ordinary  to  the  French  Ambaflador  in  England, 
which  would  make  the  Device  worke  the  more  flrongly 
with  them.  That  as  to  the  Spanifli  Project  of  giving  our 
King  a  Penfion,  although  they  are  much  in  Love  with  it. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


178 


Num.  187?. 

yet  feek'ilg  to  have  their  Wills  &  Punctualities  obfervecb 
thev  would  have  it  nmved  by  him,  which  he  holdeffi 
not  fit,  unlefs  his  Majeflie  Ihould  fo  direct  him.  Finally 
he  is  of  Opinion,  that  fomewhat  faid  &  done  this  Par¬ 
liament  to  incite  the  King  againft  Spain,  and  made  known 
there,  would  much  further  him  in  his  Service. 

65.  To  the  Earle  ofSalilbury  ;  from  Valiodalid.  213. 

Shewing  that  he  is  continually  labouring  to  bring 
the  Spaniards  to  a  reverend  &  high  Regard  of  the  Kings 
Perfon,  Power,  &  Fortune  ;  which  can  no  fooner  be  ef¬ 
fected,  than  all  is  overthrown  by  the  Intelligencers 
from  England.  That  he  is  certeinely  informed  that 
there  are  of  them  very  neere  to  the  King  ;  and  fome  fuch 
as  daily  eate  of  his  Bread,  or  elfe  Ihould  oftentymes  goe 

hungr.e  to  Bed  :  and  that  one  of  them  is . 

That  thefe  Men  give  information  of  the  prefent  weak 
Stat-  of  our  Kingdom  ;  and  of  fome  things  concerning 
the  King  which  he  knoweth  to  be  falfe,  and  which,  if 
true,  very  ill  becoming  them  to  difcover.  He  com- 
plaine'h  of  he  great  nefs  of  his  Charges,  by  reafon  of  the 
ex  remitie  of  the  Dearth  ;  and  delireth  directions  how 
he  may  gratifie  thofe  who  inform  him  of  the  Spanilh 
Counlels. 

66.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Council.  2 1 5. 

Shewing  his  Indignation  at  the  Spaniards  extreme 

delay  in  doing  Juftice  to  the  Engl  fh  Me- chants;  p.nd 
defiring  that  the  King  would  1  tt  them  know  that  he 
Wanted  not  Power  to  fatisfic  himfelf  ii'  he  Ihould  not  be 
contented  for  the  palled  Injuries,  &  fecured  from  the 
like  in  time  to  come.  But  it  appeareth.  that  upon  cooler 
1  houghts,  Sir  Charles  did  not  think  fit  to  lend  it 

67.  To  Mr.  Thomas  Wilford,  Prefident  of  the  Spanilh 
Company  of  MerchauntsinLondon;  fromValiodali  I.  217. 

In  anfwer  to  a  Letter  from  the  Company  ;  wherein 
he  cleareth  himfelf  from  an  Imj  utation  laid  upon  him  ; 
and  blameth  their  Negligenee  in  their  own  Affaires. 

68.  To  the  Earl  of  Salilbury,  from  Valiodalid.  2  . 9.  b. 

D.  firing  to  have  the  Wardlhip  of  young  Mr  Marfom 

(according  to  the  dying  Requeft  of  His  Father)  conferred 
upon  him  ;  at  his  Lordlhips  own  Price.  And  advertifing, 
that  the  Spaniards  are  very  fond  of  that  part  of  their  Pro- 
jea  (mentioned  above  at  §  22.)  relating  to  the  Mariage 
of  the  Prince  of  Wales  with  their  Infanta  ;  although  they 
were  not  yet  agreed  who  fhould  make  the  fir  ft  Motion  of 
it  in  their  Council. 

69.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Councell  ;  from  Valiodalid. 

That  the  Conftable  (of  Caftile  ? )  had  been  to  vifit 
him,  m  whnfe  Company,  among  others,  came  one 
Sr.  Andrew  Wife,  in  Spain  called  the  Priour  of  England, 
who  had  given  many  Teftimonies  of  his  good  &  dutiful! 
AffrCtion  to  his  King  and  Countrey.  That  the  Confiable 
upon  difeourfe  about  the  Caufes  of  the  Englilh  Mer¬ 
chants,  had  promifed  a  quick  &  fatisfaaory  difpatch  of 
all,  except  that  of  Hall  &  Eldred.  As  to  this,  he  faid, 
there  had  been  an  orderly  and  judicial  proceeding  inSicily 
and  that  upon  feveral  proofs  made  that  the  Crew  had 
excerliled  Piracie,  a  Sentence  of  Confifcation  had  paffed 
agamll  IT,  which  could  no!  be  revoked  by  the  Teftimonies 
of  any  Witneffes  examined  in  England.  That  to  thefe 
Speeches  of  the  Conftable,  he  had  anfwered.  that  their 
Proofs  amounted  but  to  this,  that  a  Rumor  had  been 
fpread  as  if  the  Ship  Trial  had  exercifed  Piracy  in  the 
\cars  1593  &  159S,  and  that  the  Mafters  Mate,  &c. 
had  confolled  that  they  had  done  divers  unlawful  ACts 
lhat  this  could  not  be  that  Pirate-Ship  they  meant  be’ 
cauTe  it  was  not  built  until  the  Year  i6ot.  that  the  pre¬ 
tended  Confeffions  were  extorted  by  Dureffe  &  Menaces 
&  retrained  by  the  fame  Perfons  in  England  :  that  the 
matter  whereunto  they  were  obliged  to  fubferibe  was 
invented  &  w'ritien  by  one  of  their  own  Scrivenors*  and 
m  divers  Circumftances  is  confident  neither  with  Truth 
nor  Probability.  That  the  Courfe  taken  with  our  Ships 
is  what  is  uled  m  no  other  Country  ,1  Chriftendome’ 


Num.  1 875, 

f£r  i-nGonds  confifcate  are  divided  into  Three  Parts  ; 
the  Fir  ft  to  the  King  (or  to  the  Vice-rcy,  the  Second  to 
the  Judge  who  tries  the  Caule  ;  the  Third  to  the  Denun- 
1  ^n'‘  nrer  who  never  wants  Witneffes.  'Ihat 
the  Duke  de  Feria  is  the  Conlhble’s  kinfman,  and  there- 
•nf’ni1  t!‘is  Caufe>  is  defended  by  him.  That  the  Spa¬ 
nilh  Merchants  are  negledful  of  their  Bufinefs  ;  and  thofe 
at  Lilbon  diiorderly,  by  the  means  of  a  Puritan  who  had 
crept  m  among  them.  Defires  that  the  King  would  thank 
the  Conde  de  Pugno-Roftro  for  the  good  Offices  done  10 
his  Subjects.  lhat  the  Lady  above-mentioned  (at  §  20. 
whom  Walpole  the  Jefuit  had  fent  into  England,  in  or¬ 
der  to  feduce  fome  of  her  own  Sex,  was  harboured  by 
fome  1  apifts,  who  would  willingly  that  flie  was  in  her  own 
Countrey  ;  Die  having  ha  mall  Succefs.  That  the  Dif- 
contents  between  the  EnglifliMuites  &  Seculars  continue, 
which  he  thinks  may  prove  fatal  to  the  former.  That 
the  young  Admiral  of  Cafiile  had  lately  married  the 
Daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Sea,  Son  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma 
to  whom  the  Duke  had  given  in  Dowry  1 00000  Crownes, 
and  the  King  by  way  of  Addition  a  Crown-Rent  in  Sicily 
u  3£?°°  Crowns  Per  ann-  That  they  hear  no  News  of 
the  fleet  which  failed  from  Lilbon.  '1  hat  the  King  had 
auffi  d  a  Pen  lion  of  6000  Crownes  to  his  former  Largeffe 
bellowed  upon  the  Conftable;  and  that  hisMajefties  con¬ 
tinual  Motions  from  place  to  place  hindred  all  Bufinefs 

70.  J  o  the  Merchants  &  Factors  at  Lilbone  ;  in  aun- 
iwere  of  one  of  th,  irs.  22g  ^ 

i  a.c  !  them  feverely  for  their  iiiconftant,  neg¬ 
lectful  &  irregular  Courfts.  6 

71.1..  Thomas  Howard  Earl,  of  Suffolk,  Lord  Cham- 
berlame  vino  his  Majeflie,  from  Valiodalid.  25,. 

his^Majeftie^e  ^alifbury,  Principal  Secretarie  to 

.  Signifying,  that  he  is  in  good  hopes  of  procuring 
fatisfactn.n  to  the  Engl  111  .Merchants,  excepting  o:  1,  ihe 
Hal1  and  Eldred,  rh  utwhicli  he  liu.s  noli  i,  ~r 
but  Dmimulation.  by  real.;.,  of  the  a]lV;r-.ce  l-etwceue  il-e 
Duke  of  Feria  &  the  Conlfabl.  a  d  ihe  promife  of  pair 
ot  the  drey  to  fome  of  the  Grcr  )  .es  there.  Adverlifeth 
hisLordfhip  of  the  Praftifcs  which  the  Spaniard,  i  ,d 
almoft  begun  to  put  in  Execution  aei.inft  him  (up.  11  ihe 
Incitement  of  their  Intelligencers j  among  whome  fome 
are  of  Quality  &  Difeourfe;  Luf  i„ith  that  new  their  hu¬ 
mours  are  vey  much  changed,  th'  y  being  in  great  hopes 
of  gaming  him.  And  that  th  .  Project  mentioned  in 
§  22.  he  believed  they  would  in  time  propole  to  our  King. 

72.  From  the  Lords  of  the  Council!  in  the  behalfe  fii 
one  Jolhua  Havell  Merchaur.t  of  Plymouth,  dated  2'S 
May  ,6?5>  '  275.  b. 

This  Havell  had  his  Ship  &  Goods  urjuftly  taken  by 
the  Spaniards ;  and  after  much  time  &  money  fpuu. 
could  get  no  manner  of  Redrefs  or  Satisfaction.  ’ 

74.  From  Sir  William  Waad  Clearke  of  the  Councell 
dated  31  May  1605.  with  a  Poftfcript  frem  Sir  William 
Cornwallies  th’elder.  '•?6  b 

In  the  behalfe  of  Havell  abovementioned. 

75-  From  Walter  Mathew  Mayor  of  Plymouth,  dated 
26  September  1605.  '  277.  b. 

In  the  behalfe  of  Jolhua  Havelle. 

76.  From  Charles  Howard  Earle  of  Notingham  & 
Lord  High  Admiral  of  England. 

In  the  behalfe  of  Mr.  Fearne,  who  had  certain  Goods 
ftayed  by  the  Spaniards. 

77.  From  Sir  Thomas  Edmonds  Lord  Ambaffador- 
Refident  with  the  Arch-duke,  dated  the  21  October 

■*>J-  ,  .  .  238.  b. 

ft  hat  the  Jefuites  &  their  Confederates  were  conti¬ 
nually  praCtifing,  in  all  kinds,  againft  England  ;  of  which 
the  Count  de  Villa-Mediai  a  was  fuffi cienily  fenfible  before 
his  departure  from  Flandus ;  that  he  was  exceedingly 
troubled  to  prevent  their  pallionate  purpofes ;  and  did 
direCtly  crofs  them  in  fome  of  their  chiefe  Defigns. 
ft  hat  the  Lord  Arundell  of  Wardour  had  drawn  the 
8  King’s 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


279 


Num.  1 875. 

King’s  Difpleafure  on  him,  in  the  manner  as  above  related. 
Relateth  the  principal  Actions  that  had  happened  this 
Campaign  between  Prince  Maurice  &  Spinola.  That 
there  had  been  great  Joy  in  thofe  parts,  upon  the  Report 
that  his  (Sir  Charles’s)  Chaplain  &Secretarie  had  turned 
Papills  ;  and  that  the  Englifh  Priefts  there,  had  been 
bufie  with  fome  of  his  owne  inferior  Servants  alfo,  but  he 
hoped  he  fhould  withftand  their  purpofes. 

78.  Concerning  the  Spaniffi  Proje&s  before  mentioned 
at  $  22.  and  the  Method  taken  by  the  Spaniards  in  im¬ 
parting  the  fame  to  Sir  Charles :  with  what  followed 
thereupon.  243.  b 

79*  Pianflation  of  a  Letter  from  the  Duke  of  Lerma 
to  Sir  Charles,  thanking  him  for  the  Difcourfe  concern- 
inge  the  Reformation  of  Idle  &  Vagrant  Perfons  ;  &  of 
the  Dearth  of  Victuals,  which  Sir  Charles  had  drawn  up, 
&  fent  unto  him  by  the  Conde  de  Pugno  Roftro.  246. 

80.  A  Difcourfe  drawn  up  by  Sir  Charles,  &  tranf- 
lated  into  Spanifh  by  the  Nobleman  laft  mentioned. 

_  _  246.  b. 

The  Purport  of  it  is  to  fhewwhatCommoditieswould 
accrew  to  Spain  by  a  perfect  Amide  with  England ; 
brought  about  by  their  acting  according  to  their  Projects, 
fo  often  abovemendoned.  This  Difcourfe  was  read  both 
to  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  &  to  the  King  himfelf,  who  both 
liked  it  fo  well,  as  that  it  was  fent  to  rome  fele£t  Perfons 
of  the  Council  to  be  confidered  of. 

81.  lo  the  Lords  of  the  Councell,  in  England. 

251.  b. 

That  he  had  brought  the  Merchants  Affairs  to  a 
Conclufion,  pretty  much  to  their  Satisfactions ;  and  is 
of  opinion  that  the  Crofles  &  Dc-layes  therein,  have 
rather  growne  out  of  the  confufed  Order  of  their  many 
Councells,  exceeding  Multitudes  of  Officers,  and  the 
Ordinarie  flow  Pace  that  they  have  accuftomed  them- 
felves  to  in  matters  of  Juftice,  than  to  any  Ir,difpofition 
either  in  the  King,  or  thofe  of  moft  power  with  him. 

82.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifbury.  252  b. 

ThisLetter  is  conceived  inTermes  fomewhat  obfeure. 

But  the  great  bufinefs  feemeth  to  betheSpaniffi  Projects 
fo  often  before  mentioned,  which  they  had  dc  red  him 
to  communicate  to  the  King  ;  and  which  he  accordingly 
fent  by  Mr.  Hawkelworth  his  Secretary  the  Bearer  of 
this  Letter  alfo  ;  whom  he  had  fo  inftructed,  as  that  he 
was  able  to  make  an  orderly  Relation  of  the  whole  AfFair 
to  his  Majefty. 

83.  A  Difcourfe  &  Relation  made  vnto  Walter  Hawkf- 
worth  Secretary  vnto  my  Lord-Ambaffadour,  of  the  Con¬ 
ference  had  betweene  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  the  Conde  de 
Villa  Longa,  &  his  Lordffiip,  concerning  the  two  Pro¬ 
jects  of  Ailiance,  for  reducing  the  Low-Countries  into 
Obedience.  To  be  delivered  to  his  Majeftie  at  his 
coming  into  England,  whither  the  faid  Lord-Ambaflador 
fent  him  with  his  Letter  about  that  Negotiation.  253.  b. 

.  ®4-  ^  0  the  Earle  of  Suftolke  Lord  Chamberlayne  to 
his  Majeftie.  2g, 

That  he  had  attained  to  the  defired  Succefs  in  his 
Negotiations,  &  had  fufficient  Credit  in  the  Spaniih 
Court ;  yet  he  wiffied  to  be  recalled  from  that  Place, 
where  the  Objects  of  Sicknefs  and  Death  were  hourly 
reprefented  unto  him  even  in  his  own  Houfe. 

85.  To  the  Lord  Ellelmere  Lord  Chancellor  of  Eng¬ 
land  ;  from  Valiodalid.  26i.  b. 

86.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifbury,  by  a  Merchaunt  of 

Plymouth.  262. 

That  he  had  brought  the  Great  Bufinefs  to  a  head, 
the  Honour  whereof  would  always  redound  to  His  Ma¬ 
jefty,  fince  the  Spaniards  were  the  Offerers.  That  the 
Particularities  being  not  fit  for  Paper,  he  had  determined 
to  fend  his  Secretary  Hawkfworth  purpofely  to  England 
to  acquaint  the  King  with  the  whole  matter  ;  but  that 
he  is  now  unfortunately  fallen  fick.  That  the  Spaniards 
were  become  in  all  things  exceeding  tradable,  and  had 
difpatched  the  Englifh  Merchants  to  their  Contentment. 


Num.  1875. 

He  defires  that  the  Spani/h  Ambaffador  in  England  may 
have  feme  notice  of  this,  and  of  his  Majefties  acceptance 
ot  the  fame.  That  Carre  the  Scot  had  fowne  a  Report, 
that  in  Scotland  they  would  by  no  Means  yeeld  either 
to  the  Kings  defired  Union,  or  his  Replanting  of 
Blihoppes  m  that  Kmgdome,  with  other  Lies,  aminfi 
which  he  had  wrought  a  Countermine.  That  he  had 
ately  ioe  endeared  his  Lordfhips  worthynes  to  that  State 
as  he  that  fitts  at  the  Helme  of  it  exceedingly  defireth 
.is  L0'dmip  might  underftand  his  particular  aftedion  to 
HffiT  m  3  Perfeft  Friend(hiPPe  &  Correfpondency  with 

87.  From  the  Earle  of  Salifbury  ;  dated  the  14  Oc¬ 
tober  1605.  264. 

_  Importing  that  the  King  had  approved  his  Condud 
wnn  reference  to  the  New  Duties  which  the  Spaniards 
had  laid  upon  the  Portugutfe  Wines  &  Oiles,  in  deroga¬ 
tion  of  the  late  Treaty  ;  and  inftruding  him  how  to  pro¬ 
ceed  farther  therein  ;  as  alfo  in  other  matters.  Thar  as 

rhcn.  Spaniih  Projeds  for  a  ftraiter  Alliance  with  his 
Majeftie,  &  a  General  Peace  in  Chriftendome  by  his 
meanes,  he  thinks  the  Ddign  is  to  engage  his  Majeftie 
into  a  Warre  for  the  Redudion  of  the  United  Provinces  : 
yet,  if  anie  thing  be  delivered  unto  him  authentically, 
he  might  doe  the  King  Honor  &  Service  by  bringing  it 
into  his  Eledion,  either  to  take  hold  of  it,  or  ro  let  it 
alone.  He  thanketh  him  for  the  Difcourfe  about  the 
Benefit  of  Peace,  which  he  finds  more  malicious  than 
witty ;  and  it  reflecting  on  Him,  he  would  know  the 
Author.  As  to  Fitz-Jamcs,  he  is  not  willing  that  he 
fhould  have  a  particular  Leave  to  return  into  Ireland. 

I  hat  his  Majefty  in  Confideration  of  the  extraordinary 
Charges  he  is  at,  is  willing  to  allow  him  an  Increafe  of 
40s.  a  Day  bv  an  extraordinary  Warant,  becaufe  it  (hould 
not  be  drawne  into  a  Prefident  hereafter  by  others. 

88.  From  the  Earle  of  Salifbury,  dated  the  qth  of 
November  1605.  268.  b. 

This  Letter  giveth  an  account  of  the  Difcovery  of 
the  Gunpowder-Treafon  Plot,  more  particular  &  exad 
than  what  is  rel.ited  by  moft  of  our  Hiltorians.  For  Ex¬ 
ample,  Mr.  '  peed  &  others  write,  thatK.  James  was  the 
Pc  rion,  who,  upon  hearing  the  Letter  to  the  Lord  Mount- 
Eagle  read,  gueffed  that  the  defign  was  to  deftroy  Himfelf 
&  Ins  Parliament  by  Gun-powder,  &  therefore  ordered 
the  Cellars  to  be  fearched,  &c.  But  this  Earl  of  Salifbury 

write th  thus, - “  I  Imparted  the  Lie  to  the  Earle 

of  Suftolke  Lord  Chamberlaine,  to  the  end  I  might  re- 
ceave his  Opinion.  Whereupon,  perufinge  the  Wordes 
of  the  L~re,  and  obferving  the  Writeing,  that  the 
Blow  should  come  without  knowlege  who  had 
hurt  them  ;  we  both  conceived  that  it  could  not  be 
more  proper  than  the  tyme  of  Parliament ;  nor  by  any 
other  way  like  to  be  attempted  then  with  Powder,  whilft 
the  King  was  fitting  in  th’  Affembly.  Of  which  the  Lord- 
C.hamberlain  ((hewed  ?)  the  more  probability,  becaufe 
there  was  a  great  Vault  vnder  the  faid  Chamber  which 
was  never  vfed  for  any  thing  but  for  fome  Wood  &  Cole 
belonginge  to  the  Keeper  of  the  Old  Palace.  In  which 
Confideration,  after  we  had  imparted  the  fame  to  the 
Lord  Admiral!,  the  Earle  of  Worcefter,  &  the  Earle  of 
Northampton,  and  fome  others,  We  all  thought  fitt  to 
forbeare  to  impart  it  to  the  King,  untill  fome  three  or 
fower  dayes  before  the  Seilion.  At  which  lyme  we  ffiewed 
His  Majeftie  the  L"re,  rather  as  a  thing  we  would  not 
conceale  (becaufe  it  was  offuch  a  Nature)  then  any  way 
perfwadeing  hinj  to  geve  any  further  Credife  to  it,  vntill 
the  Place  had  bene  vifited.  Wherevpon  His  Majeftie 
fwhoe  hath  a  naturall  habite  to  contemne  all  falfe 
1‘eares,  and  a  Judgment  foe  ftrong  as  never  to  doubt 
any  thing  which  is  not  well  warranted  by  Reafon)  con¬ 
curred  onely  thusfarre  with  us  ;  that  feeing  fuch  a  matter 
was  poffible,  I  hat  fhould  be  donne  which  might  prevent 
all  danger,  or  ells  nothing  at  all,”  &c. 

89.  The  Coppie  of  the  L~re  written  to  my  Lord  Mount- 

eagle, 


/' 


U I ,  'll 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Niim.  '875. 

eagle,  whereby  the  Treafons  mentioned  in  the  former 
L're  are  difcouered.  1 77- 

go.  A  L~re  to  the  Earle  of  Salifbune  fent  by  Mr. 
Hawkefworth.  277‘  b- 

Importing,  that  when  the  Great  Bufinefs  (where¬ 
on  the  King  &  State  there  are  fo  attentive)  fhould  be  a 
little  overblownc,  he  would  geve  a  newe  Affault  in  behalf 
of  the  Merchants,  for  Eafe  of  the  Impofition. 

g  1 .  Reafons  geven  to  prove  the  Performance  of  things 
treated  of  and  offered  by  the  King  of  Spaine  to  be  both 
honorable  &  fafe  to  him.  280.  b. 

92.  The  Propofitions  of  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  &  the 

Earle  of  Villa  l.onga  one  of  the  Secretaries  of  State, 
vpon  the  feverall  Conferences  had  with  them,  concerning 
a  more  ftreitc  League  &  Amity  betweene  the  Kings  of 
Great  Britaine  8c  Spaine.  284. 

93.  Private  Inftructions  delivered  to  Mr.  Hawkefworth 

for  his  Bufinefs  in  England.  2S6.  b. 

94.  A  Letter  to  the  Earle  of  Salifbury.  287.  b. 
That  with  true  feeling  &  paflion,  not  onely  the  King 

oi  Spain  &  His  whole  Courte,  but  even  the  Generality 
of  the  People  apprehended  the  Advertifements  concerning 
the  Gunpow'der-Treafon  Plot.  And  that  their  not  fay- 
ninge  in  that  matter  hath  much  enclyned  his  owne  Heart 
vnto  them,  anddrawnehim  into  a  Beliefe  that  they  will 
become  faff  8c  faithful  Friends  to  His  Majefiie  and  our 
Countrey.  Ihey  defire  that  the  King  would  be  more 
watchful  of  himfelf  for  the  future,  and  will  not  be  per- 
fwaded  but  that  the  French  had  either  an  Hand  or  an 
Heart  in  that  molt  devilifli  Purpofe.  That  upon  this 
News,  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  Sc  the  moll  part  of  all  the 
Councellours  &  Grandees  of  this  State  had  vifited  him, 
ad  invidiam  ufque  of  the  other  Foreign  Minillers.  That 
even  thofe  who  (in  regard  of  their  Places)  were  prohibited 
to  vifit ;  or  being  Sick,  could  not ;  had  fent  their  Sonnes. 
He  thinks  that  as  to  the  New  Impofitions,  he  fhall  be 
able  to  moderate  matters  fo,  as  to  bring  them  to  a  reafon- 
able  pafs.  That  the  Hollanders  may  now-,  by  our  Kings 
Interpofition,  get  the  moll  advantageous  Terms  of  Peace. 
That  a  Frier  who  had  lately  preached  before  the  King, 
is  bani Hied  the  Court  and  City,  having  vented  words  to 
this  effect,  “  That  Princes  being  the  Heads  8c  Subfiances 
of  Commonwealths,  were  in  thefe  days  become  the  Sha- 
dowes  of  fome  one  Private  man,  who  (according  to  his 
owne  humor)  governed  all  thinges.”  That  “  the  Earle  of 
Villa-Mediana  being  returned,  much  reporte  is  made  of 
our  Kings  greate  Bountyes  towardes  him.  That  the 
Marquis  of  St.  German  (as  he  heareth)  is  appointed  to 
go  into  England,  &  congratulate  the  happie  Difcoverie 
of  the  late  Treafon.’’ 

95.  From  the  Dutches  of  Feria  to  Sir  Charles  Corn- 

wallyes.  13  Decemb.  1605.  290.  b. 

Congratulating  him  upon  the  Difcovery  of  the  Gun¬ 
powder  Treafon,  in  very  handfome  terms. 

96.  The  Anfwere  to  the  Letter  abouefaid.  292. 

97.  Sir  Charles  Cornwallyes  to  Father  Crefwel,  13 

December  1605.  S.  N.  292.  b. 

Writing  civilly  to  the  Father  at  his  Departure  to  Italy  ; 
he  having  done  many  Services  to  His  Majefiies  Subjects 
in  Spain. 

98.  Tranflation  of  a  Letter  from  Sir.  Charles  Com- 

wallyes  to  the  Dukes  of  Lerma,  fent  with  a  Meffenger  to 
vnderltar.d  the  Trueth  of  a  Report,  viz.  That  the  Se¬ 
cretary  to  the  Spanifii  Ambaffador  in  France,  was  appre¬ 
hended  vpon  Sulpicion  of  a  Pradtife  for  the  Surprifeing 
of  Marfcilles.  293.^ 

99.  The  Dukes  Anfwere  tranflated.  294. 

100.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifbury.  ibid. 

That  the  Amitie  between  France  8c  Spain  is  not 

likely  to  be  durable.  That  the  Spaniards  would  not 
enlarge  their  Propofitions  above-mentioned  at  §  92.  vntil 
it  might  pleafe  the  King  of  Greate  Brittaine  to  geve  fome 
Signification  how  farre  He  would  open  himfelf,  forreceipt 
el  it.  That  the  King  of  Spaine  hath  neede  of  the  King 


Num.  1875. 

of  Great  Brittaines  Arme,  as  our  King  (neceflitatcd  by 
meanes  of  his  greate  bounty  to  his  ancient  Subjedls  8c 
Servants)  hath  good  occafion  to  ufe  the  help  of  the  King 
of  Spaines  Purfe.  That  our  Help  to  the  Spaniards  in 
recovering  the  Netherlands,  will  be  like  the  lifting  them 
out  of  a  Quick-fand,  wherein  they  ftill  fink  deeper.  That 
the  Addition  of  a  Million  of  Ducats  per  ann.  to  the  Kings 
Revenue,  befides  what  might  be  faved  from  the  Allow¬ 
ance  to  the  Garrifons,  will  be  a  good  Help  to  His  Eftate, 
That  the  Pofleflion  of  thofe  Townes  would  be  an  Honor 
&  Advantage  to  his  Majefiie,  who  would  therefore  be 
able  to  employ  more  of  his  Servants  and  Subjects.  That 
the  Souldiers  of  thofe  Garrifons  might  be  paid,  for  the 
mod  part,  in  Clothes  &.  Victuals  from  our  Countrey, 
and  the  Money  be  drawne  into  England.  That  the  Duke 
of  Seffa,  one  of  ihe  founded  Wife  men  of  Spain  is  dead  ; 
occafioned  (as  is  faidjby  Great  Debts,  &  little  Truft  in 
the  Faith  8c  Honefiy  of  his  Lady. 

1  o  ( •  From  Sir  Thomas  Parry,  Ambaffador  for  his 
Majefiie  in  France.  27  Nov.  1605.  297.  b. 

Advcrtifing  him  of  his  being  recalled  ;  and  that  the 
Lords  Montague,  Mordant,  &  Francis  Trefham  are 
committed  to  theTower,  and  manyotherspurfued.  297.  b. 

1  c  2.  From  the  Earle  of  Northampton,  3  October, 
1605.  298. 

Commending  his  Capacity  and  Indufivy  in  the  Af¬ 
faires  entrufted  to  him.  And  therefore  giveth  his  Tefii- 
mony  in  thefe  Words.  “  Yow  deferve  well,  Yow  have  a 
Mafier  that  conceaves  well,  8c  Trends  that  report  well,  and 
therefore  all  muft  end  well.”  That  they  had  been  clear, 
ing  the  remnant  of  the  Kings  Eftate,  which  had  been  much 
wafted  by  his  Profufion,  and“  His  Majefiie  himfelf  hath 
been  content  to  bind  Ilis  ov. ne  Handts  (which  noe 
mortall  Man  could  doe'  and  by  Lntayle  to  make  his 
Eftate  foe  fure,  as  it  neither  neede  to  feare  the  facility 
of  his  fweete  Difpofition,  nor  the  Rapacitie  8c  Greedynes 
of  devouri  ge  Cormorants.” 

103.  To  the  Eatle  of  Northampton.  300.  b. 

That  fo  far  as  his  weake  Eyes  can  difeerne  into  the 

Inwards  of  the  Spaniih  State,  they  build  their  gtattil 
Comforts  Sc  Hopes  upon  a  perfect  Conjunction  with  ours. 

104.  To  Sir  Flenry  Wotton  Lord-Ambaffador  for  Flis 

Majefiie  with  the  States  of  Venice.  302. 

That  in  the  Spaniards  are  all  appearances  of  Defire 
to  continue  8c  encreafe  the  Amity  begunne  with  England. 

105.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie.  20  January  1605-6. 

S.  V.  302.  b. 

That  the  Spaniards  are  now  brought  to  own  in 
public,  that  having  Peace  with  the  King  of  Great  Britain, 
they  need  not  feare  the  reft  of  all  the  whole  World.  That 
the  other  Fore’gn  Minifters  are  become  very  envious  of 
the  favor  fhewn  to  Himfelf  8c  to  the  other  Englifh  there; 
and  that  the  Popes  Nuntio  was  more  efpecially  picqued 
at  it.  That  notwithftanding  all  this,  the  Spaniards  are 
generally  fo  greedy  in  their  Natures,  8c  inclined  to  Ex¬ 
tortion,  that  he  is  continually  peftered  with  the  frefli 
complaints  of  our  Merchants.  That  hereupon,  he  was 
refolved  to  fhew  how  much  herein  the  King  fuftcreth  in 
his  Honor,  and  the  whole  Nation  in  their  Fame,  8c  alfo 
to  endeavor  to  procure  fliarp  Punifiiment  to  be  infli&ed 
upon  fome  one  or  two  of  the  Malefactors.  That  the  late 
Order  for  not  imbarqueing  of  our  Shippes  upon  fufpicion, 
and  removing  the  Determineing  of  Caufes  from  the  Or¬ 
dinary  Judges  of  the  Place  (who  were  to  have  a  part  of 
the  Benefit)  will  deliver  the  Merchants  8c  Himfelf  of  a 
great  deal  ofTrouble.  He  hopes  very  fhortly  to  procure 
the  Merchants  Privileges  to  be  confirmed.  That  the 
matter  of  Hall  and  Fldred  is  to  be  removed  from  Sicily, 
thither.  And  the  Duke  of  Lerma  hath  given  his  word, 
that  upon  Sentence  given,  the  Money  for  the  Goods 
confilcate  (hall  be  paid,  without  further  trouble. 

106.  The  Names  of  fuch  Prifoners  as  were  deliuered 
out  of  the  King  of  Spaines  Gallics  at  Lifbcne  at  the  Inter, 
cellion  of  Sir  Charles  Cornwallies,  delivered  to  John 

5  Rivcti 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


281 


Num.  1875. 

Rivett  his  Lord  (hips  Servant  the  4th  of  January  1605. 
S.  V.  who  had  Order  to  receive  them. 

107.  Concerning  thofe  who  were  in  like  manner  deli¬ 
vered  at  St.  Lucar,  to  one  Nevill  Davyes,  who  had  Order 
for  the  receaveinge  of  them  from  his  Lordfhippe.  ibid. 

108.  From  the  Earle  of  Salilbury  j  dated  the  12th 

October  1605.  3°^* 

That  his  Majefty  having  all  along  obferved  the  Spa- 
nifh  extreme  delay  in  doing  Juftice  refolved  to  deale  very 
roundly  and  &  plainly  with  the  Spanilh  Ambaffador  ;  and 
lett  him  knowe  how  fenfible  he  is,  in  this  pointe,  both 
of  his  Honor,  and  of  his  Subjects  grievous  Complaints. 

109.  A  L're  from  the  King,  8  October  1605.  307. 

Shewing  his  Acceptance  of  Sir  Charles’s  Service. 

Commandeth  Him  to  folicit  all  the  Affaires  of  the  Mer¬ 
chants  either  with  the  King  of  Spain  or  the  Duke  of  Me¬ 
dina,  as  they  (hould  require,  dealing  all  along  in  his  Name. 

no.  Sir  Charles  Cornwallies  to  the  King,  in  anfwer 
to  the  former.  308.  b. 

hi.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifbury.  .3 1 1  • 

Thanking  him  for  favors  received.  Adver tiling, 
that  Crefwell  the  Jefuite  being  fent  for  by  his  Superior 
to  Rome  ;  Walpole  within  a  few  days  after,  defired  accef's 
unto  him.  That  at  firft,  he  infinuated  a  Signification 
of  much  grief  for  the  late  traiterous  Purpofein  England, 
and  a  (hewe  of  much  Deteftation  of  foe  inhuman  &  hor¬ 
rible  Intentions,  efpeciallie  in  Men  profeffmg  the  Catho- 
lique  Religion:  to  which  Sir  Charles  replied,  that  he  had 
great  reafon  to  be  lb  grieved,  for  that  now  it  is  growne 
to  be  a  received  Rule,  that  noe  erroneous  Religion  in 
the  World  (no  not  Paganifme  itfelf)  giveth  fuch  Libertie 
&  Courage  to  Malefactors  &  Murtherers,  as  the  Roman. 
He  relateth  other  Controverfial  Difcourfe  he  had  with  this 
Jefuite,  upon  the  Subject  of  Religion,  which  was  ended 
by  the  coming  in  of  the  Conde  de  Pugno-Roflro.  I  hat 
two  days  after,  the  fame  Jefuite  came  again,  and  began 
as  before,  faying,  that  the  Traitors  had  done  their  Caufe 
an  infinite  harme  :  for  it  was  the  Error  of  the  Puritans 
that  (hold)  that  in  cafe  of  their  Princes  becomeing  of 
contrarie  Religion,  it  was  lawfull  to  take  away  their 
Lives.  Of  the  Proteftants,  that  were  they  of  Power 
fufficient,  they  might  depofe  them.  Of  the  Catholiques 
the  Opinion  was,  that  the  Pope  might  denounce  k  ex¬ 
communicate  them,  and  thereby  difcharge  their  Subjects 
of  their  Allegiance.  He  wilhed  it  might  pleafe  the  King 
to  take  Caution  &  Security  of  his  Catholique  SubjeCts 
(i.  e.  Oath,  k  Denuntiation  of  theCenfures  of  the  Church 
againft  the  difobedient  J  and  fo  to  fuffer  them  to  live  in 
Peace.  Upon  Sir  Charles’s  Reply  that  it  would  be  more 
fafe  for  the  King  to  fuppreffe  &  reftraine  their  Difobe- 
dience  by  his  owne  Providence,  and  by  his  Lawes  :  the 
Jcfuit  faid,  there  would  then  be  danger  that  their  con¬ 
tinual  Cryings  would  drawe  the  Pope  to  proceede  againft 
the  King  with  his  C.enfures.  Sir  Charles  (hewed  him 
that  in  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth  they  were  no  more 
harmfull  then  a  painted  Fire  ;  alfo  that  he  wondered  they 
could  think  of  proceeding  in  that  courfe  with  the  King, 
who  was  none  of  their  Fold.  Hee  aunfwered  that  he 
was  within  their  Fold,  for  that  he  was  baptized  a  Chriftian. 
Sir  Charles  alked  him  w  hy  therefore  the  Popes  had  not 
excommunicated  the  Emperour  of  Ruffia,  or  thofe  of 
the  Greek  Church,  &c  ?  His  aunfwere  was,  that  They 
were  without  their  power  or  pofiibility  to  revoke.  To 
conclude,  he  protefted,  that  He  k  thofe  of  his  Society 
would  by  all  meanes  &  wayes  poflible  become  Impedi¬ 
ments  to  any  proceedings  againft  the  King  ;  and  would 
onely  Labour  by  Prayer  &  Preachinge  (as  by  their  Infti- 
tution  they  were  bound)  to  reduce  thofe  that  were  gone 
aftraye  *,  and  fo  departed. 

1 1 2.  A  Letter  from  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  tranflated. 
dated  22  January.  3 1 5-  b. 

That  the  King  by  Sir  Charles’s  Interceflion  hath 
graunted  the  Order  of  St.  Jago  vnto  Don  Juan  Alonfo 
de  Villa  Viceatia. 

Cat.  Harl.  Voi..  II. 


Num.  1875. 

1 13.  To  the  Earle  of  Saliftmrie.  27  January  1605. 

316. 

That  the  Duke  of  Lerma  much  defireth  His  Lord- 
fhips  Friendfhip  &  Correfpondence.  That  He  endeavoreth 
to  hold  him  by  the  fame  meanes  that  he  won  him,  which 
was  Playnes  ;  and  giving  him  to  underftand  that  he  was 
not  ignorant  in  what  Eftate  the  Spaniards  ftand  ;  and  how 
impoflible  it-  is  to  come  to  any  end  of  their  Intricacies 
without  our  Kings  helpe.  That  this  hath  begot  in  them 
the  beft  kinde  of  Love  to  him  ;  and  he  thinketh  they 
deale  not  foe  plainely  &  above-bord  with  any  Ambaffador 
as  with  himfelfe.  That  the  Duke  always  concludes  with 
a  Sigh,  wiftiing  that  it  might  pleafe  God  to  drawee  us  to 
one  Unity  in  Religion ;  for  which  caufe  he  faid,  that 
the  King  his  Mafter  (if  he  knew  it  to  agree  with  the  King 
of  Great -Britaines  pleafure)  would  imploy  all  his  forces 
to  obtain  a  General  Council  in  the  moft  free  manner 
that  ever  yet  was  held.  That  the  Earle  Bothwell  had 
lately  thrown  a  Spaniard  out  of  a  Window,  and  efcaped 
to  the  Houfe  of  the  Emperors  Ambaffador  :  whereupon 
his  Concubine  was  feized,  and  as  it  was  thought,  would 
hardly  efcape  the  Whip. 

1 14.  From  Sir  Thomas  Edmonds,  His  Majefties  Am¬ 
baffador  to  the  Arch-dukes.  3 1 8.  b. 

That  Owen,  and  Baldwynne  a  Jefuit,  both  refident 
at  that  Court,  having  been  principal  dealers  in  the  Gun¬ 
powder  Treafon,  His  Majefty  had  commanded  him  to 
require  their  apprehenfion,  &  delivery  into  his  Handes. 
That  as  to  Baldwynne  it  had  been  anfwered,  that  He  was 
a  religious  Man,  and  (by  the  Orders  of  the  Church, 
which  they  mult  obey)  is  to  be  cenfured  by  his  Supe¬ 
riors.  And  for  Owen,  they  mult  attend  the  King  of 
Spaine’s  Directions,  he  being  a  more  immediate  fervant 
to  that  Crown  than  to  the  Arch-Dukes.  That  our  King 
in  his  Letter  to  thefe  Princes,  had  profeffed  that  He 
would  either  verifie  the  Things  alledged  againft  thofe 
Perfons,  or  forfeit  his  Credit  towardes  the  world.  That 
although  his  Majeftie  had  affured  that  they  (hould  be 
called  in  Queftion  for  no  other  Crime,  than  this  laft  ab- 
hominable  Treafon  of  Powder,  that  they  (hould  in  no 
wife  be  put  to  Torture,  but  proceeded  againft  fairly  in 
the  prefence  of  their  Ambaffadour  :  they  had  been  fo 
difrefpe&ful  as  to  defire  a  Copie  of  the  Information.  That 
the  Princes  had  fent  to  the  King  of  Spain  for  advice,  and 
therefore  Sir  Thomas  defires  Sir  Charles  to  ufe  the  proper 
methode  of  ferving  our  King  there.  That  in  the  Court 
of  Bruffels,  they  would  not  believe  that  fuch  a  Treafon 
had  been  plotted,  becaufe  the  Catholiques  were  intereffed 
therein  ;  but  fomerimes  would  fay  it  was  an  artifice  of 
the  Puritans  ;  at  other  times,  a  Defign  of  the  Hollanders 
to  reduce  our  State  to  the  fame  Condition  as  theirs  is, 
that  is,  a  Commonwealth  ;  but  now  they  fay  it  is  a 
Work  of  the  Divels,  exprefsly  to  baoifti  &  extirpate  the 
Catholique  Religion  out  of  England.  That  Sir  William 
Stanley  being  not  fo  deeply  charged  with  this  laft  Treafon 
as  Owen  and  Baldwyn,  although  it  was  defigned  to  have 
ufed  him  therein  ;  His  Majefty  hath  only  moved  to  have 
him  fecured,  till  farther  matter  be  fent  to  charge  him 
with.  That  young  Tyrone  had  been  with  him,  and 
affured  him  that  the  Council  of  Spain  before  they  would 
give  him  his  Colonel’s  Commiflion,  procured  our  Kings 
Confent  unto  it. 

1 15.  Certaine  Reafons  given  by  my  Lord  Ambaffador 

Cornwallies,  to  divers  Counfellors  of  State  and  others  in 
the  Court  of  Spaine,  to  perfuade  the  Deliverie  of  certain 
Traitors  taken  in  Flanders  :  of  whom  mention  is  made 
in  the  precedent  Letre.  322. 

1 16.  To  the  Earle  of  Salilburie.  325. 

Relating  his  proceedings  at  the  Spanifh  Court  about 

Owen  and  Baldwyn,  in  whofe  behalf  the  Jefuites  &  the 
Popes  Nuntio  took  great  paines.  That  the  King  &  the 
Duke  of  Lerma  had  a  fincere  defire  to  give  our  King 
farisfaftion,  but  were  puzled  as  to  the  manner  wherein 
it  (hould  be  done.  That  he  had  had  a  long  Conference 
4  C  with 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


2S1 


Num.  1875. 

v/ith  the  Duke  upon  this  affair,  who  told  him  that  it  had 
been  refolved  in  the  Council,  that  they  themfelves  would 
punifh  Owen,  and  alfo  procure  Baldwyn  to  be  ptmifhed 
by  his  Superiors  in  exemplary  manner.  That  the  Duke 
of  Lerma  did  then  fwear  to  him  in  a  folemn  manner, 
that  both  his  King  &  himfelf  did  deftre  the  Prefervation 
&  Good  of  our  King  as  much  as  that  of  any  Prince  in  this 
World.  That  although  the  French  King  had  ufed  the 
help  of  the  Court  of  Rome,  &  of  other  Princes  in  draw¬ 
ing  them  into  an  Alliance,  They  had  abfolutely  denied 
to  deliver  an  elded  Daughter  into  France  ;  and  had 
purpofed  Iler  for  England,  whenfoever  his  Majedies 
pleafure  Ihould  be,  upon  Terms  convenient,  to  treat  of 
that  matter  That  the  Venetian  Ambaffador  had  told 
him  that  their  State  dand  in  fome  feare  of  a  thunder-clap 
of  the  Pope,  becaufe  they  would  not  abrogate  a  certain 
Law  antiently  made,  which  was  fomewhat  like  to  our 
Statute  of  Mortmain  in  England. 

1 1 7.  The  Contents  of  another  Letter  to  my  Lord  of 

Salidmrie,  12  Febr.  1605-6.  334. 

That  the  Englilh  Merchants  both  at  Lifbon  &  at 
Sevil,  having  no  C.onfuls  or  other  Officers  to  guide  them, 
have  given  very  great  Offence  by  their  intemperate  Lan¬ 
guage  about  Religion,  and  other  diforderly  Behavior, 
for  which  they  had  been  called  into  the  Inquifition,  had 
it  not  been  for  the  RefpeCt  had  for  our  King,  &  Regard 
for  Him  his  Ambaffador.  That  the  Satisfaction  procured 
for  the  Englilh  Merchants  had  not  been  paid,  through 
want  of  Money.  That  the  King  at  that  prefent  time  had 
no  Money,  but  what  was  referred  for  cafes  of  Neceffity. 
And  that  many  Collects  (or  Praiers)  both  new  &  old, 
are  faidfor  the  fafe  &  fpeedie  Arrival  of  the  Flota. 

118.  From  the  Earle  of  Salifbury,  3  January.  335. 

That  the  Arraignment  &  Execution  of  the  Gun¬ 
powder  Traitors,  was  deferred  till  next  Ternie.  That 
it  was  found  that  Owen  &  Baldwyn  were  not  only  fur¬ 
thered  &  encouragers  of  the  Gun-powder  Treafon,  but 
with  Sir  William  Stanley  were  chargeable  of  fome  other 
Treafons  committed  fince  his  Majefties  coming  to  the 
Crown  of  England  :  and  relateth  all  the  proceedings  that 
had  followed  thereupon  both  in  Bruffels,  &  in  London. 
That  the  Miniffers  of  the  Arch-dukes  &  of  the  King  of 
Spain  had  made  ufe  of  little  Shifts  in  order  to  ward  off 
our  Complaints.  And  that  the  French  King  had  fent  the 
Baron  D’Entoure  to  congratulate  with  his  Majeftie  for 
his  happy  deliverance  ;  for  which  Minifter  our  Kino-  had 
conceived  a  particular  efteem,  ever  fince  he  had  been 
fent  Ambaffador  to  him  in  Scotland. 

itg.  From  Mr.  Hawkefworth  my  Lords  Secretarie, 
20  January  1605-6.  343- 

1'hat  the  great  Bufinefs  is  like  to  have  good  fpeed, 
as  a  thing  conceived  to  be  fafe  &  profitable  for  all  Parties, 
although  it  could  not  be  attended  unto  for  the  prefent, 
becaufe  the  late  Treafons  did  alinoft  wholly  employ  the 
Miniftry.  That  the  Earle  of  Northampton  had  acknow¬ 
ledged  that  Sir  Charles  in  managing  the  Affair  fo  that 
the  Spaniards  had  made  their  applications  to  our  King, 
had  done  his  Countrey  great  Service,  and  to  Himfelf  & 
other  Friends  (who  had  undertaken  for  his  Worthines 
&  liabilities)  much  Right  and  Honour,  with  other  Noble 
Speeches  in  his  Praife.  And  that  the  King  had  lately 
declared  in  Public  that  He  thought  Sir  Charles  Corn- 
walliesoneof  the  belt  Servants  that  any  Prince  in  Chrift- 
endome  was  Mailer  of. 

120.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie.  (22  Febr.  1805-6.) 

In  anfwer  to  the  lafl  from  his  Lordlhip.  He  addeth 
alfo,  that  if  there  were  in  Spain  Cenfors  of  Manners,  as 
there  are  Inquifitors  for  Religion,  the  greater  part*  of 
our  Traders  there  would  fall  into  their  Hands,  being 
people  difordered,  uncharitable,  &  unfriendly  amonglt 
themfelves,  &  fcandalous  to  the  Spaniards. 

1 2 1.  To  Mr.  Hawkfworth.  34$. 

In  anfwer  to  his  Letter  abovementioned  :  and  inti- 


Num.  1875. 

ma£!llr!'  ^  fl,t>uld  continue  to  ferve  him  faithfully, 
as  he  had  hitherto  done,  he  would  allow'  him  a  Gleaners 
Share  of  fuch  Fortunes  as  Ihould  befall  him. 

122.  To  die  Lords  of  the  Councill,  from  Valladolid 

rr.1  346.  b. 

That  the  Flota  was  reported  to  be  Icattered  by  a 
Lempell  between  Cartagena  &  the  Havanna,  &  that  a 
great  Fleet  of  Hollanders  was  at  Sea  with  purpofe  to  en¬ 
counter  them.  Alfo,  that  if  it  fhould  not  arrive  fafely, 
the  general  want  in  that  Kingdome  w-ould  be  greater 
than  ever.  That  there  is  a  general  reftraint  of  all  Money 
payable  by  the  King,  by  v'hich  the  Englilh  &  Scots 
Merchants  who  had  fpent  their  meanes  in  folliciting  for 
T^ir  7?an?a£es>  were  now  all  forced  to  live  upon  him. 
I  hat  findinge  in  the  Young  Princes  of  Savoy,  &in  the 
Marquis  of  Efte  who  doth  attend  them  at  the  Spanilh 
Court,  a  more  than  ordinary  affection  towards  our  King, 
he  was  content  to  give  unto  Roncas  Secretary  to  the  Duke 
of  Savoy  &  Ambaffador  there,  the  firft  Vifit ;  which  was 
kindly  taken  by  the  Ambaffador  himfelf  &  the  Princes, 
as  alfo  by  the  King  &  State,  and  is  advertized  to  the  Duke 
m  the  ample!!  manner ;  who  being  very  affectionate  to 
our  King,  &  poffeffing  the  backfide  of  France,  he  think- 

that  his  Amity  ought  to  be  cultivated.  That  the  late 
Order  he  had  procured  for  our  Merchants  hath  the  defired 
effect,  and  is  obeyed  much  againft  the  Wills  of  the 
hungry  Judges  &  Officers,  whoarefaidto  have  purchafed 
their  Offices  at  great  prices,  upon  Hope  of  prey  among 
the  Merchants.  That  all  Provifions  are  at  an  exceeding 
high  rate  in  Madrid. 

1 23.  I  o  Sir  Thomas  Edmondes  His  Majefties  Ambaf¬ 
fador  with  the  Arch-duke.  3  59-  b. 

1  hat  although  the  Spanilh  Court  had  come  to  a 
refolution  not  to  deliver  up  Owen  &  Baldwyn ;  they 
would  take  care  that  they  Ihould  be  fo  punilhed  as  that 
our  King  Ihould  be  fatisfied.  That  the  Spaniards  gene¬ 
rally  deteft  all  that  they  believe  had  either  an  head  or 
a  hand  in  the  Gunpowder  Treafon  ;  and  in  particular, 
doe  laye  a  greate  Calumniation  upon  the  Jefuits,  who  (as 
an  Inquifitor  (Minifter  ?)  had  lately  obferved  to  him) 
leaving  the  Order  of  their  firft  Inftitution,  doe  now 
ftudy  to  become  Statifts,  and  to  put  Fire  into  all  King- 
domes  where  they  converfe. 

124.  From  Sir  Thomas  Edmondes.  dated  3  Febru¬ 
ary  1605-6.  330.  b. 

That  much  Expectation  there  is  in  the  Court  of 
Bruffels,  of  the  Refolution  of  the  King  of  Spain  touching 
Owen  &  Baldwyn.  That  a  Proclamation  had  been  iffued 
in  England  for  apprehending  three  Jefuits  detected  to 
have  beene  dealers  in  the  late  Treafon.  That  all  matters 
touching  the  profecution  of  the  War  againft  the  Hollan¬ 
ders  are  at  a  Hand,  till  the  Return  of  Spinola  from  Spain, 
where  he  had  been  fent  to  follicit  Money  for  new  Levies. 
And  that  the  Englilh  Fugitives  &  Traitors  were  mightily 
careffed  at  the  Arch-dukes  Court. 

125.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie.  252.  b. 

Concerning  the  high  Efteem  which  the  King  of 

Spain  &  the  Duke  of  Lerma  proteft  they  have  for  our 
King,  and  the  mean  Opinion  they  have  of  the  French 
Sincerity  towards  England. 

126.  To  Sir  Thomas  Edmondes,  His  Majefties  Am¬ 
baffador  with  the  Arch-duke.  354. 

127.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie.  355. 

lhat  there  are  many  Reports  of  a  Combination 

j*?ainft  his  Lordlhip,  and  that  five  Englilh  Romanifts 
Ihould  refolve  his  Death,  whom  they  hold  the  Difcoverer 
of  all  their  unnaturall  &  deftruClive  Intentions  againft 
their  Prince  &  Countrey.  That  the  learned  Francif- 
cans  utterly  millike  thefe  Courfes  held  with  Princes  by 
the  Popes  &  Jefuites  ;  and  plainly  fay  that  the  Popes  have 
noe  more  to  do  with  the  Crownes  of  Temporall  Princes, 
than  thofe  Princes  with  the  Hierarchyes  that  belong  to 
them.  Relateth  a  Conference  with  a  Spanilh  Jefuite 
who  was  in  England  with  the  Conftable,  touching  the 

modera 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


283 


Num.  1875. 

modern  practice  of  the  Popes  to  fulminate  their  Cenfures 
on  Princes  who  acknowledged  not  their  Authority,  there¬ 
by  expofing  them  to  the  Treacheries  &  Violences  of  their 
own  Subjects,  wherein  he  brought  the  Jefuit  over  to  his 
Opinion.  That  the  arrival  of  the  Flota  was  expe&ed 
with  the  greatefl  Impatience,  and  the  Kings  Gallies  were 
gone  from  Lilbon  in  order  to  convoy  the  fame,  and 
that  in  the  mean  time  the  Marquis  Spinola  continued  there. 

128.  To  the  Earle  of  Salilburie,  from  Villadolid. 

358.  b. 

That  Don  Belafco  of  Aragon  defires  to  be  recom¬ 
mended  as  afl'e&ionate  to  the  Service  ot  our  King,  and 
therefore  Sir  Charles  would  have  him  taken  notice  of, 
although  he  hath  hitherto  had  little  Occafion  to  ufe  his 
Power,  or  hath  feen  any  great  effect  of  it.  That  the 
Spaniards  fhew  a  great  longing  after  the  Alliance  with 
our  King,  infomuch  as  the  very  Name  of  our  Prince 
worketh  a  Change  in  the  Countenance  of  that  People 
who  continually  throng  to  the  Conftables  houfe  that  they 
may  fee  his  Picture  ;  and  that  they  affed  him  fo  much, 
as  were  it  not  for  the  difference  in  Religion,  his  Majefty 
would  not  be  able  to  deny  him  in  Marriage  to  their  Prin- 
ceffe.  That  there  is  again  a  great  want  of  Bread,  whereby 
many  fufter  extremely  ;  and  that  there  is  a  frefli  report 
of  the  Expedtance  of  the  Indian  Fleet  furnifhed  with  at 
lead  26  Millions.  That  the  Source  of  our  Merchants 
Complaints,  is  the  covetous  &  cruel  Difpofition  of  the 
Spanilh  Judges  &  Officers,  fome  of  whom  he  will  endea¬ 
vour  to  have  punifhed  ^n  an  exemplary  manner.  That 
he  hath  to  do  with  a  People  of  an  Iron  Heart,  &  Leaden 
Heels  ;  with  whom  the  patience  of  Job  himfelf  will  be 
found  to  want  weight.  Complaineth  of  his  private  Lottes 
fuftained  at  home  during  his  abfence,  and  therefore 
defireth  to  be  recalled  as  foon  as  his  Negotiations  ffiall 
be  brought  to  a  Conclufion. 

129.  From  Sir  Henrie  Wctton  his  Majefties  Ambaf- 
fador  with  the  State  of  Venice.  363. 

That  there  is  a  Quarel  grown  between  the  Pope  & 
that  State,  attributed  to  four  Caufes.  1 .  Denyal  of  De- 
cimes  &  general  Reflitution  of  the  Clergie.  2.  Refufal 
to  paie  moneys  that  have  been  in  necefiitous  tymes  bor¬ 
rowed  of  Convents  &  Corporate  Churches.  3.  A  De¬ 
cree  patted  in  Senate  againtt  converting  of  any  Landes 
to  Holy  Ufe,  by  Legacie  or  otherwife.  4.  Laying  of 
Secular  hands  upon  fome  perfons  in  Clericall  profelfion 
&  Habit.  That  there  are  but  two  wayes  of  Remedy  in 
this  bufinefs,  i.  e.  either  to  performe  what  the  Pope  de¬ 
fireth  ;  or  to  give  him  fufficient  Reafon  why  they  will 
not  do  it ;  but  that  the  Venetians  have  from  the  very  be- 
ginninge  refolved  upon  the  latter,  notwithftanding  one 
maligne  Circumffance,  which  is,  this,  the  Pope  afle&eth 
the  Name  of  a  great  Canonift,  and  haveing  proceeded  foe 
farre  already,  will  ptrhappes  be  loath  to  be  overcome  bv 
Difputation.  In  the  mean  time,  Sir  Henry  doubts,  that 
this  Affair  will  prove  nothing  but  the  farther  enriching 
of  the  Popes  Nephewe,  or  Brother,  or  fome  one  or  two 
of  the  vehement  Cardinalls. 

130.  The  perticular  of  the  Caufe  of  William  Squyre 

an  Englifhe  Merchant,  a  Fadtor  for  John  Eldred  of 
London  ;  fent  Lifbon,  and  received  by  my  Lord-Ambaf- 
l'ador,  2E  Martij  1605.  365.  b. 

1 3 1 .  The  Caufe  of  Tom  Taylor  Fadtor  for  Mr.  Robert 
Bromley  Prifoner  in  Lifbon  received  at  the  fame  time. 

367.  b. 

Thefe  Fadtors,  with  their  Ships,  &  Crew,  &  Mer- 
chandife,  were  taken  by  Don  Luiz  Firardo  in  America, 
who  foon  fold  the  Ships  &  Lading,  fhaved  the  Crew’s 
Heads  &  Sent  them  Slaves  to  the  Gallies,  keeping  the 
Factors  Prifoners  in  his  Ship,  where  they  lived  in  great 
Miiery  &  Poverty. 

132.  To  the  Duke  ofLerma,  upon  the  Receipt  of 

thefe  Complaints.  368.  b. 

133.  Reafons  deliuered  vnto  the  State  here  (i._e.  Spain) 
to  perfwade  Redrefs  in  the  former  Complaints  370. 


Num.  1875. 

134.  To  the  Earle  of  Salilburie,  from  Villadolid,  28 

Martij,  Stilo  antique  1605.  371.  b. 

That  Walpole  the  Jefuite  had  lately  caff;  an  abo¬ 
minable  Slander  upon  his  Lordfhip,  and  advifed  his  De- 
Itrudtion  ;  faying,  that  if  he  lived,  he  might  fee  the  end 
of  others,  who  (his  Lordlhip  being  taken  awaie)  might 
doe  fome  good  to  the  Church.  He  advifeth,  or  rather 
intreateth  his  Lordfhip  to  be  very  careful  &  wary  of  him¬ 
felf,  and  not  to  truft  the  Phifitian  mentioned  by  Walpole 
too  far.  He  relateth  an  odd  Story  of  one  John  Draper, 
who  carried  a  Letter  from  Dodtor  Bagfhott  an  Englifh 
Prieft,  to  a  C.apuchine  in  Orleans  named  Archangell, 
wherein,  it  was  fpecified  that  the  Projedts  for  Engfmd 
were  now  revealed  &  prevented.  That  the  Indian  Fleet 
although  daily  expedted,  remained  at  the  Havana,  for 
more  forces  to  be  taken  on  board  for  their  fafer  con¬ 
ducing  home;  and  that  Spinola  hath  an  Order  for  the 
weekly  payment  of  300000  Crownes,  until  the  end  of 
Auguft.  That  one  of  the  Kings  C.ouncellors  as  honorable 
and  honefl  man  as  any  fitts  amonglt  them,  allured  him 
fevcral  times  that  the  King  of  Spain  nourilheth  and 
payeth  within  the  Low  Countreyes  6ocooo  perfons ; 
which  yet  he  would  not  believe. 

135.  Lilt  of  the  Officers  of  Howfehold  to  the  King  of 

Spaine,  anno  1606.  376.  b. 

136.  Officers  &  Ladies  in  the  Queenes  Howfehold, 

1606.  377.  b. 

Then  followcth  this  Title,  as  given  to  a  fecond  Part 
of  the  Work ; 

Hispania,  anno  1606. 

Coppies  of  Lettres  written  to  &  received  from  Sir 
Charles  Cornwalleis  Knight,  in  the  fecond  yeere  of  his 
Ambaflage  in  Spaine,  with  other  his  Negotiations  and 
Obfervations. 

137.  To  the  Earle  of  Salilburie  ;  fent  by  the  way  of' 

.  .  .  .  the  Ordinarie  of  Italie,  departing  from  Valli- 

dolid  the  5th  of  April,  at  night.  379. 

That  one  Saunderfon  a  Scott,  a  Gentleman  by 
birth,  and  of  fome  good  Value  in  his  own  Countrey, 
had  been  there  long  foliciting  for  Reflitution  of  the 
Value  of  a  Shipp  of  his  imbarqued  by  the  Kings  Officers 
&  loft  in  his  Service  ;  as  alfo  for  Wages  during  the  tyme 
he  ferved  with  her  ;  and  is,  at  lalt.  promifed  Money  when 
it  comes  out  of  the  Indies.  That  the  Spaniards  are  in 
hand  with  this  Sanderfon  to  undertake  the  Building  of 
fix  fmall  Pinnaces,  fuch  as  they  ufe  to  fend  between 
Spain  &  the  Indies,  upon  Meflages  of  Advice,  offering  fo 
largely  for  the  fabricature  of  them,  that  there  will  be  at 
lealt  2000I.  faved  by  the  Bargaine.  That  he  had  advifed 
him  by  no  meanes  to  undertake  the  matter  without  the 
privity  of  his  owne  Soveraigne.  That  he  purpofed  to 
build  them  in  Ireland,  three  this  yeare  &  three  the  next, 
and  therefore  Sir  Charles  defireth  his  Lordlhips  directions 
in  the  matter. 

138.  Minute  of  a  Letter  written  to  Sir  George  Ca- 
rewe  his  Majefties  Ambaflador  in  France,  relating  fuch 
occurrents  as  are  exprelfed  in  the  LTe  following.  380.  b. 

139.  To  the  Lords  of  His  Majeffies  molt  honorable 

privie  Counfell ;  fent  by  th’aforefaid  means  and  at  the 
fame  tyme.  ibid. 

1  hat  Bufinefs  is  (till  at  a  ftand,  by  the  reafon  of  the 
King  &  Queen’s  frequent  motions.  That  there  is  no 
certain  News  of  the  Flota.  That  Spinola  is  gone  laden 
with  much  Honour  &  Profit.  That  the  Marques  of 
Avilena,  now  Ambaffador  in  Rome,  goeth  for  Vice-Roy 
into  Sicilia.  The  Duke  of  Feria  is  imployed  to  the  Em¬ 
peror,  and  the  Marques  of  Itona  to  Rome,  by  whom  he 
is  promifed  a  true  &  unfeigned  Correfpondence  in  all 
things  that  fhall  there  occurre,  which  concerne  our  King ; 
which  is  well  agreeing  with  his  Inltrudtions.  That  they 
have  commanded  a  Staie  of  all  payments  to  Sir  William 
Stanley,  until  they  fhall  fee  how  it  goes  with  him  in 
England.  That  upon  Receipt  of  their  Lordlhips  Letter 
in  behalf  of  Hall  &  Eldred,  he  had  fent  Oufely  his  Secre¬ 
tary 


284 


Cataiogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1875. 

tary  to  the  Court,  where  he  hath  yet  had  no  Audience. 
That  this  Caufe  will  prove  very  difficult  in  regard  of  the 
Greatnefs  of  the  Duke  of  Feria,  and  of  his  owne  wilfull 
Difpofition :  and  that  their  Caufe  is  made  the  more  def- 
perate,  by  the  frelh  taking  another  of  their  Shipps  (as  alfo 
another  of  one  Bromley)  in  America,  whofe  Mariners  are 
putt  into  the  Gallyes,  the  Fattors  imprifoned,  the  Goods 
conhicate  and  a  great  part  aliened,  &c. 

140.  From  Sir  Henry  Wotton  his  Majefties  Ambaf- 
lador  in  Venice  ;  dated  1 1  Martij  1606.  382.  b. 

•  n  ^at  the  Cavalher  Dodo  was  gone  to  Rome  well 
inltrufted  with  Replies,  and  in  the  mean  time  the  Pope 
had  lent  a  fecond  Monitory  Brief,  importing  that  if  their 
Ambaffador  were  longer  delayed,  he  would' proceed  to  a 
tull  Excommunication;  which  Brief  the  Nuntio  had 
been  fo  imprudent  as  to  communicate  to  the  Senate  juft 
as  the  Cavalier  aforefaid  was  fuppofed  to  be  got  to  Rome. 
Hereby,  he  had  much  exafperated  the  State,  and  loft  the 
Opinion  of  a  wife  Servant.  That  they  were  in  Expec¬ 
tation  of  a  Chiaux  from  the  Grand  Signor,  whofe  Bufinefs 
was  luppofed  to  be  either  to  threaten,  or  to  borrow. 

'4/.  l’o  Sir  Henry  Wotton  his  Majefties  Ambaffiidor 
in  Venice.  Sent  by  the  afornamed  Ordinary.  084 
That  the  long  Staie  of  the  Weft  India  Fleet  breedes 
a  general  Sorrowe  &  Difmay  among  the  Spaniards, 
that  the  Maiquis  Spinola,  notwithftanding  the  generall 
VV  ant,  is  now  furniffied  with  a  certayne  Order  for  a 
weekly  receipt  of  300000  Crownes  to  the  end  of  Auguft 
or  the  Somer-fervice  in  the  Low-Countreys  ;  where  it 
was  intended  to  keep  two  Armies  in  the  Field,  the  one 
to  attend  Grave  Maurice ;  the  other  to  proceede  with 
then-  former  Courfe  in  Frizeland.  That  the  Marquis 
Weft  is  made  one  of  the  Kings  Counfell  of  Eftate.  & 
Grandee  of  Spaine.  All  other  matters  at  a  ftand,  by  rea- 
fon  of  the  King  &  Queens  Abfence,  &  want  of  Money. 

142.  lo  the  Earl  of  Salifburie,  by  Collen  Hay.  38  c. 

that  fome  Sixteen  of  the  principal  of  the  Engliffi 
Merchants  &  Fadlors  at  Lifbon  mett  at  a  dynner  in  the 
houfc  of  one  Rolles  an  Englifhman,  who  had  turned  Pa- 
put  and  married  in  the  Countrey  ;  where,  among  other 
depraving  Speeches,  one  ended  with  a  Wiffi,  “  that  they 
had  the  King  of  England  and  His  AmbafTadour  faff 
chayned  in  one  of  the  Gallyes,  in  the  Haven.”  To  which 
Rolles  added.  “  That  he  might  have  the  whipping  of 
them,  nil  the  one  had  made  a  better  peace,  and  the 
other  procured  more  redrefle  in  the  Injuries,  which  in 
thole  parts  were  offered  unto  them.”  Sir  C  harles  fhew- 
eth  that  he  can  forgive  all  that  relateth  unto  him  from 
thole  men  who  had  never  fo  much  as  given  him  Thanks 
for  the  fervices  he  had  done  them  :  but  as  to  the  King  he 
can  by  no  meanes  either  tollerate  or  conceale  their  vndu- 
tifull  and  vnlufferable  prefumption,  and  therefore  defireth 
prdent  direction  in  the  matter.  That  the  Company  of 
Merchants  of  England,  in  this  Spring-tyme  of  the  amitie 
betweene  the  two  Princes,  ought  to  have  fent  thither  the 
unit  difcrcete  fee  beft  tempered  of  their  Servants,  but  the 
‘  °‘!n’arX  dld  appear  by  their  behaviour,  both  at  Lifbon, 
ana  at  bevil.  ’ 

143-  To  Sir  George  Carew  his  Majefties  Ambaffadour 
■1  1  rauce;  ienc  by  Collen  Hay  from  Valladolid.  386.  b. 

,■  l,4+\,10  the  Earle  of  hdiilburic  from  Valladolid,  by 
Collen  Elay.  ’  ■> 

fh,r!l’“!,,n-Spt"!arilSubeg!n  “  Chlnge  ,heir  Opinion 
ol  mm  ,  holding  him  to  be  too  troublelome  &  importu- 

nalCi  and  begin  to  receive  with  great  dillalle  the  Suites 
he  inaketh  in  behalf  ot  our  injured  Merchants.  That  the 
Kang  &  Duke  of  Lernia  are  much  difeontented  ;  and  as 
he  beheveth,  have  heard  feme  late  evill  Newes  of  their 
Indian  Fleete.  I  hat  their  own  Confufions  are  fo  greatt 
as  whofoever  negotiateth  with  them  mud  with  a  Suffer’ 
ance  beyond  the  boundes  of  all  ordinary  Patience  endure 
the  ength  ofqtme  &  intolletablc  delayer  that  their  irre! 
hi  hue  &  diffracted  mindes  breede  in  all  their  bufyneffes 
1  hat  the  Complaints  fent  in  by  the  Lilbon  Merchants  arc 


Num.  1875. 

fo  general],  that  neither  He  nor  the  Spaniards  (who  alfo 
complain  much  of  the  Er.glifh)  can  tell  what  to  make 
of  them.  I  hat  Gurgeine  is  the  man  that  wiffied  the 
King  &  Him  in  the  Galleyes,  &c. 

,.nl4T  The  Contents  of  a  Letter  to  the  Earle  of  Sa- 
Iifbune,  lent  by  Collen  Hay  who  departed  from  Valla¬ 
dolid,  30  Apnll  1606.  Stilo  novo.  39,. 

That  Walpole  the  Jefuite  had  acquainted  him  that 
pprTWaS  m.uch  diftra&ed  with  Coller,  byreafon  of 
a  Kefufal  in  Parliament  of  performeinge  the  Union,  upon 
Knowtedge  whereof,  armes  were  taken  in  London,  for 
which  falfe  Intelligence  he  had  fharply  rebuked  him. 
lhat  the  Spam ffi  Secretarie  of  State  had  told  him,  that 
their  Ambaflador  had  written  from  England  that  our  King 
'u  J  ?t  Hunting  &  hurt;  whereon  it  w;  s 

pu  binned  that  He  wasflayne,  but  immediatelie  contradi&ed 
by  a  Meflage  from  the  Oueene.  That  the  Pope  &  Princes 
of  Italie  do  labour  a  League  Offenfive  &  Defenfive  be¬ 
tweene  Spaine  &  France.  That  there  hath  been  tendred  to 
the  Spaniards  a  PraChfe,  from  Ireland;  but  the  Agents  de- 
parted  ill  fatisfied,  fayeing,  “  This  people  entertayne  noe 
1  mfician  longer  than  the  fitt  is  upon  them.”  And  that 
tor  his  owne  particular,  he  findeth  neither  their  Actions 
nor  Wordes  to  agree  with  their  former. 

i  4(b  I 0  the  Lordes  of  his  Majefties  moft  honorable 
pnvie  Counfell.  Sent  by  meanes  of  Lifentia  de  Pardo  an 
Agent  for  the  Ambaflador  in  England,  from  Villadolid. 

,  .  392.  b. 

1  bat  the  Spaniards  are  preparing  a  Fleete  of  at  leaft 
100  bayle,  which  is  to  carry  40000  Soldiers,  a  Fleet 
inferior  to  that  of  88.  It  is  given  out  that  they  pretend 
only  the  freemge  their  Coafte  of  the  Hollanders  ;  but  that 
it  ieemeth  too  greate  a  proportion  for  that  Service, 
i  r47'  Fr-°m  Sir  TIloinas  Edmonds  his  Majefties  Am- 
bafiador  with  the  Archdukes,  dated  the  23  Aprill  1 606. 

393- 


Concerning  the  Gun-powder-Traitors  Owen 
Baldwyn,  with  regard  to  whom,  the  King  of  Spain  &  the 
Arch-I)uke  were  d.fpofed  fo  give  our  King  fatisfaflion, 
were  it  not  for  the  pretended  holy  Jefuites.  Among 
which  Crew,  he  findeth  none  fo  viperoufly  affefted  as  tfofe 
of  our  owne  nation,  who  doe  raife  up  all  the  practiles 
agamft  his  Majefties  State  which  they  can  by  any  means 
devife.  Ihat  the  Popes  Nuntio  in  Spain  hath  written  a 
very  Itrange  and  reprehending  Letter  to  the  Nuntio  at 
nruffels,  becaufe  he  did  not  more  iinploye  himfelf  in  the 
behalf  of  thole  Traitors.  But  the  latter  being  of  a  more 
temperate  Spirit t,  hath  geven  the  other  a  better  reafon 
for  his  forbearance  &  moderation,  than  he  could  pretend 
tor  the_  inconfiderate  Paffion  which  he  hath  fhewed 
That  Sir  William  Stanley,  &  Bayley  (Owen’s  Compa¬ 
nion)  are  fett  at  libertie.  That  if  Order  be  not  taken 
ior  removmge  thefe  lewde  Inftruments  from  thence 
there  wift  be  no  end  of  their  praftifeing,  to  the  imbroileing 
ot  the  affaires  between  England  &  the  Arch-duke.  That 
all  matters  are  at  a  ftand  till  the  return  of  the  Marquis 
Spinola.  That  there  hath  been  a  Muteny  in  the  Engliffi 
Regiment  there,  againft  the  Lord  Arondell  the  Colonell 
by  the  inftigation  of  Sir  Thomas  Studder  the  Sergeant- 
Major ;  wherein  his  Lordfhip  would  find  it  difficult  to 
procure  Satisfadhun,  becaufe  he  is  fufpeded  by  the  fac¬ 
tion  of  the  Jefuites.  That  Capten  James  Blount  of  the 
lame  Regnnent,  (who  was  an  inward  Companion  with 
Catelby  &  Sir  Edward  Baynham  ;  and  did  partake  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  late  pradife)  hath  refufed  to  obey  his 
Majefties  Command  1  or  his  Repaire  into  Englande,  and 
withdrawne  himfelf  out  of  thofe  Countreys. 

148.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Councell ;  from  Madrid, 

.  That  the  Emperors  Ambaflador  who  had  cc  itmued 
m  Spain  33  years,  overcharging  his  minde  with  •'exation 
about  the  exceffive  Charges  of  his  Removal  f  >m  Valla¬ 
dolid  to  Madrid  ;  the  fame  night  that  he  arrived,  fell 
into  fome  diftra&ion,  and  the  next  day  into  a  Fever 
*2  wherof 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


Num.  1875. 

whereof  within  five  dayes  he  dyed,  a  man  of  greate  wealth. 
That  the  fudden  &  vnexpedled  remove  ot  the  Court  in 
fo  vnfeafonable  a  tyme,  Sc  foe  generall  extreame  want  of 
money  hath  bredd  here  a  great  Confulion  &  Difcontent, 
which  will  not  be  reordered  &  removed  till  the  Arrivall  ot 
the  Indian  Fleete,  whereof  there  is  now  noe  Newes  at  all. 
That  the  King  came  to  Madrid  from  Floranicus,  an  houfe 
of  Plea  l  ure  fome  faeven  leagues  off.  That  the  Duke  of 
Lerma  had  been  Tick  of  a  Calenture,  which  upon  bleed- 
mg  was  changed  into  a  Tertian.  That  by  reafon  of  his 
Sicknefs,  he  cannot  obtain  acceffe  to  the  King  ;  and  all 
other  bufinefs  there  was  dead  for  a  tyme. 

149.  From  the  Duke  of  Lennox  dated  the  fixth  of 

March  1 606.  4° 1  • 

Thanking  him  for  the  fervice  he  had  done  to  a  poor 
man,  upon  his  recommendation. 

150.  From  the  Earle  ofSaliibury,  26  March  1606.  by 

Mr.  Hawkefworth.  40 1 .  b. 

Conccrninge  the  Remayne  of  the  Debt  due  by  cer- 
taine  Priefts  of  Cales,  for  their  Ranfome  in  England, 
which  now  they  would  fain  Ihuffle  off.  Sir  Charles  is 
therefore  required  to  folicit  the  matter  ftrongly,  for,  faith 
the  Earl,  the  Debt  is  juft,  and  by  the  Articles  of  the 
Treatie  direiff  Provifion  is  made  for  the  fatisfyinge  of 
fuch  Debts.  Which,  if  they  go  about  to  delude  or  pro¬ 
tract  in  this  fafhion  as  they  doe,  wee  can  have  but  little 
hops  of  the  reall  Obfcrvation  of  the  greater  points,  more 
than  it  fhall  feeme  profitable  &  advantageous  vnto  them. 

1 5 1 .  From  the  Earl  of  Nottingham,  Lord  Pligh  Ad- 

mirall  of  England,  22  March  1606.  403. 

Upon  the  fame  affair. 

152.  From  my  Lord  Admirall.  (May  1606.)  404. 

About  fome  bufinefs  he  had  procured  to  be  aif- 

patched  for  the  Conde  de  Lemos. 

15’,.  From  Henry  Wriothefley  Earle  of  Southampton  ; 
by  Mr.  Hawkefworth.  4°4*  b. 

1 54.  From  the  Earles  of  Suffolke,  Northampton,  & 
Salifburie  :  2.  April  1606.  by  Mr.  Hawkefworth.  405. 

In  behalf  of  Sir  Henry  Cary,  who  was  taken  pri- 
foner  in  Flanders,  removed  from  Caftle  to  Caftle,  that 
his  Friends  might  have  no  Information  concerning  him, 
and  at  laft  his  Ranfome  fett  at  a  moll  exorbitant  Price. 
Our  King  therefore,  after  having  taken  fome  Notice  of 
the  matter  to  the  Spanifh  Sc  Arch- dukes  Ambaffadors, 
commandeth  him  to  move  it  to  the  King  of  Spain,  and 
Duke  of  Lerma. 

1 55.  From  the  Earle  of  Salifburie ;  by  Mr.  Hawkef¬ 
worth.  _  4°7- 

Concerning  Sir  Charles’s  private  Affaires,  which  his 
Lord  (hip  had  taken  care  of,  with  commendations  of  Mr. 
Hawkefworth  his  Secretary,  who  had  acquitted  himfelf 
with  Reputation  in  all  points. 

156.  From  the  Earle  of  Suffolke  Lord  Chamberlayne 

to  his  Majeftie,  by  Mr.  Hawkefworth.  408. 

rI  hat  he  was  one  of  thofe  few  who  were  made  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  great  bufinefs  brought  by  Mr.  Hawkef¬ 
worth,  and  with  the  return  He  carried  back.  His  I.ord- 
fliip  is  not  of  the  Opinion  that  the  Spanifh  Court  is  fin- 
cere  in  this  matter,  but  rather  that  it  is  an  Artifice  to 
gain  l  ime.  That  there  are  daily  Threatenings  by  under¬ 
hand  Reports,  that  a  Match  betweene  Spaine  6c  France 
is  induftrioufly  purfued  on  both  partes  ;  and  that  many 
Circumftances  give  Strength  to  the  beleefe  of  more  then 
likelyhood  of  a  Concluding  Effeft  of  this  matter. 

157.  From  the  Counteffe  of  Suffolke. 

In  fauor  of  Sir  Henry  Cary  Prifoner  in  Flanders. 

158.  From  the  Erles  of  Dorfett,  Nottingham  Devon- 
fhire,  Northampton,  &  Salifburie,  by  Mr.  Hawkefworth  ; 
in  anfwere  of  certaine  Propoficions  deliuered  there  by  him 
from  my  Lord  Ambaffadour.  17  March  1605-6.  4t?-b. 

That  our  King  after  infinite  Thanks  to  the  King  of 
Spain  Sc  his  Minifters  for  the  Confideration  they  had  for 
him,  will  not  refufe  but  delay  Entring  into  a  League 
Offenfivc  6c  Defenfive  ;  as  lie  did  before  at  making  the 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1875, 

Treaty  of  Amity  ;  the  fame  Reafons  ftill  fubfiftiug.  His 
Majefty  excufeth  himfelf  from  afting  as  Mediator  be¬ 
tween  the  King  of  Spain  &  the  Hollanders  ;  and  yet  in 
fuch  a  manner  as  not  to  difoblige. 

159.  Propofitions  from  His  Majeftie,  brought  by  Mr. 

Hawkefworthe,  under  the  Handes  of  the  Earles  of  Dor¬ 
fett,  Nottingham,  Devonfhire,  Northampton,  Sc  Salif¬ 
burie.  4 1 6. 

About  a  Peace  betweene  Spaine  Sc  the  United  Pro¬ 
vinces  ;  upon  the  foot  of  yielding  the  Soveraignty  thereof 
to  the  Prince  of  Great  Britain  Sc  the  Infanta  of  Spaine, 
foe  as  a  Marriage  maie  be  had  betwixt  them,  with  Suc- 
ceflion  to  the  Children  begotten  of  their  bodyes. 

160.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie  from  Madrid  ;  by  Mr. 

Williams,  beginning  his  Journey  3  Junij.  41 9.  b. 

Relating  the  Conference  he  had  with  the  Earl  of 
Villa-longa  the  Spanilh  Secretary  of  State,  after  Mr. 
Hawkefworthe's  Returne,  about  the  great  Bufinefs. 
That  he  can  obtain  noe  acceffe  either  to  the  King  or  the 
Duke  of  Lerma  ;  which  he  imputeth  to  a  defire  in  the 
Duke  of  wynning  tyme  for  Deliberation  in  what  forte  to 
deale  with  him.  That  one  Clifford  doth  publickly  there 
deprave  the  Religion  6c  Government  of  his  Countrey. 
That  Don  Lewis  Firardo  hath  lately  beene  abroad  with 
his  Navye,  and  fas  ’tis  faid)  had  fortune  only  to  meete 
with  an  Englilh  Pirate  loaden  with  Spanyards,  purpofed  to 
be  fould  in  Barbarie.  That  he  is  advertifed  from  Siuile 
that  Firardo  in  his  Voyage  mett  with  certaine  Shippes 
from  London,  laden  with  Corne,  Sc  bound  for  Siuile. 
That  he  tooke  the  Mafters,  Sc  firft  fett  their  Neckes  in 
the  Stockes  ;  after,  removed  them  to  the  Admirall,  Sc 
there  with  his  owne  handes  did  as  much  to  their  Legges, 
reviling  Sc  calling  them  Heretiques,  Lutheranes,  Doggs, 
Sc  Enemyes  of  Chrift,  threatening  to  hang  them,  See. 
That  he  hath  been  an  earned  Suiter  for  the  liberty  of 
the  other  Englilh  Factors  Sc  Mariners,  but  is  aunfwered 
with  the  Shrinke  of  the  Shoulder,  Sc  defired  to  have  yet 
patience.  That  he  hath  not  been  able  to  procure  the  Re- 
ftraint  of  Captain  James  Blount.  That  notwithftandinge 
he  hath  lately  procured  the  King’s  Letters  to  be  fent  to  all 
his  Ports,  with  expreffe  Commandement  of  an  efpecial  re¬ 
gard  to  the  good  vfadge  of  His  Majefties  Subjects ;  yet,  in 
all  places  they  receive  as  many  grievances  as  ever,  which 
he  imputeth  to  the  evill  Difpofirions  of  the  Spaniards,  or 
to  fome  Connivance  of  the  Court.  He  fuggefteth  there¬ 
fore  that  fome  prefent  Courfe  be  taken  for  the  reliefe  of 
the  poore  Merchants,  that  can  procure  noe  Redreffe  by 
way  of  Mercy  or  Juftice. 

161.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie,  from  Madrid,  by  the 

fame.  43 

That  he  hath  been  with  the  Conde  de  Villa-longa, 
about  Sir  Henry  Carye,  whofe  Anfwer  was  good  :  Sc  he 
hopeth  when  he  can  get  acceffe  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  to 
procure  a  good  end  to  that  affair.  I  hat  he  will  afli ft 
Marten  van  Somaren  in  getting  the  remaiuder  of  the  Debt 
due  from  the  Spanifh  Friers.  That  he  purpoleth  not  to 
deliver  the  Kings  Letter  in  behalf  of  George  Strangham  a 
Scotfman,  till  he  lhall  further  underftand  his  Majefties 
pleafure  ;  wilhing  that  His  Majefties  Hand  were  more 
fpare  in  thofe  private  Caufes,  efpecially  to  the  King. of  a 
Nation  fo  punttual  as  that,  which  hath  already  fett  fome 
Note  of  His  often  writing.  That  the  Spaniards  have  nei¬ 
ther  foe  much  good  Nature  as  to  love  for  the  prefent, 
nor  foe  much  Difcretion  Sc  Providence  as  to  feare  for  the 
future.  But  fithence  Feare  Sc  Feeling  work  moll  upon 
them,  he  would  that  his  Majeftie  Ihould  make  a  little 
Effay  of  the  French  Kings  Medicine  (when  the  French 
can  find  no  Reliefe  by  waie  of  Juftice)  to  even  their  Lof- 
fes  upon  the  Seas.  Twoe  or  three  fuch  Examples  will 
prove  a  meane  of  prefent  Reformation  in  all  Dilorders. 

162.  To  the  Earle  of  Northampton.  434. 

Touching  fome  of  his  private  Affairs.  That  he 

had  the  favor  of  the  King  of  Spain  to  land  the  Value  of 
his  Money  (he  intended  to  bring  with  him,)  in  Commo. 

4  D  dities* 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1875. 

Cities,  at  Lifbon,  Cuftom-free.  That,  befides,  the  Duke 
of  Lerma  had  procured  that  King  to  give  the  Order  of 
St.  Jago  to  a  Gentleman  at  Sir  Charles’s  Requeft,  for 
which  he  received  a  Gratification  of  40.  1.  and  wondereth 
why  he  maie  not  receive  without  Sufpicioh  what  our 
King,  out  of  his  Liberalitie  would  be  ft  owe  upon  him. 
Relateth  the  meanes  ufed  by  the  Conde  de  Villa-Longa 
die  Spanifh  Secretary,  to  gain  him  to  themfelves ;  and 
his  Ccnduct  on  that  Occafion,  fince  which,  He  hath 
found  his  Reputation  much  increafed.  That  he  hath 
alfo  had  Offers  from  a  German  to  break  the  Peace  be¬ 
tween  England  &  Spain,  which  he  alfo  rejefted, 

1 63  To  the  Earle  of  Northampton,  Lord  Warden  of 
the  Cinque  Ports.  4,3  b- 

Blaming  the  Spaniards  for  their  Unfteadinefs  as  to 
their  Propofals  ;  and  Ling  this  down  for  a  Maxim  in 
State,  that  he  neither  loves  his  King  or  Countrey,  that 
wtfhes  any  Faith  to  be  given  to  the  Spaniards,  or  Con¬ 
fidence  to  their  Courtefies,  longer  than  they  ferve  for 
fupplies  to  their  owr.e  neceflities. 

164.  lo  the  Earle  of  Sulfolke  Lord  Chamberlaine  to 

his  Majefty.  43  9.  b. 

165.  1  o  the  Countefs  of  Suffolke.  440. 

That  he  ha'h  tak  n  much  paines  for  the  reducing 

Mr.  Henry  Cage’s  Ranfome  to  fome  reafonable  Propor¬ 
tion  ;  his  being  found  in  that  Company  (after  foe  many 
Favours  &  good  Entertaynement  received  in  the  Aich- 
dukes  Courier  being  very  unkindly  taken.  That  he  hath 
at  laft  prevailed  with  the  Duke  of  Lerma  &  the  Earl  of 
Villa-longa,  that  Belafco  (who  is  now  poflefled  of  him 
{hall  (when  he  receiveth  the  Kings  Liberalitie  for  his  paft 
Services-'  give  him  his  Libertie,  upon  a  verie  reafonable 
agreement  Sir  Charles  fendeth  her  Ladyfliip  fome 
curiofities  made  by  Spanilh  Nuns  of  Quality,  and  one 
among  the  reft  to  the  Lady  Cecil!. 

166.  To  the  Earle  ot  Nottingham,  &c.  441.  b. 

That  the  Conde  de  Lemos  is  very  thankful  for  our 

Kings  favor  done  unto  him.  That  the  Spaniards  are  dif- 
guftedat  our  Court,  faying  that  their  Ambaffador  can 
receive  no  contentment  or  favor  there,  but  from  the  Kinr 
himfelf.  ° 

16 j.  lo  the  Earle  of  Sufiolke,  Lord  Chamberlaine, 

^C'  rr.i  443-  b. 

1  hat  he  fuffereth  in  his  Negotiation  of  the  great 
Buhnefs,  through  the  traiter'ous  Reports  fpread  by  fome 
unnaturall  Intelligencers  of  our  own  Countrey.  That 
much  Complaint  hath  come  thither,  of  the  little  refpeft 
ufed  by  the  Englifti  Minifters  towards  the  Spanifti  Am- 
baflador  ;  for  which  reafon  the  Spaniards  have  altered 
their  Carriage  towards  him.  That  as  lo  the  afurefaid 
Great  Negotiation,  much  is  the  prefent  diftaft  of  the 
Spaniards,  and  the  neglett  we  are  growne  into  with  them. 
Vc.he  hime,h  as  if  there  was  little  likelyhood  of  their 
Conjumftion  with  France. 

16S.  "lo  the  Earle  of  Northampton.  444.  b. 

He  expreffeth  himfelf  as  if  the  Di  hit  .  in  bring - 
!I'S  ^e  great  Bufineis  about,  were  almoft  infuperable. 
that  the  Spaniards  are  not  iuft  for  Jultice  fake,  nor 
loving  in  Regard  of  Charitie  or  Merit,  but  a  perticuler 
Intere ft.  1  hat  the  Intelligencers  in  England,  &  Fujri- 
uves  there  do  infinite  prejudice  to  the  Interefls  of  our  King 

6  C  ountrev.  He  wifheth  that  Reprifals  were  made  on 

tne  .Spaniards  who  have  no  Commileration  of  our  EmTlh 
Merchants.  ° 

.  ' 6,9'  To  ®irL  T*™**  Edinon^s>  His  Majefties  Am- 
baflador  with  the  Archduke.  Sent  by  an  Englifti  Frier. 

7  m  1  uf  hC,!“Uh  r°Vcd  for  the  A  PPrehenfion  of  Captain 
James  Blount,  (who  was  recommended  thither  by  the 
Bruflels-Jefuites,  &  hath  been  confirmed  by  Walpole  & 
others)  but  without  any  farther  effect  than  Promifes 
1  hat  Biount  hath  had  better  Succefs  in  his  Endeavours 
to  blalt  his  late  Colonel  the  Lord  Arundel,  £c  alfo  his 
Lordfltip.  I  hat  this  may  be  taken  the  more  patiently. 


Num.  1875. 

m  regard  they  have  done  the  fame  by  our  King,  and  his 
whole  State.  That  the  Handle  given  to  the  Spaniards 
tor  this  a  Iteration,  is  the  reftraint  of  Englifti  Supplies  to 
them  and  the  yielding  them  abundantly  to  their  Enemies, 
the  d.iVcfpectfu!  Ufage  of  their  AmbaiTador,  &  denyal 
of  Juftice  to  their  Subj  efts.  That  the  Princes  of  Savoy 
are  upon  their  Departure,  and  ftay  only  for  the  Money 
they  ftiould  have  from  the  King  for  the  Charge  of  their 
Journey.  1  hat  the  King  did  lately  forbeare  to  goe  pub- 
Jiquely  to  his  Chappell,  becaufe  of  the  AmbaiTador  of 
Venice,  wh  ch  State  is  thought  to  be  how  compleately 
excommunicated  That  the  Marquis  Spinola  hath  en¬ 
gaged  his  Mate  for  fupport  of  this  Campaign,  and  there- 
fore  hath  bought  his  Titles  of  Councellour  of  State  & 
Grandee  ofSpaine  very  dear. 

170.  Certaine  Reafons  drawne  bymy  Lord  Ambafia- 
dour  io  prove  that  the  Allyance  with  England  concern- 
mge  the  Lowe  Countreys  in  Dowrie,  is  both  honorable 
&  profitable  for  Spaine.  ^ 

The  Coppie  of  this  was  inclofed  to  nty  Lord  of  baht, 
bune,  in  a  letter  dated  29  Maij. 

, .  *  7 1  •  JTo*he  h  ar,e  of  Salifburie,  from  Madrid  ;  bv 
Alexander  Stuart,  who  beganne  his  Journey  the  qth  of 
June  1600. 

T  hat  the  Duke  of  l  erma  looketh  very  pale  &  weak- 
u  ■nrmI,rReCovcr>’’  hating  not  been  fpared  by  the 
bpanidi  Phylictans,  who  have  not  fo  much  Skill  as  ours 
S'J  Conference  he  had  with  that  Duke,  upon 
the  Subjefts  of  Reft,iut,D„  to  be  made  to  our  Merchants ; 
of  then  Ambaffadors  being  difgracefully  ufed  by  our  Kings 
Mimifeis  ;  of  the  Kings  Anfwer  to  their  Propofitions  of 
the  great  bufmefs  ;  the  pumfbment  or  delivery  of  the 
Traylor  Owynej  &  the  enlargement  of  Sir  Henry  Carve. 
Relateth  alfo  the  D.fcourfe  between  Mr.  Hawkefivorth 
ns  Secretary  and  the  Conde  de  Villa  Longa,  about  re- 
ititution  to  be  made  to  our  Merchants.  That  the  Sm- 
niards  upon  the  Departure  of  the  Hollanders  from  their 
Coalls,  are  again  grown  as  haughty  as  ever.  That  he  is 
of  opinion  they  will  not  yield  to  the  propofed  alliance 
between  the  two  Crownes,  by  reafon  of  the  Oppofition 
made  thereunto  by  the  Cunfeifors  they  confult. 

Meijengen  ““  °f  Sa,ifl>uric  >  *=  Wald 

That  there  are  Iatelie  arrived  divers  Irlfh  Fryers? PTefts 
&  Captames,  from  the  I.owe  Countries,  &  keep  their 
Rendevous  at  the  Lodgmge  of  Captaine  Bioum  ;  where 
(as  m  other  places)  they  talke  libendlie  of  England  & 
Englifh  matters  and  againft  our  King  himfelf.  That’ for 
divers  reafons  he  finde.h  nothimlhlfin  a  capacity  of 
getting  the  Offenders  punifhed  :  one  of  which  ll  becaufe 
of  the  extreanre  Lawes  aud  bitter  Pe, fermion  as  Z 
Spamards  terms  it;  agatnfl  rhole  of  their  Religion  both 
England  &  Ireland  ;  efpecially  in  Ireland,  Jhere  'hev 
reporte  that  Pnells  &  Friers  are  executed  by  MartiajI 
Lawe.  Moreover,  that  fuch  Informations  are  gev  n 
even  out  of  the  Kings  Chamber,  in  depravation  If  his 
1  erlon.  Government.  &  State  as  fiavp  fv.ri  k  . 
fa,al  an  effefl.  Thm  Sir  Ca^bufineft  mu°ft 

be  tried  by  a  C  ouncil  of  War,  &  fubjecTed  to  the  ordinary 
delayes.  Relateth  the  lamentable  Cafes  of  our  Merchants 

K  other  the  kings  fubjeds,  who  can  have  no  relief  from 

the  Spaniards  ;  &  whole  RedrefTe  he  leaveth  to  the  King 
I  hat  the  Alliance  with  our  State  is  not  now  thought  § 
by  them.  1  hat  Spmola  was  inforced  to  engage  hifowne 
Ellate  to  the  Genowayes,  for  the  borrowmg e  ofTis 
yeeres  Money  for  the  Warres.  That  they  have  now  no 
more  hopes  ot  the  Indian  Fleete.  That  they  have  railed 
as  much  Money  in  Stciha  &  Naples  as  is  polfible  but  it 
proves  as  a  bean  in  the  Mouth  of  a  Lion.  He  looketh 
on  the  Extremity  of  their  hatred  to  the  Frc  ch  to  be  fo 
great  as  that  an  Alliance  with  that  Nation  muff  be  re. 
ferved  for  a  defperate  Medicine,  to  be  fwallowed  like  a 
1  ill,  without  either  chawinge  or  thinking  on.  Thar 
there  ts  a  great  Competition  between  the  two  Jefuits  Cref. 

4  well 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


28 


7 


Num.  1875. 

well  A  Parfons,  of  the  former  of  whom  he  conceiveth 
the  bed;  Opinion  and  thinketh  him  the  bed  Inftrutnent  he 
could  ufe  for  working  the  Alliance  with  us,  A  difappoint 
it  with  France  ;  but  fince  his  Lordlhip  hath  forbidden 
him  to  correfpond  with  him,  he  will  obey. 

j  73.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie,  from  Madrid.  473.  b. 

Relating  his  Difcourfe  with  the  Spanilh  Secretary 
Prada,  concerning  the  Spaniards  beginning  again  to  fuffer 
themfelves  to  be  abufed  by  our  Fugitives  ;  for  which, 
they  had  before  bitterly  fmarted  ;  concerning  the  Ap- 
prehenlion  of  Blount,  &  Punilhment  of  Owynne  ;  and 
that  Secretaries  Affertion  that  our  King  ftayed  all  thofe 
who  were  willing  to  ferve  the  Archduke,  and  luftered 
multitudes,  out  of  London  it  felf,  to  put  themfelues  into 
the  Army  of  the  Hollanders.  That  the  French  endeavor 
to  put  a  Pique  betweene  England  Sc  Spaine,  for  the 
better  effecting  the  late  affected  Allyance.  That  the 
Duke  of  l.erma  refufeth  to  be  fpoken  with  ;  and  though 
the  Conde  de  Villa-Longa  denyes  noe  Audience,  he  fo 
niggles  Sc  fhuffies,  as  with  him  there  can  be  found  noe 
found  ground. 

174.  A  Letter  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma.  476.  b. 

In  behalf  of  Sir  Henry  C.arye  •,  about  the  great 

Bufinefs  as  profitable  to  Spain,  A  honorable  to  the  Duke; 
and  putting  him  in  mind  of  the  Merchants. 

175.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  20  Junij  1606.  477.  b. 

Touching  the  weak  &  unfetled  State  of  Spain. 

That  the  Jefuits,  Priefls,  Friers,  A  Fugitives  agree  that 
his  l.ordfhip  is  the  Caufa  Caufarum  of  all  their  Sufferings, 
and  the  onely  efpeciall  Favourer  &  Patron  of  the  States. 
That  therefore  they  have  plotted  together  for  the  Murder 
of  his  Lordfhip,  by  a  Mufket-fhott  out  of  the  Savoy,  or 
fome  other  houfe  neere,  as  his  Lordfhippe  fhall  be  goeinge 
by  Water  to  the  Courte,  or  other  place  in  Weflminiter, 
and  he  partly  fufpecleth  that  Blount  is  the  Man  who  mull 
do  it.  That  the  Spaniards  complain  much  of  England, 
and  that  his  Majertie  hath  broken  the  Conventions  of 
Peace.  That  they  feeke  for  the  Will  of  the  Kings  Mother, 
written  with  her  owne  hand,  whereby  the  Queene,  in 
cafe  that  the  King  her  Son  fhould  ot  become  a  Catho- 
lique,  deuifed  her  Kingdome  of  Scotland,  and  all  Her 
rights  in  England,  France  &  Ireland  to  the  King  of  Spaine. 
That  advice  is  come  of  the  Loffe  of  four  of  the  Galleons 
laden  with  Treafure  from  the  Indies  ;  and  that  it  was 
much  fufpecled  that  the  other  three  are  gone  the  fame 
waye.  That  in  Peru,  there  are  live  Townes  latelye 
fwallowed  with  an  Eanhquake,  and  with  them,  two  filver 
mynes  ;  and  the  like  number  of  Store  houfes  wherein 
was  kept  the  Kings  Quick-lilver  thar  refined  the  Silver. 
That  the  Hollanders  had  funk  four  of  the  five  Ships  that 
Don  Lewis  Firardo  had^  left  in  the  Weft-Indies.  That  he 
had  had  a  late  Audience  of  the  King  of  Spaine  who  ufed 
him  very  gracioufly.  A  promil'ed  that  he  would  redrels 
the  Merchants  Grievances,  and  that  Owynne  fhould  be 
dealt  with  as  he  deferved.  That  the  Duke  of  Lerma 
holds  himfelf  verie  private  ;  but  that  his  Privado  Don 
Rodrigo  Calderon  hath  fent  him  word  that  the  bufynes 
concerning  Sir  Henry  Carey  fhall  with  greate  care  and 
fpeede  be  difpatched.  'I  hat  the  Conde  de  Vilfa-Longa 
had  folemnly  fworne  that  Blount  fhould  be  hanged,  if 
any  guiltynes  fhould  be  found  in  him,  and  yet  had  after¬ 
wards  fhewn  him  a  faire  Countenance.  That  the  fame 
Conde  hath  diftafted  all  the  Ambaffadours  about  the 
Courte,  the  Pope';  Nuntio  himfelf  n^t  excepted;  but 
the  French  Ambaffador  mofl  of  all,  who  hath  now,  of 
late,  noe  acceffe  either  to  him,  or  the  Duke.  That  it 
was  thought  that  Peace  would  not  long  continue  betweene 
Spaine  &  France.  That  there  hath  of  late  been  great 
meanes  ufed  by  the  Duke  of  Lerma  Sc  the  Conde  de 
Villa-Longa,  to  affemble  200,000  double  Piflnletts  vpon 
afudden.  And  that  the  Court  took  Offence  at  his  having 
a  Sermon  preached  in  his  houfe  on  Sundays. 

176.  To  Sir  Walter  Cope.  484. 

About  the  ill  State  of  the  Spaniards,  who  are  in 


Num.  1875. 

much  Confufion  by  reafon  of  the  Hollanders,  &  the  lofs  of 
the  greatefl  part  of  their  Indian  Fleet ;  and  that  they  are 
extremely  jealous  of  the  Earl  of  Salifbury,  who  ought 
to  be  very  carefull  of  himfelf. 

177.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie.  485.  b. 

Setting  forth  the  Perplexities  the  Spaniards  labuur 

under;  propofing  a  new  Project  of  his  owne  for  effecting 
the  great  Bufinefs,  in  cafe  the  prefent  one  ihould  fail ; 
&  reciting  a  freffi  rumor,  of  the  Hollanders  beating 
Firardo,  fpoiling  his  Fleet,  &  taking  his  Perfon. 

178.  To  the  Earl  of  Northampton,  Lord  Warden  of 

the  Cinque  Ports.  5  July  1606.  489. 

'I  hat  the  Spaniards,  upon  the  lying  Reports  of  the 
Fugitives,  are  much  altered  in  their  Inclinations  &  Carriage 
towards  us,  and  fhew  all  want  of  will  to  redrefs  any  of 
the  Wrongs  done  to  our  Merchants  at  a  Conjuncture 
when  (were  they  not  blinded  &  made  ftupid  by  theirPride 
and  overweeninge)  it  would  pi  finely  appeare  vnto  them, 
that  would  our  King  be  lightly  moued  to  an  Occafion  to 
breake  with  them,  it  is  now  in  his  power  (confidering 
the  prefent  miferable  Eflate  they  fland  in)  to  fett  his 
Foote  on  their  Heads,  A  fincke  them  for  ever.  Advifes 
that  fomeMethod  be  taken  in  order  to  draw  them  to  better 
Termes  of  Commerce  than  thofe  now  in  ufe,  otherwife 
the  Peril  1  of  our  Merchants  wil  be  much,  and  theire  Game 
nothing.  That  the  Spaniards  are  a  mofl;  ftiffe  &  ftrange 
people,  and  in  their  humours  fo  defperate,  as  that  they 
will  adventure  the  ruyne  of  all,  rather  then  for gee  their 
Cuflomes,  or  haflen  their  pace  in  any  thinge.  That  as 
for  their  Divinity,  at  this  inllant  it  hardly  agreeth  with 
good  Humanity.  That  to  murder  or  make  away  any 
man  thatflands  betweene  them  &  their  ends,  they  account 
it  rather  a  matter  of  Meritt  than  of  Malice. 

179.  To  the  Lords  of  His  Majefties  mofl  honorable 

Privie  Counfell,  from  Madrid.  4g2. 

Complaining  of  the  incertain  humorof  theSpaniards, 
from  whom  he  cannot  as  yet  procure  Juflice  to  be  done 
to  our  Kings  complaining  Subjeds.  That  the  Spaniards 
alledge  that  in  England  they  receive  noe  Juflice  nor  Favor 
at  all  ;  I  hat  unto  the  Hollanders  there  are  permitted 
5000  Souldiers,  to  them  not  one  ;  That  our  King,  by 
his  Articles,  is  to  fecure  the  Coafls,  where  the  Subjecls 
A  Souldiers  of  their  King  are  continualie  fpoiled  Sc  111a f- 
facred  :  with  the  plain  A'  refolute  Anfweis  he  returned 
unto  them,  &  their  Thrafonical  Reply.  He  fetteth  forth 
the  great  Weaknefs  of  the  Spaniard,  and  the  very  wretch¬ 
ed  way  they  go  by,  in  the  management  of  affaires.  That 
there  had  been  a  notable  Sermon  preached  in  the  Kings 
Chapell,  enforceing  the  Neceffitie  of  Obedience  to  the 
Authoiitie  of  the  Pope,  whom,  with  refped  to  the  Vene¬ 
tians,  it  is  refolved  in  Council  the  King  (hall  not  abandon. 
That  at  la  A,  after  long  Solliciiation,  Blount  is  appre¬ 
hended  &  kept  clofe  prilbner.  That  farther,  to  content 
our  King,  they  have  lately  given  warninge  to  all  the  Iriih 
Captaines,  Souldiers,  Fryers,  Priells,  Sc  Beggars  (of  all 
which  there  are  lately  come  a  great  fwarine)  that  ymedi- 
ately  they  avoyde  the  Countrey  :  and  one  Cuiack  a 
Dodor  of  Downy,  who  was  in  a  good  way  to  have  ob- 
teyned  20000  Crownesfor  amplifyeing  the  Irifh  Semina- 
rie  in  Doway,  is  now  like  to  lofe  his  labour.  That 
divers  of  thefe  whom  He  had  procured  to  be  delivered 
from  the  Callies  had  fallen  again  to  their  old  Trade  of 
pillaging  the  Spaniards  &  Portuguefe,  A  were  fett  upon 
by  Don  Lewis  Firardo,  with  whom  (notwithflanding  his 
much  fuperior force )  they  fought delperately  fora  day  A 
a  night,  killing  many  of  his  People  ;  but  were,  at  lafl 
taken,  the  principal  of  them  hanged,  A  the  refl  putt  10 
their  old  Stations. 

180.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie,  from  Madrid. 

49s- b. 

Much  againft  the  Spaniards ;  A  hinting  as  if  the 
peace  between  England  A  Spain  was  an  Impediment  to  the 
greatefl  advantage  A  meanes  to  Inriche  our  King  A 
Realine,  that  in  any  Age  hath  ever  ben  offered.  As  to 

ihe 


iS8  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  i  875. 

the  Man  that  fliould  kill  his  Lordfhip,  he  doth  now  vehe¬ 
mently  fufpeft  one  Captain  Burke  an  lrifhman,  becaufe 
of  his  owne  evill  Affection  to  our  Nation  and  Govern¬ 
ment  ;  and  the  g reate  Favours  Sc  Increafe  of  Penfion  & 
Reward  that  lie  hath  received  fince  his  coineing.  That 
among  the  Pages  of  the  Duke  of  Lerma’s  Chamber,  a 
common  talke  it  is  what  an  extreme  Perfecutor  His 
Lordfhippe  is  of  the  Catholiques  in  England.  Hereupon, 
every  man  willies  that  their  hands  might  give  him  the 
Pugnaladol  this  his  Cruelty  deferveth.  That  among 
the  reft,  one  Warren  an  Englilh  Barber  (and  of  fome 
privacy  with  the  Duke)  wiflied  he  were  in  England  to 
give  his  Lordfhip  the  Stabb,  though  he  were  hanged  Sc 
&  quartet  ed  the  next  daie  after.  That  thefe  are  the  fruites 
of  the  malicious  reports  of  our  Jefuits  &  Fugitives,  which, 
as  yet  he  cannot  fuppreffe. 

181.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie.  502. 

That  pittiful  Reports  had  been  fpread  about  Blounts 
Imprifontnent,  as  if  he  was  putt  into  Irons,  &c.  where¬ 
upon  vSir  Charles  had  fome  purpofe  to  fend  one  to  have 
Conference  with  him  Sc  relieve  him,  the  matter  was  fo 
continually  referred  forwards  &  backwards,  between  the 
Conde  de  Villa-Longa  Secretary  of  State,  &  the  Conde 
de  Miranda  Prefident  of  Caftile,  that  it  came  to  nothing 
at  laft.  Sir  Charles  adds,  I  verelie  thinke  if  a  man  fhould 
putt  up  a  memoriall  vnto  them  defiring  it  might  be  law- 
full  to  eate  Muftard  with  his  Beefe,  they  would  keepe 
one  Three  Monthes  in  the  Councells  Sc  Confults  before 
they  would  determine  it.  That  by  their  delayes  they 
daily  diftate  all  people  but  thofe  of  theire  ow'n  Nation  ; 
And  yet  they  had  a  mind  to  have  Blount  tried  by  their 
Laws,  although  a  Subject  of  our  King,  Sc  his  Treafons 
committed  out  of  their  Dominions.  That  the  f’everal 
Councils  of  State,  Warre,  Sc  the  Indies  fitt  exceeding 
often  Sc  very  clofe.  That  there  are  three  projetts  on  foot 
for  raifing  money  to  the  King.  1  A  Libertie  of  Habita¬ 
tion  &  Religion  to  the  Jewes  ;  which  people  offer  very 
largely.  2  An  yeerlie  portion  to  the  King  out  of  all 
Bifhopricks  Sc  Ecclefiafticall  Livings.  3  A  Ratable  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  Geld  &  Silver  Plate  of  that  Kingdome. 
But  that  he  believed,  all  three  would  prove  but  a  Faggott 
to  warme,  their  Shirts,  not  a  Fire  to  rofl  their  meate. 
He  doubts  not  but  his  Majeftie  will  provide  fome  Reliefe 
for  his  poor  fubjech  who  can  have  no  Juftice  in  Spaine  ; 
but  is  of  opinion  that  the  olde  Waye  ofgrantinge  Letters 
of  Mart  or  Reprifaall,  will  be  dangerous  ;  His  Majefties 
Subjects  having  fo  great  effects  there.  That  Sir  George 
Carre  hath  received  Advertifements  from  England,  which 
he  had  communicated  to  the  Conftable,  to  the  Secretarie 
Prada  Sc  Villa-longa. 

18a.  To  Sir  Thomas  Edmonds  his  Majefties  Ambaf- 
fador  with  the  Arch-duke,  9  July  1606.  536.  b. 

That  he  believeth  the  Spaniards  will  not  affent  to 
deliver  up  Blount  for  England,  toward  which  their  Hu¬ 
mor  is  much  changed  for  the  worfe.  The  caufe  of  this 
Alteration  they  attribute  to  us,  with  whom  in  generality 
they  find  neglect,  and  in  particularity  contempt.  But 
Sir  Charles  judgeth  it  to  proceed  from  the  Intelligencers 
who  deprave  the  King,  &  exaggerate  the  Perfection  (To 
called)  of  the  Catholicks,  together  with  our  aflifting  the 
Hollanders  underhand.  Herewith  they  bitterlie  charge 
fome  of  His  Majefties  Minifters  of  greateft  power,  and 
are  not  without  a  Will  to  revenge  the  fame  by  any 
meanes  they  can  either  publique  or  fecret.  That  by  the 
fuppofed  Lofle  of  the  Indian  Fleet,  and  the  extreme  want 
occafioned  thereby,  they  are  become  both  ftupid  Sc  def- 
perate,  Sc  even  careleff’e  of  the  continuance  of  the  Peace 
w'hereof  they  never  had  foe  extreame  neede,  fince  if  our 
King  was  at  Libertie,  it  would  be  within  his  power  to 
let  his  foote  on  their  Heads,  &  fincke  them  for  ever. 
Rehearfeth  the  three  projects  abovementioned  for  rayfing 
Money  ;  concluding,  that  things  there  are  in  much  Dii- 
order  and  Confufion,  being  infected  with  the  malignant 
Breath  of  fome  Jefuits  Sc  other  Fugitives,  and  other  ill- 
aft'eded  Countrey -men  of  our  owne. 


Num.  1875. 

183.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie,  9  July  1606.  509. 

That  finding  the  tyines  grown  on  the  fudden  into 

foe  extreame  Alteration,  he  fendeth  this  Meflenger  (Mr. 
Pindar)  exprefs  to  His  Lordfhip,  to  whofe  Report  he  hath 
committed  much,  as  finding  him  to  be  a  man  of  truft  & 
abilitie.  He  prays  for  the  Prefervation  of  his  Majeftie, 
and  fafetie  of  his  Lordfhip  ;  againft  whom,  whatfoever 
Malice  can  doe,  will  not  be  omitted. 

1 84.  The  Coppieofa  Letter  written  by  my  Lord  (i.  e. 

Sir  Charles  Cornwallies)  unto  Secretary  Prada,  tranflated 
into  Ehglifh.  509.  b. 

Remonftrating,  that  in  hoe  one  thing  (though  as 
cleere  as  the  Light  of  the  Sun)  hath  he  fince  his  coming 
into  that  Countrey,  obtayned  end  for  any  of  his  Mafters 
Subje&s.  What  this  hath  wrought  in  England,  he 
cannot  tell :  but  prefume  (if  the  Complaints  from 
thence  be  juft  &  true)  that  one  Neglect  hath  begotten 
another. 

185.  From  Sir  Thomas  F.dmondes  His  Majefties  Am- 

bafladour  with  the  Arch-Duke,  22  June  1606.  510. 

T  hat  fince  our  King  refufed  to  fend  over  the  In¬ 
formation  for  the  Trial  of  our  Fugitives  there,  Order  was 
prcfently  taken  for  their  enlargement,  &  even  of  O  wvnne, 
who  is  now  in  as  great  Credit  as  ever.  That  as  to  Cap- 
taine  James  Blount,  who  (with  fome  others  of  his  Coate 
there)  had  been  detected  of  defining  to  have  carryed 
awaie  the  Englifh  Regiment  there  into  England,  for  the 
aftiftinge  of  Catefbie  his  Enterprize  after  the  Execution 
thereof  :  he  had  received  Commandment  from  England 
not  to  urge  the  delivering  him  up,  feeing  his  Majefties 
Requeft  was  before  denyed,  and  therefore  advifeth  Him 
to  furceafe  his  purfuit  of  him  in  Spaine.  That  the  Englifh 
Regiment  there  hath  received  much  Difgrace  by  the 
fuddaine  Cafhiering  of  all  the  principal  Officers  thereof, 
&  almoft  one  half  of  the  Captaines.  The  Caufes  thereof 
are  pretended  to  be  the  Difagreement  between  the  Co- 
ronell  &  Sir  Thomas  Studder  the  Sergeant  Major,  which 
drewe  the  Regiment  into  great  Factions  :  Secondly,  the 
pretended  weaknefs  of  that  Regiment,  though  it  was 
then  1000  men  ftrong:  but  chiefly  becaufe  of  the  denyal 
to  fufFer  any  more  men  to  come  out  England  thither: 
although  the  laid  Reftraint  wasonely  limited  vntil  the  end 
of  the  Parliament.  And  that  their  other  carriage  towards 
England  (by  the  incitement  of  our  Fugitives)  is  fuch  as 
may  engender  evill  Conceipts  between  both  Courts. 
That  fome  Officers  have  been  beheaded,  Sc  others  dis¬ 
graced  ,  for  not  doing  their  Duty  at  the  attempt  to  take 
Sluyce  by  furprife,  which  Towns  the  Flemmings  would 
have  to  be  again  befieged,  but  that  it  was  intended 
rather  to  be  befiege  fome  Inland  Towne  than  a  Place 
that  could  be  relieved  by  the  Enemy.  He  advertifeth 
other  particulars  relating  to  the  State  of  the  War  there. 
That  the  Jefuites  had  procured  the  Revocation  of  the 
Popes  Nuntio,  becaufe  he  was  more  moderate.  Sc  would 
not  join  with  them  in  their  violent  Courfes.  Recom- 
mendeth  to  his  Sollicitation  the  Cafe  of  Mr.  Peter  Bene- 
voire  Merchant  of  London;  wdiofe  fhip,  intended  for 
Virginia,  taking  in  Water  in  the  River  of  Helena  in  the 
Coaft  of  Florida,  was  furprifed  by  the  Spaniards,  the 
Goods  confifcated  Sc  fent  into  Spaine.  As  alfo  the  Cafe 
of  one  Mr.  MountpefThns  an  old  Gentleman  who  had  fome 
arrearages  of  a  Penfion  from  the  King  of  Spain,  called 
Remato,  due  unto  him  ;  which  is  not  ufed  to  be  paid, 
but  by  efpeci«dl  Order  out  of  Spaine,  to  be  obtained  there, 
as  friends  can  be  made. 

186.  To  the  Lord  of  Salifburie  by  the  waie  of  Flanders, 

prefently  after  the  goeing  of  Mr.  Pindar  the  yth  of  July 
1606.  516. 

That  he  hath  awakened  the  Spaniards  out  of  their 
Dreame  by  fpeaking  lowdcr  than  they  :  and  row  they  fay 
that  they  are  not  fo  evill  affesSxd  as  to  breake  the  Peace 
vpona  few  vnkindnefles,  proceeding  rather  from  His  Ma¬ 
jefties  Minifters  then  Himfeli;  and  promife  Anfwers  of 
all  the  Caufes  here  dependinge,  but  he  fufpecteth  the 
Sicilian  bufinefs  will  ftill  be  ihuflied  off  at  laft.  '1  hat  the 
*7  King 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


■> 


89 


Num.  1875. 

King  of  Spain  hath  iiTued  frcfh  orders  for  preventing  Inju¬ 
ries  to  be  done  to  our  Country-men,  &  for  punifhment  of 
divers  Officers  who  have  contravened  the  laft. 

187.  To  Sir  Thomas  Edmondes  His  Majefties  Ambaf- 

fador  in  the  Lowe-Countreys.  5 1  8- 

How  that  by  his  pulling  the  Spaniards  by  the  Sleeve, 
he  hath  made  them  to  open  their  Eies.  That  Blount 
remaineth  Hill  in  Prifon,  but  that  (upon  receipt  of  his 
Letter)  he  told  them,  that  confideringe  they  purpofe  the 
fame  way  with  him,  that  before  they  did  with  Owyn, 
ourKing  not  allowing  any  Tryat  for  any  Subjett  of  his  at 
the  Tribunall  of  another  Prince,  he  remitted  him  wholly 
to  them,  whoe  (as  he  perceived)  are  determined ( to  fett 
him  at  Libertie.  .  . 

188.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  in  the  beginninge  of 

Auguft.  5*9* 

That  the  want  of  Money  &  Plenty  of  Miferies  dayly 
encreafe.  That  a  Gentleman  is  come  from  the  Marquis 
Spinola,  whofe  principal  Errand  is  thought  to  be  an 
Advertifement  of  a  faileing  in  the  Undertaking  for  the 
furnifhing  of  Money,  vpon  the  Ioffe  of  the  IndianTreafure, 
and  a  Sollicitation  for  a  Supply  from  Spain.  That  they 
now  again  give  hopes  (fmee  they  have  no  money)  to  the 
Englifh  fuffering  Merchants.  That  he  hath  of  late,  & 
fliall  be  again  very  playne  with  them,  upon  their  Reports 
of  our  King,  that  he  hath  broken  his  Covenants ;  and 
that  they  formerly  thought  the  Englifh  Nation  valiant, 
honorable,  &  punfttial  in  all  their  Adions,  but  perceive 
them  now  to  growe  cautelous  &  irrefpedive  of  their 
Word  Sc  Promile.  That  as  to  the  Sicilian  Caufe  (i.  e. 
that  of  Hall  fS:  Eldred)  the  Conftable,  being  Prefident 
of  the  Councell  of  Italic,  was  authorized  to  make  this 
Anfwer.  That  fuch  are  the  Lawes  &  Cuftoms  of  that 
Conntrev,  as  a  Caufe  there  lentenced  cannot  be  revoked, _ 
to  be  reviewed  in  another  place.  That  the  manner  of 
proceedings  there  (i.  e.  in  Spain)  is  fo  troublefomc,  vn- 
iufl,  &  vnpittiful,  as  without  fome  newe  Conventions 
for  reformation  of  the  daiely  oppreflions  of  their  Officers 
in  the  Ports,  it  will  be  neither  profitable  nor  fafe  for  his 
Majefties  Subjeds  to  continue  their  Commerce  there. 
Relates  the  Conferences  he  had  with  the  Conftable,  & 
with  the  Secretary  Prada,  touching  our  Merchants,  & 
the  better  Regulation  of  the  commerce  between  both 
Nations.  Touching  which,  the  Secretary  defired  him  to 
have  a  little  patience,  faying  that  their  Intricaces,  Dif- 
tradions.  Sc  Neceflities  were  not  unknowne  to  him. 
That  thofe  had  made  them  forgett  themfelves  in  many 
matters  that  much  imported  them  at  Home ;  and  there¬ 
fore  noe  marvaile  though  they  had  not  taken  that  Courfe 
&  Care  they  fhould  with  Foreigners  in  matters  abroade; 
and  that  there  fhould  be  an  end  of  all  very  fhortly,  and 
in  the  mean  time,  the  King  will  take  a  fpecial  care  to 
punifh  the  very  next  delinquents  that  fhall  opprefsany  of 
our  Kings  Subjeds  in  his  Poi  ts.  That  all  this  while  who- 
foever  fpeakes  word  of  England,  is  held  the  mode  found 
Friend  to  Spaine,  and  continue  their  lame  bad  opinion 
of  His  Lordfhip.  That  the  Captains  Burke  Sc  Weftou 
continue  there  dill,  being  both  ill  uffeded  to  our  Coun¬ 
trey  in  generall  &  to  his  Lordfhip  in  particular.  That 
Blount  is  ftill  in  Prifon,  although  they  would  not  deliver 
him  up  to  our  King,  having  protefted  that  for  their  Ho¬ 
nor  they  would  not  doe  it,  if  he  were  a  Turke.  Fie  f'end- 
eth  to  his  Lordfhip  a  Treaty  between  the  French  King 
&  the  Hollanders,  likely  to  prove  prejudicial  to  theie 
Eftates. 

189.  To  Sir  Henry  Wotton,  in  July  1606.  525.  b. 

Concerning  the  Sermon  preached  in  the  King  of 

Spaines  Chappel,  Sc  the  Venetians  (both  before  mentioned 

in  §  1 78-)  .  . 

190.  From  the  Lords  of  our  Pnvie  Counfell,  dated 
the  lad  oi  December  1605.  and  received  in  July  1606. 

526.  b. 

Concerning  one  William  Ballett  a  Merchant  of 
Devon,  whofe  Shippe  going  in  trade  of  Merchandize 
Cat.  FIarl,  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1875. 

toward  Gales  or  St.  Lncar,  was  taken  &  fpoyted  by  cer- 
taine  Gallics  of  the  KinK  of  Spain,  whofe  Caufe  they 
direct  him  to  fullicit  effectually. 

5 oi.  From  my  Lord  of  Sahlbury,  dated  in  June. 

527.  b. 

Admiring  at  the  courfe  taken  by  the  Spaniards  in 
fo  frequent  infringing  the  Treaty  of  Peace,  which  his 
Majefty  mud  think  proceeding  from  the  Great  ones, 
unlei?  due  punifliment  be  done  on  the  inferior  Officers; 
For  the  embargoing  our  Shipps  at  Lilbon,  conftrayning 
our  Marry ners  to  ferve  in  Warlike  Adions  againft  our 
Friends;  confifcating  of  whole  Shipps  &  Goods  for  a 
finale  Ouantitie  of  pretended  forbidden  Commodities ; 
exuding  ftill  30  per  Cent,  in  the  Iflands  of  Teiceias, 
cannot  be  condrued  as  done  by  private  Authority  ;  be- 
fides  many  fuch  other  notorious  wrongs  dailie  brought 
unto  his  Majefties  Eares,  the  Redrefle  whereof  the  Mer¬ 
chants  pretend  to  be  de'ayed  through  his  ^Sir  Charles  s) 
Remiffnefs.  Diredeth  him  how  to  proceed  at  the  Spanifh 
Court  with  relation  to  Blount,  who  had  been  accufed 
of  the  Gun-powder  Treafon  ;  who  being  fummoned  upon 
his  Allegiance  to  repaire  into  England,  willfullie  difo¬ 
beyed,  &  went  from  Bruxelles,  hopeing  to  receive  a 
better  fupport  in  Spaine.  1  hat  our  Oueene  had  been 
delivered  of  a  Daughter,  who  died  the  next  day.  That 
thev  were  in  Expedition  of  the  King  of  Denmarks  com¬ 
ing”  over  to  England.  He  fendeth  Sir  Charles  a  Procla¬ 
mation  publi filed  fince  the  finifhing  the  Parliament,  con- 
cerninge  the  banifhinge  otPriefts  &  Jefuits,  by  which  he 
might  ymagine  the  luture  courfe  of  his  Majefties.  Pro- 
ceedinges  againft  them  would  be  rather  by.  Lenity  & 
Moderation,  than  by  Seucriiie  in  th’Execution  of  the 
Lawes  :  although  in  this  Parliament  there  hath  been 
fome  (harpnes  paffed  in  Terrorem.  That  the  French 
King  hath  invited  our  King  to  be  Godfather  to  his  elded 
Daughter  at  the  generall  chriftening  of  his  three  Children, 
at  once.  That  our  King  willingly  accepted  of  the  Honor, 
but  fince  the  Pope  was  to  be  Godfather  to  the  Dolphin, 
he  defired  to  be  excufed,  becaufe  he  could  not  avoid 
Scandall  in  participating  with  the  Pope  in  any  publique 
action.  But  if  the  eldeft  Daughters  Chriftening  might 
be  performed  fome  convenient  tyme  before  the  other 
twoe  (although  his  Majeftie  knoweth  the  Difference  be- 
weene  a  Dolphin  Sc  a  Daughter  of  France)  yet  he  will  be 
mod  ready  to  accept  of  it. 

1 92.  F'rom  the  Lords  of  His  Majefties  mod  Honorable 
Privy  Counfell  ;  dated  9  July  1606.  532. 

All  upon  the  Subjed  of  the  Spanifh  cruel  &  unjuft 
Ufage  of  our  Countreymen,  who  had  defired  Letters  of 
Marque  for  their  getting  Satisfadion,  fince  Juftice  had 
been  denied  them  ;  Sc  requiring  him  again  to  folicit  thefe 
matters  with  all  imaginable  earneftnefs  &  Zeal,  in  order 
to  procure  Redrefs  for  the  poor  People,  if  it  might  be 
poflible. 

1  q  2.  From  my  Lord  of  Salilbury  ;  dated  1 2  July  1 606. 

S36-  b- 

That  the  Merchants  impute  their  lack  of  Redrefs  in 
Spain  in  a  great  meafure,  to  a  Guift  bellowed  on  him  by 
the  Kino-  of  Spain,  with  this  further  Circuinftance,  that 
certain  Englifh  Merchants  fhould  have  bought  it  of  him, 
but  that  he  differed  in  the  Price,  not  a  Trifle,  but  fome 
Thoufands  of  Pounds  ;  and  tha.  therefore  He  dare  not 
offend  the  Spaniards.  His  Lordfhip  wonders  why  he 
doth  not  putt  them  more  in  mind  of  their  often  breaking 
the  late  Treaty  of  Peace,  when  upon  every  petty  Injury 
they  fhall  be  whining  here,  &  yet  deny  Juftice  to  our 
Countreymen  who  have  fullered  more  notorious  Sc  flag¬ 
rant  wrongs,  and  of  twenty  times  the  Value.  The  Truth 
of  the  Matter  concerning  the  Reftraint  of  our  People  who 
were  willing  to  ferve  the  Arch-Duke  ;  and  of  the  Pro¬ 
ceedings  in  our  Parliament  with  reference  to  Spain,  and 
the  late  Treaty  of  Peace,  and  of  the  Neutral  Conduct  of 
the  Miniftrv  in  refped  of  the  Men  who  are  willing  to  ferve 
on  either  Side.  That  a  Piadife  had  been  difeovered  in 

4E  *e 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


the  Spanilh  Ambafladots  hmtfe  here,  againft  IE  ftlajefties 
Perfon,  and  for  feizing  his  Cautionary  Town  ofFlufhing 
betweene  one  Captain  William  Nuce,  &  '111001010  Franco 
who  inert  m  the  Chamber  of  one  John  Balkan  Inlhnru  ’ 
Servant  to  the  laid  AmbaiTador ;  who  had  made  too’ 
many  Scruples  about  the  delivel  inf  tip  of  tins  fame  Balk  ■ 
who  had  alio  kept  poyfoned  Pall  of  Genoa  by  him,  of' 
which  (as  tt  taal,  through  miliake)  Nuce  &  his  Family 
did  oat  tor  Charles  is  delired  to  advertize  this  matter 
ro  the  King  of  Spam. 

'*>*  %om  the  Lord-Treafurer  of  Denmarke  :  dated 
4  Idus  Junij  1 6.6,  ’  b 

En  v  a  Idus  Knife  writes  this  Letter  to  thank  Sir 
CharJesfor  the  Courtefies  &  Civilities  he  had  ihewn  to 
his  Nephew. 

155.  From  Lauremius  Cruftus  Vice-Roy  of  Nonvev 
4  Attend  1606. 

On  the  fame  Cccafion, 

160S6’  l  l0111  tbe  “f  Salifburie  t  dated  37  Auguif 

That  he  had  laid  his  feyeral  Letters,  wherein  7he 
had  fett  forth  the  great  coldnefs  of  the  Spaniards  towards  ' 
us,  with  their  intolerable  delays  and  Refills!  of  doing 
om-  poor  Merchants  Jultice,  before  the  King  fc  Council! 
lltat  theueupon.  His  Majcitie  (before  he  would  brake 
wtth  Spamj  had  come  to  a  Refutation  of  drawing  the 
Spantih  AmbaiTador  here  to  an  orderly  Conference  ipon 
ihe  S,  bject  of  our  I  copies  Grievances,  and  of  tile  prefent 
Cold., els  of  the  Spaniards,  which  was  for  the  moll  part 
attnbuted  to  lus  Adverlifemems  from  hence.  That  *his 
Conference  washeld  the  22  of  Auguft,  wherein  the  Baron 
of  Ho lloque  the  Arch-Dukes  AmbaiTador  was  alfo  called 
to  affiftthe  Spaniard.  His  Lordfhip  giveth  the  particulars 
tranfaffled  at  that  Meeting,  which  hath  alfo  an  cfpeciall 
relation  to  Franco,  Nuce,  &  Balle  aboyememioned.  He 
dehvereth  Ins  Opinion,  that  the  Spanilh  Coldnefs  towards 
us  at  tilts  tune,  is  occafioued  by  their  Repentance  of  the 
i  reatie  of  Peace,  which  left  us  a  Liberty  of  Voluntaire 
Service  to  the  States  both  at  Land  &  Sea,  which  galleth 
them  many  wa.es.  Thai  their  denying  us  fulliee  in  Spain 
is  to  draw  us  to  trade  with  them  in  Flandet s.  That  there’ 
fore  it  our  Country. men  fiiall  continue  to  be  thus  tyra- 
mzed  upon  in  Spain,  and  can  receive  no  right,  it  will 
be  high  time  for  His  Majeftie  to  bethink  hirnfdf  of  another 
Couife,  for  which  hehad  never  fairerOverturcs  of  flreight 
N  potent  Conjunctures  ;  although  his  inward  intention 
be  to  conferve  Peace  as  long  as  he  maye  with  Hotmour 

of  fh  J'c  1  h,at„  atC  )'  “P™  gm»  &  genera!!  Complaint 
of  the  Refort  of  Papilla  to  Mali's  at  the  Spanilh  AmbalTa- 

t1°.‘ Gfl  1’  the  Hf':hnC°mn’,ni0n  had  ortIered  feme  of 
the  OSendots  to  be  flayed.  That  as  foon  as  this  was 

knowiic  the  Officers  were  ordered  to  forbeare  to  come 
neere  Hts  Gate  any  more  that  dale,  whereby  divers  Per. 
foils  of  good  Quabt.e  who  were  within,  el'caped  He 
wmcthol  ocher  matters  relating  to  that  Ambalfador  and 
h,s  Nation  1  produce*  a  new  Indance  of  their  fmull 
relpeet  tor  our  kings  perl, m.  by  their  not  punilhihg  a 
fellow  at  Antwerp  w  ho  had  fpoken  injurioully  of  . him  ■ 
and  as  to  hmilelf  not, nil, (landing  Ins  danger  by  thei 
bloudie  pnkhles,  is  refolved  to  be  the  more  zealous  in  the 
Service  of  God  anil  his  Countrey. 

,Jf7'  ^  Imi'od1£i!on  O  the  Conference  fpceified  in 
he  fuimer  Letterj  dehuered  by  the  Earle  of  Salifburie 
to  the  Spanifh  Ambafladour.  _Q 

This  fetteth  forth  the  Nature  of  our  Compkints 
again  ft  the  Spaniards,  as,  Embargeing  our Ships 
2.  Cominuttig  the  Duties  of  30  perCcnt.  in  divers  places 

of  their  Dominions.  3.  Forceably  taking  our  Manwners 
out  of  our  Ships,  &  making  them  ferve  in  theirs,  a  Q,n 
ideating  of  Ships  &  whole  Ladeings  for  a  fmale  quantS 
of  prohibited  Goodes,  j.  Putting  our  Men  into  the  Cu 
fmon  without  layetnge  any  particuier  Charge  unto  the’m- 
S.  forcemg  them  to  doe  Reverence  to  the  Sacrament  in 
the  Streete.  6.  Imposing  of  New  Impofitiocs,  fe  C0n- 


Num.  I  875. 

tinucinge  of  other  Exaflions  at  their  pfeafure.  All  thefe 
weredireetly  againft  the  late  Treaty,  belides,  7.  Particu. 
ar  Wrongs  &  Injuries,  and  denyallof  Juflice;  &  Sly.  Many 
Indignities  &  Unkmdnelfa,  not  to  be  feparated  from  the 
Htel’rantfaha&illxJaAmmlla. 

1606  '  Slr  He"17  Wotton  from  Venice,  2  September 

Partly  in  Cyfer,  but  relating  to  the  Difference'  be¬ 
tween  that  State  &  the  Pope.  That  the  W*  between 
hem  IS  as  yet  a  Paper  War,  the  Printer  gaineing  more 
th.,11  ihe  Cutler.  That  the  King  of  Dcm-nike  js  departoj 
T  ’  htlMg brought vnhhttr  oon.  of  b  is  Co  l*-' 
fcllours  that  difvvaded  the  Voyage. 

'99- To  Sir  Henry  Wotton,  29  September  ,  606.  162. 

ihat  foe  long  as  the  Paper-fight  contynueth,  there 
s  to  be  expected  more  Efiuflon  of  Win  than  Blood  ■  the 
roccmie  being  better,  and  the  Perill  lelfe.  That  the 
dtfaftious  Fortunes  &  Improvidences  of  the  Spanilh  State 
doe  daiely  more  tc  more  Ihewe  themfelves.  That  their 
ft,  H  11  “"l  Fleet  is  partly  peril], ed,  &  the  reft  taken  by 

Ham  s  a  l'  S’  ,heAdmlra'“f  Bifay  fallen  into  the  fame 
Hands,  and  now  an  Hundred  Holland  Ships  of  Waive 
come  upon  their  Coalls,  to  attend  the  comeing  home  of 
then  Fleets  from  the  Weft-Indyes.  That  ftill,  they  will  do 
no  Jufttce  to  Hts  Majeft.es  Subjefts,  but  Injuftice  continu¬ 
ally  ;  whereby  the  Peace  will  become  as  perillous  to  Our 
h™  w 1111  T?  rre  ^vantageous  to  hisSubjects  than 
•he  Warm  I  hat  S.x  of  hts  prmcipalleft  Servants  are  now 

?  J.  Calenture!  not  to  mention  three  more  lately  dead 
of  it)  Bus  Countrey  being  in  his  Opinion  much  more  peril, 
ous  than  the  Carnpe  m  the  Low  Cotmtreyes.  Sir  Charles 
thanketh  him  for  hts  good  Advice  to  his  fon  Sr.  William 
whom  he  ftyleth  unthnftie  &  unfortunate,  faying  that  he 
had  (pent  lum  joco  pounds  at  Court,,  and  now,  when 
he  had  given  him  300  pounds  a  year  more,  he  turnes 
Ins  backe  to  lus  Fortunes.  And  that  of  all  forts  of  people 
he  moll  difpairs  of  thofe  oflus  forte,  that  are  Philofophers 
m  ihcir  Wordes,  and  Fooles  in  their  Workes  F 
300.  The  effea  of  a  Speech  vfed  ,0  the' Lordes  of 
Counfell  m  Spaine,  by  Sir  Charles  Cornwallies,  „po„- 
MC''n°n  °/nn  A®™°n  b>'  am  them,  that  Ills 

rf?hfpe?cfeGreateB,ltt™e  IUd  br°kcn  ihc  Copif'lMion 
A  Coppfc  of  the  Generali  Mcmoriallfi'Vsir 

Charles^  exhibited  to  IBs  Majeftie  of  Spaine  in  the  behalfc 
of  the  Merchants  of  His  Majeft.es  Subjects  tradinge  into 
thofe  Kmgdomes.  Auguft  1606.  g 

aba.  l  o  Don  Pedro  dc  Caftillo,  Vice-roy  ofPortu- 
gal!  m  the  behalfe  of  one  Mr.  Gargane,  fometimes  a 
Mimfler  m  England,  and  become  a  Merchant  in  Lilbon 
and  there  apprehended  by  the  Inquifition.  h 

203.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie.  h' 

a  n'J|;atubyuPrire?0d“  fl'°ma  friend.  Ite  unde'r- 
ftandeth  that  the  Merchants  give  out  that  he  dare  not 
oifend  the  Spaniards  by  importunate  Solicitation  of  their 
Caufes,  as  having  received  great  Gifts  from  the  King 
there  :  and  that  he  hath  prevayled  for  fuch  of  our  Conn? 
trymen  as  fued  for  Penfions,  but  obtained  not  the  Libertie 
“  .  keP'  Prif™ers-  To  which  he  anfwererh, 

that  He  hath  fpared  no  pames  in  their  Caufes.  that  that 
alone  of  Hall  ix  Eldred,  hath  coll  him  one  way  or  other 

Fmni  °TUC  ^  th£  i"5""  Pa'1e  0f  “  Itodred 
i  ou tides.  That  the  Spaniards  are  fuch  a  people  as  that 
no  man  can  learnc  how  to  deale  with  them,  by  reafon  of 
theire  extreame delayes,  much  mutability,  &  little  refpec- 
'U'enreff  to  their  °w„e  hon°ur  or  conCciences.  He  cleareth 
nimlelr  ot  the  Imputation  of  having  receiued  Gifts,  own 
mg  no  more  than  what  hath  been  before  mentioned. 

I  nat  as  to  Penfions  he  never  was  Suitor  for  any  mail 
whatsoever,  butrefufed  all;  only  when  the  King  of  Spaine 
lent  him  word  that  he  had  inlarged  the  Penfion  of  Mr. 
Kobert  Southwell  becaufe  he  heard  that  he  was  his  Kinf- 
ar"/n;ihcrga7e<asbccamehimf  humble  Thankes  to  his" 
Majcitie  for  foe  greate  a  Fauor.  That  as  to  his  remiffiiefj, 

10  in 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


291 


Num.  1 875.- 

jir  foil  citing  the  Libertie  of  our  captivated  Country-men, 
hi3  Letters  would  eafily  prove  the  contrary  ;  be/ides  he 
hud  actually  delivered  twoe  out  of  the  Inquifition,  one 
out  of  the  Prifon  at  Lifbon,  and  43  or  50  out  of  the 
Gallies.  That  his  Servants  daiely  fall  ft  eke,  the  Ideate 
or  this  Somcr  having  been  lb  exceffive,  as  that  they  have 
lived  m  a  manner  as  in  an  Oven  ;  &  he  himfelf  is  grown 
foe  weake,  as  his  Leggs  will  fcarce  carry  him. 

204.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie.  1 2  September,  1  606. 

_ 

hi  anfwer  (as  it  feemeth)  to  that  above  remem  bred 
at  §  193.  and  again  purgeth  himfelf  of  the  Gifts  laid  to 
have  been  received  bv  him  ;  particularly,  he  relateth  the 
mutter  of  his  Privilege  of  tranfporting  Corn  thither,  which 
was  the  thing  harped  upon  by  the  Merchants,  and  gene¬ 
rally  granted  to  Men  of  his  Place.  lie  alfo  fayeth.  That  if 
he  would  have  been  tyed  up  to  the  Spanifh  Rack- Haves, 
he  might  have  had  more  than  he  cn peeled  to  be  worth 
in  h’s  whole  Ellate.  But,  ir  the  King  of  Spain  wouid 
have  geuv.il  him  the  Value  of  all  his  Kingdomes,  he  would 
not  h  ive  tranfgrefled  in  his  faith,  or  in  any  thing  have 
hulvd  the  Trull  repofed  in  him.  That  although  the 
Spaniards  are  bad  enough  in  their  own  Natures,  &  egged 
0.1  by  fugitives  &  I, die  Intelligencers  ;  yet  fome  of  our 
Mercnants  have  been  to  blame  in  giving  Vent  to  mali¬ 
cious  &  untme  Reports,  for  ftrving  their  own  Turnes. 
He  defires  that  His  Majcflie  would  lend  him  4000  1.  to 
be  repaid  by  iodoI.  a  year;  by  which  Sum  he  lhall  be 
able  to  quiet  his  Ellate,  &  provide  for  his  Daughter  now 
marn  lgeable. 

205.  I  o  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  1 7  September  1 606.  592. 
lhat  as  to  redn  lTing  the  Grievances  complained  of 
by  our  Merchants,  all  that  comes  from  the  Spaniards  are 
onely  wordes  to  Wynne  tyme,  and  without  all  Intention. 
That  our  People  having  made  their  CoinpLints  in  gene¬ 
ral!  termes  (without  fpecifying  the  Names  of  thofe  who 
fullered,  or  did  the  Injuries)  his  Reprefentaiion  mull  oe 
fo  too,  and  confequently  his  anfwer  will  be  to  little  pur- 
pofe.  i  hat  if  our  Merchants  mull  1'uiTer  the  daielv  Injuries 
tfr.red  unto  them  by  the  Spaniards;  better  it  were  that  the 
TralEque  were  wliolly  left,  lie  proceedeth  10  hint  at  a 
Rupture  between  the  two  Crowns,  and  fendeth  h  s  Lord- 
fliip  a  Project  for  railing  money  to  fupport  the  War. 
That  dive.s  of  his  Servants  are  fallen  lick  of  the  Calen¬ 
ture,  v.:  loine  dead,  lhat  there  die  of  the  Spaniards  at 
Lafl  300  a  week,  &  of  the  IriiTi,  many,  the  Phificians 
being  fo  ignorant,  that  if  a  man  fall  Tick,  it  is  almoft  an 
even  lay  that  he  lhali  never  recover. 

2  6.  The  Gri  uances  of  His  M.i  jelly's  Subjcfts,  with 
the  Pro t rafts  &  Delayes  mentioned  in  the  former  Letter. 

207.  The  Project  for  yeerelie  Contribution  for  main¬ 
tenance  of  his  Majefties  Warres. 

I  take  this  to  be  that  which  is  above-mentioned 
at  §  203. 

208.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Counfell,  9  September  1606. 

Relating  his  proceedings  at  the  Spanifh  Courtjn 
b  eh  ah  of  many  of  our  injured  Merchants.  That  as  to 
the  Sluppe  Callor  &  Pollux,  he  knowesnot  how  to  frame 
In,  "  uite,  becaufe  the  Spanifh  Jealoufie  of  their  Indyes  is 
fo  c-.'.treame,  as  they  refolve  to  make  it  capitall  to  all 
fuch  as  lhall  fall  into  their  Hands  there.  That  Sir  John 
Watts  was  not  well  adrifed  to  fend  thither  with  Goods  of 
their  Produce,  efpecially  Maffe-bookes  &  Copes,  which 
are  n  t  Wares  for  Englim  Handes ;  but  however,  lie  will 
doe  his  bed  to  recover  w  hat  is  taken  from  him.  *  Relates 
the  Arguments  they  ufe  to  keep  their  own  People  fait  in 
their  Religion,  and  to  draw  in  ours;  which  have  had 
then-  Effects.  That  the  Accefs  to  the  King  there  is  dilli- 
cult,  that  whofoever  applies  himfelfto  Him  for  any  thin" 
f.tts  back  the  Clock  of  his  bufinefs  very  many  Degrees! 

1  hat  the  Method  of  the  Spaniards  in  Dilpatch  of  bufinefs 
is  Vciltly  diilcrent  irom,  &  more  tedious  than  that  of  Eng-’ 


Num.  1 875, 

b?  P“wim I  fo  that  the  moll  jufl 

P-Jm!  yn?  <in  "’alw"S  ™  *e  Ordinary 

.  ath)  come  to  end,  ,n  left  than  ,3  or  ,+  Monthea:  bnt 
if  a  oiled,  or  put  out  of  the  Waye,  very  hardly  in  foe 

Xi-TT  f  nThe  ueT‘h  “  be  a  to  His  Ha! 
mended  m  h  '  f  pij- h  °f  the  feveral  recoin. 

faowl  ?(,  CCC°rd,ng  1°  La,vc  &  Equity.  although  he 
knoweth  this  Attempt  will  be  brought  about  with  ex- 

foemucShgrea ■  ,  5CUhy-  That  "  hcn  lh<-7  bef. ire  flawed 
5 J\  X°OC}  Hl,moilr  to  him,  they  had  their  Aim  at  . 
the  reaping  of  many  Advantages  (which  he  enumerates) 
from  then-  Peace  with  England  ;  but  failing  in  them  ah 

!uV!v  II  7  Ty  (h°W  'ong  foev'r  «  'IbI1  e«t- 
tinue)  wdl  be  without  Love  &  Trull.  That  in  cafe  of 

blc  himShW1lh  ,Majeftie’ they  would  endeavour  to  trou- 

rn  l-  .  Vrda,ld;  but  now  of  late,  hope  much  more 

VV  m  Scotland  j  and  at  the  lad  findeing  none 
othu  Remedte,  they  fate  they  will  accept  of  the  Allyance 

tatit!  SkC  °ffCted  by  France-  That  at  the  late  Conful- 
,  “  about  the  reheuing  of  the  Kings  Wants,  many 

th  ugs  have  beetle  propounded  ;  and  amongft  the  reft  the 
Ratfinge  of  His  Coyne,  which  is  wholly  reie&d  ■  bm 
he  puttmge  olanlmpcftthm  of  a  Rva'lls  t!pon  euery 
Hereage  of  Wheate  fpent  or  fold,  they  faye  will  yeeld  to 
the  King  a  Revenue  of  at  lead  1  4  Millions.  That  Sir  An 
h  m7lf  hC  ?■  I'  ar?Ued  at  "hrre  he  arrogats  to 

win  !  hT  11  n  °*  Ambaflttdour  ,0  the  Empero?  by 
whom  he  rayeth,  he  is  fent  to  the  King  oi  Marocro 
whom  he  had  prefented  with  a  Ruble  of  great  perfeaion’ 
of  ihe  weigh,  of  .woe  Ounces,  edeemedS  j“2 00  Du 
cats,  the  farther  Story  whereof,  &  of  the  Papers  he 

209.  To  my  Lord  of  Suffolke.  6_e  ,, 

Setting  forth  the  Reafons  (before  rehcarfed)  why  lie 
now  defpatreth  of  any  Succefle  in  the  greate  Bufvnes 
!  6at  begin  to  attribute  all  their  late  Cahimii 

tyes,  .to  another  Mn.  For  openly  in  Pulpits  it  hath 
ben  preached,  that  better  ,t  had  ben  for  ,l,£m  to  have 

f ii tired  Hunger,  Penury,  nay  Pcftilence  it  fdf,  than  to 

Go)'  “ft!™  il  FTdlbi?  "7  Uertliqiie*  &  Enemy!  If ' 
God.  l  hat  they  have  already  conful tul  &  agreed  of 
he  Courfe  they  mil  take  when  the  Peace  fltadHeak! 
and  he  doubteth  not  but  our  King  hath  done  the  like. 

2  o.  !o  ray  Lord  of  Northampton.  g  ’ 

Conceminge  the  Imputation  laid  upon  him  by  the 
Merchants;  as  to  which  he  referreth  himfelf  to  the  Let. 
ter  he  hath  written  to  the  Earl  of  Salilbury. 

a  T |\  T°  Sir  TbomasEdmondes,  Ambatfadour  with  the 
Arch-Duke,  19th  September  1606. 

That  the  Spaniards  Earcs  arc  full  of  money,  but 
their  1  urfes  empty  1  hat  many  Confultas  and  Juntas  haue 
ben  lately  made  .about  the  Prouifion  of  a  Royal  Navv  • 
but  what  ,s  concluded,  or  where  they  Utoulde  ditde  mone) 
to  perfcrme  it,  he  cannot  yet  learne.  That  the  Altera! 
tion  of  their  behaviour  towards  us  upon  the  fuddaine  is 
greate  ;  and  though  he  hath  ot  late  exhibited  divers  Me 
mortals  he  can  hauc  Aunfwere  of  none,  neither  Acceflb 
to  the  King,  or  the  Duke  oFLerma. 

temb!!;  :ttLords  of  the  Couniai’ vk;rao  die  SaP- 

Relating  a  Conference  he  had  with  the  Duke'of 
Lerma  upon  the  Subjedt  of  our  Merchants  Complaints 
the  falfe  Reports  ratfed  by  our  Fugitives ;  that  L  th“  ’ 
Commiffioners  might  be  appointed  to  hear  &  determine 
of  our  Merchants  Caufes  according  to  Juftice  &  Eq!hty 
that  a  more  ftretght  Commandment  might  be  gcucn!o 
he  Apofentadorfor  an  houfe  to  beaffignld  to  him  wiSJt! 
the  1  owne  as  to  all  other  Ambatfadors.  How  the  Duk! 
began  to  wheedle  m  order  to  induce  him  to  return  to 
Popery  (wherein  he  had  been  bred)  and  the  Anfwer  made 
f*  bJ.Slr  Cbar  ,lhat  Ovryzm  is  arrived  at  Madrid, 
ouer  whotne  he  will  keepe  a  watchfull  eye.  And,  thal 
Blount  hath  exhibited  a  Meinoriall  pretending  to  be  of 

kindred 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


291 


NuiU.  1875. 


kindred  with  diuers  Noblemen  of  England,  th.it  he  left 
his  Coumrey  &  Goods  for  Religion,  &  by  Sir  Charles  s 
means  had  fuffered  long  and  ftraight  Impnlonment,  &c. 

2 1  ?.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie.  .  23* 

Still  defiring  that  His  Majefty  would  lend  him  the 
4ooo  1.  abovementioned.  Setting  forth  the  great  Mor¬ 
tality  reigning  in  his  Iloufe,  which  is  fo  ftraight,  that  nei¬ 
ther  Day  nor  Night  he  can  avoid  hearing  the  Groanes  of 
his  fick  &  dying  Servants.  That  the  Duke  of  Lerma 
begins  now  to  make  half  a  Profefiion  of  following  h.s 
Pleafures,  and  geueing  over  to  attend  the  publique  bu  fi¬ 
nes.  That  the  Court  is  followed  by  Comedians  who  colt 
the  King  ucl.  a  day,  when  thofe  to  whom  the  King  oweth 
nv.  ney  dye  daiely  for  want  of  Bred.  That  there  is  fome 
Ri  mor  as  if  thc-ire  Indian  Eleete  of  the  laft  yere,  is  either 
rome  Home,  or  verie  neare  the  Coaft,  and  that  the  Hol¬ 
landers  either  milled  it,  or  dared  not  tr  attack  it.  i  hatthere 
,s  a  generall  fame,  that  the  Hollanders  labour  much 
both  of  want  of  Men  &  Money,  and  hopeth  that  our 
King  will  not  fuller  the  Spaniard  to  conquer  them.  1  hat 
now  again  they  daiely  fhew  more  Violence  to  his  Ma- 
jefiles  Sublets  and  lefs  regard  to  what  they  capitulated. 
That  he  can  by  noe  means  get  the  two  Secretaries  to 
meete  according  to  the  Dukes  late  Order  ;  nor  from  him 
any  one  Aunfwere  or  Difpatch  cf  any  thinge. 

214.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie.  626.  b. 

Relating  the  Difcourfe  be  had  with  Secretary  1  rada 
concerning  his  Lordfhip,  the  Opinion  of  the  Spanifh 
Court  concerning  him,  &  how  they  came  to  conceive 
that  Opinion  ;  and  that  they  were  now  altered.  1  Hat 
Prada.  in  Conclufion,  plainely  confefftd  that  they  had 
received  a  double  Offer  out  of  England  ;  either  to  mur¬ 
der  his  Lordfhip,  or  to  raife  a  Difference  between  him  & 
fome  other  great  Lords;  both  which  he  protefted,  wereab- 
folutely  denyed  &c  refufed,  and  gavehim  the  Reafons  why. 
That  Owynne  hath  met  with  a  very  cold  Reception  ;  and 
neither  He  nor  Blount  goes  abroad  by  day-light.  That 
the  Ambaffador  of  Venice  tooke  knowledge  to  him  how 
much  that  State  holds  its  fclf  obliged  to  his  Majeftie,  and 
alfo  enlarged  himfelf  in  particular  Commendations  of  his 
Lordfhip,- and  that  the  other  Ambafl'adors  there,  carry  the 
fame  mvnde.  That  in  another  C.onverfationwith  Prada, 
he  told  him  that  the  Spanifh  intollerable  Delayes  A  Pro- 
eraftinaiions  drewe  much  Hatred  upon  their  Nation,  & 
fcandall  to  their  Government  ;  the  blame  whereof  1  rada 
laid  upon  the  late  Eredion  of  Confultas,  but  again  pro- 
mifed  fair  things.  He  believeth  that  there  are  fome 
fecrett  Treatyes  in  hand  betweene  Spain  and  France. 
That  diverfe  of  our  Irifh  Fugitiues  haue  of  late  obtayned 
increafe  of  their  Penfions.  That  his  Coufin  Henry  Corn- 
wallies  is  come  thither,  whofe  wants  he  relieve*,  endea¬ 
voring  alfo  at  the  fame  time  to  reduce  him  from 
Popery  ;  that  the  Young  Gentleman  defireth  fome  Pcn- 
fion  from  His  Majeftie,  whofe  Pleafure  therein  Sir  Charles 
will  expeft.  That  the  Spaniards  ftill  continue  fhufflmg 
in  the  Caufes  of  our  Merchants,  promifing  much  &  per¬ 
forming  nothing,  he  therefore  believeth  that  their  true 
Intent  is  only  to  Wynne  tyme,  without  any  purpofe  to 
giue  Contentment  in  any  thing  of  Subftance.  1  hat  the 
Ambaffador  of  Mantua  there,  hath  cf  late  received  fe- 
nerall  fpeciall  Commaundments  from  his  Matter  to  oiler 
his  Affedion  &  Service  to  our  King,  whofe  anfwer  Sir 
Charles  defireth  to  receive.  That  the  Mortatitle  conti- 
nueth  in  the  Houfe,  Mr.  Ilawkfworth  his  Secretarie  &  4 
more  being  dead  ;  his  Chaplain  &  twoe  others  Sicke,  & 
Three  more  late  fallen  downe:  and  that  notwithftanding  he 
hath  taken  Phificke,  he  is  in  daiely  doubt  to  endure  what 
his  Servants  have  done.  Laftly,  he  defireth  that  his  Ma- 
iefties  Allowance  may  be  better  paid,  he  having  gonne, 
by  borrowing,  to  the  vtmoft  end  of  his  Credite. 

215.  To  mv  Lord  of  Salifburie.  633. 

That  I  mwkefworth  hisSecretary  being  dead, he  provided 
himfelr  cf  Cooke,  who  fometymes  ferved  the  Emperors 
•'  ivb-ffador  ;  but  his  Confeffor  &  Counirevmen  fo  terre- 
*8 


Num.  1 87 5. 

fyed  him  with  the  Fire  of  Hell  to  his  Soule,  and  that  of 
the  Inquifition  to  his  Body,  as  he  withdrew  himfelf 
without  taking  his  Leave,  and  will  not  be  perfwaded  to 
retume.  That  there  is  nohepe  of  fucceffe  in  the  greate 
Bufynes  ;  for  without  Tolleration  of  Religion,  they  will 
not  aduenture  a  Daughter  in  England.  1  hat  Sir  Anthony 
Sherlcy  did  in  Barbaric  play  many  parts  of  Mounte- 
bankerie  which,  perhaps,  fome  Merchants  Factors  in 
London  will  bitterly'  taft  of ;  and  thofe  of  Lifbone  hai  div 
efcape  him.  That  Sir  Anthony  hath  fhewed  an  inex- 
ampled  Licenfe  or  Pafport  from  our  King  ;  defining  all 
Princes  to  geue  him  Paffage  thorough  their  Countreys, 
and  to  aflift  &  fupply  him  in  all  Neceffities,  which. he 
would  accept  as  a  Fauor  to  himfelf ;  and  concludeing 
that  what  he  deiired  of  forraigne  Princes  he  ftraightly 
commaunded  to  his  owne  Subjeds.  That  the  Seale  was 
like  unto  the  Privy  Seale,  and  the  Name  fubferibed  under 
the  Licenfe.  That  Seventy  Shippcs  are  lately  arriued 
out  of  the  Indies,  &  have  lately  brought  with  them  at 
leaft  Ten  Millions,  which  hath  much  ereded  theMyndes 
of  the  Spaniards  and  encouraged  them  to  threaten  a  Re- 
uenge  againft  the  Hollanders. 

216.  To  mv  Lorde  of  Salifburie.  28  October  1606. 

635- 

That  he  findeth,  of  late,  a  full  Song  among  the  Spa¬ 
nifh  Clergy  (who  abfolutely  governe  there)  that  nothing 
hath  drawne  the  heauy  Hand  of  God  fou  fe.  t  iipon  them 
as  the  Conjunction  with  Hcretiques  his  greatelf  Enemeys : 
and  thereupon,  are  content  to  publifh  &  proteft  their 
vtternu  ft  As  to  il 

Court,  his  Opinion  is,  that  although. to  ferae  their  owne 
occafions,  they  maie  temporize  for  a  while,  yet  whenfo- 
euer  they  fhal  be  able  to  arine  their  Mallice,  they  will 
not  forbeare  to  vfe  th’effed  of  it ;  and  neither  tarry  for 
termes  of  Plonour  or  Confidence  to  geue  Juftifications 
to  their  Adions.  That  notwithftanding  the  arrival  of 
their  Fleets  (which  the  Hollanders  fo  narrowly  miffed) 
they  are  ftill  deuifeing  means  to  relieue  the  lungs  wants. 
That  the  Duke  of  Lerma  hath  entered  into  a  refolulion 
to  abandon  the  World  ;  and  hath  obtained  a  Breue  of 
the  Pope  for  taking  the  Order  of  St.  Jerome,  and  hath 
alfo  gotten  a  Licence  of  the  Pope  to  retaine  his  Revenues 
in  Commendam.  This  Report,  is  not  vnprofitable,  were 
it  but  to  abate  thatEnvye  that  followes  his  wordly  Great- 
nes  ;  nor  unneceffary,  if  at  any  tvnie  he  fhould  (by  the 
end  of  the  Life  or  Fauour  of  the  King  his  Matter)  endure 
a  C  hange  of  Fortune.  That  hitherto  he  hath  been  able 
to  procure  but  fmall  Effed  of  their  Promifes  of  redrefl- 
ing  the  Wrongs  of  our  injuied  Merchants.  That  our 
Fugitiues  &  Jefuits  have  fworn  a  Report,  that  none  can 
liue  in  England,  without  takeinge  the  Oath  of  Supre¬ 
macy  ;  but  he  hath  fomewhat  taken  off  the  edge  of  that 
malicious  Slander.  '  That  the  Spaniards  are  become  uery 
carelefs  of  the  Contynuance  of  the  Peace ;  and  the  gene¬ 
rall  Opinion  amonglt  them  is,  that  it  will  not  hold.  That  : 
he  tells  them  the  lirft  daie  of  the  breach  will  be  the  be- 
ginninge  of  their  Sorrow ;  and  the  progreffe  of  the  Wane 
the  Ouerthrow  of  their  Greatnes.  1  hat  they  have  cn-  > 
creafed  the  Penfions  of  diverfe  of  the  Irifhe  :  and  Carre  , 
the  Scotchman  fends  c-c  receiues  diuerfe  Difpatches  to  Sc 
from  Scotland :  &  therefore  defireth  that  an  Eye  were 
had  vpon  his  Correfpondents.  That  by  his  laft,  Intel.!-  j 
pence  was  brought  of  the  Arraignement  &  Death  o.J 
Garret,  &  fince  then,  he  hath  gotten  aoo  Ducats  ci  lns» 
Penfion.  That  Commiffioners  are  expeded  from  the  ) 
Id  aide  Townes  with  Offer  to  ferue  the  King  by  ea  againltl 

the  Hollanders;  and  an  Ambaffador  from b.-.  -  . 

217.  To  my  Lord  of  Northampton.  64r.i1. 

Th  't  Ids  Importunitie  in  the  Caufes  or  cur  Mer-J 
chants  hath  been  fo  much,  as  made  him  fufpeded  ;  and 
fome  (of  the  belt  Sorte)  were  content  to  wluiper.that  he 
did  fo,  for  his  cv.n  Commcdilie,  Sc  not  by  Com  miff,  on  or 
Commaundement  of  the  King  his  Matter  although  thole, 
ungratefull  People  have  mifreprefented  lum  at  home. 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


293 


Num.  1875* 

He  Iheweth  many  of  the  reafons  why  he  hath  been  de¬ 
layed.  That  the  Del  ayes  in  Spain  are  equal  to  all  men  : 
He  inftanceth  in  the  Duke ofFeria,  who  bought  a  Manor 
ol  the  King  for  40 ’oo  Crownes  for  which  nobody  elie 
would  give  above  35000)  The  money  being  paid  down, 
he  was  to  be  put  into  immediate  pofflflion  ;  but  before 
that  could  be  done,  an  order  came  from  the  King  for¬ 
bidding  it  ;  the  Duke  being  fufficiently  great  already,  & 
the  King  not  willing  to  part  with  a  Seignorie  of  fuch  Com¬ 
ma  d  &  Value.  Hereupon  the  Duke  defires  his  Money, 
but  in  two  years  time  can  get  nothing,  notwithftanding 
continuall  &  importunate  Sollic’tation  ;  nor  (as  it  feems) 
any  inten'ion  of  reiniburfing  him.  To  particuler  like 
Examples  in  Perrons  inferior,  were  to  write  a  whole 
Volume.  That  the  Conde  de  Villa-Mediana,  though 
(fince  his  returne)  exceeding*  bountifully  rewarded  by 
his  king,  is  fay'd  to  liue  in  great  neceflity. 

21S.1  To  the  Lords  ol  the  Counfdl,  3  November  1 606. 

646.  b. 

That  though  our  King  had  done  Juftice,  on  the 
Pirates  whom  the  Spaniards  complaine  1  of :  in  a  late 
Cafe  of  one  Thomas  Leins  a  Scotchman,  they  have  not 
done  Juftice  ;  and  he  expecleth  the  fame  Succefs  in  ano¬ 
ther  like  Caufe.  That  he  never  yet  could  get  the  two 
Secretaries  to  meet,  according  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma’s 
Prondfe :  whkh  pitiful  dealing  would  have  troubled 
him  more,  was  it  not  common  alio  to  the  Ambaffadors 
of  other  Powers.  Advifeth  that  Confuls  &:  Officers  be 
lent  to  keep  Order-  in  the  Affairs  of  our  Merchants  in 
Spain  &  Portugal,  wiiom  he  would  have  to  be  of  liabi¬ 
lity  &  diferetion.  That  Blount  being  offered  aPenfioft 
of  3  5  Crowns  a  Month  from  Naples,  refufeth  it  as  a 
Reward  too  fmale  for  the  greatnes  of  his  Meritt.  That 
the  fame  Offer  will  be  made  to  Owen.  That  as  to  the 
Apprehenfion  of  Balle,  he  hath  fatisfied  them,  by  an  Ex¬ 
ample  taken  from  themfelveS,  being  this.  '1  he  Wife  of 
Antonio  de  Perez,  not  charged  with  Treafon,  but  with 
Eftc efts  of  true  Love  to  her  Hulband,  was  ameane  of  his 
Efcape  out  of  Prilon.  The  King  deceafed  apprehended 
her  in  the  houfe  of  the  Venetian  Ambaffador  there,  and 
fo  caufed  her  to  be  committed.  That  his  Coufin  Mr. 
Henry  Cornwallies  abovementioned,  is  deceafed  in  his 
Houfe. 

219.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Counfell,  12  November 

1606.  651. 

Concerning  the  Alteration  in  the  Spaniards  with 
refped  to  England,  and  the  Reafons  of  it.  That  the 
motion  for  Aliance  with  France  is  revived  &  purfued 
with  all  Violence  by  the  King  himfclf ;  and  with  no  leffe 
Ardour  follicited  by  the  Pope  &  the  Duke  of  Florence  : 
that,  neverthelefs,  there  remained  a  party  in  the  Council, 
who  were  rather  for  the  Alliance  with  England.  That 
one  of  them  had  dc fired  him  to  recoiled  his  thoughts 
thereon,  which  he  did  by  way  of  Proof  of  this  his  Theme. 
That  in  the  Allyance  with  France,  the  danger  will  be 
greater,  and  the  utilities  c<  honour  lefs,  then  in  that  of 
England  ;  wherein  he  already  findeth  that  his  Arguments 
have  not  been  without  their  effefit.  That  the  Duke  of 
Lerma  8c  the  Conde  de  Villa-Longa  are  yet  for  the  pro- 
pofal  for  England,  and  in  a  fewe  dayes  will  confer  with 
him  thereupon  :  although  himfelf  holding  it  eafier  to 
deftroy  then  to  build,  conceivcth  he  fhall  be  more  able 
to  break  their  intended  Alliance  with  France,  then  to 
effect  that  with  England. 

220.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  16  November  1606. 

C61. 

That  the  Jefuits  have  tranflated  into  Spaniffi,  & 
printed  our  Laws  againft  the  Popifh  Rccufants.  That 
by  their  procurement  a  Breueis  font  from  the  Pope,  for¬ 
bidding  the  Englifli  Catholics  to  take  the  Oath.  That 
he  hath  written  again  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma  in  behalf 
of  our  poore  complaining  Countrey  men.  That  the  Duke 
played  the  dilatory  game  with  this  alfo,  alledging  it  mull 
be  confidered  in  Council,  before  it  could  be  anfwered  ; 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1875. 

that  being  overpreffed  with  the  weight  of  the  Kings 
affairs,  he  could  not  be  fpoken  unto,  &c.  when  as  all  the 
while  he  doth  nothing  but  take  his  pleafures  in  his  Houfe 
&  Gardens.  That  by  the  Spaniards  Actions  it  appear- 
eth,  that  fuch  is  their  over-weening,  as  they  thinke  they 
may  playe  with  the  Nofes  of  all  other  People  of  the 
World.  He  therefore  conjectures  by  their  Government 
&  proceedings,  that  the  tyme  drawes  neere  when  it  will 
be  laid  of  them,  as  in  the  Pfalmift  ,“Perijt  memoria  eoruin 
cum  Sonitu.”  That  under  colour  of  this  late  Debate  be- 
tweene  the  Pope  &  the  Venetians,  they  aime  at  a  further 
Eftate  in  Italy.  That  one  Fludd  a  Jefuit  in  Lifbon,  lately 
wrote  unto  another,  that  he  had  made  fure  three  Men 
very  apt  &  trufty  for  the  purpofe  projected  :  k  wanted 
two  more’of  like  quality  &  truit,  which  fhortly  he  hoped 
to  procure.  What  the  bufinefs  is  he  cannot  certainly  tell, 
butaddeth  that  thofe  late  Executions  of  their  Colleagues 
in  England  hath  leit  the  hearts  of  the  Jefuitical  Faction 
on  fire,  and  apted  them  for  the  undertakinge  of  any 
Mifchiefe  whatloever.  That  Blount  &  Owynne  are  not 
fo  careffed  as  formerly.  That  in  Lifbon  there  is  one 
Linway  a  Pylot  ;  a  man  of  a  moll  traiterous  Difpofition 
that  ufeth  daiely  to  rayle  upon  our  King,  for  exercife  : 
and  wifheth  that  Fludd  &  He  were  fetched  away  into 
England,  they  both  doing  very  much  Mifchief  there. 
That  Mr.  Treiliam  who  was  fo  long  Prifoner  in  the  Fleete 
is  come  to  Madrid,  in  a  very  neceffitous  Condition.  That 
our  Laws  againft  Popifh  Rccufants  are  printed  &  pub- 
lifhed  there,  of  which  he  hath  complained,  &  kopeth  to 
obtain  fome  Redfefs  in  the  end. 

221.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  20  November  1606. 

668.  b. 

That  upon  his  Declaration,  that  if  he  could  not  fuc- 
ceed  now  in  our  Countreymens  Caufes  he  would  trouble 
them  no  more,  but  gening  them  ouer  as  defperate,  leaue 
them  to  be  remedyed  by  the  King  his  Mailer,  they  have 
fent  them  all  to  the  Confulta.  That  Blount  hath  gotten 
his  Penfion  m  Naples  tranflated  to  the  Lowe-Countreys. 

222.  A  Copie  of  a  Letter  written  by  my  Lord  Ambaf¬ 
fador  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma  in  Nov.  1606.  669.  b. 

Complaining  of  the  Breach  of  the  Treaty  by  their 
harbouring  &  relieving  our  Tray  tors  and  Fugitives,  and 
the  mod  intollerable  Delay  of  Juftice,  fo  long  that  our 
poor  Countrey-men  were  expofed  by  them  to  all  manner 
of  Myferyes  &  Neceflityes,  cuen  to  Famyne  it  felf ;  if 
he  had  not,  to  his  greate  Charge,  all  the  Lift  Winter, 
and  the  moll  part  of  the  enfuing  Somer,  fuflained  them  ; 
and  reproachcth  him,  in  handfome  terms,  of  his  Breach 
of  Promife. 

223.  Articles  fent  unto  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  in  Juf- 

tification  of  the  Letter  above-mentioned.  67  r.  b. 

Setting  forth  the  Injuries  done  by  the  Spaniards  to 
our  Countreymen,  fince  the  Peace. 

224.  The  Brief  of  a  Letter  written  to  my  Lord  of  Sa- 

lilbury,  dated  21  December  1606.  673.  b. 

That  Mr.  Button  who  carried  his  laft  Difpatch,  was 
accompanied  by  one  Gammage  a  Jefuit,  who  goes  by  the 
name  of  Reade,  and  yet  Laid  nothing  of  it  to  him.  That 
there  are  great  Preparations  made  for  Sea-Service  the 
next  Yeere.  That  now  Mr.  Francis  Cottington  is  pof- 
feffed  with  a  Calenture. 

225.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Spanifh  Counfell  of  State. 

674.  b. 

Entreatinge  the  Supprcffmge  of  certaine  Englifli 
I.awes  againft  Recufants,  printed  &  pub  I  iked  in  Spaine. 
Shewing  alfo,  that  the  Pictures  &  Books  found  in  the 
Shops  of  London  reprefenting  the  Cruelties  of  the  In- 
quiiition,  were  fupprelfed  upon  the  firfl  application  to 
our  Kings  Council.  And  that  in  this  pretended  Tranf- 
lation,  Termes  &  Wordes  difhonorable  &  falfe,  are  ma- 
licioufly  inferred,  in  derogation  of  his  Majefties  Lawes  & 
Government. 

226.  The  Coppie  of  a  Second  Letter  written  by  my 
Lord  Ambaffador  to  the  faid  Counfell  of  State,  being 

4  F  aunlwered 


*94 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1 875. 

aunfwered  to  his  former  Letter,  that  he  fhould  proue  the 
Falfhoods  which  he  alleadged  to  bee  in  the  Tranflations  of 
our  Englifh  Lawes  againft  Recufants.  676. 

He  fheweth  the  Strangenefs  &  Unreafonablenefs  of 
this  Demand  ;  but  yet  fendeth  them  the  Falfhoods  & 
malicious  Impudencies  he  meant ;  together  with  fome 
briefe  Reafons  of  the  Occafion  of  thofe  Lawes,  which  in 
the  Originall  are  at  large  expreffed,  but  cunningly  fup- 
prefied  by  the  Tranflators,  for  the  better  coveringe  the 
Treafons  &  unnatural  Pra&ifcs  of  certaine  Traitours  & 
evil-affected  Subjects  whom  they  favour. 

227.  Concerning  the  Queftion,  whethr/  his  Majeftie 
of  Spaine  fhall  pi oceede  with  the  Allyance  with  England 
moued  from  themfelves ;  or  with  that  of  France  folli- 
cited  by  others. 

The  Confederations  are  32  in  Number,  and  are 
drawn  up  by  fome  in  the  Intereft  of  France. 

228.  To  the  Earle  of  of  Northampton,  19  December 

1606.  About  his  private  matters.  682.  b. 

229.  To  the  Earles  ofDorfett,  Nottingham,  Suffolke, 
Northampton,  &  Salifburie  at  the  fame  time.  683.  b. 

About  the  abovcmentioned  32  Heads  or  Confidera¬ 
tions  ;  which,  fome  fay  were  drawn  up  by  Crefwell  the 
Jel'uit  (who  hath  withdrawn  his  Love  from  hisCountrev, 
upon  feeing  his  Name  in  our  late  Statutes)  or  by  the 
Bifhop  ol  Mounte-pulfiano  the  Florentine  Ambaffador, 
but  rather  by  the  latter.  That  Sir  Anthony  Shirley,  having- 
gotten  fome  Inkling  of  the  Matter,  perhaps  by  the  Conde 
de  Villa-longa  (whofe  Cuftome  it  is  to  dillill  all  Hearbes 
&  Weedes  that  promife  any  Juyce)  pretends  now  to  be  a 
Dealer  in  it,  which  himfelf  takes  to  be  abfolute  Mounte- 
bankery.  That  he  had  fent  one  of  the  Newe  Mapps  of 
England,  Scotland,  &  Ireland,  unto  the  faid  Conde  de 
Villa-Longa,  with  a  Meffage  that  he  fhould  perufe  it  well 
Sc  often,  as  that  Continent  from  whence  Spaine  mufte 
drawe  the  continuance  &  engreatinge  of  their  Monarchy. 
That  he  very  kindly  receaued  it,  with  particular  re. 
fpetts  to  the  King  &  Prince  whofe  Pictures  were  engraven 
therein.  That  the  Spaniards  ufe  the  French  Ambaffador 
with  more  refp'ett  then  before,  but  fay  that  there  will  be 
no  conclufion  of  the  Marriage  of  their  Princeffe,  till  the 
King  fhall  have  more  Sonnes.  That  there  is  a  Difcourfe 
upon  the  Heade  abovementioned,  faid  to  be  exceedingly 
well  penned. 

230.  To  the  Earle  of  Salifburie.  6S7. 

That  what  the  malicious  Tongues  of  our  Jefuits 

deliuer  of  the  King,  of  the  Queene,  nay  of  the  fweet 
Prince  (the  Hope  of  our  Countrey,  who  ncuer  offended 
them)  he  forbeareth  to  write,  not  onely  Honoris  gratia, 
fed  etiam  Verecundhe ;  fmee  fuch  they  are,  as  are  neither 
fit  to  revenge,  or  fo  much  as  flirre,  or  mention.  He 
hopes  that,  at  laft,  his  Majeftie  will,  in  Confideration  of 
his  Honor  k  Office,  procure  Satisfaction  for  the  greate 
k  intolerable  Injuryes  there  done  to  his  people. 

231.  To  the  Lords  of  his  Majefties  mod  honorable 

Privie  Counfeir.  68'’.  b. 

1  hat  the  Spanifh  Counfellors  delay  (according  to 
their  old  cuftome)  the  giving  anfwer  to  his  Complaint 
againft  the  falfe  I  ranllation  of  our  Laws  againft  Recufants 
lately  publifhed  there,  as  having  noe  will  to  fatisfie  us  in 
any  thing  further  then  Neceffitie  will  enforce  them. 
That  there  are  lately  prefented  to  that  State,  by  our  Fu¬ 
gitives,  certaine  Advices  or  Declinatures  of  the  State  & 
Government  of  our  King,  foe  malicious,  foe  wicked,  k 
fo  flanderous,  as  mull  proceed  from  the  Devil  himfelf. 
That  the  Jefuits  are  much  offended  with  him  for  noting 
the  faults  in  their  Tranflation,  which  Crefwell  ufeth  his 
utmoft  endeavours  to  palliate  k  fmooth  over.  That 
Crefwell  hath  drawn  up  a  Letter  to  him,  commending 
his  former  Carriage  in  that  Courte ;  wifhing  the  conti- 
nuance  of  his  Temperance  ;  and  infinuating  Scandafl  & 
Peril  1  that  followeth  Violence  ;  but  hath  not  adventured 
to  fend  it.  That  Wadfwcrth  his  revolted  Chapleine,  now 


Num.  1875. 

a  feather  of  that  Wing,  owned  that  they  are  much  ae* 
cumbred  with  what  he  had  made  appeare  in  their  Tran¬ 
llations.  That  they  now  fpread  a  Rumour  that  his  Ma¬ 
jeftie  hath  refolved  to  take  away  all  the  Biffiopricks  of  his 
Kingdome,  and  overthrowe  all  the  Cathedrall  Churches- 
1  hat  the  Spanifh  Court  is  much  perplexed  with  the  litle 
will  the  Emperor  fheweth  that  there  fhould  be  a  Diett  for 
the  Choice  of  a  King  of  the  Romans.  And  they  are  in 
greate  doubte  that  he  will  not  geue  his  Voyce  to  thole 
of  his  owne  Houfe  ;  which  moues  them  to  entertayne  new 
purpofes  ofdraweing  that  Dignity  to  the  Howfe  of  Bauier, 
and  to  beftowe  a  Daughter  of  Spaine  in  it. 

232.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie.  Sg  r. 

I  hat  he.  can,  as  yet,  gain  no  accefs  to  the  Duke  of 
Lerma.  I  hat  Crefwell  hath  written  a  Book  &  dedi¬ 
cated  it  to  the  King  there  ;  wherein  he  endeavoureth  to 
cleere  himfelf  &  his  Colleagues  of  the  Treafons  layd  to 
their  charge  ;  and  to  proue,  that  this  late  Powder-' Treafon 
(howfoever  undertaken  by  the  intemperate  heades  & 
handes  of  certaine  ignorant  young  people)  yet  was  plotted 
k  devifed  by  fome  Councilors  in  England,  for  theouer- 
throwe  of  the  Catholique  Religion.  That  Crefwell 
taketh  inceffant  pains  in  the  matter  of  their  publifhing  a 
falfe  Tranflation  of  our  Lawes ;  k  that  he  6c  his  Col¬ 
logues  lofe  ground  there.  Thai  the  wants  of  Money,  & 
Miniftration  of  Right  k  Juftice,  are  as  greate  as  euer  ; 
and  the  Treafurie-doore  is  fhutt  up,  as  where  there  is  no 
Money.  That  the  Cryes  &  Difcontents  of  the  People, 
Soldiers,  and  Ordinarie  Servants  of  the  King  are  extreme! 
And,  were  they  not  brideled  by  Extremity  of  Lawes 
&  feare  of  the  Jnquifition,  things  would  not  reft  long  in 
the  State  they  are  in.  That  the  Peru-Fleet  is  com  in, 
having  brought  above  the  Value  of  Five  Millions,  in  the 
mod  feafonable  time.  That  the  French  Ambaffador 
hath  gotten  a  better  Order  for  Relief  of  his  Mafters  Sub¬ 
jects  than  that  obtained  by  him.  That  his  Secretary  Mr. 
Collington,  and  others  being  fick,  his  Kinfman  &c. 
dead  ;  he  infinuateth  a  Defire  to  be  recalled.  That  he 
hath  had  noe  late  acceffe  to  the  King  or  Duke,  who  give 
him  hopes  that  all  his  Caufes  fhall  be  accommodated  at 
laft.  1  hat  the  Spaniards  hopes  are  greate,  with  dayes 
gotten  to  difufe  us  in  that  wherein  wee  are  ableft  to  offend 
them;  and  reduce  our  Neighbours  to  extremitie,  who 
are  the  Wall  betweene  them  &  their  defires  to  ruyne  us. 
That  he  hath  drawne  the  Edge  of  the  Jefuits  Penn  upon 
him  by  publifhing  their  late  falfehoods,  which  they  are 
attempting  to  defend.  But  if  he  may  avoyd  what  he  maie 
receaue  in  the  Platter,  he  fhall  not  much  fear  their  Penns. 
That  from  a  gr^at  Feaft  made  by  the  Prefident  of  the" 
Treafury,  one  Ramirez  de  Prada  one  of  the  greateft 
men  in  the  Kingdom  for  matter  of  money,  &  in  Autho¬ 
rity  in  thofe  bufineffes,  &  walked  even  with  the  Conde 
de  Villa-Longa,  was  taken  into  a  Coach,  &  fent  to  a 
Prifon  twoe  Leagues  from  the  Court.  Ilis  Houfe  &  all 
that  he  had,  was  inftantly  feized  upon,  and  his  Wife 
Children,  and  Servants  removed.  This  is  thought  to 
proceed  from  his  gathering  too  much  to  himfelf,  k  re- 
fpeOing  too  little  the  Kings  benefit.  He  was  a  Lawyer 
by  Profeffion,  borne  to  little,  and  within  a  fewe  yeerei 
poffeffed  of  little  j  yet  had  then  24000  Crownes  by  yeere 
in  Land,  befides  infinite  Wealth  in  Plate  and  Money. 
How  foe  much  fhould  be  gotten  with  the  Kings  Salary! 

&  Ordinary  Fees,  is  the  Riddle  he  mult  refolve. 

233.  From  the  Earle  of  Salifburie,  dated  the  28  No¬ 
vember  1606.  $95' 

lhat  His  Majeftie  and  his  Counfellors  were  heartily 
forry  for  the  Calamities  which  had  come  upon  his  Houfe 
in  Spain,  by  the  Death  &  Sicknefs  of  fo  many  of  his  beft 
k  molt  neceffary  Servants.  That  notwithftanding  the 
Spanifh  Ambaffadors  promife  made  in  Auguft,  at  the 
Conference,  that  he  would  produce  his  owne  Complaints 
againft  us  in  5  or  6  dayes,  and  fhew  the  Reafon  that 
mnued  him  to  find  fault  with  our  Juftice  here  ;  He  hath 
temporized  all  this  while  without  propounding  any  thing  ; 

excufeing 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


*95 


Num.  1875. 

excufeing  himfelf  upon  one  Difpatch  or  other  to  come 
about  it.  That  a  Watch  had  been  fett  upon  the  Spanifh 
Ambafladors  howfe  to  interrupt  fuch  Englifli  as  ffiould 
refort  thither  to  Made,  unknowne  to  his  Majefties  Coun- 
lell,  8c  by  Warrant  cnely  of  the  Ecclefiafticall  Commiffion. 
In  th’execution  of  which  Warrant,  becaufe  fome  Diforder 
was  committed  by  the  partyes  put  in  Truft,  three  of  the 
principall  ones  were  committed  to  Prifon  ;  where  they 
laye  vntil  the  Ambafladour  bcinge  throughly  fatisfied, 
made  often  intercellion  for  their  Difcharge. 

234.  To  Sir  Thomas  Edmondes,  His  Majefties  Am- 

baflador  in  Flanders.  698.  b. 

That  upon  a  Memorial,  he  hath  received  an  Anfwer 
to  his  Complaints,  which  in  Papers  appeares  a  verie 
Mountaine ;  but  in  performance  he  doubts  will  proue 
lclTe  than  a  Molehill.  That  Owyn  &  Blount  are  defended 
as  inculpable  ;  and  to  our  Kings  Charge  is  layed  Levinus 
and  all  others  of  the  Low-Countrey  Nation  inhabiting 
within  his  Dominions,  who  are  dubbed  with  the  Marke 
of  Rebells  &  evil-affedled  Subjects,  the  faults  of  Owynne 
8c  Mount  being  parelleled  with  thofe  poore  Soules  of  the 
Low  Countreyes  that  fledd  venturam  iram.  Of  the 
late  precbitous  fall  of  twoe  greate  Minifters  of  that  State, 
the  Conde  de  Villa-Longa  and  Ramaris  de  Prada  :  whofe 
Plate,  Jewells,  &  Money,  buried  under  Churches,  hidden 
in  Friers  Cells,  conveyed  into  Ambafl'adors  Howfes,  call: 
into  Privies,  laden  into  Carts  under  other  Semblances, 
are  drawen  out  by  the  Officers.  That  theSpoile  of  them 
&  fome  others  that  were  partakers  of  their  Fraudes  & 
Briberyes,  will  be  worth  to  the  King,  at  leaft,  Three 
Millions  ;  and  yet  he  hath  an  ill  bargain  ;  for,  with  the 
game  of  Three  Millions  or  four,  to  themfelves,  they  loft 
to  the  King  at  leaft  Fifteen. 

235.  To  Sir  George  Carew  his  Majefties  Ambafladour 

in  France,  19  Jan.  1606.  S.  N.  7 00. 

That  Ramaris  de  Prada  a  Principal  Minifter  of  that 
State,  who  with  the  Earle  of  Villa-Longa  abfolutely  go¬ 
verned  the  Kings  Treafure,  being  worth  almoft  a  Million 
and  a  half,  was  apprehended  8c  ftript  of  all  about  the 
beginning  of  Chrilhnafs.  After  Chriftmafs  ended,  his 
Colleague  the  Conde  de  Villa-Longa  ran  the  fame  fortune, 
being  taken  in  his  Houfe  about  1  1  a  Clock  at  Night, 
carried  inftantly  to  Prifon  divers  Leagues  from  Mad: id; 
his  Chefts  and  Calkcts  of  Plate,  Money,  &  Jewells  laden 
in  Carts  out  of  the  Windowes  ;  his  Wife  &  Children 
about  one  of  the  Clock  that  Night  removed  out  of  the 
howfe  ;  and  all  feized  on  to  the  Kings  Ufc. 

236.  To  the  Earles  of  Dorfett,  Notingham,  Suffolke, 

&  Salilburie.  jco.  b. 

That  he  believed  the  Spaniffi  Alliance  with  France 
was  now  become  impracticable,  after  all  the  pains  that 
the  French  Ambaflador  had  fpent  about  it;  who,  among 
other  Things,  had  fhewn  them  the  Picture  of  the  Dolphin 
armed,  and  with  his  Pike  in  his  hand,  at  his  Age  of 
foure  yeeres  8c  certaine  monthes :  and  now  exclaimes 
againft  the  Government  there,  much  out  of  the  boundes 
of  all  Patience. 

237.  To  the  Lords  of  the  Counfell,  the  14th  of  Janu- 

arie  1606-7.  701.  b. 

That  his  difplnying  the  malicious  fal (hoods  of  the 
Jefuits  Tranflation  of  our  Laws  againft  Recufants,  had 
had  this  effeCt,  That  whereas  before,  every  Religious 
Houfe  in  Madrid  had  them,  and  their  Preachers  vfually 
helped  out  their  Sermons  with  Declamations  againft  the 
Cruelties  of  England  ;  fome  of  them  affirming  that  much 
eafier  it  was  for  the  Chriflians  in  the  daieaof  Dicclefian  : 
now,  there  is  hardly  one  of  thofe  Tranflations  to  be  found. 
The  Jcfuites  themfelves  are  foe  affiamed  of  the  Worke. 
as  euery  of  them  denyeth  to  haue  had  any  hand  in  it. 
That  moil  of  the  Ambafl’adors  there  have  Coppics  of  his 
Letters  and  Annotations,  and  haue  fent  them  into  their 
Countreys.  That  Crefwell  cannot  get  the  Pen  ft  on  for 
fuftentation  of  the  Seminaries  of  Rome,  Do  way,  &  Sevill 
in  the  manner  8c  value  he  defired.  That  Do&our  Cecill 


Num.  1875. 

&  one  Singleton  a  Prieft  have  been  af  Rome  to  follicit 
the  fending  of  one  to  England  veiled  w  th  Epifcopal 
Dignity,  but  were  baffled  there  by  the  Jefuites  ;  who 
were  alio  too  hard  for  the  Arch-Prieft  then  reflding  in 
England.  He  can,  as  yet,  get  no  Copie  of  the  Biiefe 
prohibitinge  the  taking  of  the  Oath  by  Papifts,  and  yet 
the  Jefuits  are  in  a  great  Choller  that  he  knew  any  thing 
of  it.  That  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  promifing  to  doe  Mira¬ 
cles  againft  the  Hollanders,  fueth  to  be  made  Generali 
of  the  Kings  Armado ;  and  olfereth  for  Suertie,  to  be 
aflifted  with  a  Counfell,  and  attended  with  a  Guard  that 
(hall  continual  lie  obferue  his  ACtions.  That  the  Conde 
de  VillaLonga  being  feized,  was  carried  inftantly  away 
to  a  Dungeon  called  La  Motta  de  Medina.  That  at  a 
late  Tournay  held  at  the  Court  he  was  preferred  before 
the  Ambaflador  of  France.  Finally,  that  he  is  infinua- 
ting  himfelf  into  the  efteem  of  the  Kings  New  Confeflor, 
who  profefleth  his  Love  to  Juft  ce  &  to  our  King;  who 
feemes  to  be  a  Man  of  Courage,  8c  of  an  able  Under- 
ftandinge. 

238.  To  the  Earle  of  Salilburie.  705. 

That  Crefwell  meeting  his  Man  at  Secretary  Prada's, 
fpake  honorably  of  his  Lordfhip,  &  dutifully  of  his 
Majefty ;  and  that  the  Heads  or  Reafons  (abovementioned 
at  §  229.)  for  the  Allyance  with  France  were  notdrawne 
up  by  him.  That  it  is  reported,  as  if  160  Priefts  as  yet 
abide  in  England.  He  lendeth  his  Lordfliip  a  defeription 
of  that  retayner  to  the  Jefuits,  who  went  with  Mr.  Button 
for  England.  Thar  the  King  intendeih  to  fend  a  Fleet 
to  the  I.evant-Seas,  to  difturb  the  Trade  of  the  Holland* 
ders  in  thofe  parts.  It  having  been  reported  that  the 
Dutch  earneftly  fue  either  for  Peace  or  Truce  ;  ’tis  faid 
that  the  French  King  hath  fent  them  Blanks  firmed  with 
his  Hand,  admittinge  them  to  infert  any  cond  tion  that 
ffiall  feeme  reafonable  vnto  themfelves,  rather  than  to 
come  to  any  conclufion  with  the  Spaniard.  That  Money 
now  growes  very  plentifull  in  the  Kings  Trea'urye  :  they 
tell  it  not  with  their  l  ingers  as  in  England,  but  weigh 
it  in  Scales  large  enough  to  contayne  twoe  greate  Oxen. 
That  if  their  Fountaine  be  not  flopped,  8c  if  by  Peace  or 
Truce  their  wafte  be  reftrayned,  he  difeerneth  not  how 
they  may  be  flayed  from  cverflowinge,  in  tyme,  all  the 
parts  of  the  Earth  that  their  Pride  8c  Ambition  (hall  turne 
their  Streame  vnto  ;  efpecially  now  that  the  falfe  Fingers 
of  the  Minifters  are  broken,  which  by  deceipt  palled  by 
(in  prejudice  to  the  King)  at  leaft  20  Millions,  to  the 
Ufuringe  Genoefe  8c  Portugalls  ;  and  a  better  Courfe  be 
held  for  the  future.  That  it  is  faid  that  the  Earle  of 
Villa  Longa  had  in  Lands  neere  too.oool.  by  yeere, 
and  in  other  Wealth  to  the  Value  of  a  Million  8c  a  Half. 
He  relateth  the  Difcourfe  he  had  with  Crefwell  the  Jefuit 
btfore  the  Ambaflador  of  Florence,  upon  the  fubje&  of 
the  Villanies  of  him  8c  His  Fraternity,  and  how  at  length 
he  putt  him  to  Confufion.  That  the  Spaniards  ftill  con¬ 
tinue  to  give  good  words,  but  yet  he  can  promile  to  him¬ 
felf  nothing  of  the  event.  That  Sr.  Edward  Baynham 
hath  vifited  him,  pretending  to  come  there  only  to  fee 
the  Countrey,  8c  to  learne  a  little  Spanifh  ;  but  Mr.  Cot- 
tington  hath  found  that  he  hath  been  there  neere  three 
Monthes,  and  pafled  as  a  French  Man,  and  had  found 
him  alfo  with  Crefwell  at  Secretary  Fradas.  That  this 
Secretary  Prada  is  likely  to  become  great,  haueing  Villa- 
longa’s  Office :  he  fheweth  much  Honeftie,  Playnenes 
8:  Charitie;  but  is  a  ghoftly  Child  of  Crefwell,  and  much 
affe&ed  to  that  Societie.  That  his  Chapleine  8c  twoe 
more  of  his  Englifli  8c  mod  neceflarie  Servants  being 
feared  with  the  Sicknes,  are  importunate  to  be  gone  : 
whom  to  keepe  againft  both  their  Willes  8c  their  Sto- 
mackes,  agreeth  not  with  his  Difpofuion,  neither  is 
without  danger. 

239.  To  the  Earle  of  Northampton.  7 1 1 .  b. 

That  it  was  his  Fortune  to  meete  with  the  Falflioods 
of  our  Jefuits  8c  Fugitives  foe  aptly  in  their  late  pretended 
Tranflations  of  our  Lawes  againft  Roman  Recufants,  as 

fome 


2$6 


Catalogus  Libroram  MSS. 


Nuni.  1 875. 

fome  of  themfelues  have  acknowledged  the  Loffe  of  the 
principal  Feathers  they  were  here  wont  to  fly  with,  and 
are  now  ftndyeing  how  to  amend  their  Wings.  Relateth 
the  falls  of  Ramans  de  Prada,  &  the  Conde  de  Villa- 
Longa  ;  of  which  laft,  he  had  drawn  e  to  favour  hartelie 
the  .State  of  England,  as  far.  as  he  durft,  he  being  adverfe 
to  that  of  France.  Obferves  that  Birds  of  his  Qualitie 
are  not  put  in  Cage  with  purpofe  to  be  lett  out  againe  ; 
the  Intention  of  the  Court  beinge  to  profitt  by  his  Suf- 
feringe,  not  to  take  Pleafure  in  his  Singing.  And  that 
it  is  thought  he  will  not  be  the  laft;  that  {hall  followe  in 
this  Tragedie. 

240.  The  Briefe  cf  a  Letter  to  my  Lord  of  Salifburie. 

7 14 

That  the  Spaniards  have  laid  an  Embargo  on  all 
Shipping  along  their  Coafts,  being  about  to  equipp  out 
a  Fleet  with  all  fpeed.  That  as  to  our  Complaints,  it 
is  their  Arte  not  to  deny  Juftice,  but  (which  is  worfe) 
to  protract.  &  not  performe  it.  Neverthelefs  we  haue 
this  Advantage  of  other  Nations,  inafmuch  as  either  for 
Louc  or  Feare,  they  make  ihewe  of  Defire  to  fatisfie  us, 
or  at  leait  .0  if  ill  us  :  to  others,  they  geuc  Appearance 
of  Dilregard,  neither  performeinge  what  they  uefire,  or 
geueinge  eare,  or  aunfwere  to  their  Complaints.  That  the 
French  Ambaffador  faith  he  will  write  to  the  King  his 
Maker  to  render  them  lapareiile  for  theSpoiles  they  daily 
make  of  their  Subjects. 

241.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie.  715. 

Relating  the  Effect  of  a  long  Conference  he  had 

with  the  Duke  of  I.erma  upon  the  Subjeft  of  the  Good 
Will  borne  by  his  King  to  ours ;  That  fome  of  our 
Kings  Mir  ifters  out  of  Puritanifme,  and  Hatred  to  the 
Religion  profeffed  there,  diffwaded  Contynuance  of 
Freindfliip  with  Spaine,  upon  two  feverallReafons.  1.  That 
the  holdinge  of  Ametie  with  Spaine  would  be  a  meane 
to  introduce  the  Catholique  Religion  &  fubvert  theirs. 
2.  That  the  King  of  Spain  taking  Reft  &  gathering  Trea- 
fure  &  Strength,  would  as  foon  as  he  had  finifhed  his 
warres  with  the  Hollanders,  make  his  next  attempt  againft 
us.  How  our  King  had  reftrayned  his  Subjects  from  the 
Service  of  the  Arch-duke,  and  foe  much  enlarged  them 
to  the  Hollanders,  that  their  Armyes  by  Land  &  Navyes 
by  Sea,  were  full  of  the  Bodyes  &  Veffells  of  the  Englifh. 
With' that  of  the  Alliance  of  England,  efpecially  on  the 
topic  of  Religion,  the  Treaty  with  the  Hollanders,  and 
the  Caufes  of  fome  of  our  Countrey-men  w  hich  the  Duke 
referred  to  the  Conde  de  Lemos  Prcfident  of  the  Coun¬ 
fell  of  the  Indies.  That  talking  with  the  Conftable  about 
the  abevementioned  Jcfuit'call  Tranflations,  he  made  thefe 
pitiful  Excufes  for  them  vizt.  that  the  King  had  noe  Pri- 
vnie  either  with  the  Doer,  or  what  was  done.  That  to 
matters  of  any  moment,  the  Office  of  Inquifition  tooke 
an  efpeciall  regard  ;  t  ut  fuch  Papers  &  Pamphlets  as 
that  Tranflation,  haue  aKvayes  ben  fuffered  to  palfe  with- 
out  Survey,  i  hat  His  Majeftie  wiflied  there  were  a  true 
Tranflation  <>f  them,  and  that  himfelfe  had  them  in  Latine, 
i  i  her  nothing  or  veiy  little  different  from  the  Spanilh. 
Bcfides,  to  them  that  vnderftand  not  theEngliffi,  it  would 
appeare  that  there  were  not  fo  many  faults  in  the  Tranf- 
h-'-ion  as  I  alledged  :  which  Excufes  raifedSir  Charles’s 
choler.  Th-.it  the  Conftable  and  others,  even  in  Council, 
{peak  well  with  regard  to  England,  but  yet,  fccretly  gtue 
belt  Countenance  &  Eare  to  thofe  that  are  worfe  affe&ed 
to  our  Ling  A  his  Couernement,  and  haue  lately  dif- 
patched  Blount  with  Captaine  Burke  &  twoe  Irifh  Fryers 
into  the  Low  Countrcye  with  an  Entertaynement  of  50 
Crownes  a  Month. 

242.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  Februarie  1606-7. 

72 5.  b. 

Concerning  an  Englifh  Ship  (wherein  his  Lurdfhip 
was  laid  to  be  concerned)  bound  for  Virginia,  taken  by 
the  Spaniards,  &  brought  to  Sevill,  which  he  was  not 
without  hopes  of  retrieving,  as  havingprocurcd  the  French 
Ambaflador  to  write  earneftly  to  the  Marfliall  of  France 


Num.  \  875. 

&  Lieutenant  of  the  Duchieof  Guyen  to  favor  the  CreW 
in  their  Suits  againft  certain  Spaniards  whofc  Shippe  is 
ftayed  at  Bourdeaux.  That  as  to  the  Spanilh  Mimfters, 
fo  farre  as  he  can  conceue  out  of  their  Actions,  their 
Papers  and  their  wordes  are  to  none  other  end  than  to 
Wynne  tyme.  For  not  in  any  one  of  the  things  pretended 
to  be  commaunded  by  the  King,  can  he  procure  Perfor¬ 
mance,  or  much  Probability  of  any  meaneing  to  doe  it. 
That  Blount  is  gonne,  with  an  Entertaynment,  for  the 
I.ow-Countreyes,  the  Dukes  Promile  not  thought  on ; 
they  neuer  thinking  it  leffe  than  meritorious  to  deceiue 
Heretiques.  To  our  Fugitives  money  is  geuen  daielie, 
but  to  his  Majefties  faithful  Subjects  noe  Penny  payd  of 
what  is  due  unto  them.  That  Secretary  Prada  being  now 
in  Vilia-ionga’s  place,  is  too  much  devoted  to  the  Jeluites  j 
and  al !  thinges  are  much  worfe  than  they  were  before,  fo 
that  the  wifeft  of  their  owne  people  prophecie  a  prefent 
ruyne  to  their  Monarchic.  If  therefore  the  States  faint 
now  when  they  haue  molt  caufe  to  hope,  it  ffial  be  to 
their  greate  Aduenture.  Sir  C  harles  defircih  to  be  re¬ 
called,  his  Eies  beginning  to  faile  him,  &  his  Body  con- 
fuming,  and  addeth  thefe  words,  If  I  liue  long,  it  flial 
be  more  than  I  expert  or  defire ;  but  if  here  I  dye  (befidcs 
the  di  courageinge  of  him  whoe  fhall  fucceedej  I  fliall 
in  my  owne  particuler  fuller  more  lhan  I  cann  exprefie, 
to  end  my  dayes  without  a  farewell  to  my  Wife  & 
Children. 

243.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  6  Februarie  1606-7. 

728. 

That  he  is  in  Doubt  that  the  Hollanders  mean  to 
wrapp  up  an  Agreement  with  the  Spaniards,  whoe  doe 
much  affect  it,  and  will  yield  to  large  Conditions  ;  but 
hopeth  that  if  it  fhould  happen  fo,  our  King  will  worke 
out  of  it  his  owne  Honour,  Profitt,  and  Saktie.  Relateth 
the  Difcourfe  he  had  with  Secretary  Prada  about  this 
matter.  T.hat  the  Confufion  in  the  Spanilh  Affairs  is 
greater  now  than  euer  ;  becaufe  the  Duke  cannot  endure 
to  remitt  any  parte  of  the  Authoritie  he  had  engroffed, 
nor  will  tell  whom  he  will  take  in  to  help  Him  ;  foe  greate 
is  his  Jealoufy.  That  the  King  hath  commaunded  our 
Lawes  againft  Recufants  to  be  truely  tranllated  out  of  the 
Englifhe,  by  Sir  Andrews  Wife,  that  calks  liimlelfPricur 
of  England.  That  whofocuer  goes  from  England  to  Ame¬ 
rica  mult  prouide  to  goe  flronger ;  for  if  they  be  taken, 
they,  are  to  expert  noe  Remillion.  That  hi’s  Secretary 
Cottington  continueth  flek. 

244.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie.  729.  b. 

'Ihat  the  Conde  de  Villa-longa  fuffers  his  Mile  ryes 

W'lth  greate  Patience  :  that  a  Judge  being  lent  to  examine 
him,  he  was .  content  to  anfwer  to  matters  inferiour,  as 
to  Bribes  &  Corruptions,  but  not  to  thofe  that  concerne 
matters  of  State  ;  except  it  were  in  the  prefence  of  the 
King,  the  Duke  of  Lenna,  or  fome  of  the  principalleft 
of  his  Majefties  Counfell.  1  hat  the  Spaniards  kill  con¬ 
tinue  their  old  cultome  of  delaying  or  denying  Juftice  to 
our  Countrymen,  as  he  maketh  appear  by  divers  frefh 
Instances.  So  that  if  our  King  fhall  not  be  pleaied  that 
His  Subjects  ufe  fome  meanes  to  right  themfelues,  he 
can  expect  neither  Juftice  nor  Fauor,  whatfoeuer  out- 
warde  fhewes  the  Spaniards  may  fc-tt  upon  the  matter. 

245.  To  Sir  Thomas  Edmondes  His  Majefties  Am. 

baffad or  in  Flanders,  8  Februarie  1606-7.  732. 

246.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  8  Februarie  1606. 

StyloAnglie.  7^. 

Ihat  fince  the  fall  of  the  twoe  moft  negotiating 
Mimfters  of  that  State  Villa  longa  &  Prada,  there  hath 
none  other  rilen  in  their  place;  by  meanes  whereof,  thinges 
are  more  confufed  &  difordered  than  ei;er.  That  as  to 
the  Paper  Difpatches  which  he  lent  into  England  (con¬ 
taining  the  meanes  of  Satisfaction  which  the  Spaniard  had 
folemnly  promifed  our  fullering  Merchants)  they  remay  ne 
as  yet  in  their  owne  Nature,  neither  altered  in  Subftance 
nor  Accidents,  nor  one  Sillable  of  them  performed  ;  but 
on  the  contrarie  parte,  all  that  hath  fithence  appeared 
G  *  before 


Bibliothecae  Harieianse. 


■1 


Num,  1 87^. 

before  them,  either  ouerthrowne  or  foe  delayed,  as  thbre 
fe  litle  Hope.  That  Ten  Shippes  of  Warre  are  makeing 
ready,  as  is  geven  out,  for  the  States;  but,  as  it  is  thought, 
to  fetch  in  tne  Englifh  that  are  gone  into  the  Indies.  That 
great  Boafts  are  made  what  infinit  Treafure  the  King  is 
offered  out  of  Churches  &  Religious  Houfes  towardes 
his  Warres  in  the  Low-Countreyes,  Sc  ayding  of  the  Pope. 

247.  From  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  9th  Januarie  1606-7 

735- 

Comforting  Sir  Charles  in  his  houfehold  Afflictions, 
and  want  of  Succefs  in  the  Caufes  he  follicited  in  the 
Spanifh  Court.  That  the  Spanilh  Ambaffador  had  defired 
a  Conference  with  our  Minifters,  pretending  to  give 
anfwer  to  our  Complaints,  and  came  off  in  moll  wretched 
manner; 

248.  From  Mr.  Levinus  Monke  Secretarie  to  the  Earle 

of  Salifburie,  10  Januarie  1606-7.  73^-  b* 

That  Sir  Charles  is  little  beholding  to  fome  Younglings 
that  are  come  from  Spain,  efpeciallie  to  one  Vaughan  ; 
but  lead  of  all  to  one  Daniel  Powell,  whoe  hath  exhibited 
fome  Articles  againft  him,  of  his  difloyaltie  in  Religion 
&  Dutie,  but  himfelf  hath  Hopped  them  all  as  well  as  He 
can  ;  and  if  it  had  not  been  for  him  the  Lords  had  geuen 
Eare  to  him.  That  as  to  the  matter  of  Confulls,  it  is 
referred  to  the  Merchants  to  appoint  whome  they  will ; 
becaufe  neither  His  Majeftie  nor  the  Lords  would  be 
aunfwerable  for  the  Errors  which  they  might  committ. 
That  as  to  the  Great  Matter,  feeing  the  Spaniards  encline 
hot  to  us,  it  is  little  cared  to  whome  they  bend.  The 
Style  of  this  Letter  is  fomewhat  extraordinary,  Mr.  Monke 
feeming  to  have  a  very  good  Opinion  of  himfelf,  and  to 
be  fuperior  to  Sir  Charles. 

249.  Sir  Charles  to  the  Cdnfefior  of  the  King  of 

Spaine,  27  Februarie  1606-7.  741.  b. 

That  having  for  almoft  two  Years  continually  fol¬ 
licited  the  Caufes  of  our  fuffering  Merchants,  he  hath 
not  obtayned  any  entire  or  due  Satisfaction  in  any  one  of 
them,  and  therefore  now  for  his  laft  Shift  (for  he  meaneth 
not  longer  to  employ  his  Labours  therein)  he  addreffeth 
himfelf  to  his  Reverend  Fatherhood,  as  the  Advifer  of 
the  Kings  Soule  &  Confcience.  Defiringe  that  he  would 
be  pleafed  to  acquaint  the  Duke  therewith;  and  afterward, 
to  be  a  meane  that  His  Majeftie  may  prefently  appoint 
fome  of  his  Counfell  to  take  underftanding  of  the  feuerall 
Caufes,  Sc  drawe  them  to  fome  finall  end,  without  fuch 
intollerable  delayes  &  protractions  as  have  been  hitherto 
ufed. 

250.  A  Letter  received  from  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  dated 

10  December  1606.  743-  fr¬ 

it  is  not  inferted  ;  but  the  purport  thereof  appears 

to  have  been  a  defire  of  our  Kings  Amity  &  Good  AffeCtion. 

251.  Unto  the  King  our  Soueraigne,  7  Martij  1606. 

Stilo  Anglie.  _  744- 

Concerning  the  Duke  of  Savoys  Letter,  which  He 
fent  enclofed  in  this  ;  and  defiring  to  be  recalled. 

252.  To  my  Lord  of  Salifburie,  at  the  fame  time. 

745.  b. 

That  in  order  to  delay  the  giving  liberty  to  the 
Englifh  taken  in  the  Indies  by  Firardo,  Secretary  Prada 
had  quibbled  with  the  Memorial  he  had  offered  in  the 
poor  mens  behalf,  faying  that  it  feemed  not  either  to 
come  from  our  King,  or  to  be  authorized  with  his  Name, 
with  the  other  Difcourfe  on  this  matter.  That  the  Spa¬ 
niards  boaft  of  a  great  Vi&orie  they  have  gotten  of  the 
Hollanders  &  Englifh  that  haue  begun  to  fortifie  them- 
felues  in  an  Ifland  in  the  Eafl  Indies  called  Terra  nata  ; 
of  whom  they  have  not  left  one  manaliue,  and  have  alfo 
flayne  4000  of  the  Natives  that  tooke  their  parts.  The 
prefent  Bootye  they  found  there(befides  700  greate  peeces 
of  Ordnance)  they  report  to  be  at  lcaft  8,ooo,oool.  and 
that  the  Iflande  will  yeeld  in  yeerely  profitt  to  the  King, 
a  Million  &  an  half.  That  the  Order  of  St.  James  is 
lately  beftowed  on  Sir  Anthony  Sherley,  Sir  James  Lind- 
fey  ;  &  upon  the  Sonnes  of  O  Sullivan  Beere  &  Mac 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


-• 91 


Num.  1875—1877. 

Williams,  Irilhmen.  They  haue  alfoe  made  Sir  Anthpny 
of  his  Majefties  Councill  of  Naples,  and  Generali  of 
diuers  Shippes,  which  mull  be  of  his  owne  procuring  : 
and  Jeremy  Laurence  mufte  drawe  them  out  of  England 
for  him.  That  it  is  reported  that  they  have  bellowed 
100  peeces  of  Ordnance  upon  the  King,  which  Laurence 
long  fince  tranfported  out  of  England.  If  this  be  foe,  it 
is  not  well  that  foe  liberall  a  Paflage  is  geuen  to  Merchan¬ 
dize  of  that  nature.  They  talk  of  fitting  out  of  a  Greate 
Navye  ;  and  ’tis  certaine  that  400,000  Crownes  are 
deliuered  for  prefent  Marine  Charges.  That  Secretary 
Prada  hath  fent  him  word  from  the  King  that  the  above- 
mentioned  Englilh  Prifoners  Ihall  for  this  one  time  be 
delivered,  but  if  hereafter  any  Ihall  be  taken  offendinge 
in  the  like  fort  (i.  e.  by  prefuming  to  go  for  America) 
they  Ihall  not  haueleiluie  to  become  Suitors,  but  receiue 
their  Difpatch  immediatlie  after  their  Apprehenfion.  He 
hopes  therefore,  that  fuch  as  Ihall  faile  into  thofe  parts, 
will  prouide  to  keepe  themfelues  from  falling  into  Spanilh 
hands.  That  the  King  hath  fent  exprefs  Commandment 
to  his  feuerall  Counfells,  for  fpeedyend  of  all  our  Countrey- 
mens  Caufes  ;  when  he  Ihall  fee  the  fruite  of  them,  he 
will  beleeue  they  are  tritely  intended  ;  for  although  in 
England  the  Old  Prouerb  is,  Hee  that  is  in  Potfeflion, 
hath  Eleuen  Points  of  the  Lawe  for  Him :  there,  he  may 
well  be  fayd  to  haue  Eleven  &  three  quarters.  That  poore 
Mr.  Dorington  travaileth  daielie,  and  findeth  himfelf  noe 
whitt  neerer  his  Journeys  end.  That  he  tooke  himfelf, 
at  his  firft  arrival,  for  a  Man  of  much  underftanding  in 
Spanilh  Caufes,  but  now  hath  fufticiently  found  the  con¬ 
trary. 

253.  To  Sir  George  Carewe,  his  Majefties  Ambafla- 
dor  in  France.  750. 

Relating  the  Misfortunes  attending  his  Houfehold, 
by  the  Death  of  many  of  his  Servants,  &  the  Departure 
of  others  who  feared  to  die.  That  thereby,  till  he  could 
get  others  from  England,  he  was  forced  to  retain  Papifts, 
of  whom  he  hath  at  length  cleared  both  his  Howfe  & 
Table.  That  the  Jefuits  watch  his  Family  fo  carefully, 
as  none  of  them  can  goe  out  of  his  doores  without  peril! 
of  fome  Alterations.  That  lome  they  perfwade,  fome  they 
threaten,  &  others  they  allure  ;  twoe  of  his  principalleft 
Gentlemen  having  ben  offred  the  Penn  werewith  to  fett 
downe  their  owne  Conditions.  That  the  bearer  of  this 
Letter  his  kinfman,  fonne  to  Sir  Thomas  Cornwallies 
his  Majefties  Groome  Porter,  was  placed  by  him  with  the 
Conftable  of  Caftile,  who  gaue  his  Word  that  he  Ihould 
not  be  tampered  with  in  his  Religion,  but  notwithftand- 
ing  that,  the  Jefuites  (unlefs  he  had  timely  prevented 
them)  had  perverted  him,  &  made  him  a  Penfioner  to 
that  State;  He  therefore  defireth  Sir  George  to  receive 
him  into  his  Houfe,  or  fome  other  place  near  him,  untill 
the  Young  Gentlemans  Father  can  give  Order  about 
him ;  deiiring  farther,  that  he  may  be  allowed  1  ol.  a 
quarter  (being  his  Fathers  allowance)  towards  which  he 
fendeth  two  Bills  in  Hand. 

1876. 

A  Recent  Book  in  fol.  wherein  is  contained  a  Treatife 
(as  yet  unprinted)  whofe  Title  is,  an  Account  of  the 
Life  of  Mahomet. 

I  have  heard  that  the  Author  was  DoCtor  Henry 
Stubs  the  Phyfician  ;  but  it  is  not  particularly  mentioned 
in  the  large  account  given  of  him  &  his  Works  bv  Mr. 
Anthony  Wood  in  the  Second  Volume  of  his  Athencd 
Oxonienfes. 

1877. 

A  paper  Book  in  fol.  (bought  of  me)  wherein  are  con¬ 
tained, 

1.  An  Imperfect  account  ot  the  Contents  (in  the  firft 
fpare-leaf.) 

2.  A  memorandum  touching,  the  Rates  which  were 
paid  by  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Rape  of  Bramber  in  Suflex, 

4  G  toward 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


198 

Num.  1877. 

toward  the  Subfidie  granted  ann.  1 8  Jac.  1.  (in  the  fecond 
fpare  leaf,  b.)  __  0 

In  the  next  leaf  are  entered  divers  ihort  Notes  & 
Memorandums  :  many  of  which  fhall  be  mentioned  in 
their  Order. 

3.  That  the  Words  ‘God  fave  the  King  &  preferve 
the  Common-wealth,’  appear  in  a  Proclamation  made 
21  Hen.  vin. 

4.  How  the  Value  of  fine  Gold  was  raifed  ann.  36 
Hen.  viii.  to  prevent  the  further  carrying  of  it  out  of  the 
Reahne. 

5.  That  it  appeareth  by  a  Proclamation  of  Edw.  vi. 
that  the  Stewes  were  whited  on  the  Ontfides,  &  Signes 
painted  on  them. 

6.  That  an.  2  Edw.  v.  there  was  a  grant  to  the 
King  from  every  Sheepe,  Sc  Cloth  :  which  being  found 
burthenfome,  was  repealed  ann.  3  &  4  Edw.  vi. 

7.  That  the  Meafure  of  an  Englifh  Handful  or  Hands- 
breadth,  is  four  Inches. 

8.  That  there  was  a  Proclamation  an.  32  Hen.  viii. 
allowing  men  to  eate  white  meates  &c.  becaul'e  Fifh  was 
deare. 

9.  How  the  Lord  Chiefe  Juftice  Popham  reported 
openly  in  Parliament,  that  in  the  fall  of  3s.  in  a  Todd  of 
Woll,  England  loft  200,000!.  in  a  yeare. 

10.  That  Marchants  Adventurers  vent  4  times  as 
much  white  Cloth,  as  all  the  reft. 

1 1 .  That  Clothes  dyed  Sc  dreffed  in  the  Low  Coun¬ 
tries  are  fold  for  15  or  20  per  Cent  above  ours  of  the 
lame  making. 

1 2.  That  the  Elollanders  vent  their  Clothes  vnder  the 
Seale  of  England. 

13.  Of  the  Clothes  made  in  Germany. 

14.  That  the  Still-yard  (hipped  White  Clothes. 

15.  That  the  Lord  of  Cumberland,  by  licence  had 
2s.  8d.  of  every  Cloth  above  price. 

With  other  like  obfervations  touching  the  Woollen 
Trade,  &  feveral  Companies  of  Merchants. 

*  1 6.  That  ann.  27  Eliz.  Sir  Walter  Myldmaye  being 

a  Privy-Councellour  &  Chancellour  of  th’Exchequer, 
fpake  againft  the  graunting  of  two  Subfidies. 

17.  The  Value  of  the  Homage  paid  in  18  Eliz. 

18.  That  Northumberland,  Cumberland,  Weftmer- 
land,  &  Durham,  never  paid  Subfidyes  till  the  time  of 
K.  James  1.  by  reafon  of  their  Border-Service. 

1 9.  The  Contents  of  the  Superficies  of  England,  in  or¬ 
der  to  the  levying  a  Tax  to  be  paid  to  King  James  r.  for 
redeeming  of  Wardlhippes,  &c. 

20.  That  a  Patent  of  Wynes  was  cancelled  in  Parlia¬ 
ment  anno  50  Edw.  in. 

21.  That  there  were  no  Receivers  till  Henry  viii. 
time  ;  but  the  SherilFes  paid  the  Tellers. 

22.  That  the  King  paid  15000I.  in  Fees,  where  he 
received  but  8oocl.  profit 

23.  That  Abbots  made  Knights  till  the  year  1102, 
when  that  Liberty  was  taken  away  by  Parliament ;  al¬ 
though  K.  Henry  the  firft  in  the  26th  year  of  his  Raign 
granted  that  Privilege  to  the  Abbot  of  Reading. 

24.  The  Titles  of  George  Villiers  Duke  of  Bucking¬ 
ham  A.  D.  1624.  in  Latin. 

25.  Of  the  Titles  of  the  fame,  as  engraven  in  his  Seale 
A.D.  1618. 

Then  follow  in  the  numbred  Leaves, 

26.  The  Kings  Oathe,  as  exhibited  in  Tottels  Magna 

Chaita  printed  A.  D.  1  ^56.  1 . 

27.  :r  Edward  Cookes  Verfes  in  Parliament,  ibid. 

28.  An  Oration  made  by  the  Lord  Kcper  Bacon  to 

the  Queues  Majeftie,  in  her  Gallerie  at  Weftminfter; 
exhorting  her  to  marriage.  2. 

29.  The  Aunfwere  given  in  the  Quenes  Prefence  (by 
the  fame)  to  the  Lord  Mayor,  when  he  was  prefen  ted. 

ibid. 

30.  Speachc  vfed  (by  the  fame)  to  a  Sergiaunt  at  Lawe, 

called  to  be  a  Judge.  ibid. 


Num.  1877. 

31.  An  Oration  made  to  the  Quenes  Majeftie  by  the 

Lorde  Keper  (Bacon)  concerninge  her  Mariage,  and  the 
Succeflion  of  the  Crowne.  3-  b. 

32.  The  Effefte  offuch  Speach  ufed  by  the  faid  Lorde 

Keper  vnto  the  Quenes  Majeftie  at  fuch  tyme  as  her 
Highnes  firft  called  him  to  ferve.  5.  b. 

33.  A  Speech  vfed  by  the  Lord  Keper  amongfl  the 

Lords  of  the  Starre-Chamber,  1568.  6. 

24.  The  Speach  vfed  by  the  Lorde  Keper  tenne  daies 
before  Chriftmafs,  anno  1559.  at  the  Councelle-borde, 
concerning  an  ayde  required  by  the  Scottes,  for  the  re¬ 
moving  of  the  French  out  of  Scotlande.  8.  b. 

35.  An  Oration  made  by  the  Lorde-Keper,  the  8th 
of  March,  the  Parliament  then  ending,  to  the  Nobles  & 
Commons,  in  the  Prefence  of  the  Quenes  Majeftie. 

13.  b. 

36.  Mompeflons  Judgement,  for  oppreffinge  the  Sub¬ 
ject  vpon  Monopolies.  15.  b. 

37.  A  Letter  written  by  a  Friend,  to  my  Lord  Cooke. 

16. 

This  Friend  (as  I  have  heard)  was  Sir  Francis 
Bacon. 

38.  Articles  of  Agreement  Sc  Compofition  made 

.  .  February  15S6.  betweene  Sir  Francis  Knolles 

Knight  Treafurer  of  Her  Majefties  moll  EIonorableHowfe, 
Sir  James  Crofts  Knight  Comptroller  of  the  fame,  and 
others  Her  Highnes  Officers  of  the  Greene-cloth,  for 
and  on  the  behalfe  of  Her  Majeftie ;  and  Thomas  Lord 
Buckehurfte,  Henry  Goring,  See.  Juftices  of  the  Peace 
within  the  County  of  Suflex  ;  for  &  on  the  behalfe  of 
the  faid  Countie,  towards  th’expence  of  her  Majefties  faid 
Howfe.  (Imperf.)  20. 

39.  Pes  Computi  Henrici  Cocke  Militis  Cofferarij 
Hofpitij  Domini  Regis,  pro  uno  anno  finito  ultimo  die 
Septembris,  anno  primo  DTli  Regis  Jacobi.  21.  b. 

40.  The  Rate  at  which  each  County  of  England  was 

to  be  addled,  according  to  the  Superficial  Contents  of 
the  whole,  efteemed  at  34866  Myles,  in  order  to  the 
redeeming  of  Wardfhipps,  &c.  of  King  James  1.  by  his 
firft  Parliament.  23. 

41.  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Letter  to  the  Lord-Keeper, 

when  under  Difpleafure  about  the  Succeflion,  fent  by  the 
Lady  Bacon,  who  had  carried  his  Submiflion.  25. 

I  am  apt  to  think,  that  this  was  rather  a  Speech  or 
a  Meflage  to  the  Parliament. 

42.  A  Lettre  from  the  Lord  Keeper  Bacon  to  Secre¬ 
tary  C.icill.  (16  Nov.  1564.)  25.  b. 

Defiling  that  He  &  the  Lord  of  Leicefter  (Dudley) 
would  be  a  meane  for  his  recovering  Her  Majefties  moll 
gracious  favor. 

43.  The  Lord  Keeper  Bacon  to  Leyfter  touching  a 

Sute.  26. 

44.  A  Speech  of  the  Lord  Keeper  to  Manhood 

when  he  was  made  Chiefe  Baron.  ibid. 

45.  A  trew  Report  of  that  which  was  laid  to  my  (Mr. 

Peter  Wentworth’s)  Charge  in  the  Starre-Chamber  by 
the  Committees  of  the  Parliament-houfe,  that  fame  after- 
noone  after  that  1  had  all  the  Speech  in  the  Houfe  ; 
and  my  aunfweres  to  the  fame.  29. 

46.  Table  of  the  Forces  of  thirty  Shers  within  the 

Realme  of  England,  &  the  whole  Country  or  Principa- 
litie  of  Wales,  at  they  were  muftered  in  anno  1591,  & 
certified  to  the  Lords  1591,  &  1592.  30.  b. 

47.  Eftimate  of  the  Yearly  Value  of  the  feveral  Pro¬ 
vinces  &£  Imperial  Cities  of  Germany ;  and  their  feveral 
Contingents  toward  the  Army  of  the  Empire.  3 1.  b. 

48.  The  placeing  of  Eftates  of  Englifh  Nobilitye. 

32.  b. 

49.  The  placeing  of  the  great  Officers  according  to 
the  Aft  of  Parliament  made  anno  ai  Henrici  Oftavi. 

ibid . 

50.  The  Inftruftions  of  Cardinall  Sermonetta  to  his 
Colon  Petro  Gaetano,  at  his  firft  going  into  Flaunders 
to  the  Duke  of  Parma,  to  fervePhilipKing  of  Spayne.  33. 

51.  Peter 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


-99 


Num.  1877. 

5 1 .  Peter  Wentworth’s  Speech  when  the  Queen  would 

dilfolve  the  Parliament.  37- 

52.  A  Speech  by  himdeliuered  for  the  Speaker  to  fay 
vnto  the  Queene. 

53.  The  molt  waighty,  fecrett,  &  laft  Inflections 
given  by  Philip  ihe  fecond  King  of  Spaine,  to  his  Sonne 
King  Philip  the  Third,  which  now  reigneth ;  teaching 
him  how  to  governe  himfelf  and  hi.'  Kingdome  after  the 
Deceafe  of  his  faid  Father.  Brought  to  light  by  a  Servant 
.  .  .  Don  Criftopher  de  Mona  called  Roderigo  D.  A.  &c. 
and  tranflated  out  of  Spanilh  and  Dutch  into  Englidi.40. 

54.  Copie  of  King  Henry  the  Fights  Will,  dated  the 
3d  of  November,  in  the  38  th  year  of  his  Reign  ;  taken 

from  the  Inrolment  thereol  in  Chancery.  __  4'  - 

55.  The  Petition  of  Mary  the  foie  Daughter  &  Heire 

to  Henry  Nevill  Baron  of  Burgavennye,  (k  Wife  to  Sir 
Thomas  Fane  of  Kent  Knight)  claiming  the  fame  Barony 
from  the  Heir-male  ;  together  with  her  Defcent  ;  the 
two  Queftions  fent  by  Robert  Devereux  Earl  of  Ellex 
the  18th  of  February  1598,  touching  this  matter,  vnto 
Sir  John  Popham  Lord  Chiefe  Jultice,  Sc  Sir  Edmond 
Anderfon  Lord  Chiefe  Jultice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  and 
their  Anfwers  to  the  fame,  returned  by  William  Camden 
Clarenceux  his  Lordffitps  Meflenger.  45- 

56.  A  new  Ordinance  prepared  by  the  King  our  Sove- 

raigne  Lord,  for  the  Office  k  due  attendance  of  the 
Knight  Marffiall.  4^. 

57.  The  Manner  k  Cultome  of  the  vfages  of  Thomas 
Brotherton,  which  he  had  &  vfed  in  the  Office  of 

Marffiallfea.  .  ib^. 

58.  Lift  of  the  feveral  Sums  of  Money  received  by  Ed¬ 
mund  Dudley,  for  the  ufe  of  King  Henry  the  Seventh.  47. 

59.  The  proceeding  & .  true  marffialling  of  each  Degree 

&  Office  in  his  right  place,  as  the  Queenes  Majeftie  went 
to  »  Paules  Church  in  London  from  Somerfett-houfe, 
to  acknowledge  Gods  great  Deliuerance  againft  the  Spa- 
nifh  Attempt  ;  and  was  fett  downe  by  the  Lord  Burghlcy 
Lord  high  Treaforer  of  England,.  &  Earle  Mar  (hall  for 
the  time  anno  1588.  4$- 

60.  The  Patent  whereby  King  James  1.  granted  Autho¬ 

rity  to  the  Lord-Keeper  F.gerton  to  (fay  Suites  and  Peti¬ 
tions,  bearing  Tefte  2 1  May,  anno  piimo.  49. 

61.  A  Project  for  the  tranfporting  of  fome Enghffi  Co- 

lonies  into  the  parts  of  Ireland,  whereby  not  only  the 
Countrey  mav  be  repeopled,  and  her  Majeftie  be  ferved 
with  allured  Subjects  •,  but  alfo  her  highnefs  Revenues 
may  be  reftored  &  the  Engliffi  live  there  well  k  fafely. 
dat.  December  1585.  5l,b* 

62.  A  Generali  Colleftion  of  all  the  Offices  of  Eng- 

land,  with  their  Fees,  in  the  Queenes  Majefties  Guifte. 
Anno  Dm  1397-  .  _  ,  r 

63.  A  long  Speech  in  the  Commons  houie  of  Parlia¬ 

ment  (temp.  R.  Eliz.)  upon  the  Subjeft  of  Freedome  of 
Speech.  .  57* 

64.  A  Letter  dated  .  .  Aug.  1601,  concerning  the 

then  ftrait  keeping  the  Records  in  the  Tower.  With  a 
Poftfcript  (hewing  how  Will.  Lambert  (who  had  the 
Cuftody  of  the  fame  after  the  deceafe  of  Michael  Hennage) 
got  his  Death,  in  rummaging  into  them,  from  the  un- 
wholefome  Smell  which  ilfued  from  them.  60. 

65.  The  Manner,  Forme,  k  Ufadge  of  Gilbert  de 
Strogile  Marffiall  of  England,  in  what  manner  he  occupied 
&  vfed  the  Hid  Rome  &  Office  in  all  his  time  ;  and  how 
he  was  admitted,  holden,  taken,  &  regarded,  in  executing 
of  his  Office  at  the  Coronation  of  King  Henry  11.  and  of 
his  Knight  Marffiall,  and  all  other  their  Inferior  Officers 
to  them  belonging ;  with  all  other  their  Subftitutes  k 
Deputies  as  well  for  the  day  &  time  for  •>  the  Kings 
moft  Royall  Coronation,  as  in  all  other  times  :  and  of  the 
Vantages,  Commodities,  k  Profitts  auntiently  ^accuf- 

66.  Letter  of  Edmund  Grindall  Archbiffiop  of  Can¬ 
terbury  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  dated  12  Nov.  1578.  62. 

This  is  that  remarkable  Letter  (in  defence  of  the 


Num.  1877. 

Exercifes  or  Prophecyings,  as  they  were  then  called  j 
which  brought  fo  great  troubles  on  the  Writer.  But  it 
may  be  noted  that  the  date  abovementioned  is  different 
from  thofe  in  the  Copies  exhibited  by  Mr.  Fuller  & 
Mr.  Strype ;  and  the  prefent  Copie  doth  alfo  want  the 
preamble. 

67.  Circular  Letter  from  George  Abbot  Arch-biffiop 

of  Canterbury  to  the  Biffiops  of  his  Province,  dat.  1 2 
Aug.  1622,  including  therein  the  Kings  Letters  to  him, 
for  preventing  the  fchifm  &  diffention  which  might  arife 
from  the  many-times  unprofitable,  unfound,  feditious,  Sc 
flaunderous  Doftrines  taught  by  divers  younge  Students^ 
milled  by  late  Writers  &  ungrounded  Divines.  His  Ma- 
jefty  is  the  more  concerned  about  thefc  Preachers,  in  as 
much  as  their  Abufes  k  Extravagancies  in  the  Pulpit  have 
been  in  all  tymes,  in  this  Realme,  repreffed  by  fome  Aft 
of  Councell  or  State,  with  the  Advice  &  Refolution  of 
greate  &  learned  Prelates :  the  very  licenfinge  of  Prea¬ 
chers  havinge  had  beginninge  by  an  Order  of  the  Star- 
Chamber  the  8th  day  July  in  the  19th  yere  of  King 
Henry  vm.  .  65. 

68.  Letter  from  the  Lord  Keeper  Williams  to  the 
Judges  of  the  y  Courte,  requiring  them  forthwith  to  fett 
free  all  Papifts  imprifoned  for  any  Aft  of  Recu'ancy,  con¬ 
cerning  their  Religion  only.  dat.  9  Auguft  1622.  ibid. 

69.  Directions  concerning  Preachers,  fubferibed  by  the 
juft  abovementioned  Archbiffiop  ;  but  feeming  to  have 
been  drawn  up  by  the  Kings  Privy-Council.  65-  b. 

70.  Formula  Juramenti  a  Legato  Anglia:  praeftandi,  de 
oblervando  traftatu  Matrimonij  inter  Carolum  Wallias 
Principem,  et  Mariam  Hifpaniarum  Infantem.  _  66. 

71.  Articuli  Matrimonialis  Conventus  habiti  inter 

Sereniffimum  Wall  ire  Principem,  k  Sereniffimam  Infan¬ 
tem  ;  per  communes  eorundem  Commiffarios,  22  Julij 
A.  D.  1623.  ,66- 

72.  The  Proteftation  of  Parliament,  anno  19  Jacobi 

Regis.  67.  b. 

This  afferts  the  Liberties  k  Privileges  of  the  Houfe 
of  Commons. 

73.  Reafons  whye  England  ffiould  proteft  the  Low- 

Countries.  ’kid. 

74..  Noats  concerninge  Spaine  k  the  Lowe-Countries. 

‘  68.  b. 

75.  The  Speech  of  Monfieur  du  Vair  when  he  delivered 

the  Seales  to  the  King  of  Fraunce.  69.  b. 

76.  The  Lord  Chauncellers  Speech  to  Sir  Henry  Mon¬ 

tague,  when  he  was  fworne  Lord  Chief  Juftice  of  the 
Kings  Bench.  7°-  b; 

77.  A  Petition  of  John  Lilly  to  the  Queenes  Majeftie. 

71. 

This  Man  was  a  Play-wright  (as  it  feems)  in  Qu. 
Elizabeths  Court ;  and  after  ten  years  Attendance  there 
wanted  to  be  Mafter  of  the  Revells. 

78.  John  Lillies  Second  Petition  to  the  Queene.  71.  b. 
Herein,  after  thirteen  years  Attendance,  he  wittily 

complains  of  his  misfortune  in  getting  Nothing  all  the 
while, 

79.  Addrefs  of  the  Commons  Houfe  of  Parliament  to 

K.  James  1.  letting  him  know  that  they  were  all  equal 
among  themlclves,  none  higher,  none  lower,  than  one 
another ;  and  that  therefore  fuch  as  ffiould  pretend 
to  be  Undertakers  for  them  to  His  Majefty,  were 
vaine  &  idle,  and  by  that  their  Ambition  made 
thcmfelves  k  all  their  former  Merits  contemptible  k 
defpiied.  ’kid. 

80.  A  Speech  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  made  in  the  Par¬ 
liament,  at  the  breaking  up  thereof;  29  March  A.  D. 

1585-  72: 

81.  Reafons  including  his  Majeftie  to  make  Marie 

Ladie  Compton,  Counteife  of  Buckingham,  .  .  Auguft, 
1618.  72-b. 

This  is  only  the  Preamble  of  the  Patent  of  her 
Creation. 

82.  Commiffion  of  King  Charles  1.  to  the  Lords  & 

7  others 


3°° 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1877,  1878. 

others  of  the  Privy  Councell,  concerninge  the  prefeilt 
Raifeinge  of  Moneyes.  Tefte  &c.  ultFebr.  anno  regni  3. 

74.  b. 

83.  Order  or  Warrant  of  King  Philip  &  Queen  Mary, 
touching  a  Regulation  of  the  Poundage  lately  granted  to 
the  Queen  by  Parliament,  and  levying  the  fame  according 
to  a  Book  of  Rates  newly  dfawn  up  for  that  purpofe. 
Yeouen,  28  May,  in  their  fourth  and  fifth  years.  77. 

84.  A  Declaration  expreflinge  the  Ioffe  fufteyned  by 

reafon  of  the  difference,  between  Wool  and  Cloth  Cuf- 
tomes  &  Subfidyes  ;  and  alfo  exprefling  the  Rate  affeffed 
uppon  the  Cloth.  77.  5, 

This  is  mentioned  in  the  former  Order. 

85.  Fhe  Cuftumarie  of  the  Lordfhippe  of  Southwark 

appertaining  to  the  Bifhopp  ofWinchefter  &  his  Suc- 
ceffors,  made  of  olde  tyme  in  .  .  Articles  ;  which  ought 
to  be  enquired  of  att  every  Court  holden  within  the  faid 
Mannour  &  Lordfhippe.  7^. 

This  relateth  to  the  Stews  formerly  eftablifhed  there. 

86.  The  Lettre  fent  by  His  Majeltie  to  the  Lord 

Scroope,  22  Dec.  162P.  when  he  was  to  leave  the  Pre- 
fidentfhipp  &  Lieutenancie  of  York.  81. 

87.  The  King  of  Spaines  yearly  Revenue  out  of  all 

his  Dominions.  83.  b.  &  87.  b. 

88.  "I  he  King  of  Spaines  Stile.  g4. 

89.  Lift  of  the  Archbifhopps  &  Bifhopps  in  Spaine 
&  Portugall,  with  their  feveral  Revenues  by  the  Yeare. 

t  -n.  ibid. 

90.  Lift  of  the  Spanifh  Nobility  Temporal,  with  the 

yearly  Value  of  their  Eftates.  84.  b. 

91.  Lift  of  the  feveral  Counfailes  in  Spain.  87. 

92.  Allowances  made  by  the  King  of  Spain  to  his  Am- 

baffadors  abroad.  '  87.  b. 

93.  Names  of  the  Univerfities  in  Spain  &  Portugall, 
with  the  Number  of  Students  to  them  belonging,  ibid.  ’ 

94*  The  Circuit  of  Spain  &  Portugall  expreffed  in 
Englilh  Miles.  gg 

95.  Names  of  the  feveral  Provinces  in  Spain.  ibid. 

96.  Notes  touching  the  great  Rivers  in  Spain.  88.  b. 

97.  The  Lord  Chief  Juftice  Cookes  Caufe,  as  it  was 

handled  at  Whitehall  &  Greenwich  by  the  Lords  of  the 
Council!,  in  June  1616.  ggf 

98.  Notes  of  Henry  the  Sevenths  Raigne,  Lett  downe 

in  Manufcript  by  the  Lord  Chancellor  Bacon.  91. 

99-  The  auncient  Courfe  &  Cuftome  of  Proceeding, 
in  divers  matters,  in  the  Prerogative-Court.  91 .  b. 

ico.  George  Parke’s  Bill  for  Service  done  in  Chan¬ 
cery,  A  D.  1622.  g2> 

1  o  1 .  The  Order  taken  by  my  Lord  Admiral,  &c.  con¬ 
cerning  knowledge  to  be  given  to  the  Coafts  of  Suffex 
of  her  Highnes  Navye  when  it  (hall  paffe  by  them  :  where¬ 
by  they  may  difeerne  them  from  Enemyes.  anno  1 588. 

x-  ,  92.  b. 

102.  Numerus  Feodorum  Militufn  in  Anglia.  93. 

103.  Abftratt  of  the  Allowances  made  to  the  Auditors 

of  Oueen  Elizabeth’s  Revenues.  foid. 

'Phis  was  exhibited  by  Mr.  Lichfield  one  of  tlie 
Grorncs  of  the  PrivY  Chamber,  about  the  26th  yeare  of 
her  Reign ;  who,  in  one  acconipt,  with  the  daflie  of  a 
Penne,  had  deceived  her  Majefty  of  4000  pounds. 

104.  Charges  for  an  Adminiftration,  pag.  ult. 

105.  That  Sir  James  Parrott  loft  a  great  Eftate  by 
reafon  the  Clerke  wrote  that  Sir  John  Parrott  obiit,  & 
felte  out  thefe  words  inde  feifitas. 

1878. 

Ar°nk-V  me  !  containing  a  mod  curious 

Collection  of  Precedents  &  Papers  all  relating  to  the 

a“efh.the  “d 

.  1  •  Indented  Writt  in  the  Kings  Name,  for  the  Car 
mge  of  Wool  in  the  Ship  of  Clays  Bcdrikeffon  from  Lon¬ 
don  to  Calais  free  of  all  Cuftoms  &  Subfidies.  dat.  12 
July,  ann.  13  R.Rich.  ji.  (in  Latin)  u 


Nam.  1878. 

2.  Memorial  (in  French)  to  the  King,  fetting  forth  the 

Damage  fuftained  by  tranfporting  a  certain  Commoditie 
called  CltrommCS,  which  being  in  themfelves  more 
valuable  than  unwrought  Wool,  were  the  rather  bought 
up  by  the  Foreigners,  to  the  Quantity  of  500  Sacks  in  a 
year,  Cuftorii  Free,  or  at  leaft  not  rated  up  to  their  Value 
whereby  the  Crown  loft  100  pounds  per  ann.  and  pro- 
pofing  a  Remedy.  This  hath  the  Dale  of  ann.  20  R.  2. 
added  to  it  by  a  modern  Hand.  ibid. 

3.  Petition  of  the  Merchants  of  the  Town  of  New- 
Caftle  upon  Tine  to  the  King,  fetting  forth  the  Incon¬ 
veniences  6c  Loffes  attending  their  tranfporting  their 
Wool  to  Calais.  And  that  as  heretofore  he  had  granted 
them  liberty  to  fhipp-oft  2000  Sacks  of  Wool  where  they 
pleafed,  whereby  his  Ciiftomes  were  encreafed  to  2900 
Marks  in  one  Year  :  they  now  defire  the  like  liberty  of 
tranfporting  3000  Sacks  more.  Hereunto,  a  modern 
hand  hath  added  the  Date  of  20  R.  2.  (In  French)  2. 

4-  Warrant  from  the  Signet- Office  to  the  Privy-Seal, 
in  order  to  pafs  under  the  Great  Seal,  Letters  Patent 
granting  liberty  to  the  Merchants  of  New-Caftle  upon 
'I  ine  to  tranfport  Shorling  Lambefkynnes  &  Calvdkynnes 
growing  in  the  Countees  of  Northumbrelande,  Weftmer- 
lande,  Cumberlande,  &  Bisfhopryke  of  Durefme,  vnto 
the  Townes  of  Brugges  &  Middelburghe,  as  not  being  of 
the  Goodnefs  of  Staple-ware  :  they  paying  therefore  the 
Subfidie  called  Pondage,  that  is  to  wite  i2d.  of  the  lib. 
Yeven  the  8th  day  of  Marche,  ann.  30  R.  Henr.  vi. 

ibid. 

5.  Petition  (in  French)  of  Thomas  de  Grymefby  Clerke 

&  Hugh  Atte-Fenne,  Cuftutners  in  the  Port  of  Great- 
Jernemuthe  (i.  e.  Yarmouth)  for  Relief  againft  John. 
Spynke  who  claimed  &  took  of  all  Merchants  in  the  fame 
Port  (as  due  to  him  by  Inheritance)  certain  Sums  of  Mo¬ 
ney  which  he  called  IlaficigC,  without  any  Grant  or 
Confirmation  from  the  King,  &c.  and  of  which  LaftatTC, 
by  order  of  the  late,  &  then  prefent  Lord  Treafurer,  & 
of  the  Barons  of  the  Exchequer,  they  had  put  his  Ma¬ 
jefty  into  poffefllon.  This  is  dated  by  the  fame  modern 
Hand.  Anno  2  1  Ri.  2.  2i  b. 

6.  Warant  of  King  Henry  iv.  (in  French)  granting, 

with  the  Advice  &  Affent  of  the  Prelats  &  the  other 
Eftats  of  the  then  prefent  Parliament,  an  abatement  of 
three  Shillings  &  Eourpence  of  the  Duty  laid  on  every 
Sack  of  Wool,  to  the  Merchants  of  Venice  &  Lucca,  as 
had  before  been  done  to  thofe  of  Florence.  The  Rea¬ 
fon  of  his  Generofity,  was’the  miftake  of  the  Clerk  of  the 
Parliament  holden  at  Co  ventre  in  the  Sixth  year  of  his 
Reign  ;  who,  when  the  Parliament  had  given  the  King 
a  Noble  from  every  Sack  of  Wool,  putt  down  Ten 
Shillings  in  the  Roll  of  the  faid  Parliament ;  which  was 
levied  accordingly,  the  Merchants  being  obliged  to  pay 
Threefcore  &  three  Shillings  6c  four-pence  Duty  on  each 
Sack,  inftead  of  Threefcore  Shillings  only.  Given  under 
his  Signet  at  Glouceftre,  the  16  of  Novembre,  in  his 
ninth  Year  (in  French)  ibid.. 

7.  A  Lilt,  in  Latin,  of  the  Annuities,  Wages,  and 

other  great  Sums  of  Money  affigned  on  the  Cuftoms  in 
the  Port  of  Hull,  temp.  R.  Henr.  iv.  3. 

8.  Petition,  in  French,  of  Richard  Garner  Citizen  & 
Vintner  ol  London,  to  King  Henry  iv.  6c  his  Counfel, 
ihewing  that  notwithftanding  the  Provifions  made  that 
all  Block-Tin  fhould  be  carried  to  the  Staple,  &  no 
where  eiie  ;  about  1000  Pieces  (or  Piggs?)  were  never- 
thelefs  yearly  carried  to  other  Places.  He  therefore  fup- 
plicates  that  he  may  have  the  Liberty  of  fliipping-oft  year¬ 
ly  1200  Pieces  of  Tin  to  other  Places  than  the  ftaple,  for 
Seven  years  to  come.  For  which  he  will  be  obliged  to  pay 
all  Duties,  to  bring  half  the  Value  of  the  faid  Tin  into  this 
Realm  in  Gold  or  Silver  Moneys,  or  Bullion  ;  and  will 
moreover  pay  yearly  into  the  King’s  Exchequer  49 
Marks.  In  the  modern  hand  this  is  dated  anno  1 1  H.  iv. 
On  the  top  is  written  Le  Roy  ad  graunte  per  advis  de 
Counfelle  ;  and  at  the  bottom,  R.  Seigneur  de  Grew  4. 

9.  War- 


Bibliothecas  Hairleianse. 


30i 


Num.  1878. 

g.  Warrant,  in  Latin,  for  Robert  Rufifell  Merchant  of 
Briftolle  to  load  two  Ships  with  Cloth,  Wine,  Salt  & 
other  Merchandifes  not  appertaining  to  the  Staple,  to  fell 
the  fame  in  Ireland,  &  to  reload  them  there  with  Flefh, 
Hides,  Salmons,  Herring,  Fifties,  Sc  other  Victuals,  & 
bring  the  fame  into  England ;  paying  all  Cuftoms, 
Subfidies,  Sc  other  Duties.  By  a  modem  hand  this  is 
noted  to  have  been  granted  Anno  9  Henrici  Quinti. 

ibid. 

10.  Petition,  in  French,  of  the  Merchants  of  New- 

Caftle  upon  Tine,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Counfel,  for  Li¬ 
berty  to  tranfport  2000  Sacks  of  Wool  growing  in  the 
Counties  of  Northumberland,  Cumberland,  Weftmere- 
land,  &  Bilhoprick  of  Durham,  reckoning  one  Lad  of 
Hides  as  two  Sacks  of  Wool,  and  ....  of  Skins 
as  one  Sack  of  Wool.  ibid. 

This  Petition  is  figned  by  the  proper  Hands  of  the 
Lords  of  the  Kings  Counfel  then  prefer)  t,  being  Humfrey 
Duke  of  Glouceftre,  Henry  Chicheley  Ardibiihop  of 
Canterbury,  John  Kempe  Archbilhop  of  York  &  Lord 
Chancellor  of  England,  William  Grey  Bifhop  of  Lon¬ 
don,  Thomas  Langley  Bifliop  of  Durham,  Philip  Morgan 
Bifhop  of  Ely,  John  Stafford  Bifhop  of  Bath  & 
Welles,  Humfrey  Earl  of  Stafford,  Henry  Percy  Earle 
of  Northumbyrlonde. 

11.  Petition  of  John  Shipwarde  to  King  Henry  vi. 

for  Licence  to  Trade  in  the  Parts  of  Gafcoign  or  Spain, 
with  one  Ship.  ibid. 

K.  Henry  vi.  granting  the  Petition,  fubferibed  the 
Warant  with  his  own  Hand,  or  Sign  Manual,  in  the 
34th  year  of  his  Reign. 

1  a.  Warrant  to  the  Privy  Seal  for  Letters  Patents 
under  the  Great  Seal  for  William  Tailloure  Alderman,  of 
London  to  fhipp-off  a  certain  quantity  of  Wool,  Tin, 
Lead,  etc.  Given  at  Wyndefore  24  July  in  the  10th 
year  of  K.  Edward  iv.  as  fomebody  hath  noted  at  the 
bottom.  5* 

1  3.  Licence  of  K.  Henry  vm.  granted  to  Mafcye  Vill- 
yard  his  Barbour  to  Ihipp  off  fix  hundred  Quarters  of 
Whete  at  a  price  not  exceeding  Six  Shillings  a  Quarter, 
notwithflanding  any  Aftc,  Statute,  Ordenaunce,  Procle- 
mation,  or  Reftraint.  Yeven  12  March,  in  his  Sixt 
Yere.  6. 

This  is  figned  by  his  Majefties  hand. 

14.  Licence  of  K.  Henry  vm.  for  his  trufty  Coun- 

faillour  John  Erneley  his  Attourney-Generall  to  fliipp- 
off  oone  Thowfande  Quarters  of  Whete,  the  price  not 
exceeding  Six  Shillinge  eighte  pence  at  the  port.  22  Juyne 
in  his  tenth  yere.  ibid. 

This  is  fubferibed  ‘  Auftoritate  Parliamenti.’ 

15.  Petition  of  the  Merchants  Strangers,  to  K  Ri 
chard  n.  for  abatement  of  the  Cuflomes  laid  on  Wool, 
Wool-lelles,  Hides,  See.  by  Aft  of  Parliament.  ibid. 

At  the  bottom  are  thei'e  words  added,  «  Lettre  eut 
fent  faite  a  Weftm.  le  fecond  jour  de  Juyn,  l’an  &c. 
noefifme,  par  avis  du  Confeil.’ 

16.  Petition  of  Richard  Lounde  to  K.  Henry  vi.  for 

the  Office  of  Comptroller  of  the  Cuflomes  at  the  Port  of 
Ippefwich,  with  a  non  obftante  againft  the  Statute  in  that 
cafe  provided.  7* 

The  King  luperfcribed  the  fame  with  lvs  own  hand 
and  it  is  fubferibed  in  thele  words,  ‘  The  King  graunted 
j?is  Bille  ad  Windefore  the  23  day  of  Decembre,  the 
yere  of  his  gracious  Rcygne  27.’ 

17.  Aft  of  the  Kings  Council,  ann.  9  Henr.  vi. 

touching  abatement  of  Cuftoms  by  Parliament  fet,  in 
refpeft  the  Merchant-Strangers  plead  it  againft  the  Inter- 
cors  and  Treatys.  ibid. 

This  is  fubferibed  by  both  the  Arch-bilhops,  the 
Biftiops  of  London,  Ely,  &  Bath  abovementioned  at 
§  1  o.  and  alfo  by  John  Langdon  Biffiop  of  Rochefter. 

18.  Expofition  of  a  Statute  of  7  Hen.  v.  for  an  Impo- 
fition  upon  Merchants  Strangers  ;  made,  as  is  written 
by  a  modern  hand  at  the  bottom,  .  .  Hen.  vi.  rbid. 

Cat*  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


NUin.  1878* 

1  g.  Tenor  of  the  Protedlion  granted  by  K.  Henr)-  vii 

to  the  Florentine  Merchants  trading  here.  8. 

This  is  figned  by  His  Majefty  ;  and  at  the  bottom  is 
dated  by  the  fame  modern  hand  13  Febr.  19  Hen.  viti. 

20.  An  Act  of  the  Lords  in  the  flCrCCH  C{ieiml)tC  at 
Weftmynftrc,  the  16th  day  of  Juyn  in  the  12th  yere  of 
Henry  vi.  beynge  Jiere  prefent,  my  Lords  of  Bedfoid* 
Glouceftre,  J;e  Cardinal,  Canterbury,  Yorke,  Ely,  Lin¬ 
coln,  Huntingdone,  Northumbrelonde,  Suffolke,  Hun- 
gerforde,  Tiptot,  Jre  Chancellcr,  pe  Treforer,  and  j:e 
Prive  Seal ;  in  the  matier  of  Valuying  of  Merchandifes 
goying  out  of  }:is  land,  &  corny ng  yn  to  it.  ibid. 

This  is  the  fiift  certain,  Oiiginal  &  Authentic  Re¬ 
cord  of  Proceedings  in  the  Star-Chamber  that  I  remember 
to  have  any  where  feen.  I  make  no  doubt  but  that  there 
are  others,  Sc  even  more  antient  in  the  prefent  Book,  as 
( for  example)  thole  deferibed  above  at  §§  17.  &  10.  but 
the  Court  not  being  particularly  therein  mentioned,  I  will 
not  be  too  pofitive. 

2  1 .  Petition  of  John  Breknoke  Treforer  of  the  Houf- 

holde  to  K.  Henry  vi.  for  Letters  Patents  giving  him 
1 1.  6s.  8d.  out  of  every  one  of  the  2400  Sacks  of 
Wooll  all  wed  to  be  exported  by  Laurentius  Barbarigo 
&  Haimo  Bonegrete.  dat.  26  Aug.  anno  36.  9. 

22.  Licence  of  King  Henry  vii.  (at  the  Requeft  of  the 

King  &  Queen  of  Spain)  for  Alonfo  de  Burgues  to  im¬ 
port  twoo  hundred  Sc  thirtty  Tonnes  of  Ode  (Woad  ?) 
of  Tholoufe,  any  Aft,  Statute,  Ordenaunce,  or  Reftraint 
made  or  to  be  made,  notwithftanding.  Yeuenthe  8  day 
of  Juylle,  the  fixth  yere  of  his  Reigne.  10. 

'I  his  is  figned  by  that  Kings  Hand. 

23.  Warrant  of  K.  Henry  the  Sixth  putting  in  Execu¬ 
tion  1  lie  Rcfolution  taken  in  the  Star-Chamber,  about 
levying  the  Poundage;  mentioned  above  at  §  20.  ibid. 

24.  Wriet  of  King  Henry  .  .  rellraining  the  Exporta¬ 

tion  of  divers  commodities  (except  to  Calais  only)  not¬ 
withftanding  any  Statutes  to  the  contrary,  under  penalty 
of  iool.  ibid. 

25.  Petition  of  thofe  belonging  to  the  Staple  of  Ca¬ 

lais,  defiring  that  for  the  future  no  more  Grants  might 
be  iffued  for  carrying  Staple-Goods  to  other  places  than 
to  the  faid  Staple.  This  is  dated  by  a  modern  hand 
26  Dec.  22  H.  6.  11. 

Above  thefe  words,  the  kynge  hath  grauntid  this 
By  11c  ;  and  below,  B.  Seudeley  Chambirleyn. 

26.  Draught  of  the  Kings  Writt,  appointing  and  con- 
ftituting  John  Pikbourne  to  be  Lieutenant  or  Deputie  at 
Bourdeaux  to  Sir  Ralf  Botiller  his  Chieff  Butler,  in  the 
100m  of  Nicholas  Bohhope  who  had  delivered  in  his 
Letters  Patents  for  the  fame  Office,  to  be  cancelled. 
This  is  dated  by  a  modern  Hand,  a°  26  Hen.  6.  ibid. 

27.  Petition  of  the  Burgefes  of  Briftol,  in  French, 

relating  to  the  Duties  laid  on  Wines  imported,  which 
they  are  willing  to  pay  in  purfuance  of  Sc  according  to 
the  Kings  anfwer  made  to  his  laft  Parliament.  This  is 
dated  by  the  fame  modem  Hand  20  R.  11.  ibid. 

Thus  far  all  Matters  are  written  upon  Parchments ; 
what  follows  is  upon  baper. 

28.  Draught  of  an  Aft  of  Parliament,  or  Bill  (c.  t.  R. 

Hen.  vm.)  for  the  payment  of  the  Kyngs  Cuftomes  and 
Revenues.  12. 

29.  Abftraftus  generalisSumm.  Cuftumariorum  fuper 
eorum  Deliberationibus  in  Recepta  Scaccarij,  deliberat. 
abftraft.  et  examinat.  de  annis  fubferiptis,  vizt.  22.  23. 
Sc  24  R.  Henr.  vn.  et  7.  8.  Sc  9.  R.  Henr.  vm.  13.  b. 

30.  Warrant  of  K.  Henry  vm.  to  the  Privy  Seal,  in 
Order  to  a  Grant  of  the  ferine  of  the  Sublidie  of  Ulnage 
of  Clothe  within  the  Citie  of  York,  Countie  of  Yorke,  Sc 
Towne  ofHulle  (Torfaited  by  the  Attaynder  of  Nicholas 
Tempeft)  to  Edward  Vaughan  one  of  the  Gcntlemen- 
waiters  with  the  Queene,  for  30  yeres.  Yclding  four- 
fcore  Sc  fifteen  Pounds,  and  iixteen-pence  by  the  yere. 

This  did  not  pafs  under  the  Signet.  16. 

31.  Copy  of  a  Warant  under  the  Create  Seale  of  K. 
Henry  vm,  authorifing  J.  M.  to  take  Wheate,  Flowre, 

4  li  Brede, 


50i 


Catalogus  Librorura  MSS. 


Num.  1878. 


Brede,  Bakers,  Cotipcrs,  Foyftes,  Sc  other  Veffeis,  with 
all  manner  Laborers,  &  other  neceffaries,  from  tyme  to 
tyme,  apte  for  Vitaillinge  his  Towne  of  C'aleys  ;  for  or 
at  his  reafonable  paymentys,  Wages,  Ik  Prifes,  20  Aug. 
anno  Regni  14.  _  18. 

This  is  examined  Sc  attefled  per  G.  Coppinger. 

32.  A  Byll  of  Shyppingof  Wollysto  Calys  ;  and  what 

the  Cuftomes  thereof  did  amount  to  in  two  yeares,  vizt. 
the  25th  &  26th  of  Hen.  tih.  19. 

33.  fit  of  Noble-Men  Sc  Noble  Womens  Names  for 

the  allowance  of  the  Newe  Ympolt  of  Wynes,  upon  due 
knowledge  that  the  fame  fhall  be  fpent  in  theire  Howfes. 
A.  D.  1565.  ai. 

34.  Orders  to  be  taken  by  the  Conrte  of  Exchequer, 

for  the  Cuftom-hcufe  of  London.  A.  D.  1  24- 

35.  Brevis  Declaratio  Denar.  D~ne  Regine  debit,  pro 
Cuflum.  &  Subfid.  ac  omnibus  rebus  et  Mercand.  in 
quolibet  Porlu  Anglic  tarn  educL  quam  induCh  pro  uno 
a#no  integro  fimto  ad  feflum  b.  Michaelis  Archaneeli, 
An'o  Eliz.  20. 

Ihis  is  continued  to  the  end  of  that  Oueenes  25th 
year. 

36.  Lflimateof  the  Sums  then  demand.tble  of  the  Far¬ 
mers  of  the  Cuffoms.  *5. 

37.  Eftimate  of  the  Sums  due  upon  Cuflomes  at  Mi- 
ehaelmais  1582. 

I  his  is  figned  by  Thomas  Colfhill  Sup. 

38.  Another  Effimate  of  what  was  due  upon  Cuftomes 

at  Eafter  1594.  ^7. 

'Phis  is  figned  by  John  Smyth  Deputy-Surveyour. 

39.  Inftrudtions  for  levying  the  Imports  at  Andwerpe  ; 

concluded  in  the  Aftembcly  of  the  Generali  States  of  the 
Lowe  Countries  at  Delft  2 6  januarie  1581.  38. 

Part  of  that  Title  was  prefixed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Burleigh. 

40.  Other  Orders  for  the  Controllers  of  the  Pafie- 
ports  ;  concluded  in  the  Alfembly  of  the  Generali  States 
of  the  Lowe  Countres  at  Delft  26  January  1581.  41. 

41.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lord-Treafurer  Burghley 
to  Mr.  Colfhill  Surveyor  of  the  Cuftomes,  dated  3  De¬ 
cember  1583.  defiring  to  know  what  Orders  had  been 
taken  in  the  Cuftome-boufe  in  difpenfing  with  the  Mer- 
chantes  Strangers  for  the  Statut  of  Imployment.  42. 

42.  Lift  of  the  Names  of  Suerties  for  Mr.  Philippes  Sc 

Mr.  Younge,  Cuffoiners.  A  D.  1586.  44. 

43.  Another  Lift  of  the  Names  of  Suerties  for  the  fame 

Gentlemen.  ^ 

44-  Eift  of  Mr.  Ihomas  Philipps’s  Suerties  for  the 

City  Cuftomes.  47. 

45-  Condition  of  a  Recognifance  for  the  Office  of  a 

Cultumer.  ^ 

This  feemeth  to  have  been  apoflcl’d  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Burleigh’s  Hand. 

46.  Conditions  of  Recognifances  for  Cuflumers-  50. 

47.  C  barges  for  palling  Mr.  TI10.  Philipps  his  Accompt 

for  the  Parva  Curtum.  A.  D.  1  586.  52. 

Ihis  is  fubferibed  Sc  endorfed  by  his  own  hand. 

48*  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Richard  Carmerden  to 
Mr.  Thomas  Gurlin,  about  Cuftomes :  dated  the  7th 
rill  1591. 

il  l'  is  that  Richard  Carmarden  that  contributed  to 
tb.e  Printing  of  the  great  Englifh  Bible  at  Rouen  A.  D 
1586? 

49.  Accompt  of  the  Sheeps  &  Lambs-Skynns  ffiipt 
from  the  Porte  of  London  from  Eafter  A.  D.  159 1 .  untill 
Eafter  1593. 

50.  Original  Precept  of  the  Lord-Treafurer  Burghley 

to  the  Officeis  of  the  Cuftomes,  dated  22  March  irj 
requiring  them  to  take  the  M archant  Adventurers  Entryes 
(upon  theyr  Licence)  for  UndrefTed  Clothes,  according 
to  the  Tenor  thereof,  and  not  otherwife.  -7. 

5f*  Original  Warant  of  the  Lord  Treafurer  Burghley 
(to  Mr.  Younge  ?)  to  deal  with  Mr.  Philipps  Collector  of 
the  Putie  Curtome  of  London  owtwards  j  who  owing  a 


Num.  1878. 

a  Sum  to  her  Majeftie,  was  willing  to  Sell  or  Mortgage 
certaine  Lands  or  Leafes,  in  order  to  the  railing  of  Money- 
fur  payment  of  the  Debt.  Dat.  i5Julye  1595.  59. 

52.  Account  of  Diforders  daily  committed  by  William 

Marwood  Cuftomer  ofPiymmouthj  wherby  her  Majeftie 
is  greatly  deceaved.  A.  D.  1596  61. 

53.  Wollen  Commodities  made  in  the  Realme,  Ship¬ 

ped  out  of  the  Porte  of  London,  to  be  tranfported  by 
Lande-Carriages  to  the  Places  of  their  Vent  by  Merchants. 
Strangers,  from  the  4th  of  January  1598.  to  the  12th  of 
December  1  599.  unto  which,  flight  'Tanned  Shepefkins 
were  allowed  them  for  Wrappers  to  fave  their  Commo¬ 
dities  from  perifhing  by  Cafualtie  of  Weather  otherwife* 
as  for  many  yeres  part  hath  byn  permitted.  62. 

54.  A  Note  of  Cuflome  &  Subfedy  paid  to  her  Ma- 
jefties  Collectors  by  divers  Merchants-Strangers,  for 
Merchandize  by  them  brought  into  the  Port  of  London, 
in  retome  of  their  Woollen  Commodities  tranfported. 

62.  b. 

5^.  The  Contents  of  a  Leafe  to  be  granted  of  her 
Majefties  Cuftomes  due  for  Velvetts,  Sattens,  Taffitaes, 
Pole  &  Spanifh  Silkes,  Cambricks  &  Lawnds.  63. 

56.  Deeeat  in  Cuftoming  of  Silkes,  Venice-Golde. 
A.  D.  1600. 

57.  Reafons  whie  the  Cuftomes  muftneedes  encreafe 

much  beyonde  the  former  Receiptes  by  his  Majefties 
Cuftomers.  55 

58.  An  Eftimate  of  fueh  Money  as  hath  byn  anfwered 

to  the  Queenes  Majeftie  in  7  yeares,  ended  at  Michael- 
mals  anno  43  Eliz.  within  the  Realme  of  England  & 
Wales  (Barwick  excepted)  for  the  Cuflome  &  Subfedie 
of  Cambricks,  Lawnds,  Velvets,  Sattins,  &  all  other 
forts  of  Silks,  tranfported  out  of  the  Realme  by  way  of 
Merchandize.  Collected  out  of  the  Cuflome-bookes 
remaining  in  the  Exchequer,  6g. 

This  is  faid  to  have  been  examined  by  Hen.  Fan- 
fhawe,  15  Marrij  1601. 

59'  ^  briefe  Collection  of  fuch  feverall  kyndes  of 
Siloes,  Velvets,  Taftetaes,  Cambricks,  Lawnes  See.  as  are 
comprized  in  the  Giant,  and  haue  byn  brought  into  the 
Realme  in  thisYeare  ended  the  laft  ofFebruary  1601.  with 
the  Cuflome  Sc  Subfedie  thereupon  dewe  Sc  payd  to  the 
vfe  of  the  right  Idonble.  Sir  Robert  Cecill  Knight.  68.  b. 

60.  The  Receipts  for  the  Cuflome  &  Subfedie  vpon 

all  Silks,  Velvetts,  Cambricks,  Lawnds,  See.  brought 
into  the  Ports  of  London  &  Douer,  as  well  by  Englifh 
Marehants  as  by  Strangers,  fince  the  Feaft  of  St.  Michael! 
laft,  to  the  28th  day  of  February  1601.  70. 

6 1 .  Certaine  Pointz  to  be  conftdered  vpon  the  Statutes 

for  Meafuring  of  Silkes,  See.  7 , , 

62.  A  Devife  towchinge  Leade.  73. 

T.  his  is  a  ProjeCl  for  Raifing  Money  to  Q.  Eliz.  by 

that  native  Commodity. 

63.  Concerning  Imports.  73, 

This  is  a  ProjeCl  for  a  Leafe  of  the  Import  of  all 

manner  of  Wynes,  for  England  Sc  Wales.  75.  , 

64.  A  Difcovery  of  Deceipts  ufed  by  Merchantes  Sc 

Officers  for  Cuflomes  ;  &  effeCtuall  Inducements  to  raife 
the  Booke  of  Rates,  by  Thomas  Gurbyn.  77. 

65.  Declaration  of  the  Orders  which  Mailers,  Own- 

ers,  &  others  taking  Charge  of  Shipes,  ought  to  obferve; 
and  the  Penalties  againft  the  Offenders.  Requifite  to  be 
hanged  in  Tables  in  every  Cuftome-houfe,  by  Thomas 
Gurbyn.  80. 

66.  Of  the  Loffe  whiche  the  Queene  receaues  by  the 

Difproportion  of  the  Cuftomes  of  Kerfeys.  82. 

67.  Concerning  Bayes,  8c  the  feveral  forts  of  them. 

84. 

68.  The  Length,  bredth,  Sc  weight,  ofeerten  Carolls 
Moccados,  Beys,  See.  certefied  to  my  Lord  Threforef 
by  Mr.  Fanfhawe,  Me  (i.  e.  Mr.  Philipps)  &  Mr.  Yonge, 
in  Julie  ..  1578. 

69.  The  Lengthe  8c  Waighte  of  all  Bayes  &  Kerfies. 

86. 

70.  Suite 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


3°3 


Num.  1878. 

70.  Suite  to  the  Queene  (Eliz.)  for  the  Farme  of 

Reemployments  by  Marchant  Strangers.  88. 

71.  The  Lord  Trefurer  Dorfet’s  Lettre  to  Sandwich 

for  the  new  I  lpofitiou  upon  Wines  &  other  Wares  tranf- 
ported  or  brought  ouer  to  or  from  Spaine  &  the  Iflands. 
10  Auguit  16  6.  §9; 

72.  Project  for  Reformation  of  Abufes  now  vfed  in 

Cuftom-Cawfes.  A.  D.  [604.  91- 

73.  Concerning  the  Seafures  of  Goods  vncuftommcd. 

93- 

74.  Articles  or  Suggeftions  ngainft  the  Tranfportcrs 
of  Wares  be  Merchandizes  into  Forraigne  Parts;  whereby 
His  Majeflie  is  defrauded  of  his  due  Cuftome.  95. 

75.  Declaration  of  the  Abufes  committed  by  the  Offi¬ 

cers  of  the  Cuftoms,  temp.  Jac.  t.  with  certain  Remedies 
propounded.  97-  b. 

76.  Reafones  alleadged  by  Merchants,  againfl  the 

Exactions  Si  Extortions  taken  of  them  by  Ills  Majefties 
Officers  of  the  Cuflome-howfes.  1 07. 

77.  Notes  for  the  Reformation  of  Abufes  concerning 

Cuftoms  and  Subfidies.  108. 

78.  Notes  concerning  the  Cuflomes,  Subfidies,  & 

Impoftes  of  London.  1 1  o. 

This  paper  is  figned  by  Tho.  Heriffon  ;  who  feemeth 
alfo  to  have  drawn  up  that  next  above. 

79.  The  FarmersAccompt  of  the  Cuflomes  for  7  years, 

eliding  A.  D.  161 1.  112. 

80.  Original  Letter  of  Richard  Sutton  Efq;  to  John 
Sucklinge  Efquier  ;  fhewing  the  Fees  given  to  the  Far. 
mers  &  others  about  the  Collection  of  the  Impofle. 

Il3- 

8 1.  Confideraeons  to  be  taken  in  Coflome-Caules, 

if  his  Majeflie  fhall  farme  the  fame.  1 15. 

82.  Instructions  for  Cnflome-Caufes.  1 1 7. 

Thefe  are  amended  by  another  Hand,  and  figned  on 

the  backfide  by  the  name  ‘  Bate’. 

83.  Reafones  tuchinge  the  vnfitues  of  the  Officers  to 

be  Farmers  of  His  Majelties  Cuflomes,  of  any  another 
will.  1 1 9- 

84.  Sir  Henry  Billingfly’s  Notes  touching  the  farming 

of  the  Cuflomes.  121. 

85.  Notes  upon  the  Conditions  of  Farming  the  Cuf- 

tomes.  125. 

8b.  Thyngs  to  be  obferved  touchingc  the  Vndertakcrs 
of  Cuflomes,  Ac.  *  27. 

87.  Propofals  of  fome  fufficient  Perfons,  for  taking 
the  Farme  of  the  Cuflomes  out  of  the  Farmers  hands. 

1 29. 

88.  Petition  of  Sir  John  Swinarton  Kt.  Mayor  of  Lon¬ 

don,  Si  George  Lowe  Merchi.  Farmors  of  the  Cuftoms 
of  Silke,  &c.  (againfl  the  Farmors  of  the  Greate  Cuf- 
tome)  to  the  Lords  Comm"  of  the  Treafury.  1 33. 

89.  Statutes,  in  force,  concerning  Officers  for  the 

Kings  Cufloms.  ColleCled  by  Tho.  Gurlyn.  131. 

90.  ProjeCl  for  yearly  increafing  his  Majefties  Cuftoms 

with  more  than  40,000k  and  for  reforming  abuces  in 
Officers;  by  the  fame.  132. 

9 1 .  Notes  concerning  fraudes  betwen  Merchants  & 

Officers;  by  the  fame.  134. 

92.  A  ProjeCl  to  reduce  to  the  more  right  Confidera- 
cion  &  Proporcion  of  auncient  vfage,  the  Payment  of  the 
auncient  Cuflome  or  Duty  of  Butlerage  &  Prifage 
ofWynes,  for  the  due  Avayle  of  the  Kings  Majefly. 

!35-. 

93.  The  Aunfwere  of  Richard  Drake  vnto  the  Arti¬ 

cles  exhibited  againfl  him  by  Hance  Storme  and  Roger 
Adoim  Straungers,  touching  his  Monopoly  of  Drinks  & 
Sawces.  temp.  Eliz.  1 37- 

94.  Touching  the  Subfedies  of  Tonnage  Sc  Imports  of 

French  &  Rhenifh  Wynes.  J39’ 

95.  Conceiving  the  Suite  of  Sir  Robert  Knollis,  for 

the  Tranfportation  of  Beere.  1 4 1  • 

9 6.  A  Memoriall  concerninge  the  Impofition  of  the 
Millions,  and  other  Imp,  fitions  in  Portingell.  1 43. 


Num.  1878. 

c  7.  Sir  John  Gray’s  Motives  &  Reafons  for  the  Im¬ 
pofition  vpon  Whale-Finnes.  145. 

98.  A  Specimen  for  raifing  the  Book  of  Rates.  147.. 

99.  A  Declaration  expreffinge  the  Lofle  fufteyned  by 

the  Kinge,  by  reafon  of  the  Difference  betwene  the  Cuf- 
tome  Si  Subfedy  of  W00II&  Cloathe;  and  alfo  expreflinge 
the  Rateafleffed  vppon  Cloathes.  148. 

100.  Mr.  Gardiners  Notes  touching  Reformation  of 

Cuftome-houfe-Officers.  150. 

101.  Orders  for  regulating  the  Porte  of  London,  in* 

wardes.  1 54. 

102.  A  printed  Table  fhewing  the  Duties  paied  by  all 
Strangers  in  every  Cuftom-houfc,  for  Goods  imported 
&  exported  :  with  the  Compofition-money  paied  to  the 
Kings  Grocer  for  the  Provifion  of  His  Majefties  Houffiold, 
afwell  by  Englifh  as  Strangers  for  Goods  brought  in.  159. 

At  the  end  this  Date  is  written  10  March.  1607. 

1 03.  A  Cautionary  Conceit  of  the  Farming  out  of 
his  Majefties  Cuflomes,  EffeCls  of  Trafficke.  In  two 
printed  Leaves,  fubferibed  by  the  hand  of  Thomas  Milles. 

160. 

1870. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  (quern  unacum  alijs  a  me  rede¬ 
mit  illiiflriffiinus  Dominus  ineus)  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Catalogus  Codd.  MSS.  numero  plus  minus  230. 

jam  olim,  ut  videtur,  in  Bibliotheca  Joannis  Dee  M.  D. 
confervatoriim.  1 . 

2.  Titles  of  certain  MSS.  perhaps  in  the  fame  Library, 

wanted  by  Sir  Robert  Cotton  ;  in  whole  Library  divers 
of  them,  and  others  mentioned  in  the  preceding  Catalogue, 
are  now  to  be  found.  10.  b. 

3.  Catalogus  Librorum  Gracorum,  quos  Gracus 
quidam  nomine  Conflantinus  Palteocappus,  patria  C.y- 
doniates,  Lute  tire  Parifiorum  manu  fua  deferipfit.  Grace. 

1 1. 

4.  Notes  concerning  a  Regifter-book  of  the  Abbey  of 

Sr.  Augullin  near  Canterbury  ;  which,  as  I  remember,  is 
now  extant  in  the  Cottonian  Library.  19.  b. 

5.  Catalogus  Librorum  iinprefforum  Bibliothecas 

Mortlacenfis  D.  Johannis  Dee ;  incosptus  6  Septembris 
A.  D.  1583.  20 

6.  Ejufdem  Bibliothecas  Librorum  Manufcriptorum 

numero  197  Catalogus.  93. 

Utrumq;.  Catalogum  manu  fua  propria  deferipfit 
egregius  ille  Librorum  melioris  Literatura  Inveitigator 
ac  Colle&or  Johannes  Dee  Mortlacenfis. 

1880. 

A  very  thin  Parchment-Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  con¬ 
tained, 

1.  An  Indenture,  or  Deed  of  Bargain  &  Sale,  bear> 
ing  Date  the  14th  day  of  March,  in  the  33d  yere  of  King 
Henrye  the  vm.  betwene  the  fame  Kyng  &  Andrewe 
Wyndefore  Knyght  Lord  Wyndefore.  Whereby  the 
fevde  Lord  Wyndefore  fold  to  His  Majefty  his  Lordlhip 
orManour  of  S taiUllCllC  in  the  County  of  Midd.  with 
its  Membres  8:  Appurtenaunces  in  ^tantUClle  afore- 
fayde,  (KiClLTScOfOLmtE,  li3nmontieS  alias 

borne,  tOecemonbes,  Ipoyle,  Pnibc,  Jrauincs, 
IDccflotic,  IilriliDoitbe,  topllpngbone,  francs, 
ILalcgbam,  andlEotUlCy  in  thefeyde  Cowntye  of  Midd. 
IDatbmcDc,  IBonenep,  loortonc,  and  'IBurnebam, 
in  the  Cowntye  of  Bucks.  (DHokCfCiDC,  CljitOnCbalOE 
in  (ifulcige,  and  in  Ti3agflj0tt  in  the  Cowntye  of  Barks. 
221jjnljalle  and^alefrijangCC  in  theCowntyeofSuthT. 
Pepei-'barroiue,  Ipactcmeuc,  tDoi*jne= place  in  the 
Pariffieof  Comptone ;  (DGelLljorfclcji-  <EtLbucptf, 
T5airo\xj=l'ille,  (Egge-ham,  and  <4.{ioipe  in  the 
Cowntye  of  Surrey  :  The  Church  8c  Parfonage  of 
^tanTClle,  theManoursof  ipctupQjc  &  (Egg bam 
in  the  leyde  Cowntye  of  Surrey  :  the  whole  being  (befides 
the  Woods)  of  the  clere  yerlye  valeweof  2251. 16s.  iod.  iq. 
over  &  above  all  Reprizes.  The  faid  Woods  were 
Valued  at  1 1 1  il.  4s.  3d. 


3°4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nnm.  1878, 

fn  donfideration  whereof,  and  alfo  for  the  Soirime 
of  2 1 07I.  5s.  8d.  already  payd  by  the  feydeLorde  Wynde- 
fore,  the  Kynge  fold  unto  him  the  Manors  &c  Advowfons 
bf  siflpnchvnriDamptone  &  auenpnae,  the  Manors 
Fermes  of  IppnbOUtnC  &  lUfPmcrC  in  the  Cowntye 
of  Glowceft.  with  their  Appurtenances  there,  or  in 

IRtiDbiunbe,  T5ur?*mere,  'Bcpn&effombeTcitDP, 

laplefflottbe,  Idjahcnhillc  in  the  feyd  Cowntye,  & 
in  ^oniCl'forDP  in  the  Cowntye  of  Wiltes.  lately  be- 
longinge  to  the  late  Monafterye  of  ©pon  in  the  Cown¬ 
tye  of  Midd.  The  Scite  of  the  late  Hofpitalle  of  Seynt 
Barthlemewes  of  JpjeptJOne  nygh  iRpe  in  the  Cown¬ 
tye  of  Suflexe,  lately  belonginge  to  the  late  Monafterve 
of  Seynt  Peter  of  tKEIeftnignllt  r,  with  its  Appurte¬ 
nances  in  j^icpbonc,  IKf c,  ^alcorc,  Ipefcmetcbe, 
lochclep,  TBreoe  OOpmere,  J,Dcnc,  OEioburfl  & 
J0ortb=pani,  in  the  fcvtle  Cowntye:  Thefourth  part  of 
the  Manoure,  &  th’advowfone  of  |0CDlPp  in  the  feyde 
Cowntye,  lately  belonging  to  the  feyde  Monafterye  of 
St.  Peter:  Certain  Lands  in  ^tFiCOinjinlllT  Parcelle  of 
the  Polfellionsof  the  fame  late  Monafterye  :  The  Manour 
of  Cmnbc  ill  the  Cowntye  of  Suflexe  lately  belonging 
to  the  Monafterye  of  Seynt  Albones  :  The  Manor  &  Ad- 
vowfon  of  CuanitOUDe  with  their  Appurtenances  there, 
&  in  OcfTlccDfiintc  Dattonr,  Ipavlpnntonp,  & 

il)Cfi;01ie  in  the  feyd  Cowntye  of  Midd.  lately  belonging 
to  the  late  Priorye  or  Hofpytalleof  Seynt  Johns  Jerufi- 
1cm  in  Englonde  :  The  Manour  callyd  lj)C  GpOtE  in 
CramfOrDC  ill  the  feyde  Cowntye  ol  Midd.  lately  be¬ 
longinge  to  the  Monaftery  of  A m C  in  the  Cowntye  of 
Oxforde  :  The  Manour  of  ItjartmECC  in  the  Cownty  of 
Surrey  lately  belonging  to  the  late  Monafterye  or  Priorve 
ot  JBcluatbC  in  the  fame  Cowntye  :  Certain  Londes, 
Tenements,  &:c.  in  JgtOftC  lpO0Cfi  in  the  Cowntye  of 
Buks.  lately  belonging  to  the  Pryorye  of  Seynt  Marve- 
Overey  in  the  feyde  Cowntye  of  Surrey  :  The  Scite" of 
the  late  Monaftery  the  Advowfon  of  the  Church,  the 
C-hapell  of  St.  Stephen,  &  the  Lordfliip  of  'BotDfflrp, 
the  Lordfliip  &  Church  of  <£rr;icbi  C,  the  Lordfliips 
of  ITxiDiitu',  §tutcbe--1£cntln\  GToiilep, 
tvnbpllc,  ‘duilanp,  &  the  Grange  of  iDCtUCllP,  vith 
a  Pa  ft  u  re  called  IRuffgfrillC  in  CetDebiCTP,  all  in  the 
Cowntyes  of  Worefter  &  Warr.  the  whole  being  of 
the  clere  yerly  valewc  of  307I.  14s.  id.  above  all  Re- 
prifes,  and  alfo  above  the  feverall  yerely  Rents  hereby 
re’evvyde  to  the  Kyngs  Highnes  being  34I.  3s.  1  id.  To 
holde  the  fame  by  the  Servyce  of  the  Twenty  parte  of  a 
Knyghts  Fee. 

1.  The  Kings  Grant  of  the  Premifes  to  the  fame  Lord 
Wyndefore,  according  to  the  purport  of  a  Claufe  in  the 
Deed  of  Bargain  &  Sale  abovementioned,  in  Latin,  dat. 

27  die  Aprilis  anno  Regni  34.  8. 

1881. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  recentiflima  manu  deferiptus, 
fumptibus  nimirum  venerabilis  Viri  Hugonis  Todd. 

S.  1.  P.  Cathedralis  Ecclefis  Carliolenfis  Prsbendarij ; 
qui  ilium  huic  Bibliothecs  contulit  (Volumina  fimilis 
materia;  etiam  alia  tria  condonaturus)  hoc,  qui  fequb 
•  tur,  Titulo  fronti  prsmiffo,  “  Cartas  Fundatoris  & 
Dotatoris  Prioratus  de  Wedderall,  &  Abbatis  de 
Holm-Cultrum,  in  Comitatu  Cumbria;,”  &c.  i.  e.  Apo¬ 
graph*  Regeftorum  de  Wedderall  &  Holm-Cultrum, 
qua;  jam-nunc  in  ejufdem  Ecclefis  Cathedralis  Bi¬ 
bliotheca  religiofiflime  confervantur. 

Hoc  autem  Ordine  pergit  Chartularium  de  Wed- 
deral. 

1.  Carta;  de  Fundatione  ejufdem  Domus  per  Ranul- 
fum  Mefchyn,  cum  Confirmationibus  Regijs  fuper  eadem. 

2.  Confirmationes  Epifcopales  fuper  Ecclefijs  eidem 

Dorrui,  pervarios,  conceflis.  ,2 

F.cclefiarum  Nomina  funt  Wedderhale  ;  Capella  de 
Waithwic  \  Ecclefia  de  Crokelyn;  Eferemi  orium  Sancti 


Num.  1878. 

Andres  (Decimse  de)  Scoteby  ;  Ecclefia;  Sanfli  Micha-* 
elis  &  San&i  Laurentij  de  Appelby  ;  Ecclefia;  de  Kvrke- 
by-Stephan,  Ormes-heved,  Morland,  Clibbrunor,  Brum- 
feld  :  Capella  de  Burgo  j  Karcarevill ;  Dentant,  &c.  et 
vid.  pag.  228.  263. 

3-  Carta  diverforum  fpe&antes  ad  Terras  Monafterij 
in  Wedderale.  1.  28.  63.  73.  87.  go.  121.  257.  277. 

4-  Carta;  variorum  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Chorkeby.  ‘ 

31.  37.  &c.  51.  267. 

S'  - - - - Warthwic.  36.  &c.  51. 

F  .  ,  54.25?. 


8. 

- Newby.  8y.  144. 

T  t 

Aglunby.  104. 

- Burgo.  107.  170. 

18.  Carta:  de  Terris 

&c  in  Bordd-Ofwald.  132. 

ialcan.  136. 

-a 

Kuciott.  165.  169. 

Kirk-Ofwald.  100. 

rluddelcocii.  igr. 

Nlvefby.  194. 

Culgait.  208.  210. 

- Kirk-Andreas.  209.  254. 

- Morlund.  216.  226. 

226.  256.  266. 

41 

4^ 

oclegue.  240. 

Colf-bv  *53'  *7l 

v.oleby.  248. 

ibid. 

249.  25s. 

5°-  ~  ■ — - - Mayburne.  264. 

51.  Diftributio  Cumberlandis  adConqueftum  Anglis. 

271. 

52.  Carta:  de  Terris  in  Colby.  275.  278. 

53  1  lcirungb) .  275. 

Sequuntur  Carts  Abbacis  de  Holm-Cultrum  ;  fc. 

54.  Carta  Henrici  Comitis  Huntendonis  Filij  David 
Regis  Scotia:  Fundatoris  ;  cum  Cartis  Confirmatorijs 
Regum  Scotorum,  ct  Pontilicum  Romanorum.  283. 

55.  Carts  deEcclefijs,  Teiris  &.c.  in  Burgo.  20?. 

59-  - - - - 

~ - - -  Newby.  311. 

f  60.  Carts 

Bibliothecae  Harleianse 


S°5 


Nurn.  1881,  1882.' 


63 

66 

67 

68 

69 

70 
duff. 

7* 


79 

80 
lake, 


90 

91 

92 

93 
Abba 

94 


95 

hale. 

96 


Cart®  deEcclefijs,  Terris &c.  in  Karliol. 


316. 
320. 

-  Flemingby.  323. 

339-  333-  33<S.  338- 

— —  Vv  ayte-croft. 

327- 

-  Setona.  328. 

3 3°*  355-  337-  339- 

-  ■  Brodlona.  330. 
Pifcaria  de  Alne. 

337-  340. 
Crofieby.  341. 
Leykltya.  342. 

•  Diflingtona.348. 

-  Pifcatoria  de  Tor- 

350* 


Wavertone. 


Sandewathe,  Fullcbrigg. 


82 

83 

toftes 

84 

85*. 

Crolrig  &  Kelkes. 

ton. 

87, 


352.  353- 

Blen  coggen. 

ibid. 

Gilerna.  ibid. 

- - - Gilcruce.  354. 

- Salmurthoo. 

355* 

- Herterpoll.  357. 

- Wiggeton.  360. 

- Kirkby-Thore. 

361. 365. 369. 37i.  373. 37s. 

Sperftaurig.  3  63. 
Witetoft,  Beorns- 

„  ,  ,  365- 

New-Bigmg. 

•368. 

CrofTnegane. 

m  37°* 

- Trutebeck,  Kirk- 

374- 

— ■ —  Sandllach.  377. 

-  Warthbergh, 

381. 

- -  Mayburgh,  New- 

382.  386. 

- *  Lenfingham. 

3S5* 

-  Ormefby. 

3«s.  390. 

-  Allaneby.  3^8. 

- Brumfeld.  391. 

- Caldbeck. 

399-414- 

•  Crofieby.  400. 


Cartse  Regia;  de  Proteftione  &  Confinnadone 
asde  Holm-Cukrum,  &c.  ibid.  4,2.  4I  -t 

Heremitorium  S.  Hilda;  in  Forefta  de  Englewode. 

Agmen  claudunt. 

Index,  five  Tituli  Cartarum  Prioratus  de  Weder- 
.  419. 

Rubrics  Cartarum  Abbacite  de  Holm-Cultrum. 


Definit  Liber  pagina  450.  nuperrime  deferiptus,  per 
adolelcentum  quendam,  ut  videtur,  prifearum  literarum 
ufui  haud  fatis  afiuetum.  Optandum  igitur,  ut  Vir  doc- 
tifiimus  a  ine  fupra-memoratus,  per  totum,  tnanus  fuas 
prebuilfet  Medicas,  perinde  atq;  fec.rit  paginis  2 6-1 
264.  &  26 5. 

1882. 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  (bought  of  me)  and  bearing  the  fol¬ 
lowing  Title, 

Howe  to  perfume  Gloues ;  To  make  Perfumes 
&  Swete  Waters;  with  divers  other  fundrie  Preferva- 
tives  ;  as  they  be  made  in  Spaine  6c  Portugall.  Tranflated 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1882 — 1885. 

forthe  of  a  written  Spanifhe  booke  of  the  Ducties  of 
Ferias. 

At  the  end  is  The  Table  to  the  feveral  Receipts 
contained  in  the  book.  23. 

1883; 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  manu  Belgica  deferiptus  (ac  a 
me  per  Illuftrilfimum  Dominum  meum  redemptus)  in 
quo  continentur,  , 

1.  De  Remedijs  utriufq;  Fortune,  Adriani  Carthu, 

fienfis  devoti,  et  Sacre  Pagine  Doiftoris  eximij,  Libri 
duo  1 . 

2.  Franch'ifci  Zabarelli  PatYvini,  juris  utriufq;  Do6to- 

ris,  Cardinalis,  &c.  de  Felicitate  Libri  Tres,  ad  Petrum- 
Paulum  jultinopolitanum.  81. 

3.  De  duobus  Amantibus  Iliftoria,  per  Fneam  Silvi- 

um,  (poftea  Pium  Papam  Secundum)  abfoluta  Vienns, 
2d".  Nonas  Julias  A.  D.  1444.  1,9. 

4.  Dyalogus  A  Confolaniis  B  Me  ft  urn,  propter  cafum 

Reipubl.  in  Francia.  136. 

5.  Kpiftola  de  Vita  Curiali  deteftanda,  tanquam  mife- 

rijs  plena.  14,.. 

6.  Controverfia  de  Nobilitate,  inter  Publ.  Corn  Scipi- 
onem,  et  Gayum  Flamineum  ;  per  Legum  Do&orem 
egregiumq;  Oratorem  Bonajurfutn  ?  Piftorienfem.  ■  74. 

7.  Mafei  Vegij  Laudunenfis  Dialogus  Veritatis  &  Phi- 

lalethis  ad  Euftachium  Fratrem.  •  133. 

8.  Ejufdem  Dialogus  de  Felicitate  &Miferia.  161.  b. 

9.  Zenophontis  Philofophi  Tyrannus,  e  Greco  in 
Latinum  Converfus  per  Leonarduin  Aretinum.  172. 

10.  Tractatus  de  Miferia  Curialium,  editus  per  vene- 
rabilem  virum  EneamSilvium  de  Picolominibus  dcSenis, 
Poetam  Laureatum,  Regium  Secretarium  colendiftimum. 

1  79. 

it.  Dyalogus  Pogij  Florentini  in  Avaritiam,  ad  Fran- 
eifeum  Barbarum.  [ 

12.  Pij  Pap®  ('ll.  five  TEne®  Sylvij  fupra-memorati) 
EpiftolaprolixaadMahumetem  TurcoruniPrincipcm.  2 1  o. 

Sunt  qui  dicunt  nonnullos  ex  liifce  tradtaiibus  non- 
dum  efle  typis  excufos. 

1884. 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  ("bought  of  me )  wherein  are  contained, 
Docquets  of  the  feveral  Grants  palling  the  Royal 
Signet,  from  .  .  of  June  1660,  to  the  .  .  of  Novem¬ 
ber,  in  the  fame  year. 

1885. 

Codex  membranaceus  (fed  diverfis  in  locis  mutilatus)  ■ 
quern  a  meredemit  illuftriflimusDominus  meus;  nempe 
Liber  Irrotulatorius  feu  Regeftum  Cartarum  Prioratus 
de  Dunftaple,  Ordinis  S.  Auguftini,  in  agro  Bcdfor- 
dienli  per  Henricum  1.  Anglorum  Regem  fundati. 
Hoc  in  Codice,  perinde  ac  in  hujulmodi  quam  plu- 
rimis  alijs,  cernuntur  diverf®  diverlorum  Seculoium 
mantis,  cum  Cards  noimullis  autographis  confutis  et 
adiiotauonibus  Hiftoricis,  &c.  de  quibus  infra,  plura. 
Verum'  cum'  non  poftulet  hujufee  Brevioris  Catalogi 
ratio,  ut  omnes  Carta-,  Epiftolas,  Placiia,  6cc.  fingilla- 
tim  recenferein  ;  de  ijs  folum'  memionem  faciam,  qu® 
in  volvendo  Codice,  rarior^  faltem,  li  non  memoratu 
digniora,  vifa  funt.  fcil. 

1.  Syllabus  Cartariim  de  Terris  &  Tenemends  ad 

Monafterium  Duneftaplienfe  pertinentibus ;  maxima  ex 
parte  per  Ricardum  de  Morins  ejufdem  Donnie  Priorem 
exaratus.  '  3.  k  1  1.  b.  ’ 

2.  lnquifitio  de  Redditibus  in  Bradenham,  aflignatis 
EcclefiaiSancteMarieinBedeford;  fadta  A.D.  1 294.  3.  b. 

_  ^  3-  Notul®  Hiftoric®,  cum  pardculan  Defcriptione 
Terrarum  pr®didi  Ccenobij,  manu  fupra-memorati  Prio- 
ris,  ut  videtur,  feript®.  <3. 

4.  Indotaiio  Vicariarum  perpetuarum  in  Ecclefijs  de 
Stodham,  Toternho,  Chagrava,  Helfeburne,  ScSeguiho; 
per  Hugonem  Epilcopum  Lincolnienfem.  13. 

(fol.  18.  See.) 

4 1  5-  Liner® 


306 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1885. 

5.  Liltera:  patentes  Nicholai  Archidiaconi  Bedefordi- 

enfisad  Ricardum  Archiepifcopum  Cantuarienfem,  fuper 
Pccnitentia  Gileberti  de  Sauuervilla,  coram  Archidiaco- 
nali  Synodo,  et  ut  credidit  Lepra  tafti,  eo  quod  Edga- 
fum  Sacerdotem  ejecit  de  Capella  de  Rokefhac,  quam 
Pater  ejus  Philippus  de  Saunervilla  Monatterio  concefie- 
rat.  Singularis  eft  temporis  defignatio  Poenitentite  illius 
injun&ac,  atq;  Liiterarum  fcriptaiom.  Hoc  totuni  com- 
pletum  eft  antequam  ReX  Anglia:  filiam  prenominati 
Gileberti  de  Saunervilla  cum  Hereditate  fepememorato 
W.  conceffiffet.  20.  b. 

6.  In  Ttac  parte  Codicis,  habentur  plurimre  Carta:  de 
Ecclefijs  &  Capellis,  puta  de  Ecclefia  deStodham,  1  8. — 
de  Eclefijs  de  Chaugrave  &  Afpcle,  18.  b. —  de  Ecclefia 
de  Thoternho,  19. — de  Ecclefia  de  Pateflmlla,  ibid. — de 
Ecclefia  de  Segenho,  ibid  — de  Ecclefia  de  Heccham, 
19.  b. — de  Capella  de  Rokeflioc,  ibid. — de  Ecclefia  de 
Flittewic,  ibid. — de  Ecclefia  de  Huffeburne,  20.  — de  Ec¬ 
clefia  de  Neubotle,  2  — de  Ecclefia  de  Herlingedune, 
ibid — de  Ecclefia  de  Pullokelhullue,  ibid. — de  Ecclefia 
S.  Maria:  in  Bedeforda,  2 1.  b. — de  Ecclefia  de  Cublintone 
&  de  Gledele,  22 — de  Ecclefia  de  Steppingele,  22.  b. — 
de  Ecclefia  de  Merftun,  23.  de  Ecclelia  de  Ceftrefham, 

23.  b. — de  Ecclefia  de  Brichulla.  30.  b.  31.  &  61.  b. 

7.  Littera:  Pandulfi  Legati,  omnibus  Prelatis  Lincol- 
nienfis  Diocefis  ddUnatte,  quos  hortatur  ut  multis  et  varijs 
quibus  Dominus  Rex  opprimitur  neceffitatibus  confider- 
atis,  manum  auxilij  de  mera  gratia  porrigerent  liberaliter 
&  libenter,  ut  tarn  a  Sede  Apoftulica  (in  cujus  Cura  & 
Cufiodia  ipfe  Rex  Henricus  m.  confiftit)  quam  ab  Ipfo 
cum  ad  astatem  perreniret,  nierrto  deberent  commendari. 

39.  col.  2. 

8.  Compendium  Bulla:  Innocentij  in.  Pontificis  max- 

imi,  Abbatibus  de  San£to-Albano  &  de  Woburna,  et 
Majori  Celerario  de  Sancto-Albano,  ad  Inftantiam  C.ario- 
nicorum  de  Dunftaplia  deftinata: ;  contra  quofdam  eorum 
Vicarios,  quibus  quedam  F.cclefiaftica  Beneficia  liberaliter 
contulcrunt,  Dei  timore  poftpofito,  Mulieres  Fornicarias 
■&  Adulteras  (i.  e.  Uxores)  in  fuis  prefumunt  domibus 
publice  detinere ;  et  licet  fuerint  fepe  commoniti,  eas 
nolunt  abtccre,  in  Scandalum  Populi,  et  opprobrium  Cle- 
ricale.  39.  col.  1.  §  2. 

9.  Initium  Annalium  Duneftaplienfium,  inanu  Ricardi 

Prioris  ejufdcm  Domus  exaratum  ;  de  quo,  infra  plura 
funt  nobis  dicenda.  40.  b. 

10.  Carta:  de  Ecclefia  de  Bradeburna.  43.  b.  55.  & 

i  74* 

1  1.  Decifio  Litis  inter  Priorem  &  Canonicos  de  Dun¬ 
ftaplia  ex  una  parte,  et  Alexandrum  Juvenein  cum  po- 
pulo  ejufdem  Villa- ex  altera;  luper  Decimis  Negotia- 
tionis,  Oblationibus  ;  per  Johannein  Archidiaconum 
Bedefordia,  A.  D.  1221.  49. 

T2.  Litiene  Ricardi  Prioris  Duneftaplia  ad  Robertum 
Epifcoputn  Lincolnienfem,  fupei-  Capella  &  Cantaria  de 
Bareworthe.  A.  D.  1226. 

NB.  Litteras  excipit  Adnotatio  cujufdam  Neoterici, 
hifce  Verbis  ‘  There  is  now  no  fuch  Chappell  or  Chantrie.’ 

videfis  etiam  51.  col.  i.&  56. 

13.  Concordia  de  Wybbefunade  ;  five  ut  idem  Neo- 

tericus  voiuit.  ‘The  Bounds  of  the  Parilhes  ofScodam,  & 
"Whipl'naid,  &  part  oi  Toternhoo.’  ^2. 

1 4.  Concordia  fuper  annua  quadam  Penfione  cx  Ec¬ 
clefia  de  Cublintona  perfolvenda.  A.  D.  1239.  54.  b. 

(&  59  ) 

15.  Concordia  fuper  Decima  Turbarum  perfolvenda 

Ricardo  Priori  de  Dunftable.  A.  D.  1236.  55. 

16.  Adnotaiiones  ex  Rotulis  publicis,  de  Mifericor- 

dijs  (ut  aiunt;  varijs  per  Priorem  &  Canonicos  Dunfta- 
plienfes  de  jure  captis,  aut  recuperatis.  36. 

17.  Breve  Regis  Henrici  in.  contra  MalefaQores 
publice  Itinerantes,  et  tam  de  Die  quam  de  Node,  fine 
Impedimento  Ballivorum  vel  aliorum,  multa  mala  contra 
Paean  luam  facicntes  :  cum  certus  fuerit  quod  hec  facerq 
non  poflcnt,  mfi  Confenfu  &  tnanifefto  receptamento 


Num.  1 885. 

multorum  cum  quibus  pernoftantur ;  et  qui  eis  Cibarta 
&  alia  tieceflaria  inveniunt,  fine  quibus  non  poflunt  diu- 
tius  moram  facere  in  aliquibus  partibus.  37.  b. 

18.  Redditus  qui  debent  folvi  de  Domo  de  Dunfta¬ 
plia-  .  64. 

19.  De  Decimis  Frugum  in  Cherltona.  69.  col.  2. 
ao.  De  Advocatione  Ecclefia:  S.  Petri  de  Bedeforda. 


70.  b. 

21.  Carta  Originalis  R.  Henrici  li.  qua  Confirmat 

Willelmo  de  Bafenvilla  quinquaginta  Solidatas  Terra:  in 
Buttebroc,  quas  Ricardus  de  Luci  ei  dedit  de  Honore 
Bolonite.  Confuitur.  70. 

22.  De  Ecclefia  et  Decimis  de  Toternho.  71. 

23.  Syllabus  Terras  Tenendum  in  Parochia  S.  Cud- 

berthi  de  Bedeforda.  jj,  b. 

24.  Compofitio  Litis  inter  Conventum  &  Homines  de 
Dunftaple,  per  Ottonem  Legatum  Romanum.  72. 

25.  Determinatio  Litis  fuper  Ecclefia  de  Tudinge- 

duna.  72.  b. 

26.  Admenfuratio  Manerij,  Tcrrarum,  &  Bofci  de 

Shortegrave,  &  Extenta.  73.  b. 

zy.  Veredi&um  Juratorum  fuper  ConfuetudinibuS 
quibufdam  Burgi  de  Dtmftaplc.  73. 

38.  Breve  Regium  de  Affidatione  Auxilij,  fcil.  Qua- 
dragefima:  partis  omnium  Bonorum  mobilium  in  Parlia- 
mento  conceiforum,  per  Archiepifcopos,  Epifcopos, 
Abbates,  Priores  &  Clericos  (Terras'  habentes  qua:  ad 
Ecclefias  non  pertinent)  Comites,  Barones,  Milites,  Li- 
beros  Homines  et  Villanos.  ibid. 

29.  Proteffio  Ordinandi  in  Epifcopum.  73.  b. 

30.  Profellio  Regis  Coronandi ;  imperf.  ibid. 

31.  Placita  de  Quo  Waranto  (fc.  fuper  Privilegijs 
Monafterij  Duneftaplienfis)  apud  Bedeford.  coram  Ro¬ 
berto  de  Arderne  &  Socijs  fuis  Jufticiarijs  Itinerantibus 
ibidem,  die  Lune  proxima  poll  feftum  Nativitatis  Beat! 
Johannis  Baptifte,  anno  R.R.  Edwardi  111.  a  Conqueftu, 
quarto. 

32.  Iter  de  Dunftaplia,  coram  Roberto  de  Arderne, 

Johanne  deCauntebrigge.  &  Thoma  de  Louth  Jufticiarijs 
D'ni  Regis,  Itinerantibus  in  Comitatu  Bed.  eodem 

anno,  &c.  8.*.b. 


33.  Continuatio  ejufdem  coram  Johanne  de  Caunte- 

brigge  &  Socijs  fuis  Jufticiarijs  poll  Seflionem  Roberti 
de  Arderne.  s4.  b. 

34.  Placita  Corone  coram  Roberto  de  Arderre  &  So¬ 

cijs  fuis  Jufticiarijs,  D  ni  Regis  Itinerantibus  in  Comitatu 
Bed.  die  Luna:,  &c.  (ut  fuprain  §.  31.)  89. 

33.  Placita  Corone  coram  Roberto  de  Arderne,  &c. 
(ut  fupra.)  go. 

36.  Littera:  Patentes  R.  Ricardi  11.  in  quibus,  per 
Infpeximus  (ut  aiunt)  recitantur  Cart®  Regum  Edwardi 
m.  Edwardi  11.  Henrici  in.  Henrici  1.  Ricardi/.  Henrici 
it.  De  fundatione  &  indotatione  Prioratus  S.  Petri  de 
Dunftaplia.  qr.b. 


37.  Narratio  Hiftorica  de  Placitis  fupramemoratis,  deq; 

Gravaminibus  Priori  &  Conventui  Dunftaplienfi  illatis, 
e  quibus  orta  funt.  gg, 

38.  Taxatio  Bonorum  Spiritualium  atq;  Temporalium 

ejufdem  Prioratus.  lcj,  b. 

39.  Allocationes  Amerciamentorum  Nobis  (i.  e.  Con¬ 
ventui)  fafte  in  Scaccario  Regis.  1 1 0. 

40.  Narratio  alia  de  Placitis,  fuper  Libertatibus  & 
Privileges  ejufdem  Monafterij,  rcgnanteRege  Edwardom. 


11  r. 

41.  Carta  Originalis  Ricarda  de  Lega,  qua  concedit 
Canonicis  de  Biflemade  totam  Terram  fuam  in  Bedeford. 
ad  Suftentationem  unius  Canonici,  qui  in  predi&a  Domo 
de  Biffemede,  pro  anima  fua,  &c.  Miflam  cantaret  (ad- 
ne£titur  folio  1 17.) 

42.  Breve  Regis  Edwardi  in.  de  conftituendo  Thoma 

de  Swynforde  in  Vice-Comitem  Comitatuum  Bed.  & 
Bucks,  ac  Efcaetorem  ibidem  ;  una  cum  Forma  Jura* 
menti  per  eundem  Thomam  prseftandi.  1 16.  b. 

43.  Placita  apud  Weftm.  coram  .  .  dp  Thorpe 

7  et 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


i°7 


Num.  1885. 

et  Socijs  fuis  Jufliciarijs  de  Banco,  de  Termirio  Trin. 
anno  36  R.  Edw.  in.  fuper  Ecclefia  de  Wymyngtone. 

119. 

44.  De  eadem  Ecclefia,  Termino  S.  Hill,  anno  23.  R- 

Henrici  vn.  119.  b. 

45.  Adnotationes  de  Placitis  eandem  Ecclefiam  tan- 

gentibus,  A.  D.  1362.  1 2I* 

46.  Placita  apud  Weftm.  coram  Thoma  de.  Weyland 

&  Socijs  fuis,  Termino  S.  Hillarij  anno  16  R.  Edw.  1. 
fuper  Jure  Pannagij  in  Totemho.  12  *•  b. 

47.  Bona  et  Proventus  Redorie  de  Bradburne  cum 

appendices  anno  5  R.  Henrici  ill.  deduda  Portione  Vi- 

carie  ibidem.  122.  b. 

48.  Breve  R.  Henrici  iv  ?  de  armatis,  et  perturbato- 

tibusPacis.  123.  b. 

49.  Breve  de  Statuto  de  Ingreffu  de  Manu  forti.  124. 

50.  Writt  of  K.  Edward  iv.  for  receiving  the  Oath  of 

JohnHampdene  for  the  Office  ofEfcheator  in  the  Coun¬ 
ties  of  Bed.  k  Bucks,  with  the  Form  of  the  fame  Oath  in 
Englifh.  I25; 

51.  Proceffus  coram  Homagio  de  Flamftede,  de  Terns 

Prioratus  de  Dunftaple  in  eadem  Villa.  1 26. 

52.  Teflimonial  Letter  or  Certificate  of  many  of  the 

Inhabitants  of  Dunllaple,  Edifburgh,  Whipfnade,  1  ill- 
worth,  Stanbrigge,  &  Kemefworth,  touching  the  right 
of  Common  of  Pafture  claimed  by  the  Inhabitants  of 
Houghton  &  Sewelle,  in  the  Fields  of  Eytone  &  Tolern- 
ho.  Y oven  9  Marche,  ann.  15.  Edw.  iv.  126.  b. 

53.  Carta  Originalis  Nicholai  Burre,  qua  quietum 

clamat  D~no  Johanni  Wanvykhille  perpetuo  Vicario  de 
Toturnho,  totum  quod  habuit  jus  in  dimidia  Acra  Prati 
in  Toturnho-Fenne-Mede.  dat.  4  die  Junij,  anno  1 1  R. 
vm.  I2^‘ 

54.  Difpenfatio  Originalis  Reginaldi  Poli  Pontificis 
Romani  Legati  a  Latere  ad  RR-  Philippum  et  Mariam, 
Joanni  cuidam  Wardo  Scholar1  I.ondonienfi,  de  Sacris 
Ordinibus  capefandis.  dat.  prid-  IdusFebr.  A.  D.  1 556. 

129. 

Hanc  propria;  fo®  manus  Subfcriptione  munivit  Re- 
dnaldus. 

55.  A  Latin  Hexaftich,  which  technically  (lor  me¬ 

mories  fake)  includeth  the  Chief  Points  deter  mined  in  the 
Synod  A.  D.  1640,  with  an  Explication  of  the  fame, 
in  Englifh.  ,  129.  b. 

So  far  touching  this  valuable  Book  ;  it  now  remain¬ 
ed  that  I  fiiould  fay  fomewhat  concerning  him  by  whofe 
Command  it  feemeth  to  have  been  firft  made,  and  of 
whofe  hand-writing  much  remained  therein,  (till  to  be 
feen.  I  mean  Richard  de  Morins,  who  was  made  Prior 
of  Dunftable  A.  D.  1202.  and  deceafed  A.  D.  1242.  as 
will  appear  anon ;  a  man  eminent  in  his  time,  and  yet 
not  remembred  by  any  that  have  treated  of  our  Englilh 
Writers,  fo  far  as  I  can  hitherto  learn. 

That  he  was  an  Hiftorian  or  Annalift,  is  plain,  from 
the  beginning  of  the  Annals  of  Dunftaple,  to  be  found 
in  this  Book  written  wid  his  own  hand,  at  fol.  40.  b. 
(of  which  above  §  9.)  and  of  which  this  is  the  firft  Sen¬ 
tence,  “  Ab  Adamufq;  ad  Nativitatem  Crifti,  fiuxerunt 
anni  fecundum  Hebreos  tria  milia.  900.48  ;  fecundum 
Septuaginta  Interpretes  5  milia  100.96  ;  et  exindeufque 
ad  Odavurn  Annum  Noftrum  100.200.10.”  and  this 
Man  therefore  was  made  Prior  A.  D.  1 202.  in  which  year 
in  the  Dunftaple-Annals  now  in  the  Cottonian-Library 
inferibed  Tiberivs  A.  x.  I  find  thefe  words,  Anno 
120'’.  Ricardus  Canonicus  Meretoni®  adhuc  Diaconus, 
fit  Prior  de  Dunftaplia  ;  et  Sabbato  Quatuor  Temporum 
ordinatus ;  die  Saudi  Mikaelis  primanx  Miflam  cele- 

bra'  "phis  is  the  man,  who  feemeth  to  have  been  him  who 
can  fed  our  prefent  Chartulary  to  be  made  up  ;  and  began 
the  fame,  partly  wid  his  own  hand,  &  partly  by  the 
hands  of  others,  as  occafion  offered.  After  the  Entries 
of  many  matters,  at  fol.  40.  b.  (according  to  the  prefent 
Numeration  of  the  Leaves  j  for  it  is  93.  b.  alter  the  Old 


Num.  1885. 

Figures)  he  began  his  Annals  with  his  own  Hand  ;  but 
then,  perchance,  confidering  dat  they  would,  in  time, 
come  to  be  the  foundation  of  the  Annals  of  the  Houfe,  he 
kept  on  this  Book  for  the  Chartulary,  &  began  his  An¬ 
nals  again,  in  the  fame  words,  and  with  the  fame  (that 
is  his  own  hand)  in  another  Book,  namely  dat  Cottonian 
MS.  above  mentioned,  which  is  often  cited  by  our  modem 
Writers  by  the  Title  of  the  Chronicle  or  Annals  of  Dun¬ 
ftaple. 

Although  he  proceeded  with  his  own  hand  in  thefe 
his  Annals  not  much  farther  in  one  book,  than  in  the 
other  ;  I  may  believe  that  he  might  often  didate  the 
matter,  even  when  he  himfelf  is  mentioned  in  the  third 
perfon  ;  as  we  fee  that  Moles  often  writeth  of  himfelf  in 
that  manner. . 

As  to  de  Adions  of  this  Prior  Richard,  without 
doubt,  much  may  yet  be  found  which  is  not  recorded  in 
this  Chartulary^  nor  in  the  Cottonian  book  ;  but  foraL 
much  as  I  have  not  now  time  to  fearch  elfewhere,  I  Ihall 
content  myfelf  with  citing  fome  places  of  the  Annals  (ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Tranfcript  which  I  made  of  them  the  laft 
Winter)  and  alfo  hint  at  fome  others  in  the  Chartulary^ 

&  fo  conclude. 

“  Anno  1203.  didus  Ricardus  Prior,  intrante  Fe- 
bruario,  Romani  pro  D  no  Rege  pet  rexit  ;  et  profpere 
reverfus  circa  feftum  S.  Jacobi,  fecum  adduxit  Legatum 
unum,  fcilicet  Abbatem  de  Cafemere  ad  componendum 
inter  lieges.” 

“  Anno  i-ro^L — Eodem  anno,  Ordinavimus  fuper 
Priorcm  apud  Rokefhac  ;  et  difpofuimus  de  Elemofinario 
et  Sacrifta,  quid  recipere  &  quid  facere  debeant  annua- 
tim.” 

“  Anno  1206. — Eodem  anno,  Ricardus  Prior  nof- 
ter,  audoritate  Johannis  Diaconi  Cardihalis  Apoftolic® 
Sedis  Legati,  fadus  eft  Vifitator  omnium  Virorum  Re- 
ligioforum  per  Epifcopatum  Lincolnienfem  ;  exceptis 
Templarijs,  et  Hofpitalarijs,  et  Ciftercienfibus,  et  Pr®- 
monftratenfibus.” 

“  Anno  1  2 1 2. — Eodem  anno,  menfe  Odobri,  miffi 
font  Inquifitorcs  per  omnes  Epifcopatus  Angli®  ad  inqui¬ 
rendum  de  ablatis,  &  damnis  Anglican®  Ecclefi®  iilatiS. 
Et  inter  cteteroS,  miffus  eft  Prior  nofter  per  Epifcopatum- 
Lincolnienfem.” 

“  Eodem  auno^  menfe  Septembri,  miffit  Papa  tres1 
Praadicatores in  Angliam  ;  fcilicet  Magiltrum  Willelinuni 
de  Lundonia,  et  Magiftrum  Leonem  Decatfum  Wellen- 
fem,  et  Magiftrum  Philippum  de  Otheforde.  Qui  cum 
Privilegijs  multis  per  fe  &  Coadjutoics  foos,  multos  fig-*, 
navei  unt  ad  honorem  Crucis,  rnulta  colligentes,  etTrun- 
cos  per  fingulas  Kcclefias  ftatuentes.  In  quo  Officio, 
vicem  eorum  geffit  Prior  de  Dunftaple  in  Comitatu  Onte- 
donite,  et  Bedefordi®,  et  Hertfordiee.” 

«  Anno  1 2 1 3.— Eodem  anno,  in  fefto  Sandi  Luc®, 
dcdicata  eft  Ecclefia  de  Dunftaple  ab  Hugone  11.  Licol* 
nienfe  Epifcopo,  pr®fentibus  Comitibus  &  Baronibus, 
Abbatibus  &  Prioribus,  et  Nobilibus  multis,  et  Plcbe 
cujus  non  trat  Numerus.  Ubi  Pccnitentibus  vere  Con- 
feftis,  infra  quindecim  Dies  illuc  venientibus,  fada  eft 
Remillio  Triginta  Dierunr  ;  et  exinde  in  perpetuum  ad 
Anniverfarium  Diem  Dedicationis,  vel  infra  Octo  dies 
fequentes  venientibus,  fada  eft  ibidem  Remillio  Viginti 
Dierunr,  pereundem  Epifcopum  ;  a  quo,  Reliqui®  mul- 
torum  Sanctorum,  per  Priorcm  a  multis  ainicis  adquifit®, 
repofit®  font  in  Major!  Altari.” 

“  Anno  1215.  Celebratum  eft  Concilium  Lateranis,- 
quod  inchoavit  in  Crallino  Omnium  Sandorum,  et  folu- 
tum  eft  in  Crallino  Sandi  Andre®,  fob  Innocentio  Papa 
Tertio.  Cui  interfuerunt  Patriarcha  Conftantinopolita- 
nus,  Jerofolymitanus,  Aculegenfis,  Venetianus,  et  Alex- 
andrinus  Fratrem  luum  Procuratorem  deftinavir.  Inter¬ 
fuerunt  etiam  quadraginta  ?  Epifcopi,  et  Odingenti  /rb- 
bates  et  Priores  ;  et  inter  c®teros  Ricardus  Prior  Dunfta- 
pli®  interfuit  ;  et  rediens  Parifiis,  in  Scholis  Theologi-^ 
eodem  anno  integro  remanfit.  Sed  alij  redeuntes  Jnfidias 


Catalogus  Librorum  jMSS. 


08 


vis  evafcrunt ;  quidnm  etiam  intercept!  fuht,  alij  apud 
Redeo  tnc  gravein  R.  dempiionem  fubierunt.” 

Anno  1219. - ooiin anno,  dieSanfti  Benedict, 

Ric.irdus  Prior  apud  Dunltaple  tenuit  Curiam  fuam,  de 
omnibus  Piaci  is  Coronas  &  Capitulis,  coram  Jufticiarijs 
ufitatis.  Et  tunc  aftidebant  ei  Stephanus  &  Mauritius 
Jufticiarij  Domini  Regis  ;  et  firmata  funt  Juramenta  fub 
hac  forma,  “  Hoc  audis  Domne  Prior  Jufticiarie  Sandti 
Petri  de  Dunftaple,”  &c.  Et  tunc  habuit  ibi  Placita  Co¬ 
rona;  ;  nonunatim,  de  Thefauro  invento,  contra  Gode- 
fridum  Mafchun :  item,  deNovis  Diffeflinis;  etdeEuga 
Incai  ceratorum  ;  et  de  Morte  multorum. 

“Anno  1220. - Eodem  anno  Prior  dirationavit 

apud  Scaccarium;  Mifericordiam  Stephani  Viniioris  et 
Pcnj  Viniioris  .  ...  Mi  ficut  feriptum 

elt  in  Rotulo  D  ni  Regis  Anni  quarti.” 

Eodem  anno,  idem  Prior  fecit  Concordiam  cum 
M  'j°ria  de  Bukldhore  &  Sororibus  fuis  ;  quie  rotulata 
efl  coram  Jufticiarijs  in  Bancho.  Quo  anno,  idem  Prior 
contra  multos  Parochianos  luos  Decimas  de  I'ceno  obti- 
nuit.” 

“  Eodem  anno,  Prior  de  Dunftaple  traftusin  Caufam 
conn  a  Ricardum  deStepingele,  per  Breve  D'ni  Regis  de 
ultima  Prcefentatione,  receflit  quietus  a  Judicio,  et  alter 
in  Mifericordia  remanfit.  Similiter  tradus  in  Caufam 
per  Alls  Martel,  per  Breve  de  Dote,  de  Terra  de  Boke- 
leftiore,  quietus  a  Lite  remanfit.” 

“Anno  1221 - Eodem  anno  Rrcardus  Prior 

movit  Controverfiam  contra  quofdam  Burgenfes  de  Dun- 
ftaplia  ;  et  tandem  contra  omnes,  fuper  Decimis  Negoti¬ 
ations  (vid.  fupra  §  1 1.)  ubicunque  exercitas  ;  et  fuper 
Decimis  Fceni  et  Molendinorum  ;  et  fuper  quibufdam 
Oblationibus  ;  de  quibus  Compofuio  facia  eft  coram  Jo- 
hanne  Archidiacono  Bedefordire,  et  coram  Populo  Dun- 
ftaplias,  in  Ecclefia  recitata  eft,  et  ab  omnibus  approbata 
et  per  Judices  a  Papa  delegatos  confirtnata;’’  &c.  * 

“  Eodem  anno,  Molly  filius  Brun  Judaius',  vexavit 
Ricardum^  Pnorem  de  Dunftaple,  et  Ecclefiam  fuam 
fuper  Septmgenm  Libris,  per  quandam  Cartam  ■  qua 
ideo  probata  eft  falfa  per  Drim  Martinum  de  Pateftulia 
et  alios  Jufticiarios  D'ni  Regis,  quod  Carta  loquebatur 
de  mutuo  accepto  per  Priorem  Thomam  (Ricardi  decef 
forem)  et  Sigillum  appofitum  expreffit  Nomen  Ricardi  • 
ipfa  etiam  Carta  ftlit  lota  ;  et  infuper,  falfam  Gramma- 
ticam  continebat.  Unde  dittus  Judams  incarceratus  fuit 
]  um  London.'®  per  Annum  &  ampiiiis,  quia  alij  Judtei 
deelcrunt  Rep  umun  Marram  Auri  pro  Judieio  deferendo. 
fc-t  poftmoduin,  cum  ampiiiis  prorogare  non  poffent 
dederunt  Regi  Centum  Libras  ne  fufpenderetur  in  Ligno 
W  opprobrium  Legis  fuai,  Et  fic  fuper  Rotulum  (Legem 
Moifisj  fuum  dittos  Judaius  abjurans  Regnum  Regis  > 
et  Utlagatus  eft.  6  ‘ 

rev  “  4;'"°  ,  =  (Eodem  anno,  Piior  Dunftapli® 

faeftus  eft  Vifitator  Ordmis  Noftri  in  Provintia  Ebora 
cunli,  una  cum  Abbate  de  Derleia.  Qui  pacjfjce  exft 
cull  funt  Officmm  fuum  ufque  ad  Ecclefiam  de  Kircham 
Ub,  occurlus  eis  Prior  de  Novo-burgo,  contra  ipforum 
OiSemm  appeliavlt ;  quern  Ipf,  in  receffu  fuo  Excom- 

mumcaverunt. 

“  Anno i  i  z24.  formatum  eft  Cirograffum  in  Curia 
Rcgis,  inter  Pnorem  de  Dunftaple,  et  Willelmum  FiHum- 
Ba.dewnu,  de  Terra  Johannis  Nerbonenfis  ” 

“  Eodem  anno  formatum  eft  Cirograffum  inter 
Pnorem  de  Dunftaplo  &  Ricardum  Krot.  fuper  Eccle 
liam  de  Heiingedune.”  ^  ■ 

“Anno  1228.- - Eodem  anno.  Prior  de  Dunftaple 

celebrant  Curiam  fuam  apud  Dunftaple,  affidentibu/ei 
Domino  Stephano  de  Segrave  &  Willelmo  Londone  In 

fc  tbenT  mFB?drK°’  fmn  i'  f'oronat„res  extra  Surgum 
io  nabent.  Eoldem  etiam  feet  Prim-  r,, a  m  P 
rum,  fei licet  de  Dims,  * 

tudme  1  annorum.  ’  ’  ■uau 


T..r  “  Eodem  anno,  die  San&i  Stephani,  inventus  fait 
eiaurus  in  Cimiterio  de  Hufleburne,  valens  circiter 
quinqtiagmta  Marcas  ;  quern,  coadi  fuimus  prtefentare 
coram  Jufticiarijs  tunc  Itinerantibus;  et  fub  eorum  Sigiilis 
elarus  fuit  Londonias,  coram  Rege.  Et  quia  tarn  Epif! 
copus  Lincolnian,  qnam  Prior  Dunftaplije,  quam  etiam 
Kex  Ipie  dittuin  Tezaurum  vendicabant ;  provifum  fuit 
ad  preces  Domini  Regis,  quod  Epifcopus  &  Prior  con! 
cell lerunt  didum  i  efaurum  NuvoHofpitali  de  Loura,  falvo 
jure  cujuflibet. 

“  Eodem  anno,  impetratae  funt  tres  Jurats  contra 
1  riorem,  de  Muro  qui  eft  circa  Cardium  j  et  dixit  Jurata 
contra  1  riorem. 

Fodem  anno,  orta  fuit  Diffentio  inter  Priorem  de 
Dunftaple  &  Decern  Burgenfes  ejus,  fuper  Subtrattione 
UDiationum.  Confpiraveruntenim  qubdinNuptijsvel  puri- 
ncatiopibus,  vel  prsfentibus  Corporibus  Defunttorum 
princjpalem  perfonam  tantunf  duteperfoua:  fequeremur  ■ 
et  pro  hoc,  rlli  Decern  fuerunt  excommunicati.  Sed  po- 
pulus,  hoc  non  obftante,  communicavit  eis;  et  ipfi  paflim 
mirabant  Eccleftam,  et  populus  cum  eis  j  ita  quod  tam 
Cctnventus  quam  Prefbiter  Parochialis  a  Midis  follennibus 
ceffaverum  m  Ecclefia,  a  kalendis  Augufii,  ufque  ad 
feftum  Sanfli  Dionyfij :  interim,  in  Cape  la  Infirmaria; 
follenmter  celebrame..  Qua  de  caufa,  Epifcopus  Fin. 
colnite  acceflit  ad  locum,  cum  multitudine  Clericorum 
a  Capellanorum,  et  in  Pulpito  Ecelefiae  foUenniter  ex- 
communicavit  dittos  Decern,  f,  de  ctetero,  Ecclefiam 
mtrantes  Divmum  Officmm  turbarent;  item,  omnes  alios 
qui,  de  caitcro  eis  communicarem  ;  et  tam  illos  quam 
omnes  alios,  fi  infra  proximum  Feftum  bantti  Martini 
non  fatisfacerem  Ecclefia:  defubtractis  ;  et  hoefeiente  et 
pralente  Sacnfta :  item,  omnes  illos  qui,  .de  ctetero 
propter  aliquas  Liles  vel  Odium  aiicujusperlona:,  aliquid 
fubtraherent  Ecclefia;  de  Oblationibus  debitis,  vel  Con. 
fuetudmibus  Venationibus,  ante  Lites  motas  ufitatis 
ibidem.  Eodem  die,  mediantibus  de  Lincolne,  et  de 
Bedeforde  Archldiacoms  et  Magiftro  Stephano  de  Efeine- 
tone,  compufitum  fuit  in  hac  forma.  Quod  Excom- 
mumcau  forma  Ecclefia;  abfolverenturT  et  poftea  S- 
vadiarem  Prior,  vigmu  libras,  quas  Trior  remitteret  eis  ad 
preces  Mediatorum,  ufque  ad  quinquaginta  Solidos,  infra 
ditmdium  Anm  Priori  folvendos.  Et  poftea  fub  Jura- 
mento  mjunttum  fuit  eis,  quod  in  Sememijs  Ecclefia; 
de  caetcns  efient  obediemes;  et  quod,  de  emtero,  nihil 
fubtraherent  Ecclefia;  de  Decimis  vel  Oblationibus,  vel 
aliqutbus  Venationibus,  ante  tempus  Litis,  in  Jitta  Ec 
cleiue,  ufitatis ;  et  de  tunc  fubtraclis  fad-  (accrent  infra 
proximum  feftum  Sat.tti  Martini,  Ecclefia;  Sacrifttc. 
on  milter,  quotquot  eis  communicaverant,  fuii  hinili 
Juramentoet  Difciplina,  ad  OfUum  Ecclefia  Mleniter 
funt  abfiluu,  et  fimilia  funt  eis  injundii.  Et  fic  oui 
de  ctetero,  allquid  fubtraxerint,  non  folum  in  Senten’ 
t  am  i:  pilcopi,  led  in  perjuriatum  incidunt.” 

“  ;le  Dunftaple  A  de  Neuham  Priores 

per  Genera fe  Capttulum  ftatuti  Vifitatores,  vifitaverun? 
Monafteria  fui  Ordmis  per  Epifcopatum  Lincolnienfem  & 
Coventrenfem;  et  tunc  renuntiante  Priore  de  Sancfta- 
Prethefw., ha,  fubil, tutus  eft  e,  alius,  nomine  Helias 
Similiter  et  Prior  de  Gnfelcya  Prioratum  fuum  refignavS 

Anno  i  a 2 y - Eodem  anno,  menfe  Maio,  Henrico 

Rege  tranfeunte  per  Dunftapliam,  et  in  Priomtu  hofpi! 
ato,  Rtcardus  Prior  humiiiter  ei  fupplicavit.  quod  ficut 
totius  Regm  gubcmaculum  accepit,  et  fpecialfter  ipfms 

Priorer^aBUIt  Pa'ron"tllm  ;  difeordijs  ortis  inter 

Pnorem  &  Burgenfes,  Paeem  Deo  acccptabilem  faceret, 

J  t;!:1‘ Eseisiiaj  quam  Burgenfibus  utilem  providerer. 
June  Rex,  deConfilio  H(uberti) de Burgo,  mediantibus 
majonbus  de  Cm.  Regis,  videlicet,  Luca  Dublinenfi 
eletto,  Radulfo  Jiho-Nicholai  Senefcailo,  Roberto  de 
Lexintona,  Johanne  de  Monemue  R(adulfo)  Epifeooo 
Ciceftrenlt  Dm  Regis  Cancellario,  et  muftis  alijsfquan- 
dum  I  acctn  formavit,  quam  majores  populi  de  Dun 
Itapic,  Rege  pnefente,  admii'erunt ;  fed  poll  receffum 

Regis, 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse, 


Num.  i  885. 

Regis,  peniths  contradixerunt ;  ideoq;  Prior  per  Breve 
Domini  Regis,  fecit  eos  citari,  cujus  verba  funt  haec, 

R'-x,  &c. - Poftmodum  diftis  Burgenfibus  coram 

Bancho  conftitutis,  ipfi  Jufticiarij,  habito  Confilio  cum 
Domino  Rege  &  Primatibus  ejus,  ipfam  Pacem  apud 
Dunftaple  prius  fbrmatam,  parfibus  pnefentibus  recitarunt 
quam  poftmodum  Vice-comiti  Bedefordia:  mandaverunt 
ut  earn  faceret  obfervari  ;  cujus  Verba  funt  haec,  Hen- 

ricus,  &c. - Quoniam  vero  Burgenfis  per  has  Lite- 

ras  pro  Vice-comiti  noluerunt  in  Tallagiutn  confentire, 
nifi  haberent  Mandatum  Regis  fuper  hoc  fpeciale  ;  ideo, 
D~ns  Rex  iterum  fcripfit  Ei  in  ha;c  verba,  Rex,  &c. 

- Cum  igitur  Vice-comes  hoc  Au£loritate  vellet 

talliare  Burgenfes,  refponderent  quod  tantum  in  Capite 
Tenentes  de  Priore,  et  non  alios  permitterent  talliari  :  et 
accedenies  ad  Regem,  impetraverunt  ab  Eo  literas,  in 

htec  Verba,  Rex,  k c. - Cum  vero  Prior  hijs  Literis 

impeditus,  vellet  faltem  in  CapiteTenentes  talliare,  vocavit 
in  medium  Duodecim  Burgenfes  quos  fideliores  teftiina- 
vit.  Qui  juramento  corporaliter  prteftito,  quod  rationa- 
biliter  afliderent  Tallagiutn,  nec  teniulos  injufte  gravarent 
nec  deterrent  amicis  ;  afliderunl  tantum  Sexaginta-tres 
Solidos  ;  ita  quod  ditiores  Burgi  non  erant  aflili  nifi  ad 
tres  Solidos.  Iiuic  autem  perjurio  manifefto  fucceflit 
tantu.>  furor  populi,  quod  in  odium  Ecclefite  fubtraxerunt 
Decinas  et  Obhtiones  ;  ita  quod  Funere  pradenti,  vel 
Muliere  fe  Purificante,  unum  tantum  Do  arium  obtu- 
lerunt ;  tabricam  etiam  Ecclefia;  admodum  diflipate,  pro 
derelicto  habuerunt ;  Blafphemias  et  niinas  Canonicis  et 
eorum  famulis  intulcrunt,  et  per  impofitionem  falforum 
Crimfr  vu  eos  per  totam  Angliam  diifamarunt.  Bannum 
eti  -  in  Ifrr-lefia  publice  propofuerunt,  quod  nullus 
Bu:ge:\(;um  moleret  ad  Molendina  Prioris.  Bladum 
c  .atn  Dominicum  ipftus  Prioris  in  vijs  antiquitds 
ufitaris  proftraverunt  in  terrain,  et  equwn  tub  fua 
cuftodia  incluferunt ;  qui  aliquando  per  Prr.epofitus, 
aliquando  per  vicinos  C.apellanos,  aliquando  per  ip- 
fum  Decanum  vix  poterat  iiberari.  Corruperunt  etiam 
B  lhvos  Nobilium  Vicinonun,  ut  nos  et  res  noftras  in  fuis 
territorijs  impedirent ;  quod,  frequenter  inunet  ibus  illefli, 
fecerunt.  Cum  autem  hate  omnia  D'ni  Regs  Caneel- 
h.rio,  et  S(iephano)  de  Segrave  D~ni  Regis  Capitali  Juf- 
ticiario,  in  hujus  perfecutionis  fervore  per  Burgum  de 
Dunftaple  tranfeuntibus.  Prior  oftenderet ;  videbantur 
turbari  k  pro  malo  habere,  et  cceperunt  Burgo  connni- 
nari ;  veruntamen,  illis  recedentibus,  Malitia  non  cefla- 
vit.  Hijs  omnibus  accellit,  quod  cum  Eallivus  Vice-co- 
mitis  vellet  pignora  capere  pro  Tallagio  non  Soluto  ;  tarn 
mafeuli  quam  foemina:  de  Burgo  inlurrexerunt  in  eum, 
omnimodam  diftriflionem  fieri  prohibentes.  Et  quamvis 
ad  inftantiam  Prioris,  Domnus  Lincolnienfis  Epifcopus 
per  vicinos  Burgos  et  vicinos  Decanatus  prsefatos  male- 
faftores  diebus  folennibus  exconrmunicari  jufliflet  ; 
tamen  ab  inccepto  furore  et  malitia  non  celfarunt,  fet 
profitebantur,  fe  effe  Excommunicatos,  et  fe  velle  pod  us 
ad  Infemum  delcendere,  quam  in  caufa  Tallagij  fuccum- 
bere.  Prolocuti  fuerunt  etiam  cum  Willelmo  de  Canti- 
lupo  quod  in  Campo  vicino  Burgo  de  Dunftaple,  conce- 
deret  eis  quadraginta  acras,  in  qua-  Tabernacula  fua 
transferentes  habitaient  a  Tallagio  St  Teloneo  quieti. 
Hac  igitur  Tempeftate,  utriufque  Fori  Judices  per  fre- 
quentiam  querelarum  Prioris  faftiditi,  quafi  per  aceidiam 
victi,  difiiinulando  ftupuerunt,  et  tantam  univerfitatem 
Populi  fcandalizare  abhorruerunt.  Et  quia  tanta  Mul¬ 
titude  fuit  in  Caufa  tarn  Munerum  quam  Populorum, 
infinita  fcelera  remanl’erunt  in  punita.  Cum  itaq;  tanta 
iniquitas  habundaret  ;  ecce,  repente  vifitavit  Dominos 
fpiritum  Magiftri  J^ohannis)  Archidiaconi  Bedefordia; : 
qui  inter  Partes  amicabiliter  compofuit,  et  procellas  pefti- 
lentes  fubito  convertit  in  Speciem  Lenitatis  j  ficut  per 
Cyrographum  faftum  in  Curia  Domini  Regis,  et  Cartam 
Prioris  k  Conventus  manifefte  patet  ;  qua;  inferihs  fub- 
fequuntur.”  (vid.  etiam  Codicis  praefentis.  66.  6:  54.  b. 

Anno  1233. - “  Eodem  anno,  recefferunt  Walterus 

Cat.  HaRL-Vol.  II. 


Num.  1885. 

profefius,  et  Johannes  nonprofeflus,  Canonic!  Dunfta- 
plienfes,  fine  licentia  :  et  per  feneftram  fra  clam  exeuntes, 
et  murum  Monafterij  tranfilientes,  inter  h  ralres-Minored 
habitum  Oxonia;  fuiceperunt  :  quos  Prior  de  Dunftaple 
Oxonia;  et  alibi,  denuntiari  fecit  Excommunicatos; 
Unde  Walterus  cum  tribus  Fratribus  de  Ordine  Minorum 
reverfus,  ad  Capitulum  Dunftaplia;  humiliter  petijt  ab- 
folvi  j  et  juravit  quod  pareret  niandatis  Prioris  in  om¬ 
nibus,  falvo  Ordine  fuo.  Et  fic  abfulutus  eft,  juffU 
Prioris  a  tribus  Canonicis,  per  corporalem  Difciplinam  } 
et  poftmodum,  a  toto  Conventu  voce  tenus.  Demuni 
injun&um  eft  ei,  ut  imprimis  reftituat  Quaternas  k  Pan- 
nos  quos  afportavit ;  et  infra  annum  deliberat,  ut  ft  Ordo 
Minorum  arflior  eft  noftro  ibi  remanc-at ;  fin  autem,  ad 
noftrum  Ordinem  revertatur,  ubi  Gratiam  valuerit  inve- 
mre.  Johannes  vero  Londonia;  inventus,  a  Priore  fi mi- 
liter  abfolutus  eft.”  &c. 

Anno  1241. - “  Eodem  anno,  obijt  EadmunduS 

Cantuarienfis  Archiepifcopus,  in  Burgonia  lepultus  apud 
Punteniacum  ;  pro  cujus  meritis,  operatus  eft  Deus  mira- 
cula  multa,  tarn  ubi  Corpus  jacet,  quam  apud  Cateby  in 
Anglia,  ad  tact  11m  Pallij  quod  idem  Archiepifcopus  forori 
fua;  Moniali  de  Cateby  contulerat.  Et  quoniam  idem 
ante  receflum  fuum  Monachos  Cantuarienfes  excommu- 
nicaverat,  duo  Monachi  Rom  am  profecti  Litteras  Abfo- 
lutionis  ad  Abbatem  et  Priores  de  Duneftaple  et  de 
Sanclo-Albano  impetraverunt,  ne  pra;textu  Excommu- 
nicationis,  eorum  Eleftio  impediretur,  et  ne  eorum  Ec- 
clefia  a  fidelibus  vilior  haberctur  j  et  quod  facerent  Dif- 
penlationem  cum  Monachis,  fi  port  Sententiam,  contra 
Conlcientiam  celebrantes,  irregularitatem  coiitraxerint 
falvo  tamen  in  omnibus  jure  Archiepifcopi  iuccefluri. 
Et  licet  Archidiaconus  Cantuarienfis  in  principio  fe  ob* 
jecerit,  poftea  tamen  fe  lubtraxit,”  &c. 

Anno  1 24c. - “Eodem  anno,  quinto  Idus  Aprilis, 

mortuus  tft  bonse  memorise  Ricardus  de  Morins  quon¬ 
dam  Prior  de  Dunftaple.” 

Thus  far  1  have  taken  from  the  Annals  ;  I  (hall  now 
hint  at  fome  few  other  matters  relating  v  our  Prior 
Richard  out  of  (he.  Chartv.lar-y,  which  1  have  not  yet 
m 

H< 

only  by  the  nature  of  the  lcveral  Employments  above- 
mentioned,  but  by  fome  Notes  of  his  own  Hand,  (till  to 
be  feen  at  fol.  74. 

His  Hand  is  like  aFrench  Hand,  and  his  Name  looks 
like  a  French  Name ;  but  whether  he  was  a  Frenchman, 
or  deicended  of  a  French  Family,  I  know  not. 

He  leemeth  to  have  been  a  Man  of  a  griping  k  exatting 
temper,  which  often  brought  him  into  troublefome  fuits  of 
Law  with  theTownfmen,  k  othershisTenants&Neighbours. 

He  was  Prior  39  years,  and  what  by  grants  of  Cor- 
rodies,  Money,  Letters  of  Fraternity,  or  other  wavs,  he 
got  much  Land,  which  enlarged  the  Revenue,  and  alfo 
amplified  the  Monaftery  itfelf  with  divers  coftly  buildings; 

56.  In  his  time  notwith (landing  the  Canons  of  Coun¬ 
cils)  divers  of  the  Clergy  were  married  Men,  &  left  their 
Benefices  to  their  Children,  as  may  be  (ten  by  one  of  his 
Complaints  or  Accufations  about  Bradbourne-Church 
(44.)  which  beginneth  thus,“|(  luiiquerimus  Deo  &Vobis 
de  Roberto,  et  Willelmo,  ct  Henrici,  Perfona  k  Vicarijs 
de  Bradcburna,  quod  contra  Jufticiam  impediunt  Inftitu- 
tionem  noftram  in  Ecclefia  de  Bradeburna  &  Capellis 
fuis :  et  ideo  injufte,  quia  Robertus  filius  eft  Godefridi  qui 
proxime  miniftravit  in  eadem  Ecclefia,  et  imitator  paternc 
Incontinentie.  Henricus  fimiliter  filius  fuit  Johannis  Vicarij 
ejufdem  Ecclefia;,  et  Patri  fuo  in  medietate  fucceflit,  et  pa- 
terne  incontinentie  imitator  exiftit.  Willelmus  fimiliter  fo- 
cariam  publice  tenet,  canibus  venaticis  infiftens,  Tonfuram 
k  Clericale  officium  relinquens.”  This  Difpute  was  ter¬ 
minated  in  the  feventeenth  year  of  Pope  Innocent,  that 
is,  about  A.  D.  1214. 

I  mentioned  above  (fub  anno  1221,)  the  Trouble 
that  this  Prior  met  with,  at  the  forging  hands  of  Molly  the 
4  K  Son 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


3ro 


Num.  1885,  1886. 

Son  of  Brun  the  Jew ;  which  he  feemeth  partly  to  have 
deferred,  becaufe  he  brought  the  Jews  to  Dunftable,  and 
had  dealings  with  them  there  j  as  may  appear  by  thefe 
extracts  from  our  Chartulary. 

57.  ’’  Ricardus  Prior  de  Dunftaple  et  totus  ejufderri 

loci  Conventus - Sciatis  nos  concefiiffe  Flemengo  Ju- 

deo  de  London.  Sc  Leoni  filio  fuo,  et  fuis,  et  fervientibus 
eorum,  ire,  et  venire,  et  manere  in  Villa  de  Dunftaple, 
bene  Sc  in  pace,  quiete  &  honorifice.  Conceftimus 
fitiam  eifdem  Fleming  et  Leoni  omnes  Liberates  &  libe- 
ras  Confuetudines  ville  de  Dunftaple,  ficut  aliquis  de 
hoininibus  noitris  de  villa  eas  melius  et  plenius  habet. 
Nec  nos,  nec  Noftri  impediment um  facieinus  predidtos 
Judeis,  quin  lucrum  fuum  fideliter  faciant  in  villa  noftra, 
fecundum  confuetudinnm  Judeorum.  Et  nos  inanute- 
nebimus  predidtos  Judeos,  et  fuos,  et  eorum  fervientes, 
et  res  fuas  in  villa  rationabiliter,  ficut  faceremus  fi  de 
nobis  tenerent.  Pro  hac  autem  concelfione  noftra,  dabit 
nobis  predidtus  Flemeng  quamdiu  ipfe  moram  fecerit  in 
villa  Dunftaplie  lingulis  annis  duo  C.oclearia  argentea, 

quorum  utruinque  duodecim  denarios  ponderabit, - Si 

autem  predictus  Flaraengus  abfens  fuerit,  predidtus  Leo 
filius  ejus  eadem  coclearia  ejfdem  terminis  perfolvet.  Hec 
autem  Conceflio  et  Conventio  tota  vita  prtedidtorum 
Judeorum  durabit.”  35.  b. 

58.  •*  Ricardus  Prior  de  Dunftaple,  Sec. - Sciatis  nos 

de  Confenfu  tocius  Capituli  noftri  deuifl'e  Jofep  filio  Ro- 
geri  unius  danonici  Conredium, - Pro  hac  autem  Con¬ 

celfione  noftra  dedit  nobis  predidtus  Jofep  tredecim  Mar- 
cas  Argenti  ad  redimendum  illud  idem  Conredium  de 
manu  cujufdam  Judari,  cui  Willclinus  de  Hufleburna 
illud  impignoraverat,  et  qui  de  nobis,  jure  predicti  Wil- 
elmi  hoc  iplum  Conredium  percipere  iolebat.  Et  hoc 
quidem  fecimus  Confilio  Sc  Afi'enfu  Domni  W.  Lincoln- 
ienfis  Epifcopi,  ut  fie  Bona  Ecclefie  noftre,  cum  aliter 
non  poflemus,  de  manu  Judei  liberaremus.  ibid. 

59.  “  Willelmus  de  Hufleburna - Sciatis  me  red- 

didifle — Priori  Sc  Conventui  de  Dunftaplia  totam  prje- 

bendam  meam  quam  idem  mihi  concdlerant, - Cariis 

etiam  quas  fuper  predidtis  de  predidtis  Canonicis  habui, 

in  manus  eorum  omnes  refignavi, - Ouare  volo  Sc 

concedo  quod  predicti  Canonici  tarn  predidtam  Preben- 

dam  quam  predidtam  Terram - Pro  hac  autem  dimif- 

fione  &  quieta  clamatione.  et  prefentis  Carte  confirma- 
tione,  predicti  Prior  Sc  Conventus  adquietaverunt  me 
erga  Flamengum  &  Bendinum,  et  Aaron,  et  Jacobum,  et 
Leonem,  Judeos ;  de  fexaginta  &  decern  Marcis.  Et 
fiquis  Judeus  vel  Judea  occafione  alicujus  Invadiationis 
per  me  fadte,  de  predidtis  Prebenda  vel  Terra,  predidtos 
Priorem  Sc  Conventum  vexare  voluerit,  ego  eos  per 
omnia  adquietabo.” 

Many  other  of  the  Adtions  of  this  Prior  Richard 
may  be  colledted  from  this  Chartulary,  which  I  lhall 
omit  for  the  prefent,  thinking  that  what  is  already  done 
may  fuffice. 

1886. 

A  paper-Book  in  fol.  (bought  of  me)  firft  defigned  by 
the  Burgo-mafter  Chriltopher  von  Stcrnfee  of  Harlin¬ 
gen  in  Iriefland,  for  a  Debt-book  ;  as  may  appear  by 
the  Alphabet  at  the  beginning,  and  by  what  is  written, 
in  the  ILgh-German  Language.  j. 

But  this  purpofe  being  changed,  it  was  employed  to 
a  better  ufe,  the  fame  man  writing  therein  a  Copie  of  the 
Annals  or  Regifter  of  the  Province  of  Frizeland,  from 
the  Year  ....  to  the  Year  ....  What  care  was  taken 
m  compiling  thefe  Annals,  by  the  States  of  the  Province, 
may  appear  by  the  Preface  thereof,  which  at  my  intreaty 
Mr.  John  Drummond  tranflated  from  the  Low-Dutch  into 
Englilh,  and  is  (with  fome  few  Amendments  only)  this 
which  followeth  :  1 

“  The  Preamble  of  an  Aft  made  by  the  Common 
Confent  of  Frizeland,  about  making  a  Regifter-  and 
what  perfons  were  appointed  to  compile  the  fame. 

“  I11  the  Name  of  God,  and  of  his  Divine  Nativity  the 


Num.  1886*  1887. 

1528th  year,  on  the  27th  day  of  February,  in  the  Town 
ol  Leeuwarden,  it  is  deliberated  at  an  ordinary  Diet  & 
general  Convention  of  the  Prelates,  Clergy,  Nobles, 
Gentlemen  &  Commons,  Cities  &  Inhabitants  of  the 
Province  of  Frizeland.  Forafmuch  as  in  the  Affairs  of 
hrizeland  &  places  adjacent,  many  Tranfadtions  have  hap* 
psned  in  our  times,  more  remarkable  than  have  hitherto 
palled  in  the  Memory  ol  Man :  And  whereas  in  different 
Diets,  many  Matters  have  been  treated  on,  which  hare 
not  as  yet  been  entered  into  any  Public  Regifter  :  And 
whereas  out  of  natural  Inclination  ik  prudent  forecaft,  it 
is  Satisfactory,  Profitable,  &  Neceffary,  to  know  &  keep 
in  memory  Matters  Sc  Tranfaftions  pafled  for  an  Example. 
And  fince,  next  to  the  misfortune  of  Sicknefs,  and  the 
incertainty  of  Mans  Life,  nothing  can  be  more  ufeful  & 
fatisfadtory  than  to  preferve  in  Remembrance  the  Words 
Sc  Deeds  of  Men.  It  is  found  beneficial  Sc  neceffary  to 
caufe  an  Anna!  or  Regifter  to  be  compofed.  Towards 
the  doing  of  which,  the  States  &  Votes  beforementioned 
have  defired  &  appointed  in  particular,  Kempo  van  Mar- 
tena,  Doctor  Knight  Sc  Counfellor  here  in  this  Court  of 
Frizeland,  as  confiding  in  Ins  Wifdom  Sc  Experience  of 
all  matters  puffed  fince  the  Year  1498,  touching  the  In¬ 
come  of  the  'Faxes  of  the  Saffes  to  the  Year  1  540,  raifed 
by  any  Adt  during  the  Refidenee  of  the  Lady  Maty 
Queen  of  Hungary  in  the  Netherlands,  the  yeare  1 549, 
included ;  particularly  what  may  relate  to  the  I, anil  & 
People  of  Frizeland.  Alfo  to  recolledt,  difeover,  fett  in 
Order,  &  regifter  the  chief  &  molt  remarkable  occur¬ 
rences  which  have  happened  without  tiie  Land  of  Frize¬ 
land,  which  may  ferve  for  Example,  Ufe,  and  Improve¬ 
ment  ;  and  to  bring  the  fame  tu  be  examined  Sc  autho¬ 
rized  by  Gerrolt  van  Herema  alfo  his  Majefties  Coun- 
ctllor,  Mr.  Seyts  Tzyarda,  Jarich  de  Hama,  Wychis  van 
Canmunga,  Sc  Jonge  Jane  he  Douwena.  And  whereas  by 
divers  Impediments  the  Perfons  aferefaid  could  not  per¬ 
forin  the  faid  Orders,  the  General  Slates  of  Frizeland  in 
a  Diet  holden  at  Lceuwairden  on  the  1 8th  of  April  in  the 
Year  1539,  did  again  order  Sc  appoint  Mr.  Jarich  & 
Siche  van  Ethama,  Syts  Fyaerda,  Aebe  Syouxina,  and 
Janche  Douwema  ;  and  upon  another  Diet  held  at  I.eeu- 
wairden  the  fourth  of  December,  Syfbrandt  van  Roorda 
was  joyned  to  the  Perfons  aforefaid,  to  revife,  corredt. 
Sc  authenticate,  or  caufe  to  be  authenticated  this  prefent 
Regifter.  And  it  is  to  be  und  *ltood,  that  the  Five  Per¬ 
fons  abovementioned  fliould  take  to  iheir  Affiftance  the 
Councel lours  of  Frizeland,  namely  Mr.  Albert  Aernfina, 
Doctor  Renich  van  Bourmania,  Dodtor  Hedtor  van  Hox- 
wier,  and  Pieter  van  de  Hama,  by  them  to  be  examined  Sc 
approved  jointly  with  the  others.  To  all  and  every  one  of 
whom,  the  States  Sc  Voices  aforefaid  (as  trufting  in  their 
Difcretion  Sc  Experience)  do  order,  appoint,  &  give  full 
Power,  to  examine  Sc  to  approve  of  the  fameas  they  lhall  find 
meet ;  that  the  fame  may  be  carried  on  Sc  continued  for  an 
Example,  &  for  the  Ufe,  Advantage,  and  Information  of 
our  polteritv.” 

This  valuable  Book  beginneth  with  the  Year  1498,  Sc 
endeth  with  the  Year  1545,  both  abovementioned. 

1887. 

A  paper-Book  in  fol.  (bought  of  me)  and  written  as  ap- 
peareth  by  fol.  167.  (according  to  the  new  Numera¬ 
tion)  by  Sir  JohnCocheVicar  ofStockIand-Gaunt,A.D. 

1 545>  containing  his  Collection  of  Receipts  &  Medi- 
cuics  Phyfical  &Chirurgical,  6cc.  to  which  divers  others 
have  been  added  by  thofe,  who  after  his  time  owned 
the  Book,  a  lift  ol  whom  may  beleen  in  fol.  167.  b. 

I  lhall  choofe  to  deferibe  it  more  particularly,  in  the 
manner  following, 

1.  The  Vertue  &  Degrees  of  fome  Herbs.  1. 

2.  Tra flatus  pnefati  Domini  Joannis  Coche,  ut  vide- 

tur,  de  Thcoria  ik  Practica  Medicine.  2. 

3.  Tractatus  mirabilis  Aquarum  ;  quern  compofuit 

Magifter  Petrus  Hifpanus,  ex  naturali  induftria  fui  Intel- 
lectus,  manu  ejufdem  Joannis  Coche.  46. 

4.  Receipts 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae; 


Num.  1887,  1888. 

4.  Receipts  of  Waters,  added  by  John  Coch,  to  the 

laft  Treatife.  55. 

5.  Another  Collection  of  Receipts,  of  Phyfic,  Chi- 

rurgery,  &c.  partly  in  Englifh  &  partly  in  Latin,  by  the 
fame  John  Coch.  58. 

6.  How  Mannys  Nature  is  chaunged  from  on,e  Com- 
plexcion  into  another;  by  the  fame  John  Coch.  136. 

7.  Ad  cognofcendum  omnia  Ulcera  five  Apoftemata 

de-foris,  cujus  generis  five  qualitatis  fuerint ;  in  Englifh, 
by  the  fame.  142.  b. 

8.  De  Herbis  colligendis  ;  in  Englifh,  by  the  fame. 

143* 

9.  Tabula  Salerni ;  manu  ejufdem.  1  _> 4. 

10.  Of  the  Virtues  of  Herbs,  by  the  fame.  151. 

1  v.  The  Tretyfe  of  the  4  Elements  with  the  7  Planetts, 
and  the  12  Signes,  with  there  Qualiteys,  Naturys,  & 
Difpoficions,  the  which  is  ful  neceflary  &  expedient  to  be 
knowen  for  many  caufes  concernyng  the  dilpoficion  of 
mannys  Byrthe,  Sc  the  Miniftracion  of  Medicines  in  tynre 
of  Sicnes  ;  and  to  know  the  Tymes,  Dayes,  6c  Houres, 
which  be  gode  or  evylle  to  do  any  thyng  yn  &c.  by  the 
fame.  155. 

Pie  writeth  (fol.  162.  b.  where  he  is  upon  knowing 
the  Wether  by  chonge  of  the  <t  )  that  part  of  this  TraCt 
is  taken  from  the  work  of  John  de  Barba  de  Monte  Pef- 
fulano,  as  John  Bolte  t reflated  the  fame  owt  of  Latyn 
into  Englyfh.  And  at  the  end,  is  this  Rubric  by  the 
farm  Hand,  ‘  Et  ficinX~po  valeatis,  1545,^  14  dieMenfis 
Aprilis,  ex  induftria  Johannis  Coch,  Vicarij  de  Stoclond- 
Gaunte.’ 

12.  Another  Collection  or  Sett  of  Medicines  &  Re¬ 
ceipts  chiefly  Chirurgical  by  the  fame  Hand.  168.  to  262. 

It  may  be  noted,  that  all  along,  in  thefe  Collections, 
the  feveral  Medicines  are  ranked  under  certain  Heads  ; 
and  fpace  lef  for  inferting  more,  as  they  fhould  come 
to  Pland.  This  work  hath  been  performed  by  thole  who, 
in  procefs  of  time,  caine  be  owners  of  ;he  Book,  and 
who  by  the  pains  they  have  taken,  did  fufficiently  manifeft 
their  Efteem  of  it. 

I  am  not  infenfible  of  many  things  therein,  which 
may  be  impertinent  enough  at  this  time,  wherein  we  find 
a  new  PtaCtife  eftablifhed  :  but  notwithflanding  them, 
I  am  pretty  fure,  that  many  ufeful  Hints  may  be  herein 
found,  both  as  to  Phyfic  and  Surgery,  which  if  revived 
might  redound  to  the  public  good. 

1888. 

A  paper-Book  in  fol.  the  Title  whereof  feemeth  to  be  of 

Sir  SimondsD’Ewes’s  fland-w'riting,  in  thefe  words, 

‘A  Journall  of  the  Parliament  holden  at  Weftminfter  in 

anno  35  Regina:  Elizabeths,  A°.  D~ni  T592.’ 

In  comparing  this  with  Sir  Simonds  D’Ewes  his 
Journals  of  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Parliaments  in  Print,  I 
find  it  to  be  often  therein  cited,  as  particularly  in  the 
places  following. 

— and  a  Speech  ufed  by  Her  Majefly  Her  Self  at 
the  Conclufion  of  the  Parliament,  which  alfo  is  fupplied 
out  of  a  certain  Journall  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  very 
elaborately  taken  by  an  Anonymous.  456.  col.  1. 

Nota,  That  which  is  fet  down  touching  the  coming 
up  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons — is  not  found  in  the  Ori¬ 
ginal  Journal-Book  of  the  Uppcr-Houfe,  but  is  here  in- 
lerted  out  of  the  Original  Journal-Book  of  the  Houfe  of 
Commons,  and  partly  out  of  another  very  exaCt  Journal 
of  that  Houfe  which  was  in  my  Cuftody,  being  very 
diligently  oblerved  &  fet  down  by  fome  Anonymus,  who 
was  a  Member  of  the  faid  Houfe  during  this  Parliament. 

458.  col.  2. 

Nota,  That  thefe  feveral  interlocutory  Speeches  of 
the  Speaker  &  the  Lord-Keeper,  are  not  found  in  the 
Original  Journal-Books  of  the  Upper  Houfe,  or  the 
Houfe  of  Commons,  but  are  fupplied  out  of  a  very  elabo¬ 
rate  Journal  of  the  paffages  of  the  faid  Commons  Houfe, 
taken  by  fome  anonymous  Member  thereof  this  Parlia¬ 
ment.  460.  col.  2. 


Num.  1888. 

Note - Partly  out  of  another  very  exaCt  Journal 

of  that  Houfe,  which  was  in  my  Cuftody,  being  very 
diligently  obferved  and  fet  down  by  fome  A  ndnymus  who 
was  a  Member  of  the  faid  Houfe  during  this  Parliament, 
out  of  which  the  faid  Speeches  were  writtefi  almost 
verbatim.  467.  coll  1. 

Which  Paffage,  as  alfo  divers  other  particular  Spee¬ 
ches,  being  not  found  in  the  Original  Journal-Book  of 
the  Houfe  of  Commons,  are  fupplied  out  of  another 
Journal  of  the  fame  Houfe  very  exactly  &  elaborately 
taken  by  an  Anonymus,  being  a  Member  of  the  fame  at 
this  Parliament.  468.  col.  j. 

Nota,  That  none  of  thefe  particulars — are  fett  down 
in  the  Original-Journal  book  ol  the  Houfe  of  Commons, 
but  are  abftraCted  out  of  another  Journal  of  the  fame 
Houfe  taken  by  an  anonymous  Member  of  the  fame 
during  the  Parliament.  470.  col.  1. 

- - and  therefore  that  which  followeth,  is  fupplied 

out  of  that  anonymous  Journal  mentioned  at  the  begin 
ing- -  ibid.  col.  2. 

Nota,  That  this  is  all  that  is  found  in  the  Original 
Journal-Book  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  touching  thefe 
Speeches  ;  which,  becaufe  they  contain  many  excellent 
Paffages  concerning  the  Hiftory  of  thefe  times  of  Her 
Ma jelly,  I  have  therefore  fupplied  at  large  (Sir  Edward 
Stafford's  Speech  only  excepted,  which  was  wanting  there 
alfo)  out  of  a  very  elaborate  Journal  of  the  fame  Houfe, 
taken  by  fome  anonymous  Member  thereof  at  this  Par¬ 
liament.  471.  col.  2. 

Nota,  That  there  is  no  other  Speech  touching  this 
Bufinefs  particularly  &  fully  fet  down  in  the  original 
Journal-Book  ol  the  Houfe  of  Commons  ;  and  therefore 
thofe  Speeches  which  follow,  are  fupplied  out  of  that 
anonymous  Journal  of  the  fame  Houfe,  kc.  474.  col.  2. 

After  this  Speech  of  Mr.  Bacons,  there  is  no  par¬ 
ticular  mention  of  any  other  Speech  which  was  fpoken 
at  this  time  touching  this  Bufinefs  in  the  original  Journal- 
Book  of  the  Houle  of  Commons ;  and  therefore  thefe 
Speeches  which  follow  are  fupplyed  out  of  another  ano¬ 
nymous  Journal  of  the  Paffages  of  this  Parliament,  &c. 

477.  col.  2. 

Now,  in  the  next  Place,  there  enfiieth  the  Relation 
of  her  Majeffies  lending  for  the  Speaker,  and  of  the 
Mefl'age  which  (lie  gave  him  in  Command  to  deliver  to 
the  Houfe  ;  all  which  he  declared  at  large  this  day,  as 
it  is  very  elaborately  k  fully  let  down  in  the  anonymous 

Journal, - and  therefore  it  is  wholly  inferted  out  of  it; 

and  the  rather,  becaufe  it  is  almolt  wholly  wanting  in  the 
original  Journal -Book  itfelf,  there  being  one  whole  blank 
Page  and  a  good  Part  of  another  Page  left  unwritten  wiih 
Intention  doubtlefs  at  firft  to  have  inferted  it,  although 
it  was  afterwards  very  negligently  omitted  by  Mr.  Fulk 
Onflow  Clerk  of  the  faid  Houfe  of  Commons.  478.  col.  1 . 

- All  which  (fome  alterations  only  excepted  for 

Order  and  Explanations  fake)  are  herein  inferted  out  of 
the  faid  anonym  ais  Journal,  See.  479.  col.  2. 

Nota,  That  thefe  Speeches  are  all  tranlcribcd  out  6‘f 
the  faid  anonymous  Journal.  480.  col.  2. 

'llius  far  out  of  the  before-mentioned  anonymous 
Journal,  touching  the  aforefaid  Quellion,  how  far  an 
outlawed  Man  might  be  a  Member  of  the  Houfe. 

482.  col.  2, 

- are  either  very  imperfectly  fet  down,  or  wholly 

omitted  in  the  original  Journal-Book  it  felf,  and  are' 
therefore  fupplied  out  of  the  laid  anonymous  Journal. 

483.  col.  2. 

- All  which  faid  Speeches  being  either  very 

fhortly  and  imperfectly  fet  down  in  the  original  Journal- 
Book  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  or  wholly  omitted,  & 
for  which  three  intire  Pages  and  more,  are  left  blank 
to  have  inlcrted  them  (in  which  are  fet  down  the 
Names  only  of  fome  of  thofe  that  fpake  them)  therefore, 
they  are  fupplied  out  of  the  aforefaid  anonymous  Journal 
very  elaborately  taken  bv  fome  Member  of  the  faid  Houfe 
during  this  Parliament/  487.  col.  2. 

7  Nota, 


112 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Kum.  1888. 

Nota,  That  there  is  no  more  found  of  this  Days 
Paflages  in  the  original  Journal-Book  of  the  Houfe  of 
Commons,  although  there  be  almoft  two  Pages  left  blank 
by  M  f.  Fulk  Onflow,  at  this  time  Clerk  of  the  faid  Houfe, 
with  intention  doubtlefs,  at  the  firft,  to  have  inferted 
them  ;  and  therefore  they  are  very  largely  &  fully  fup- 
plied  out  of  the  aforefaid  anonymous  Journal,  very  ela¬ 
borately  taken  by  fome  Member  of  the  fame  Houfe, 
durni'r  this  Parliament,  &c.  489.001.2. 

Nota,  That  there  is  no  more  of  this  days  Paflages 
found  i.  the  original  Journal-Book  of  the  Houfe  of  Com¬ 
fit  ns,  although  there  followed  divers  Speeches  upon  the 
for  egoing  Motion  of  Sir  Thomas  Heneage — concerning  i 
the  great  bufinefs  of  Supply  to  be  given  to  Her  Majefty  ; 
all  which  are  therefore  inferted  out  ol  that  forefaid  ano¬ 
nymous  J  urnali  taken  by  fome  Member  of  the  faid  Houfe 
during  this  Parliament,  which  are  there  fet  down  'with 
very  little  alteration  to  them)  in  manner  k  form  follow- 
,ng-  491.  col.  2. 

But  what  thofe  alterations  were  upon  w'hich  the 
old  Bill  :  againft  Recufants)  was  rejected  k  a  new  Bill 
framed,  are  wot  fet  down  in  the  original  Journal-Book 
itfelf ;  and  therefore,  becaufe  it  is  a  matter  of  no  final  1 
Conlequence,  and  may  alfo  be  of  fome  TJfe,  I  have  infer¬ 
ted  the  particulars  thereof,  out  of  the  aforefaid  anony¬ 
mous  Journal,  &c.  497.  col.  2. 

- which  Speeches  containing  in  them  matter  of 

good  confequence,  are  wholly  omitted  in  the  original 
Journal-Book  it  felf,  and  are  therefore  fupplied  out  of  the 
the  aforefaid  anonymous  Journal,  &c.  500.  col.  1 . 

- which  faid  Speech,  containing  divers  matters 

of  good  moment  in  it,  although  it  be  omitted  in  the  ori¬ 
ginal  Journal-Book  it  felf,  yet  I  have  thought  good  to 
fupply  it  out  of  the  aforefaid  anonymous  Journal,  &c. 

504.  col.  2. 

After  which,  there  followed  divers  long  Speeches  &  1 

Arguments  on  both  fides,  both  with  the  Bill  k  againft 
the  Bill;  which  faid  Speeches  being  omitted  in  the  original  | 
Journal  Book  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  are  in  refpedt 
of  the  great  weight  of  this  matter  touching  Aliens  now 
controverted,  fupplied  out  of  the  aforefaid  anonymous 
Journal,  &c.  503.  col.  <• 

Nota,  This  is  all  which  is  found  in  the  original 
Journal-Book  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  of  this  days 
Paflages ;  and  therefore  there  being  an  excellent  Vote 
or  Rcfolution  of  the  Houfe  touching  the  Addition  k 
Amendments  of  Bills  after  their  pafling  of  either  Houfe, 
ftt  down  in  the  often-before-recited  anonymous  Journal 
—I  have  thought  good  to  have  it  inferted,  Ac.  512.  col.  a. 

Which  fhort  remembrance  of  this  excellent  Prece¬ 
dent — is  all  that  is  found  in  the  original  Journal  Book  it 
feif  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons:  and  therefore — I  have 
Caufed  it  to  be  t;  mferibed  at  large  out  ot  the  often  before 
■  514.  col.  1. 

I  purpofely  omit  divers  other  citations  made  by  Sir 
Simonds  D’Ewes  from  the  prefent  MS.  but  do  obferve, 
that  1 .  It  was  of  exceeding  great  ufe  to  him,  in  compiling 
his  Narra  ion  of  the  Occurrences  pafling  in  this  Parlia¬ 
ment,  as  being  h;s  only  original  for  a  great  part  thereof. 

2.  1  hat,  notwithftanding  his  owning  the  fame  to  be  an  ! 
exact  Journal,  he  hath  not  copied  the  fame  exadtly,  but 
abridged  &  varied  from  it  in  fuch  phiccs  as  he  thought 
wanted  amend  mem ;  as  may  be  feen  by  comparing 
the  fame  with  his  Manufcript  Journal  in  the  Library! 

3-  That  Mr.  Bowes  (who  borrowed  the  faid  Manufcript- 
Joumal  <  jhby  D’Ewes,  an  pri  it  wi  hout 

aiking  his  Confent,  as  Sr.  Simonds  D’Ewes  and  his  Lady 
more  than  once  aflured  me)  hath  ufed  the  fame  Liberty 
in  his  Print,  as  old  Sir  Simonds  did  in  compiling  his  Ma¬ 
nufcript  ;  and  what  was  worfe,  hath  all  along  nepledted 
the  keeping  up  to  the  Alteration  of  the  Hands  in  his  Print, 
as  is  ufed  in  the  Manufcript,  whereby  Sir  Simonds  plainly 
diftir.guifhed  what  was  fa:d  f-om  Authority,  from  that 
which  was  only  of  his  own  Hand. 


Num.  1 889— 1  891. 

1889. 

A  Book  in  fol.  (bought  of  me)  and  entituled, 

‘  Obfervations  Political  &  Civil,  by  XV.  B.’  whom  fome 
deem  to  be  Sir  William  Bofwell. 

1  890. 

ABook  in  fol.  bound  in  red  Turkey-Leather,  and  ftamped 

with  the  Armes  of  the  late  King  James  11.  On  the  back 

it  beareth  this  Title,  ‘  Inventory  of  his  Majefties 

Goods  ;  ’  and  confifteth  of  the  following  Trails,  viz. 

1.  An  Inventory  of  his  Majefties  Goods  in  the  Stand¬ 
ing-Wardrobe  at  Whiie-hall ;  dated  15  February  1688. 
and  figned  by  Edward  Rogers  Wardrobe-keeper.  1. 

2.  Wardrobe-Goods  in  the  Charge  of  Philip  Kynner- 

fley  Yeoman  of  His  Majefties  removeing  Wardrobe,  the 
17th  day  of  March  1687-8.  8. 

ft  his  is  figned  by  the  fame  Phil.  Kynnerfley. 

3.  An  Inventory  of  all  the  Goods  that  are  now  be¬ 

longing  to  His  Majefties  Standing  Wardrobe  at  Hampton- 
Court,  now  in  the  Charge  of  Mr.  James  Marriott  Keeper 
thereof.  !S, 

This  is  figned  by  the  fame  Ja.  Marriott. 

4.  A  true  k  perfett  Inventory  of  all  k  fingular  the 

Kings  Majefties  Wardrobe-Stuffs  in  the  Charge  &  Safe¬ 
keeping  of  Thomas  Hall,  Keeper  of  His  Majefties  Standing 
W ardrobe within  His  MajeftiesHonour  of  Windfor-Cafl  le. 
Surveyed  &  Inventoried  this  26th  day  of  March  1688. 
by  me  ft’homas  Hall.  25. 

This  is  alfo  figned  by  the  fame  Tho.  Hall. 

5.  An  inventory  of  the  Kings  Goods  at  Newmarket. 

This  is  figned  by  Geo  Mann.  3 1 . 

6.  An  Inventory  of  His  Majefties  Goods  in  Ludlow- 
Caftle,  furniflied  out  of  His  Majefties  Greate  Wardrobe, 
by  Warrants  from  the  Right  Honourable  the  I.ord  Chara- 
berlaine  of  His  Majefties  Houfehold;  nowin  the  Cuftody 
of  Walter  Lloyd  Keeper  of  the  Wardrobe  there.  33. 

This  is  figned  by  the  faid  Walter  Lloyd. 

7.  An  Inventory  of  all  his  Majefties  Jewells ;  Gold- 

Guilt,  k  White  Plate  ;  which  are  either  in  the  Charge  & 
Cuftody  of  His  Majefties  Jewell  houfe,  or  in  the  Charge 
of  the  aforefaid  Office,  k  in  the  Cuftody  of  other  Per- 
fons  k  Offices.  'Taken,  19  March  1687.  34. 

This  is  figned  by  the  proper  Officers. 

8.  A  Lift  of  His  Majefties  Pictures  in  Whitehall  45. 

I  am  afraid  that  neither  this,  nor  the  reft  that  follow 
are  always  to  be  relied  upon  as  to  the  Characters  or  De- 
feriptions  of  them  ;  or  as  to  the  Names  of  thofe  Mafters 
who  are  faid  to  have  painted  them. 

9.  Another  Lift  of  certain  of  his  Majefties  Pictures ; 

but  which  doth  not  lltew  where,  or  in  whofe  Cuftody 
they  then  were.  68. 

10.  Pictures  of  the  Kings  in  the  Queene-Dowagers 

Cuftody.  _  69. 

1 1.  Pictures  in  XVindfor-Caftle.  72. 

12.  Pictures  at  Hamptort-Court.  76. 

1 3.  A  Lyft  of  His  Majefties  Pictures  (that  were  not  the 

late  Kings)  in  Windfor-Caftle.  82. 

1 4.  Pictures  of  his  Majefties  in  Whitehall,  that  were 

not  the  late  Kings.  83.  b. 

15.  Another  lift  of  Pictures,  without  a  Title  j  being 

( perhaps)  thofe  of  his  Majefties  Pictures  in  Hanipton- 
Court  which  did  not  belong  to  K.  Charles  11.  84.  b. 

16.  Ilis  Majefties  Pictures  at  St.  James.  85.  b. 

17.  A  Lift  of  the  Statues  in  Marble  ;  and  Figures  in 

BralTe  ;  in  Whitehall.  87. 

This  is  figned  by  Will.  Chiffinch ;  who  feemeth 
alfo  to  have  been  the  perfonwho  drew  the  abovementioa- 
ed  Lifts  of  the  Pictures. 

1891. 

A  Book  in  fol.  confiding  of  two  main  parts.  Vizt. 

1 .  The  perfpeCtive  of  Hanfe  Lencker  a  Citizen  of  Nu- 
renbergh ;  compoled  in  the  German  Language,  and 
printed  at  the  fame  Place,  A.  D.  1571. 

The  remaining  part  of  the  book  is  Manufcript,  being, 

2.  A  Treatife 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


3*3 


Num.  1891,  1 S92. 

2.  A  Treatifeof  Gauging,  in  the  German  Language  ; 

with  Schemes  &  Figures.  30. 

3.  A  Treatifeof  Perfpedtive,  grounded  on  fome  Geo¬ 

metrical  Precepts  ;  by  the  fame  hand,  &  in  the  fame 
Language.  _  7°- 

This  is  not  finilhed  ;  for  moft  of  the  Figures  have 
never  been  inferted. 

1892. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  min.  a  binis  Librarijs  oplimd 
fcriptus,  plurimorumq;  artificum  labore  (infertis 
etiam  nonnullis,  ex  alijs  Codicibus  avulfis,  Tabulis) 
inluminatus.  Argumentum  Libri  ell  plane  Theolo- 
gicum  ;  Titulus  vero  non  apparet.  Ktiufmcdi  Codices 
vulgariter  Manualia  Precum  nuncupantur,  Anglice 
Primers :  verum  hujufee  Content  a,  fic  fe  Ordine  ha- 
bent. 

1.  Tabula,  in  quA  coloribus  adumbratm  cernuntur 

Domini  noftri  Jefu  Chrifti  Captio,  Flagellado,  Coro- 
natio,  Crucis  bajulatio,  Crucifixio,  deinortui  adoratio, 
Sepultura,  Refurredlio.  1  •  b. 

2.  De  viginti-quatuor  milibus  annorum  Indulgentiae 
per  Summos  Pontifices  concefforum,  Verfus  refonantes. 

2. 

3.  Alia  Rubrica,  in  qua  traditur,  quod  Calixtus  Papa 

in.  dedit  omnibus  vere  confeffis  &  contritis,  quociens 
coram  Ymagine  Pietatis  (i.  e.  the  Image  of  Pity  ;  feu  J. 
C.  crucifixi)  llexis  genibus  dicunt  Quinque  “  Pater 
Nofter,”  &c.  Indulgencias  Viginti  Milium  &  Viginti  qua- 
tuor  annorum,  cum  diebus  Viginti-tribus.  ibid. 

4.  Quod  quicunque  devote infpexerit  haec  arma  D.  N. 
J.  C.  (pracedentem  for  itaninnuit  Tabulam  (habebit  Sex 
milia  755  annos  Indulgencie,  cum  quatuor  diebus.  ibid. 

5.  Summa  totalis  annorum  Indulgentiae,  a  Summis 
Pontifkibus  concefforum;  (nempe  52779  anni)  cum  23 
diebus. 

6.  Orationes  ad  Jefum  Crucifixum.  ibid. 

7.  Oratio  feripta  in  uno  lapide  in  Ecclefia  Sandti  Jo- 

hannis  Laterenenfis  in  Roma.  Et  conceduntur  omnibus 
illam  dicentibus  femel  in  die,  devote  genu  fledtando  Odties 
Centum  millia  annorum  Indulgenciarum  propter  Peccata 
mortalia,  et  pro  tempore  pradiclo.  _  3- 

8.  Oratio  ad  B.  V.  Mariam  cujus  hmc  Rubrica,  Six¬ 

tus  Papa  Quartus  conceffit  cuilibet  devote  dicenti  Oraci- 
onem  infra-feriptam,  Undecim  milia  annorum  Indulgen¬ 
ciarum  pro  qualibet  vice.  3.  b. 

9.  Oracio,  cui  praponitur  hasc  Rubrica,  ‘  Quicunque 

devote  dixerit  hanc  Oracionem,  dabuntur  ei  a  Papa  Jo- 
hanne  Secundo  Sex  milia  &  fexcenta  anni,  et  fexaginta 
dies  Indulgenciarum.  4. 

10.  Altera,  cum  hac:  Sex  Milia  fexcenti  annorum, 
et  totidem  dies  Indulgenciarum,  huic  dabuntur.  ibid. 

1 1 .  Oracio,  ad  D.  N.  J.  Chriftum ;  cum  ipfius  effigie 

in  littera  principali.  4-  b. 

12.  De  Sandta  Maria,  et  de  Sandto  Johanne  Evange- 

lifta,  Oracio.  5.  b. 

13.  Ad  bonum  Angelum,  Oracio.  6.  b. 

14.  De  Sandta  Maria,  Antiphona.  7. 

15.  De  eadem,  Oracio.  7.  b. 

’  16.  Tabula,  quit  vividis  coloribus  depingitur  Nativi- 

tas  Domini  noftri  Jefu  Chrifti,  cum  beata  Virgine  ado- 
rante,  beftijs  circumftantibus,  angelifq;  in  Ccelo  canen- 
tibus.  >  .  8,  b. 

Pidtura  margines  egregie  ornantur  imaginibus  flo- 
rum ;  put&,  Caryophyllorum,  Carduorum,  Calendula;, 
Lupini,  Legurainis,  &c.  Flas  dum  attentius  afpiciam, 
non  poffum  quin  Pictoris  ingenium  vehementer,  mirer. 
Nam,  inter  alia,  ponuntur  nonnulla  quafi  fortuito  (ut  de 
Infcriptione  qua:  legitur  in  gloria  circa  Caput  B.  V.  M. 
omnino  taceam)  quae  ad  certam  quandam  animi  Inten- 
tionem  annuere  videantur.  Rubra;  fcilicet  Rofa;  tres 
flores  (quos  Domus  Lancaftrienfis  Principum  Clientes 
olim  geltiebant)  heic  in  fummirate  pagina:,  perinde  atque 
alius,,  in  ad  dexteram,  ora,  folijs  fuis  fpoliatus,  depidti 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1892. 

confpiciuntur.  Ima  etiam  parte  apparent  diverfi  generis 
Liliorum  flores,  ad  Regnum  Galliarum  ceu  ad  quofdam 
e  Regibus  ejufdem  forte  annuens.  Quin  et  in  ftniftro 
tabula;  latere,  habentur  trium  humanorum  craniorum 
imagines  (Lancaftrienfis  familite  Reges  Henricos  iv.  v.  & 
vi.  ft  locus  fit  conjedtura,  referemes)  cum  avibus  pug- 
nantibus,  aut  hinc  et  inde  difperfis,  quibus  innuere  vi- 
detur  artifex  lethifera  inter  Lancaftrienfes  ct  Eboracenfes 
Principes  bella,  ac  fatalem  fuperftitum  Nobilium  difper- 
fionem  aut  captivitatem. 

Sequuntur, 

17.  Quindecim  Orationes  ad  D.  N.  J.  Chriftum,  a 

Littera  five  Interjeclione  O  incipientes  ;  quas  B.  Brigitta 
compofuiffe  fertur.  9* 

18.  Paflio  domini  noftri  Jhefu  X~pi  fecundum  Johan- 

nem.  13* 

Prope  principalem  literam,  datur  piclura  captionem 
Salvatoris  exhibens. 

19.  Oratio  ad  Jefum  Chriftum.  17. 

20.  De  Veronica,  ut  dicitur ;  feu  impreflione  Vultus 
Salvatoris  noftri  panniculo  impreffa,  Hymnus  cumprece; 
et  pidfura  ejufdem  vividioribus  coloribus  expreffa.  ibid. 

2r.  Hiftoria  Jefu  Chrifti  comprehenft  atq;  funibus 
ligati,  coram  Pilato  ftantis ,  calamo  Germanico  repr^e- 
fentata.  18.  b. 

22.  Lectiones  perpaucte,  de  fmgulis  Evangelijs  fump- 

tze.  19. 

23.  Jeronimi  de  Laude  Dei,  fuper  Pfalterium,  Pra:- 

facio  ;  cum  ejufdem  effigie,  quali-quali,  in  principali 
littera.  21. 

24.  Cantionis  Pfalmorum  laudes.  23. 

25.  Preces  nonnulla;.  24. 

26.  Calendarium  nitidiffime  feriptum  &  inluminatum  ; 

in  quo,  prater  negotia  fmgulis  menfibus  propria,  et  figna 
duodecim  Zodiaci,  picturis  fatis  elegantibus  adumbrata  : 
memorantur  e  Sandtis  Britannicis,  Wlftanus  Epifcopus 
&  Confeffor,  Ofburga  virgo,  Cedda  Epifcopus  et  Con- 
feffor,  Edwardus  Rex  &  Confeffor,  Ricardus  Epifcopus 
&  Confeffor,  Alphegus  Epifcopus  et  Martyr,  Joannes  de 
Beverlaco,  Dunftanus  Epifcopus,  Aldelinus  (redtius  Al- 
delmus)  Epifcopus,  Tranflatio  S  Edmundi,  Tranflatio  S. 
Ricardi,  Tranflatio  S.  Edwardi  Regis,  S.  Albanus  An- 
glorum  Prothomartir,  Etheldreda  Virgo,  Tranflatio  S. 
Thome  Martiris,  Tranflatio  S.  Swithuni,  Knelmus  Rex 
&  Martir,  Sampfon Epifcopus, Ofwaldus,  CuthburgaVirgo 
non  Martir,  Tranflatio  S.  Cuthberti,  Editha  Virgo,  Lam- 
bertus  Epifcopus,  Tranflatio  S.  Etheldrede,  F;edefwida 
Virgo,  Wenefreda  Virgo,  Edmundus  Archiepifcopus, 
Hugo  Epifcopus  &  Confeffor,  Edmundus  Rex  &  Mar¬ 
tir,  Thomas  Archiepifcopus  &  Martir,  &c.  25. 

27.  Effigies  B.  V.  Maria;  infantulum  Jefu  geftienfis, 
arbori  impofitm,  cujus  radix  fita  eft  in  pedtore  Patriarchs 
Jeffe  recumbentis.  In  arboris  ramufculis  confpiciuntur 
imagines  prmcipuorum  e  familia  Davidica  virorum.  Ex- 
hibentur  etiam  marginibus  pidtura;  florum  Quadrifolij 
cjcrulei,  Quinquefolij  albi,  Aquilegim,  Rofarum  Lancaf¬ 
trienfis  ac  Eboracenfis  (ut  de  Pavonibus,  Papilione,  Sc 
alijs  tarn  avibus  quam  infedlis,  taceam)  artificiofe  fatis  pidla;. 

28.  Pfalterium,  illius  Verfionis  quam  D.  Hieronymi 

Gallicanum,  vocant.  32. 

Heic  in  Principe  totius  Pfalterij  Litera  depidla  eft 
Imago  Regis  David  cytharam  tenentis,  ijs  vero  oma- 
mentis  decoratus,  qua;  Henricum  vi.  Anglia:  &  Francis; 
Regem  potius  decerent.  Sedet  enim  fuper  Thronum  in 
cujus  fuirfitate  jacent  quatuor  Leones  pufillanimi.  Regis 
veftis  fuperior,  undique  aureis  incerti  numeri  annulis  et 
Lilijs  cernitur  fparfus  ;  craffiorefq;  Littera  partes  occu¬ 
pant  quatuor  pilces.  In  extremis  oris,  videre  eft  Aquilas 
a  reliquis  Avibus  vidlos  et  fugatos  :  Regij  Canis  albi  gut- 
tur  ab  hybride  catulo  demorfum  ;  Lancaftrienfis  Rofae 
florem  a  caule  fuo  avulfum,  cranio  humanoe  regione 
pofita,  &c. 

29.  Pfalmi  26.  (quiab  his  fcilicet  verbis incipitDominus 
illuminacio  mea)  Littera  Capitalis  exhibet  Sceptrigerum 

4  L  Regem 


S 1 4- 


Catalogus  Librorurn  MSS. 


Nuin.  1892,  1  893. 


Regem  Imperial!  Diademate  coronatus,  in  Solio  fedens 
aureis  Rofis  atque  L'lijs  confperfo.  46.  b. 

30.  Tabula  in  qua  depingitur  Hiftoria  Salvatoris  nof- 
cri  in  horto  Gethfemene  a  Judais  capti.  Inibi  reprafen- 
tatur  Servus  Sumnii  Pontificis  quafi  lava  auricula;  anipu- 
tarionem  a  B.  Petro  patliis ;  contra  fidem  Evangeliorum 
D.  Luca:  &  D.  Johannis,  qui  illam  fuilTe  dexteram  difertis 
verbis  tradunt.  Replete  lunt  ora  ijs  omnibus,  qua  in 
adornanda  Salvatoris  uoftri  Paffionis  Hiftoria,  Pictoribus 
in  urn  veniunt.  ^ 

n  m'  TT?bula’."}  cIua  adumbratur  Hiftoria  flagellationis 
1).  N.  Jclu  Chrifti,  a  Judais  :  Ima  margine,  cernuntur 
imagines  trium  humanorum  craniorum,  cum  hac  Infcrip- 
tione,  ‘Vos  autem  ficut  homines  moriemini,  et  ficut  unus 
de  pnncipibus  cadetis.’  Propheta.  Cap.  1.  66.  b. 

3  a.  Ejufdem  Hiftoria  exemplum  alterum.  67. 
33.  1  abula,  in  qua  reprafentatur  Jefus  Chriftus  de 
Icenlus,  difruptis  Inf'eri  poriis,  eripiens  &  liberans  Ada- 
mum  cum  Eva  et  primavis  patriarchis  a  limbo  patrum. 

Marginibus  exhibentur  Galli  Gallinacei  pugnantra  ■ 
oanctus  Georgius  Eques  monftmfum  Draconem  gladio 
percutiens  :  armaii  Equites  diredis  Lanceis  congrefluri  ; 
canes  rubicundi  bini  ululantes,  quibus  circumponuntur 
tria  oila  humana,  cum  cranio. 

34-  Folium  cujufdam,  ut  videtur,  Libri  MifTalis,  a 
loco  fuo  avulfum,  atq;  heic  indebite  tranllatum.  Inibi 
picfta  vifuntur  Hiftoria  Crucifixionis  Jefu  Chrifti;  Adami 
.  Lvrc  a  Paradyfo  per  Angelum  fugationis ;  Crucifixi 
in  gremio  B.  V.  Maria  jacentis  ;  Liberations  Patriarcha- 
rum  ab  Infens  per  Jefum  Chriftum  defeenfum.  In  Oris 
dantur  Imagines  Apoftolorum  duodecim.  1 1  e. 

p.jj  1  foFerium  excipiunt  Cantica  qua  dicuntur  Sacra  ; 

35.  Confitebor;  Canticum Ifaia.  (If.  xn.  1.) 

J.6‘  >  Canticum  Ezechia,  hie  Pfalmus  Da- 

vidi  rallo  mfcriptum  (If.  xxxvm.  10.)  j  ,2.  b. 

37.  Exultavit;  Canticum  Anna  (1  Reg.  n.  1.)  P,’ 

38.  Cantemus;  Canticum  Moyfts  (Exod.  xv.  1.) 

39.  Domine;  Canticum  Abacuc(Abac.  m.  2.)  ^4.  b- 

40.  Audite  ;  Canticum  Moyfts  (Deut.  xxxn.  1.) 

41.  Te  Deum  Iaudamus.  ^138 

^enetbc*te  >  Canticum  trium  puerorum  (Dan.  m. 

43-  Benedidus  ;  Canticum  Zacharia  (Luc.  1.  68.) 

44-  Magnificat;  Canticum  Maria  (Luc.  t.  46.)  1  mb. 

45-  Nunc  dimittis  j  Canticum  Symeonis  (Luc.  11.  29.) 

46.  Quicunque  vult. 

47-  Sequuntur,  Litania  cum  precibus.  ut  in  aliis  id 
genus  codicibus.  141  b 


l893- 

A  paper-Book  in  fol.  wherein  are  contained  the  following 
Trads.  0 

1.  A  Confcfiion  of  the  Faithe,  by  Mr.  Francis  Bacon. 

Chu'rche  o“„r‘  C°n“ 

pi™Hfer'  the  Author  Iayeth  open  the  faults  on  both 
hues;  &  feemeth,  to  me,  to  handle  the  matter  with 
Judgement  &  Impartiality. 

3.  t.ertaine  Confiderations  touching  the  better  Pacifi 
cation  &  Edification  of  the  Church  of  England  ■  dedi 
cated  to  his  moil  excellent  Majeffie  K.  James  t.  ,a 
Many  Phrafcs  and  Expreflions  /hew  this  Trafl  to 
have  been  compiled  by  the  author  of  the  former  :  and  he 
(near  the  beqmnmg)  owning  bimfelf  to  be  dfa  Profeffion 
and  that  different  from  Theology ;  fome  other  circum' 
jiancei.  alfo  concurring ;  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Sir 
Francis  Bacon  might  be  the  man. 

*4 


Nun-i.  1 893,  !89+. 


4.  The  Elite  of  1 13  Heade  (of  Foot-men,  in  the  Du  :h 
Service)  contayninge  a  monethspaie. 

5.  lhe  Lifte  of  100  Heade.  t( 

.  6 •  Relation  of  the  Defeate  of  Turnhdlte  by  SF  FrU 
cis  Vere.  - 

7-  The  Order  of  Exercifing  Foot-Soufdiers.  A 

8.  A  Pacifique  or  favourable  Examination  of  the  Doc 

trine  of  the  Hugounts  ;  proueing  againft  the  more  rigo¬ 
rous  forte  of  Calhohques  of  thefe  times,  and  perticulerlie 
again  it  the  objedions  of  the  anfwere  made  to  the  Catho’ 
Iique  Apologia,  that  wee  that  are  Members  of  the  Catho- 
hque  Apoftoiique  Romane  Church,  ought  not  to  con- 
deinne  theHugonois  for  Heretiques,  till  newe  Proofo  bo 
made. 

9-  S!,r.,4ery?fe  El"'efe  <■«  Speech  at  Ills  Execution  otr 
lower-hill.  Nov.  ...  1615. 

to.  Ill  Henricum  Principem  Wallias,  Eluvium  Fran- 
cifci  Bacom.  b 

11.  An  dnfwere  to  the  Queilions  propofed  by' Sir 
Alexander  Hay,  touching  the  Office  of  Conftable.  76.  b. 

,  ’  2‘  ,S.ir  ^a,ter  Raleighes  Letter  to  his  wife,  the  Night 
before  his  Execution.  g° 

13.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  his  Speech  at  his  Death  •  who 
was  beheaded  in  the  old  Pallace,  at  Weftminftcr,  the 
29th  of  October  1618.  ^ 

This  is  but  the  beginning  thereof. 

1.1.  Condicions,  or  Qualifications  neceflary  in  all 
Military  Pcrfons,  according  to  their  refpeaive  Stations. 

15.  Relation  of  the  Battell  of  Newport  by  Sir  Francis 

vere.  _  86 

Turning  to  the  end  of  the  Book,  I  find,1 

16.  A  Letter  of  Thomas  Spelman,  to  the  noble  Knight 

Sir  rrancis  Bacon.  ° 

Juftifying  his  Innocence,  as  being  charged  with 
committmg  iome  diforder;  &  defiling  that  the  matter 
might  be  judicially  tried. 

17.  Another  from  the  fame  Tho.  Spelman,  to  Sir 
1  lancis  Bacon,  upon  the  fame  matter. 

Then  follow  Copies  of  Letters  written  by  Mr 
Edward  Anderfon,  a  little  before  his  Execution  :  being* 

18.  To  Sir  George  Villiers,  &c.  defiring  him  to  inter¬ 
cede  with  the  king,  m  his  behalf.  ,  b 

19.  Ad  eundem  ;  upon  the  fame  occafion.  ibid* 

20.  Ad  eundem;  to  the  fame  effeft.  V 

at.  To  Sir  Francis  Bacon  Knight;  to  the  fame  pui-- 

P°  e‘  2.  b. 

I  894. 

A  Book  in  fmall  fol.  neatly  enough  bound  in  Crimofine 
Velvet  wnh  Sliver  Clafps,  &  Gill  Edges;  wriiten  all 
along  in  the  Spamili  Tongue.  It  conlifteth  of  two  main 
Pans  the  firft  whereof  being  in  a  larger  &  plainer 
Hand  is  upon  Velum  ;  the  other,  upon  paper.  But 
before  all,  I  find 

fuites  A  ?iaUre  °f  Ignatius  L°y°Ia>  Founder  of  the  Je- 
Then  follow,  X* 

2.  An  Efcocheon  wherein  are  painted  Quarterly,  the 
rmes  of  the  families  of  Ynchaurandieta,  Maquibar, 
Lecuona,  &  Ehzondo.  2 

.  3-  An  Hiftorical  Account  of  the  Rife  &  Progrefs  of 
the  faid  Families,  ani  how  &  when  they  came  to  inter- 
mai  ry  ;  given  by  Don  Francifco  de  Morales  Zarco  Hi f- 
tonographer  &  King  of  Armes  to  His  Catholic!:  Maiefty 
King  Charles  the  Second,  dated  the  20th  of  Oftober 
A.  D.  1697.  2>b> 

The  chief  bufinefs  of  this  Account  or  Certificate 
is,  to  fet t  forth  the  Merits  of  fome  of  the  abovementioned’ 
families,  as  alfo  to  difplay  the  Excellency  of  their  feveral 
Bearings  m  their  Armes.  'I'his,  Don  ‘Francifco  hath 
done  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  he  thought  might  belt  difeover 
h.s  profound  Learning,  extenfive  Heading,  &  Heraldi- 
cal  Skill :  although,  notwithftanding  all  this  Splutter, 

fome 


Bibliothecae  Harleianue. 


Num.  1894 — 1896. 

fome  in  England  would  deem  him  an  ignorant  perfon, 
and  one  who  would  lay  any  thing  for  Money.  The 
Certificate  is  adorned  with  the  Armes  of  the  faid  fami¬ 
lies  painted,  I  i'uppofe,  as  well  as  the  Spaniffi  Heralds 
could  perform.  At  the  end  is  Don  Francifco’s  Hand 
&  Seal  of  Office  ;  and  afterward,  come  the  Certificates 
&  Hands  of  feveral  other  Officers,  attefting  &  authenti¬ 
cating  the  fame. 

Thus  far,  all  is  written  upon  Velum  :  what  fol¬ 
lowed  is  upon  Paper. 

4.  A  Plea  or  Procefs  of  Defcent,  Nobility  &  Gentry, 

&  C’.learnefs  ofBloud,  carried  on  by  Sebaftian  de  Azcue 
Aranguren,  Neighbour  in  the  Noble  &  Loyal  Valley  of 
Oyarzun  in  the  very  Noble  &  very  Loyal  Province  of 
Guipuzcoa  in  Bifcay,  as  Hufband  of  Maria-Martin  de 
Ynchaurandietta,  Sifterto  Captain  Don  Ignatiode  Yncha¬ 
urandietta,  and  in  his  Name  &  behalf,  he  being  abfent 
in  the  Indies  ;  in  Order  to  his  being  admitted  into  the 
Number  of  the  Gentry,  &  confequent/y,  capable  of  bear¬ 
ing  Offices  in  the  Province  both  Civil  &  Military.  In 
carrying  on  this  tedious  Caule  (which  held  above  a 
twelve-month)  it  was,  at  Iaft,  proved,  that  this  Don  Ig. 
natio  was  a  Native  of  the  faid  Valley,  &  defcended  of  the 
firlt  peoplers  thereof  (although  I  do  not  remember  that 
the  allegations,  as  to  the  antiquity  of  the  family,  amount 
to  above  100  years)  that  he  fprung  from  the  Old  Chrif- 
tians,  clear  of  all  evil  race  of  Jews,  Moors,  Lepers,  & 
Penitents  from  the  Holy  Office  of  the  Inquifition,  or  of 
any  other  reprobate  Seil :  and  therefore  Sentence  was 
given  accordingly  in  his  Favor  :  which  was  confirmed  by 
the  Junta  of  the  faid  Province,  which,  although  it  be  but 
a  part  of  Bifcay,  hath  neverthelefs  its  own  government. 
This  Tranfcript  from  the  Registers  was  figned  &  au¬ 
thenticated  by  the  proper  Officers,  En  Teftimonio  de 
Verdad,  in  November  &  December,  A.  D.  1697.  27- 

In  the  procefs,  befides  the  Interrogatories,  &  Depo- 
fitions  of  WitnefTes,  are  Extracts  from  the  public  Records 
touching  this  Family  ;  and  what  is  more  confiderable, 
divers  Grants  &  Charters  of  Privileges  made  to  the 
Province  by  fome  of  the  Kings  &  Queens  of  Spain  are 
here  recited. 

5.  The  Original  Confirmation  of  the  Province,  above- 
mentioned  ;  with  the  Seal  &  Hand  «  Per  mandado  de  la 
Junta,”  of  Don  Phelipe  de  Aguirre  their  Scribe  :  added 
tojffie  end  of  the  book. 

This  is  before  recited,  at  92.  b. 

6.  The  Grant  of  an  Augmentation  to  the  Arms  of  the 

Province  of  Guipuzcoa,  by  Joan  Queen  of  Spain,  dated 
the  28  of  February,  A.  D.  1513.  93. 

This  is  figned  as  the  lafh  j  but  hath  the  Seal  of  the 
Province  affixed. 

1895. 

Codex  cfiartaceus  in  fol.  min.  manu  Italica  fatis  probe 
perfcriptus,  quern  ante  aliquot  menfes  a  me  redemit 
Illuftriffimus  Dominus  meus.  In  eo  continentur, 

1 .  Pomponij  Melae  de  Cofmographia,  Libri  Tres.  x . 

2.  Opufculum  Probte.Falconite  uxoris  Adefli  (leg. 
Adelphi)  excerptum  de  Virgilio,  ad  Teflimonium  Veteris 
Teftamenti  et  Novi. 

.  3-  C.  Cornel  ij  Taciti  de  Origine  &  Situ  Germanorum 
Liber:  cum  Notis,  uti  videtur,  ineditis.  35. 

I  896. 

A  Parchment  book  in  fmall  fol.  (bought  of  me)  wherein 
are  contained, 

x.  S.  Hicrom’s  Pfalteriura  Gallicanum ;  with  an  old 
Engliffi  Verfion  thereof,  written  verfe  by  verfe;  the  Latin 
(being  the  Original)  with  Red  Ink  ;  &  the  Engliffi  with 
Black  Ink  ;  and  fairly  illuminated.  1. 

’Tis  much  pity,  that  two  Leaves  (before  fol.  44.) 
fhould  be  torn  out. 

After  the  Plalter,  come  the  Cantica  Sacra,  written 
in  the  fame  manner  both  in  Latin  and  Engliffi  ;  being, 


Num.  1896 — 1 898. 

Canticunx  Ifaia:.  Confitebor.  If.  xii.  1 .  us. 
Canticum  Ezechias.  Ego  dixi.  If.  xxxvm.  ibid. 
Canticum  Anna:.  Exultavit.  1  Reg.  11.  1.  113. 
Canticum Moyfis.  Cantemus.  Exod.  xv.  1 .  1 13.  b. 
Canticum  Abacuc.  Domine,  audivi.  Abac.  in.  2. 

1 14.  b. 

Canticum  Moyfis.  Audite  cceli.  Deut.  xxxii.  1. 


i'5-b. 

8.  Canticum  trium  Puerorum.  Benedicite.  Dan.  111. 

52-  117.  b. 

9.  1  c  Deum  laudamus.  I 1 7. 

10.  Canticum  Maria*.  Magnificat.  Luc.  1.46.  117.  b. 

1 1.  Canticum  Zacharue.  B  nediilus.  Luc.  1. 68.  1 18. 

12.  Canticum  Symeonis.  Nunc  dimittis.  Luc.  11.  29. 

1 18.  b. 

13.  Quicunque  vult.  118.  b. 


1897. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  quern  etiam  a  me  redemit 
Illuftriffimus  Dominus  meus ;  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Trailatus,  quiabh's  Verbis  incipit,  ‘  Templum  Dei 
Sanitum  eft,  quod  eftis  Vos.*  1  Cor.  in.  j. 

iraifatum  cui  titulus  £  Femplum  Domini,’  inter 
opera  Roberti  Grofi'eteft  Epifcopi  Lincolnienfis  recenfet 
D.  Gul.  Cave  in  Ilift.  Litt.  Vol.  1.  pag.  717.  illumq;  ex- 
tare  in  Bibliotheca  publica  Cantabrigienfi  aflerit :  et  qui- 
dem  haud  frufta  ;  cum  Templum  Domini  per  eundem 
i.  e.  Lincolnienfem,  videre  fas  eft  in  Catalogi  Jamefiani 
n°.  1 1 8.  Quinetiam  habetur  in  alijs  Bibliothecis  ;  v.  g. 
in  Bodleyana  ;  ubi  inter  Codices  Digbianos  ilium  infpi- 
cere  fas  eft  qui  locum  obrinet  149.  et  exhibet  Roberti 
Grofthead  Trailatum  de  Confeffione,  qui  dicitur  Tem¬ 
plum  Domini.  Primus  Bodleyani  Codicis  in  fcripti  NE. 
A.  111.  18.  “  Trailatus,  agit  DeTempIoDei  myftico,  per 
Robertum  GroftheadEpifcopumLincolnienfem”  compila- 
tus.  Inejul'dam  infuper  Bibliotheca  Codice  NIL  B.  1.  12. 
notato,  obvius  eft  Roberti  Grofthead  Liber  qui  inti- 
tulatur  Templum  Domini:  princ.  Sanilum  eft;  1  emplum 
Domini,  quod  eftis  vos.  1  Cor.  3. 

In  Bibliotheca  Collegij  S.  M.  Magdalense  apud  Ox- 
onienfes,  Codex  M  S.  cujus  Nota  109.  inter  diverfi 
generis  TraCtatulos,  exhibet  *  Summam  Roberti  Groft¬ 
head,  qua:  infcribitur  Templum  Dei :  Liber  eft  Anagogi- 
cus,  de  Virtutibus  et  Vitijs.’ 

2.  Hugonis  de  Victore  tradlatus  De  Sacramentis, 
exemplar  vetuftum. 


1898. 

A  Book  in  fol.  wherein  thefe  feveral  Modern  Trails  are 
bound  together,  vizt. 

1.  A  Paper  fetting  forth  the  Publick  Revenue  due  & 

payable  in  the  Reigncs  of  the  late  King  Charles  the  Second 
tic  King  James  the  Second,  which  remained  &  had  con¬ 
tinuance  on  the  5th  of  November  1688.  and  became  pay. 
able  to  their  Majefties  from  the  25th  of  March  1689.  by 
vertue  of  an  Adt  of  Parliament  made  in  the  firft  Year  of 
their  Majefties  Reigne,  intituled  an  A Q.  for  preventing 
of  Doubts  &  Queftions  concerning  the  collecting  the  Pub- 
lick  Revenue,  as  the  fame  flood  on  the  firft  of  May  in 
that  year  1 690.  ’j# 

2.  An  Account  of  their  Majefties  Revenue  in  the  feve¬ 
ral  Counties  of  England  &  Wales  by  the  Seven  Auditors. 

7. 

3.  Another  Account  ftated  by  way  of  Charge  and 

Difcharge.  j  6, 

1  hen  follows  a  Mifcellaneous  Trail ;  a  particular 
Account  of  whofe  contents  here  follovveth,  taken  from 
the  Index  prefixed  thereunto,  at  fol.  27. 

4.  An  Eftimate  of  the  Charge  of  their  Majefties  Navy 

for  the  Year  1694,  with  Notes  thereupon.  29. 

5.  A  Lift  of  the  Ships  intended  for  the  main  Fleet,  in 
the  Channel,  &  for  Service  in  the  Mediterranean  A  the 
Weft-Indies,  for  the  Year  1694,  with  Notes  thereupon. 

29  b. 

G  The 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


316 


Num.  1898. 

6.  The  Line  of  Battle,  for  the  Year  1694.  32.  b. 

7.  A  Lift  of  their  Majeftiee  Ships  &  Veflels  at  prefent 

in  Sea-Pay  ;  and  to  what  Services  diftributed.  dated  at 
the  Admiralty  Office,  21  May  1694.  .  33.  b. 

8.  Several  Schemes  of  Stations  for  Cruifers.  35. 

9.  Mr.  Papillun  &  the  reft  of  the  Commiflioners  Letter 
to  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty,  in  anfwer  to  theirs  dated 
the  3d  of  November  1693,  requiring  an  Eftimate  of  the 
Charge  of  Proviftons  for  the  next  Summer.  35.  b. 

1  o.  An  Account  of  the  Coft  &  Charges  of  the  Pro- 
vifions  for  1000  Men,  one  Month,  or  28  Days.  36. 

1 1 .  Notes  upon  the  Commiilioners  of  the  Viftualling’s 
Demands  for  Money,  for  the  Year  1693.  36.  b. 

1 :.  Copy  of  Letters  from  the  Navy-board,  to  the  Ad¬ 
miralty,  concerning  the  Pay  of  the  Marine  Regiments, 

5  Januar.  16  )3,  and  28  March  1694.  38.  b. 

1 3.  A  Lift  of  the  Land-Forces  which  His  Majefty 
thinks  necelfary  to  be  maintained  in  England,  Scotland, 

6  beyond-Seas,  for  the  Service  of  the  year  '694.  39.  b. 

1 4.  An  Account  of  the  Proportion  of  Forces  of  the 

feveral  Confederates  for  carrying  on  the  Warr  for  the 
Year  1604.  40.  b. 

15.  An  Account  of  what  the  Houfe  of  Commons  gave 
for  the  Service  of  the  Warr,  Winter-Seflions  1693-4. 
diftinguiftiing  the  Services  for  which  the  fame  was  given; 
and  Obfervations  upon  the  Diftribution  thereof.  41.  b. 

1 6.  An  Abftraft  of  a  Lift  of  Convoys  &  Cruifers, 

delivered  to  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  by  the  Lords  of  the 
Admiralty.  42.  b. 

j  7.  An  Eftimate  of  the  Charge  of  the  Sea-men  ferving 
in  Six  of  their  Majefties  Firft  Rates,  Nine-Second  Rates, 

27  Third  ;  from  the  15th  of  October  to  the  15th  of 
February.  43. 

18.  An  Abftraft  of  the  Defalcations  abated  on  fuch 

Shipps  Books  as  were  paid  by  the  Treafurers  of  the  Navy, 
from  t2  Julv  1673,  &  24  June  1681,  &  from  23th  June 
1681,  to  5  November  1688.  43.  b. 

19.  Abftraft  of  the  time  of  Sea-Pay,  being  at  Sea  & 

in  Port,  of  Six  Firft-Rates,  Ten  Seconds,  &  41  Thirds  ; 
from  the  firft  of  January  1691-2,  to  the  30  September 
1693.  #  44- 

20.  An  Eftimate  of  the  Generali  Debt  of  their  Ma¬ 

jefties  Navy  on  the  feverall  Heads,  calculated  to  30  Sep¬ 
tember  1693,  excepting  what  is  contrafted  on  accompt 
of  the  27  New  Ships.  44.  b. 

21.  A  Companion  of  the  different  Charges  brought 

to  accompt  by  the  Commiflioners  of  the  Navy,  for  Wages 
Sc  Workman  (hip,  in  Building  at  each  of  His  Majefties 
own  Yards,  Third,  Fourth,  Fifth,  &  Sixth  Rate  Ships, 
carrying  the  Guns  therein  mentioned.  45. 

22.  An  Account  of  the  Numbers  &  Rates  of  Ships  to 

be  imployed  in  their  Majefties  Service  at  Sea,  in  the  Year 
1C93.  45-b. 

23.  A  Lift  of  the  French  Fleet  as  given  to  Sir  George 

Rook,  by  the  Captain  of  a  Fire-Ship,  taken  in  Lagos- 
Bay  18  June  1693.  46.  b. 

24.  A  Lift  of  the  French  Fleet  in  the  Year  1689. 

47.  b. 

25.  A  Lift  of  the  French  Armada,  including  the 

Thoulon-Squadron,  Anno  1693.  48.  b. 

26.  A  Lift  of  the  French  Fleet,  1693,  given  by  Secre¬ 
tary  Trenchard.  49.  b. 

2 7.  The  French  and  Englifh  Fleets  compared  by  the 

number  of  their  Guns,  anno  1 693.  50. 

28.  An  Account  of  what  the  Commons  gave,  Win- 
ter-Sellions  1692,  for  Ordnance  for  Sea  and  I.and-Ser- 
vice  ;  compared  with  what  was  iffued  for  thofe  Services. 

5°.  b. 

29.  A  Particular  of  the  Payments  made  to  Charles 

Bertie  Efq;  Treafurer  of  the  Ordnance,  and  the  refpec- 
tive  Funds  from  whence  fuch  Payments  were  made:  from 
1  October  1692,  to  the  30th  of  September  1693.  51. 

30.  The  Accompt  of  the  Excife  from  Michaelmas 
1692,  to  Michaelmas  1693,  of  the  Cuftomes  from  Mi- 


Num.  1898. 

chaehnas  1692,  to  Michaelmas  1693,  &  of  the  Poft- 
Officc  3d  October  1692  to  2d  October  1693.  52* 

31.  The  Accompt  of  the  Quarterly  Poll.  53.  b. 

32.  The  Exchequer-Accompt,  froniMichuelmafs  1692* 

to  Michaelmafs  1693.  54.  b. 

33.  An  Abftraft  of  what  hath  been  yei'lded  between 

Michaelmafs  1692,  and  Michaelmafs  1693,  towards  the 
Publick  Charge,  by  old  Excife,  Cuftomes,  the  Poll- 
Office,  and  by  Loans  and  Tailes  of  Anticipations  ftrook 
thereupon  ;  with  the  Produce  of  the  linall  Branches,  and 
the  Arrears  of  the  dowble  Excife.  55. 

34.  A  State  of  what  was  demanded  and  what  was 
granted  for  the  Service  of  the  Navy,  for  the  Year  1696. 

55- b- 

35.  A  State  of  the  Warr  relating  to  the  Quotas  which 

the  Confederates  &  Allies  do  feverally  furnilh,  for  the 
Year  1696.  56. 

36.  A  Lift  of  the  Land-Forces  which  his  Majeftie  has 

now  in  his  Pay,  and  which  he  thinks  neceftary  to  be 
continued  &  maintained  in  England  &  beyond  the  Seas, 
for  the  year  1 696.  56.  b. 

37.  Abftraft  of  the  foregoing  Lift  of  the  Army  ;  fhew- 

ing  alfo  what  was  granted  by  the  Parliament  on  Saturday 
the  13  th  of  December  1695.  58. 

38.  An  Abftraft  of  an  ordinary  Eftimate  for  the  Navy 

for  one  year  according  to  the  Number  of  Ships  now  (1 
October  1696,)  belonging  to  it,  and  thofe  at  this  Time 
in  building,  if  they  were  all  in  Harbour  in  a  Time  of 
Peace  ;  as  alfo  what  the  Charge  thereof  would  be,  fup- 
pofe  48  of ’em  were  employed  at  Sea.  39. 

39.  An  Eftimate  of  the  Charge  of  maintaining  48  Mea 

of  Warr,  at  Sea,  for  one  year.  59.  b. 

40.  An  Abftracl  of  the  ordinary  Eftimate  of  the  Navy 

prepared  the  firft  of  January  1 685  for  that  enfuing  Year  : 
as  alfo  of  that  prepared  the  firft  of  October  1696,  where¬ 
by  is  ftiewn  how  much  the  Charge  of  the  later  exceeds 
the  former.  60.  b. 

41 .  An  Accompt  of  what  Woollen  Manufactures  were 
made,  exported,  &  confumed  at  home,  from  25  Decem¬ 
ber  1687,  to  25  December  1688,  with  Notes  thereupon. 

Then  follow,  6 1 .  b. 

42.  A  generaal  Account  of  the  Produce  of  the  Excife 

of  Beer,  Ale,  &  imported  Liquors,  within  the  City  & 
Port  of  London,  in  one  whole  Year  ;  from  Midfummer 
1668,  to  Midfummer  1669.  63. 

43.  The  like  Accompt  of  one  whole  year  ;  from  Mid¬ 
fummer  1669,  to  Midfummer  1670.  ibid. 

44.  The  Accompt  of  one  whole  year  ;  from  Midfum¬ 
mer  1670,  to  Midfummer  1671.  ibid. 

45.  The  grofs  Produce  of  the  Excife  of  Beer  &  Ale  in 
in  London,  from  24  Junij  166S,  to  24  Junij  1688. 

63.  b. 

46.  An  Ab draft  of  the  Excife  as  it  was  farmed  for  1 2 

Yeares.  64. 

47.  An  Abftracl  of  the  Grofs  &  Neat  Produce  of  the 
Excife  for  Three  Years,  ending  at  Midfummer  1677, 
during  which  Time  it  was  farmed  to  Mr.  Vincent  &  Part¬ 
ners,  and  the  additional  Duty  was  then  in  being,  ibid. 

48.  An  Abftraft  of  the  Grofs  and  Neat  Produce  of  the 

Excife  for  Six  Yeares  ended  at  Midfummer  j  683,  during 
which  Time  it  was  managed  by  George  Dafhwood  Efq; 
and  Partners  :  but  the  additional  Duty  in  being  during 
the  Three  firft  Yeares  onely.  64.  b.  65. 

49.  An  Abftraft  of  the  Grofs  &  Neat  Produce  of  the 

Excife  for  one  Year;  ending  24  Junij  1684  being,  the. 
firft  Year  that  it  was  in  Commiffion.  ibid. 

50.  An  Abftraft  of  the  Grofs  &  Neat  Produce  of  the 

Excife  for  one  Year,  ending  24  Junij  16S5.  66. 

51.  Another,  for  one  Year,  ending  24  Junij  1686. 

ibid. 

52.  Another,  for  one  Year,  ending  24  Junij  1687. 

ibid. 

53:  Another,  for  one  Year,  ending  24  Junij  1688. 

06.  b. — 67. 

54.  Another 


Bibliothecae  Harleians. 


3*7 


Nani.  1898. 

«u.  Another,  for  one  Year,  ending  24  Junij  1689. 

ibid. 

Another,  for  one  Tear,  ending  24  Junij  1S90. 

67.  b. - 06. 

cCn  Another,  for  one  Year,  ending  24 Junij  1691.  ibid. 

0.  The  Grofs  Quantities  of  Beer  and  Ale,  for elSht 

Years  ended  24  June  1691.  ('l'  V  .1’ 

eg.  An  Abftratt  of  the  Grofs  &  Neat  Produce  of  the 
Excife  for  the  Year,  ending  24  Junij  1(  92.  69.  b.— 7°- 
r  Another,  for  the  Year,  ending  24  Junij  i°93- 

ibid. 

60.  A  State  of  the  Revenue  of  the  Excife,  from  Mid- 
fomer  1691,  to  Midfomer  1695.  7°- b- 

6 1  Grofs  &  Neat  Produce  of  the  Excife,  from  24  June 
1602’  to  24  June  1693.  .r  lbld- 

62*  Grols  &  Neat  Produce  of  the  Excife,  lrom  24 
June  169  :•  to  24  June  1694-  _  ;r  f  (  _  . 

6j.  Grofs  <x  Neat  Produce  of  the  Excife,  horn  24 
June  1694,  to  24  June  1695.  lbld- 

Then  followeth  another  Iraft  entituled, 

6a  Naturall  and  Pcliticall  Obfervations  and  Conclu- 
fions  upon  the  State  &  Condition  of  England  :  by  Gre¬ 
gory  King  Efq;  Lancaster  Herald  of  Aimes,  A.  D.  1696. 

Then  followeth,  „  ,  _  ... 

A  Collection  of  the  Lids  of  the  Royal  Navy,  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  Navy-Office  at  the  Board  ot  Accompts. 
vizt  Of  Ships  remaining  on  the  5th  Novem^r  1688. 
and  of  all  Ships  &  Veffels  added,  dimimfhcd,  &  altei  d, 
fince  the  fame  time :  as,  _  .  - 

6c.  A  Lift  of  all  their  Majefhes  Ships,  Yatchts,  &. 
Veffels  of  each  rate  &  fort,  belonging  to  the  Royal  Navy, 
upon  the  5th  day  of  November  ,688.  expreffmg  ,n  feve- 
ral  Columns  their  refpeffive  Burthens  Numbers  ot  Men 
&  Guns,  under  the  different  Eftabhlhments  ot  War  St 

FC66.'  a  Lift  of  all  the  Ships,  Yatchts,  &  Veffeils,  of 
each  Hate  St  Sort,  which  have  been  added  to  Ra)’-'11 
Navy,  between  the  sth  of  November  1688.  anti  the  -5th 
of  March  1691.  with  their  Rates,  Names,  Burthens 
whether  built,  bought,  or  taken  as  Femes,  Time  of 
Addition,  and  Eftablilhment  of  Men  be  Guns.  94-  b- 
67  A  Lift,  of  all  Ships  &  Veflels  of  their  Majefties, 
which  have  been  either  loft,  taken,  fold  or  converted 
to  other  Ufes.  Whereby  the  Ships  &  Veflels  of  the 
Rovall  Navy  have  received  any  Diminution,  between 
the  sth  of  November  -688.  and  the  Jth  of  March  1691. 
exprefling  in  diftmeft  Columns,  their  Rates,  Names, 
Burthens,  Commanders,  Complements  ot  Men  &  Guns, 
with  the  Time  when,  &  Place  where,  &  the  manner  how 
the  fame  were  lb  loft,  taken,  fold,  or  converted  to  other 

Wes.  .  9S'  b- 

68.  Letter  of  the  Commiffioners  of  the  Navy,  to 
Mr  Toilet  Secretary  to  the  Commiffioners  ot  the  Public 
Accompts,  dated  the  19th  of  October  1692.  relating  to 
the  two  l-ills  next  following.  _  ,  97‘  f 

6n.  A  Lift  of  all  the  Ships,  Yachts,  &  Veffcte,  of 
e-,ch  rate  &  fort,  which  have  been  added  to  the  Royall 
Navy,  from  the  25th  of  March  169..  with  their  Names, 
R-Ues  Burthens,  whether  built,  bought,  or  taken  as 
Prizes,  Time  of  Addition,  and  Eftablilhment  of  Men  & 

C’  C  A  Lift  of  all  Ships  k  Veffeils  of  their  Majefties, 
which  have  been  either  loft,  taken,  fold  or  converted 
to  other  Ufes  ;  whereby  the  Ships  N  Veffeils  ot  he  Roy- 
all  Navy  have  received  any  Diminution:  from  the  25th 
Of  March  1691.  With  their  Rates,  Names,  Burthens, 
Commanders,  Complements  of  Men  &  Guns,  Me.  98. 

71  A  Lift  of  all  the  Ships,  Yachts,  N  Veflels  of  each 
Rate  &  Sort,  which  have  been  added  to  the  Royall  Navy, 
from  the  1  ft  of  November  169:.  to  nth  September  1693. 
with  their  Rales,  Names,  Burthens  whether  built, 
bought,  or  taken  as  Prizes,  Time  of  Addition,  * 
blifliment  of  Men  &  Guns. 

Cat.Harx.  Vox-  II. 


Nam.  1898. 

72.  A  Lift  of  their  Majefties  Ships,  which  have  been 
either  loft,  taken,  or  fold,  &c.  whereby  the  Ships  be 
Veffeils  ol  their  Majefties  Navy  have  received  any  l  dimi¬ 
nution  ;  between  the  19th  of  O&ober  1692.  &  2vth  ol 
September  i6q 4.  ,  99- 

-  4.  A  Lift  of  fuch  of  their  Majefties  Ships,  that  fince 
the  5th  of  November  1688.  &  their  firft  Denominations, 
have  had  Alterations  either  in  their  Names,  Rates,  Qua¬ 
lities,  kc.  and  how  they  firft  flood  in  the  Royall  Navy; 
as  alfo  their  Alterations  refpe&ively,  with  the  Dates  ot 
the  Orders  for  the  fame  :  to  the  28th  September  1693. 

1 00.  b. 

74.  A  Lift  of  an  the  Ships,  Yachts,  &  Veflels  of  each 
rate  A  fort,  which  have  been  added  to  the  Rovall  Navy 
from  Michaelmafs  1693.  with  their  Rates,  Names,  Bur- 
thens;  whether  built,  bought  or  taken  as  Prizes,  lime 
of  Addition,  &  Eftablilhment  of  Men  &  Guns  ;  lent  to 
the  Board  of  Accompts,  9th  Odtober  1694.  ,1°l- 

7;.  A  Lift  of  all  Ships  &  Veflels  of  their  Majefties, 
which  have  been  either  loft,  taken,  fold,  or  converted 
to  other  Ufes  ;  whereby  the  Ships  k  Veflels  of  the  Roy¬ 
all  Navy  have  received  any  Diminution  ;  from  Michael¬ 
mas  1603.  with  their  Rates,  Names,  Burthens,  Com¬ 
mander,  Complements  of  Men  k  Guns,  &c.  (.Received 
at  the  Board  of  Accompts,  9  October  1604  ) 

76.  A  Lift  of  Ships  &  Veffeils  of  all  Sorts,  built, 
bought,  or  otherwayes  added  to  His  Majefties  Navy  ; 
between  the  firft  of  October  1694.  k  the  30th  of  Jine 
i6qc.  with  their  Burthen,  Men,  Guns,  &c.  102.  b. 

j-,,  A  Lift  of  the  Ships  &  Veffeils  of  all  Sorts,  which 
have  been  loft  or  diminifli’d,  between  the  1  2th  of  Sep¬ 
tember  1694.  &  the  40th  of  June  1695.  with  the  Places 
where,  the  Times  when,  and  manner  how,  they  were 
loft,  taken,  or  otherwife  diminilhed.  ‘  °3* 

78.  Obfervations  made  by  the  Commiffioners  of  Ac¬ 
compts,  upon  fome  of  the  foregoing  Lifts.  «°3-  b* 

79.  A  Lift  of  the  Ships  &  Veffeils  added  to  His  Ma¬ 

jefties  Royall  Navy,  between  the  30th  of  June  1695.  and 
the  4th  of  November  following  ;  with  the  1  ime  be  man¬ 
ner  of  the  faid  Additions.  }c4- 

80.  A  Lift  of  the  Ships  k  Veffeils  of  His  Majefties 
Navy,  which  have  been  bunt’d  &  taken  between  the 
40th  of  June  palt,  &  the  5th  of  November  1695  .  104.  b. 

81.  An  Ahftract  of  the  Lift  of  Ships  k  Veflells,  build¬ 

ing  for  His  Majefties  Service,  on  the  9th  November 
16  ibid. 

82!  A  Lift  of  Ills  Majefties  Ships  of  ihe  Firft,  Second, 
Third.  &  Fourth  Rates  i  with  the  Complements  of  Men 
allowed  them  by  theOld  St  New  Eftabliihmenls  (2  j  Novr. 
I6qr.)  ,05- 

8  '  A  Lift]  of  the  Ships  &  Veflels  of  all  .Sorts,  built, 
bought,  or  otherwife  added  to  His  Majefties  Navy 
between  4th  November  1 695.  &  nth  July  following :  with 
their  Burthens,  Men,  Guns,  &c.  lob,b- 

84.  A  Lift  of  the  Ships  k  Veflels  ot  His  Majefties 

Naw  which  have  been  loll  or  diminifli’d,  between  the 
4 ih  November  1695.  and  9th  July  1 696.  with  the  Places 
where,  the  Times  when,  k  manner  how  they  were  loft, 
taken,  or  otherwife  diminifli’d.  107. 

85.  AbHraft  of  a  Lift  of  Ships  A  Veflels  building  on 

the  10th  of  July  1696.  for  Elis  Majefties  Service;  either 
in  His  Majefties  Yards,  or  on  Contract.  ibid. 

86.  A  Lift  of  the  Ships  k  Veflels  of  all  Sorts  ;  built, 
bought,  or  otherwife  added  to  His  Majefties  Navy, 
between  the 8th  July  1696.  and  31ft  March  1697.  107.  b. 

87.  A  Lift  of  the  Ships  &  Veflels  of  all  Sorts  which 

have  been  loft  or  diminifli’d,  between  10  July  1696. 
&  31  March  1697.  .  ,0^' 

Now  follow  fome  other  Trafts,  vizt. 

88.  An  AbltraCl  or  Cerlificate  of  all  their  Majefties 
Public  Revenue  arifeing  within  the  Audit  of  Charles 
Herbert  Efq;  with  the  Rents  k  Profits  thereof,  the ^  te¬ 
nants  &  Fee-farmers  names  ;  with  the  Allowances,  fees, 
Wages,  A'  Penfions,  yearly  chargeable  upon  the  lame. 

•  4M  As 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


iS 


JNum.  1898 — 1900. 

.As  alCo,  what  hath  been  anfwered  &  accompted  for  by 
the  feveral  Sheriffs  within  the  1  2  Counties  ot  Wales,  in 
the  years  1688.  &  1689.  and  paid  to  their  Majefties  Re¬ 
ceivers  General  for  the  faid  Counties.  With  the  Recei- 

VfooNamCS;  Arrears  fmce  the  5'h  day  of  November 
1688.  appearing  upon  the  States  of  their  Accompts  though 
not  yet  declared;  there  haveing  been  no  accompts  de¬ 
clared 1  fmce  Michaelmas  1C80.  for  South- Wales,  nor 
fmce  Michaelmas  1687.  for  North- Wales.  Which  Cer- 
nfi^te  is  made  out  by  Order  of  the  Honble.  the  Com- 
miilicners  appointed  by  Act  of  Parliament  to  examine 
take’  &ir^ate\thcPublickAccomPtsoftheKingdome.  1 10. 

89.  Eftablifhment  of  K.  James  11.  touching  Salutes 
by  Guns,  to  be  obferved  in  his  Majefties  Royal  Navy 
dated  22  of  June  1688.  *11* 

This  is  printed,  and  followed  by  an  Order  of  Coun- 
cdl,  for  putting  the  fame  in  Execution. 

9n°r  ^  Pnnted  b°ok  of  Inftruclions  to  K.  William  & 
q,  Manes  Commanders  of  Ships,  with  Directions  for 
c  e  °lder  ng  tke  fame,  regulating  the  behavior  of  the 
Sea-men  ;  with  Patterns  or  Specimens  of  Journals  &  other 
Sea-books. 

S'-  A  Rough  Draught  of  a  New  Model  at  Sea.  ii£' 

92.  An  humble  Propofition  for  the  more  regular & 
fpeedy  payment  of  His  Majefties  Treafure,  graded  or 
to  be  granted  by  the  Lords  &  Commons  alfembled  in 

h  ,hmem’rf°r  the  carrymS  on  his  Majefties  Expences, 
whether  Ordinary  or  Extraordinary,  both  in  Time  of 
Peace  &  time  of  Warr. 

93.  Orders  &  Letters  fent  from  the  Commiflione^of 
the  Navy  to  the  Commiflioners  of  the  Victualling,  with 
relation  to  the  ViduaMing  the  Fleet.  From  the  S  lanu 

■69I-  ‘O'ho  3  Auguft  1693.  Copied  out  of  the  Ori- 
gmall  Booke,  fent  from  the  Navy-Office.  2os 


l8qq. 

An  imperfect  Book  infol.  thus  entituled 
„„  t0  ffls  Majefty  touching  a  New  Model  of 

rortihcati  n  :  with  many  Draughts. 

,0  h„Th|C  Ha."ud  ?  m“?cr  !8™raw'n£  'he  Author 
to  have  been  the  late  Colonell  ThomasColepeper,  mod  of 
whofe  Papers,  by  my  means,  are  come  into  this  Library  • 
although  this  individual  Book,  was  (with  others)  given 
by  Colonel  Henry  Worleley,  at  prefent  His  Majtfties 
Envoy-Extraordinary  in  Portugal. 

1  900. 

A 7Par.?Se",t'B0Du  “  f°L  bou«ht  &  S™  by  »y  noble 
iuord  Dai  ley ;  wherein  are  contained  more  of  the  Tran- 
ftations  &  Compofitions  of  John  de  Trevila  Vicar  of 
Berkeley,  &  Chaplain  to  Thomas  Baron  of  Berkeley 
than  1  havefeen  m  any  other  book. 

They  are, 

1.  Dyalogous  inter  Militem  &  Clericum ;  i.  e.  between 
the  abovementioned  Lord  &  Himfelf ;  in  Fngliih  i 
It  beginneth  thus,  “  Ich  wondre  Sire  noble  Knyzt 
Vatmfcwe  dayes  tymes  bej.  chaungide  ;  rizt  is  y-buried 
lawes  bef  overrented ;  &  Statutes  be),  y-trode  under  feet  » 
And  the  mam  Drift  thereof  feemeth  to  he  to  impugne 
thepapal  power  mTempora!  matters:  for,  as  may  be 
gathered  from  John  Bale,  he  was  no  great  l'riend  to  the 
Regular  Clergie  of  thofe  tiroes  ;  and  might,  poffibly  differ 
ra  opinion  from  them,  touching  more  matters  than  their 
Ir.de,  Luxury,  &  Hypocrifie.  Thus  a  little  from  the 
beginning  the  Knight  faith,  “Neman  haji  power,  oorieyne 
no  Statutes  vppon  fynges,  ouer  Jie  whiche  he  ha/no 
Lordichip  :  as  feKyng  of  Fraunce  may  ordeyne  no  Sfe 
tutes  vppon  f  e  Empyre :  nofer  fe  Emperour  vppon  fe 
kyngdorn  of  England,  And  alfo  Princes  of  the  World 
may  ordeyne  no  Statutes  of  zoure  Spiritualte ;  for  L; 
hauep  no  power  ouer  zoure  Spiritualte.  Alfo,  ze  mowe 
ordeyne  no  Statutes  of  Temporalte,  ouer  fe  whiche  ze 
hauep  no  power  noper  auclorite.  perfore,  ich  louz 
wel  fafte  whanue  ich  herde  telle  J>at  Pope  Bonefashadde 


JNum.  1900. 


made  a  newe  Statute,  fat  he  hym-filf  fchuld  he  aboue 
alle  feeder  Lordes,  Princes,  Kyngis,  &  Emperours,  & 
aboue  alle  Kyngdoms,  &  make  lawe  vppon  alle  binges  i 
,  >at  h™  "=*>  nouzt  but  write  ;  fondle  bingesfchalle 
be  his  whatme  he  hath  y-u  rite.  For,  to  mike  a  Statute 
is  nouzt  elles  but  wilne  pat  j-e  rlccrc  be  y-hoide,  &  ordeyne 
&  hootepathit  hey-holde.  Zifhe  wole  haue  my  Cafte! 
my  lour,  my  Feelde,  my  Money,  &  alle  fiche  Ping, 's’ 
hym  ncdif  nouzt  but  wilne  hit,  &  write  &  make  a  Decree’ 
&  hote  pat  hit  be  y-holde  ;  &  whanne  fat  is  y.do,  he 
hap  nzt  10  alle  fuche  fmgis.  Nowe,  goode  Clerk,  p„„ 
knoweft  wei  how  worpi  pis  Jape  is  to  be  fcorned.  ”  This 
notable  Statute,  as  the  Knight  calleth  it,  I  take  to  be  tliar 
Conftitution  of  1  ope  Bomhtcius  vm.  which  I  find  in  the 
Corpus  Juris  Canonici.  Edit.  Pith.  Extravag.  Comm 
Lib.  1.  In.  vm.  De  Majontate&  Obedientia,  an  Extract 
trom  whence,  I  venture  here  to  put  down.  “  Unam 
Sandam  Ecclefiam  Catholicam,  &  ipfam  Apoftolicam 
urgente  tide,  credere  cogimur  &  tenere.  Nofq-  hanc 
firmiter  credimus,  &  fimpliciter  confitemur:  extra  quam 

nec  Salus  eft,  nec  remiflio  Peccatorum _ Iritur  Ecclel 

fis  unius  &  unica ;  unum  Corpus,  unum  Caput;  non 
ftuafl  Monftrum  ;  Chriftus  videlicet  et 

Chnfti  Vicar, us  Petrus,  Petnq;  fuceeffor - Sive,  ergo 

Grasci  live  alij  fe  d.cant  Petro  ejufqj  Succefforibus  non 
eiie  commilics,  fateantur  neceffe,  fe  de  Ovibus  Chiifti 
non  effe,  dicente  Domino  in  Johanne,  Unum  Ovile  et 
Unicum  effe  Paftorem.  In  hac  ejufq;  poteftate  duos  effe 
Gladios,  Spintualem  videlicet  &  Tern,  oralem,  Evanee- 
hcis  diths  mftruimur.  Nam  dicentibus  Apoftolis  Ecre 
Gladij  duo  hie  (in  Ecclefim  fcilicet  cum  Apoftoli’loque- 

rentur)  non  refpondit  Dominus  nimis  effe,  fed  Satis  - _ _ 

Uterque  ergo  eft  in  poteftate  Ecclefia:,  Spiritual  fcilicet 
Gladius,  &  Matenalis  ;  fed  is  quidein  pro  Ecclelia  ■  ille 
verb  ab  Eeclefia  exercendus.  Ille  SacLdotis“t  m^ 
Regum  &  Mil, mm  ;  led  ad  nutum  &  patientiam  Sacer- 
dotis.  Oportet  autem  Gladium  effe  fub  Gladio,  et  Tem- 

porajem  auftoritatem  Spiritual!  fubjici  poteftati _ S„i_ 

ntua'em  autem  &  Dignitate  &  Nobilitate  terrtnam  quam 
hbet  Precellere  poteftatem,  oportet  tanto  clarius  nos  fateri 

quanto  Spirituals  Temporalia  antecellunt. _ Nam  Veri’ 

SpW‘ua!!s  po'cilas  Terrenam  poteftatem  in- 

tituere  habet,  et  Judicare  ft  bona  non  frierit _ Ergo 

i.  devat  Tenrena  poteftas,  judicabitur  a  poteftate  Spirits 
all:  led  ft  deviat  Spmtualis  minor,  a  fuo  Superior!  •  ft 

verp  Supreme,  afoloDeo,  nonabHomine,  poterit  iudi- 

- - Porro,  fubeffe  Romano  l’ontifici  omnem  huma 

nam  creaturam  declaramus,  definimus,  &  pronunciamns 
oninmo  efie,  de  neceflitate  Salutis.*1 

This  I  raa  is  omitted  by  John  Bale,  &  John  Pits. 

2.  Sermo  Domini  Archiepifcopi  Armacani,  Anglice." 

This  Tradftation  is  alfo  omitted  by  Bale  &  Pits  fe 
all  f  1  evtfa  s  works  are  by  John  Leland’  &  Dr.  Cat  e)  but 
the  Lam,  Original  ,s  publifted  by  Dr.  Browne  in  bis  Ap- 
pendix  to  the  Fafciculus  Return  expetendarum  &fueien- 
darum,  at  pay.  jl  6.  where  n  bearab  il,,v.  i,„  f;tie' 
Defenforium  Cvratorvm  contra  eos  qui  privilegiatos 
fe  dicunt  :  Propofmo  Richardi  [Filij  Radulfi,  fiveFitz- 
■  rlrc  •cplfc0pl  Armachaili  Primatis  Hibernim,  fafta 
in  Confiftono  coram  Domino  Papa,  &  Dominis  Cardina. 
hbus  ac  I  rtclatis,  ad  utihtatem  Cleri  &  populi  Chriftiani 
fupc-r  materia  Mendicitans  &  Privilegiorum,  contra  Fro- 
tres  de  Ordmibus  mendicantium  quibuicunnue;  apud 
Avmionem  oftava  dieMenfis  Novembris  A.  D  i  or7 
In  this  learned  Trad,  it  appeareth  that  dim:w  t‘he 
I  imes oil  opeiy,  therewere  more  Studentsin Oxford?  tlian 
at  this  day  ;  ior  faith  he,  fol.  1 1 .  b.  “So  fat  zet  in  mv 
gmiem  fe  vmverfitie  of  Oxenford  were  fritty  foufand 
Seolers  at  ones :  &  now  bef  vnnefe  fixe  foufand  f  but 
good  Books  were  fcarcer  there,  proportionate  than 
now;  font  followeth  prefently  thus,  “  for  bch  Orders 
ot  Beggers,  for  endelefs  wynnynges  fat  fei  getef  by 
beggyng  of  fe  forie.de  Fryvyleges  of  Sdtriftes  1-  Scpul- 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


3  r9 


Num.  1900. 

tures  &  o}?ere,  J)ei  be})  now  fo  multiplyed  in  Coventes  & 
in  Perfons,  >at  many  men  telli]?  ]?at  in  general  Studies, 
unneje  is  y-founde  to  fillyng  a  profitable  booke  of  pc 
faculte  of  Art,  ofDyvynyte,  of  Lawe-Canon,  ofPhifik, 
o>er  of  Lawe-Civil,  but  allebookes  be})  y-bouzt  of  Fre- 
res ;  fo  >at  in  euerech  Couent  of  Freres  is  a  noble  Li- 
brarie  &  a  grete  :  andfo  fat  euerech  Frerefat  hath  State 
in  Scole,  fiche  as  pei  be})  now,  hath  an  huge  Librarye. 
And  alfo  y  fent  my  Sugettes  to  Scole  pre  ofer  foure 
perfons  :  and  hit  is  feid  me  fat  fome  of  them  bef  come 
home  azen,  for  fei  myft  nougzt  finde  to  felle  oon  gode 
Bible,  nofer  ofere  couenablc  bookes.”  Here  (by  the 
way)  I  like  the  Englifli  Tranflation  General  Studies 
(which  fignifieth  as  much  as  Univerfities)  much  better 
than  the  Latin  Text,  as  given  us  by  Dr.  Browne,  or  as 
cited  from  the  Lambeth  Manufcript  by  Mr.  Henry  Whar¬ 
ton,  in  his  Auftarium,  or  Appendix  to  Arch-Bifhop 
Ufhers  Hiftoria  Dogmatica  de  Script.  &  Sacr.  Vern. 
page.  429*  both  which,  the  words  are  Studijs  commu- 
nibus. 

3.  “  f  e  booke  of  Methodij  fe  Bifchop  of  fe  chirche  of 

Paterenis  &  Martir  of  Crift  ;  which  he  chargiJe  to  tranf- 
Iate  of  Hebrue  &  Greek  fpeeche  into  Latyn  :  fat  is,  of 
fe  bvgynning  of  fe  world  &  the  Rewmes  bitwixe,  of 
Folkis,  &  f e  ende  of  worldes  ;  which  fe  noble  man  Seynt 
Jerom  in  his  werkis  prayfed.”  2 1 .  b. 

This  Trafct  is  likewife  omitted  by  Bale  (&  Pits)  of 
whom  the  former  (to  do  him  Juflice)  after  fplitting  Tre- 
vifa’s  Tranflation  of  the  Polycronicon  into  many  pieces, 
concludeth  thus,  et  alia  plura  fecit  &  tranflulit.  As  to 
the  Original ;  learned  men  generally  deem  it  fuppofi- 
titious ;  it  being  idle  enough,  and  making  mention  of 
the  great  Conquefts  &  Cruelties  of  the  Sarazcns,  who 
brake  not  forth  from  Arabia  until  many  Centuries  after 
the  deceafe  of  Methodius  Patarenfis. 

Then  follow, 

4.  An  Alphabetical  Table  or  Index  to  Ranulph  Hig- 

dens  Polychronicon.  2^_ 

NB.  Some  of  the  Principal  Letters  are  cut  out,  by 
Children,  as  may  be  fuppofed. 

5.  Another  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  fame  Book,  in 

Eng'ifli.  _  32.  b. 

6.  John  Trevifa’s  Dialogue  with  his  Lord,  touching 
the  utility  of  Tranflations  in  General,  &  of  the  Tranfla¬ 
tion  of  Polychronicon  into  Englifh  in  particular.  42. 

In  one  place  of  it  (which  efcaped  Dr.  Hickes  ;  but 
is  cited,  in  Latin,  by  Mr.  Wharton  in  his  Audtarium,  or 
Appendix  abovementioned.  pag.  439.)  the  Lord  argueth 
thus,  “  It  is  wonder  fat  fou  makeft  fo  feble  arguments, 

&  haft  y.go  fo  longe  to  fcole  ;  Ariftotils  bokes  &  ofere 
bokes  alio  of  Logike  Sc  of  Philofophy  were  tranflated  out 
of  Grue  into  Latyn.  Alfo  atte  praying  of  Kyng  Charles, 
Johan  Scot  tranflated  Denys  bookes  out  of  Grue  into 
Latyn  ;  Cc  fan,  out  of  Latyn  into  Frenfche  ;  fan  what 
hath  Eng  life h  y-trefpaced  fat  hit  myzt  not  be  tranflated 
into  Englifch  ?  Alfo  King  Alurede  fat  founded  fe  Vni-  ■ 
verfitie  of  Oxeuford,  tranflated  fe  beft  Lawes  into  Eng¬ 
lifch  tonge  ;  and  a  grete  del  of  fe  Sauter  out  of  Latyn 
into  Englifche  ;  and  made  Wirefrith  Bifchop  of  Wircetre 
tranflate  Seynt  Gregories  bokes  of  Dialoges  out  of  La¬ 
tyn  into  Saxon.  Alio  Cedmon  of  Wbiteby  was  enfpired 
of  pe  holy  Goft,  &  made  wonder  poifyes  an  Englifch, 
neiz  of  al  fe  Storyes  of  Holy  writ.  Alfo  fe  Holy  man 
Beda  tranflated  Seynt  Jones  Golpel  out  of  Latyn  into 
Englifch.  Alfo  fou  woft  whare  f e  Apocalips  is  y  write 
in  fe  Walles  Sc  Roof  of  a  Chapel,  bofe  in  Latyn  &  in 
Frenfche.” - ■ 

This  Dialogue  which  taketh  up  no  more  than  three 
pages  Sc  Six  Lines,  is  one  of  the  Books  alcribed  to  our 
Trevifa  by  Bale  [Upon  occalion  of  the  word  (J5?UC,  twice 
above-written,  and  lignifying  the  Greek  Language  [& 
<2>niE0  &  <cD?CEg  fignify  the  Greek  People]  I  call  to 
mind,  that  in  Benedictus  Petroburgenfis,  Sc  in  his  De- 
florator  Roger  Hovedene,  the  Greeks  or  that  Part  of 


Num.  1900. 

the  People  of  a  Region  who  followed  the  Greek  Worfliip 
are  divers  times  called  Gryfones  ;  which  leemeth  to 
have  given  occalion  to  the  formation  of  the  former  word. 
And  I  leave  it  to  the  Heralds  to  determine,  whether- 
their  beloved  Monfter  the  Gryphon,  were  not  firft  born 
by  fuch  of  the  Latins,  who  in  their  Sauntering  towards 
the  Holy  Laud,  had  occafionally  exerted  their  Manhood 
upon  thole  of  the  Greek  Religion] 

But  to  return  ;  the  next  thing  that  appeareth,  is, 

_  7.  Trevifa’s  Epiftle  to  his  Lord  Berkeley;  teftifying 
his  williugnefs  to  enter  upon  the  Tranflation  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  Work,  Sc  his  Refolution  to  go  through  with  the  fame. 

43.  b. 

8.  John  Trevifa’s  Tranflation  of  Ranulf  Higden’s 
Polychronicon,  in  7  Books.  44, 

T- his  iranilation  endeth  in  the  year  of  our  Lord 
*357  >  and  hath  none  of  the  Continuations  mentioned 
by  Bale  &  others. 

I  have  already  (in  this  Volume)  obferved  that  Ra¬ 
nulf  was  not  the  original  Author  of  the  Polychronicon, 
but  an  errant  Plagiary ;  and  will  not  here  repeat  that 
matter.  But  it  may  not  be  amifs  to  put  down  what  Mr. 
Wharton  faith  of  Trevifa,  &  of  this  Performance,  in  pagg. 
48  &  49  of  his  Appendix  to  Dr.  Caves  Hiftoria  Littera- 
ria.  “  Ranulphi  Polychronicon,  faith  he,  juflu  nobilis 
viri  Thoma;  de  Barkeley  Anglice  vertit  Joannes  de  Tre¬ 
vifa,  Sacerdos  Cornubienfis,  ac  Vicarius  de  Barkelij ; 
qui  et  multisalijs  Scriptis,  imprimis  vero  integra  utriulq; 
Teftamenti  verfione  AnglicA,  inclaruit.  Polychronici 
Verfione  ipfe  nonnulla,  appofita  tamen  femper  diftinc- 
tionis  nota  de  fuo  intexuit,  prtefertim  contra  Monaftici 
Ordinis  petulantiam  ac  Superftitiones,  quas  faspius  ex- 
agitare  folet.  Verfionem  ad  finem  perduxit,  uti  ex  nota 
calci  adnexa  patet,  anno  1387.  die  8vo  Aprilis :  adeo 
ut  palum  lapfus  fit  feu  incuria  feu  errato  Typographico 
Caxtonus ;  qui  in  fine  Verfionis  a  fe  typis  imprelfe,  ad- 
notavit  earn  finitam  efle  anno  1357.  Illam  enim  im- 
mutato  paululum  Anglicte  lingua;  Archaifmo,  et  a  feipfo 
ad  annum  ufq;  1460.  Edwardi  iv.  Regis  primum  con- 
tinuatam,  typis  impreflam  evulgavit  Londini  1482.  Gu- 
lielmus  Caxtonus,  qui  fub  Edwardo  Rege  dido  claruit 
primufq;  omnium  artem  typographicam  Anglia;  intulit. 
Ipfamet  autem  Johannis  de  Trevifa  verfio,  a  Caxtono 
nondum  perpolita,  extat  MS.  in  inftrudliflima  Rev.  viri 
Thoma;  Tenifoni  Theologi  noftratis  do&iflimi,  Biblio¬ 
theca.” 

The  abovementioned  Note  at  the  end  of  this  Tran¬ 
flation,  hath  created  yet  more  trouble  to  learned  men,  as 
may.  partly  appear  by  the  following  Citations.  “  Ad 
petitionem  Domini  fui  Thomas  de  Barkeley  (faith  the 
learned  Primate  Ulher,  Hift.  Dogm.  pag.  1 57.)  in 
Anglicanum  idioma  tranftulit  totuin  Bibliorum  opus, 
utruinq;  fcilicet  Teftamentum  ;  prafatione  pra;fixa, 
cujus  initium  *  Ego  Johannes  Trevifa  Sacerdos,’  See.  ut 
habet  Bakeus,  Centur.  7.  Cap.  18.  ubi  etiam  notat  eum 
Polychronicon  continuafle  ab  anno  a  Chrifti  Incarnatione 
1342.  ufq;  ad  annum  ejufdem  1397.  in  quo,  inquit, 
ipl’emet  Trevifa  claruit  fub  Richardo  it.  Anglorum  Rege! 
Verum  ipfe  in  fine  Tranflationis  Polychronici,  tempus 
quo  feripfit,  his  verbis  proponit,  Verfio  ifta  finita  eft 
die  Jovis  (lege  potius  die  Martis)  die  18  Aprilis  A.  d! 
1357.  anno  autem  35  Patroni  mei  Thoma;  Domini  de 
Barkeley,  qui  me  Verfionem  iftam  adornare  fecit  ;  atq; 
anno  31  Regni  Regis  Edwardi  poll;  Conqueftum  Anglia! 
hi.  Diem  Martis  pro  die  Jovis  ideo  legendum  cenfui 
quod  fe  Trevifa  Verfionem  feria  5ta  Pafchalis  Hebdomadis 
finivifle  ibidem  afferat.  Anno  autem  1357,  c^es 
Aprilis  in  feriani  3  Pafchalem  incidit.  Anno  quidein 
1397.  dies  18  Aprilis  eft  feria  5.  fed  incidit  is  in  annum 
20  Ilichardi  11.  In  MS.  Codice,  qui  penes  M.  Fofterum 
Collegij  D.  Johannis  Cantabr.  habetur,  fic  lego :  die  Jovis 
Aprilis  b'vo  anno  1387.  decimo  Richardi  11.  In  Cod, 
MS.  Cottoniano,  die  Jovis,  Aprilis  1 8.  anno  1387.  duo¬ 
decimo  Richardi  11.” 


'8 


But 


327° 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  1900. 

Bat  I  find  the  words  of  the  fame  Cottonian  MS. 

Tib.  D.  7.  to  be  thefe, . ])J)0  t’llflaCgOll 

«enDeo  in  a  parfoag  H  cp?tctii]>c  bag  of  3ue*gl. 


Num.  1900. 

Pc  ?cc  of  nr  lorn  a  poufcnD  prcDon^co  tiout  fcore 
&  fcucnc  pc  tncpc  (a  plain  miftake  for  tmpC}  ^CC  Of 
Ugntj  lRgcparD  pc  fccunD  •  •  •  &c. 


To  the  above-- written  paffage  of  Arch-bifhop  Ulher,  Mr.  Wharton  maketh  the  following  Anfwer,  Auftar.  pag.  439. 

Trevifa:  aetatem  Cl.  Ufferius  a  Caxtono  deceptus  male  pofuit.  Quae  enim  ex  fine  Tranflationis  Polychronici  citat,  a 
Caxtono  foede  corrupta  funt.  Namq;  is  Verfionem  patlim  emendare,  et  pro  lubitu  mutare  in  fe  recepit ;  quod  in 
Prsfdtione  Editionis  lute  fatetur.  Cum  itaq;  Hiftoria  Polychronici  anno  1  .57.  defierit ;  ille  Verfionem  illo  anno  fini- 
tain  efie,  aut  imprudcns  credidit,  aut  forfan  etiam  fciens  fubftituit.  Propius  ad  veritatem  accedunt  bini  Codices  M.3S. 
ab  Ulferio  memorati,  alter  D.  Folteri,  alter  Cottonianus  ;  quorum  ille  notar  Verfionem  finitam  elfe  die  Jovis.  Aprilis, 
f  octavo,  anno  1387.  decimo  Richardi  it.  Ifte  autem, 


f  If  the  MS.  Copie  of  Trevifa* s  Tranflation  now  in  the 
Library  of  St.  Johns  College  in  Cambridge,  be  that 
which  formerly  belonged  to  Mr.  Forfter  (as  in  probability 
it  may)  the  date  thereof  is  right  enough ;  for  it  exprefly 
faith  ppnprcnrlje.;  as  appeareth  by  the  fame  fent  by 
Mr.  Baker  to  Dr.  Ilickes,  with  a  remarkable  pallage  from 
the  fame  book  ;  which,  although  it  was  before  printed 
both  by  r axton,  and  by  Wynkyn  de  Worde,  the  Dodlor 
reprinted  in  the  general  Preface  to  hisThefaucus,  at  pag.  1 7. 

(  This  mull  be  an  error  in  the  Print ;  furely  Mr.  Whar¬ 
ton  could  not  have  been  guilty  of  fo  great  a  blunder. 


die  Jovis,  Aprilis  18.  anno  duodecimo  Richardi  11.  Uter- 
que  vero  lapfus  e(l.  Neque  enim  (in  priore  calculo) 

Aprilis  18  anno  -387.  in  diem  Jovis  incidit,  led  in  diem 
Lunte :  nec  (in  polteriore)  annus  1  ^87.  incidit  in  duode- 
cimum  Richardi  11.  annum,  fed  in  {  vicefimum.  Utrique 
igitur  fcrupulo  feliciter  fatisfacit,  et  finite  Verfionis  tempus 
rente  definit  Codex  MS.  qui  in  inftrucliflima  cl.  Tenifoni 
Bibliotheca  habetur,  his  verbis.  Ida  Tranflatio  finita  eft 
die  Jovis,  decimo  oflavo  Aprilis  die,  A.D.  1387.  decimo 
Richardi  11.  poll  Conqueflum  anno;  anno  autem  trice- 
fimo  quinto  aetatis  Patroni  mei  Domini  Thomte  Baronis  de 

Berkeiy,  qui  me  Tranflationem  iftam  aggredi  fecit.  Cral- 

lius  adhec  hallucinatur  Seldenus  (in  fine  praifat.  ad  X  Scriptorcs  Angl.)  qui  Trevifam  Fligdeni  Polychronicon  con. 
vertilfe,  et  ad  initia  Edwardi  i.||  annum  fc.  1460.  con-  11  Here  is  another  erratum;  for  Selden’s  words  are 

tinuajle  dial.  Qiu  Verfionem  emm  Polychrome,  primus  thd-  Verfio  illa  ,  jSj  ctiam  fllpCrioribus  feculis,  bis 
edidit  Caxtonus,  C.ontinuationem  ejus  ab  anno  ■  357- tditil  e(l .  et  ;ib  interprere,  Joanne  Jcilicet  de  Trevifa 
i46o.  non  a  Trevifa,  fed  a  iemet  ipfo  confer, ptam  fuille  aiam  -m  E(lwardi  Brti  ;nitia  condnuata.” 
difertis  verbis  amrmat. 

I  have  only  to  add,  concerning  the  date,  that  in  the  prefent  Copie  of  my  Lords  now  before  me  ;  and  in  another  now 
in  the  poffeflion  of  my  learned  Friend  Mr.  Anftis,  I  find  plainly  the  rDili  Dag  Of  3UEtgli'and  the  tCnJ’C  year,  about 
which  fo  much  difpute  hath  been  made ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  the  fame  true  reading  may  be  found  in  other  Copies. 
As  to  the  Bible's  being  wholly  tranflated  by  our  Author  Trevifa  ;  I  percieve  it  mentioned  by  Caxton  ;  from  him  by 
Bale  &  Pits,  who  give  the  beginning  of  the  Preface  thereunto  ;  from  Bale,  Primate  Ulher  takes  the  notion  ;  and  at 
length  Mr.  Wharton  (App.  ad  Cav.  Hilt.  Litt.  pag.  49.)  believes  it  may  be  (till  extant :  it  relating  not  to  the  book  in 
hand,  I  fliall  fay  no  more  but  this  ;  I  fhall  be  very  glad  to  fee  one  of  them. 


19OI. 

A  paper-Book  in  fol.  (given  by  the  Hon.  Coll.  Henry 
Worfcley,  at  this  time  His  Majefty’s  Envoy  extraor¬ 
dinary  to  the  King  of  Portugal)  being  a  fecond  tome 
belonging  to  a  former,  defigned  to  be  a  complete  Re- 
gilter  of  the  feverall  Acts,  Negotiations,  &  Letters 
relating  to  Sir  Thomas  Roes  Ambalfage  in  Germany, 
for  bringing  about  the  Reftoration  of  the  Palatine-Fa¬ 
mily.  A  good  part  of  it  feemeth  to  have  been  written 
by  Sr.  Thomas  Roes  own  Hand  ;  the  reft,  by  his  Se¬ 
cretary  or  Amanucnfis.  This  Second  Tome  may  be 
confidered  in  the  manner  following, 

Firlt,  Minutes  or  Draughts  of  Letters  to  diuers 
Kings  Sc  Princes,  drawne  vp  by  his  Majefties  Order,  to 
be  lent  to  Oxford,  Auguft  164*. 

NB.  Thofe  that  follow  in  this  Divifion,  are  all  in 
the  Name  of  K.  Charles  1. 

1.  To  the  Duke  of  Brunfwick  &  Lunenburgh.  1.  b. 
Thanking  them  for  rhe  Affection  they  had  ftiewn 
to  the  Queen  of  Bohemia  His  Sifter,  Her  Son  the  Prince 
Palatine  Sc  his  Familie,  at  the  late  Diet  at  Ratilhon  ; 
whofe  Interefts  His  Majefty  is  ftill  refolved  to  purfue  at 
the  general  Treaties  deligned  to  be  held  at  Munfter  and 
Ofnabrug  ;  efpecialiy.  fince  at  the  Afiembly  in  Francfort 
the  German  Princes  had  declared  the  Exile  &  Opprellion 
of  his  Nephew,  air  Eledlor  Sc  principal  Member  of  the 
Empire,  to  be  a  cheife  impediment  of  the  interne  Peace  : 
and  particularly,  fince  the  C.rownes  of  France  &  Sueden 
would  take  that  juft  Caufe  into  their  Prote&ion.  He 
defireth  them,  therefore,  to  join  with  thofe  other  Princes 
Sc  States  who  are  mediators,  or  (hall  be  interefled  in  that 
Treatye,  for  the  generall  pacification,  infilling  upon  the 
Vindication  of  their  fundamentall  Lawes  Sc  Liberties, 
and  a  general  Amnellie  to  the  yeare  1618.  becaufe  both 
the  being  of  the  Proteltant  Religion,  Sc  all  the  Lybertve 
Sc  pruiledges  of  the  German  Princes,  will  depend  vpon 


the  Conclufion  of  this  Treatye.  For,  as  this  fliall  leaue 
them,  either  fecured,  or  opprefled,  or  over-balanced  by 
the  inequalitye  of  the  Eledorall  Colledge,  many  future 
Ages  are  like  to  find  them. 

2.  A  Note,  fhewingthat  the  fame  inSubftance  was  to 
be  lent  to  the  Landgrave  &  Landgravine  of  Helfen,  to 
whome  the  Title  of  Illuftriftima  Celiitudo  is  to  be  given, 
in  like  manner  as  to  the  Dukes  of  Brunfwick.  ibid. 

3.  To  the  French  King.  2. 

Defiring  that  he  would  give  fuch  Commands  & 

Inftructions  to  His  Ambafiadors  at  the  approaching  Treaty 
of  Munfter,  as  that  the  exiled  Palatine  Family  may  be 
comprehended  therein,  as  principal  Members  of  the 
Empire  ;  whofe  opprellion  hath  beetle  an  abfolute  im¬ 
pediment  of  the  Peace  ;  and  without  which,  nothing  can 
be  fettled  fecure  &  liable.  2. 

4.  To  the  Queene  Regent  of  France.  ibid. 

Defiring  that  through  Her  Proteclion,  &  Authority 

with  the  King  Her  Son,  the  Condition  of  his  Siller  the 
Queen  of  Bohemia,  Sc  the  Rights  Sc  entyre  Reftitution 
of  the  Princes  her  innocent  Children,  may  be  compre¬ 
hended  in  the  general!  intended  Pacification  of  the  Em¬ 
pire,  without  which,  no  peace  can  be  fecure,  while  one 
of  the  principall  Members  lhall  be  excludedfrom  that  ge- 
narall  benefitt,  whofe  caufe  he  can  never  in  Honour,  nor 
for  the  nearnes  of  bloud,  abandon.  In  which  worke 
alfo,  he  is  affured,  the  Queene  of  Suede  will  concurre  & 
co-operate.  ibid. 

5.  To  the  Duke  of  Orleans.  2.  b. 

Invoking  both  the  Afiiftance  of  his  Authoritye  & 

Wifedome,  that  in  the.generail  intended  Treatyes  for  the 
Pacification  of  the  Empire,  the  reftitution  ol  the  Palatine 
Family  may  be  comprehended,  as  elfential  to  the  Peace. 
Which  can  never  be  fecured,  but  by  relettling  the  prin- 
cipall  Members  in  their  annent  Right  &  Inheritances. 
That,  in  this  conjuncture  he  lhall  haue  Oportunitye  to 
oblige  two  of  the  finneft  Pillars  of  the  German  Lybertye, 
f>*  the 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


3ii 


Num.  1901. 

the  Mutinous  Houles,  Palatin  &  Lorreyne  ;  whofe  pof- 
teritie  will  owe  this  benefitt  to  the  Crowne  of  France, 
that  they  may  be  able  to  ferve  it,  as  bulwarkes  againlt  any 
Enemye, 

6.  To  the  Queene  of  Suede.  ibid. 

Thanking  Her  for  acquainting  His  Nephew  the 

Prince  Elector  Palatine  in  her  late  Letters,  that  {he  had 
refolved,  in  theprefent  Conjuncture  of  the  defigned  Trea- 
tye  of  Pacification,  to  embrace  his  Caufe,  as  an  impe¬ 
diment  of  that  confequence,  that  no  Peace  can  be  fecure 
with  the  Oppreflion  &  Exclufion  of  one  of  the  principall 
Pillars  Sc  Members  of  the  Empire  ;  and  to  that  end,  had 
procured  from  the  Emperor,  a  Safe-ConduCt  for  him  or 
his  Deputies,  to  appeare  &  plead  his  owne  Rights.  Shew- 
ing,  that  both  the  well-being,  Sc  being  of  the  Protellant 
Religion,  doth  abfolutely  depend  upon  refettling  the  bal- 
lance  of  the  Electoral  Colledge,  and  the  Preferuation  of 
thole  Princes  who  will  be  vnited  by  the  Common  band  of 
the  iincere  worfhip  of  God.  His  Majefly  declareth  his 
Opinion,  that  She  will  not  find  the  Emperor  very  averfe ; 
he  having  tailed  the  bitternes  of  the  Bavarian  Friendfhip  ; 
and  is  mod  allured  that  She  (hall  meete  the  Cooperations 
of  the  Crowne  of  France,  of  His  Unkle  the  King  of  Den- 
marke,  and  of  all  the  Princes  Sc  States  of  Germany, 
that  take  any  care  of  their  owne  Safetye  &  the  Common 
Libertie. 

7.  To  the  King  of  Denmarke.  3. 

Declaring,  that  fince  neither  the  Julticc  of  the  Prince 

Eledor  Palatines  Caufe,  his  own  longe  abufed  Patience, 
nor  the  Interceffion  of  fo  many  Kings  &  Princes,  had 
brought  forth  EffeCts  anfwerable  to  his  defires  &  endea¬ 
vors  for  the  Common  Peace  ;  Sc  efpecially  fince  by  the 
Refolutions  of  the  Duke  of  Bavaria,  it  doth  appeare, 
that  there  is  left  no  Flope,  that  he  will  by  any  private 
Treaties  or  Mediations,  make  any  Rellit’ution  accep¬ 
table,  neither  of  the  Dignitie  nor  Lands  by  him  vfurped  : 
His  Majefty  had  thought  it  fit  to  lay  hold  vpon  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  the  generall  Treaties  at  Munfter  &  Ofnabrug, 
principally  defligned  for  the  refettling  &  pacification  of 
the  Empire.  In  which,  His  Danifh  Majefty  being  the 
cheife  Meditator,  He  fervently  recommendeth  the  Caufe 
of  the  Palatine-Family  to  his  protection,  that  it  may  there 
be  received  as  a  principal  Impediment  of  the  defired 
Peace  ;  which  can  neuer  be  fecured  with  the  Exclufion 
and  oppreflion  of  the  firft  EleCtor,  as  long  as  there  lhall 
Hue  any  of  that  Mutinous  Famely,  that  haue  either 
freinds  or  Courage. 

8.  To  the  EleCtor  of  Saxe.  3.  b. 

9.  To  the  EleCtor  of  Brandeburgh.  '  ibid. 

1  o.  To  the  EleCtor  of  Mentz.  4. 

1 1.  To  the  Elector  of  Collen.  4.  5. 

The  purport  of  all  thefe  Letters  is  the  fame  ;  vizt.  to 

exhort  them  to  purfue  the  Interefts  of  the  Palatine  Family 
at  the  approaching  Treaties  ofMunlter&c  Olhabrug;  which 
they  would  find  to  be  countenanced  by  the  Crowns  of 
France,  Denmark,  &  Sueden. 

There  are  Notes  concerning  the  Style  to  be  ufed  to 
the  Electors  in  writing  ;  namely,  that  to  the  Secular 
Electors,  Sereniflima  Celfitudo  muft  be  given  in  the 
conclufion  ;  as  alfo  in  the  fame  manner  to  the  Ecclefiaf- 
tical  EleCtors,  who  mud  be  complimented  with  Rever"'\ 
Celfitudo  at  the  beginning  ?  &  Reu"‘\  Dignitas  toward 
the  middle. 

Now  followeth,  the  Second  Tome,  or  Continuation 
of  ACts,  Negotiations,  &  Letters,  of  my  (i.  e.  Sir  Thomas 
Roe’s)  Ambafiage  to  the  Emperour,  EleCtorall  Diet, 
Princes,  &  States  of  Germany,  viz. 

12.  Relation  ofa  Conference  betweene  the  Mediatours 

&  me;  44  March  1641-2.  5. 

Thefe  Mediators  were  the  Ambafladors  of  the  King 
of  Denmark  &c  of  the  EleCtor  of  Mentz,  who  faid  they 
came  to  Sir  Thomas  with  a  Meflage  from  the  Emperors 
Commiflioners  at  the  Treaty,  the  eft'eCl  of  which  was, 
that  Sir  Ihomas  fhould  fend  away  a  Poll  to  procure  from 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1901. 

His  Majefty  K;  Charles  1.  two  things  ;  firft,  an  nChial 
Ratification  of  what  fhould  be  concluded  in  the  Treatyey 
fo  that  the  Execution  on  our  part  might  follow  imme¬ 
diately  without  more  Ceremonye  ;  for  that  they  would 
actually  and  inflantly  reftore  &  give  poffeflion  to  the 
Pnnce  EleClor-Palatin  of  whatfoever  fhould  be  agreed 
vpon.  Secondly,  that  His  Majefty  would  procure  a 
Declaration  frona  His  Parliament,  that  they  would  be 
obliged  to  aflift  him  for  the  performance  of  his  part ;  to 
the  end,  that  they  might  be  affured  both  from  the  King 
&  Kingdomc.  Both  thefe  propofals  were  utterly  reiected, 
as  highly  unfeafonable  &  affronting. 

Then  follow  Draughts  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe’s  Letters. 

13.  To  Sir  Arthur  Hopton,  March  19.  16  +  1-2.  7. 

Concerning  the  King  of  Spain’s  Pleni-potence  or 

full-power  (of  which  there  was  much  talk  at  the  Con¬ 
ference  above-mentioned)  which  Sir  Thomas  objected 
againft,  as  invalid  in  refpeCt  of  Language,  Form  &  Sub- 
fiance.  T  hat  the  Imperialifts  are  grown  weak,  &  by 
thefe  little  &  oblique  Arts  feek  to  gain  time. 

Another  Letter  of  the  fame  Date,  was  fc-nt  to  Sir 
Henry  de  Vic. 

14.  To  Mr.  Curtius,  19  March  1641-2.  7.  b. 

About  the  Spanilh  Pleni-potence  above  mentioned  ; 

with  remarks  upon  the  Induftry  of  the  Hollanders,  who 
during  other  mens  Troubles,  feek  their  own  Opportuni¬ 
ties  ;  as  if  there  were  no  day  of  reckoning.  While 
Spayne  &  Portugall  contend,  they  catch  the  Bone ; 
while  we  wrangle,  they  fnatch  up  the  Stakes. 

15.  To  the  Duke  of  Wirttemberg,  in  French.  21 

March,  1641-2.  3. 

That  now  having  attended,  as  Ambaffador  from 
our  King  to  the  Emperor  &  Imperial  Diet,  five  Months, 
in  Order  to  procure  Reftitution  to  all  Princes  who  had 
been  opprefled  by  the  Emperor  (among  whome  His  Fligh- 
nefs  was  one)  he  had  not  been  able  to  effeCl  any  thing 
of  that  which,  was  chiefly  defired  ;  fince  the  Amnefty 
which  was  coming  out,  was  exclufive  of  the  much- 
wronged  Palatine- Houfe,  whofe  Caufe  our  King  would 
never  abandon. 

16.  To  the  Earle  of  Arundell.  26  March  1641-2. 

8.  b. 

That  when  the  Commiflioners  xvere  ready  to  enter 
into  a  real  Treaty,  grounded  on  their  powers,  the  Spa¬ 
nilh  Ambaffador  conieffed  he  had  none.  That  the  Em¬ 
peror  fending  an  Exprefs  into  Spayne,  and  affuring  them, 
that  he  would  procure  fuch  powers  as  were  requifite’ 
they  had  vorne  out  four  Months  more.  That,  at  laft| 
there  is  come,  and  confidently  enough  prefented,  a  thing 
like,  and  by  them  called,  a  Plenepotence  j  but  fo  full 
of  abufe,  that  it  forceth  him  to  conclude,  that  we  can 
expett  nothing  from  thence  but  Scorne  or  Delufion. 
Though,  in  the  Condition  wherein  they  are,  in  neede  of 
freinds,  he  is  amafed,  that  they  fhould  thus  induftrioufly 
loofe  them  by  trifling.  That  a  little  before,  the  Media- 
tours  had  fettled  the  Treaty  in  a  forme:  that  is,  that  the 
Emperour  fhould  firft  declare  what,  &  how  he  would 
reftore,  for  the  Lands  in  the  lower  Palatine,  remitted  by 
the  Duke  of  Bavare  to  him ;  and  for  thofe  held  by  the 
heyres  of  Infpruck,  Mentz,  &  Darmftat.  Then,  that 
the  Duke  of  Bavare  fhould  declare,  for  the  Dignitye  & 
Upper  Lands  ;  and  then,  that  the  Conditions  of  Confce- 
deration  fhould  be  propofed.  That  they  now  expeft  the 
Emperors  anfwer,  who  hath  taken  upon  himfelfe  to  con¬ 
clude  &  execute  for  Spayne,  upon  which  he  (Sir  Tho¬ 
mas)  has  chofen  to  relye,  as  vpon  the  Head  of'  the  Em- 
pyre. 

17.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas,  23  March  1641-2. 

Concerning  the  Matters  before  rehearfed  ;  with  his 
Opinion,  that  if  he  fhould  breake  off  &  returne,  the  Em¬ 
perour  would  fend  to  His  Majefties  Gates,  &  offer  that, 
which  they  will  not  give,  while  they  have  hope  of  6ur 
Patience,  or  relye  on  our  owne  home  Troubles  ;  for  this 

Protraction 

4  N 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1901. 

Protraction  of  the  firfl:  Anfwere  doth  block  vs  up,  fo  that 
He  cannot  lay  hold  vpon  the  ouvertures  of  the  Duke  of 
Bavare.  That  the  Arch-duke  Leopold  doth  ftiflly  refufe 
the  Charge  of  Flanders  with  the  Title  of  Governor  }  but 
requireth  that  of  Regent,  and  to  chobfe  all  his  owne 
Counfell :  with  condition,  that  if  he  marry,  and  have 
Heyres  males,  that  they  fliall  inherit  it,  as  was  agreed 
vnto  the  Arch-duke  Albertus.  But  Sir  Thomas  cannot 
believe  the  Spaniards  will  give  that  away  which  is  their 
owne  ;  when  they  will  not  reftore  that  they  ufurpe  with 
injurye. 

1 8.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  30  March,  1 642.  1 0. 

That  neither  Iiimfelf  nor  the  Mediators  can  procure 

the  Emperors  anfwere  ;  which  ought  to  be  the  firfl  Step 
&  Ground  of  a  'Treaty.  That  his  Mini  Hers  have  reftrey- 
ned  it  agayne  to  declare  only  for  Himfelfe,  Spayne,  the 
Heyres  of  Infpruch,  and  that  part  of  the  Lower  Palati¬ 
nate  remitted  by  the  Duke  of  Bavare :  flatiy  referring 
us  to  feeke  our  owne  accommodation  with  Mentz  &  Darm- 
ftat  for  the  reft,  and  with  the  Duke  of  Bavare  for  the 
Dignity  A  Upper  Lands ;  to  whom  the  Mediators  have 
intimated  this  Refolution  j  &  the  firfl;  two  have  taken 
time ;  but  Bavare  replyed,  that  whenfoever  the  Emperor 
will  do  his  part,  He  will  declare  &  enter  vpon  Treaty 
the  next  day.  But  Sir  Thomas  thinks  that  this  is  all 
Collufion,  &  that  the  full  defign  is  to  weary  us  out ; 
fprung  from  our  owne  diftempers,  and  a  Collection,  that 
we  can  doe  neyther  good  nor  harme  :  it  being  reported 
that  the  Emperor  A  all  his  Court  will  loon  goto  Preiburg, 
thence  to  Pv  rna,  &  from  thence  to  Prague,  there  to  fettle 
his  Refidence  ;  and  he  believes  that  they  Ihall  not  have 
tyme  enough  left  for  them  to  firnilh  that  in  three 
weeks,  which  they  have  not  beene  able  to  begin  in  Nine 
Months. 

19.  'To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  6  April  1 64-1.  to.  b. 

"I  hat  the  Emperors  Anfwer  fo  long  promifed,  is 

ftill  delaved  ;  the  meaning  whereof  is  this  ;  the  Imperial 
Court  want  to  know  what  our  King  will  do  for  them. 
For,  vnlefs  they  may  haue  help  from  His  Majefty,  in 
this  their  extreme  necellity,  they  will  reftore  nothing. 
They  will  afke  (A  nothing  abate)  to  have  prefently  1 0000 
men  given  fo  the  Prince  Elector  Palatin  ;  A'  His  Majefty 
bound  by  a  Treaty  to  mainteine  them,  in  conjunction 
with  the  Emperor  A  Empyre,  vntill  the  generall  Peace 
can  be  obteined,  and  againft  whom  they  Ihall  be  imployed. 
Without  this  they  will  doe  nothing ;  and  this  for  the 
Lower  Palatinate  only  ;  we  being  left  to  make  our  com- 
pofition  with  Bavare,  as  well  as  we  can.  Wherefore, 
the  Scale  hangs  thus.  Whether  it  will  be  lefs  Dilhonour 
or  Inconvenience  to  breake  off  vpon  their  Delayes,  or 
upon  a  Confellion  of  our  own  Impotency  ?  Sir  'Thomas 
gives  divers  particulars  relating  to  the  Courts  of  Vienna, 
Madrid,  Ac.  which  I  here  omit. 

20.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  13  April  1642.  1 1. 

That  the  Caufe  of  the  Emperors  Anfwer  being  ftill 

delayed,  is  the  Liberty  of  the  Prefs  in  England,  and 
freedom  for  all  manner  of  advertifements  to  pafs  our 
Ports.  lor  Relations  A  Journals  of  our  Affaires  being 
brought  thither,  are  inftantly  tranflated  A  publifhed  to 
the  infinite  difadvantage  of  our  .State.  Infomuch,  as  he 
findeth  a  fctled  Opinion  there,  that  His  Majefty  is  not 
able  to  comply  with  their  delyres  of  prefent  Ayde.  And, 
therefore,  howfoever  they  will  in  their  Anfwere  make 
fome  fpecious  Offers  vpon  Conditions  ;  yet  that  is  only 
done  to  make  a  fayre  Ihowe  to  the  World,  in  affeurance 
they  Ihall  not  be  put  to  the  Tryall  of  Performance  ;  and 
fo  they  will  fpinne  vs  out,  as  long  as  they  can,  and  in 
the  end  lay  the  fayling  vpon  vs.  That  the  Emperor  will 
remeue  within  5  Weekes  yet  there  is  no  Invitement 
either  to  Him,  or  to  the  Mediatours,  to  follow  the  Court, 
as  was  ferioufly  done  at  Ratilhon.  So  that  it  appeares 
they  are  content  he  ffould  take  an  occafion  to  feparate ; 
and  then  he  Ihall  be  forced,  before  that  remove,  to  begin 
his  Returne,  left  it  Ihould  be  too  apparent,  that  he  is 


Num.  190  i. 

left  behind  as  vnconfiderable.  Yet  this  he  cannot  do, 
unlefs  he  be  fupplied  with  Money ;  for  which  he  renucs 
his  preffing  Inftances* 

21.  To  Sir  Arthur  Hopton.  16  April  1642.  n.b. 

That  the  Emperors  Anfwer  cannot  yet  be  obteinedj 

the  difficulty  refting  betwfeene  Him  A  the  Duke  of  Bavare, 
to  accomodate  the  Dukes  Satisfaction  betweene  themfelues; 
In  which,  if  they  can  agree,  He  Ihall  do  all  his  worke  at 
once ;  if  not,  we  Ihall  only  receive  an  anfwere  for  the 
Lower  Palatinate  ;  and  be  left  to  treate  with  Bauare  apart, 
which  will  prue  uery  knotty.  Sir  Thomas  heares  that 
the  Anfwer  will  be  reafonably  free,  in  the  matter  of  Rc-f- 
titution,  but  uery  high  the  demands  of  Ayds  A  Confce- 
deracyes  on  our  part.  Which  Demands  if  they  Ihall  be 
exorbitant,  the  meaning  will  be,  to  make  a  fayre  Showe, 
as  if  they  w'ould  have  reftored  for  the  Loue  of  Peace,  but 
that  the  fayling  Ihould  reft  upon  us,  as  (in  this  vnhappy 
conjuncture  of  hoinetroubles  (vn willing  or  vnable  to  com- 
piy  with  their  neceflities  &  defyres. 

22.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  20  April  1642.  12. 

In  this  as  in  former  Letters,  concerning  the  confu- 

fed  ftate  of  the  German  Affaires,  which  I  pafs  over,  hafte- 
ning  to  what  more  nearly  concerneth  us,  viz.  that  He 
had  follicited  the  Emperors  Anfwer  to  the  laft  Hour  before 
his  removal  to  Vienna,  and  then  was  told  by  the  Am- 
baffador  of  Mentz,  that  the  Declaration  of  the  Empe¬ 
ror  touching  the  Lower  Palatinate  was  ready,  for  as  much 
as  concerned  Him  ;  but  that  he  had  given  order  it  Ihould 
not  be  exhibited,  vntill  the  Duke  of  Bauare  A  the  Elec¬ 
tor  of  Mentz  Ihould,  at  the  fame  tyme,  deliuer  their 
Refolution  &  Conditions.  This  being  contrary  to  the 
Forme  agreed  ypon  ;  contrary  to  the  Imperial  conftant 
Promifes  ;  &  a  direCt  oppofition  to  the  Duke  of  Bauares 
Proteftation,  is  the  fure  way  anew  to  embroyle  the  pro¬ 
ceeding.  That  to  pacifie  him,  the  Ambaffador  of  Mentz 
had  lent  to  excule  this  delay,  vpon  the  vnreafonable 
demands  of  the  Duke  ofBauare;  and  that  the  Emperour 
had  fent  to  the  Duke  for  more  equal  conditions.  That 
the  Elector  of  Saxe  hath  commanded  his  Ambaffador  to 
return,  if  a  very  fpeedy  courfe  be  not  taken  to  expedite 
the 'Treaty,  oneway  or  other,  'that  the  Ambaffadors 
of  Mentz  have  no  Commiffion  nor  InltruCtiom  to  declare 
any  thing  for  the  Bergftraet,  which  is  remitted  to  the 
Chapter  to  refolue,  which  may  be  done  in  2  or  3  Months, 
according  as  the  French  proceede  or  retyre  from  their 
Borders.  That  unlels  the  ElcCtor  of  Mentz  doe  declare 
a  Reftitution,  Bavare  will  not  defeend  to  any  particular 
offer.  Sir  'Thomas  is  refolved,  hereupon,  to  fend  a  pre- 
paratiue  of  Farewell  to  the  Mediators  ;  and  to  refent  the 
Abufe  by  Letter  to  Count  Trautinanfdorf.  That  he 
will  govern  himfelf  according  to  what  fuch  an  Intimation 
may  draw  from  them  ;  and  if  they  will  be  content  thus 
to  let  him  goe,  he  will  retyre  to  Nurenberg  and  there 
attend  His  Majefties  Orders.  Laftly,  that  he  enterteine 
the  offered  feperate  Treaty  with  the  Duke  of  Bavare,  and 
thereby  make  a  full  tryall  of  his  Intentions. 

23.  To  Count  Traulmanfdorff,  in  Italian,  21  April 

1642.  t2.  b. 

The  occafion  of  this,  is  intimated  in  the  AbftraCt  of 
the  laft. 

24  Sir  Thomas’s  Latin  Letter  to  the  Mediators  ;  com¬ 
plaining  of  the  ill  ufage  they  all  had  received  by  the 
Delay  of  the  Emperors  Anfwer  fo  often  promifed ;  thank¬ 
ing  them  for  their  good  Offices  ;  and  partly  taking  leave 
of  them.  But  in  the  Margin,  he  hath  written  thefe  words, 
“  This  deferred  to  be  fent  vpon  arrivall  of  an  Exprefs 
from  England  ;  &  new  Promife  of  the  whole  anfwere.” 

25.  To  the  King  26  April,  1642.  13.  b. 

In  Anfwer  to  one  he  had  received  from  His  Majefty, 

wherein  He  had  {hewn  His  gracious  acceptance  of  Sir 
Thomas’s  Services. 

26.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  26  April  1642.  14. 

That  Count  Trautmanfdorfe  had  fent  him  an  Anfwer 

to  His  Letter,  wherein  he  promifed  a  prelent  Refoluriun 

from 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


Num.  1901. 

from  the  Emperor  to  the  whole  Reftitution.  He  after¬ 
wards  enters  into  a  long  deliberation  upon  the  purport 
of  fome  Letters  received  by  the  Prince  Palatine  Minifters 
from  their  Matter  ;  whereby  it  was  geffed  that  his  Majef- 
ties  pleafure  was  that  that  Prince  fhould  accept  of  the 
Lower  Palatinate  ;  with  a  Salvo  jure  to  the  Upper  Palati¬ 
nate;  k  obferve  a  Neutralise  in  the  prefent  War  in  the 
Empire.  Sir  Thomas  Ihewcth  the  Reafons  of  his  diflike 
to  fuch  a  Motion  ;  and  that  it  is  better,  in  the.  prefent 
conjuncture,  to  wait  the  Emperors  frefhly-promifed  Re- 
folution ;  to  gain  time  by  flaying  for  Iflue  of  the  approach¬ 
ing  Campaign;  or  to  break  off  the  Treatie  in  expectation 

of  a  more  favorable  Opportunity. 

27.  To  the  Prince  Elector  27  April  1642.  !5-. 

Referring  Him  to  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas  for  His 

Opinion  of  the  Motion  abovementioned.  That  His  High- 
neffes  Minifters  k  himfelf  had  agreed  to  prol'ecute  the 
Treaty  for  the  whole  Lands;  and  an  immediate  alterna¬ 
tive  :  and  then  if  the  anl'were  to  the  generall  (hall  be  fuch 
as  his  private  information  whifpereth,  he  fliall  not  be  able 
to  beare  it,  but  with  juft  Indignation  will  breake-off,  & 
venture  His  Majeftiesdifpleafure  in  coming  away  without 
order  :  for  by  fo  doing,  he  fliall  leaue  H<s  Highneffes 
Caufe  entyre  for  a  better  occafion  ;  k  be  juttetyed  by 
the  Iniquity  of  tlitir  Conditions. 

28.  Relation  of  a  Conference  betweene  the  Ambaffa- 

dors  Mediator  &  Sir  Thomas,  vpon  their  prefentation  of 
the  long  expeftcd  Declarations.  15.  b.  1642.) 

It  flieweth  that  then  the  Ambaffadors  of  Denmarke 
&  Mentz,  as  Directors  of  the  Mediation,  came  to  Him, 
Sc  prefented  him  with  foure  Papers,  being  the  feverall 
anfwers  &  declarations  of  the  Intereffed  k  Poffeffors  of 
the  two  Palatinats.  The  firft  in  the  name  of  the  Empe¬ 
ror,  for  himfelfe  ;  the  King  of  Spayne  ;  the  Duke  of 
Bavare  ;  and  the  Archduchefs  of  lnfpruch,  as  Tutrefs 
to  the  Heyres  of  Leopold.  The  Second  from  the  Elec- 
tour  of  Mentz,  concerning  the  Bergftraet.  The  third 
from  the  Bifhop  of  Worms.  The  Fourth  from  the  Land¬ 
grave  of  Darmftat. 

29.  Sir  Thomas’s  Anfwer  to  the  Mediators  thereupon; 
in  Latin.  30  April,  1642.  16. 

The  Exordium,  and  divers  of  the  Expreflions  are 
taken  from  that  abovementioned  at  no.  24.  but  what  our 
King  did  refolutely  infill  upon,  may  be  feen  by  the  words 

following.  “  Placebit  itaq;  Excell""’-  k  Ill' .  Dombu'- 

veftris  cerlb  feire,  nullam  aliam  Palatinatus  Inferioris 
rettitutionem,  nifi  integram,  cum  omnibus  Juribus,  Mem- 
bris  k  Privileges,  tarn  Politicis  quam  Ecclefiafticis,  in  eo 
Statu,  ac  Condilione,  uti  a  Principibus  EleCloribus  Pala- 
tinis  antiquitus,  et  fpecialiter  anno  161S.  poflidtbantur, 
abfque  ulla  Limitatione,  aut  Diminutione,  vel  Jurifdicti- 
onis,  vel  Poffellionis,  ficut  omnes  alij  EleCtores  k  Prin- 
cipes,  vel  vi  Legum,  et  Conftitutionum  Imperialium, 
vel  Jure  proprio  in  ditionibus  fuis,  ijfdem  gaudent  et 
poflident,  a  Nobis  acceptam  iri-  Quod  ad  Dignitatem 
EleCtoralern,  &  Palatinatum  Superiorem  attinet.  Excell""1- 
Sc  Ill1"1"*  Dombus-  veftris,  et  univerfo  Orbi  Chriftiano  de- 
daro,  Serenm''m-  Regent  meum  de  accommodatione  tequfi 
et  honefta  tract  a  re.  in  animo  habuiffe :  fed  vel  Terras 
emere,  vel  de  alia  alternativa,  nifi  immediate  k  integral, 
quicquam  audire nolle.”  This  Sir  Thomas  oppofedas  an 
anfwer  to  the  four  Papers  brought  by  them,  which  being 
obfeurely  or  craftily  worded.  Sc  fo  as  to  beget  many  in¬ 
conveniences,  he  would  no  farther  medle  with. 

30.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  3  May  1642.  16.  b. 

That  He  cannot  thinke  of  the  Papers  aforefaid,'  nor 
mention  them,  without  Indignation,  and  breaking  out 
into  Paflion:  For  never  was  any  thing  propofed  fo  vnjuft, 
fo  mfolent,  k  fo  dilhonourable.  Nor  can  he  make  any 
other  Judgment,  but  that  by  longer  Stay,  he  fliall  mul¬ 
tiply  the  Occafion  of  more  Scorne  k  Abufe.  And  he 
is  the  more  amafed,  becaufe  their  Condition  was  never 
fo  low,  allmoft  defperale.  He  giveth  the  Sum  of  a  Con¬ 
ference  he  lately  had  with  Mr-  Bidenback  the  Danes  Am- 


323 


Num.  igot. 

baffador,  in  the  prefence  of  the  Prince  EleCtor  Palatines 
Minifters,  and  the  Anfwer  he  gave  to  the  Queftions  afked 
by  that  Mediator,  His  Judgement  (i.  e.  Sr.  Thomas’s) 
is,  that  nothing  will  be  offered  or  alked,  that  fliall  be, 
in  any  proportion,  equall,  or  juft,  or  pofiible.  So  that 
he  relolveth  to  take  his  Leaue  of  the  Emperor  in  fayre 
tearmes,  without  breach  of  the  Treaty  abfolutely,  but  to 
fufpend  it  to  another  tyme  k  place,  and  to  abetter  Con-  - 
jun&ure  ;  fuch  as  Aral  be  agreed  on  betweene  their  Ma- 
jefties,  it  both  fliall  like  of  it. 

31.  To  the  Prince  Elettor.  3  May  1642.  ly.b. 

That  there  is  a  neceflity  for  him  to  come  off,  upon 

the  Iniquity  of  the  Declarations  fo  long  expected ;  k 
rather  to  preferve  His  Highneffes  Rights  k  1  file  entyre, 
then  to  weaken  them  by  offring  to  accept  that  which  fliall 
not,  vpon  any  termes  of  honor  be  obteined.  Yet  hepur- 
pofeth  not  to  breake  the  Treaty  (wherein  fome  of  the 
Mediators  are  our  Oppofites,  and  not  only  mock,  but 
betray  us)  but  to  part  vpon  fayre  tearmes,  and  to  fufpend 
it  to  fome  other  place,  &  a  fitter  Conjuncture. 

32.  To  the  Queene  of  Bohemia.  4  May,  1642.  18. 

That  after  ten  Moneths  attendance,  expectation,  & 

promifes ;  the  Declarations  of  the  Emperor  k  the  others 
intereffed,  were  delivered  ;  being  fo  abfurd,  vnjuft,  dis¬ 
honourable,  k  impoflible,  that  they  deferved  none 
anfwer.  That  he  will  preferve,  in  integrity  the  juftice  of 
the  Prince  Electors  caufe,  &  leaue  it  110  worfe  than  he 
found  it ;  but  fo  much  better,  in  that  he  hath  drawn 
from  them  aConfeflion,  that  he  is  reftorable ;  and  that  it 
is  fitt  to  doe  him  Juftice;  &  that  they  haue  declared  a 
will  to  treate  euen  for  the  whole  ;  but  that  the  only  hin- 
derance  hath  bene,  not  in  the  Equity  of  the  Caufe,  but  in 
the  Iniquity  k  Covetoufnes  of  their  Offers  &  Demands. 

33.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  4  May,  1642.  ibid. 

Touching  the  Declarations  he  had  received;  of 

which  he  thought  thofe  of  Mentz,  W ormes,  &  Darm- 
ftadt  worthy  of  no  Reply.  For  the  Ambaffadors  of 
Mentz  nothing,  in  theirs,  but  they  had  no  formall  Order 
from  their  Prince,  but  that  they  did  colleCt  out  of  fome 
Circumftances,  that  he  would  be  content  to  pay  the  mo¬ 
ney  for  which  the  Bergftraet  had  bene  engaged.  The 
pretenfion  of  the  Bifhop  of  Wormes  is  but  a  quarrell 
pickt,  to  embroyle  the  Caufe  with  the  Church,  that  Con- 
fcience  might  be  pretended,  to  countenance  Injury.  The 
Deputie  of  Darmftats  long  Narration  was  but  Rayling, 
Scandall,  &  Folly  ;  yet  the  Conclufion  though  fweeter, 
was  ridiculous,  vizt,  that  he  would,  for  Love  of  Peace 
furrender  de  faClo  ;  upon  condition,  that  he  might  haue 
Security  to  receiue  back  the  fame  Lands  in  Feudo.  He 
knoweth  not  what  the  Duke  of  Bavare  will  doe,  the  Em¬ 
peror  having  the  point  of  anfwering  for  him  ;  fo  that  he 
is  not  likely  to  abate  to  vs,  nor  treate  vpon  lower  tearmes, 
than  he  hath  agreed  to  the  Emperor.  The  caufe  of  this 
Change  is  fuppofed,  this,  that  he  hath  fecured  his  feares 
by  fome  fecret  accord  with  the  French  :  into  which,  it 
is  fufpe&ed,  he  doth  endeavour  to  draw  his  brother  of 
Cullen,  &  the  Elector  of  Mentz,  now  in  this  their  affem- 
bly.  In  fumme  the  whole  Offer,  k  every  pait  thereof 
is  fo  unworthy,  vnjuft,  infolent,  k  diflionorable,  that  he 
is  refolved  not  to  treate  farther  vpon  it.  That  the  Medi¬ 
ators  hope  to  procure  more  moderate  or  tollerable  Con¬ 
ditions  to  be  propofed,  which  he  will  be  ready  to  receiue, 
to  the  la  ft  hower  of  his  flay :  but  he  will  doe  no  more  ; 
fuppofing  he  can  neuer  come-off  with  more  fhowe  of 
Honour,  then  vpon  the  Iniquity  of  their  moll  vnequall  k 
impoflible  Offers  k  Demands. 

34.  To  the  Prince  Elector.  10  May,  1642.  18.  b. 

That  the  Defign  of  the  Imperial  Court  was  that 
England  fhould  both  enter  into  a  League  with  them  for 
their  Afliftance,  that  is  for  our  King  to  raife  &  maintain, 
at  the  leaft,  10, coo  Men  for  them  (which  he  was  then 
unable  to  do)  and  that  the  Parliament  fhould  be  Security 
for  the  Kings  performing  his  Covenant;  and  further, 
that  his  Majefty  fhould  pay  a  great  Sum  of  Money,  at 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


3 14 


tl  c  leaft,  2  or  300,000!.  to  the  Duke  of  Bauarc.  He 
thinks  therefore,  rather  than  confefs  our  weaknefs,  & 
take  the  Breach  upon  our  felves,  it  would  be  belt  to  hold 
them  to  a  declaration  of  a  full  Reftitution,  which  they 
will  never  yield  to,  a  id  then  to  feparate  upon  the  In¬ 
iquity  &  Bafenes  of  their  Offers  &  Demands. 

35- To  Mr-  Secretary  Nicholas,  n  May,  1642.  19. 

1  hat  the  Mediators  haue  fummoned  the  Ambafla- 
dors  of  the  Prince  Elector  Palatine,  to  draw  them  either 
to  a  particular  Treaty,  vpon  every  Article  of  the  Empe¬ 
rors  Declaration  ;  or  elfe  by  them  to  engage  himfelf  to 
fome  promifc  of  a  Summe  of  money,  to  helpe  toward 
the  Satisfaction  of  the  Duke  of  Bavare,  which  is  what  the 
Imperial  Cou*  moft  wanteth.  The  Sum  pitched  upon, 
as  he  is  fecrerly  en Formed,  is  900,000  pounds  ;  and,  lefs 
than  300,000  will  not  be  accepted.  But  he  will  hold 
them  down  to  that,  which  they  will  not  do  ;  that  is,  to 
imke  a  Declaration  of  a  full  &  entyre  Reftitution,  at 
leait  or  the  Lower  Palatinate ;  this  being  the  only  way  left, 
to  preferue  the  publicque  honour,  &  the  juftice  of  the 
1  rtnee  Eledors  caitfe  entire.  That  that  Court  &  the 
Mediators  play  with  him,  &  thinke  thev  can  hold  him  by 
a  twyne  thred,  as  long  as  they  pleafe,  they  having  intelli¬ 
gence  from  England,  that  he  would  not,  nor  durlt  depart. 

1  hat  he  is  fecretly  afTured,  that  he  ftiall  neuer  haue  bet- 
ter  anfwere,  vntil  he  {hall  begin  to  take  Lcaue ;  and 
then,  if  they  haue  any  reall  purpofe,  they  mull,  &  will 
vnvajle  ir.  1  hat,  abfolutely,  they  will  not  reftore  the 
Lower  Palatinate  without  a  League,  to  joyne  the  Army 
vnder  the  1  nnce  Elector  with  them,  &  fome  Convenien- 
cias  fm  Spayne;  nor  the  Vpper,  without  a  great  Summe 
of  Money  to  Bavare  ;  nor  the  Dignity,  but  vpon  fuch 
an  A  Iter  nan  ue,  as  would  weaken  the  whole  frame  of  the 
Reformed [Religion  m  the  Empyre.  He  thinks  therefore 
that  it  is  better  by  removing,  to  avoyd  the  neceflity  of 
lciuhng  to  do  fomewhat  on  our  part,  then  to  lofe  his  ad- 
v  antage  ;  and  had  rather  tall  to  his  owne  Mailer,  and 
trull  in  his  benignity,  than  into  a  publique  Shame 
36.  I  c I  the  Count  of  Guebriant,  Generali  of  the 
Armyes  of  the  I  ranch  King  within  the  Empy  re  j  -  Mav 
1042,  in  French.  ~ 

i  hanking  him,  in  a  very  complimental  manner. 
Requdl'"8  C°  °ne11  Hmdel*n  at  liberty,  upon  his 

37-  To  Sir  Arthur  Hopton.  14  May,  1642.  20 

Ihat  he  cileemeth  the  Treaty  irrecoverably  fick  • 
yet  the  Mediators  will  not  give  it  over,  but  haue  conftilted 
to  procure  a  Moderation  in  fome  of  the  Articles.  f  hat 
the  Imperial  Court  will  not  reftore  the  Lower  Palatinate 
without  fome  very  advantages  League,  both  for  the 
Emperor  &  King  of  Spayne,  which  will  coil  His  Maieftv 
more  then  that  Province  is  now  worth.  Nor  will  the 
Duke  of  Bavare  furrendcr  the  Upper  Palatinate  with¬ 
out  a  great  Summe  of  Money ;  nor  the  Dignity  but 
vpon  fuch  an  alternate,  as  will  deftroy  the  Promilant 
Intereft.  Heis  confident  that  the  Emperor  fincerely  de- 
liteth  tofettie  tins  bufines;  but  his  prefent  neceflity 
caufeth  his  Mmtfters  to  atke  rather  according  to  the  E xl 
gentS:  Proportion 1  of  their  own  wants,  than  any  thing 
Wtthm  compafs  of  Reafon  or  Equitye  ;  indeed/ the? 
w  holly  impoflib  e.  But  in  the  Duke  of  Bavare  appearefh 
playne  &  vnmalked  Govetoulnes  &  Selfe-Loue  that  will 
abate  nothtng  tor  the  Publicque.  Moreover,  the  Church 
is  become  engaged,  and  Confcience  pretended,  to  coun 
tenance  oppreflion :  and  this  alfo  hath  two  (IroNg  P  iw" 

■he  Popes  Nunee,  &  the  Jefuites.  He  thereforeMnS 
n  more  couniclable  ,0  remit  the  Caufe  ,0  Gods  tvme 
&  to  preferue  the  Prince  Electors  Title  enu  re  to  abet’ 
ter  Conjunction ;  which  hath  yet  by  this  Negotiation 
gotten  this  advantage,  I, a,  it  is  now  held  to  berfconci™ 

be  gra“med  ™  *  P°m‘  “  f°rmerly  wouJd  no  wife 
38.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  14  May,  ,s4,  20  b 

That  the  Mediators  endeavor  to  moderatl  fome  of 


tv  util.  1901. 

the  Articles,  but  he  believes  it  wail  be  in  vaine  ■  becaufe 
the  Emperor,  &c.  K,„  doe  nothing  bu,  for  a  prlceaboue 

39-  To  the  Princefs  Elizabeth.  1  s  May,  ,  642  ibid 

thenUfurper  Scashard  as  Flint,  would  have ’ been  i, 

,  f0'.  ?lr..Tll?mas  Roe’s  relation  of  a  Conference  he 
had  with  Monfr.  Bidenbach.  13  May,  1642.  2l 

five  Zn'J T ™u,d  re<l“ire  a  League  OffeN- 
Anflri Dff“ire  a11  the  Enemyes  of  thS  Houfe  of 

Auftria,  at  leaft  within  the  Empyre  That  rmmt r,~v  u 
manfdorfle  had  deciared,  that  if  England  is  not  di/pnfed 
lare  hfye  "'e  jtmperor  by  a  League.  &  the  Duke  of  Ba- 
=by  aS?od  Summe  of  Money,  they  would  not  giue 
msdelfv,,hC,r't,'eS/or  n0thinS'  T1™  the  Surrender 

Mnatem^h  TS °f  Spay"e  °f  h,’S  part  of  lha  Lower  Pa¬ 
latinate  to  the  Emperor,  was  ypon  Conditions  of  Aydes 

for  lb"  "'To  'mat  the  Duke  of  Bavare* 

iZoh  1  “  th«e>  had  °bbgtd  the  Emperor  to  pay 
\nto  him  3000  pounds  Sterling  yearly  for  8  years  -fA 
.  St  that  Duke  had  parted  within, hin’g’  whhou/  mon’ey 
and  therefore  tile  Imperial  Minillers  would  not  buy  him 

fa.riiTh  Ik'  p  th.e“'  pretenfions,  without  being  reim- 
burfed  by  the  Palatms,  or  by  England.  That,  St  laft 
Sir  1  homas  had  drawn  this  Mediator  to  undertake  to 
make  the  Monon,  that,  the  bufines  of  the  Dignity  £  ,1° 
Upper  Palattne  be, ngfufpended  vmil  a  fitter  tyLe  fbe! 
rniule  they  would  never  come  without  money)  the  Lower 
flrould  be  reftored  de  ft, So,  intyreiy  both  in  PtfefaT 
Junfdtctton,  with  a  Salvo  Jure  to  all  other  rights  M- 
pended  ;  upon  fuch  reafonable  Condiil  ns  as  might  not 
A& «  of  b"‘A: ,ral1  81  Xueoient 

Acts  oi  1  rtendlhlp,  on  the  behalf  of  our  Kinge,  Sc  due 

RteXtof5  Per°r  &  £',,Py,e  0"  *h=  th= 
■ithIbfRUilhe!|°kCOn,|CrenCfC  wMchSir  Tll»"'aa  M 

May  r^a  h  Chanccll°r  the  Duke  ofBavare,  16 

thb-ftld1,  TrC’  “  I1,0''111  appc,1r- tll3t  ,he  D,lk(-'  °f  Bavaria 
unified  after  our  Money  exceedingly,  and  would  do  any 
hmg  10  get,  it.  Bu,  Sir  Thomas  is  of  opinion,  that  XI 

part  with  Ch'°U  C°mC  11  Co,Klufion>  Bttvare  will  no, 
part  with  Chamb  ;  nor  agree  the  alternative  immediate  • 
nor  accept  of  lefs  that  300,000  pounds :  nor,  that  the 
Stuisfeaiom^  re^oie  ,de  L°w'er  Palatinate  only  for  his 
4t-  lo  Mr.  Secretaty  Nicholas.  tS  May.  1642. 

That  he  had  vifited  the  Arch-Duke  Lcopoldlwh^'is 
a  gallant  Prince  ;  expreffed  much  refpeft  for  our  King  • 

I"  P'“"lRd  to  mterpofe  his  power,  that  he  might  ifot 
depart  without  fatisfaffion.  That  Wolftenftein  was 
lent  from  the  Emperor  to  the  meeting  at  Mentz,  tan- 
quam  exploratory  and  to  awe  their  Refolutions  ;  &  hath 
fo  well  taken  Ins  meafures,  that  he  hath  diverted  the 
inayne  Intention  of  Neutrality.  That  fome  difeontent 
hath  anfen  betweene  the  Emperor  &  the  Spanifh  Am- 
baflador,  who  hath  Bills  or  Monyes  there  to  haue  ravfed 
men  for  his  Mailer.  Which  being  not  able  to  efiicl 
fo,  the  Scarcity  &  dearnes  ofLevyes,  the  Emperor  would’ 
haue  made  life  of  it  ;  prormfing,  that  as  fooiie  as  the 
Suedes  fliould  be  expelled  Sflefia,  to  employ  :  ;  whole 
Army  in  the  Spanifh  Service  :  but  that  not  ft  vine  the 
tume,  he  would  haue  borrowed  it ;  but  could  obteine 

nothing 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


5-3 


Num.  1901, 

nothing.  Sir  Thomas  was  told  that  a  principal  Coun- 
fellour  fayd  to  a  Engliftnnan,  a  Pried  there,  thus.  The 
Englifh  Ambaffador  in  his  anfwere  offers  nothing,  for  his 
King  can  doe  nothing  :  he  threatens  us  that  he  will  be 
gone  ;  and  none  here  doth  hold  or  forbid  him. 

43.  Negotiation  from  the  1 8th  to  the  24th  May,  1642. 
and  Conference  vpon  it,  betweene  the  Englifh,  Danes, 

&  Palatiii  AmbafTadors.  23. 

This  fheweth,  how  Sir  Thomas  was,  at  length,  drawn 
by  the  Ambaffador  of  Denmark,  (rather  than  fuffer  the 
Treaty  to  be  broken  off,  through  the  mere  want  of  an 
Offer,  on  our  fide)  although  he  had  no  power  abfolutly 
tooffer  mony,  which  was  neuer  fuppofed  would  haue  bene 
demanded,  yet  feeing  That  was  the  Condition  fo  much 
infilted  vpon  for  tl  e  fatisfa&ion  of  the  Duke  of  Bavare 
A  eafe  of  the  Emperor :  He  was  content  to  offer  an 
afliftance  of  600,000  Dollers,  to  be  payd  in  reafonable 
tymc.  Sr.  Th  >mas  thought  this  is  the  befl  bargain  that 
can,  or  euer  could  be  expeCted  ;  being  made  only,  for 
Honor,  A  not  like  to  be  accepted.  That  being  made 
without  our  Kings  Order,  he  made  it  exprefly  ad  ratiii- 
candum.  That  if  Security  for  the  Money  fhoulu  be  re¬ 
quired,  it  fliould  be  propofed,  that  the  Upper  Palatinate 
fliould  remayne  in  the  poffdlion  of  the  Duke  of  Bavare 
quoad  ufu  fruClum,  as  a  pledge,  vntill  the  mony  agreed 
vpon  fliould  be  payd.  So  that  His  Majefly  fliall  not  be 
obliged  to  the  Impcrialls,  nor  Bavare  ;  nor  further  then 
he  plcafeth  to  aflift  toward  the  payment ;  and  yet  the 
Upper  Palatinate  to  be  reftored  quod  Dominium  A  de 
Jure,  the  profits  only  remaining  as  a  pawne,  to  be  re¬ 
deemed  when  the  Prince  Elector  (hall  be  able. 

44.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  25  May,  1642.  24.  b. 

That  He  had  a  late  Conference  with  Count  Traut- 

manfdorff,  the  Summe  of  whofe  Refolution  was,  (though 
given  in  fayre  &  hopefull  Expreflions)  that  we  mult  fatis- 
fye  the  Duke  of  Bavare  with  mony,  or  no  Trcatye.  Yet 
Sir  Thomas  is  conftant  to  his  opinion,  that  He  (hall  doe 
nothing  ;  and  that  though  all  the  difeourfe  A  prefen  t 
Intention  is,  vpon  mony  to  content  the  Duke  of  Bavare  j 
yet  if  they  ca, .  once  engage  vs  by  an  agreement  upon  that  ; 
then  thev  will  propofe  new  matter  for  the  fatisfaftioii  of 
the  Emperor,  Spayne,  St  others,  without  which  all  will 
fall.  For  he  believeth  not,  that  ever  the  Emperor  A 
others  will  quitt  all  their  owne  lnterefts  &  Commodityes 
only  for  that  Dukes  advantage,  though  they  never  more 
needed  him  then  now  ;  and  are  forced  to  vie  all  meanes, 
not  only  to  keepe  him  a  freind ;  but  to  hold  him  vpright, 
that  he  fall  not  to  the  Enemye.  For,  it  is  reported,  that 
He  with  the  Electors  of  Mentz  A  Collen,  Sc  the  Bifhop 
of  Wirtzburg,  have  fent  part  of  their  Refolutions  to  the 
Kmpcn>r  ;  That  if  His  Imperal  Majefly  will  not  feparate 
himfelfe  from  the  Spanifli  Counfells  A  lnterefts,  and 
feeke  the  Peace  of  the  Empyre  without  forreyne  relations ; 
they  arc  refolved  to  take  another  courfe  :  which,  at  the 
beft,  muft  be  a  Neutralitye  A  Separation  from  the  Inter- 
efts  of  the  Houle  of  Auftria.  This  doth  more  trouble  the 
Court  &  Spanifh  Minifters,  then  the  Suedes  profperity. 

45.  Relation  of  a  Conference  betweene  Sir  Thomas, 
the  Danes,  A  the  Mcnts  Ambaffador.  27  May.  25.  b. 

Here,  the  Danilh  &  Mentz  AmbafTadors,  being 
(as  Mediators)  to  hold  an  equality  between  all  the  par¬ 
ties;  prefl'ed  Hint  to  offer  more  money  than  he  had  be- 
foiedone;  buthegave  them  fuch  Anfwers  as  they  deferred. 

46.  To  Mr.  Browne.  31  May,  1642.  27. 

That  the  late  Affembly  at  Mentz  haue  meditated  a 

Neutrality  with  France  ;  &  preffed  the  Emperor  to  fepa¬ 
rate  himfelfe  from  the  Counfells  8c  lnterefts  of  Spayne ; 
or  elfe  they  muft  provide  for  theinfelues  ;  but  that  France 
had  refufed  them  the  Neutrality,  and  offered  them  only 
Protection  upon  their  Submiffion.  That  the  Suedes  in 
Silefia  haue  defeated  Duke  Fra.  Alberts  Anny,  A  taken 
himfelf  prifoner  being  wounded  in  three  places  ;  who  be 
ing  a  Lutheran,  fufpe&ed  &  rayled  at,  hath  fcarce  gotten 
pitiy  after  this  full  Teftimony  of  his  Fidelity  A  Courage. 

pAT.  UaRL.  Vox,.  II. 


Num.  1901. 

47.  To  my  Lord  of  Falckland  Secretary  of  State. 

31  May,  164?.  ibid. 

That  the  Declaration  of  Reftitution  which  he  hath 
received,  is  limited  to  fuch  Conditions  as  are  both  dif- 
honorable  &  impoflible  ;  occafioned  by  our  own  diftem- 
pers  at  home,  w'hich  hath  layd  our  reputation  flat,  as  being 
neyther  fitt  to  be  friends  nor  foes  ;  nor  able  to  doe  good, 
of  harmc.  Yet  the  Emperor’s  Condition  is  not  fuch,  as 
that  he  may  negleCt  Friends,  efpecially  now  after  Duke 
Francis  Alberts  defeat.  That  the  Emperor  is  a  fweete, 
ingenious,  A  noble  Prince ;  and  would,  if  he  were  not 
bound  to  Bavare  A  Spayne,  and  had  the  juncture  bene 
generally  propitious,  have  done  much  for  his  Majefties 
Satisfaction,  A  the  Peace  of  his  Countrey. 

48.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  1  June,  1641.  27.  b. 

That  the  Mediators  will  ftill  hope  beyond  hope, 

vpon  moderation  of  conditions  :  fo  that  thereby  a  Summe 
of  Money  to  ballance  all,  for  the  Satisfaction  of  the  Duke 
of  Bavare  may  be  obteined.  Sir  Thomas  relates  the  refult 
of  the  late  Affembly  at  Mentz  ;  A  the  Confufion  of  the 
Emperors  Affairs  as  in  former  Letters.  With  this  addi¬ 
tion,  that  Picolomini  who,  ten  days  fince,  refigned  his 
Commiflion  of  Generality e,  A  had  refolved  to  retyre,  A 
never  more  to  ferue  the  Houfe  of  Auftria,  with  much 
adoe,  is  gayned  to  take  vpon  him  his  old  Charge. 

49.  To  the  Earle  of  Holland.  3  June,  164?.  28.  b. 

How  he  had  heard  that  the  French  Ambaffador,  by 

his  Lordftiip’s  Mediatii  n,  had  preferred  a  Complaint 
againft  him  in  the  Houle  of  Peers,  that  he  had  offered 
to  the  King  of  Hungary,  a  League  offenftve  A  defenfive, 
againft  all  men  :  vpon  Condition  of  Reftitution  of  the 
Prince  EleCtor  Palatine  to  His  LandsandDignities.  Which 
being  in  Contravention  of  the  League  betweene  His  Ma- 
jeftie,  the  French  King,  A  the  United  States,  was  offen- 
fively  taken.  Which  whole  acculadon.  Sir  Thomas  re- 
plieth,  in  forme  A  matter,  in  fubftance  A.  circumftances, 
is  vnjuft  ;  in  the  firll  biventer  fall*;  A  againft  binocency, 
Truth,  A  faithfull  Service,  fcar.dalous.  For,  he  never 
received  any  fuch  power  nor  Inftructions  from  his  Majef- 
ty;  nor  had  the  boldnefs,  infidelity,  or  inducretion,  to 
do  it  of  himfelfe :  but  fo  far  the  contrary,  that  he  had 
often  openly,  authentically,  A  ferioufly  protefied  againft: 
any  motion  or  cuerture  of  at  y  confederation,  direCtly 
or  confequentJy,  againft:  the  Crownes  of  France,  &  Suede, 
A  the  Vnited  Provinces,,  his  Majefties  Friends  A  Allyes, 
as  is  regiftered  in  many  public  ACts.  He  being  a  good  A 
true  Englilh  man,  neyther  French,  Spanifli,  Auftrian,  nor 
Dutch  ;  nor  for  any  refpeCt  Ihall  ever  be.  He  hath  prin¬ 
cipally  directed  all  his  Scope  to  the  Honor  of  his  Majef- 
ty  the  Safety  &  Advantage  of  his  Kingdomes,  and  the 
prefervarion  of  true  religion  in  thofe  places,  where  it  hath 
pleafed  God  both  to  plant  and  purge  it  by  his  Chaftife- 
ments.  This  he  befeecheth  his  Lordlhip  to  prefent  to 
the  Houfe  of  Peeres,  that  they  may  be  pleafed  to  regif- 
ter  A  publilli  his  Proteftation,  for  the  Vindication  of  his 
Iionefty  A  Reputation. 

50.  To  Mr.  Edward  Waller.  3  June,  1642.  29. 

Upon  the  fame  occafion,  and  to  the  fame  effeCt ; 

with  defire  that  the  houfe  of  Commons,  of  which  he  is  an 
humble  member,  would  judge  better  of  him. 

51.  To  Mr.  Edward  Waller.  6  June,  1642.  29.  b. 

Accompanying  a  copy  of  what  he  wrote  to  the  Earle 

of  Holland ;  which  he  may  ufe  according  to  his  diferetion, 
as  he  fliall  find  that  His  Lordlhip  hath  publifhed  or  con¬ 
cealed  the  atteftation  of  his  Innocency.  For,  as  he  would 
not  offend  His  Lordlhip  by  Jealoufye  ;  fo  he  would  not 
omitt  his  owne  Juftification  by  too  much  Indulgence  to 
be  a  fuppofed  friend. 

52.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  6  June,  1642.  ibid. 

That  his  Bufinefs  is  defperate  ;  and  fo  much  the 

more,  becaufe  of  the  Complaint  abovementioned,  which 
hath  made  a  great  Clamour  &  Noyfe,  from  whence  the 
Court  of  Vienna  ('which  is  better  enfonned  of  all  things, 
than  himfelf)  hath  drawne  a  C.onclufion,  that  there  is 
4  O  nothing 


»iS  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1901. 

nothing  to  be  expe&ed  of  us,  in  Correfpondence  with 
them  ;  nor  any  other  ayde  for  the  Houfe  ofPalatin.  lie 
fendeth  to  Sir  William  Coppyes  of  what  he  wrote  to 
both  Houfcs  of  Parliament,  which  he  defires  may  be 
publifiied  to  the  States,  Sc  fuch  others  as  he  lhall  think 
fit.  If  this  will  not  cleare  his  Innocency  he  will  print 
fuch  a  Defence,  as  fhall.  make  the  Accufers,  if  they  have 
any  fhame,  afhamed.  For  it  was  not  him  alone  that  they 
ayined  at.  but  another  deffigne  which  he  well  dil'covereth, 
and  w  ill  in  tyme  make  apparent  to  the  world. 

53.  To  IMr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  June  8,  1642.  30. 

That  the  Mediators  do  but  trifle,  Sc  ferve  the  old 
Tome  to  keep  vp  an  opinion,  &:  to  gayne  tyme.  The 
Minillersof  Bavare  haueanfwered  to  the  Motion  of  Mo¬ 
deration,  that  they  afke  nothing  of  vs  ;  &  defpile  the  pro- 
pofition  of  Monfr.  Bidenfcack  ;  nor  will  abate  of  their 
demand  of  1 3  millions  from  the  Emperor,  being  afecured 
debt  ;  laying  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  King  of 
England.  That  Mentz  will  not  rcltore  the  Bergftraet ; 
In  that  there  is  no  hope  to  i>bteine  any  thing.  This 
Matter  is  the  more  inflamed,  by  the  French  Ambafladors 
complaint  againft  himfelt  in  Parliament,  which  hath  been 
largely  related  at  Vienna,  &  commented  vpon,  as  having 
occafioned  fome  difcourle  in  one  of  thelloufes,  that  they 
have  no  defy  re  to  oblige,  or  be  obliged  to  the  Houfe  of 
Auftria  ;  nor  by  that  way,  if  by  any,  to  afiift  the  Prince 
Ele&or  Palatin  c  lo  that  being  fure  they  fhall  haue  no¬ 
thing,  they  will  do  nothing.  He  concciverh  theFrench  Am¬ 
bafladors  bolt  not  to  belhot  at  him  alone  ;  but  at  the  buli- 
nefs;  and  perhaps  with  a  worfs  Intention,  w  hich  he  doubt- 
eth  not  but  His  Majeflies  Wifdom  will  penetrate.  The 
French  grounded  their  Complaint  vpon  fome  words  in  a 
Declaration  of  the  Emperors,  agai'dt  which  he  had  ex¬ 
cepted  &  protefted,  as  crept  in  captioufly  A  inftdioufly,  to 
call  us  into  the  Jealoufie  of  our  Friends.  That  the  Media¬ 
tors  made  this  fault  by  the  levitye  of  Monfr.  Bidenback  ; 
which  when  he  relented  to  Count  T rautmanfdorfie,  he 
anfwered,  that  it  was  not  their  Error,  but  a  miftake  of  the 
Mediators;  who,  in  hope  to  do  a  good  office,  had  exceeded 
theirCommifliou.  But  he  will  not  fo  wholly  cleare  neyther 
the  one  nor  the  other,  but  that  there  might  be  an  Art 
feminandi  difeordiam,  and  it  purpofely  done  ;  which  he 
then  fufpedted,  and  is  now  come  to  pafs.  Sir  Thomas 
much  wonders,  that  the  Imperial  Court  will  not  fee  their 
neede  of  Friend  s,  in  this  extrer.me  danger  of  the  Enemye; 
and  not  much  lefs  of  the  Refolutions  of  the  Princes  af- 
lembled  lately  at  Mentz,  and  prorogued  to  the  fil'd  of 
Augud  at  Erancfort.  Where,  they  will  eyther  draw 
the  Emperor  to  governe  according  to  the  antient  Confti- 
tutions ;  or,  without  quedion,  feparate  from  him  and 
inditute  a  new  forme  &  way,  to  recover  the  peace  of 
the  Empyre.  Which  may  be  an  occafion  to  let  in  the 
Prince  Elector  Palatin,  vpon  better  Conditions  than  he  is 
like  euer  to  obteine  of  the  particulars  interefled. 

54.  To  Sir  Arthur  Hop  ton.  13  June,  1642.  31. 

That  vpon  receipt  of  the  an  (were  of  the  Emperor 
for  Himfclfc  A-  for  the  others  interefled,  &  the  whole 
manner  of  their  delatory  proceeding,  His  Majedy  hath 
fent  him  a  revocation.  That  he  kr.ows  the  Ends  of  all 
the  parties.  Mediators  &  others  ;  and,  particularly,  that 
they  would  cad  the  Scandall  upon  vs.  'Which,  if 
He  cannot  avoyde,  Me  will  defend,  A  as  doutlv  i-Jtort 
vpon  them,  by  publishing  that,  which  utherwife,  difere- 
tion  &  temper  would  conceale.  For,  the  difficultves  haue 
not  proceeded. from  the  Emperor,  who  is  a  mod'bcnignc 
and  fvveete  Prince,  but  only  as  he  is  bound  vp  by  others. 

Sc  cannot  fatidyc  the  Duke  of  Bavare,  who  is  the  great 
remora  or  rock  whereon  the  Peace  doth  fiiij  rack-  Nor 
dothehe  now  complaine  of  Spayne  :  though  he  doubteth 
not,  but  there  doth  lye  hid  vnder  their  conveniencias 
fomewhat  ;  which  being  difeovered  would  be  rocky 
enough.  For  now,  the  Terminus  when  they  will  fur. 
renucr  is  changed,  to  When  it  lhall  conduce  to  the  Peace 
of  Germany.  However,  he  will  endeavour  rather  to 


Num.  1901. 

fufpend  the  Treaty  to  a  Conjuncture  more  propitious, 
than  to  breake  it.  lie  therefore  prepareth  for  his  depar¬ 
ture  within  1 4  dayes  ;  which  he  is  willing  yet  to  give 
them,  if  at  the  lad  they  will  propofe  any  thing  that  may 
induce  him  to  day  longer. 

55.  do  the  Queene  of  England.  14  June,  1C42.  32. 

That  he  cannot  get  himfelfe  at  Liberty,  by  coming 

away ,vnder  14  dayes  ;  partly  for  Ceremonyes,  and  partly 
becaufe  the  Mediators,  who  haue  trifled  12  Months, 
would  now  rayfe  new  hopes,  againd  their  Confidence  & 
Experience,  only  today  him  for  their  greater  Confufion. 
Which  if  he  fhould  refufe,  and  thereby  give  them  a 
little  fcope,  they  would  cad  the  Scandall  of  an  abrupt 
breach  upon  him  ;  which,  f  r  honour,  he  mud  avoyde. 

56.  To  the  Queene  of  Bohemia.  15  June,  1642. 

ibid. 

That  having  intimated  the  Order  he  had  received  to 
returne,  to  the  Mediators  ;  they  put  on  gratie  &  bufye 
faces,  pret.  tiding  that  they  defpayied  not.  That,  if  I 
would  breake,  they  could  not  oppofe  it  ;  bin  rhe  fault 
fliculd  not  red  on  them.  That  he  anfwered,  that  thev 
had  not  advanced  one  Step  in  Six  Weekes,  fince  the  lalt 
Declaration  ;  and  he  could  not  expect  they  would  do 
more  in  a  few  dayes,  then  they  had  done  in  1 2  Monthes. 
That  he  could  not  depart  in  1 4  dayes ;  tyme  enough 
feeing  all  the  interefled  knew  what  they  would  doe  ;  if 
yet  they  would  propofe  any  thing  honorable  and  accep¬ 
table.  For  the  Imputation  of  the  Breach,  whenfoeuer 
they  would  begin  to  charge  it  vpon  him,  he  would  publilh 
all  the  proceedings  to  the  world  ;  which  yet,  he  thought 
were  better  on  both  fydes  to  be  concealed  ;  and  to  part 
in  a  condition  of  friendfhip.  Afterwards  they  propofed 
to  procure  a  Confent  of  Reflitution  of  the  Lower  Palati¬ 
nate  entyre,  from  all  the  Interefled,  which  they  would 
prefent,  with  their  judgement  &  Exhortatiun  to  the  Em¬ 
peror  :  which  would  be  a  great  {Lengthening  to  the 
Prince  Electors  caufe,  although  it  would  be  denyed  to  be 
ratefyed  This  he  accepted  under  the  three  Conditions 
formeily  by  me  fpecified  ;  and  they  undertook  toanfwer 
him  in  7  or  8  dayes.  However,  for  his  prefent  falisfac- 
tion,  and  to  induce  fome  beliefc  in  him,  he  defired  that 
the.  Ambafladors  of  Mentz  would  clearly  declare,  that 
their  Mailer  would  reftore  the  Bergftraet :  but  they  flatly 
rtfufed  it ;  and  offered  the  money  for  the  pretended  mort¬ 
gage  :  which  he  as  plainly  refufeing,  in  great  chcler, 
they  faid,  the  bufmefs  then  mull  be  recommended  to  God. 
Yet  the  other  Mediators  defyred  their  tyme  to  trve  5  and 
fo  he  is  yet  in  expectation,  but  not  in  hope. 

57.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  15  June,  1642.  33. 

That  Count  Trautmanfdorfte  feems  to  pretend  that 

there  is  yet  hope,  at  leaft  a  defyre  to  end  the  bufmefs 
now  ;  but  not  without  a  great  Summe  of  money  to  the 
Duke  of  Bavare,  and  fome  helpe  to  the  Emperor  to  ad¬ 
vance  the  Peace.  To  which  lie  replycd,  that  he  would 
yet  accept  of  any  reafonable  A  honorable  propofition, 
though  for  the  Lower  Palatinate  alone  ;  fufpend  ire-  the 
vnper  &  the  Dignity,  falvo  Jure,  to  tyme  &  occafion. 
And  it  is  likely  he  may  get,  if  not  the  Reftitutic-n,  yet 
fome  Declaration,  that  may  advantage  the  Caufe  in  the 
future;  if  but,  that  the  Prince  is  reftorable  in  Juftke. 
That  he  hath  diligently  penetrated  into  the  Intentions  of 
the  Duke  of  Bavare,  and  doth  find,  that  he  doth  ready 
defyre  an  accommodation  dining  1:1:-  f  ile  ;  but  for  monv, 
that  is,  lor  3  or  400,0001  to  be  paid  in  tyme :  for  which, 
he  is  confident,  we  may  compofe  with  him  for  the  vpper 
Palatinate  and  the  Dignity  ;  the  pofleffion  of  the  Lands 
refting  in  him  for  Security  till  rhe  Pay  ment  be  made. 

58.  Relation  of  a  Conference  betweene  me  Sc  the  Me¬ 
diators,  the  13th  of  June,  1642.  33.  b. 

The  Sum  of  it  is  already  fpecified  in  the  Abftradts 
of  preceding  Letters. 

59.  To  the  Prince  Eledtbr.  21  June,  1642.  34.  b. 

That  the  Emperor  doth  fincerely  defyre  3n  end  of 

this  Treaty,  and  hath  laboured  it ;  but  will  neuer  yield 

to 


Bibliothecas  Harleiatlse. 


3i7 


Num.  1901. 

to  tmrchafeit  at  hisowne  coft.  That  all  the  Minifters  Sc 
Mediators  make  a  fayre  fhow  and  pretenfion,  upon  the 
Clofe  of  the  bufinefs.  Firft,  to  fatisfye  the  world  by  ap- 
parencyes  and  femblances,  that  they  would  haue  done 
much,  if  the  Treaty  had  continued,  fo  to  faue  their  owne 
reputation,  and  to  call  the  fcandal  of  a  bleach  vpon  us. 
Secondly  if  thereby  they  can  engage  him  to  flay,  they 
belieue  his  Hignefles  Condition  is  fo  defperate  by  the 
troubles  of  England,  that  he  will  at  laft  accept  of  any 
thing,  and  be  forced  to  quitt  all  clayme  to  the  vpper  Paliti- 
nate  &  Dignity.  Which  is  the  pldtt  of  the  Duke  of  Ba- 
vare,  that  he  being  Septuageharius  and  living  by  art, 
may  fee  the  quarrell  fettled  in  his  Life,  &  leaue  his 
Heyres  fccure  in  the  poffeflioii.  This  is  the  mailte  caufe 
why  he  prefleth  the  Emperor  to  a  prefent  conclufion  ; 
becaufe  he,  thinkes  Kis  Highneffes  feares  to  alike  prefs 
Mira  tO  any  accommodation.  That  His  Highneffes  af¬ 
fairs  were  neuer  before  in  fo  good  a  State  as  now,  there 
being  much  gayned  in  this  negotiation.  Firfl,  many 
declarations  both  of  the  Emperor  &  Princes  of  the  Em- 
pyre,  that  it  is  requifite  and  ne'ceffary,  for  the  publicque 
Peace,  that  His  Caufe  fliould  be  accommodated.  Se¬ 
condly,  that  the  whole  is  treatable  ;  and  therefore  fome 
juflice  on  his  part.  For  a  Treaty  fuppofeth  a  right  ; 
whereas  when  there  istio  right,  men  vie  to  proceede  by 
Supplication.  Thirdly,  the  Duke  of  Bavare  hath  cOnfent- 
ed  to  treate  both  for  the  vpper  Palitinate  5c  Dignity,  Vpon 
conditions:  fo  that  it  will  appeare  in  the  future,  that  the 
want  of  effedt  of  this  Treaty,  refted  not  vpon  the  mentis 
of  the  Caufe.  but  vpon  the  exholbkant  conditions  de¬ 
manded  by  the  Duke  of  Bavare,  5c  meerly  vpon  a  matter 
ofmony.  This  neyther  the  Emperor  nor  Env  yre  will 
endure  when  that  Duke  fhall  be  deceafcd.  For  then  the 
Emperor  will  be  free  5c  fui  Juris;  and  the  Adinniftrator 
will  not  haue  that  Authority  which  Bavare  hath  ;  and, 
in  fewe  yearcs  the  Emperors  obligations  to  him  will  be 
voyd.  So  that  if  the  general  good  inclination  be  dexle- 
roufly  preferved,  there  is  no  doubt  of  better  tearmes  then 
tie  can  now  expedt,  or  ever  obteine  by  fuch  partiall 
Mediators. 

60.  To  Mr  Secretery  Nicholas.  2  2  June,  1642.  36. 

That  the  Emperor  defireth  an  accommodation,  in 
order  to  be  cleare  of  Bavare,  but  dai  e  not  force  him  nor 
prefs  him  to  any  difeontent.  Bavare  prcfTeth  an  end 
now;  not  fo  much  in  hope  of  Money,  which  heforfees 
will  not  be  had  to  his  Satisfaction  :  but  deligning  to  fettle 
the  Vpper  Palatinate,  &  Dignity  fccure  vpon  his  Pofteri- 
tye,  he  hopes  the  Prince  Eledlor  Palatin  will  be  content 
to  renounce  all  his  claymes  rn  thofe,  to  haue  Reflitution 
of  the  other.  And  therefi >re  he  hath  nev.'ly  declared  that 
he  will  not  furrender  Heidelberg  Sc  the  Dependencyes, 
vnlefs  he  may  now  haue  a  final!  end.  Nor  will  he  treate 
with  us,  nor  with  any  whomfoever,  for  his  mony,  but 
with  the  Emperor.  Nor  wiil  Mentz  yeild  the  Bergflraet. 
And  howfoeuer  this  new  Decree  (as  they  tearme  it)  of 
the  Emperor,  would  feem  to  encourage  the  Mediators  to 
proceede,  as  if  lhe,re  were  yet  hope  :  it  is  oblervable, 
that  it  doth  not  declare  what  the  Emperor  will  doe  for 
his  owne  part,  5c  Gcnnenfheim ;  which  had  been  ne- 
ceffary  firfl,  for  an  example  to  others.  But  it  is  moft 
certayne  nothing  can  be  done  ;  5c  they  all  know  it,  for 
the  difficulty  5c  obftrudtion  of  Bavare  ;  which  being  re¬ 
moved,  there  is  no  doubt,  upon  the  foundation  layd,  we 
make  a  good  end  of  a  bad  bufines. 

6t.  To  Mr.  Browne.  24June,  1642.  36.  b. 

Specifying  little  frcfli  matter;  befides  the  defign  of 
fettling  in  the  Electorate  of  Collen  5c  Triers,  two  Princes 
oppofite  to  the  ends  of  the  French. 

62.  To  Doctor  Richel  Chancellor  of  Bavare,  28  June 

1 642.  in  Italian.  37.  b. 

Taking  Leave  of  him,  upon  fufpenfion  of  the  Treaty 
to  a  better  Conjuncture. 

63.  TotheBifhop  of  Wurtzburgh.  28  June  1642.  in 

Fjrench.  ibid. 


Num.  1901. 

to  the  fame  purpofe. 

64.  To  the  Minifters  affembled  at  the  Congrefs  at 

Francfort,  23  July,  1642.  in  Latin.  38. 

Herein  Sir  Thomas  throweth  the  Odium  of  his  not 
fucceeding  in  his  Negotiations,  upon  the  Avari'ce  5c  ex¬ 
orbitant  Demands  of  the  Duke  of  Bavaria  ;  more  efpe- 
cially  fince  the  Emperor  had  promifed  to  do  all  that  in 
him  lies  fur  the  Reftitution  of  the  Palatinate  Family,  when 
the  others  intereffed  fliould  do  what  might  reafonably  be 
expected  of  them.  He  exhorts  them  therefore  to  make 
fuch  effedlual  Application  to  the  Bavarian,  as  that  the 
Treaty  may  bereaffuihed,  &  with  the  defired  Refloration 
a  bleffed  Peace  &  Tranquility  be  eflablifhed  in  Germany. 

65.  Inftrudlions  to  Mr.  Curtius,  for  the  deliuery  of  a 
relation,  left  by  me,  to  the  Ambaffadors  of  the  Eledtors 
&  Princes  at  the  Aflembly  at  Francfort.  23  July  1642. 

39- 

Befides  which,  Mr.  Curtius  is  diredted  to  allure  the 
I.ady  Landgravine  of  Caffell,  of  our  Kings  conftant  af- 
fedlion  to  her  Caufe;  and  that  although  there  was  no 
oportunity  to  mention  the  Coinprehenfion  of  her,  &  her 
Sonnes  ellates:  yet  to  faithfully  promife  her,  that  if  the 
Treaty  be  reaffumed,  She  fhall  be  taken  into  fuch  due 
Con  fide  ration,  by  particular  Articles,  as  her  C.onftancy 
&  Magnanimity  hath  merited, 

66.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  23  July  1642.  40. 

That  he  as  left  the  Treaty  in  a  Sufpenfion,  much 

for  the  Advantage  of  the  Caufe,  and  neceffary  in  confide^ 
ration  of  our  owne  Condition  in  England.  He  hopeth 
that  he  c.tine  off  with  honour,  Sc  the  general  content, 
notwithflanding  a  Jeffigne.  by  art,  to  cafl  the  breach  of 
Separation  vppon  him.  But  he  efcaped  their  Netts,  5c 
forced  the  Mediators  to  a  Stand,  &  a  cleare  Confeflion, 
that  they  could  doe  no  more.  The  Emperor  is  fo  pleafed 
with  the  opinion  Sc  reputation  of  continuance  or  reaffump- 
tion  of  the  Treaty,  that  he  hath  fent  an  hivitatory  Decree 
to  the  Mediators,  to  reaffemble  the  1  oth  of  January.  Sir 
Thomas  well  kno  veth  the  meaning  hereof,  and  will 
make  another  vfe  of  it,  to  the  Aflembly  at  Frankfurt,  by 
inviting  thole  Princes  to  remove  the  Impediments.  That 
the  worthy  Billiop  of  Wirtzburgh  dyed  fuddenly  at  the 
Table  ;  whom,  the  day  before,  he  had  left  in  perfedt 
health. 

67.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  31  July,  1642.  ibid. 

Requiring  him  to  remonflrate  to  the  Eledlor  of 

Menttt,  &  to  the  Count  de  Rebolledo  Commander  of 
the  Spanifh  Forces,  how  unjufl  their  defign  of  perfecuting 
the  Proteflants  in  the  Lower  Palatinate  is.  That  fuch 
proceeding  will  caufe  vs  to  difpayre,  as  to  the  Treaty. 
It  being  a  flrange  Zeale,  now  to  begin  that  alteration 
(when  they  haue  profefled  to  reflore)  which  they  haue 
forborne  fo  many  yeares  ;  from  whence  alfo  he  mull  con¬ 
clude,  that  there  is  no  purpofe  in  them,  but  to  excite  vs 
to  other  waves  ;  of  which  they  have  no  neede. 

68.  To  the  Provoft,  Deane,  Prelates,  5c  Chanoyns 
of  the  Church  of  Wurtzburg.  31  July  1642.  in  French. 

40.  b. 

Condoling  with  them,  upon  the  fad  occafion  of  the 
Deceafe  of  their  good  Bifliop  5c  Prince. 

69.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  18  Auguft  1642. 

,  .  .  41- 

That  in  the  Conference  with  the  Eledlor  Mentz,  he 
promifed,  that  though  he  had  not  declared  for  the  Ber<r- 
flraet,  feeing  Bavare  held  back  ;  vet  the  Breach  fliould 
not  reft  vpon  Him,  when  the  Accommodation  fliould  be 
ripe.  But  that  the  Tytle  by  him  claytned,  being  for  the 
Church,  he  mull  proceede  lento  pede,  and  with  fuch  Cir- 
cumftances,  as  might  agree  with  his  Reputation.  That 
in  the  poynt  of  the  new  Edidl  publiflied  and  ready  for 
Execution  :  he  obteined  a  cleare  promife  of  fufpenfion. 
That  the  I’.'edlor  of  C  alien  engaged  his  word  more  clearly 
in  the  j  oynt  of  accommodation  with  his  brother  of  Ba¬ 
varia  ;  cuufefling  that  the  Peace  could  not  be  made,  or 
notfecurely,  without  the  Compofure  of  the  Palatin  caufe. 

And 


it 


328 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1901. 

And  therefore,  he  promifed  (though  in  a  matter  of  mony 
his  Brother  be  very  vn tradable  ;  &  that  he  who  needed, 
and  vfed  him  in  that  kind  could  word  interpofe)  yet  he 
would  vfe  all  the  power  he  had,  to  procure  fuch  a  Mode¬ 
ration,  as  might  be  poflible  to  be  accepted,  &  occafion 
a  new  meeting  to  accommodate  the  whole  Caufe  a  l'amia- 
ble  :  which,  if  the  Princes  at  the  Aflembly,  lhall  vnder- 
take,  according  to  their  Promife  &  Intereft  ;  it  may 
proue  of  much  more  efficacye,  then  the  Offices  of  Stran¬ 
gers,  or  Negotiation  of  Ambafladors.  For  if  they  there 
lhall  find  it  fit  for  the  preparation  of  the  Peace  of  theEm- 
pvre,  to  declare  that  they  ought  not,  nor  will  not  fuller 
the  whole  to  perifh  for  the  ambition  or  avarice  of  Ba- 
vare  ;  and  that  he  ought  to  comply  with  the  publicque, 
or  proue  the  Enemy  of  Peace  :  fuch  a  Declaration  will 
both  plane  the  w'ay  to  accommodation,  &  fortefy  the 
Caufe  in  ali  events.  That  the  lofs  of  the  Bifhop  of 
Wurtzburgh  is  vniverfally  deplorable;  particulerly  by 
the  Prince  Elector.  For  he  piotelted,  that  as  he  would 
prefs  the  poynt  at  the  deffigned  meeting  :  fo  he  would 
contribute  one  Million  of  Horens  toward  the  fatisfadion 
of  Bavare.  His  fucceifor  hath  good  Aftedions  ;  but  being 
new,  can  haue  no  mony,  nor  fetled  authority.  That 
he  hath  related  the  procefs  of  his  Negotiation  8c  State  of 
the  Treary,  to  the  States-Generall ;  from  whom  he  re¬ 
ceived  a  cold  anfwere,  as  if  they  were  not  difpoflefled  of 
iome  Jealoufye,  or  imprefiions  they  had  taken.  That  he 
prefTelh  an  anfwere  to  his  Propofitions,  and  the  Com- 
playtlts  &  Grievances  of  our  Merchants  injured  in  contra¬ 
vention  of  the  Treatyes  of  Commerce  ;  and  hath  a  pro¬ 
mife  to  receiue  fome  latisfadion. 

70.  To  the  Earle  of  Arundell.  2oAuguft,  1642.  42. 

In  the  former  part  of  this  long  (but  very  diflind 
Letter)  there  is  little  freffi  matter;  but  the  Conclufion 
s  thus.  The  advantages  gotten  to  the  Caufe  Palatin  by 
this  negotiation,  are  thefe.  Firft,  the  Emperor  hath 
made  a  very  fayre  declaration  for  Ilimfelfe,  and  for  what 
is  in  his  power  as  Emperor.  Secondly,  Sir  Thomas  hath 
gotten,  by  publicque  ads,  a  judgement  that  the  whole 
Cauie  is  treatable,  &  confequently  not  fo  condemned,  as 
not  to  be  capable,  in  right,  of  a  review.  Thirdly,  that 
the  Duke  of  Bavare  hath  confented  to  reftoreall,  and  the 
Ypper  Palatinate,  vpon  Conditions  ;  to  winch  formerly 
he  would  never  be  induced  ;  and  to  treate  in  the  poynt 
of  the  dignity.  Fourthly,  in  the  Treaty,  the  accommo¬ 
dation  doth  not  depend  vpon  the  meritts  of  the  Caufe, 
but  vpon  Conditions  ;  and  thofe  of  a  Summe  of  money  ; 
which  is  bafe  in  the  refuler  of  peace.  Lafily,  that  the 
Scandall  of  Breach  is  caft  vpon  one  only,  vizt.  the  Duke 
of  Bavaria :  the  Emperor  hauing  invited  by  a  decree, 
after  his  departure,  all  the  interelfed  to  renew  the  Treaty, 
which  may  provoke  him  to  a  better  temper,  or  rayfe 
againft  him  an  envy  dangerous  ik  vnfupportable.  Plereby 
Sir  Tlmmas  fuppofeth  the  Caufe  is  in  better  condition 
then  he  found  it ;  or,  then  it  hath  bene  fince  the  unjufl 
decrees  of  the  aflembly  at  Mulhufen. 

7  1 .  1-!  ^capitulation  of  the  laf!  ads  of  the  Treaty  of  the 
Faint  in  Caufe:  for  what  reafons  it  was  fufpended ;  and 
in  what  efiate  it  was  left,  at  the  feparation  of  the  Me- 
d’ators.  30  June,  1642.  43. 

Herein,  Sir  Thomas  relateth  the  laft  Conferences 
he  had  with  the  Emperor  and  Count  Curtz  his Minifter ; 
and  how  in  order  to  keep  the  Treaty  yet  alive,  they 
ag:  '  ud  that  a  Correfpondence  lhould  be  kept  between 
hnne  of  the  Miniflers  of  His  Imperial  Majefty,  England, 
U  Denmarke. 

72.  Eo  Count  Lefley.  30  Augufl,  1642.  46. 

Deli  ring  that  it  will  pleafe  the  Emperor  to  be  conlfant 
in  his  declaration,  to  receiue  the  Prince  Eledor-Palatin 
&  his  Family  into  his  favour  by  an  Amneftye  ;  whenfo- 
ever,  with  the  other  interelfed  an  accommodation  lhall 
fucceede.  And  that  he  will  not  releafe  the  power  of  re- 
floiing  the  Lands  poflefled  by  the  King  of  Spayne,  in  the 
Lower  Palatinate.  That  he  will  remember  the  two  Con- 


Num.  1901. 

ditions  of  reaffumption  of  the  Treaty ;  that  is,  that  the 
Summe  of  mony  demanded  by  the  Duke  for  the  re- 
ffitution  of  the  Vpper  Palatinate,  be  reduced  to  a  cer- 
teinty  &  reafonable  proportion.  And  that  the  Duke  doe 
declare  that  he  will  treate  for  the  Succeffion  after  him 
of  the  Dignity,  upon  Conditions  poffible  to  take  effed, 

&  fuch  as  may  conduce  to  the  Satisfadion  of  all  thofe 
that  are  interelfed,  and  the  fecure  peace  of  the  Empvre. 
For  vntil  his  Majefty  our  King  may  have  fome  affurance 
in  thefe  poynts,  there  is  little  hope  either  to  renew  the 
Treaty,  or  to  perfed  it. 

73-  To  the  Bifhop  of  Wurtzburgh.  30  Augufl:  1642. 

46.  b. 

Congratulating  His  Highnefs  upon  his  Eledion ; 
and  recommending  the  Palatin  Caufe  to  his  favor  S;  fur¬ 
therance,  at  the  approching  Aflembly. 

74.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  30  Augufl,  1642.  47.  b. 

That  the  Eledor  of  Mentz  but  coldly  performing 

his  promife  for  the  Sufpenfion  of  his  cruel  Etlid  againlt 
thofe  of  our  Religion;  Mr.  Curtius  is  required  to  prefs 
him,  &  not  to  let  goe  his  engagement ;  which  if  he  per- 
forme  not,  we  niuft  interpret  an  oppofition  to  the 
reaffumption  of  the  Treaty.  That  Sir  Thomas  hath  bene 
invited  by  the  new  Bifhop  of  Wurtzburg,  to  fucceed  to 
the  friendfhip  of  his  predeceflbr  :  he  profelling  his  defyre 
to  contribute  all  in  his  power  &  means  to  the  publicque 
peace.  That  if  Mr.  Curtius  can  procure  from  the  Princes 
at  the  intended  Aflembly,  a  Declaration  or  Judge¬ 
ment  in  the  Caufe,  it  will  be  of  very  great  advantage  in 
the  future.  That  if  this  meeting  fhould  not  hold  (as  he 
fufpedeth  from  a  little  flattering  profpeiity  of  the  Empe¬ 
ror)  Mr.  Curtius  is  to  fend  Coppies  of  the  Paper  left  with 
him,  to  all  the  Princes,  and  particularly  to  the  Bifhop  of 
Wurtzburg,  and  to  the  3  Cittyies,  that  they  may  be 
without  excufe  of  ignorance  of  our  Intentions  ;  and  that 
no  difadvantage  arile  to  the  Caufe  by  a  feeming  contu- 
macye  &  refufal  of  the  Emperors  invitation  to  returne  to 
the  Treaty  vpon  the  xo  of  January. 

Now  cometh  the  Third  Part  of  this  Volume,  which 
Sir  Thomas  Roe  hath  thus  Ert  tied, 

“  Letters  written  after  my  coming  home;  being  com¬ 
manded  by  His  Majefty  to  continew  the  Negotiation  of 
the  Caufe-Palatin,  &  to  correfpond  with  his  Miniflers 
beyond  Seas.  1642.  1643.  I^44*” 

75.  To  the  Prince  Eledor.  20  September,  1642.  48. 

Pie  doubteth  ft  111,  the  King  is  not  pleafed  with  his 

Highnefs ;  and  findetli  the  Parliament  infinitely  diftafted 
againft  the  Queene  of  Bohemia  &  His  Highnefs,  but 
efpecially  againft  Prince  Rupert,  who  as  is  reported  hath 
done  fome  outrages,  8c  threatned  firing,  plundring,  & 
forcing  contribution,  according  to  the  War  in  Germany: 
infomuch  as  nothing  is  fo  cryed  out  againft,  as  his  actions, 
which  refled  a  very  ill  odor  vpon  the  whole  Palatin 
Famelye  &  Caufe.  lie  wifhes  therefore  that  I  lit  Highnefs 
&  the  Queene  would  write  to  Him. 

76.  To  the  Prince  Eledor.  iSOdober,  1642.  48.  b. 
Complaining,  as  in  former  Letters,  of  the  public  I 

Calamities  ;  that  here  is  no  mediator  from  abroad,  nor  » 
none  that  feeketh  peace  at  home,  no  not  one.  'I  hat  I 
both  Tides  require  obedience  ;  no  neutrality  is  admitted,  I 
for  thofe  who  are  not  with  them,  are  againft  them  ;  &  j 
thus  men  liue  in  feare  8c  danger.  The  voluntary  Con-  I 
tributions  dayly  encreafe ;  8c  who  will  not  contribute,  I 
are  as  Come  betweene  two  Milftones.  Such  a  condition  fl 
for  private  men,  Germany  hath  not  tryed  :  for  there  I 
were  fome  Cittyes  of  Refuge  ;  here  none  ;  all  being  one  J 
way,  or  other,  engaged.  That  the  Adions  of  Prince  j 
Rupert  8c  Prince  Maurice  were  not  fo  flagrant  as  was  rj 
reported  ;  nor  can  be  blamed  by  thefe  who  know  the  I 
liberty  of  War.  That  he  hath  heard  the  Caufe  of  His 
Majefty ’s  Coldncfs  toward  His  Highnefs  ;  which  he  mult 
referve,  vntil  he  can  advife  it  by  a  trufty  Mefienger.  I 
That  he  purpofcth  to  continew  the  relolued  CorreL  j 
pondence  8c  Negotiation  with  Count  Trautnn.nfdorfle  &  j 
4  the  11 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


3i9 


Num.  iQOr. 

the  Imperiall  Minifters ;  and  to  put  vpon  it  the  befl  face 
our  condition  can  affume. 

77.  To  the  Oueene  of  Bohemia.  19  Oftober,  1642. 

49. 

Moftly  upon  our  public  Calamities ;  concerning 
which  he  is  yet  perfuaded,  that  if  any  fitt  Mediators  were 
interpofed,  who  might  open  the  way  to  a  Treaty,  and 
who  might  fpeakc  &  propofe  to  both,  that  which  no 
Subject  may.  to  His  King,  nor  no  Member  dare  to  the 
Parliament,  it  may  not  be  impoffible  to  reconcile  thefe 
dellrufliue  differences,  where  either  partis  about  to  fight 
for  that,  which  both  may  hauc  better  cheape. 

7S.  To  the  Oueene  of  Bohemia.  2  1  December,  1642. 

49.  b. 

That  there  being  a  neceffity  to  take  Care  of  the 
publicque  honour  abroad  ;  lie  had  once  more  written  to 
Sir  Edward  Nicholas  for  frefli  orders, 

79.  1  o  the  Princefs  Elizabeth,  Daughter  to  the  Queen 

of  Bohemia.  (21  December,  1642.)  ~5o. 

That  both  fides  prepare  for  war,  &  are  very  flrong  ; 

both  dayly  eiicreafe,  and  are  mighry  to  their  ov/ne 
deftruttion.  ihat  he  himfelf  hath  no  Commerce  with 
the  Court ;  fuch  being  His  Majeftjes  pleafure ;  and  no 
other  notice  is  taken  of  him  by  the  Parliament,  who  are 
content  to  connive  at  his  retyrement.  lie  wondereth 
that  the  Hollanders,  whom  we  hatte  tendered  in  their 
Cradle,  &  nurled  with  our  Bloud,  fhould  not  bend  one 
thought  to  interpofe  in  this  our  unnaturall  quarrell,  which 
may  vndoe  them,  andinvolue  them  into  ruyne.  He  left 
them  in  another  feni'e,  and  would  fayne  know  the  hin- 
dcrer  ;  ^  or  the  policye  of  State,  that  defers  fuch  an  office. 

80.  To  the  Prince  Elector;  21  December,  1642. 

50.  b. 

That  fince  His  Majefty  had  not  found  it  fitt,  that 
he  fhould  give  up  the  account  of  his  Negotiation,  he 
had  putt  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas  in  mind,  that  it  is 
moll  neccffary  not  to  feeme  to  fluke  under  our  bur¬ 
then. 

81.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  21  December,  1642. 

He  dc.fi  res  to  fee  &  kifs  His  Majefties  Hands,  &' give 
fome  account  of  the  Eftate  &  Condition,  wherein  he  left 
the  Treaty  ;  efpecially  fince  there  is  an  expectation  of 
fome  returne  from  him  :  which  being  omitted,  the  af- 
fetnbly  at  Francfort  will  be  fruitlefs  for  us,  'J'hat  he  had 
left  a  declaration  that  may  produce  the  greateff  effect, 
becaufe  their  owne  Intereft  is  mingled  with  the  Caufe 
Palatin.  that  he  hath  received  fome  letters  both  from 
Vienna,  &  the  BiOiop  of  Wirtzburg,  which  confirm  their 
expectation  of  his  return.  Per,  at  the  dole,  he  left  the 
bufinefs  in  a  better  Condition  then  ever  it  was  ;  or  per¬ 
haps,  then  His  Majefty  did  conceiue  it  :  which  is  alfo 
much  bettered  by  the  late  Vittorye  of  the  Suedes,  & 
humiliation  of  the  Emperor  and  Duke  of  Bavare,  who 
now  pleads  publicquely,  that  he  was  not,  nor  will  not 
be  the  hinderance  of  the  publicque  peace.  That  the  two 
inayne  impediments  of  the  generall  peace  betweene  France 
fx  the  houfe  of  Auftria  are  removed,  by  the  lofs  of  the 
Tinperiall  Army,  &  feare  of  the  Duke  of  Bavare,  on  the 
one  part ;  and  the  death  of  the  Cardinall  Richelieu  on  the 
other.  That  now,  doubtlefs,  all  Art  will  be  vfed  to 
advance  it,  the  Pknepotences  from  Spayne  being  arrived, 
in  forme. 

82.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  22  December,  1642. 

51.  b. 

Defcribing  the  fad  face  of  our  public  affairs,  at  that 
time  ;  and  wondring  that  he  can  hear  of  no  refolution  of 
the  States  to  feeke  our  peace,  who  haue  payd  fo  deare 
for  their  Security,  by  war. 

83.  To  Mr.  Curtis,  Agent  at  Franckfort.  8  Febru¬ 
ary,  1642-3.  _  £2. 

That  haying  been  with  the  King  at  Oxford,  His 
Majefty  had  given  him  the  Care  of  the  Correfpondencyes 
oi  Germany  ;  with  direction  to  profecute  the  Treaty 

Cat.  Harl.  Vox..  II, 


Num.  190? . 

fufpended,  both  with  his  owne,  and  the  Imperial  Mini¬ 
fters,  and  other  interefted  Princes  of  Germany.  That 
Mr.  Curtfus  will  receive  a  Congratulatory  and  Credentiall 
Later  to  the  Bilhop  of  Wirtzburg,  &  another  to  the 
Ambaffadors  of  the  Affembly  ;  which,  he  hopes,  will 
fully  introduce  him  to  hold  up  our  Intereft  in  the 
publique.  Sir  Thomas  alfo  directeth  him,  Firft,  that 
wdiat  treatye  foever  fhall  be  fettled,  whether  for  the  peace 
of  Germany,  betweene  the  Fmpyre,  France,  Suede,  & 
Spayne  ;  or  particuler,  by  the  Princes,  or  fome  of  thofe 
to  prefs-in  the  intereft  of  the  Palatin  Caufe,  as  an  ingre¬ 
dient  neceffary  and  eflential  to  the  Peace  :  without  which 
(.however  fabulous  rumor  may  deerje  us)  there  never 
can,  nor  fliall  be  any  Peace  or  agreement,  which  may 
not  be  reviewed.  We  being  as  like  to  difburihen  our 
fclves  vpon  the  Enemycs  of  a  juft  peace,  as  before  we 
had  this  vnhappydiitratfion  that  hath  armed  us.  Secondly, 
that  we  lofe  not  the  ground  we  haue  gotten  on  the 
Emperor ;  who  hath  declared  for  himfelf,  whenfoever 
it  may  be  agreed  by  the  others  Interefted,  principally, 
with  the  Duke  of  Bavare.  Nor,  that  it  was  conceived 
generally  at  the  laft  'Treaty,  that  the  imperfection  of 
the  reconciliation  did  net  depend  vpon  the  merits  of  the 
Caufe,  but  upon  a  Surame  of  money,  8c  particuler  latis- 
fadions  ;  which  are  great  advantages,  and  in  died  con- 
felled  by  the  Duke  of  Bavarcs  remonf trance.  Now, 
for  thole  fatisfadions  ;  if  the  Duke  of  Bavare  will  de¬ 
fend  to  poflibilities,  the  conclufion  will  beeafye,  8c  His 
Majeftye  will  doe  his  part.  But  if  he  will  not  abate  to 
what  may  be  poftible,  the  Princes  mult  conclude  it  is 
(till  He  that  will  not  haue  peace.  Yet  this  mud  be  fo 
dexteroefly  iufinuated,  that  we  do  not  make  him  more 
Enemye  then  he  is.  As  for  Mcntz  &  Darmftat ;  the 
generall  x-efolution  will  over-beare  them.  As  to  the 
Bavarian  printed  Apologye,  the  general  fcope  is,  only 
to  difburthen  the  envyc  vpon  the  houfe  of  Auftria  ;  Sc, 
by  infilling  vpon'  a  fpetious  pretence  of  a  juft  debt,  im- 
poftible  for  them  to  pay,  to  keepe  what  he  poffeffeth 
by  Armes,  at  the  colt  of  the  whole  Empyre.  Which 
if  the  Emperor  &  all  the  States  of  Germany  will  not  fee 
or  not  refent  ;  their  cafe  is  as  defperate  as  the  Palatins  : 
all  mud  fuffer  8c  perilh,  to  fett  vp  a  new  Imperiall 
Famelye  in  Bavare  ;  which  doubtlefs  is,  next  his  owne, 
the  French  defigne. 

84.  Sir  Thomas  Roes  Inftructions  to  Mr.  Curtius. 
8  February  1642-3 

Directing  lnm  how  to  introduce  the  Bufinefs  into 
the  Affembly,  &  how  to  carry  it  on :  as  alfo  how  to 
anfwer  to  the  main  matters  contained  in  the  Bavarian 
Apologie  ;  8c  to  make  a  proper  advantage  from  the 
falfity  of  fome  of  them,  &  the  perverfenefs  of  others.  That 
he  mull  keepe  a  watchful  Eye  upon  the  progrefs  of  the 
generall  Trcatyes  fo  far  advanced  at  Munfler  and 
Ofnabrug.  For,  if  this  Affembly  fhould  be  transferred 
thither.  His  Majefty  will  remove  His  &  the  Eledors 
daymes  thither  alfo,  as  .  effential  to  the  Peace  of 
Germany,  for,  if  any  thing  be  any  where  concluded, 
with  omiHion  or  exclufion  of  that  Caufe,  there  will  be 
no  way  left  but  Armes.  That  he  fhould  keepe  good  cor¬ 
respondence  with  the  Minifters  of  the  Dukes  ef  Brunf- 
wick  and  Lunenburg;  &  the  Landgravine  of  Heflen  ; 
&  all  the  Proteftant  States :  alluring  them,  that  His 
Majefty  will  never  defert  his  Nephewcs,  nor  his  Allyes, 
nor  the  common  Liberty  6c  Proteftant  Religion. 

85.  io  Count  Lefley.  9  February,  1642-3.  54.  b. 

I  hat  he  hath  now  begun  the  Correfpondence  with 
Count  1  rautmanfdorff,  which  may  grow  to  the  renewing 
of  the  Ireatyes,  if  the  Duke  of  Bavare  do  not  hope 
that  all  Germany  will  be  content  with  his  printed 
Apologyes,  which  doe  call  back  upon  the  Emperor  the 
whole  burthen  of  not  accommodating  the  Caufe  Palatin 
by  his  pretence  of  debt  ;  and  that  for  his  private  lucre 
of  rnony,  that  the  whole  Empyre  will  patiently  endure 
the  continuance  of  a  confirming  war.  That  there  being 
4  P  now 


33°  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  igoi. 

now  an  appearance  of  Peace  in  England,  His  Majefty 
&  the  Kingdome  being  fully  armed,  will  be  in  a  con¬ 
dition  both  to  ayde  his  friends,  and  to  oppofe  the  ob- 
ftinacy  of  theEnemyes  of  a  juft  peace  in  Germany. 

86.  To  Count  Trautnianfdorfle,  to  February,  1642-3. 

(in  Italian')  55. 

Reaffuming  the  intermitted  Correfpondence  ;  with 
divers  particulars  relating  to  this  Caufe,  which  being 
taken  notice  of  before,  I  here  omitt. 

87.  To  the  Bifliop  of  Wirtzburg.  10  February, 

1642-3.  in  French.  5S- b. 

Ruffling  him  forward  to  exert  himfetf  in  the  aifembly 
at  Francfort,  in  order  to  the  fo  much  defired  reftitution 
of  the  Palalin  Family,  anti  the  Tranquility  of  Germany. 
Of  which,  if  there  may  appear  any  good  profpect  3  his 
Majeftie  will  flic  tv  his  good  Intentions  to  the  whole  World 
by  his  Royal  Contribution. 

88.  To  Mr.  C'urtius.  16  February,  1642-3.  56. 

lhat  in  no  Cafe  any  Treaty  is  to  be  admitted,  or  hear¬ 
kened  vnto  from  the  Elector  of  Mentz,  to  repay  or  re- 
deeme  his  pretenfions  upon  the  Bergftraet  :  but  that  he 
mult  ftand  vpon  this  poynr.  That  it  was  vfurp’d  by  force, 
&  rendred  to  him  by  an  enemye;  that  Juftice  doth  re¬ 
quire,  vt  ante  omnia  fpoKatus  reftituatur ;  and  then  let 
them  purine  their  title  at  Spires.  That  he  muft  endeavour, 
not  to  let  loofe  the  bulines  to  any  particuler  treatye,  at 
Prague,  or  elfewhere  :  but  to  we iue  it  into  the  generall 
conluliations  and  interefls  of  the  Empyre  3  etigaging  the 
Minifters  of  the  Princes  &  Slates  Protellant,  £  of  the 
Cittyes,  who  defyre  the  peace,  to  hold  it  faft  as  efl'ential 
to  the  publicque  tranquillity  &  intereft  of  Germany. 
That  it  would  much  perplex  the  Duke  of  Bavare,  if  the 
Princes  fhould  be  brought  to  aike  a  reafon  of  his  high  de¬ 
mands,  &  call  him  to  accotnpt  :  yet  this  muft  be  fo  ten¬ 
derly  handled,  as  not  to  cult  him  into  defpayre.  That 
the  Emperor  doth  not  much  relilh  that  this  caufe  ftiould 
be  handled  by  the  Aifembly  at  Frankfort,  nor  embraced 
as  a  publicque  intereft  ;  but  rather  to  be  tranfafted  alone 
with  Him,  or  concluded  in  a  privat  treatye.  That  the 
King  of  Denmark  being  the  great  Mediator,  would  haue 
the  honour  of  the  reconciliation,  as  his  worke,  &  not  let 
goe  his  ownc  intereft  in  any  treatye.  That  the  beft  expe¬ 
dient  would  be,  for  the  Piince  El  eft  or  to  procure  the 
King  of  Demnai  ke  to  lend  his  ambafladors  to  Francfort, 
there  to  joyne  with  all  the  Affembly,  and  to  reafliime 
the  Treatye 5  and  to  that  end  to  get  a  Safe-Conduft  for 
the  perfonal  prefence  of  the  Eleftor,  which  would  be  of 
high  advantage  to  his  Cau'e. 

89.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  1 6  February,  1642-3 

That  the  occafion  of  the  Emperor’s  Agents  coming 
to  Oxford,  is  to  prefs  His  Majefty,  to  declare  what  &  how 
much  he  will  contribute  toward  the  fatisfaftion  of  the 
Duke  of  Bavare,  in  cafe  of  a  full  reftitution  of  all  the 
Palalin  lands  by  him  pofllflcd  ;  that  the  Emperor,  as 
Mediator,  may  know  how  to  driue  the  bargaine :  which 
oeing  expreffed,  the  Agent  hath  order  to  declare  fomwhat 
concerning  the  Dignity  Eleftorall  That  thefe  Propofi- 
tions  although  very  fpecious,  may  yet  be  made  at  this 
tyine  for  dilcoverye,  and  to  draw  the  bufines  eyther  to  a 
particuler  treaty,  &:  foie  dependance  vpon  the  Emperor, 
and  lb  to  fever  the  Caufe  from  the  engagement  of  the 
Princes  now  aflfembled  ;  which  will  be  dangerous  :  or 
in  cafe  of  a  cold  Anfwere,  to  difpavre  the  faid  Princes, 
&  induce  them  to  be  Id's  hearty  in  embracing  this  Caufe’ 
to  which,  the  Eleftor  is  not  able,  nor  his  friends  willing 
to  contribute  much.  He  ad vifeth  therefore,  would  kindly 
embrace  the  propofuion  ;  becaufe  the  Emperor  is  the 
right  port,  &  i'afe  way  for  the  Prince  Fleftor  to  re-enter: 
but  not  to  declare  any  fumme,  till  it  be  declared  what 
will  content  Bavare.  For  the  beft  way  will  be  to  keep 
to  generall  tearines ;  as  that  His  Majefty  will  contribute 
in  Inch  a  proportion,  as  both  the  Emperor  &  all  Germany 
fhall  conlefs  both  His  2Iealc  &  Bounty  to  promote  the 


Num.  1901. 

peace  of  the  Empyre.  But  if  he  fhall  yet  be  prefled  to 
name  a  Surnrne,  to  mention  800,000  Dollars :  for  Ba¬ 
vare  will  never  take  lefs,  then  more  then  thrice  that  mony, 
which  muft  be  raifed  jointly,  by  the  Emperor,  the  £m- 
pyre,  &  by  the  Palatin  allyes. 

90.  lo  the  Prince  Eleftor.  17  February,  1642-3.  57.  b. 

lhat  His  Majefty  is  well  fatisfyed  with  the  ftate 

wherein  the  Palatin-buftnefs  was  left,  and  the  Treatye 
alio ;  and  had  commanded  him  to  continew  &  keepe  it 
i.liue,  by  correfpondence,  at  his  owne  diferetion.  Sir 
1  homas  advifeth  His  Highneis  to  procure  the  King  of 
Denmark  to  fend  to  Frankfort ;  and  that  both  the  Media¬ 
tors  &  the  reft  of  the  Deputyes  might  vnitedly  vndertake 
the  compofition;  as  the  right  courie,  both  to  remove  the 
obftacles,  and  to  ftrengthen,  and  to  fettle  the  treaty  to  a 
happy  iffue.  1  hat  vpon  the  returne  of  the  Emperors 
Agent  from  Oxford,  he  fhall  be  better  able  to  make 
fome  judgement,  and  to  worke  according  to  occafion. 
For,  in  the  condition  wherein  both  his  Majefties  & 
his  Highneffcs  affairs  are,  all  that  can  be  done,  is  dex- 
teroufly  to  governe  the  prefent,  and  to  gett  tyme,  and- 
to  keepe  the  Treatyes  aliue,  without  defpayring  any  fide. 
To  this  end,  Sir  Thomas  will  omitt  no  paynes,  though 
this  burthen  be  both  too  heavye  &  vnpleafant,  to  be  vied 
only  as  anothers  Clarke.  For  he  expefteth  nothing  but 
the  inward  reward  ;  to  employ  himfelfe  for  loue  to  the 
the  caufe;  and,  if  poffible,  to  doe  good  for  goodnes 
fake.  This  is  his  portion  ;  and  he  is  contented  to  dve 
in  it. 

91.  To  the  Princefs  Elizabeth.  17  February,  1642-3. 

58.  b: 

Upon  our  domeftic  affairs  :  with  this  Obfervation, 
touching  the  prafticablenefs  of  a  Peace  between  the  King 

and  the  Parliament, - Not  that  I  forefee  not  great 

rocks  difficultyes  ;  but  if  our  other  Star  would  be 
pleafed  to  aft'oard  &  contribute  the  influence  of  her  gra¬ 
cious  beames  for  peace,  and  were  now  here  :  I  fhould 
be  confident.  Now  is  the  cryfis,  the  true  feafon.  If  the 
Oueene  would  vfe  fome  meanes,  fend  fome  Angell  or 
Doue  before  Her,  to  affure  the  whole  Kingdomes,  that 
She  would  come,  Crowned  and  Crowning,  with  the 
Oliue-branch  :  I  know,  She  wuuld  not  only  be  received 
with  publicque  joy,  but  a  more  Royall  fleete  fent  to  con- 
duft  her,  than  that  of  her  happy  mariage.  She  may  now 
take  the  honour  to  her  felfe,  lecure  the  Kingdomes,  and 
her  Princely  children,  and  oblige  the  whole  State  to 
acknowledge  her  the  Mother,  as  well  of  their  felicity,  as 
of  their  Kings.  1  his  is  the  opinion  of  many  of  her  molt 
devoted  Servants:  particulerly  of  fome  great  Lords;  one 
now  prefent,  the  Earl  of  Pembroke  i  who  doth  now 
contribute  all  his  power  to  peace. 

92.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  8  March,  1642-3. 

59. 

lhat  Monfr.  Lyfola  the  Emperors  Refident  hath 
bene  very  preffme  for  fome  Declaration  ;  whom  he  would 
not  difpayre,  becaufe  he  hath  many  reafons  to  believe 
that  thefe  motions  are  fincere  :  yet  he  conceiveth  that 
the  Emperor  eyther  defyres  to  loofen  the  Prince  Electors 
Caufe  from  the  judgment  of  the  Princes  now  afftmbled, 
and  the  publicque  intereft  :  or,  that  He  may  have  difeo- 
vered  the  ouvertures  of  the  Duke  of  Bavare,  made  bv  a 
Minifter  of  the  Bifliop  ol  Wirtiburg,  who  pretends  to 
ofter  a  private  accommodation  of  the  Caufe,  if  He  may 
haue  afliftance  from  his  Majefty  to  revenge  himfelfe,  and 
to  recover  his  firft  pawne  from  the  houfe  of  Auftria. 
Sr.  1  homas  lends  the  anfwers  he  gave  to  Lyfola,  the 
drift  of  which  were  only  to  gain  time  ;  and  defires  Qr* 
ders,  if  he  be  further  preffed,  to  declare,  that  His  Ma¬ 
jefty  will  contribute,  in  convenient  tyme  a  Million  of  Rix 
Dollars;  which  amount  not  to  250,000k  Sterling.  Which, 
if  it  fhould  be  accepted,  would  be  a  very  good  bargayne^ 
in  refpeft  of  his  Majefties  continuall  increafing  penfions: 
and  the  noyfe  of  fuch  a  Summe  would  flop  all  mouthsj 
and  have  a  mighty  operation  vpon  the  affembly  of  Princes,’ 

and, 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


33i 


Num.  1901. 

and,  perhaps,  difcover  the  fecret  intentions  both  of  the 
Emperor  &  Duke  of  Bavare,  and  fhew  vs  which  way  to 
choofe,  in  this  variety. 

93.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  10  March,  1642-3.  60. 

That  his  Majefty  having  wholly  referred  Monfr. 

Lyfola  the  Emperors  Agent  to  confer  with  him  ;  he  like 
a  young  negotiant,  hath  prefled  that  a  precife  Sc  cleare 
declaration  be  made  vnto  him,  in  confidence,  what  Sum- 
me  His  Majefty  will  contribute  toward  the  Satisfaction  of 
the  Duke  of  Bavare:  without  any  intimation  of  a  certeine 
abatement  of  the  great  demand  ;  and  what  temperament 
His  Majefty  would  accept  for  the  Electoral  Dignity.  Two 
high  poynts  to  be  fqueezed  out  at  once  ;  and  vpon  which, 
fo  many  Ambafl'ages  &  Negotiations  haue  lhipwrakt. 
Notwithftanding  which,  he  hath  given  fuch  anfwers,  as 
may  giue  full  fiuisfaCtion  to  thofe  who  proceede  with 
fincerity  towards  His  Majeftv.  As  to  the  ouvertures  of 
the  Duke  of  Bavare,  made  by  the  Deputy  of  Wirtzburglv; 
he  gives  his  opinion  and  thinkelh  it  a  matter  of  high 
confequence,  and  to  be  carefully  penetrated  into.  More¬ 
over,  he  adviieth  him  to  adhere  as  clofe  as  he  can  to  the 
Aflembly  of  Princes  ;  and  to  imprefs  into  them  their 
common  intereft  :  which,  if  they  will  heartily  embrace, 
His  Majefty  will  contribute  both  his  Authority  Sc  Meanes 
to  cooperate  with  them  by  the  fatisfaCtion  of  Bavare  ;  or 
in  fuch  other  wayes,  as  may  by  their  joynt  advife,  pro¬ 
cure  &  fettle  the  fo  much  defyred  peace  of  the  Empyre. 
Sir  Thomas  concludeth  thus,  that  he  hath  well  obferved 
the  preface  to  the  Bavarian  Declaration ;  &  is  tempted 
to  make  fome  fliort  reply.  He  defircth  that  it  be  intimated 
to  the  Bavarian  Deputies,  that  fuch  afperfions  call  vpon 
thofe  who  really  haue  endeavoured  peace,  &  an  equall 
fatisfaCtion  to  their  Prince,  are  not  the  right  wayes  to  pro¬ 
cure  any  confidence  of  their  fincerity,  ordefyrcof  peace. 
For,  as  there  is  neyther  truth  nor  civility  in  their  Pro¬ 
logue  :  fo,  if  he  fhall  be  forced  to  difcover  their  proceed¬ 
ings,  he  will  make  it  appeare  to  the  world,  that  the  whole 
hath  bene  a  Earfe  on  their  part,  to  abufe  thofe  who  are 
too  eafilv  abufed. 

94.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  1 1  March,  1 642-3. 

6  • . 

Upon  fuch  matters  as  require  no  particular  abftraCt. 

95.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  17  March,  1642-3.  ibid. 

Giving  reafons  for  his  opinion,  why  the  Caufe  Pa- 

latin  fhould  be  brought  before  the  Alfembly  at  Frankfort ; 
which  was  defligned  to  debate  the  meanes  of  a  general 
peace.  la  which,  if  it  had  bene  wholy  left  out,  as  vn- 
concerning  orvnneceffary  to  it,  fuch  a  filence  would  haue 
bene  emerpreted  to  the  extreme  prejudice  thereof.  That 
his  purpofe  was  ;  firft,  not  to  neglect  the  Princes,  nor  to 
feeme  to  feparate  the  C.aufe  from  the  publicque  intereft  ; 
but  rather  to  draw  a  declaration  from  them,  that  this  re¬ 
conciliation  was  neceflary  therevnto.  Secondly,  to  in¬ 
duce  them  as  Mediators,  for  a  temper  with  the  Duke  of 
Bavare  ;  vpon  which  only,  it  was  poflible  to  renew  the 
Treaty.  And  laftly,  by  this  occafion,  to  move  ihem  to 
contribute  fome  proportion  of  his  Satisfa&ion.  But  never 
to  make  them  Judges  to  giue  any  Sentence  or  Decifion  in 
the  Caufe.  Nor  could  it  be  any  trayne  layd  by  others  : 
for  both  the  Emperor  &  Bavare  haue  vfed  all  arts  there 
to  filence  it  ;  and  the  defligne  proceeded  from  himfelfe, 
not  from  the  Princes.  This  appeared  fo  cleare,  that  the 
Minifters  of  Bavare  doe  threaten  to  diflolve  that  Affem- 
bly  (though  it  treate  of  Peace)  if  it  meddle  with  the  bufi- 
nes  :  which  will  clearly  worke  one  of  his  ends,  by  throw¬ 
ing  the  whole  Impediment  upon  Bavare.  That  Mentz, 
Collen  k  Saxe  are  interefled  againft  us :  Collen  for  his 
brother  of  Bavare  ;  Mentz  for  the  Bergftraet ;  Saxe  for 
his  fonne  in  law  Darmftat,  &  his  treaty  of  Prague  ;  and 
now  to  be  expefted  more  partiall  for  the  Emperor  then 
ever,  for  his  fuccour  of  Friberg  :  but  many  of  the  Papift 
Princes  haue  no  other  intereft,  but  the  generall  peace. 
His  judgment  then  is,  that  we  fliall  never  come  to  a 
happy  ilfue,  but  by  the  generall  Treatye  of  the  Peace  of 


Num.  1901. 

the  Empyre  ;  if  by  all  arts  we  (hall  be  able  to  make  our 
Caufe  appeare  ofabfolure  neceflitv  thereunto. 

96.  To  the  Prince  Elector.  17  March  1642-3.  62 

Together  with  encloitd  papers,  whereby  his  High- 

nes  might  lee  how  far  he  had  proceeded  ;  and  that  he 
had  no  purpofe  to  forfake  the  Treaty  of  Mediation  ;  or 
to  engage  the  Caufe  to  be  decided  ;  but  only  to  be  de¬ 
liberated  by  the  Aflembly,  concerning  the  Moderation, 
&  Meanes.  Being  ftill  of  opinion,  that  if  the  King  of 
Denmarke  &  the  other  Mediators  would  haue  fent  their 
Ambaffadors  thither,  both  the  place  and  the  conjuncture 
would  haue  bene  proper  Sc  propitious.  For  if  they  fhall 
debate  upon  the  Meanes  of  a  Generall  peace  within  the 
Empyre,  how  can  this  bufinefs  be  left  out  ?  Sir  Thomas 
will  not  prefume  to  make  any  judgment  how  his  High- 
nefs  ftandeth  in  the  Kings  opinion  ;  in  whom,  neverthe- 
lefs,  he  found  no  declination,  it  his  condition  were  any 
way  correfpondent  to  his  wifdome  or  afieCtion. 

97.  To  the  Lord  of  FaLkland,  Secretary  of  State.  19 

March  1642-3.  62.  b. 

That  the  Summe  of  all  the  negotiations  for  the 
Caufe  Palatin  are  rel'olved  into  an  emulation,  if  it  be  fin- 
cere,  whether  the  Emperor  or  Bavare  fhall  oblige  His 
Majefty  in  the  reft itution  ;  both  oftring  vpon  conditions 
of  mony,  and  engaging  Ilim  on  their  partye.  For  the 
jealoufyes  or  hatred  beiweene  them,  are  ready  to  breaks 
out ;  et  hinc  fperare  poffumus.  That  when  lie  lhall  know 
how  the  Declaration  will  be  embraced  by  the  Aflembly 
at  Francfort ;  his  Majefty  may  haue  fome  light,  which 
way  to  choofe  :  and  in  the  meane  tyme,  we  mult  enter- 
teine  every  thing. 

98.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  24  March  1642- 63. 

Shewing  his  gladnefs  to  finde  that  in  many  of  the 

Dsputyes  there  is  an  opinion,  that  the  Palatin  Caule  ought 
to  be  embraced  by  the  States  of  the  Empyre  ;  and  that 
fome  of  them  think  fttt  to  contribute  toward  thelatisfac- 
tion  of  the  Emperor,  or  Bavare.  And  advifing  him  to 
procure  fuch  a  declaration  ot  their  Judgment,  that  the 
Caufe  concerns  the  publicque  peace,  and  ought  to  be 
embraced  therein;  and  that  the  impediment  doth  reft  vpon 
mony,  and  the  private  avarice  of  one  man.  In  which, 
if  they  will  undertake  to  mediate,  that  the  treaty  maybe 
reaffirmed  with  any  probability  ;  his  Majelty  will,  by  a 
Royal  Contribution,  give  them  an  Example  for  their 
owne  good.  For  it  would  be  of  great  confequence  in 
the  future  to  the  meritts  of  the  Caufe,  to  haue  obteyned 
the  judgment  &  declaration  of  fuch  an  Aflembly,  the  lub- 
jeCt  of  v.  hofe  meeting  was  the  true  meanes  of  a  generall 
Peace.  Sir  Thomas  agrees  that  the  Houle  Palatin  rnuft 
be  reftored  eyther  by  agreement  with  the  Emperour,  or 
Bauare  ;  though  it  may  refolue  into  a  generall  Treaty. 
Which  way  ofthefe  to  chooie,  is  the  knot.  He  belieues, 
by  the  Emperor  is  both  the  righter  way  &  theeafyer  ; 
and  therefore  to  be  firft  purfued.  For  cerieinly,  he  hath 
lefs  Intereft  in  the  Keftitution  than  Bauare  ;  who  mull 
furrenderboth  a  principality  &  a  beloved  Dignity.  And, 
perhaps,  it  may  be  the  intereft  of  the  Emperor,  rather 
to  \v.lh  Bauare  leflened,  then  the  Palatins  extinguifhed. 
For,  if  ever  the  Houle  of  Auftria  receive  an  affront  in 
Germany,  they  haue  caufe  to  feareit  only  from  that  lyne. 
This,  he  wifheth,  may  be  hiculcated,  as  deep  ns  may 
be  to  the  Imperialls  ;  and  a  neceffity  of  balancing  the 
Electoral  Colledge  to  the  Proteftant  Princes.  But  feeing 
all  wayes  mull  be  trved ;  Sir  Thomas  defireth  him  to 
penetrate  ••  what  the  Bavarian  will  expert  from  His  Ma¬ 
jefty  Sc  the  Houfe-Palatin,  in  cafe  they  fhall  treat  with 
&  adhere  to  him  ;  that  thereby,  we  may  conjecture 
which  will  be  the  cheaper  bargayne.  For,  if  the  demands 
of  Bauare  may  be  more  moderate  then  thofe  expeCted 
from  the  Emperor  ;  they  may  be  embraced,  in  refpeCt 
of  France,  &  Suede,  Sc  other  allyes,  with  lefs  oppofition, 
then  by  any  conjunction  with  the  houfe  of  Auftria. 

99.  TotheLord  of  Falckland.  6  April  1643.  64. 

Obferving,  that  the  reft  of  the  world,  who  may  be 

our 


Catalogus  Librarian  MSS. 


Num.  1901. 

our  enemyes,  haften  to  a  Peace  among  themfelues ;  and 
thofe  who  fhould  be  our  friends,  make  a  filent  war  upon 
the  advantage  of  our  troubles  ;  as  may  be  found  by  the 
refolutions  of  the  Auftrians,  French,  &  Hollanders,  to 
fettle  their  generall  Treatyes  :  and  by  the  Edifis  of  the 
States,  to  prohibit  our  Commerce;  contrary  to  the  Trea¬ 
tyes,  &  the  long  poffelfion  &  pra&ife  of  our  Merchant- 
Adventurers  in  Holland. 

100.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  6  April,  1643. 

64.  b. 

That  his  own  Declaration,  and  the  Prince-Ele&or’s 
Caufe  haue  bene  eagerly  embraced  by  the  Afiembly  at 
Francfort.  Neverthelefs,  he  his  afrayd  it  will  fall,  with¬ 
out  fome  fupport.  He  lhall  keepe  as  much  Life  in  it  as 
words  &  intimations  will  mainteine;  ifpoffible,  to  carry 
it  along,  among  the  neceffityes  of  the  German  peace,  to 
the  General]  Treatyes,  which  are  now  allmoft  fetled  : 
but  there,  if  there  be  no  Procurator,  no  Advocate  ;  it 
will  not  be.  much  confidered.  That  the  Emperors  Agent 
prelfeth  him  to  anfwere,  whether,  &  what  His  Majefty 
will  contribute  ?  That  we  now  fhould  wvn  tyme,  and 
not  difpayre  the  Emperor.  Therefore  if  His  Majefty  will 
confent  that  he  may  name  the  l'umme  formerly  mentioned, 
as  it  will  not  be  obligatory,  fo  it  will  not  be  accepted  fo 
haftily,  but  that  many  other  difficultyes  will  gine  tyme 
enough  to  ratifye  it.  Yet  it  will  both  flop  thofe  mouthes 
who  defy  re  to  crye  out,  that  His  Majefty  will  doe  nothing, 
and  make  a  great  impreflion  in  thofe,  who  will  thinke 
that  in  fuch  an  offer,  His  Majefty  hath  done  more  then 
could  be  expefted  from  Him. 

101.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  7  Apiil  1643.  65. 

_  Teftifying  his  Joy  for  the  Suffrages  of  the  Affembfy 
at  Frankfort,  gathered  out  of  the  Protocol,  being  more 
than  he  expe&ed  from- many  of  them.  But  efpecially, 
that  the  Direflorium  hath  apprehended  Sc  confeifed,  that 
the  affayre  Palatin  is  judged,  by  plurality  of  voyces,  to 
be  one  of  the  impediments  of  Peace,  and  that  they  would 
deliberate  further  vpon  it.  That  therefore,  he  fhould 
purfue  the  poynt,  encourage  them  to  conftancy,  and  to 
follow  the  Vote  of  Wurtzburgh,  to  write  to  all,  both 
Mediators  A  Intereffed,  to  reaffume  the  Treaty  in  this 
propitious  difpofition  and  conjuncture.  For,  notwith- 
ftanding  the  Prince  Elector’s  dilferent  Opinion,  the  way 
to  bring  this  great  affair  to  a  good  conclufion,  is  not  by 
a  private  treaty  with  Bavaria,  or  the  Emperor  Sc  him  at 
Vienna  where  the  Counfellors  of  the  Emperor  will  be  at 
eafe ;  and  may  weary  thofe  that  are  far  from  home  ; 
and  may  fpmoutthe  bufinefs  withfayre  hopes,  vntill  the 
Generali  Treatyes  fettle  with  an  exclufion  of  that  Caufe, 
as  left  to  a  private  Treaty,  where  in  conclufion  it  may  be 
defperate.  That,  in  view  of  the  generall  Treaty,  the 
Proteftation  of  the  Duke  of  Bavare  againft  the  delibera¬ 
tion  of  the  meancs  of  Reconciliation  before  the  Affembly 
at  Frankfort  doth  not  affright  him.  For,  in  fuch  cafe, 
it  will  appeare  publicque  to  the  world,  that  he  declineth 
the  judgment  of  the  Princes,  feares  the  Juftice  of  his 
Caufe,  and  cannot  endure  the  motions  of  Peace,  which 
he  only  oppofeth.  But  the  truth  is,  he  is  armed  8c  mo- 
nyed,  et  nec  Superos,  nec  Inferos  timet. 

102.  To  the  Queene  of  Bohemia.  7  April  1643.  66- 
That  he  had  made  vfeof  her  Letter,  to  the  Lords 

of  Do  laid  Sc  Pembroke  (who  are  very  well  enclyned  to 
ferue  Her)  that  Her  bufinefs  might  haue  moved  from 
the  vpper  Houfe  ;  and  had  confulted  with  Sir  Henry  Vane 
and  divers  others  of  the  Hcufe  of  Commons,  to  haue 
prepared  the  way  of  a  fayre  acceptance.  But  that  they 
haue  refolued,  that  it  mult  moue  immediately  from  her- 
felfe,  by  Letters  to  the  Speakers  of  both  Houfes,  or  by 
fome  immediate  Meffage  ;  oiherwife,  they  are  of  opinion 
it  will  be  foyled.  That  he  knows  her  Majefties  wifdome 
to  be  fuch,  that  if  Ihe  fhall  write,  fhe  will  fo  endeavour 
to  giue  the  Parliament  Satisfaction,  as  not  to  offend  the 
King.  That  there  had  been  an  Order  to  fend  back  her 
Letter  to  the  Commons,  with  the  Senfe  of  the  Hovfe 


TQCI. 


vpon  it ;  principally,  becaufe  of  fome  wifti  hi  it,  that  the 
Prince  Elector  had  bene  as  well  counfeUed  as  Prince  Ru¬ 
pert.  Sir  1  hennas,  having  in  former  Letters,  complained 
of  the  exorbitantly-cruell  Taxes  levied  of  him  by  the 
Parliamentarian  Faction,  now  writes  that  he  is  utterly  vn- 
done  ;  having  neyther  Rent,  nor  meanes  to  Hue. 

1 03.  To  the  Prince  Ele&or.  7  Aprill  1 643.  66.  b. 

I  hat  his  Caufe  hath  gayned  much  advantage  ;  the 
Votes  of  the  Affembly  hauing  concurred  with  his  Scope  Sc 
Senfe,  which  had  thele  ends.  Firlt,  to  enterteyne  tyme  ; 
elfe  the  bufinefs  had  layne  dead  afleepe :  and  the’feare 
that  it  might  be  embraced  by  the  Princes  in  a  publicque 
Affembly,  hath  begott  the  warmth  &  motions  made  by 
the  Emperors  Agent  here,  &  will  difeouer  the  Duke  of 
Bavare  Sc  nourifh  a  Jealoufy  between  the  Emperor  &  him. 
Secondly,  to  gain  the  generall  declaration  &  judgment 
from  fuch  an  Afiembly,  that  the  Exclufion  of  the  Pala¬ 
tin  Family  was  one  of  the  principal  impediments  of  the 
interne  peace:  which  is  fomwhat,  though  it  fhould  proue 
but  an  induction  to  leade  it  on  to  the  general  Treaty. 
Laftly,  that  the  Treaty  of  Mediation  fhould  be  reaflumed; 
not  at  Vienna,  but  in  the  Affembly  ;  who  were  likely  to 
be  better  Moderators,  then  the  intereflecl.  Therefore  he 
wifhed  that  the  King  of  Denmarke  would  haue  fent  thi¬ 
ther,  where  already  the  Ambafladors  of  all  the  Mediators 
are  prefen t.  And  that  Ilia  Highnes  fhould  fpeedily  apply 
all  His  endeavours  to  bring  his  bufines  againe  into  agi- 
tation  ;  and,  at  the  wo:  ft,  :t  would  be  an  eafy  remoue, 
both  of  the  Perfons  &  Caule,  to  the  generall  i  reatves  in 
Weftphalia. 

104.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  7  Aprill,  1643.  67.  b. 

He  is  forry  the  States  fhould  be  no  wiler  then  to 

fhew  vs  how  they  would  vfe  us,  if  we  were  in  their  power. 
Which  hath  gotten  him  a  Stomack,  as  a  private  man,  to 
write  to  Monfieur  de  Meufe,  and  to  debate  with  him 
their  proceedings  ;  for  which  he  hath  leaue  of  llis  Ma- 
jefty. 

105.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  10  Aprill,  1643. 

67.  b. 

That  hh  endeavours  haue  rayfed  a  great  noyfe,  and 
putt  new.  life  to  the  Caufe  of  the  Prince  Palatin :  which, 
by  vote,  is  embraced  at  the  afiembly  of  Princes,  notwith- 
ftanding  the  open  oppofition  of  Bauare,  and  the  vnder- 
hand  declination  of  the  lmperiall  Minifters.  That  in  this 
Negotiation  hitherto,  he  hath  obteined  all  his  deffignes ; 
and  knoweth  not  wnat  further  to  doe,  but  to  leaue  it 
to  tyme,  and  the  deliberation  of  thofe,  who  may  acknow¬ 
ledge  themfelues  concerned  in  it.  And  to  that  end,  to 
purfue  the  poynt,  he  hath  further  inftruefted  Mr.  Curtius 
in  every  particular.  Whether  they  will  undertake  to 
mediate  an  abatement  of  the  13  Millions  demanded  by 
the  Duke  of  Bavare,  he  doubted:  becaufe  that  Prince  is 
allmoft  omnipotent,  and  few  dare  offend  him.  But  he 
conceiueth,  that  the  Emperor  will  endeavour  fomewhat 
in  it,  as  being,  windy  defyrous  to  end  the  Caufe  by  a 
Treaty  with  himfelfe,  rather  then  by  a  judgment  of  the 
Empyre.  So  that  it  mull  worke  in  both  Spheres,  that 
we  may  take  our  choice  when  we  fhall  fee  what  effects 
their  feverall  ends  fhall  produce.  1  hough  his  Judgment 
is,  that  both  the  Treaty  by  the  Mediators,  and  the  Co¬ 
operation  of  the  Princes,  as  Moderators,  may  be  joyned 
at  Francfort,  as  moft  convenient  for  all  parlyes.  For  l'o, 
if  that  Affembly  and  all  the  matters  handled  therein, 
fhail  be  removed  to  the  generall  Treatyes,  which  the  Em¬ 
peror  endeavours,  as  being  loth  to  be  curbed  by  the  autho¬ 
rity  of  this  Afiembly :  yet  in  that  cafe,  at  the  worft,  the 
Prince  Eleftors  Caufe  will  be  carryed  along,  as  a  prin- 
cipall  fubjeft  of  the  Treaty,  &  Intereft  of  the  Empyre. 
Being  fo  commanded  by  his  Majeftie,  Sir  Thomas  deli- 
vereth  his  opinion  concerning  the  Generall  Treatyes  ; 
and  of  the  confcquences  &  relaiions,  that  an  agreement 
betvveene  the  Houfe  of  Auftria  Sc  France,  and  their  mu- 
tuall  Allyes,  may  worke  vpon  His  Majefties  Interefts,  at 
home  &  abroad.  Concluding,  that  the  fettlement  ol  his 
2  Majefties 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


333 


Num.  1901. 

Majefties  Peace  &  Authority  at  home,  is  only  able  togiue 
life  &  countenance  to  his  Negotiations  abroad.  Next  to 
that,  the  well-managing  of  the  States  of  Holland,  by 
reducing  them  to  vnderftand  the  ground  of  their  owne 
fafety,  by  a  ftrift:  vnion  with  the  Crowne  of  Englande  ; 
from  which,  they  fec’me  moll  vngratefully  &  ruynoufly 
to  fwerue :  is  the  fureft  &  moll  probable  way  to 
ballance  the  Events  of  any  other  Treatyes,  or  Combi¬ 
nations. 

106.  To  the  Prince  Eleftor.  14  April,  1643.  71. 

Herein,  is  little  frelh  matter  Only,  therewith,  Sir 

Thomas  font  a  Coppy  of  His  Majefties  lad  Letter  to  him; 
whereby,  his  Highnefs  might  lee  His  care,  &  conllant 
affe&ion  to  His  caufe. 

107.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  14  April,  1647.  ibid. 

Upon  the  Calamities  impending  on  the  Nation,  for 

want  of  Agreement. 

10S.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  22  April,  1643. 

69.  b. 

That  all  in.iuftry  is  ufed  by  the  Imperialls,  &  Ba- 
tare,  to  diflolue  the  Affembly  at  Frankfort;  under  pre¬ 
tence  of  remitting  all  bufinefs  to  the  genera II  Treatyes  : 
not  without  lome  oblicque  refpeft,  that  the  Palatin  Caufe 
may  receiue  no  countenance  from  the  judgment  or  me¬ 
diation  ol  the  Princes.  And  probably,  that  they  intend 
to  exclude  the  Caufe  from  the  publicque  in  the  Treatye, 
as  they  did  from  the  debate  of  the  Dyet,  &  Amneftye  at 
Ratilbon.  For  to  keep  it  confined  to  a  private  mediation 
will  be  dangerous.  Sir  Thomas  hath  therefore  advifed 
Mr.  Curtius  to  procure  an  Aft:  of  Declaration  in  that 
Affembly,  conformable  to  their  Voyces,  that  the  Refti- 
tution  of  the  Palatin  famelye  to  their  Rights  is  eflentiall 
to  the  pubheque  Peace  :  there  being  little  hope  that  Ba- 
vare  will  hearken  to  any  mitigation  of  his  Demands.  That 
Bavare  hath  reconciled  himfelf  with  the  Emperor  ;  and 
they  haue  joyned  their  Interells,  to  his  advantage.  For 
it  is  conceived  that  he  ftiull  obteine  in  full  fatisfaclion  of 
al  his  pretences,  the  land  firft  pawned  to  him  vpon  the 
Ens ;  and  that  the  pofiefiion  of  the  Palatinats  fhall  be 
returned  to  the  Emperors  difpofing.  This  will  much 
better  the  Condition  of  a  Treaty,  and  facilitate  the  Re- 
flitution  ;  becauie  He  cannot  fo  fately  keepe  them  as  to 
be  an  apparant  hinderance  to  the  peace.  That  Count 
Lefley  writes,  tha*  the  Inclination  in  the  Emperor  to  giue 
his  Majefly  fatisfaclion,  was  never  fo  great  as  at  this  pre- 
fent ;  but  the  point  of  the  Ele&orat  will  be  the  difficulty. 
Sir  Thomas  will  therefore  keepe  vp  the  bufines  in  a  ge¬ 
neral!  way,  as  the  publicque  interelh ;  and  if  pofiible,  to 
carry  it  along,  to  the  Treatyes  of  Munller  &  Ofnabriig, 
where  only  the  Caufe  can  be  well  fetled,  &  where  His 
Majefly  fhall  haue  the  heft  bargavne.  For  the  major 
part  of  the  Prince:-'  Sc  States  do  inlift  &  refolue,  to  feparate 
in  that  Treatye  the  Interells  of  the  Strangers  ;  and  to 
eftablifh  the  inti  mall  peace  of  the  Empire,  which  includes 
the  Caufe  Palatin.  Therefor  it  will  be  neceffary  that  His 
Majefly  ix  the  Prince  Elector  doe  fend  to  that  Meeting. 
That  upon  the  deceafe  of  Cardinal  Richelieu,  &  the  like¬ 
lihood  of  the  French  Kings  death,  the  face  of  affairs  in 
that  Kingdom  is  much  changed.  lie  belieueth  that  the 
French  Regency  viii  haflen  the  peace  with  the  houfe  of 
Auflria,  and  v  ill  find  friends  to  do  their  bufinefs  with 
advantage.  lie  wifheth  that  fuch  an  agreement  may  be 
flopped,  Viitill  our  kingdome  may  be  in  a  better  condi¬ 
tion;  and  that  we  would  flrengthen  our  felues  by  making 
ft  rider  Leagues  with  ourFremds  the  Northernc  Crownes, 
Sc  helping  to  recover  the  witts  of  the  Hollanders. 

1C9.  To  the  Earle  of  Northumberland.  3  May,  1643. 
Upon  the  then  prefen t  Troubles.  71.  b. 

no.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  4 May,  1643.  72- 

That  having  fallen  into  the  jealoufie  of  the  Houfe 
of  Commons,  he  hath  been  advifed  to  retyre.  That  the 
Emperor  &  Bavare  haue  accorded ;  and,  though  at  the  Af- 
fcmbly  at  Frankfort,  the  Princes  do  continue  their  defyre 
to  accommodate  the  Caufe  Palatin;  yet  fo  fuperior  is.  the 
.Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  I  90li 

power  of  the  other  two,  that  the  belt  that  can  be  expelled, 
will  be,  that  the  particuler  treaty  be  either  realfumed 
there,  if  that  meeting  fhall  fo  long  continew ;  or  that  it 
fhall  be  carryed  over  amongfl  the  neceffary  ingredients 
of  Peace,  to  the  Generali  Treatyes  of  Munfter  &  Ofna- 
biug  ;  where,  he  belieueth,  the  accommodation  mufl  be 
made  by  agreement  with  the  Emperor  &  Bauare.  That 
it  is  requifite  for  his  Majefly  to  take  to  his  Confideration, 
whether  He  will  fend  interefs  himfelf  in  the  approaching 
1  reaty,  or  not ;  without  which,  Sir  Thomas  conceiueth 
both  lofs  of  reputation,  &  extreame  danger  to  the  Caufe 
of  the  Prince  Elector.  T  hat  nothing  is  more  wifhed  in 
the  Empyre,  than  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Bavare  ;  he 
having  both  overfwayed  the  Princes  by  his  Armes,  Sc 
overwitted  them  in  the  lafl  Conventions  ;  where  he  pro- 
mifed  to  proteCl  the  publicque  Liberty.  In  which  he  had 
no  other  defligne,  but  to  fhew  to  the  Houfe  of  Auflria, 
how  neceffary  he  was  vnto  them  ;  and  thereby  to  joyne 
their  powers  in  prejudice  of  the  Princes  &  States  of  the 
Empyre.  That  if  the  Duke  of  Bavaria  be  dead,  accord¬ 
ing  to  a  late  rumor,  it  will  be  in  the  Emperors  power  to 
make  a  b.-tter  bargain  for  himfelf. 

hi.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  4  May,  1643. 

Declaring  his  Opinion,  that  if  Bavare  hath  obteyned 
his  ends.  Sc  gotten  the  confent  of  the  Emperor  to  haue 
the  lands  vpon  the  Ens  in  fatisfaftion  of  all  his  pretences; 
the  Emperor  may  be  perfuaded  to  accept  of  fuch  a  Summe 
as  can  poffibly  be  had,  rather  then  by  retevning  the  lands 
remitted  by  Bavare  in  his  hands,  to  hinder  the  general! 
peace.  Sc  take  vpon  him  the  Envye  which  Bavare  hath 
fo  wifely  call  off.  InftrucTng  him  therefore,  to  affure 
the  Imperiall  Minifters,  that  if  they  will  rcaffume  the 
Treaty,  in  an  equall  &  convenient  place,  his  Majefly 
will  largely  contribute  toward  the  Emperors  fatisfaction. 
Provided,  we  may  haue  nothing  to  doe  with  Bavare,  nor 
Spayne ;  and  that  the  Compofition  for  the  Eleclorall 
Dignity  may  be  fuch,  as  may  content  the  Palatin  Fame¬ 
lye  ;  &  the  Proteftants  of  the  Empyre.  But  if  the  Duke  of 
Bavare  be  dead,  he  mufl:  prefs  the  Princes  to  enterpofe, 
before  any  thing  be  fetled  by  invefliture,  or  admittance  of 
an  adminiftrator  (for  the  Minor)  in  the  Eleftorall  Dignity, 
that  nothing  be  done  in  prejudice  of  theparticuler,  or  gene- 
rail  Treatyes.  Then  it  will  be  in  the  Emperors  power  to 
make  a  better  conclufion,  either  with  the  Adminiftrator, 
or  Minor  ;  both  for  himfelfe,  vs,  and  the  generall  Peace. 

M2.  To  the  Lord  of  Falkland.  5  May,  1643.  74- 

Upon  ourinteftine  divifions  ;  and  giving  his  judge¬ 
ment  as  to  the  method  to  be  ufed,  in  order  to  the  com- 
pofing  the  fame. 

113.  To  Mr.  Browne.  9  May,  1643. 

About  the  Meeting  intended  to  be  held  at  Munfter 
&  Ofnabrug,  and  the  Duke  of  Bavarias  endeavors  to 
exclude  the  Palatin  Caufe  from  being  debated  therein. 
He  giveth  the  prefent  State  of  that  bufinefs,  for  the  ad¬ 
vancement  of  which,  he  inllrufteth  Mr.  Browne  to  nego¬ 
tiate  in  his  Majefties  Name,  with  the  Minifters  of  State  in 
his  Refidence  ;  that  they  give  exprefs  Order  to  p  rote  ft: 
this  Caufe  in  the  generall  Treatyes,  as  one  of  the  princi- 
pall  impediments  of  the  Peace,  and  not  fufl'er  it  to  be 
excluded  for  the  advantage  of  the  Duke  of  Bavare,  who 
hath  now  joyned  his  interells  clofely  with  the  lloufe  of 
Auflria,  and  ufed  France  only  as  a  {talking  horfe  to  his 
privat  defiignes.  Ibis,  in  honour,  France  cannot fuffer  : 
nor  abandon  a  Caufe,  &  the  protection  of  a  Prince  Ac 
antient  Ally,  nor  violate  the  profefSons  made  particularly 
to  His  Majefly,  &  publickly  to  the  world,  that  (he  took 
vp  Armes  for  refctling  the  Liberty  of  the  Empvre  vpon 
the  antient  foundations. 

114.  To  Mr.  Averye.  9  May,  1643.  76. 

Opening  unto  him  the  State  of  the  Palatin  Affair,  now, 

upon  the  approaching  Treaty.  rl  hat  he  hath  difeovered 
how  the  Dutch,  for  the  fake  of  lucre,  abufed  the  Danes 
with  falfe  fuggeflions,  which  begat  a  Coldnefs  between 
our  King  &  the  King  of  Denmark  his  Uakle,  a  vaft  mif- 
4  Q  fortune 


334 


Catalogus  Librorurn  MSS. 


Num.  1901. 

fortune  to  the  Eaffland  Company,  and  to  himfelf  the 
K.  of  Denmaik’s  difpleafure;  to  whom  he  had  traufmitted 
an  Apology  for  his  Conduft.  He  defires  to  know  how 
it  was  accepted  by  that  Prince  ;  in  whom  if  any  inclina¬ 
tion  may  be  found  to  fettle  this  bufines  right,  our  King 
will  giue  his  Unkle  fuch  content,  as  may  confirme  the 
mutuall  Loue  &  Confidence  necelfary  to  them  both,  Sc 
to  their  Kingdomes. 

115.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  10  May,  1643.  77. 

That  he  is  not  concerned  becaufc  of  the  Duke  of 

Bavares  being  moved  at  his  late  Declaration.  He  hath 
as  much  caufe,  and  all  the  Minifters  alfo,  to  refent  His 
Manifeft  &  the  added  Preface.  He  cannot  hope,  in  refpeft 
of  the  oppofition  of  Bauare,  and  of  the  fhort  life  of  the 
Francfort  Aflembly.  that  the  Treaty  of  Mediation  can  be 
brought  thither.  That  if  he  (Mr.  Curtius)  can  procure 
by  the  Interpofition  of  the  Princes,  that  the  Treaty  may 
be  tranlacled  at  the  generall  Meeting,  he  lhall  haue  very 
great  hope  of  a  good  end  ;  if  we  breake  not  concerning 
the  Eleciorat,  which,  he  fears,  will  proue  the  infuper- 
able  rock.  Sir  Thomas  alfo  direfteth  Mr.  Curtius,  fpee- 
dily  to  informe  Mr.  Browne  at  Paris,  and  Mr.  Avery  at 
Hamburgh,  what  he  findeth  will  be  done  or  refolved  by 
the  Affembly  in  the  Palatin  Caufe,  that  they  may  timely 
negotiate  fitt  Inftru&ions,  concurrent  to  our  ends,  for 
the  Ambaffadors  which  lhall  be  fent  to  Munfter  and  Of- 
nabrug,  from  the  Crownes  of  France,  Denmarke,  and 
Suede. 

1 16.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  10  May,  1643. 

.  77- b- 

Acquainting  him  with  his  lateft  proceedings  about 
the  Palatin  Caufe  ;  which,  although  it  was  all  he  is  able 
to  doe:  is  not  all  that  is  necelfary,  both  for  His  Majefties 
Honour,  A  Intereft,  &  Reafon  of  State.  For  hovvi'oever 
His  Majelly  is  ftreightned  at  home  ;  it  Ihould  not  be 
profeffed  abroad,  by  omitting  to  lend  to  Munfter,  vpon 
fuch  an  occafion  ;  where,  the  whole  Eftate  &  Affayres 
of  Europe  will  be  brought  vpon  the  Stage,  and  the  l’eve- 
rall  deflignes  of  all  Princes  defcovered.  Neyther  was 
there  any  Prince  brought  fo  lowe,  but  he  could  fend  an 
Ambaflage.  For  it  is  not  the  Caufe  Palatin  alone,  (which 
is,  in  comparifon,  a  private  bufines)  but  the  reputaiion 
of  the  Proteftant  partye,  in  their  relation  to  vs,  and  the 
honour  of  His  Majefty  &  the  Kingdome,  that  willfuffer, 
if  we  feeme  to  abandon  both  our  felues  &  thofe  allyes 
which  will  be  as  necelfary  to  our  fafety,  as  their  owne. 
That  the  Earl  of  Arundell  is  allready  abroad,  and  fpends 
as  much  in  the  Courfe  he  is  in,  as  he  would  by  remo¬ 
ving  to  Munfter,  or  Ofnabrug.  That  others  may  be 
found  in  England,  glad  of  that  protetflion  from  ruyne  at 
home  ;  and  that  the  Parliament  cannot  oppofe  it.  That 
Sir  William  Bofwell  w  ere  very  fitt,  if  his  health  would 
permitt.  That  a  lefs  quality  than  an  Ambalfador  will  haue 
no  luftre  nor  authority :  for  which  reafon  he  cannot 
approve  of  Curtius,  although  well  verfed  in  public  affairs. 
But  it  this  cannot  be  done  ;  his  opinion  is,  that  His  Ma- 
'efty  muft  fuddenly  fend  his  Letters  to  the  French, 
Danes,  &  Suedilh  Crownes,  to  recommend  the  Caufe 
wholly  to  them,  to  be  negotiated  &  protedled  by  their 
Ambaffadors  ;  and  fo  wholly  to  depend  vpon  them. 

1 17.  To  Sir  Dudley  Carleton.  1 1  May,  1643.  78.  b. 

Wifhing  that  the  Prince  Elector  may  not  be  de¬ 
ceived,  in  the  felling  of  his  Penfion  vpon  a  ground  that 
cannot  hold  ;  was  once  held  a  grievance  ;  and  to  which, 
iome  of  his  good  friends  haue  a  title.  He  would  be  glad 
the  States  would  doe  any  thing  that  might  make  vs 
thinke  they  defyre  our  peace ;  and  that  the  common 
error  did  not  blind  them.  That  they  ought  to  confider, 
that  a  change  in  France,  may  change  the  Counfells  & 
Government  there  :  and  if  England  be  reduced  to  that 
condition  that  it  be  not  able  to  afiift  them  ;  or  by  their 
demerit,  unwilling  to  doe  it  :  the  French  will  lbrue  them 
to  what  te.irmes  they  pleafe.  Therefore,  now  is  the 
tyme,  that  they  may  ihew  wifdome,  loue,  &  gratitude : 


Num.  1901. 

and  if  they  haue  none  of  thefe  qualetyes,  they  m  .ill  ex¬ 
pert  retribution  of  the  fame  mealure. 

118.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  11  May  1643.  ibid. 

That  the  Emperor  will  make  no  peace  with  France, 

but  comprifing  and  compofing  the  controverfyes  with 
Spayne.  For  he  hath  affured  the  Duke  of  liavare  to 
him  ;  who,  like  a  ratt,  hath  quitted  the  houfe,  he  fore- 
faw  would  fall,  when  Richelieu  the  great  Pillar  was  re¬ 
moved.  So  that  the  difficultyes  in  the  generall  treaty 
may  be  encreafed,  by  the  heightening  of  the  Spirits  & 
Demands  of  the  Auftrians,  unlefs  the  French  will  yeild 
vp  more  than  will  fort  with  their  honour,  &  late  floud  of 
profperity.  That  we  ought  not  to  negledl  the  French,  if 
they  may  be  induced  toembracethe  Palatin  affayres  in  their 
treaty,  which  may  be,  to  them,  an  advantage  of  honour. 
For,  peace  will  not  be  made,  vnlefs  France  make  large 
furrenders  :  and  they  haue  been  fo  fuccefsfull,  that  thev 
haue  nothing  to  remand,  except  Nauare,  &  the  reftitu- 
tion  of  their  allyes  ;  thereby  to  mainteyne  their  reputa¬ 
tion,  that  they  giue  not  ail  for  nothing.  That  Mr. 
Curtius  hath  written,  that  the  Affembly  will  adhere  to 
their  votes.  But  it  is  difeovered,  that  the  Emperor  & 
Bavare  would  exclude  the  Palatin  Caufe,  as  well  from 
the  Generall  Treatyes,  as  they  haue  endeavoured  to 
filence  it  at  Francfort.  Therefore,  we  muft  plye  &  prefs 
the  three  Crownes  of  France,  Denmarke,  &  Suede, 
that  they  will  infill  upon  it,  that  the  bufines  doth  con- 
cerne  the  General  peace,  at  leaft  the  interne  tranquillity 
of  the  Empire. 

119.  To  the  Prince  Elcdlor.  12  May,  1643.  79.  b. 

Befides  what  hath  been  before  rehearfed,  that  he 

can  forefee  no  good  fuccefs  if  his  Highnefs  be  left  alone, 
to  the  mercy  of  the  intereffed,  in  a  particular  &  private 
treaty.  Which  makes  him  wonder  at  the  opinion  of 
thofe  of  his  Highneffes  Counfell,  that  the  Mediation 
fhould  be  reaffumed  in  the  prefence  of  the  Aflembly  at 
Francfort.  And  is  therefore  very  forry  that  HE  had  fo 
much  enclined  to  them,  as  coldly  to  accept  what  was  en¬ 
deavoured  ;  which  had  kept  the  Caufe  aliue,  and  made 
it  publicque  ;  and  which,  without  that  communication, 
had  never  bene  accepted  in  the  general  Treaty;  but  vnder- 
ftood,  as  the  Imperialls  &  Bauarians  ftyle  it,  a  private 
affayre  betweene  the  Emperor  &  his  Highnefs,  no  way 
concerning  the  Empyre  nor  publicque  peace  :  that  His 
Majefties  offer  would  have  been  refufed  at  Vienna,  and  fo 
ftated  ;  whereas  at  the  generall  Treaty,  it  will  make  a 
great  noyfe,  and  the  oportunity  will  be  fayre,  if  the 
death  of  the  French  King  rayfe  not  the  Auftrians  too 
high  ;  or  that  the  Counlells  in  France  warpe  not  toward 
the  Spaniard. 

120.  To  the  Princeffe  Elizabeth.  12  May  1643.  80. 

Upon  our  own  Confufions  ;  the  folly  or  madnefs  of 

the  Dutch,  who  interpofe  not  themfelves  in  order  to  pro¬ 
cure  a  peace  between  our  King  &  his  People  ;  wherein 
themfelves  are  fo  much  concerned,  efpecially  now  upon 
the  death  of  the  French  King,  which  may  be  attended  by 
alterations  much  to  their  prejudice.  That  the  Palatin 
Caufe  is  now  in  the  Cryfis  ;  and,  if  the  decifion  be  not 
more  publicque.  than  fome  doe  counlell,  it  is  defperate. 
Sir  Thomas  vvifheth  therefore,  that  her  Brother  thePrince- 
Eledlor  be  not  deceived  in  the  wayes  wherein  he  now 
feemeth  to  trull,  both  here  &  abroad. 

12 1.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  19  May,  1643. 

ibid. 

Concerning  the  ftate  of  the  Palatin  caufe ;  about 
which,  here  is  little  frefh  matter.  That  he  fufpedleth  the 
K.  of  Derimarkmay  have  made  fome  private  Treaty  with 
Bavare,  which  may  bring  fome  prejudice  to  this  Caufe  ; 
and  that  this  Duke,  being  not  heartily  affedled  to  the 
Emperor,  may  encline  more  to  the  French  fide.  That 
the  French  Parliament  hath  enlarged  the  Queens  Autho¬ 
rity  as  Regent,  and' fettled  their  National  Affairs,  efpecially 
the  power  of  the  Princes  &  Great  Officers  in  a  flat® 
-of  Peace  Sc  Tranquillity.  Moreover,  Sir  Thomas 
5  heareth 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


33S 


Ntirn.  1 90 1. 

heareth  from  thence,  that  the  Queene  Regent  &  the 
Avhole  Counfell  do  refent  the  preffures  of  our  Parliament 
againft  his  Majellie  as  an  effeft  of  the  miftaken  doftrine 
of  tire  reformed  religion  ;  which  is  like  to  make  that 
partie  fuffer  in  France,  at  leaft  to  be  kept  very  low,  for 
i'eare  of  the  Example.  And,  that  they  encline  very 
zealoufly  to  aflift  &  proteft  the  declining  Royaltie  :  and 
to  that  end,  they  purpofe  fpeedily  to  fend  hither,  to  ex- 
poftulate  with  the  Parliament  concerning  the  Cappuchins  ; 
and  vpon  that  occafion  to  make  fome  other  ouvertures. 

122.  To  Mr.  Burlemachy  23  May,  1643.  81. 

In  anfwer  to  a  letter,  wherein  Sir  Thomas  was 

alked,  whether  a  mediation  from  the  States  Generali  were 
feafonable,&  likely  to  take  any  good  effect  for  our  peace  P 
He  giveth  his  opinion,  at  large,  in  the  affiimative,  &  that 
it  would  be  both  honourable  &  advuntagious  to  that 
State  to  offer  fuch  a  Mediation,  &  would  fhew  their  wif- 
dorne  &  gratitude  by  profecuting  the  fame.  And  though 
it  might  feeme  very  late,  yet  it  might  Hill  be  feafonable, 
if  they  fhould  dexteroufly  manage  the  occafion  of  the  firft 
Entrance.  In  this  laft  refpedt  Sir  Thomas  giveth  his 
advice. 

123.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  25  May,  1643.  81.  b. 

Concerning  the  Palatin-caufe,  which  muff,  by  all 

meanes,  be  brought  into  the  public  Treatie,  &  not  be 
left  to  private  Charetye.  Advifing  what  he  fhould  inti¬ 
mate  to  the  Princes,  concerning  the  Ele&oral  Digni:y  ; 
and  giving  his  opinion  touching  the  reftitution  of  the 
lands  taken  from  the  Duke  of  Bavaria’s  Anceffor,  by  the 
Emperor  Maximilian  the  firft. 

124.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  26  May,  1643.  82.  b. 

That  our  oppofites  intend  aLaberinth,  out  of  which 

we  Ihall  neuer  gett,  but  at  their  pleafure.  That  the  Im- 
perialls  &  Bauarians  haue  craftely  obteyned  their  ends. 
Therefore  he  muff,  if  it  be  not  too  late,  awaken  the 
Princes  from  the  {lumber  into  which  the  charmes  of 
Bauare  hath  caff  them.  That  they  have  forfaken  their 
honour,  their  intereft,  &  their  votes.  Yet,  if  they 
will  add  a  judgement  or  Declaration,  that  the  Caufe  doth 
concerne  the  publicque  fo  much,  that  it  is  neceffarys  to 
be  decided  among  the  impediments  of  the  interne  peace  ; 
it  will  be  fome  amends.  If  they  dare  not  do  it,  there  is 
no  more  truft,  no  courage  in  them  :  but  we  muff  fly  to 
the  Strangers  the  Three  Crownes  ;  to  force  them  to  fee 
their  own  fayntnefs  &  impotencye. 

125.  To  the  Prince  Eledor.  26  May,  1643.  83. 

That  the  Emperor  &  Duke  of  Bavare  haue  en¬ 
deavoured  nothing  more  feduloufly,  then  to  feparate  his 
highnefs  caufe  from  the  publicque  :  which,  if  they  can 
doe  (and  they  have  done  much  more  than  was  expeded) 
they  will  have  the  game  fare  in  their  owne  hands.  For 
that  reafon,  he  defired  to  weave  it  into  the  publicque 
confultations  of  the  meanes  of  peace  ;  not  in  hope  to  fee 
atFrancfort  a  finall  decifton,  but  to  putt  life  in  the  bufines, 
which  otherwife  had  layne  filer.ced  in  expedation  of  re- 
affumption  of  a  private  Treatye  ;  vpon  which,  the  Em¬ 
peror  would  neuer  haue  called,  if  he  had  not  beene 
awakened  by  that  alarme.  That  the  offers  he  hath  made 
to  Ifola,  are  only  to  keepe  the  Emperor  in  a  good  difpo- 
fition,  &  continue  the  Treatye  in  the  way  refolved  at 
Vienna  :  leaft,  if  we  fhould  fay  nothing,  it  might  be 
objeded  that  wee  had  broken  it,  or  difeontinued  it  on 
our  part.  That  he  hath  received  fomewhat  from  Count 
Trautmanfdorffe,  Which,  he  thinks,  doth  fay,  that  this 
bufines  is  now  wholly  in  his  mailers  power  ;  and  that  he 
will  fpeedily  putt  an  end  vnto  it,  either  before  or  at  the 
generall  Treatyes  from  this  expreflion,  fperandum  illud 
die  ac  tempore  ipfo  ad  fuam  maturitatem  breui  peruen- 
turum.  That  therefore  His  Highnes  muff  endeavour, 
by  all  his  friends,  to  bring  his  caufe  to  the  publicque  trea¬ 
ties,  and  to  ftrengthen  it  there  by  the  three  Crownes  ; 
and  vfe  all  the  power  he  hath  in  England  to  procure  His 
Majellie  to  fend  his  Ambalfador  to  aifift.  Elle  the  world 
will  judge  that  we  haue  defer  ted  ourfdves  &  our  Al- 


Num.  1901. 

lyeS  ;  and  the  Minifters  will  be  cold  enough,  fhould  none 
be  prefent  to  watch  ouer  them,  and  hold  them  faff  to 
their  profeflions. 

126.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  30  May,  1643. 

83.  b. 

Shewing  by  many  forcible  reafons,  how  neceffary  it 
was,  that  his  Majefty  fhould  fend  an  Ambaffador  to  the 
approaching  Treaties  :  which  yet,  if  his  Neceflities  would 
in  no  cafe  permit,  the  expectance  thereof  ought,  never- 
thelefs,  to  be  kept  up  ;  and  Negotiations  ought  to  be  had 
with  the  three  Crowns  of  France,  Denmark,  &  Sueden, 
that  the  bufinefs  might  be  brought  to  good  effedt  by  their 
Authority.  That  Monfr.  Ifola  the  Emperors  Refident 
here,  in  his  propofitions  given  to  His  Majellie  at  Oxford, 
in  February  laft,  hath  gone  far  beyond  his  Inftrudlions 
&  Commiflion  ;  and  is  like  to  be  difavowed.  For  the 
Duke  of  Bavare  hath  gotten  a  Coppie  of  them,  and  writ¬ 
ten  a  fliarp  Letter  to  the  Emperor,  relenting  the  injurye, 
and  protefting  againft  the  performance,  on  his  part. 
Hereof  Sir  Thomas  hopes  to  make  a  very  good  ufe ;  the 
drift  being  to  dilengage  us  from  feeking  to  bring  the 
Palatinat-caufe  to  the  cognition  of  the  Affembly  atFranc¬ 
fort,  or  to  the  generall  Treaties  ;  which,  if  effected,  the 
game  would  be  in  their  own  power. 

127.  The  Heads  &  Subflance  of  what  is  concerned  re- 

quifite  to  be  negotiated  with  the  Crownes  of  France, 
Denmarke,  &  Suede,  in  preparation  to  the  generall 
Treaties  defligned  ;  particularly  in  the  caufe  Palatin  ; 
partly  by  Letters  C.redentive,  partly  by  the  Negotiation 
of  the  Minifters  of  His  Majeftie,  with  them  refident.  31 
May,  1643.  84.  b. 

128.  To  Mr.  Auery.  June  1.  1643.  86. 

That  the  Imperialls  &  Bauarians  haue  fo  far  pre- 

uayled  by  their  Arts,  as  to  filence  the  further  profecution 
of  the  Palatine-bufinefs  at  Frankfurt  ;  and  to  exclude  it 
from  the  Generall  Treatyes  (if  they  can)  as  a  particular 
difference  betweene  the  Emperor  &  the  Houfe  Palatin,  no 
waye  concerning  the  Publicque.  Sr.  Thomas  hopes  that 
the  3  Crownes,  who  will  bewthe  great  Adtors  in  the  Ge¬ 
neral  Treatye,  will  refent  this  cunning,  which  hath  awa¬ 
kened  our  King ;  who  hath  fent  frefh  Orders  to  oppofe 
this  defligne,  by  engaging  Denmarke  &  Sueden  to  infill 
upon  the  Comprehenfion  of  this  Caufe,  as  effential  to  the 
Peace  of  the  Empire. 

129.  To  Mr.  Browne.  June  1.  1643.  ibid.' 

Much  to  the  fame  purpofe  ;  with  Orders  to  prepare 

the  French  to  make  the  fame  Motions. 

130.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  2.  June,  1643. 

86.  b. 

Reciting  various  Opinions  as  to  what  would  be  fit 
for  our  King  to  do  at  this  juncture.  His  own  is,  that 
His  Majellie  fhould  write  to  the  3  Crownes,  the  Eledtor  of 
Brandenburg,  the  Dukes  of  Lunenburgh,  &  Landgrave, 
of  Heffen,  and  alfo  to  fome  choyce  Minifters,  to  take 
the  bufinefs  into  their  manage,  and  make  a  good  end 
thereof  at  the  generall  pacification. 

1 3 1  -  To  the  Queene  ofBohemia.  7  June  1643.  87. 

Shewing,  in  the  main,  his  affedtion  to  Her  Majefties 
Service,  though  unable  to  advance  in  any  great  degree. 
Talks,  as  if  fomewhat  might  beexpedted  from  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  ;  efpecially  for  her  Subfiftance.  But  laments  our 
public  differences. 

132.  To  the  Prince  Eledlor.  7  June,  1643  87.  b» 

Relating  what  hath  been  lately  done  in  his  bufinefs; 

with  his  own  opinion,  which  he  fubmits  to  the  Electors 
Will. 

133.  To  Princefs  Elizabeth,  the  Eledlor-Palatin’s 

fifter.  7  Juue,  1643.  ibid. 

Giving  his  Senfe  upon  the  partial  Conduct  of  the 
Dutch,  who  would  make  an  advantage  by  our  Troubles 
of  which  he  believeth,  that,  fooner  or  later,  they  will 
repent :  fince  too  much  Caution,  and  open  Covetoufnefs, 
are  but  Follies.  1  hat  her  Brother  hath  accepted  of  a 
weak  foundation  of  Subfiftance,  viz.  12000k  per  annum 

upon 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1901. 

upon  the  Brafs  Farthings  ;  which  Penfion  is  now  in 
great  Arrear.  That,  at  the  bed,  the  Thing  was  not 
worth  to  the  Undertakers  3000I.  yearly  ;  and  then  it 
was  a  grceuance  to  the  Kingdome  ;  and  will  be  greater, 
if  enlarged. 

134.  to  Mr.  Curtins.  8  June,  1643.  S3. 

Inflrufting  him  how  to  proceed  in  the  management 

of  the  Palatin-affair  ;  which  our  King  will  never  defert. 
He  juflifiesHis  own  late  Declaration,  which  none  think 
injurious  to  the  Colledge  Elle&orall,  but  One  Dottor. 
That  He  communicafed  the  Subdance  thereof  to  the 
Electors  of  Mentz  &  Collen,  the  one  a  Friend,  the 
other  a  Brother  to  the  Duke  of  Bauare,  who  took  no 
Exception?,  but  (being  convinced)  rather  approved  it. 
Adding,  that  as  the  Greated  Clerkes,  are  not  the  Wifed 
Men  :  So,  He  has  obferved,  that  all  the  Treatyes  Sc 
Resolutions  of  the  Princes  of  Germany,  (which  Ihould 
be  managed  by  generous  Spiritts,  fenfible  of  Honour)  are 
ouer-lealoned  with  that  too-learned  ingredient  of  Doctors, 
hke  good  Broth  ouer-falted.  Thus,  he  leaves  Sc  def- 
pifes  their  Cenfures. 

135.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  6  June,  1643.  88* 

That  the  Allcmbly  at.  Frankfort  hath  done  fome 

Good,  in  difeouering  the  Emperor  Duke  of  Bauare 
(who  is  very  angry)  that  the  Votes  will  remayne  vpon 
the  Regider,  and  ought  to  be  a  great  Inducement  to  the 
Crownes  to  embrace  the  Caufe,  by  Judgment  of  the 
Princes,  declared  eflential  to  the  interne  Peace.  He 
wonders  at  the  Conduct  of  the  States  ;  who  zSt  not  as 
they  are  obliged  by  the  antient  Treatyes,  or  at  lead  by 
the  Equitve  of  them  :  whereby  they  ought  not  to  enter- 
teyne  a  Conference  of  Peace  with  Spayne,  without  ac- 
quaynting  our  King. 

136.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  1 2  June,  1643.  89. 

That  the  Deputies  of  the  Princes  affembled  at  Franc- 

fort,  will  infid  upon  their  Voles.  That  Mr.  Cut  tius  hath 
there  presented  a  Memorial!,  to  require  an  Anfwere  to 
His  Credence  j  which  will  engage  them  to  fome  Decla¬ 
ration  more  publique.  That  the  Duke  of  Bauare  &  His 
Miniders  are  much  difeompofed,  finding  that  this  great 
affaire  will  not  be  remitted  in  a  Corner,  to  be  treated  at 
Vienna,  or  in  any  priuate  Colloquye,  but  in  the  face  of 
theEmpyre;  and  before  thofe,  who  will  not  fo  much 
reguard  his  13  Millions,  as  the  publicque  Safctyc,  & 
Peace.  That  they  now  wifh,  they  had  rather  confented 
to  have  had  it  ended  there,  where  there  w  as  fome  appearance 
of  Contribution  ;  then  by  the  generall  Treaties,  where 
He  can  expect  nothing  but  the  Honor  to  haut  l'acrificed 
his  rrivat  Pretenfions  to  the  publicque  :  or  to  be  left  to 
the  Lav.es,  to  recouer  of  the  Emperour.  He  conceiveth 
that  the  Letter  of  that  Duke  to  the  Emperour  hath  made 
all  the  Princes  fee,  that  there  is  no  purpofe  in  him  to 
agree  with  the  Elector  Palatin;  but  to  feparate  him  from 
the  protection  of  the  publicque  Intered,  vnder  the 
colour  of  a  priuat  Treatye.  So  that  there  is  nothing  to 
be  traded  unto,  of  Monfr.  l’lfula’s  ouuertures  made  to 
His  Majellie  at  Oxford,  which  by  Bauare  are  required 
to  bereuoked. 

137.  To  Mr.  Browne.  14  June,  1643.  89.  b. 

Directing  him  to  folicit  the  Ficnch  Court  for 

Indructions  to  their  Ambalfadors  ;  and  to  procure  (if 
p  ffible)  a  Letter,  or  fome  equal  Signification  from  that 
Cruwne,to  the  King  of  Denmmke  as  the  Great  Mediator, 
f  >r  Con  pr<  henfi  >n  <  f  the  Ele&or-PaHtin  Sc  his  Famelye 
as  an  Allye ;  that  His  Caufe  may  be  decided  at  the 
General  ’1  roaties  as  effential  to  the  Peace.  With  a  prefent 
conjecture  at  the  Danes  behaviour  then,  Sc  the  reafon 
thereof. 

138.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  15.  June,  1643.  90. 

Approving  his  proceedings.  That  He  (Sir  Thomas) 

has  endeavoured  to  prepare  the  King  of  Denmarke  to 
remove  his  Mediation  to  the  Generali  Treaties ;  when 
he  may  have  Concurrence  Sc  Help,  fo  as  not  to  be  over- 
fwayed  by  pluralitie  of  intereffed  Voyces.  To  which 


Num,  1  go  1. 

end  alfo,  he  hath  endevoured  to  procure  Letters  from 
France  &  Suede. 

He  likewife  gives  further  Directions,  how  to  add  with* 
regard  to  the  Emperor,  in  this  affair. 

139.  To  Mr.  Auery.  19  June,  1643.  90.  b. 

Touching  the  private  Views  of  the  King  of  Den¬ 
marke,  Sc  of  the  Duke  of  Bauare  ;  hoping,  that  His  Da- 
nidi  Majedy  will  not  be  made  the  Inftrument  of  betraying 
that  Caufe,  he  fo  generoufly  undertook  to  protect. 
Which  Caufe  is  of  too  high  a  Nature  as  to  become  a  pre¬ 
cedent  for  all  Caufes  (as  lome  pretend)  Sc  confcquently  an 
obdruction  to  the  general  Peace.  This  being  the  Cafe  of 
Confiscation  cf  the  fird  (temporal)  Prince  of  the  Empire  ; 
and  the  Tranflation  of  an  Electoral  Dignitye  ;  which  is 
the  Intered  of  the  King  of  Denmark,  as  well  as  of  all 
other  Protedant  Princes  to  prevent,  and  in  it  felf,  not 
triable  at  the  Imperial  Chamber.  That  the  general  Opi¬ 
nion  is,  that  the  Peace  cannot  be  concluded,  or  at  leaft 
'  fecured,  without  the  Reditution  or  Extinction  of  the 
Palatin-Family.  And  that  France  &  Sueden,  efpecially, 
are  of  this  Judgment,  underdanding  the  Eleftor-Palatin 
as  an  Allye  of  their  Crownes  ;  m  which  Qualitye  they 
have  procured  Safe  Condudt  for  his  coming  or  deputing, 
to  the  general  Treaties :  not  being  willing  that  a  Caufe 
of  this  high  concernment,  Ihould  be  remitted,  or  hazarded 
in  a  privat  meeting,  wherein  they  diall  haue  neither  In¬ 
tered,  nor  Communication.  That  the  Imperial  Miniders 
at  Francfort,  have  privately  confeffed  that  their  Mader 
doth  now  defire  that  the  bufinefs  mav  now  be  ended 
by  the  Authority  of  the  States  of  the  Empire  ;  in  hopes 
of  bridling  the  Demands  of  the  Duke  of  Bavare,  which 
he  can  not  expect  by  any  private  Mediation  ;  but  that 
the  Debt,  or  a  Quarrel),  mud  wholly  red  upon  him,  <$; 
his  TIoufe.  Sir  Thomas  alfo  fetts  forth  the  prefent  good 
Difpofition  of  the  Electors  of  Saxony  &  Brandenburgh, 

&  of  the  Imperiall  Townes,  to  this  good  Sc  great  Work. 
That  the  King  of  Denmarke  &  his  Sonnes,  will  he  better 
fecured  by  obliging  &  affuring  the  Protedant  Partye  to 
Him,  than  by  all  the  hopes  he  can  have  of  the  Audrians  ; 

Sc  may  make  himfelfe  General  of  the  two  Circles,  being 
mod  Protedants,  fooner  by  his  owne  Meritt  &  Authuritye, 
then  by  the  Suffrage  of  thofe  who  cannott  take  plcafure 
in  any  accefs  of  Reputation  to  Ilim.  Sr.  Thomas  defires 
him  to  open  a  way  for  rectifying  the  inid"keincrS  which, 
have  happened  between  our  King  the  Dane.  That 
Ilis  Majcdie  will  doe  all  things  on  hi?,  part,  if  the  King 
of  Denmark  will  fettle  the  Tolls  according  to  the  Dutch 
Agreement,  according  as  lie  is  bound  by  Treatye.  If 
he  will  not ;  we  may  be,  for  a  fyme,  oppreded ;  but  the 
Nation,  or  Traders,  will  not  bo, ire  it. 

14c.  To  the  Prince-Eledtor.  30  June  1643.  92. 

Giving  Mis  Highnefs  an  Account  of  what  had  lately 
been  clone  in  his  Bufinefs,  efpecially  with  relation  to  the 
King  of  Denmark.  And  adviimg  him  to  induce  our 
King  to  fend  an  Ambaffhdor  to  the  Public  Treat--  in 
Order  to  countenance  &  promote  His  Caufe. 

1 41.  To  Mr.  Browne.  1  July  1643.  gz. 

Defiring  him  to  induce  the  Queen  Regent,  &  Mi¬ 
niders  of  the  Court  of  France,  to  fignifie  to  the  King  of 
Denmarke  their  Refolution,  to  have  the  Palatin  bufinefs 
comprehended  in  the  General  Treaties.  That  in  Order 
to  this,  He  mayaffure  them,  that  fuch  a  Refolution  will 
be  acceptable  to  that  King,  who  hath  lately  written  to 
the  Emperor  Sc  Duke  of  Bavare,  that  this  Caufe  could 
not  be  accommodated,  but  by  the  Generali  Treatye. 
And  that  the  Queene  of  Suede  hath  given  the  Prince- 
Elector  afl'urance,  that  die  will  life  all  her  Power,  in  the 
Affembly,  to  refettle  him  in  his  Rights.  And  that  {he 
hath,  to  that  purpofe,  commanded  her  Ambaffador  to 
negociate  the  Cooperation  of  the  Crowne  of  France  with 
Her.  That,  it  is  probable  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans 
will  drenuoufly  endeavor  at  the  Reditution  of  the  Houfe 
of  Lorreyne  5  whereby  the  French  Crown  may  gain 
much  Honor,  by  fetting  againd  it,  the  Reditution  of  the 
2  Houfe 


Bibliothecse  Harleiarise. 


337 


Num.  1901* 

Hotife  Palatine.  That  the  Caufes  and  Qualities  of  thofe 
Princes  being  equall,  the  French  may  be  thereby  invited 
to  oblige  two  Friends  by  one  Worke.  For,  without  both 
be  reftored,  there  can  be  no  Peace. 

142.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas,  3  July  164?.  94. 

Propofing  that  our  King  fhould  fend  an  Ambaffador 
to  the  General  Treatie  ;  as  alfo  earnedly  to  recommend 
the  Exchange  (i.  e.  the  Reflitution  of  the  Houfe  of  Lo- 
ranie  on  the  one  fide,  for  that  of  the  Palatin-Family  on 
the  other)  as  the  moll  probable  way  to  move  the  Crowne 
of  1' ranee  to  give  that  Peace  to  Europe,  which  they  do 
publicquely  pretend  ;  and  without  which,  there  -can  be 
no  condant  Peace.  For,  fuch  an  Exchange  may  be 
favored  both  by  the  Spaniards  and  the  Duke  Bauare, 
becaufe  of  the  Houfe  of  Lorreyne,  whofe  Reedablilhment 
they  will  jointly  infill  vpon  in  the  Treatye,  both  for  rea- 
fon  of  State,  and  for  Allyance  in  Bloud.  He  gives  rea- 
l’ons  for  his  Opinion  and  the  probability  of  it ;  and  de¬ 
fires  that  His  Maieflie  would  write  Letters  (recommend¬ 
ing  the  Palatiu-Caufe)  to  the  Emperor  ;  the  three 
Crownes,  ihe  States  General  the  Ele&ors  ;  and  elpecially 
to  thofe  of  Saxe  &c  Brandenburgh,  to  the  Landgravine  of 
Heffen,  &  Dukes  of  Lunenburgh  &  Brunfwicke. 

147.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  4  July  1643.  94.  b. 

That  the  3  Crownes  have  affured  us,  that  they  will 
embrace  the  Palatin-caufe  as  publicque  ;  and  that  Den- 
marke  hath  written  to  the  Emperor,  that  it  cannot  any 
where  be  accommodated,  but  in  the  generall  Treatye. 
■Wherefore,  Sir  Thomas  doth  not  weigh  the  opinion  of 
the  Ambafiadors  of  Collen,  who  fpeake  as  they  defire, 
in  compliance  with  the  Duke  of  Bauare.  That  Monfr. 
Plfola  the  Emperors  Miniiler,  is  gone  to  Oxford  with 
fome  new  Bayts  :  but  fince  it  is  found  by  the  Duke  of 
Bauares  Letter  to  the  Emperor,  that  he  will  reltore  no- 
thing,  but  modo  fuo  ;  and  that  the  Emperor  cannot  per¬ 
forate  without  him  ;  all  Communication  vpon  his  Ouver- 
tures,  &  offers  on  his  Majedies  part,  are  fallen  ;  and 
the  Caufe  mull  flick  only  to  the  Judgement  of  the  great 
Tribunal. 

144  To  Mr.  Auery.  5  July  1643.  95. 

Settiug  forth  the  Steps  that  have  been  taken  by  the 
3  Crownes,  in  order  to  accommodate  this  great  Affair 
at  the  General  1  reaty.  Ihat  the  Queene  of  Suede  hath 
1  written  a  very  heartye  Letter  to  the  Prince  Eleftor,  fignr- 
I  fy‘ng  that  Ihe  hath  giuen  Commiffion  to  the  Plenipoten- 
l  tiaries,  and  moued  the  French  Refident  in  her  court, 

1  and  alfo  written  effectually  to  Monf.  Grotius  to  negotiate 
&  agree  with  the  Crowne  of  France,  for  its  Concurrence 
:  and  Cooperation.  Profefling,  that  Ihe  will  mainteyne 
I  the  Honour  &  Judice  of  her  Father  in  undertaking  a  War 
!  for  the  Reliefe  of  his  oppreffed  Friends.  And;  that  if 
;  others,  particularly  the  Princes  of  Germany,  will  clofely 
adhere  ;  She  will  endeavour  a  generall  Reduftion  of  all 
1  the  States,  to  the  ftate  of  the  yeare  1618.  Further, 
i  Sir  Thomas  defires  to  know  if  he  hath  moued  any  thing 
i  to  Monfr.  Rauentclaw  the  Danifh  Minifter,  concerning 
l  the  Accommodation  of  the  Treatye  of  Commerce,  &  the 
I  Eafe  of  the  Merchants,  who  fuller  on  all  fydes. 

145.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  17th  July  1643. 

95.  b. 

That  the  Prince  EleCtors  Caufe  is  in  a  fayre  way 
toward  Munfter,  whither  he  is  refolved  to  fend  His  De¬ 
puties  ;  with  defyre  that  fome  may  be  employed  by  His 
Majefly  to  aflid  there.  That  a  Letter  will  come,  from 
the  EleCtors  to  our  King,  defiring  him  to  fend  his  Am- 
1  baffador  to  refume  the  Private  Treatye ;  touching  an 
fi  Anfwer  to  which.  Sir  Thomas  gives  his  Judgment.  That 
l!  new  Credential  Letters  will  be  neceffary  for  introducing 
j!  Mr.  Avery  into  this  Negotiation;  wherein,  it  will  be 
requilite  to  give  him  both  Grace  and  Authority.  For  he 
l  hath  complained,  that  being  employed  to  the  King  of 
Denmarke  lor  the  Ealtland-Company :  his  Iafl  Credentials 
were  altered  in  the  Style  &  Titles ;  &  fo  rellreyned  & 

;  limited,  that  at  firfl  he  was  refufed  Audience  as  a  pub- 

Cat.  Haiu,.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  19011 

licqueMinidcr,  &  flighted  by  thofe  appointed  to  hear  him 
and  fent  away  re  infeCta  :  under  which  difgrace,  he  ye 
fuffereth  in  that  Court.  That  the  Duke  of  Orleans  & 
His  Party  will  returne,  not  only  into  Reconciliation, 
but  to  prime  Authority  in  the  manage  of  State-Affayres 
in  France  ;  being  united  (by  the  Wifdome  of  the  Duke 
of  Guife)  to  fecure  their  future  Condition.  That  their 
full  Reedablilhment  will  be  drongly  favoured  by  the 
Houfe  of  Audrm ;  and  confequently,  they  will  be  the 
fitted  Indruments  for  working  the  Protection  of  the 
Palatin  Caufe;  the  Satisfaction  of  the  Duke  of  Bauare  ; 
and  the  Confent  of  the  Emperor  &  King  of  Spain.  That 
they  are  mod  like  of  any  to  keep  good  Correfpondence 
with  our  King  ;  and  (though  it  appeare  a  Paradox)  noc 
to  disfavour  the  Protedant  Partye,  whofe  depreflion  they 
haue  found  to  have  been  the  Oportunity  of  that  abfo- 
lute  Power  exercifed  in  the  late  Government. 

14^.  To  Mr.  Browne.  18  July  1643.  96.  b. 

That  if  the  two  Crownes  (i.  e.  France  &  Sueden) 
can  fettle  &  agree  their  owne  lntereds  ;  the  right  way 
to  end  the  Quarrels  of  Germanye  will  be  in  the  lump. 
Not  to  difpute  this  &  that  Pretenfion  apart,  and  to  weigh 
the  Merits  of  euery  Circumdance  ;  but  to  infid  vpon  the 
redoring  of  the  Condition  &.  Libertye  of  the  Empire,  & 
of  euery  opprefled  Prince  &  State,  to  what  it  was,  8c 
what  they  judly  poffeffed  in  the  yeare  1618.  before  the 
War  begun.  He  is  defired  therefore  to  infinuate  this 
DoCtrine,  &  the  Confequences  thereof  into  the  French 
Miniders  ;  that  by  their  apprehending  or  rejecting  it,  a 
judgement  may  be  made  as  to  what  may  be  hoped  from 
them. 

147.  To  the  Prince  EleCtor.  19  July  1643.  97. 

L  hat  he  hath  fent  all  His  Highneffes  Letters  to  our 

King,  as  alfo  the  Contents  of  them  ;  but  hath  received 
no  Direction  thereupon  ;  which  Sir  Thomas  imputed  to 
the  nearnefs  &  daily  aCtion  of  both  Armies. 

148.  To  the  Queene  of  Bohemia.  19  July  1643.  ibid. 

Is  glad  that  our  Parliament  hath  given  Her  a  little 

Money  ;  wherewith  the  King  will  be  content,  fince  he 
could  not  do  it  himfelf.  As  for  his  own  Circumdances, 
Sir  Thomas  writes  thus,  I  neuer  yet  felt  want,  which 
now  I  fuddenly  feare.  For  my  Rents  are  either  taken 
vp,  or  vpon  pretences  not  payd  ;  and  from  the  King  no 
Releife ;  nor  can  I  expeft  it,  vntill  God  haue  mercye 
vpon  the  whole  Kingdome,  whofe  State  I  tremble  to 
confider. 

149.  To  Princes  Elizabeth.  19  July  1647.  07  h 

Complimental.  *  3  97‘ 

150.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  19  July  1643.  ibid. 

Comforting  him  in  his  prefent  Affliction  ;  and  flaw¬ 
ing  this  Satisfaction  at  the  good  Difpofition  the  French 
feem  to  be  in,  for  advancing  the  Palatin  filtered. 

1 51.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  20  July  1643.  98. 

Blaming  the  ConduCt  of  certain  German  Miniders 

m  this  Adair.  Defiring  him  to  fend  the  Names,  Titles 
&  Qualities  of  our  Friends  Ambafiadors  &  Plenepoten- 
tianes  which  fhall  aflid  in  the  Generall  Treatye  ;  becaufe 
there  may  be  occafion  for  His  Majedie  to  write  unto  them. 
Is  glad  that  the  Duke  of  Bauare  vnmaikes  himfelfe  with 
Bravado’s  toward  the  Protedant  Princes ;  prefling  their 
Contribution  to  ruyne  themfelues.  That  the  Truth  is, 
the  Princes  haue  vfurped  vpon  the  Libertye  of  the  Free- 
lownes  ;  and  therefore,  as  judly  the  EleCtors  haue  taken 
away  the  Libertye  of  the  Princes.  They  ought  therefore 
to  take  heed  they  giue  not  vp  the  libertye  of  all  Germa¬ 
nye,  to  one  who  will  trample  vpon  it. 

152.  To  Monfieur  Ifola,  Refident  here  for  the  Empe¬ 
ror;  m  French.  22  July  1643.  ibid. 

Giving  him  a  Touch  (as  he  expreffeth  it  in  the  next 
Letter)  that  He  might  not  think  he  walked  invifibly  ; 
or  that  His  Majedy  would  depend  vpon  any  Priuat  Trea¬ 
tye,  againd  the  Hopes  whereof  the  Duke  of  Bauare  had 
proteded. 

153.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  22  July  1643.  98.  b. 

4  R  Concerning 


5J8 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1901, 

Concerning  the  Motion  for  a  Marriage  between 
Prince  Rupert  &  Mademoifelle  de  Rohan.  Alfo,  of 
another,  for  the  Spaniards  obliging  His  Majefty,  by  giv¬ 
ing  up  what  they  hold  in  the  Lower  Palatinate ;  now 
that  the  French  are  about  to  take  Theonuille  ;  which 
hath  ha.ftened  a  refolution  in  the  Emperor  to  refture  the 
Duke  ofSimmeren. 

154.  To  Mr.  Aucry.  26  July  1643-  99* 

That  what  he  hath  done  with  the  French  and  Swe- 

difh  Minifters,  will  be  acceptable  to  His  Majeflie  :  and 
therefore  directs  him  to  profecute  his  beginnings,  to  bring 
the  caufe  to  publicque  Cognition,  &  to  run  along  with 
the  fortune  of  the  Generali  Peace.  That  it  will  be  the 
Intereft  of  the  French  to  maynteyne  the  Partye  of  the 
Religion  in  Germany ;  fince  they  cannot  balance  the 
Power  Sc  Growth  of  the  Auftrians,  but  by  the  Proteftant 
Partye. 

155.  To  Mr.  Browne.  27  July  1643.  99-  b. 

That  Duke  Charles  of  Lorrain  is  in  a  faire  way  to 

make  his  owne  Peace  with  France.  Which  he  would 
have  fo  letted  &  obftru<5led,  by  remitting  the  final  Con- 
el  ufi on  thereof  to  the  General  Treatie,  as  that  the  Intereft 
of  the  Palatin  Caufe  may  be  promoted  thereby.  That 
this  Game  hath  often  beene  playd  fecrettly  betweene 
France  &  Spayne,  with  the  Old  Duke  of  Savoy,  and 
may  now  be  of  great  advantage  to  Us.  That  the  Em- 
perour  hauing  refolved  to  rtftore  the  Duke  of  Simmerin 
&  Ele&rice-Dowager,  upon  the  feare  of  Theonville : 
He  hopeth  they  may  do  as  much  for  the  Prince  Eleftor, 
if  prefled  ;  at  lead  to  quitt  Bacherach,  Franchendall,  Sc 
Oppenheim  :  this  being  the  time  for  fifhing  in  their  trou¬ 
bled  Waters. 

156.  Sir  Thomas  Rowe’s  fhort  Cenfure  of  the  Baua- 

rian  Libel.  ibid. 

157.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  1  Auguft,  1643.  IO°- 

Sir  Thomas  belieueth  that  the  Bauarian  Libel  was 

not  read  in  that  Duke’s  Chancery,  though  dictated  in  the 
Aflembly  :  But  that  if  it  be  authorized  and  acknowled¬ 
ged,  He  fhall  not  fayle  to  unravell  it,  and  to  lett  them 
alfo  tad  of  his  Inke.  That  the  French  Order  for  termi¬ 
nating  the  Prince  Elector  Palatins  Intereft  at  the  General 
Aflembly,  is  very  pofnive  ;  not  only  concerning  the 
Reftitution  of  his  Countrye,  but  of  the  Electorall  Dig- 
nitye,  as  being  the  more  important  Poynt,  for  the  ad- 
uantage  of  that  Crown.  That  this  Comfort  is  to  be  infu- 
fcd  into  the  Protdlant  Princes  &  States  ;  who  adhrcring 
ftoutly  Sc  conftantly,  the  Balance  (whofe  inequalitye  will 
vndoe  them  all)  niay  be  brought  right.  That  it  will  not 
be  long  before  they  who  now  defpife  Vs,  &  take  the 
boldnefs  to  profeffe  it,  may  both  need  &  feare  us  :  and 
that  whatfoeuer  the  Emperor  cannott,  or  Bauare  will  not 
doe  ;  if  the  Crownes  hold  their  Words,  Neceflitye  will 
enable  &  enforce. 

158.  To  Mr.  Auery.  2  Auguft,  1643.  ICO-  b- 
Is  forry  that  the  Suedes  Inftrudlions  are  not  fo  ex- 

prefs,  to  embrace  the  Palatin-Caufe,  as  an  Eflentiall  to 
the  Peace.  But  his  Opinion  is,  shat  thofe  of  France  fhould 
deeply  engage  the  Cooperation  both  of  the  Suede,  and 
of  the  King  of  Denmarke.  That  notwithftanding  the 
Emperors  endeavors  to  remove  Matters  to  Vienna,  and 
Invitation  of  the  Electors  thither,  where  the  Old  Treatye 
may  be  reaflumed  at  his  Court :  our  King  is  refolued  to 
runne  the  fortune  of  the  Generali  Peace. 

159.  To  the  Prince-Ele&or.  9  Auguft,  1643.  jot. 
That  Monfr.  Ifola  had  fent  him  Word,  that  his 

Journey  to  the  Court  at  Oxford,  was  only  to  giue  Ad- 
uertifement  to  His  Majeflie,  that  the  Emperor  his  Mafter 
had  condelcended,  that  the  Palatin-Caufe  fhould  be  treated 
at  the  Generali  Aflembly.  That  this  contradifts  what 
Mr.  Curtius  had  advifed,  vizt.  that  his  Commiflion  was 
to  fignifye  the  adjournment  of  the  Priuat  Treatye  to  the 
end  of  Auguft,  at  his  owne  Court.  That  Mr.  Browne 
hath  follicited  a  Letter  from  the  French  Court  to  the  King 
of  Denmarke,  to  fignifye  their  Refolution  to  have  the 


Num.  i go  1. 

faid  Caufe  brought  to  the  Publicque  Decifion  ;  but  that 
he  cannot  obteyne  a  direft  Anfwere  ;  which  looks  afquint 
vpon  their  other  profeflions.  That  he  hath  done  tha 
Office  to  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  which  hath  beene  well 
enterteyned,  and  may  work  Tome  good  effect ;  efpecially 
if  feconded  by  a  Letter  from  himfelf. 

160.  To  Mr.  Browne.  9  Auguft,  1643.  101.  b. 

That  Monfr.  Ifola  hath  informed  him  that  his  Jour¬ 
ney  to  Oxford  was  only  to  enforme  His  Majeflie  how  the 
Emperor  his  Mafter  had  condefccnded  that  the  Palatin 
caufe  fhould  be  treated  at  Munfter ;  which  is  a  great 
poynt ;  and  of  which,  he  may  make  extraordinarie  ufe. 
Sir  Thomas  congratulates  His  happines  8c  dexterous  Ne¬ 
gotiation,  in  procuring  fo  fayre  &  pofitiue  Inftru&ions  in 
this  great  bufines.  To  which,  if  He  can  add  the  Fauour 
&  Alliftance  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  and  the  partifans 
of  the  houfe  of  Lorreyne,  the  Worke  is  halfe  done  ;  but 
that  a  Letter  to  the  King  of  Denmarke,  would  be  a  pub¬ 
licque  engageing  of  the  Crowne  of  France. 

161.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  9  Auguft,  1643.  ibid. 

That  the  Bavarian  Libel  being  in  Print,  &  fomewhat 

more  publicquely  authorized,  They  who  haue  laid  what 
they  fhould  not,  may  heare  what  they  would  not.  That 
the  Opinion  of  Monfr.  Langerbec  &  others,  who  fay  that 
the  A  cl  ion  of  the  Duke  of  Bauare  eft  fonde  en  Droit,  &c. 
may  be  true  in  relation  to  the  Emperor ;  but  in  relation 
to  the  Prince-Eleftor- Palatin,  it  is  falfe  ;  his  owne  pub¬ 
licque  a£ts  difelayming  any.  And  if  he  haue  bought  or 
accepted  any  thing  of  the  Emperor,  which  He  could 
neither  giue  nor  fell,  by  the  fundamc-ntall  Lawes  of  the 
Empire  :  fuch  Purchafe  can  giue  him  no  Right ;  nor 
he  be}  ignorant  of  the  rule  Caue.it  Emptor.  Sir  Thomas 
replies  to  thofe  who  pretend  that  he  acquicfces  to  the 
reaffiimption  of  the  particular  Treatie  vpon  Conditions  ; 
that  thofe  Conditions  haue  beene  refufed  by  the  Duke  of 
Bauare  ;  fo  that  he  is  not  bound.  Nor  can  the  Aft  of 
Invitation  of  the  Emperor  oblige  him,  being  made  kpub- 
lifhed  after  his  Departure. 

162.  To  Mr.  Auery.  17  Auguft,  1643.  102. 

That  the  Emperor  hath  condifcended  that  the  Pala¬ 
tin-Caufe  fhall  be  treated  &  decided  at  the  General  Af- 
fembly  at  Munfter  &  Ofnabrug.  That  as  to  the  Duke  of 
Bauare,  &c.  he  pretends  the  purfuing  thr  particular 
Mediation  ;  and  to  Us,  the  Generali  Treatye  :  which  lad 
feemeth  trueft,  becaufe  he  hath  fent  the  Ele&or-Palatin 
another  Safe-Conducl,  dated  in  July.  That  this  is  the 
mofl  probable  way  for  him  to  difebarge  free  himfelfe 
from  the  extravagant  Demands  &  Entanglements  with 
Bauare,  whofe  preflures  Sc  menaces  are  iniupportable,  as 
well  to  him,  as  to  all  other  the  free  States  k  Princes  of 
the  Empire. 

163.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  21  Auguft,  1643. 

102.  b. 

Concerning  Letters  to  be  written  to  the  King  Sc 
Princes  interefled  in  the  generall  Treaties,  recommending 
the  Palatin  caufe.  That  the  Houfe  of  Lorreyne  do  treate 
their  owne  peace  in  France  ;  which  may  engage  many 
Friends  unto  the  faid  Caufe.  He  thinks  that  in  the  Let¬ 
ters  to  France  &  the  King  of  Denmarke,  Credences  to 
Mr.  Browne  Sc  Mr.  Auerye  fhould  be  defired,  mention¬ 
ing  only  the  general  fubjeft  :  becaufe  it  would  giue  a 
larger  fcope  to  fpeake.  Sc  urge  many  things  not  proper 
for  the  Letter  of  a  King  ;  and  he  himfelf  can  more  fully 
inftruft  them.  That  Mr.  Curtius  prefleth  to  haue  a  par¬ 
ticular  C.redentiall  to  the  Ele&or  of  Mentz,  as  Director  of 
the  Colledge,  to  refent  fome  vnfeemly  proceeding  of  the 
Duke  of  Bauare  at  Francfort.  T  hat  the  fame  Duke  not 
hauing  fpared  himfelf  in  a  publicque  writing;  Sir  Thomas 
defireth  the  Kings  leaue  to  giue  a  Replyc  of  good  Inke, 
without  Gall:  believing,  that,  in  a  point  of  Honour,  His 
Majefty  cannott  be  too  i'enfible  ;  lead  the  Example  pre- 
uayled  to  exclude  any  of  His  Minifters,  or  their  Negotia¬ 
tions,  vpon  any  of  the  affayres  of  the  Empire  ;  which  the 
King  of  Suede  apprehended  as  an  Injvrye,  &  motiue  of 

his 


Bibliothecas  Harfelanae. 


339 


Num.  1901. 

his  Reuenge.  That  a  Letter  to  his  Majeftie  from  the 
King  of  Poland,  is  left  with  him,  .but  without  a  Coppie. 
But  feeing  that  there  is  fome  Diftaft  between  them  ;  He 
delires  to  know  His  Majefties  pleafure,  whether  it  Ihould 
be  fenl  unto  Him,  or  returned. 

164.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  26  Auguft,  1643. 

io3- 

Touching  the  Letters  to  the  Kings  &  Princes  treating 
the  General  Peace;  which  he  had  drawn  up,  in  obe¬ 
dience  to  His  Majefties  Commands.  That  he  fhall 
not  need  to  advertife  the  Comminge  of  the  Count  de 
Harecourt  from  France  in  Ambalfage  ;  nor  what  he 
heareth  Grotius  hath  aduifed  of  his  Melfage :  If  it  be 
true,  it  is  of  very  great  confequence,  and  His  Majeftie 
will  take  it  to  deepe  &  ferious  Confultation. 

165.  To  the  Princefs  Elizabeth.  31  Auguft,  *643. 

103.  b. 

That  while  England  languilhed,  he  fees  fayre  beames 
fhine  vpon  her  Brothers  Caul'e  ;  which  will  be  embraced 
by  thofe  who  will  haue  Power  to  protett  it. 

166.  To  Mr.  Browne.  5  September,  1643.  ibid. 

Is  glad  that  there  is  hope  of  obteyning  a  Letter  from 

France  to  the  King  of  Denmatke,  upon  account  of  both 
the  Vfe  &  the  Scafon.  For  Monfr.  Ifola  retradls  the 
ConfeiTion  of  his  Mafters  Confent  to  trcate  the  Palatin- 
bufinefs  at  the  Generali  Affembly  :  having  had  new  En- 
formation,  that  the  Emperor  hath  figned  the  Invitation 
to  reaffume  the  private  Treaty  at  his  owne  Court  in  Oc¬ 
tober  next,  wherefoever  that  will  be.  That  this  Change 
is  an  cited!  of  theBauarian  predcminacy  over  him.  That  he 
(the Bavarian)  procured  the  F.ledtors  that  fent  toFrankfbrt, 
to  write  ro  the  Emperor,  for  fuch  a  Declaration  ;  and 
that  their  Letters  of  Intimation  to  his  Majefty  are  dayly 
expected  :  being  allready  written  &  figned.  That  His 
Majefty  is  prepared  for  anfvvere ;  and  will  not  change 
His  Refolution  to  truft  the  Caufe  with  his  Friends  & 
the  Publicque  only.  That  the  King  of  Denmarke  will 
be  firme  ;  efpecially  if  He  may  haue  fuch  a  ground,  that 
it  is  the  defyre  of  the  Crowne  of  France  :  as  to  whofe 
Inftrudlions  in  thatPoynt,  Mr.  Grotius  writes  but  faintly, 
viz.  That  they  will  mediate  ;  but  not  infilling  vpon  it 
as  neceflary  to  the  Peace  ;  without  fome  new  Conditions, 
of  a  high  Nature,  to  be  propofed  by  the  Count  of  Har- 
court.  Thus,  if  the  French  fuller  the  Duke  of  Bauare 
to  gourmandize  the  Empyre,  as  he  doth  awe  the  Em¬ 
peror  ;  the  Peace  which  they  pretend  as  a  benefitt  to 
their  friends,  will  be  more  hurtful  to  their  Liberty,  then 
the  War  ;  for  in  this,  they  may  dye  Free  Men. 

167.  To  the  Prince-Elcdtor.  6  September,  1643. 

104. 

Advifing  His  Highnefs  to  looke  about  him,  and 
endeavour  to  fixe  the  King  of  Denmarke  ;  all  other 
Planets  feeming  to  be  in  Conjundlion  with  Mercury. 
That  the  Count  de  Harcourt  at  his  coming  hither  will 
make  fomePropofitions,  which  will  be,  inthisConjundlure, 
of  hard  digeftion.  And  that  vnlefs  they  be  accepted, 
neyther  France  nor  Suede  will  infill  vpon  His  Reftitution, 
as  luch  an  Impediment  to  Peace  as,  fine  qu^,  non:  but 
that  they  will  mediate  fome  kind  of  accommodation. 
That  His  bufinefs  is  in  the  Cryfis,  and  mull  be  every 
way  wratched.  That  there  is  no  Danger  fo  great  to  him 
as  to  haue  none  of  Authority  from  His  Majefty  at  the 
Treatyes :  and  this  cannot  be,  vnlefs  fome  delay  or  In¬ 
terruption  of  the  Meeting,  gayne  vs  Time. 

168.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  6  September,  1643.  104.  b. 

Belieues  that  the  Emperors  complyance  with  the 

Duke  of  Bauare,  in  figning  the  Intimation  for  His  owne 
Court,  was  to  auoid  clalhing  with  Him,  who  is  the 
Winde,  Sayles,  &  Sterne  of  the  tottering  Ship  of  Ger¬ 
many.  That  the  Free  Cittyes  have  juft  Caufe  to  refent 
the  rejection  of  their  Vctes  in  all  Alfemblyes,  as  delibe¬ 
rative  only,  and  Opinions  not  to  be  weighed.  For  re- 
couery  whereof,  if  they  appeale  to  the  Crownes  in  the 
general,  nothing  can  be  more  prevalent,  nothing  fo 


Num.  1901. 

readily  embraced.  That  the  benefit  of  any  other  Peace, 
will  but  augment  the  Giues  &  Manacles  which  now 
enthrall  them ;  and  will  be  as  little  honorable  to  their 
great  Vindicators,  as  profitable  to  themfclues.  Sir1 
Thomas  approves  his  Tranllation  of  his  C.enfure  upon 
the  Bavarian  Libell ;  to  which  he  will  alfo  prepare 
a  full  Anfwcr  ;  and  make  them  wifh  they  had  not  ftirred 
that  which  was  quiet.  That  now  they  mull  endure  their 
owne  Savour;  and  heare  that  which  they  had  wifelier 
kept  in  filence.  That  he  hath  defired  a  Credence  for 
him  to  the  Elector  of  Mentz,  both  to  refent  &  to  pre¬ 
vent  the  barbarous  incivility  futurely.  That  they  may 
remember,  it  was  not  the  lead  of  the  King  of  Suedes 
pretences  of  Revenge,  to  haue  bene  refufed  in  a  Treatye 
concerning  the  peace  of  the  Empyre.  Finally,  that  if  he 
can  get  any  Declaration  of  the  Dyet,  conformable  to 
their  Votes,  it  will  much  advantage  the  Remove  of  the 
Caufe.  That  Mr.  Browne  hath  obteyned  of  the  French 
King,  a  Letter  to  the  King  of  Denmarke,  to  bring  the 
Palatin  Caufe  to  the  generall  Treatyes.  That  it  is 
very  effedtual,  and  will  animate  that  King.  That  it  is 
a  publicque  Engagement  of  the  French,  an  Example  to 
the  Suede,  and  a  great  Encouragement  to  all  the  Pro- 
teilant  Princes  ;  as  alfo  a  great  Helpe  to  him,  in  bal- 
lancing  all  the  Tricks  of  Bauare,  and  all  the  Inuitations 
to  a  privat  Treaty. 

169.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  7  September,  1643. 

105.  b. 

That  very  good  Vfe  will  be  made  of  the  French 
Kings  Letter  to  the  Dane,  in  refpedt  of  the  Wauering, 
or  rather  Complyance,  of  the  Emperor  to  the  Machi¬ 
nations  of  Bauare,  and  all  their  Plotts  to  tye  the  Caufe 
vp  to  a  privat  Treatye. 

170.  To  Mr.  Averye.  7  September,  1643.  ibid. 

That  the  French  Kings  Letter  ought  to  encourage 

all  the  Proteftant  Princes  &  States  to  vnite  clofely,  to 
redeeme  their  Liberty,  vtterly  loft,  if  the  inequality  of 
the  Voyces  in  the  Eledtorall  Colledge  jfhall  be  fetled,  to 
decide  all  Controverfyes  to  the  advantage  of  the  Roman 
Church  &  Partye.  That  they  haue  now  a  fayre  Sandtuary 
open;  and  may  take  an  Example  from  the  French  Protef- 
tants;  who  (though  abfolucefubjedls)wouldnot  make  Peace 
without  an  Equality  of  Affeffors  &  Judges  in  their  Par- 
laments  :  which  is  granted  to  them  in  all  the  Edidts  of 
Pacification.  Sir  Thomas  is  of  the  fame  opinion  with 
him,  that  the  French  &  Suedes  haue  not  yet  abfolutely 
inftrudted  their  Ambalfadors,  fo  far  to  infill  vpon  the 
entyre  Reftitution,  as  to  breake  the  Treaty  vpon  the 
Refufall :  and  yet,  that  it  may  be  fo  managed  as  never 
to  come  to  that  extremitye  ;  it  being  probable,  that 
there  will  be  other  occafions  of  making  a  Rupture,  be¬ 
fore  the  Caufe  Palatin  can  be  the  fubjedl.  That  the  right 
way  of  avoiding  that  Rock,  is  not  to  treat  the  bufines 
fingle  &  apart,  but  mingled  &  woven  into  the  Generall 
of  the  neceflary  Peace  of  the  Empyre.  Which  if  the 
Crownes  do  not  fettle  fecurely,  they  will  reape  as  little 
honour,  as  their  Client  benefitt. 

171.  To  the  Prince  Eledlor.  19  September,  1643. 

x°6. 

That  he  hath  diredtion  from  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas 
at  Oxford,  to  correfpond  with  the  Lord  Goring  his 
Ambaffador  in  France,  where  Mazarini  &  Chauigny 
goueine  in  matters  of  State ;  and  the  Houfe  of  Guife 
adhering  to  them,  are  like  to  recouer  Authoritye,  &  may 
be  the  fitted  Inftruments  of  promodng  His  Caufe  with 
their  owne  (as  branches  of  Lorreyne)  at  the  Generall 
Treaties.  That  he  feareth  both  the  Affections  &  Inflec¬ 
tions,  from  Rome,  of  a  Cardinall,  in  relation  to  the  Re- 
couery  of  theEledloral  Dignitye.  That  theDuke  of  Bauare 
is  fo  omnipotent,  that  he  threatens  to  breake  the  General 
Treatye,  by  his  Power,  Armes,  or  Arts,  if  they  fhall 
looke  backe  to  fuch  an  Amneftye  as  fhall  comprehend 
His  entyre  Reftitution.  That,  at  laft,  the  States  are 
likely  to  fend  Ambalfadors  for  England,  in  correfpon- 
9  deuce 


34° 


Catalogus  Lib  rorom  MSS, 


Num.  1901. 

dence  with  France:  but  Sir  Thomas  hopes  they  will  not 
dance  only  to  their  Tune  :  and  intimateth,  that  fome- 
what  may  be  pfopofed,  that  will  not  fuite  with  their 
Conjunction. 

172.  To  the  Queene  of  Bohemia.  ^September,  1643. 

106.  b. 

Directing  Her  how  to  procure  an  Alignment  on 
Public  Funds,  for  the  Arreare  of  her  Penfion  :  being 
perfwaded,  that  if  the  Parlament  were  rightly  enformed 
of  her  Wants,  they  would  tender  Her  Honour  &  Necef- 
fities.  But  herein  he  advifeth  her  to  acquaint  the  King 
who  doubt lefs  would  confent,  &  otherwise  might  take  it 
as  a  Negleft  of  Him,  &  a  whole  Dependance  vpon  their 
Fauour. 

173.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell  20  September,  1643. 

,07. 

That  (with  relation  to  the  Falatin  Caufe)  he  liketh 
not  the  Game,  which  is,  &  ftill  mull  be  played  vnder 
a  Red  Hatt  (i.  e.  Mazarini).  That  he  hath  obferved  from 
Hiftorye  &:  Experience,  that  no  Gouenunent  is  fo  rigid, 
as  in  the  predominancye  of  an  Ecclefiaflical  Statefman. 
1  he  caufe  is,  becaufe  they  are  mifplaced  ;  not  as  vtterly 
vnfut  for  temporall  Affayres ;  but  that  they  are  vfed  as 
a  Weight  to  caft  the  Balance,  whereas  they  ffiould  only 
hold  the  Beanie,  &  affift  the  Temper  &  Equalitye  of 
Meafures.  He  goes  on  to  apply  this  to  the  Bilhops  of 
the  Church  of  England. 

>74-  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  21  September, 

3.  ^  107.  b. 

Advifing,  that  when  the  Count  of  Harcourt  (hall 
be  with  His  Majeftie,  it  will  be  necelfarie  to  prefs  the 
Palatin  Affaire,  and  to  procure  a  clear  Declaration,  how 
far  France  will  valew,  and  to  what  Ilfue  they  will  driue 
the  accommodation.  That  in  defeat  of  Refolution,  the 
Lord  Goring  do  follicice  fuch  Powers  &  Orders,  as  that 
the  Caufe  may  be  taken  into  the  mayne  ;  and  not  only 
precario  mediated  vpon  by  the  by,  &  apart,  for  fo  it 
will  haue  a  cold  end.  That  nothing  being  more  de- 
fired  by  the  houfe  of  Auftria,  then  the  refettling  the 
Duke  of  Lorreyne  in  his  Pofleflions  ;  nothing  but  the 
Palatin-Caufe  can  balance  it  with  Honour.  But  then, 
His  Majefty  mull:  counter-negociate  the  One  againft  the 
Other ;  in  Spayne,  or  at  Bruxells.  At  Brulfells  Sir 
Ihomas  can  engage  Sir  Henry  de  Vic,  if  authorifed,  & 
Sr.  Henry  be  commanded  to  correfpond  with  Him.  That 
now  is  the  tyme ;  for  the  Plenepotentiaries  &  Am- 
balfadors  moue  from  all  parts,  toward  the  Cittyes  def- 
ftgned  forTreatye. 

175.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Sir  Edw.  Nicholas.  23  Sep¬ 
tember,  1643.  108. 

lhat  the  Duke  of  Bauare  hath  written  a  long 
Letter  to  the  King  of  Denmarke,  to  perfwade  him  to 
prevayle  with  the  EleClor-Palatin  to  waue  the  Generali, 
and  to  be  content  with  the  Priuat  Treaty  ;  and  to  induce 
our  King  to  fend  his  Ambafladors  to  affift  therein  :  being 
relolued  rather  to  breake  all,  then  to  endure  the  tell  of 
the  Empire,  lo  this  end,  he  hath  wrought  the  Em¬ 
peror  to  continue  the  AlTembly  at  Francfort,  againft  the 
Judgement  of  mod  of  the  Princes,  fo  to  feparate  the 
matter  from  the  Publicque,  and  from  the  Intereft  & 
Cognifance  of  the  Crownes  of  France  &  Suede.  That 
the  King  of  Denmarke  hath  written  to  the  Emperor  & 
Electors,  vrging  the  Neceffitye  of  deciding  the  Caufe  at 
the  Generali  Treatye,  as  the  principall  Impediment  of 
the  Peace ;  without  which,  France  &  Sueden  will  not 
enter  into  any  C  onference.  That  theBivarian’sMyftery 
is  Mony  ;  which  he  hopes  to  get  in  a  priuat  Lompolition, 

&  which  will  not  be  conlidered  in  the  balance  of  the  Pub¬ 
licque  Peace. 

176.  To  Mr.  Browne.  26  September,  1643.  j08.b. 
That  Four  Electors  having  jointly  written  to  our  Kino, 

inviting him  to  realfume  thePrivate Mediation:  HisMajefty 
is  conltant,  and  will  anfwer  (by  a  Ciuill  Refufall)  to  all 
other  motions ;  as  refolued  to  truft  the  Caufe  to  hisFriends, 


Num.  3901. 

to  Publicque  Juftice,  and  to  the  fortune  ot  the  Generali 
Peace.  Sir  Thomas  alfo  gives  him  further  lights,  how 
to  negotiate  the  Palatin-Intereft  at  the  French  Court. 

177.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  27  September,  1643.  ioq. 

Directing  him  to  be  conftant  in  affirming,  that  His 

Majeflie  cannot  decline  the  Socielye  &  Intereft  of  the 
Crownes  of  France  &  Sueden  ;  who  haue  refolued  that 
the  Caufe-Palatin  is  neceilarie  to  the  Publicque  Pacifica¬ 
tion  :  and  is  engaged  with  them,  to  relye  vpon  the  Gene¬ 
rali  Treaties.  That  feeing  the  Duke  of  Bauare  oppofed 
all  mention  of  that  Caufe,  in  the  AlTembly  at  Francfort 
(in  which,  nothing  was  intended  bvt  a  fayre  Mediation) 
it  hath  caufed  His  Majeftie  to  defpayre  of  any  Treatye 
under-hand  :  fo  that  the  Change  of  Counfells  in  that 
poynt,  hath  beene  his  owne  Fault,  &  Violence.  That 
the  Free  Cittyes  haue  it  now  in  their  power  (if  they  know 
howto  vfeit)  to  caft  the  Balance,  k  to  fettle  the  Peace. 
This  to  be  effe&ed,  by  jointly  preffing  (on  all  Tides)  the 
Amneftye,  &  the  Reiettiement  of  the  Empyre  in  the 
State,  as  before  the  War. 

178.  To  Mr.  Auery.  28  September,  1643.  II0. 

Affirming  that  if  the  Free  Cittyes  would  joyne  in 

conftantly  requiring  an  entyre  Amneftye,  &  general 
Rellitutien  &  Refettlement  of  Pofleflions  &  Lawes?  in  the 
fame  State  as  before  the  War :  the  Crownes  will  not 
refufe  their  Patronage,  but  be  glad  of  the  Occafion. 
Moreover,  if  the  Treatye  moue  vpon  particular  Accom¬ 
modations,  the  Debates  will  be  infinite,  &  fuch  Difficul¬ 
ties  be  difeovered,  that  many  Yeares  will  not  fuffice. 
And  whatfoeuer  lhall  be  fetled  or  agreed  feparatly,  will 
neither  be  durable  nor  fafe. 

179.  To  a  Friend.  4  October,  1643.  1 10.  b. 

About  a  Method  of  beginning  a  Treatie  of  Peace 

between  the  King  k  Parliament :  which  he  thinks  to  be 
a  very  nice  k  difficult  matter  to  eftedl. 

180.  To  Mr.  Browne.  4  October,  1643.  ibid. 

That,  the  Count  of  Harcourt  being  arrived  at  Lon¬ 
don,  Mr.  Ifola  the  Emperors  Agent  is  refolved  to  go  to 
Oxford,  and  to  oppofe  him.  That  he  pretends  that 
the  French  will  not  conclude  a  Peace.  And  if  they  ffiould 
they  will  not  fo  embrace  the  Caufe-Palatin,  as  fine  qua 
non:  and  in  that  Cafe,  we  lhall  lofe  the  Emperor  by 
adhering  to,  k  taking  Prote&ion  of  his  Enemies,  k  ffiaM 
be  left  betweene  two  Stooles.  Sir  Thomas  himfelf  is  of 
opinion,  that  if  the  French  {hall  leave  vs  in  the  halfe  way, 
the  Caufe  is  vtterly  loft  :  for  when  we  have  forfaken  the 
Emperor  k  the  Mediation,  it  will  be  too  late  to  bee  a 
fauour.  It  will  be  requifite  therefore  that  the  Lord 
Goring  &  he  fhould  get  a  clear  Declaration  &  Obliga¬ 
tion,  how  far  they  will  infill  vpon  the  entyre  Reftitution 
of  Lands  &  Dignitye.  That  this  is  a  poynt  deepely  con- 
fiderable  ;  feeing  Mazarini  (who  is  not  to  be  trufted  by 
us)  governs  the  Counfells  in  France.  That  it  is  not  pro¬ 
bable  that  theFrench  will  fcandalize  the  Romilh  party,  by 
wrefting  backe  the  Ekaorall  Dignitie,  when  fo  much 
concerns  them.  The  Lands  only  will  touch  the  Duke 
of  Bauare  ;  but  the  calling  voice  in  the  Ele&orall  Col¬ 
lege  will  be  friended  by  the  Pope,  k  all  the  Catholique 
faction.  And,  in  the  mean  time,  the  Minifters  of  the 
Duke  of  Bauare,  doe  boaft  of  their  Secrett  good  Intel¬ 
ligence,  &  affurance  of  France.  That  the  Bavarian  De¬ 
puties  have  intimated,  that  they  may  now  be  content  to 
admitt  the  Palatin  Caufe  to  a  Mediation  of  all  the  Princes 
at  the  AlTembly  at  Francfort  (which  is  decreed  to  cominue 
purpofely  to  depriue  the  generall  Treatye  of  the  Cogni¬ 
zance  of  fome  feledt  Caufes)  that  it  may  there  be  pre¬ 
pared  ;  or  goe  on,  pari  paflu,  with  the  Generali  Treatye  : 
although  before,  neither  the  Emperor  nor  Bauare,  would 
heare  of  the  mixture  of  the  Princes  k  States.  That 
Monfr.  Ifola  hath  complained  that  he  (Mr.  Browne)  hath 
negotiated  in  France,  diredtly  againft  the  Houfe  of  Auftria 
k  to  oblige  the  Eleclor-Palatin  as  an  Ally  with  that 
Crowne  ;  which  cannot  confill  with  the  fay  th  of  a  Prince 
of  the  Empire.  That  herein,  his  Majeftie  hath  difobiiged 

the 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


34i 


Num.  1901. 

the  Emperor,  and  giuen  him  juft  Caufe  to  withdraw  his 
good  Intentions  to  that  Family.  That  Ifola  hath  gotten  a 
Coppie  of  the  Remonftrance  given  the  Mimfters  ;  which 
he  mull  haue  from  them  or  their  Servants. 

18  To  a  Friend.  13  October,  1643.  lii.b. 

Concerning  a  Requeft  made  by  certaine  Englifli  Fa¬ 
milies  formerly  retired  into  Holland ;  who  now  defire 
leave  to  rcturne,  &  be  permitted  a  Church  &  Minifter  of 
their  owne.  Thcfe  were  Independants,  whofe  principles 
Sir  Thomas  could  not  approve  of. 

182.  To  Mr.  Browne.  25  October  1643.  ibid. 

Concerning  the  Letters  which  our  King  had  writ¬ 
ten  to  the  French  King,  Queene  Regent,  &  the  Duke  of 
Orleans,  and  that  the  Elector  hath  defired  others  to  the 
Prince  of  Conde  &  Mazarini  ;  which  may  be  poftponed 
untill  he  fhall  be  appriled  of  the  Count  de  Harcourts 
Negotiations,  &  our  Kings  Refolutions  vpon  them. 

183.  To  the  Prince  Elector.  25  October  1643. 

That  whereas  His  Highnefs  had  defired  that  he 
would  attend  at  Oxford,  during  the  Negotiations  of  the 
Count  de  Harcourt,  to  which  end  a  free  Pafs  would  be 
procured  from  the  Parlament  :  He  had  received  no  Com¬ 
mands  from  his  Majefty,  without  which  he  held  it  unfitt 
to  intrude  into  1  Iis  Counfells.  That  the  Emperors  Agent 
is  gone  after  the  Count,  to  counter-workc  for  thePriuate 
Treatye. 

184.  To  Mr.  Curtins.  26  October  1643. 

Hoping  that  the  Count  de  Harcourt,  at  Oxford, 
may  prepare  the  wayes  of  our  owne  Accommodation  ; 
and  with  it,  conclude  vpon  the  meanes  of  fettling  the 
Palatin  Caufe  by  Treatye.  That  Monlr.  Ifola  doth  pro- 
fefs,  that  his  Mailer  will  be  difobliged.  Sc  free  from  any  j 
Promil'es  or  Declarations,  made  on  his  part,  if  the  Prince- 
Elector  foly  adhtere  to  his  Enemies,  &  refufe  the  Media¬ 
tion  in  his  prefence,  as  diltiufting  his  fincere  Intentions. 
That  this  is  a  ticklifh  point  &  will  require  a  dexterity  of 
manage,  not  to  loll-  the  Emperor,  and  not  to  lofc  Eauour 
ix  Oportunitye  of  the  Collegued  Crownes,  <5c  of  the 
Generali  Treatye.  I  hat  the  Judgment  will  reft  vpon 
this,  how  far  the  French  will  embrace  the  Caufe,  and 
not  leave  it  out  in  the  conclufion  r  For,  out  of  doubt, 
Bauare  will  rather  breake  all  Treaties,  and  continue  the 
War,  then  reitore  by  Compulfion..  only  for  publicque 
Peace.  As  to  the  Medium  propofed,  of  a  paralel  Trea¬ 
tye  at  Francfort ;  Sr,  Thomas  thinks  it  mult  not  be  for 
that  Caufe  alone  ;  but  with  the  Confent  of  France  & 
Suede  ;  that  il  Agreement  cannot  be  made,  it  may  re¬ 
tyre  &  be  received  into  the  Generali  Treatye.  So  that 
this  privat  Mediation  fhould  not  be  vnderftood  as  con- 
cluftue  there,  and  exclufiue  of  the  Gtnerali  ;  but  pre- 
paratorye,  for  eafe  of  Difpatch  of  Bufines.  That  after 
all,  the  Duke  of  Bauare  may  write  &  plott  what  he 
pleafes,  but  muft  be  content  'to  doe,  or  fuller,  as  we 
fhall  conclude  with  the  French ;  which  may  give  him 
worke  enough. 

185.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  26  October  1643. 

1 12.  b. 

That  it  is  reported,  the  Count  de  Harcourt  hath 
propofed  fuch  ways  of  Accommodation,  as  are  like  to 
take  fotne  effect.  That  the  Ambailadors  of  the  States 
will  come  late  enough.  For  the  bufinefs  will  either  be 
entred  vpon,  with  little  Grace  to  them  ;  or  Del'payred 
of,  before  they  arriue. 

186.  To  Princels  Elizabeth.  26  October  1643.  ibid. 

That,  the  French  neuer  think  vs  enough  Vn-Efpa- 

niolifed ;  which  they  feare  not  in  others  who  are  the 
Antipodes  to  Monarchy.  And  yet,  while  they  kill  a 
Bafilifk,  they  may  nourilli  a  Snake. 

187.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  26  October,  1643. 

1 :3* 

Complaining  of  the  ill  ufage  &  Ingratitude  of  fome 
about  the  King,  whom  he  had  obliged.  That  the  Dex- 
tcritye  of  negotiating  with  Count  Harcourt,  will  lie  in 
this  povnt.  Firft,  not  to  accept  the  continuance  of  the 
priuat  Mediation  ;  and  yet  not,  by  the  Refufall,  to  loofe 

Cat.  Hart.  Vut.  II. 


Num.  1901. 

the  Emperor,  by  Teeming  to  miftruft  him,  &  depending 
only  vpon  his  Enemies  ;  which  would  uftrfrate  his  declara¬ 
tion  of  receiuing  the  Prince-Elector  into  Grace,  &c.  vpon. 
Condition  of  no  Pra£tife  with  his  Enemies,  vntill  the  bu¬ 
fines  were  concluded.  Sir  Thomas  apprehends,  that  the 
french  &  Suedes  will  doe  no  more  than  may  make  a 
fayre  Show  ;  their  own  Aduantages  ouerfwaying  all  other 
Refpects.  That  it  is  neceflary  to  know  of  the  French, 
whether  they  will  embrace  the  Caufe  as  Eflentiall  to  the 
Peace ;  or  only  as  Mediators,  which  is  worth  little  : 
and  of  tire  Emperor,  how  far  he  will  vfe  his  abfolute 
Authoritye,  if  the  Duke  of  Bauare  fhall  continue  obfti- 
nate  ? 

188.  To  the  Prince-Ele&or.  2  Nouember,  1643. 

1 13.  b. 

He  believes  that  the  Houle  of  Guife  will  not  much 
fauour  His  Highnefs ;  but  that  they  may  do  much  for 
their  owne  Chiefe,  the  Duke  of  Lorrain.  That  therefore, 
they  may  be  induced,  with  the  Duke  of  Orleans  as 
Mediator,  &c.  to  prefstbe  Duke  of  Bauare  (who  is  Vnkle 
to  Duke  Charles)  to  yield  as  the  only  meanes  to  re-efta- 
blilh  his  Nephewes  &  Neighbours,  tk  to  fettle  a  Peace, 
Sir  Thomas  will  aduife  to  Oxford  the  Contents  of  the 
Duke  of  Bauares  Letter  to  the  Electors ;  the  cafe  being 
playne.  If  he  will  abate  no  mony,  or  not  more  thru  the 
halfe  ;  he  can  haue  no  Satisfaction,  &  fo  no  reftitution. 
That  the  Emperor  cannott  pay  it ;  fo  it  is  to  no  purpofe 
to  treatevpon  Impoflibilities. 

1S9.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas,  it  Nouember,  1643. 

Reminding  him  of  fome  things  neceflary  in  the  Pa- 
latin-bufinefs,  which  had  Iain  too  long  neglected.  And 
tendering  his  Service  to  his  Majefty,  in  Order  to  procure 
an  Accommodation  of  the  plus  quam  Civile,  &  Vnnatu- 
rall  War. 

190.  To  the  Prince-EleCtor.  13  Nouember,  1643. 

ibid. 

Advifing  him  to  procure  fome  Friend  of  Power, 
at  Court,  to  follicite  the  Difpatch  of  the  Kings  Letters 
written  in  His  behalf,  That  the  King  of  Spaine  being 
greatly  affeCted  to  Cardinall  Richelieu,  &  auerfe  from 
France,  muft  be  more  laboured,  Cc  the  more  neerely 
looked  into. 

191.  To  Mr.  Browne.  15  Nouember,  1643.  1 14.  b. 

That  much  Labour  Cc  Art  hath  been  vfed  euery 

where,  to  procure  His  Majeftie  to  waue  the  Generali 
Treaties,  by  reafluming  the  priuat  Mediation  :  in  which, 
Monf.  Ifola  hath  receiued  at  Oxford  a  ciuill  Denyall,  in 
anfwer  to  his  Memoriall  exhibited  to  His  Majeftie.  That 
the  Imperialls  &  Bauarians  haue  made  a  very  odd  fort  of 
Interpretation  of  the  Safe-ConduCts  for  the  EleClor-Pala- 
tin,  or  His  Deputyes,  to  come  to  the  Generali  Treaties, 
procured  by  France  &  Suede  ;  vizt.  that  they  are  for  their 
Perfons,  as  Spectators  j  not  for  their  Caufe,  as  Actors, 
or  interefled. 

192.  To.  Mr.  Auery.  21.  November,  1643.  ibid. 

That  the  Count  of  Harcourt  hath  begun  fome 

Ouuerture  of  a  Treatye,  by  interpoling  as  a  Mediator,  of 
accommodation  of  our  miferable  DiftraClions.  That 
Monfr.  Ifola  is  much  difeontent  with  the  Anfwer  he  re¬ 
ceived  to  his  Memorial.  lie  conceives  that  His  Majeftie 
will  give  the  like  to  the  late  Letter  of  the  Electors  ;  being 
relolved  to  trail  the  Caule  only  with  the  Crownes  his 
Friends,  &  the  Publicque.  Sir  Thomas  is  furry  for  the 
Comportment  of  the  King  of  Denmarke,  toward  Mr. 
Avery  :  and  though  he  knows  the  malicious  Pride  &  In- 
folence  of  fome  of  his  German  Minillers  ;  yet  fears  it 
proceeds  from  an  ill  naturall  Route.  Adding,  that  at 
leaft,  in  the  Condition  we  are,  we  can  expeeft  nothing 
but  Contempt  &  Injury. 

193.  To  Mr.  Pooly.  2 1  Nouember,  1643.  11  S’ 

Defiring  him  to  difeouer  how  he  Hands  in  the  Grace 

or  Difpleafure  of  the  King  of  Denmark  ;  with  regard  to 
whom,  he  clears  his  own  Conduct.  He  recommends 
(as  he  did  in  that  to  Mr.  Avery)  his  friend  Mr.  Barker 
4  S  employe^ 


342' 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1901. 

employed  by  the  Eaftland-Company,  to  peticion  the 
King  of  Denmarke,  in  the  Obftruflions  of  their  Trade. 

194.  To  Mr.  Browne.  21  Nouember,  16+3.  1 15.  b. 

I  hat  the  Eledtor-Palaiin  feemeth  to  doubt  that  too 
earned  a  prefl'ure,  how  far  the  Crowne  of  France  will  de¬ 
clare  in  his  Caufe,  may  offend  ;  or  draw  on  fome  ether 
reciprocal  Queftion  from  our  Court.  Therefore  lie  ra- 
ther  defireth  to  proceed  in  good  Confidence,  then  to 
fearch  out  that  which  he  would  not  know.  That  other 
Jealoufies  are  infufed  into  that  Prince,  by  his  Counfel- 
lers,  ot  the  affection  or  power  of  tile  Houfe  of  Lorreyne 
and  the  Guiles.  But  that  there  is  no  other  way,  nor 
balance  of  this  bufmes,  which  the  Tryall  at  Munfler  fhall 
juitefye.  For,  to  that  Tribunall  the  Caufe  is  refolutcly 
referred  on  our  part,  and  as  obflinately  refufed  on  the 
other.  Laftly,  that  Monfr.  Ifola  inculcateth,  that  all 
die  French  fayre  weather  toward  vs,  is  only  to  fright  the 
Duke  of  Bauare,  to  a  Revolt  from  the  Houfe  of  Auftria. 

195.  fo  Mr.  Curtius.  22  Nouember,  1643.  n6 
Concerning  the  Practices  of  the  Bauarians  to  poifefs 
the  World  with  their  Pretenfions  ;  &  to  avoid  the  Ge¬ 
neral  lrea_t.es  by  fpecious  Abufes,  of enclining  to  an  Ac¬ 
commodation  by  the  Priuat  mediation.  That  Monfr. 
Kola  is  not  well  content,  that  he  cannott  cofen  us.  That 
we  appeale  from  their  pretended  k  partial!  Dyett  of 
Mulnauien ;  and  deny  any  prejudicial!  Decree  at  Ra- 
tifbon  ;  and  proved  againft  the  Clandeltine  Treatye  of 
Iragiie;  and  knew  no  judge  competent,  but  the  iuftice 
&  lundamentall  Lawes  of  the  Empire.  Nor  can  they 
more  grofly  abufe  the  Saxe-Ambaffador  then  to  make 
him  beleeue,  that  Bauare  will  yeild  up  both  Palatinats, 
Th  f,nd;L0UL  °f.  t!’e  Emperors  power  &  poffeflion. 
Ihat  he  (Mi.  Curtius)  hath  touched  a  right  String  in 
adhering  to  the  Cittyes,  who  haue  voted  an  unlisted 
Atnneftyc  at  Ranibon.  And  if  the  Suedes  can  procure 
their  Appearance  as  Alliiiants.  and  Intereffed  at  the 
generail  I reatye ;  their  Power,  if  they  know  how  to  ufe 
If*  'V,U  caft ,be  Alliance.  'I  hat  the  Count  de  Harcourt 
hath  offered  to  the  Lords  his  Enterpofitinn,  in  the  Name 

hv'h  Regeilt>  (already  accepted 

by  h,s  Majeftie)  and  that  the  Cot, f, deration  thereof  now 
relts  in  the  Houfe  of  Commons. 

.tpS.  To  Prince  Rupert.  t4December,  1643. u6.b. 

1°  kll°"  111  "'tat  Condition  he  (lands  with 
His  Majeftie ;  finning  all  Opportunities  preuented  ;  euery 
man  preferred  or  graced  t  and  himfelf  only  ,  that  hath 
wffl  negiefted,  if  not  ruined:  '  l  hat  the 

U  oild  will  judge  of  Ins  Seruices  by  the  Reward  k  Efti- 
illation  putt  on  them,  or  Himfelfe,  by  his  Majeftie.  He 
further  defires  that  the  King  would  vouchfafc  to  lett  him 
know  lus  faults  or  faylmgs  :  where!. .  he  hath  demented  ; 
wherein  he  ha*  beenedefeffiue,  in  his  Duty,  Allegiance 
m  a  poilihle  Obedience,  or  Succcfs  in  Hi/  Commands  • 
and  .t  he  may  vnderiland  his  Sinnes,  he  will  puniih 
Difgrace:  ’  'hCre  b'  need  filent  or  implicit/ 

19;-  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  1 4  December  1 643. 

That  he  hath  receiued  a  Coppie  of  His  Maiei'its 
Anfw  ere  to  Monfr.  Ifola,  which  ought  to  farisfve  his  vn 
reafonable  tinportunttyc.  That  the  defeat  of  the  French 
Tn  Gcrmanye  will  prove  very  difadvamagious  to  /he 
Cauie  Palatin,  &  ,0  the  whole  State  of  th?  Affayres  & 
7lh  7a  ETre-  1  hat  the  S“eJcs  "ifi  foddcnly 

T  .  /ttaft  a  ,‘t;  “d  I,Crl‘aPs  »fo"d  „y 

Heat,  at  leait  a  truce  apart.  ihat  the  Imperialls  k 
Bauanans  alrcadie  braue  all  their  AllyesSt  Frie/ds  ftew 
mg  how  they  would  vfe  a  to, ail  CoZqueft.  Tha  C„n 
fit], at, one  haue  been  fmee  held  betweene  the  French  Pfo- 
nepotent, anes  A  the  Commiflioners  of  the  States  Generali 
about  profecutmg  the  Treatyes  of  Munfter.  Fmher 

T-d  "h0  hath  “VW  *em 


1643. 


Num.  1901. 

!.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  t9  December, 


the  tu  7'  *  S'61?.  '  °f  the  French  ma)'  not  difluLc 
the  Meeltng  at  Munfter;  but  will  certainly  alter  the  Slate 
ot  Affaires,  and  make  the  end  of  the  Treaty  difficult  • 
particularly,  ,t  will  weaken  the  hopes  of  'the  Eleeto’r 
lalatm.  1  hat  the  Auftnans,  after  this  blall,  will  fweli 

ThnM  m/a‘UrC-  &  "|H  Erae  La"  ia  Germany. 
Ihat  Mr.  Secretary  will  h„d  both  the  Houfe  of  Heflin 
&  Brunfwtcke  faynting,  if  not  changing,  k  prouiding 
only  for  them  owne  Saietye.  Further,  Sr.  Thomas  Hi* 
contmues  ,0  prefs  for  His  Majefties  Commands,  Whe- 
ther  he  ihall  lend  or  bume  the  King  of  Polands  I  etter 
which  hath  lien  in  his  Hands  above  Six  Months.  ’ 
199.  To  the  Prince  Elector.  21  December,  1643. 

That  he  hath  received  Advice  from  Mr.  Secrelarie 
that  now  upon  the  French  Defeatc,  the  treaties  of 
Munfter  and  Ofnabrug  will  not  hold.  That  the  lm- 
perialis  Sr  Bauarians  are  fo  high  vpon  their  Victory,  that 
they  openly  profeft  little  Care,  whether  his  Caufe  he 
brought  thither  ;  or  treated  (as  they  defired )  by  the 
pnuat  Mediation,  or  not:  for  in  all  Cafes,  they  thinkc 
themfelves  Mailers  ot  the  Conclufion.  Sir  1  homas 
excufes  an  error  of  Sir  Arthur  Hopton,  proceeding  from 
a  wan,  of  Correfpondence  8t  Information,  ufually  in  our 
Mitnftry  &  States-men.  That  His  Majeftie  our  King  is 
conftam  not  to  fend  to  the  private  Treaty;  and  thinketh 
Iks  Hlghnefs  (hall  belt  excufe  himfelfe  10  the  Emperor 
that  without  lbs  Majefties  Counfeil  &  A  lit  fiance  He 
cannot  accept  to  renew  a  Treaty  begun  by  him,  without 
Him  For,  in  all  Euents,  the  Emperor  ihouid  not  be 
vtterly  dtfeompofed  Sr  difobliged  by  apparent  diffidence  : 
iince  without  Him,  nothing  will  be  done  in  Germany 
200.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  17  January,  ,643.4 

h  forty  he  cannot  obey  His  Majefties  Commands  in 

repainng  ,0  Oxford  ;  God  having  picaled  lay  many 
Affl, atom  vpon  hun,  both  of  body  and  mind;  and  bis 
Weaknefs  lately  fo  mcreafed,  that  his  Bed  hail,  bcene  all 
hts  Confoktion.  If  Gad  Ihall  enable  him,  he  (hall 
faithfully  feme  His  Majeftie  ;  if  too  late,  he  (I, all  dve 
enjoying  the  Peace  of  a  loyall  Heart.  That  the  Caufe- 
I  alatm,  by  the  Changes  in  Denmarke,  may  be  iayd  vn 

Difeafe C  Remedye’  for  “  old  &  itrong 

Th';?'7Mr-Ary’  7  January,  ,643.4.  ibid. 

.  ,|hat  heknoweth  not  what  is  become  of  the  Creden 
halls  promtfed;  fearing  it  is  too  late ;  and  that  by  the 
miraculous  changes  in  Ikolltein,  &  the  reuolutions  in 
Gei  many,  God  hath  fome  great  worke  to  finifti 
which  it  is  in  vayne  for  Man  to  trouble :  and  con- 
fequently,  that  the  deplorable  Caufe  Palatin  may  be 
hanged  vp  vpon  the  Hookes  of  Hope,  vntill  God  will 
be  reuealed. 

302.  To  Mr.  Browne.  17  January,  1643.4.  ibid 
.  „  the  Changes  of  the  Reputation  of  the  French 
m  Germany,  and  the  Reuolution  in  Holfteln  &  Den 
marke  have  fo  dejected  the  Hopes  of  the  CaufoPalatin 
that  he  can  gme  no  Admce,  but  to  continue  &  goe’ 
along  with  the  Publicqtte  Intereft  &  Generali  Treatyes- 
ft  jil  them  there  iocceed  no  Interruption,  the  Auitrian! 

'  '“ated  be>'ond  of  Companion  or 

20.3.  To  Mr.  Curtius.  ,7  January,  ,643-4.  ibid. 

1  o  the  fame  effect  as  before.  Councelling  him  to 
beare  vp  St  not  to  finke  in  Spirit!  ;  to  unite  St  keene 
cloie  to  the  1  ubiteque  Intereft  of  the  Protcftant  Princes 
&  the  Fate  of  the  Generali  Peace,  or  Ruine.  ’ 

204.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  17  January,  1643-4. 

Ms  g'tvious  Indifp'oftiou; 
wttha  ldelinng  that  Dr.  Cneuftelius  mav  be  feut  ove? 
to  help  him  ;  or  elfe  induced  to  tarry  in  Holland,  until! 
kir  Thomas  may  be  carried  over. 


205.  Tc 


Bibliothecae  Harleiante. 


343 


Num.  1901 . 

20  c.  To  Sir  William  Bofwell.  20  February,  1643-4- 
5  1 18.  b. 

Upon  the  fame  Matter  ;  as  alfo  about  fome.  Afper- 
fions  call  upon  Him  ;  perhaps,  with  regard  to  his  Con¬ 
duct  in  menaging  the  Palatin -affair.  He  writes  that  he 
knows  that  his  Innocencye  will  juftefye  him  before  God, 
and  Juftice  preferue  him  among  Men. 

206.  To  the  Oueene  of  Bohemia.  20  February, 

1643-4.  .  11  ?• 

Concerning  Her  Majefties  late  Indifpofition,  k  His 
own.  That  the  Count  de  Harcouit  is  gone,  without 
any  Effect ;  being  only  feaffed  in  London,  by  young 
Griffin,  to  the  Tuneof40ol.  A  Summe,  that  would  now 
keepe  Sir  Thomas  ( that  hath  been  feaffed  of  many  Kings) 
all  his  Life  :  his  Rents  and  Meanes  being  taken  from 
him,  he  knows  not  why. 

207.  To  the  Prince-Elector.  20  Februarye,  1643-4. 

ibid. 

That  he  hath  receiued  no  Direction  nor  Intelligence 
from.  Oxford,  fince  the  Change  of  State-Officers  ;  and 
therefore  his  Correfpondence  abroad  is  become  ufelefs. 
He  cannot  conceiue  how  the  Treatyes  can  proceed,  fqme 
of  the  Wheeles  being  taken  off.  And  he  forefees  that 
if  they  ffiould,  new  Matter  &  new  Embroylments  will 
fill  his  Unkles  hands  full  of  the  Care  of  Himfelfe.  For 
he  is  now  embarqued  in  the  War  ;  &  the  fettling  of  his 
owne  Eftate  muff  be  a  part  of  the  Vniuerfal  Peace.  That 
that  States  k  all  other  Princes  interfiled  in  the  Neceffitve 
or  Vfe  of  the  Trade  through  the  Sound  (hall  look  about 
them  Sc  be  well  aduiffd.  'For.  the  Suedes,  if  they  ffiall 
engrofs  all  in  the  North,  will  fetr  their  owne  Prices,  k 
giue  Lawes,  fuch  as  flow  from  their  great  Maxime  of 
State,  Non  convenit  rationi  Status  noftvi.  Advifes  his 
Ilighjiefs  to  apply  to  France,  vpon  this  opportunitye  & 
Ground  (which  they  haue  experienced  at  a  dearc  price) 
'chat  the  French  Armes  &  Deffignes  in  Germany  can 
neuer  profper,  vnlefs  they  be  commanded  &  con¬ 
duced  bv  a  German  Prince  :  the  chiefeft  of  their  Force 
confiffing  of  that  Nation,  who  will  not  conftantly  obey 
a  Stranger.  That  this  will  add  fome  Luffre  to  the 
Juftice  of  their  War  within  the  Empire  ;  which  now  ap¬ 
pears  a  forreyne  tnvafion.  That  it  feemeth  not  impro¬ 
bable,  but  that  llis  Highnefs  may  now  gett  the  Command 
of  the  Remay  of  thofe  Forces  ;  the  French  deffigning 
Moneyes  into  Germany  to  recruit  them  ;  k  preparing 
fome  Leauies  in  France,  who  vnwillingly  pafs  the  Rhyne : 
whereas  He,  fupported  with  the  French  Money,  can 
with  much  lefs  expence  rayfe  Men  in  Germany,  then 
tranfport  them  thither.  That  the  Duke  of  Lorreyne 
hath  made  himfelfe  confidcrable  bv  fmall  Troopes  :  and 
the  Landgrauine  of  Heffen  k  Duke  of  Brunfwicke  haue 
made,  k  can  make  their  owne  Peace,  becaufe  they  are 
armed.  Sir  Thomas  adds,  that  when  at  Vienna  he  ob¬ 
jected  their  War  with  the  Emperor,  equall  to  any  Offence 
of  the  Palatin-Familv  :  it  was  favd.  They  had  a  right 
Intereft  in  the  Peace,  becaufe  they  were  part  of  the 
War.  .  , 

208.  To  the  Prince-Eleftor.  8  May,  1644-  i'9-  b- 
That  Sir  Arthur  Hop  ton’s  Error  from  Spayne  was 
meere  Ignorance  or  Inanimadverfion ;  at  leaff,  had  no 
ground  from  any  Averfion  either  to  His  HighnesPerfon, 
Caufe,  or  Rights,  from  England.  He  feares  a  pnuate 
Treatye,  betweene  France  &  Spayne ;  which  may  be 
as  dangerous  to  England,  as  exclufiue  to  His  Highnefs; 
efpecially  feeing  the  King  of  Denmarke  needs  Mediators 
for  himfelfe.  "And  pravs  that  the  Suedes,  from  whom 
much  hath  beene  expefted,  for  the  Common  Good 
(who  haue  no  ends  but  their  owne,  not  one  Publicque 
Thought)  do  not  verefye  the  Proverb,  Omne  malum  ab 
Aquilone. 

aog.  To  the  Queene  of  Bohemia.  8  May,  1644. 

1 20. 

Moftly  upon  his  own  matters.  Believes  that  the 
States  Ambaffadors  are  wearie  of  Labour  in  Vayne  :  and 


Num.  1901 . 

that  they  will  confefs,  there  was  more  Truth  then  Man¬ 
ners,  in  that  Word  (peremptorily  k  unleafohabl yj poken 
to  them  in  Holland)  That  fome  vnderftood  the  State  of 
England  better  then  they  :  which,  fince,  is  made  good. 
210.  To  Princefs  Elizabeth.  9  May  1644.  ibid. 

Complaining  of  the  Mifchiefs  &  Mifunes  of  this 
World  ;  which  he  feems  not  unwilling  to  leave.  And 
Prophefying,  that  while  Religion,  of  all  fydes,  is  made 
the  Stalking  Horfe,  and  not  the  Bird  :  there  fliall  be  no 
Peace  vpon  the  Earth. 

an.  To  Mr.  Hollis.  16  May  1643.  i2o.b. 

That,  Two  Errors  in  State  do  now  prevayle  in  the 
Parliaments  Conful cations  ;  firft,  in  difeontenting  the 
Ambaffadors  of  the  United  Provinces,  by  not  Answering; 
or  not  accepting  them  as  Mediators  of  Peace:  lecondly, 
in  inclining  to  make  fome  Conjun&ion  with  the  Suedes; 
fuch  as  may  prejudice  the  King  of  Denmarke  ;  with  re¬ 
ference  to  both  which,  he  giveth  his  Reafons  at  length. 

212.  To  Mr.  Secretary  Nicholas.  2  June,  1644.  121.  b. 

Geffeth,  that  the  French  are  far  aduanced,  or  refol- 

ued  to  huddle  vp  a  Truce  (which  will  vndoe  all  thePro- 
teftants)  if  they  cannot  agree  vpon  a  Peace.  That  the 
Invitation  of  the  Elector  Palatin,  is  very  feruent ;  ik 
doth  oblige  the  French  farther  than  any  other  publick 
Act  of  theirs.  He  therefore  thinks  it  agreeable  with  His 
Majefties  intentions,  that  that  Prince  either  goe  or  fend 
thither,  refolued  to  ftand  or  fall  with  the  Publicque. 

If  it  fliall  be  Peace ;  they  cannott  with  Honour,  leave 
Him  out,  for  their  owne  expreffed  Reafons  k  Intereft. 

If  the  Treaty  fliall  breake  ;  he  ffiall  reft  unreconciled, 
with  good  Company  :  where  any  privat  Dccifion  would 
ffiutt  him  up  for  euer. 

213.  To  the  Prince-Ele&or.  x  1  June,  1644.  122. 

Efteeniing,  the  French  Invitation  ofHis  Highneffes 

Affiftance  at  the  Generali  Treaties,  a  very  great  Obliga¬ 
tion  on  their  Part ;  and  fuch,  as  nay  worke  great  EfteCts 
for  Him.  But  that  a  Truce  is  to  be  avoided  as  a  Rock 
upon  which  His  Caufe  will  Splitt ;  and  hopes  that  the 
States  of  Holland  will  lock  to  the  Danger  of  it.  . 

214.  To  Mr.  Aucry.  20  June,  1644.  ibid. 

Belieuing  not  that  the  French  intend  a  Peace,  when 

they  multiplye  their  Charge  in  new  Seiges,  oi  fuch  Im¬ 
portant..:  as  G  rauelin  ;  nor,  that  they  will  euer  giue  it 
up,  if  they  gett  it ;  or  the  States  of  Holland  confenr. 
Nor  yet,  that  the  Spaniards  will  reft  content  with  the 
Lofs,  k  ordinarie  Conditions  of  a  Truce,  qua:  poffident, 
poffideant  :  fo  he  fears  not  their  fudden  Agreement,  but 
our  owne  Condition  to  fee  our  Seas  hemmed  in  by  a  po¬ 
tent  k  growing  Neighbour.  That  formerly,  England 
would  not  haue  fuffered  the  French  fo  to  fwell,  as  to  be 
able  to  braue  vs  in  the  Mouth  of  Thames.  Thcfe  are  the 
Firft  Fruits  of  our  more  then  Vn-ciuill  War  ;  which  few 
confider,  or  underftand  ;  and  the  Prefage  ofworfe.  Wee 
now  know,  k  the  King  of  Denmarke  doth  feele,  how 
great  an  Error  it  is  to  ftretch  a  Prerogatiue  ;  or  awaken 
fome  pretended  Rights,  which  were  fafer  afleepe  then 
pracHfed. 

215.  To  the  Oueene  of  Bohemia.  20  June,  1644. 

1 22.  b. 

Concerning  his  Difeafe,  which  fo  encieafeth ;  that 
only  to  be  lame,  were  an  Happinefs.  Wiffieth  that  they 
who  haue  neglected  his  Seruice,  may  neuer  need  it ; 
nor,  too  late,  know,  that  thofe  Counfells  are  fafeft,  or 
more  honeft  wherein  is  no  Selfe-Intereft,  which  He  hath 
alway  neglected  &  defpifed.  That,  the  King  of  Den¬ 
marke  may  emerge  out  of  his  prefent  Danger,  that  there¬ 
by  the  State  of  the  North  may  be  balanced,  k  not  fall 
into  the  Iron-hands  of  the  Suedes.  That  no  l'riendfhip 
•  in  State  is  fecure  againft  Ambition  backed  by  too  great  a 
Power,  nor  can  any  wifely  truft-  fo  great  a  Jewel  at  the 
Baltic- trade  to  the  Curtefie  of  one  Nation.  That  while 
things  are  almoft  everv  where  in  Confufion,  and  we  m  an 
Un-civill  War  ;  the  French  will  become  Mailers  of  the 
Flanders-coaft  ;  which  we  ought  not  to  fuffer,  and  the 
I  Hollanders 


344 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1901 — '1938. 

Hollandemvin  repent  But  fiffceall  things  tend  to  Rnyne 
he  hail  detlje  with  Caftrucao,  to  be  buried  with  his  Pace’ 

£«5l  Dfcd2c' or  Com^“  ih=  G™. 

k  ^oria. 

a  n  r. iiomas  Koes  Employment  at  Vienna 

ash  feemeth.  ^  ,M0  ^  *  **«-.  by  Wei  {, 
o- 2«.?‘  or  Iranflation  of  a  Letter  or  MemomHof 

antl^he  Sntcenty  of  others  is  taxed.  UaifenS  into  "he 

f.  vt!8'  T0Mr'BurIaraach;  fr°“  Vienna.  3  Ju„e  \l%_ 

teritv "m  S  h,''"relf’  b°lh  as  to  rhe  Integrity  & '/)« 

1  homas  avers  to  be  ablblutly  falle,  both  in  Matter  * 
Forme  ;  Subftance  &  Circuit  (Hnre  a/)  e  & 

z  e;chi  sri:n’-  D-h,  tautSSj 

126. 


1902. 

A  thin  velum  Bookin  fob  given  by  Mr.  Charles  Mawfon 
....  ,>  f-"e“ei  -Herald ;  containing, 
x.  Ihe  Defcent  of  William  Feildinn-  f?.iri  nfn  k-  e 

of  the  Houfe  Auftria.  Habtpurg  Founder 

ofriieS^oSeFaSi^ilZTll^"1' 

t>  the  Right  Honble.  William 

mond,  &c.  hving,  ,683.  (no,  finilhed) S  ^ 

19°3- 

Ati?rert°k’  giVC"  b)'  Co]“"e'  He"ry  Worfelev 

SntSjritX  a°  ary  “  the 

Another  given  by  the  fame  Honorable  Gentleman ;  & 

A  ...  _  con  taming,  ’ 

Lands  i^HampMrtf‘0mthe  lS'M  R™rJ.  concerning 

a  ,  •  x9°5- 

Another,  given  by  the  fame  Gentlemin  ■  X,  „ 

A  like  Extract  from  the  fan  e  R  ’  i&  C°ntaminS’ 
Lands  in  Kent.  lame  Record>  concerning 

a  u  T9°6. 

Another  given  by  the  fame  Gentleman  •  «. 

A  like  Extra#  from  r  n  ’  *■  containing. 
Lands  in  Norfolk.  *me  Record>  concerning 


Another, 


Num.  1909 — igi2, 

1909. 

“apsSSrSSM 

Copiet  :fcRl*AUniVCTft>r  °f  bridge  i  wit! 

Univeriitv  ■  the  lift  of, h  T  rnI™ffions  »  the  farm 

being  prttX;TabS“£'dM  8  ^  *“«• 

SBSfflSjfrtfS 

AofZt"kJ!l  wirtnsCilTm'red’  fTbc  °"*“» 
which  Cor  oZon  ™  wixtto  - 

bought  of  me.  now  extm#.  1  his  book  was 

1912. 


I  907 


AeriikiVExima  f™Tih?fntlemRni  aiid  c°n,a™g. 

Lands  in  Su flex.  b  fame  Reeord,  concerning 

Another,  given  by  the  tai  Honorable  perfon,  con 
.  taming,  ’ 

A  l.'ke  Extra#  from  the  fim*.  R  a 
lands  in  Worcefter  lhire.  Record»  concerning 


A  paper-Book  in  fob  bough,  rfme;  wherein  are  «, 
rp  r  .  tamed, 

.otheitiS'^ulrCoiregi^llir^  &C',  rd“‘m 

into ,hifsictT”ega^evN,mf  er  °f  adroit 

both  included  ^  ye“’  fromA-D-  1 52  ■  -  to  .6y4 

ted!-4^S  laid  Gem. emen  fo  ^ 

ing  Ihe  Nan^s'of  the  Cem?CeS  i"“.Gra-ve» 

from  when"  they  came  .  'rm’  J'  &  &™y 

when  admitted:  bcgSi  with  the  Yy’  r"?  &  Y“r 

with  the  year  1677.  ^  be  Yeai  1 626.  lending 

Socle, v  .  with  ad"i,ted 

ciety.  ‘Il  °f  AbbMS  81  admitted  of  the  fame 

***ora*££; 

p aimed ^a"eS  °f  K"gh,S  fo  admi>t=d  i  with  their  rirmis 
Reader,  duremg 

■  a.  Alphabetical  Index  of  Names.  '7°;b’ 

J3  A  bucceflion  of  Reader  !n  r1,  t  ,7i- 

S' Ss"  “*■  -S'c™”" 

Srd 

■s.  Lift  of  Barrefters,  made  from  a,  N  "l8- 

Grayes  Inne.  belonging  the  Society  of 

230.  b. 

22.  Series 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


345 


Num.  1912 — 1916, 

20.  Series  of  the  Stewards,  &  Butlers,  there  ;  to  the 

year  1676.  231- 

21.  A  Catalogue  of  Readers  of  the  feuerall  Inns  of 
Court ;  with  their  Armesin  Colours,  (i.  e.  of  thofe  Innes) 

232. 

22.  Table  to  the  following  Trad.  237. 

23.  Orders,  made  fas  it  feemeth)  by  the  Society  of 

Graves  Inne,  upon  fundry  occafions.  237. 

24.  A  perticular  A  ccount  of  the  Plaite  in  ufe  about 

the  Chappell  Sc  Hall  (and  given  to  the  Society  of  Grays- 
Inn,  by  feuerall  Gentlemen  Members  of  the  faid  Society; 
exprefling  theire  Falhion,  Inlcription,  Coats  of  Arms, 
and  Value  of  each  peice;  not  finifhed.  244.  b. 

25.  Alphabetical  Lift  of  the  Benchers  &  Treasurers 

of  Grayes-Inne.  247.  b. 

26.  A  Generali  Survey  of  all  the  Rents  belonginge  to 

the  Honorable  Society  of  Grayts-Inne  ;  contayninge  the 
feverall  Courts,  Buildings,  Sc  Chambers,  with  their  re- 
fpedive  Rtnts,  Termes,  Owners  or  Pofleflors.  Alfo  a 
View  of  the  Perquifitcs  for  Seauen  yeares  lafl  pad ;  with 
the  Fees  &  Allowances  to  Officers,  &c.  iflueing  out  thereof 
in  Anno  166  1.  248.  b. 

The  Trad  is  preceded  by  an  alphabetical  Index  of 
Sur-names. 

27.  Fines  paid  for  Chambers  there,  from  A.  D.  1647. 

to  A.  D.  1(377.  both  included.  269. 

Mere  beginneth  the  Parcel  bought  of  Mr.  Bourf- 
cough’s  Executors 

I9I3* 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fob  manu  Italica  deferiptus ;  in 
quo  leguntur. 

Gregorij  Paps  ix.  Decretalium  Libri  v.  cum  Gloflis 
diverforum. 

IQI4- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  in  Italia,  ut  videtur,  feriptus  ; 
in  quo  comprehenduntur, 

Breviaiij  Johannis  Medici,  filij  Strapionis,  Libri 
five  Tradus  Septem  ;  cum  explicauone  Vocurn  Techni- 
canim,  in  fine.  (De  hoc  opere,  vide  judicium  dodiffimi 
Samuelis  Canuti.  in  folio  rejedaneo  politum) 

I91 5- 

Codex  membranaceus,  antiquus,  niddus,  ac  bona:  nota:, 
in  fol.  quo  habentur, 

1 .  Unum  ex  quatuor  ;  feu  Concordia  Evangeliflarum 

et  defuper,  Ex  poft  do  continua,  exadiflima  diligentia 
edita  a  Zacharia  Chrifopolitano.  1.  b. 

2.  Interpretationes  Nominum  in  Evangelio ;  ex  Re- 

migio,  ut  videtur.  165. 

3.  Expofido  Bede  Prefbiteri  in  Adus  Apoftxlorum  ; 

ad  Accam  Epifcopum.  167. 

4.  Retradationes  ejufdem,  in  Ltbrum  fuper  Adus 

Apoftolorum  ;  ad  Accam  Epifcopum.  183. 

5.  Liber  Ieronomi  ad  Anatholium,  de  Explana  ione 

Apocalipfis  B.  Johannis  Evangelifta:.  193. 

(Tradatus  hie,  a  quibufdam,  Vidorino  Petavionenfi 
tribuitur) 

6.  Topographia  Venerabilis  Bede  Prefbiteri,  in  Adus 
Apoftolorum,  colleda  ex  Libris  Bead  Ieronimi.  1  98.  b. 

7.  Brevis  Expofitio  Ieronimi  in  Apocalypfim  Johannis 

Apoftoli  (vid.  fupra,  no.  5.)  200.  b. 

1916. 

Codex  membranaceus  &  anriquus,  in  fol.  quo  habentur, 

1.  Capitula  Lectionum  Sandi  Evangelij  fecundum 

Iohannem.  1. 

2.  Sermones  five  Homilia:,  numero  xliv.  in  Evan- 
gelium  D.  Joannis,  Auguflino  forfan  adjudicandi.  1. 

Initio,  defideratur  folium  unum  aut  alterum. 

3.  Ejufdem,  Homilia:  in  Evangelium  D.  Joannis,  alias, 

numero  lxx.  129. 

4.  Ejufdem  (ut  videtur)  in  Epiftolam  primam  D.  Jo¬ 
hannis,  Homilia:  five  Tradatus  x.  180. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1917,  1918. 

.  I9I7* 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  Italorum  manibus  deferiptus; 
in  quo  continentur, 

Gregorij  Papa;  ix.  Libri  v.  cum  Gloflis  &  Tabulis 
neceflarijs  :  in  fine  truncati. 

1918. 

Codex  membranaceus  et  antiquus,  in  fol.  cujus  in  im& 
01A  paging  printse,  legitur  ha:c  (qua:  fequitur)  In- 
feriptio.  In  hoc  libro  continentur  Expofitiones  Evan- 
geliorum,  videlicet  Diebus  Dominicis  ;  incipientes  a 
Sando  Sabbato  Pafce,  ulq;  ad  Adventum  Domini. 
Et  poft,  fequitur  de  Nadvitate  Domini ;  de  Circumci- 
fione ;  et  de  Epiphania  Domini,  fcil. 

1.  In  Sabbato  Sando  Pafce,  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bede 

Prefbyteri,  in  illud  S.  Matthad,  Vefpere  Sabbati  quae 
lucefcit  in  primam  Sabbati ;  et  reliqua.  1. 

2.  Senno  Beati  Leonis  Papae  in  Sando  Sabbato.  3. 

3.  In  die  Pafchae,  Omelia  Bead  Gregorij  Papae,  in 

illud  S.  Marci,  Maria  Magdalene,  et  Maria  Jacobi,  et 
Salome  abeuntes,  emerunt  aromata :  et  rel.  4.  b. 

4.  Sermo  bead  Maximi  Epifcopi,  in  Refurredione 

Domini.  6. 

5.  Sermo  cujus  fupra.  6.  b. 

6.  Unde  fupra  :  Sermo  Beati  Fauftini  Epifcopi.  7. 

7.  Unde  fupra  :  Sermo  Bead  Auguftini  Epifcopi.  8.  b. 

Nota  marginalis  cujufdain  Neoterici,  et  Samuelis 

Canuti  five  Knotti,  Non  eft  Auguftini ;  excufus  non 
agnofeit. 

8.  Feria  Secunda,  Omelia  ejufdem  Beati  Gregorij 

Papae,  in  illud  S.  Lucae,  Duo  ex  Difcipulis  ibant  in 
Caftelliun  :  et  rel.  9. 

9.  Feria  Terria,  Omelia  venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri, 

in  illud  S.  Lucae,  Stetit  Jhefus  in  medio  Difcipulorum 
fuorum  :  et  rel.  1  o. 

10.  Feria  Quarta,  Omelia  ejufdem  Beati  Gregorij 

Papae,  in  illud  S.  Johannis,  Manifeftauit  fe  iterum  Jhe¬ 
fus  difcipulis  fuis  :  et  rel.  12.  b. 

11.  Feria  Quinta,  Omelia  ejufdem  Beati  Gregorij 

Papae,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem ;  Maria  ftabat  ad 
monumentum  foris,  plorans  :  et  rel.  14.  b. 

12.  Feria  Sexta,  Omelia  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fe¬ 

cundum  Matthamin  ;  undecim  Dil'cipuli  abierunt  in  Ga- 
lileam  :  et  rel.  1 8. 

13.  Sabbato,  Omelia  ejufdem  Beati  Gregorij  Papae, 

in  illud  fecundum  Johannem  ;  Una  Sabbati  Maria  Mag¬ 
dalene  venit  mane  :  etrel.  20. 

14.  Sermo  Beati  Auguftini  Epifcopi,  in  Odavis.  23. 

15.  Cujus  fupra.  23.  b. 

16.  Omelia  ejufdem  Bead  Gregorij  Papae.  (in  ilium 
fee.  Johannem,  Cum  diet  fero  die  illo,  una  Sabbatorum) 

24,  b. 

1 7.  In  Natali  Thomae  Apoftoli.  26. 

18.  Omelia  ejufdem  Bead  Gregorij  Papae  (Dominica 

prima  poft  Odavas  Pafchae)  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem 
Dixit  Dominus  Jhefus  difcipulis  fuis,  Ego  fum  Paftor 
bonus  :  et  rel.  27.  b. 

19.  Dominica  Secunda;  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae 

Preibiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem ;  Modicum  et 
jam  non  videbitis  me  ;  et  iterum,  modicum  et  videbitis 
me.  28.  b. 

20.  Dominica  Terda ;  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae 

Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem  ;  Vado  ad  eum 
qui  me  mifit :  et  rel.  30. 

2 1 .  Dominica  Quarta  ;  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae 

Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem  :  Amen,  amen, 
dico  uobis :  fi  quid  petieritis  Patrem  in  Nomine  meo, 
dabituobis:  etrel.  32.  b. 

22.  Feria  Secunda,  in  Rogadonibus :  Sermo  Beati 

Maximi  Epifcopi.  34.  b. 

23.  Feria  Tertia;  Eledion§s  Tres.  35. 

24.  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fe¬ 
cundum  Lucam,  Quis  ueftrum  habebit  amicum,  et  ibit 

ad  ilium  media  node  :  et  rel.  35*  b. 

4  T  2 5.  Feria 


346 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1918. 

2 5.  Feria  Quarta ;  Sermo  Beati  Auguftini  Epifcopi  de 

Jejunio.  _  3^' 

26.  In  Vigilia  Afcenfionis ;  Sermo  ex  Comment. 

Beati  Augudini,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem  :  Subleu- 
atis  dominus  Jefus  oculis  in  coelum  ;  dixit,  Pater,  venit 
hora  :  et  rel.  39. 

27..  Sermo  Beati  Leonis  Papae  de  Afcenfione  Domini. 

41. 

28.  Feria  Sexta;  Lettiones  Tres.  42. 

29.  Sabbato  ;  Lettiones  Tres.  ibid. 

30.  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae,  in  illud  fecundum 

Marcum :  Recumbentibus  undecim  Difcipulis,  apparuit 
illis  dominus  Jhefus.  42.  b. 

31.  In  Afcenfione  Domini ;  Lettiones  otto.  44. 

32.  In  Ottavis  ;  I.ettiones  totidem.  44.  b. 

33.  Dominica  infra  Ottavas  :  Omelia  Venerabilis  Be- 

dae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem ;  Cum 
uenerit  Paraclytus  quem  ego  mittam  uobis  a  Patre :  et 
rel.  _  _  45- 

34.  Feria  Secunda  ;  Leftiones  Tres.  47.  b. 

35.  Feria  Tertia  ;  Lettiones  Tres.  ibid. 

36.  Feria  Quarta  ;  Lettiones  Tres.  48. 

37.  Feria  Sexta.  (leg.  vta.)  Lettiones  Tres.  48.  b. 
33.  In  Vigilia  Pentecoftes ;  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae 

Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem;  Sidiligitis  me, 
mandata  mea  fervate.  49. 

39.  In  die  fantto  Pentecoftes,  Omelia  ejufdem  Beati 

Gregorij  Papae,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem ;  fi  quis 
diligit  me,  Sermonem  meum  fervabit.  52. 

40.  Sermo  Beati  Leonis  Papae  de  Pentecoften.  55. 

41.  Cujus  fupra.  56. 

42.  Cujus  fupra;  Lettiones  otto.  57.  b. 

43.  Feria  Secunda  ;  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Beati 
Auguftini,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem  ;  Sic  Deus  di- 
lexit  Mundum  ut  Filium  fuum  unigenitum  daret :  et  rel. 

58.  b. 

44.  Feria  Tertia  ;  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Beati  Au¬ 

guftini  Epifcopi,  de  eadem  Lett,  in  illud  fecundum  Jo¬ 
hannem,  Amen  amen  dico  uobis,  qui  non  intrat  per 
hoftium  in  ouile  ouium.  ibid. 

45.  Feria  Quarta;  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Beati  Au¬ 
guftini  Epifcopi,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem  ;  Nemo 
poteft  uenire  ad  me,  nifi  Pater  qui  niifit  me,  traxerit 
eum  :  et  rel. 

46.  Feria  Quinta  ;  Sermo  ex  CommentarioVenerabilis 

Bedm  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam  ;  Conuocatis 
dominus  Jhefus  duodecim  Apoftolis,  dedit  illis  uirtutem 
&  poteftatem  fuper  omnia  demonia.  59.  b. 

47.  Feria  Sexta;  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Venerabilis 
Beds:  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam  ;  Fattum  eft 
in  una  dierum,  et  dominus  Jhefus  fedebat  docens.  60.  b. 

48.  Sabbato  ;  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Venerabilis 

Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam ;  Surgens 
dominus  Jhefus  de  Synagoga,  introiuit  in  domum  Symo- 
nis.  61.  b. 

49.  In  Ottavis  Pentecoftes  ;  Trattatus  de  Fide,  ex 

Concilio  Toletano  xi.  Lettiones  otto.  62. 

50.  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fe¬ 

cundum  Johannem  ;  erat  homo  ex  Pharifeis  Nichodemus 
nomine.  64. 

5 1 .  Dominica  prima  poft  Ottavas  Pentecoftes  ;  Ome¬ 
lia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Ho¬ 
mo  quidam  erat  diues,  et  induebatur  Purpura  et  Byflb. 

66.  b. 

52.  Dominica  Secunda  ;  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae, 

in  illud  fecundum  Lucam  ;  Homo  quidam  fecit  cenam 
magnam,  etvocavit  multos  :  &  rel.  ylm 

53.  Dominica  Tertia  ;  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae, 

in  illud  fecundum  Lucam  ;  Accefterunt  ad  dnm 
Jhefum  Publicani  et  Peccatores,  ut  audirent  ilium  :  et 
re^  74.  b. 

54.  In  Feftivitate  Sc  i  Michaelis  Archangeli.  76. 

55.  Dominica  (Quarta)  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Ve¬ 
nerabilis  Bedte  Prelbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam  : 


Num.  1918. 

Eftote  mifericordes,  ficut  et  Pater  uefter  mifericors  eft  : 
et  ret.  .  79.  b. 

56.  Dominica  (Quinta)  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Ve¬ 

nerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam  : 
Cum turbse  irruerent  ad  dnm  Jhefum, ^ut  audirent  Ver- 
bum  Dei :  et  rel.  ‘  80.  b. 

57.  Dominica  (Sexta)  Omelia  in  illud  fecundum  Ma- 

theum  :  Amen  dico  uobis,  nifi  habundauerit  jufticia  uef- 
tra  plufquam  Scribarum  et  Pharifeorum :  excerpta  de  , 
diuerfis  Trattatoribus :  et  rel.  8  x .  b. 

58.  Dominica  (Septima)  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Ve¬ 

nerabilis  Beds;  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Marcum, 
Cum'  multa  turba  effent  cum  d'no  Jhefu,  nec  haberent 
quod  manducarent  :  et  rel.  82.  b. 

59.  Dominica  (Ottaua)  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Vene¬ 

rabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Maiheum, 
Attendite  a  falfis  Prophetis,  qui  ueniunt  ad  uos  ueftimen- 
tis  ouium  :  et  rel.  84. 

60.  Dominica  (Nona)  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Vene¬ 
rabilis  Bedte  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Homo 
quidam  erat  Diues,  qui  habebat  uillicum  :  et  rel.  86. 

61.  Dominica  (Decima)  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae, 

in  illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Cum  appropinquaffet  cfns 
Jhefus  Jerufalem,  oidene  Ciuitatem,  fleuit  fuper  illam  : 
et  rel.  87. 

62.  Dominica  (Undecima)  Sermo  ex  Commentario 

Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam, 
Dixit  D'ns  Jhefus  ad  quofdam  qui  in  l'e  confidebant,  tan- 
quamjufti :  et  rel.  89.  b. 

63.  Dominica  (Duodecima)  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae 

Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Marcum,  Exiens  Efns 
Jhefus  de  finibus  Tyri,  uenit  per  Sydonem  ad  mare  Ga- 
lileae  :  et  rel.  90.  b. 

64.  Dominica  (Decima  tertia)  Sermo  ex  Commentario 
Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam, 
Beati  oculi  qui  vident  quae  uos  uidetis  :  et  rel.  92. 

65.  Dominica  Decima-quarti;  Sermo  ex  Commentario 

Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam, 
Dum  iret  d'ns  Jhefus  in  Jerufalem,  tranfibat  per  mediant 
Samariam  :  et  rel.  9^.  b. 

66.  Dominica  Decima  quinta ;  Sermo  ex  Commen¬ 
tario  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Ma- 
theum,  Nemo  poteft  duobus  Dominis  fervire  :  etrel.  95. 

67.  Dominica  Decima-fexta  ;  Sermo  ex  Commentario 
Venerabilis  Bedte  Prefbiteri.  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam, 
Ibat  d'ns  Jefus  in  Ciuitatem  quse  uocatur  Naim.  96. 

68.  Dominica  Decima-Septima  ;  Sermo  ex  Commen¬ 

tario  Venerabilis  Bedte  Prelbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum 
Lucam,  Cum  intraret  drfs  Jhefus  in  domum  cujufdam 
principis Pharifeorum,  Sabbato  :  etrel.  96.  b. 

69.  In  Jejunio  Septimi  Menfis,  Feria  quarta ;  Sermo 

ex  Commentario  Venerabilis  Bedte  Prefbiteri,  in  illud 
fecundum  Marcum  :  Refpondens  unus  de  turba,  dixit 
ad  dri  m  Jefum,  Magifter,  attuli  filium  meum  ad  te,  ha- 
bentem  Spiritum  mutum  :  et  rel.  97.  b. 

70.  Sermo  Beati  Leonis  Papa:  de  jujunio  Septimi 

Menfis.  pg. 

7 1.  Ejufdem,  unde  fupra.  99.  b. 

72.  Item,  Ejufdem  unde  fupra.  JOo. 

73.  Feria  Sexta  ;  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papre,  in 

illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Rogabat  dnm  Jhefum  quidam 
Pharifeus,  ut  manducaretcum  illo  :  etrel.  ioo.b. 

74.  Sabbato  ;  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij,  in  illud  fecun¬ 

dum  Lucam,  Arborem  fici  habebat  quidam  plantatain 
inVineafua:  etrel.  IOo. 

7.v  Dominica.  Decima-ottava  ;  Omelia  excerpta  de 
diverfis  Trattatoribus  ;  in  illud  fecundum  Matheum,  Pha- 
rifei  audientes  quod  dns  Jhefus  filentium  impofuiflet  Sadu- 
ceis:  etrel.  ic4.  b. 

76.  Dominica  Decima-nona  ;  Omelia  Beati  Johannis 

Chryfoftomi  Epifcopi  Conftantinopolitani,  in  illud  fecun¬ 
dum  Matheum,  Afcendens  diis  Jhefus  in  Nauiculum 
transfretauit  &  uenit  in  Ciuitatem  fuam  :  etrel.  105. 

7 7.  Dominica  Vicefima;  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


347 


Num.  1918. 

in  illud  fecundum  Matheum,  Simile  fa&um  eft  Regnum 
caelorum  homini  Regi,  qui  fecit  Nuptias  filio  fuo  :  et 
rel.  .  .  .  *°6- 

78.  Dominica  Vicefima-prima  ;  Omelia  Beati  Grego¬ 
rij  Papte,  in  illud  fecundum  Johannem,  Erat  quidam  Re- 
gulus  cujus  films  infirmabatur  Capharnaum :  et  rel.  1 10. 

79.  Dominica  Vicefima-fecunda  ;  Sermo  ex  Commen- 
tario  Beati  Jeronimi  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Mathe¬ 
um,  Simile  eft  Regnum  caelorum  homini  Regi,  qui  vo- 
luit  rationem  ponere  cum  Servis  fuis  :  et  rel.  1 1 1. 

80.  Dominica  Vicefima-tertia ;  Omelia  excerpta  de 

diuerfis  Tra&atoribus,  in  illud  fecundum  Matheum, 
Abeuntes  Pharifei  confilium  inierunt  ut  caperent  dnm 
Jefum  in  Sermone :  et  rel.  ibid. 

81.  Dominica  de  Aduentu  Domini ;  Omelia  excerpta 

de  diuerfis  Tra&atoribus  ;  in  illud  fecundum  Matheum, 
Cum  appropinquaflet  dris  Jhefus  Jerofolymis,  et  uenifiet 
Bethphage  ad  montem  Oliueti :  et  rel.  113. 

8  2 .  Dominica  Secunda ;  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae, 
in  illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Erunt  SignainSole,  &  Luna 
etStellis,  et  in  Terris  preffura  Gentium  :  etrel.  114- 

83.  Dominica  Tertia  ;  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae, 

in  illud  fecundum  Matheum,  Cum'  audiffet  Johannes  in 
uinculis  opera  Crifti :  et  rel.  11 5-  b. 

84.  Eeria  Quarta ;  Omelia  Venerabilis  Beds  Prefbyte- 

ri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Miffus  eft  Angelus  Gabri- 
hel  a  Deo,  in  Ciuitateni  G.  Ideas  cui  nomen  Nazareth  : 
et  rel.  b- 

85.  FeriaSexta;  Omelia  Venerabilis  Beds  Prefbiteri, 
in  illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Exurgens  Maria,  abijt  in 
montana  cum  feftinatione  in  ciuitatem  Juda  :  et  rel. 

1  j8.  b. 

86.  Sabbato;  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae,  in  illud 
fecundum  Lucam,  Anno  quinto  decimo  Imperij  lyberij 
Caefaris,  procurante  Pontio  Pilato  Judeam  :  et  rel. 

121.  b. 

87.  Dominica  Quarta  ;  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae, 
in  illud  fecundum  Johannem,  Miferunt  Judei  ab  Jerofoli- 
mis  Sacerdotes  et  Leuitas  ad  Johannem  :  et  rel.  1 24.  b. 

88.  In  Vigilia  Natiuitatis  Domini  ;  Omilia  Origems, 

in  illud  fecundum  Matheum,  Cum'  diet  defponfata  mater 
(<fni)  Jhefu  Maria  Jofeph  :  et  rel.  .  .  I2^' 

89.  In  die  Natiuitatis  Domini  noftri  Jhefu  Crifti,  Lec- 

tiones  tres.  _  I2^- 

90.  Sermo  Beati  Yfidori  Epifcopi  de  Nativitate  Do¬ 
mini.  t  .  128.  b. 

91.  Undefupra,  Sermo  Beati  Leonis  Papa;.  ibid. 

92.  (In  Vigilia  Nativitatis  Domini;  Epiftola  Leonis 

Papae  ad  Flauianum  Conftantinopolitanum  Epifcopum  de 
Incarnatione  Verbi.  129.  b. 

93.  Sermo  ejufdem  ;  unde  fupra.  _  132. 

94.  Sermo  Beati  Fulgentij  Epifcopi  ;  unde  fupra. 

132.  b. 

95.  Unde  fupra ;  Sermo  Beati  Maximi  Epifcopi. 

*33*  b- 

96.  (Sermo)  cujus  fupra.  J34-b. 

97.  De  eadem  Feftivitate,  Sermo  Beati  Auguftini  Epif- 

eopi.  *35- 

98.  Ejufdem,  undefupra.  _  _  136.  b. 

99.  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Beati  Ieronimi  Prefbiteri, 

in  illud  fecundum  Matheum,  Liber  generationis  d~ni  Jhe¬ 
fu  Crifti :  et  rel.  _  I3  7- b. 

100.  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papje,  in  illud  fecundum 

Lucam,  Exijt  edittum  a  Cefare  Augufto  ut  defcriberetur 
univerfus  orbis  :  et  rel.  .  *37- b- 

101.  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prelbiteri,  in  illud  fe¬ 

cundum  Lucam,  Paftores  loquebantur  ad  invicem,  tran- 
feamus  ufque  Bethleem :  etrel.  _  _  I3^‘ 

102.  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prelbiteri,  in  illud  fe¬ 
cundum  Johannem,  in  principio  erat  Verbum,  et  Ver- 
bum  erat  apud  Deum,  et  Deus  erat  Verbum.  et  rel. 

1 .39-  b.  _ 

103.  Sermo  Beati  Fulgentij  Epifcopi,  in  Natali  Sanfti 

Stephani  Proto-martyris.  *42* 


Num.  1918. 

1 04.  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Beati  leronymi ;  in  illud 

fecundum  Matheum,  Dicebat  dns  Jhefus  turbis  Judeo- 
rum,  et  Principibus  Sacerdotum  :  etrel.  *43*. 

105.  Sermo  Beati  Maximi  Epifcopi,  in  Natali  Santti 

Stephani  Proto-martyris.  143-  b* 

106.  In  Natali  Sandti  Johannis  Apoftoli  et  Evange- 

liftae  :  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prelbiteri,  in  illud  le- 
cundum  Johannem,  Dixit  dns  Jhefus  Petro,  fequere  me : 
et  rel.  144.  b. . 

107.  In  Natali  Sanctorum  Innocentium  ;  Sermo  Beati 

Johannis  Epifcopi.  *47* 

xo8.  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prelbiteri,  in  illud  fe¬ 
cundum  Matheum,  Angelus  domini  apparuit  in  Somnis 
Jofeph,  dicens.  Surge,  &  accipe  puerum  et  matreinejus: 
etrel.  147.  b. 

109.  Infra  Oftavas  :  Sermo  ex  Commentano  Vene¬ 
rabilis  Bedae  Prelbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Exijt 
Edidtum  a  Caefare  Augufto,  ut  defcriberetur  uniuerfus 
orbis.  .  *49* 

no.  Infra  Odtavas  ;  Sermo  ex  Commentano  Vene¬ 
rabilis  Beda;  Prelbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Paf- 
tore  loquebantur  ad  invicem,  tranfeamus  ufq;  Beth¬ 
leem:  et  rel.  I5I>  b* 

m.  Infra  Oftavas  ;  Omelia,  in  illud  fecundum  Jo¬ 
hannem,  In  Principio  erat  Verbum,  et  Verbum  erat  apud 
Deum,  et  Deus  erat  Verbum  :  et  rel.  152.  b. 

112.  Sermo  Beati  Maximi  Epifcopi  de  Nativitate  Do¬ 
mini  ;  Dominica  infra  Odtavas.  .  15^* 

1 1 3.  Sermo  ex  Commentario  Venerabilis  Bedae  Pref¬ 

biteri,  in  illud  fecundum  Lucam,  Erant  Pater  &  Mater 
dni  Jhefu  mirantes  fuper  ijs  qua;  dicebantur  de  illo  :  et 
rel.  *59-b. 

114.  Tra&atus  de  Circumdfione,  excerptus  ex  Com¬ 

mentario  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri  fuper  Lucam.  In 
Oiftavis  Domini.  #  160.  b. 

1 1 5.  Omelia  Venerabilis  Beda;  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fe¬ 

cundum  Lucam,  Poftquam  confummati  funt  dies  odlo, 
ut circuncideretur  puer,  uocatum  eft  nomen ejus  Jhefus: 
et  rel.  .  i6l-b- 

1 1 6.  Sermo  Beati  Maximi  Epifcopi,  de  Circuncifione 

Domini.  1  ^4- 

1 17.  In  Vigilia  Epiphanie  Domini,  Omelia  excerpta 

de  diverfis  Tradtatoribus.  l&4-  b. 

118.  In  die  Epiphaniae.  1^5\ 

1  x  9.  Sermo  Beati  Leonis  Papae,  in  Epiphania  Domini. 

165.  b. 

1 20.  Omelia  Beati  Gregorij  Papae,  in  illud  fecundum 

Matheum,  Cum  natus  effet  dns  Jhefus  in  Bethleem  Judae, 
in  diebus  Herodis  Regis  :  et  rel.  >66.  b. 

1 21.  In  Epyphania  Domini ;  Sermo  Beati  Leonis  Pa¬ 
pae.  1  ^  • 

122.  Ejufdem,  undefupra.  169* 

123.  Item  Ejufdem,  undefupra.  169.  b.^ 

124.  Unde  fupra,  Sermo  beati  Fulgentij  Epifcopi. 

170.  b. 

125.  Sermo  Beati  Maximi  Epifcopi,  unde  fupra.  172. 

126.  Cujus  fupra.  1 73* 

1 27.  Cujus  fupra;  Die  prima  Odtavarum.  173.  b. 

128.  Cujus  fupra  ;  Diefecunda.  174- 

129.  Cujus  fupra;  Die  tertia.  175* 

130.  Cujus  fupra  ;  Die  quarta.  175.  b. 

13 1.  Cujus  fupra  ;  Die  quinta.  176. 

132.  Cujus  fupra;  Diefexta.  _  176.  b. 

133.  Undefupra;  Sermo  Beati  Leonie  Papae,  Do¬ 
minica  infra  Odtavas.  I77* 

134.  Omelia  Venerabilis  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fecundum 

Matheum,  Venit  (Tns  Jhefus  a  Galilea  in  Jordanem,  ad 
Johannem,  ut  baptizaretur  ab  eo  :  et  rel.  178. 

135.  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fe¬ 

cundum  Johannem,  Vidit,  Johannes  d  m  Jhefum  veni- 
entem  ad  fe,  et  ait,  Ecce  agnus  Dei,  ecce  qui  tollit  pec- 
catamundi:  etrel.  180.  b. 

136.  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri,  in  illud  fe¬ 
cundum  Lucam,  Cum  fa&us  elfet  d'ns  Jhefus  anno- 

rum 


348 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1918 — 1920. 

i'um  duodecim,  afcendentibus  illis  Ierofolymam.  et  rel. 

1S2. 

137.  Dominica  ;  Omelia  Venerabilis  Bedae  Prefbiteri, 
inillud  fecundura  Juhannem,  Nuptiae  fattae  funt  in  Cha- 
na  Galileae,  et  erat  Mater  cTni  Jhefu  ibi :  et  rel  1 83.  b. 

138.  Dominica;  Omelia  Originis  ;  in  iilud  fecundum 

Matheum,  Cum  defcendiffet  d~ns  Jhefus  de  monte,  fecu- 
tae  funt  eum  turbae  multae  :  et  rel.  1  86. 

*39-  Dominica  ;  Omelia  Origems  ;  in  iilud  fecundum 
Matheum,  Afcendente  iTno  Jhefu  in  naviculam,  fecuti 
funt  eum  Difcipuli  ejus  :  et  rel.  (delink  abrupte)  189. 

I9I9- 

Codex  membranaceus,  litterifq;  grandiufcuKs  exaratus  • 
in  quo  reperiuntur, 

1.  Berengari,  Berengaudi  (five  utdodiflimo  D.  Tho¬ 

ms  Iamefio  placuit)  Berengwiddi  cujufdam  Expoi  tio 
Libn  Apocalypfcos  D.  Joannis,  a  plurimis  perperam  S 
Ambrofio  tributum.  r 

2.  Commentum  fuper  Canticum  Canticorum  :  quod 

ab  his  verbis.  ^ 

_  Incipit  Salomon  infpiratus  divino  Spiritu,  compo- 
fmt  hunc  libellum  de  Nuplijs  Ecdefiae. 

Here  beginneth  n  Catalogue  of  the  Heraldical 
and  other  MSS.  bought  of  the  Executors  of 
Randle  Holme,  late  Citizen  and  Armes- 
Pamter  of  Chester. 


A  Book  in4to  confiding  of  divers  Trafts  and  (mole 
P^ers  bound  up  togeth  r,  and  on  the  back  entituled 
a  Mize-booke.  !l  hey  are, 

1.  A  Note  of  Moneys  payd  for  Rents,  A.  D.  1597. 

*  ■^^"e^"rTlen^  f°r  Claverton,  modern.  1.  b 

3.  Number  of  Hearths  &  Stoaues  within  the  County- 

:  the  Annual1  bums  them,p2on 
4-  A  parffett  Inventory  of  the  impolments  (i.  e.  Imple- 
rnents  or  Houfehold  goods)  in  the  howfle  wherin  lett 
(1.  e.  late)  Thornes  Bedford  dewlled  ;  9  June  1  cS  ? 

5.  I  able  of  principal  Trafts  contained  in  this  Book. 

6  Series  Jufficiariorum  ac  Vicecomitum  Cedrenfiut, 
ab  A.D.  1216.  ufq;  ad  Annum  22  Regni  Regis  Henrici 

r7‘  ,A  Catologue  of  the  Chamberlaines  of  the 
County  of  Cheflnre  i  col'efted  carefully  fr„mlhe  b 
rang  of  Edward  in.  Raigne,  out  of  the  Records  o/the 

ttZ “oVold^ edsd  brf0re  thM  ty"K-  “  1  ^ 

been  done  by'one  ofThe'Hofme’s'famiM^  ^  “  haVe 

8.  A  true  Catologue  of  tbe  Sheriffes  of  Chelhire  ■ 

colleaed  out  of  old  Deeds:  and  fince  the  begineing  of 
Edward  1H.  Raigne  (Sc  feme  before)  carefully  «!mled 
thefame!^  RK°rdS  °f ' ““  E)tchKul“°r  County,  by 

aboveLtiL'netri  ^  ^ 

9.  The  proportion  of  the  Mize,  through  .1.  1.1 

war'd  tv*"'  °f  thC  M"e  °f  Che“re>  “  P*  to  K.M. 
^CeftnraECClefi™etCa‘’dl™-->«cC^. 

Man^lnf  lSvPaid  Chtlht 

One^Tem  ^  of  Chedrlre-Mizes^m 

14.  A  Table  fhewing  the  Proportion  of  every  Hundred 


Num.  192c - 1922. 

a  eh^T’  for  T^Summe  'sha*=rer>  under  a  Mize 

rill  3  9  '  I9S- od0M  upon  the  fame  County  in  gene 
Inn'oTfiyl  CM£"y  "P-  b?  ThonJjaeSn, 
15.  Lift  of  Chelhue-Gentlemen,  ann.  24  Hem'vm. 

eodem.N°mina  Coroi“torum  in  Cotnitatu  Cefirie,  ann. 

1  I7T-iN°!U,iS:  fuper  Bre,i  de  reftitutione  Temramtto 
dam  Ehzabethe  Vaudrey,  anno  eodem.  "Z  b 

EdflLy,  A'  D.Ts9°o  ‘  ^  H“ndreds  “f  & 

19.  Affeffinent  of  Chelhire  Gentry  (Free-holdetf '?! 

toward  payment  of  the  Firft  Subfidv  gLitedin the pj 
Itament  begun  ,6  January  anno  23Eliz.  .5 

20.  AlMTment  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Chefter,  for  & 

toward  payment  of  two  of  the  Subfidies  granted  by  Par 
Lament,  ann.  1 5  Car.  11.  6  °yrar- 

anno' Fre£j,°lders  b  North-TVitch-HuncW. 
A.  D.'  fsofT&t  °ff0nle  FamilPbook  ufDHburfements, 

dred3;  alTfil 

69. 

1921. 

A  paper-Book  in  4to,  opening  long-ways  :  &  confiftino- 
chiefly  of  the  Iaft  Randle  tfolnJs  cIlledL  rdS 
to  Letters  &  Hand- Writings.  “ 

wig£PllCatl°n  0ffome  Latin  Names  °f  Meafures  & 

a.  Of  onrEnglilh  Gold- Weights.  iby 

3.  Part  of  a  Letter  directing  Randle  Holme  to  diveis 

Authors,  who  treat  of  Alphabets  &  Abbreviations.  - 

4-  Alphabet  called  EngUfl,  or  Norman,  Britift,  a‘nd 
Saxon  (ill  done,  &  of  little  ufe) 

5-  Alphabet  of  Letters  of  fundrylltapes,  bothMamf 

cu  es  A-  Mniufculest  colIeQed,  as  it  may  feem  front 
old  Deeds,  &  written  books.  *  1 

,j'2d  FrB“rtS’  'vit,11.fom=  Abbreviations  found^n 
Latin  Manufcripts,  explained.  , 

7.  Copies  of  tome  old  Infiruments,  taken  by  Jh 
Hotoie  ;  who  imitated  their  feveral  Hands,  as  welfas  hi 

Ai;bHtbltdchLDz:rdd'book;  withR™ia  * ««« 

9.  The  aunciant  Englilh  Charaflersfi.  enhe  princinal 

toto’^lp^  “Idp™ad  Books!  sri 

t  o.  Saxon  Charafters  (1.  e.  an  Alphabet  not  well  &£) 

It.  Printed  Paper,  Ihewing  the  Priming-Letter  .wef- 
fary  for  Priming  m  the  Irilh  Language.  “ , 

.  1  2*  Explication  of  the  common  Irifh  jugated  Letters- 
m  part  of  a  Letter  to  Mr.  Holme.  J  ‘  o  ,  ’ 

WrimrsFTib1  &  Alphabets,  taken  from  printed 

oT™r;%u.?utoor“.,S’  Tri,hCmiUS’  ^ 

and  S^ds^yt,’  *  f°mt"'hat  °f ‘he  ^ 

written.^  h"1'  lrifh  P°em  °f  C6Sbd"  m'c  Puertily 
Enghlh^Hand.1'1^1  Let,ers  -d  Jugations, 

77- 

A  •  1922. 

paper-Book  in  4to  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  A  very  old  Armes-book,  chiefly  ofEngliflj  Families 
pamted  ;  with  mod  of  their  refpective  Names  written 
above  them,  but  much  abufed  5c  torn. 
at  2‘  Some  Families  Armes  lately  tricked  on  frefh  Paper; 

modeit™"'  °f  Cmain  Fara!'ieS  ln  BWon.'  fio.to'iom 


4-  Certi- 


Bibliothecae  Hadcunoe 


34-0 


Kum.  1922 — "926. 

4.  Certificates  of  the  Service  d.  ne  to  the  Parliament  by 
divers  of  C.oll.  Hciuy  iVLynwaring’s  Regiment oiTTHe  ; 
temp.  R-  Caro.li  x.  A  Copie  imperf;  °2- 

1923. 

A  thin  paper  Bock,  in  4to,  wherein  is  contained, 

A  Treat iic  oi  the  Practice  of  Heraldry,  in  Wclfh; 
written  by  Thomas  Chaloner  of  Chcfter,  A.  D.  1594- 

1924. 

Codex  membranaceus  et  amiquus,  in  410,  quo  complec- 
tiintur, 

1.  Liber  deVita  et  Miraculis,  recnon  et  de  Tranfitu 

BeatiPatrisCuthbertiLindisfarnenfisEpifcopi,  per  Bedam 
Prefbyterum  compilatus  profaice.  1. 

Hoc  in  exemplari,  defxderantur  Capita,  xli.  xliii. 
xx.iv.  XLV.  XLVI. 

2.  Tra&atulus,  cui  prsifigitui  hujufmodi  Rubrica, 

Quomodo  in  per  grini  habitu,  a  minillro  Elfredi  panem 
drvifum  Cuthbertus  accepit,  qui  poftea  integer  inventus 
eft.  Et  quomodo  idem  Elfredus  ipfo  adjuvantc,  Rex 
effettus  eft.  .  f?- 

Sequuntur  et  alias  Narrationes  Legendary  de  Mira¬ 
culis  ejufdem  Confefforis,  quarum  'liiulos  deferibere, 
haud  opera:  pretiumduxi. 

3.  Quomodo  poft  quadringentos  decern  &  o£lo  annos, 
corpus  B  ati  C.uthberti  incorruptum  fit  inventum ;  et 
in  novam  Ecclefiam  tranftatum  1  Ic.  A.  D.  1 104.)  .  62. 

4.  Narratio  de  Miraculo  in  duos  fratres  Clericos  de 

Norwegia  illato,  qui  recuperante  Sanitatis  gratia  ad  Sanc¬ 
tum  Cudbertum  (i.  e.  Dunelmum)  conveneiant ;  aliena 
manu.  _  .  .  7°- 

Hujufce  Codicis  lettor  jam  ohm  fuit  diligentillmius 
Ricardus  Bell,  Ecclefise  Dunelmenfis  Prior,  dum  rerum 
potiretur  R.  Edwardus  iv.  qui  etiam  plurima,  per  toium 
fere  codicem,  manu  fua  notavit. 


1925. 

A  Book  in  4fo,  opening  long-ways,  and  confiding  of 

divers  Heraldical  Tracts  bound  together  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  Order :  viz. 

1 .  f  he  Poore  Man’s  Petition  to  the  King,  James  1 .  for 

amending  fundry  iuppofed  Grievances  both  in  Chnrch 
and  State.  #  _  *•  b. 

2.  Defcents  of  many  Chefhire  Families.  2.  b.  &  52. 

3.  Names  of  the  Knights  made  by  the  Kinge,  A.  D. 

1603.  46- 

4.  Knights  of  the  Bath,  the  15th  of  July,  1603.  50. 

5.  Names  of  Knights  &  Gentlemen,  who  were  for¬ 

merly,  perhaps,  put  upon  Juries  in  the  County  of  Lan- 
cafter.  .  54*  b. 

6.  Defcents  and  Pedegrees  of  many  Lancafliire  Fami¬ 
lies.  56-  b. 

7.  Defcents  of  Chefhire  Families.  103. 

In  this  Tra£t  I  alfo  find, 

8  The  Maner  &  Order  of  Her  Majefties  &  Her  Knights 
of  the  Garter,  vfed  in  the  Chapeli  at  Grenewyche,  vpon 
St.  George’s  Daye  lafte  pafte  (i.  e.A.  D.  1591-)  1 10.  b. 

9.  At  the  End,  are  two  Tables,  referring  to  the  Coates, 
and  to  the  Pedegrees  fett  down  in  this  Booke,  both  of  the 
Hand  of  Randle  Holme  the  laft. 


J  926. 

A  paper  Book  in  4to  (imperfect  at  the  Beginning}  yet 
feeming  to  be  a  fort  of  Re.ifter,  wherein  many  Angle 
Papers'  relating  to  the  publick  Bufinefs  of  the  County 
of  Lancafter  are  fairly  exemplified,  or  entered.  They 
are, 

1 .  Imperfect  Certificate  (as  it  feemeth}  of  the  numbers 

of  able  Men  to  be  furnifhed  by  the  feveral  Townes,  Vil¬ 
lages,  Hamletts,  &c.  throughout  the  feveral  Hundreds  of 
Lancafliire  ;  temp.  Reg.  Eli z.  >• 

2.  A  General.  Mufter  certyfied  within  the  Countie  of 

Lancafter,  in  Januarie  1 559.  4.  b. 

3.  The  Numbers  of 'l)y  my  lances,  Iiorfes,  Geldings 
Cat.  Haul.  Vol.  II. 


Kum. 


y 

1920. 


for  I.ighte  Horfemen,  Armour,  Municioil,  and  Weapons 
put  in  Readyncs  within  ihe  County  of  Lancafter,  as  well 
by  force  of  the  Statute.  as  grailnied  of  good  Will ;  certi¬ 
fy. d  vnto  Her  Majefties  Hon.  Privie  Counfell,  conjoyned 
with  the  Generali  Mullers  by  force  of  the  Firfte  and  Se- 
conde  Coiqmiffions  of  the  faidde  Mvfters  in  Augufte 
ann.  16.  Eliz.  4-b- 

4.  Cevtiiicare  of  a  Generali  Mufter  of  the  able  Men, 

both  furnifhed  by  force  of  the  Statute,  as  of  others  un- 
a /ined;  taken  within  the  Countie  of  Lancafter,  ann. 
16  Eliz.  20. 

5.  Declaration  of  the  Auncient  Tenlhe  and  Fifteenthe 

chargeable  within  the  Countie  of  Lancafter  ;  with  a  Note 
alfo  of  the  Dud  unions  fett  downe  by  Sir  Peter  Leighe  and 
btlicrs,  Commidu mers  for  the  fame  Deductions,  by  Vertue 
&  Force  of  a  Commiflion  to  them  dire&ed  in  the  23th 
yeaie  of  K.  Henrye  vi.  with  aNoate  alfo  of  the  Remaine; 
and  Declaration  of  the  certen  Tenths  and  Fifteenths  now 
payable  throughout  the  faidde  Countie.  21. 

6.  The  Appointement  Ee  Taxacon  of  200  Sowldiers 
beinge  all  Archers,  leuied  within  the  Countie  of  Lan¬ 
cafter,  to  ferve  the  Queencs  Majefty  vnder  the  Conduc¬ 
tion  of  Sir  Robert  Wcrfeley  Knighte,  and  Edward 
Tyldefley  Efq;  A.  D.  1556.  et  ann.  3^4  Phil.  &  Mar. 

*3- 

7.  A  Taxacon  of  400  Men,  within  this  County  of 

Lancafter,  to  f  rve  the  Queen’s  Majefty  at  Barwicke, 
vnder  ihe  Conduit  of  Sir  John  Sowthworth  Kt.  21  De- 
cemb.  1559-  _  *bid. 

8.  Souldiers  (of  Lancafliire)  appointed  to  ferve  the 

Queen’s  Majefty,  vnder  the  Conduition  of  Thomas  But¬ 
ler  Efq;  Ec  others,  ann.  2  Eliz.  1559-  28.  b. 

9.  Ihe  Taxacon  &  .Appointment  of  50  Men  into  Ire- 

lande  •,  within  the  Coimty  of  Lancafter  ;  29  Marcii  Anno 
1566.  _  Ibid. 

10  The  Taxacion  of  the  Hundrches  within  the  Coun¬ 
tie  of  L  incalter,  tor  the  makinge  of  1  :o  Sowldiers  into 
Irelande  ;  furnifhed  3  day  of  Febr.  Anno  16  Eliz.  29. 

1 1 .  The  Taxacon  of  the  Hundrethes  within  the  c  oun- 
tie  of  Lancafter.  for  the  makinge  of  6  Mafons.  6  Car¬ 
penters,  £:  1 3  Labourers,  to  haue  bene  fent into  Ireland, 
in  June  1576.  29-  b* 

1  2.  A  Taxacon  made  within  the  Countie  of  Lancafter 
12  Marcii,  576.  for  the  mufteringe,  leuyinge  &  fetting 
fourthe  of  1 2  able  men,  to  ferve  Her  Majefty  in  Ireland, 
vnder  Mr.  Egerton,  as  Carpenters;  and  other  12  able 
men  to  feru;  there  alfoe,  as  Mafons.  30. 

13.  A  Rate  &  Taxacon  of  300  able  Men,  levied 

within  the  County  of  Lancafter,  by  Commiflion  vnder  the 
Greate  Seale  ;  with  Inftrudions  alfo  for  the  mufteringe 
&  trayninge  of  them  Ten  dayes  euerie  Yeare  ;  withe 
the  Chardges  of  there  Furniture  &  Trayninge.  Aflefled, 
18  Augvfte  1  577.  3  !* 

14.  A  Rate  &  Taxacon  of  200  able  Men,  levied 
within  the  Countie  of  Lancafter,  in  July  1386.  by  War¬ 
rant  vnder  Her  Majefties  Hande,  and  to  be  transported 
into  Irelande,  there  to  ferve  under  Henrie  Stanley,  Efq. 


15.  Noteof  theFyfteenthe  ofSalftrd  Hundrethe.  33. 

16.  The  Furnifliinge  1 5  Sowldiers  into  Irelande,  within 
the  Hundrede  of  Salforde:  accordinge  to  an  Order  & 
Agreement  fett  downe  at  Manchefter,  30  Marcii  1587. 

.34- 

17.  Taxacon  of  the  Hundrethes  in  the  Countie  of 

Lancafter,  for  the  makinge  readie  of  200  Men,  to  feme 
vpon  an  Howres  warning;  30  Januar.  1577.  34-  b. 

18.  A  Subdivicion  in  the  Hundreth  of  Salforde,  of 

the  aforefaid  Number  therto  afiigned;  acccording  to 
auncyent  Divicions.  35- 

19.  That  in  Anno  1 550,  4  die  Januarii,  there  was  made 

into  Scotlande,  in  Lancafliire,  300  Men.  56.  b 

20.  How,  8bebr.  1573.  there  was  made  into  Ireland} 

out  of  Lancafliire,  100  Men.  ibid. 

21.  How,  10  Febr.  1 577.  300  Men  were  levied  in 

4  U  Lancafliire 


353 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1926. 


Lancafture,  by  vertue  of  Her  Majefties  Letter  written 
to  therle  of Derbie,  the  Sheriffe,  &  Juftices  ofPeace.  ibid. 

22.  That  one  other  Letter  towchinge  the  fame  mat¬ 

ters,  was  written  by  the  Lords  of  the  Counfdl,  1  3  Jan. 

1577*  .  #i  __  37. 

23.  That  20  Marcii  1586.  there  was  made  into  Ire¬ 
lande  out  of  .Lancafhirc,  ico  Men.  ibid. 

24.  How  in  19  Eliz.  there  was  appointed  200  Soldiers 
to  be  trayned. 

25.  How,  200  Soldiers  were  to  have  been  made  for 
Irelande. 

2 6.  llow,  100  Soldiers  are  to  befurnilhed  into  Ire- 

lande.  ibid. 

27.  An  Agreement  between  S:r  Edmond  Trafford,  & 
others,  as  a  Proportion  between  the  leveral  Hundreds, 
Ill  iurmthing  or  levj'ng  Men  or  Money,  for  the  public 
Service  ;  fat  dmvnc,  30  Marche,  Anno  eg  Eliz.  37  b 

28.  ]  he  Prefenement  ofthe  Jurats  of  Salford -Hundred 

concerning  the  conveying  of  Horl'es  &  Mares  out  of  this 
Realme;  &  towchi  igc  tb  ncroafe  &  breeding  of  Horfes, 
Geldings  &  Mares.  o 

29.  Harts,  Geldingcs,  Armour,  Weapon,  lykewyfe 

prefented  by  the  fatd  Jurats.  tS.  b. 

1  I"11™®0™  g™et>  28  Augulle,  Anno  I  3S3.  by 

the  I..  Burghley  &  others,  the  Queens  Majefties  General! 
Comimifyoners,  for  the  Mufteringe  of  Horfemen,  h  for 
the  Ordering  of  Brcedinge  of  Horfes,  &c.  in  all  Places 
within  the  Realme. 

t-t  3  j  Somn,ie  to  becollefled  A.  U.  1 587.  in  Salford- 
Hundred,  towards  the  furnifhinge  of  15  Souldiers.  46.  b. 

32.  Inventory  of  the  Furniture  necefl'ary  for  72  choife 
rootmen.  J  ' 

Here  iS  alfo  the  Rate  laid  upon  the  faid  Hundred 
upon  that  occafion. 

33-  Towchinge  the  Provicion  of  Oxen  for  her  Ma- 
jelties  Howfhould,  witliin  theCouiitie  ofLancafter  A  I) 

*583-  _  .g  / 

34-  A  Taxacon  of  the  feuerall  Iiundrethes  within  the 
Ccuntie  ofLancafter,  for  a  Somme  to  be  levied  for  the 
Di  (charge  of  the  Hid  County  of  the  Provifion  of  Oxen, 

,  J ,or  her  Majefties  Houfeholdj  made  8  Januarie,  anno 
26  Eliz.  ’ 

r  V'  ,.T,he  Kames  ruc:h  Perfonnes  as  are  appointed9 to 
fynde  hghte  Horfemen,  within  the  Countie  ofLancafter 
furniihed. 

36.  Warrant  from  Q,  Elizabeth  to  the  Sheriffe  fAif. 
ttces  of  the  Peace  in  Lancalhire,  for  the  fpeedy  levying 
of  zoo  able  Men  furniihed,  to  ferve  in  Ireland,  under 
the  Command  of  Edmunde  Trafforde  Efq;  dat.  i6Au- 
guft,ij!,4.  _  1  „b- 

Hereunto  is  added  the  Proportion  of  Men  &  Money 
to  be,  thereupon,  rafted  in  each  Hundred,  S  c 

.  37-  Warrant  oftheDeputie-Lieurenants  for  the  Levy¬ 
ing  72  Men  in  the  Hundred  of  Salford  ;  being  its  Propor. 
uon  of  500  Men,  to  be  rafted  in  the  County  :  with  an 
Inventory  of  rite  Furniture  to  be  provided.  Yeoven  22 
December  1587.  5, 

38.  Letter  from  Sir  John  Byron,  Deputy-Lieutmant 
the'ffif'd1  Df sbp;’  n°  *e  Jl,llices  of  the  Peace  within 
Men  r  n  /  0ld’  tor  ,hefP“dy  levying, 5  able 
Men,  furmlhed,  dat,  20 Marche,  1586.  b 

39-  better  from  the  Lords  of  the  Council  to  the  Juf- 
ttces  ofthe  Peace  within  the  Hundred  of  Salford  ;  requir¬ 
ing  them  to  make  choife  of  30  able  Perfons,  tobefoon 
tmbarqued  or  the  Queens  Service  in  Ireland  ready  fur. 

,“8t ,he  c“  *  **•  wiu.stLiey. 

mT  -f,'0ra  Q-  Elizab'*h  for  levying  3So4'abie 

Men  within  die  county  ofLancafter,  toward  filLr  “ 
the  decayed  Bandes  111  Ireland.  Gcven,  8  Nov.  1^82 

41.  Precept  of  Ferdinando  Lord  Straunge,  reqkrL 
3uftiees  of  Peace  within  the  Hundred  of  Salford  to 
luuimon  all  Gentlemen  within  that  Precina,  Jiauinge  any 


Num.  1926'. 

Lande,  tb  appearc  before  him  at  Prefton,  at  a  certain 
Day  ;  Her  Majefties  Service  requiring  the  fame.  Yeouen 
4  Julie  1588.  s  ’ 

42  Taxation  for  the  watching  of  the  Beacon  at  Ry- 
ven-Parke,  from  10  July,  Ann.  30  Eliz.  to  30  of  neat 
September.  g  ^ 

43.  Taxacion  in  Manchefter-Divifion,  toward  watch. 

SmCroSal  L*1™**'  “* 

r  I  t  Ibid. 

44.  Letter  to  t  ie  Lords  of  the  Privy-Council,  to  the 

Lord  Straunge,  the  Bid, op  ofChefter,  &  the  reft  ofthe 
Jufticcs  of  the  I  eace  in  the  Counties  of  Lancafter  and 
C.'iefter  :  ft miewhat  blaming  them  for  their  Negligence  in 
not  ftntlly  obfervmg  the  Queen's  Proclamation  for  fup. 
prellinge  certen  fedicious  &  traitorous  Bookes  &  Labe’ 
les,  and  due  Pumfhment  of  Aufttors,  Spreaders  abrade 
and  Deteyners  of  them.  And  moreover,  requiring  them 
to  exert  themfelves  to  the  utmoft,  upon  occafion  of  the 
dilperfing  a  mofte  malicious,  falfe,  and  fclaunderous 
Libel,  publftlied  agatnft  the  Earl  ofLeycefter.  dat  -a 
Juaei5S5.  4  ’ 

45;  Letter  from  Robert  Dudley  Eatl  of  Leycefte/^o 
the  ShenffSr  Jufticcs  ofPeace,  o/the  County  ’of  L^’caf- 
rtr.  dat.  S  Febr.  1387.  defmng  them  to  make  diligent 
bearch,  ^  Inqmrie  afwcll  of  all  Diforders  &  Mifdemean- 
om-s  committed  by  anie.  Purveioure  or  Carrer  of  Coml 
million  for  any  Provificion  for  the  Service  of  Her  Maief- 
ties  I-iowfe  :  as  alfo  what  Sommes  of  Money  any  Perfoii 
or  Perfonnes  can  clayme  by  Bill,  Tayle,  or  Debentur  for 
ame  1  rovmcions  whatfoeuer,  from  the  15th  Yere  of  her 
Majefties  Ragne,  untill  this  prefent,  but  mofte  efpeciallv 
tor  theis  tower  Yeares  pafte.  Further  requiring  2  or  \ 

0.‘  the™  tof  «Pay«  before  him  being  Lord  Stuerde,  & 
the  relte  of  the  Green-Cloth,  to  offer  reafonable  Service 
vnlo  her  Majelue,  byway  of  Compoficion  of  fuche  Pro- 
vicions  as  their  County  doth  beft  yield.  g0  ^ 

.  4n6.'  ,Pre7eP'  of  H™7  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby,  dire'aed 
to  Richard  Brereton  Efq  ;  requiring  him  to  bring  his 
D)  nylaunce  fnfficiently  furniihed,  to  Northwitch,  there 
to  be  muftered  on  a  certain  Day.  dat.  25  Sept.  ijSj. 

47  ■  Precept  of  Ferdinando  Lord  Strange,  to  the  Juftkes 
off  race  widen  the  Hundred  of  Salford  :  30  April  ,  5S8. 
Requmng  them  to  receive  and  lend  to  him  forthwith. 
Half  of  the  Money  remaking  in  the  Conftable  hands 
whicli  was  gathered  within  the  Hundreth  of  Salford  for 
the  lurnilhmg of  Souldiers  appointed forScotlande.  6-’.  b 
48.  Letter  of  Henry  Eal  of  Derby,  to  his  Deputy 
Lieutenants,  as  it  feems  :  26  February,  , 586.  written 
upon  occafion  of  the  feverall  Aduertifements  of  the  Pre 
paration  in  fundry  Pans  beyond  the  Seas,  of  Forayne 
Forces  to  muade  this  Realme.  And  therefore,  commaund- 
mg  them  to  put  their  Armour  &  Weapons  in  a  ready- 
next  March'hCir  r™nimiltS  &  Followers,  by  20  of  the 

49-  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Prefton  to  the  Juftices3of 
Peace  within  the  Hundrethe  of  Salford,  n  Ian.  ,cSa 
requiring  them  to  fend  unto  him  the  aoo  Men  lately  or- 
dered  to  be  rafted,  that  out  of  them  he  might  chooll  30 
Men  furniihed,  to  be  employed  in  her  Majefties  Service 
within  her  Graces  Realm  of  Irelande.  6-,  ^ 

5°.  Lettei r  of  Henry  Earl  of  Derby,  to  all  the  Jufticis 
26FeebK  &  2uorum,  within  the  Comity  of  Lancafter, 
f, lifted  •S8'-1  req'-1Inng  them  to  fee  the  faid  County 
urmlhed  \\nh  Petronells  (from  which  they  had  defired 
to  be  excufed)  berore  20  of  the  next  March  j  it  bein? 
.adverty-fed,  and  that  of  Creadit,  that  Foraine  Forces 
aie  madereadaie  in  fundrie  places,  to  inuade  this  Realm. 

•  e  L.e'Kr  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  CoumtlMn 
the  Sheriffe  8c  Juftka^  ofPeace  within  the  Countie  of 
Lancafter  ,7  Auguft,  1,84.  concerning  the  railing 
wo  Hundred  able  Men  tor  the  Queens  Service  in  Ireland® 
then  Furniture,  and  Conduft-money  :  Promiling  that’ 

'  thefe 


Bibliothecae  F-Jarleianse, 


Num.  1926. 

thefe  Souldiers  f hall  not  be  commanded;  or  turned  over 
to  any  Stranger,  in  England  or  in  Ireland  ;  and  willing 
the  faiel  Sheriff!*,  &c.  to  provide  themlelves  with  as  much 
Armour,  & c  as  that  which  they  ihould  thus  fend  away; 
that  there  might  be  no  lack  in  the  County.  65! 

52.  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Councd,  17  Auguft 

.  .  .  .  about  levying  of  Horlemen,  or  their  equi¬ 

valent  in  Money,  for  this  prefente  Service  in  Irelande, 
upon  the  Lancafhire  Recufants.  Lettinge  them  vnder- 
ftande,  that  in  cafe  her  Majeftie  (hall  fynde  them  con¬ 
formable,  they  fnall  geve  her  Caufe  to  vfe  them  with 
more  Fauor,  and  to  qualifye  fome  parte  of  th’  extretnitie 
that  otherwyfe  the  La  we  dothe  laye  vpon  them.  67. 

53.  Precept  of  Ferdinando  Lord  Strange*  to  the  Juftices 
of  Peace  within  the  Hundred  of  Salford,  q  .Tulv  158'. 
willing  them  to  require  the  Gentlemen  and  Free-holders 
to  attend  him  at  Warrington  16  of  the  faid  July,  and  not 
at  Prcfton  on  13,  as  he  had  before  commanded.  6S.  b. 

54.  Letter,  or  Mandate  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  Henry 

Earl  of  Derby,  or  in  his  abfence,  to -the  Lord  Strange. 
Geven,  18  June  1588.  Signifying,  that  forafmuch  as  the 
King  of  Spain’s  Intention  not  only  of  invadinge.  but  of 
makinge  a  Conqucfte  alfoe  of  this  Realm,  is  nowe  con- 
llantlie  moore  &  mnore  dete&edd  &  confirmed,  as  a  mat¬ 
ter  fully  refolved  on  an  Armye  alreadie  beinge  putt  to 
the  Seas  for  that  purpofe)  She  required  him  fourthwith 
to  call  together  the  befte  furt  of  Gentlemen  under  his 
Lieutenancie  ;  and  to  declare  vnto  them,  that  confideringe 
theis  great  Preparacions  6c  Threatningts  nowe  burfte  out 
in  Ahtion  vpon  the  Seacs,  tendinge  to  purpofe  Conqueft; 
wherin  euerie  Mans  perticuler  Eftate  is  in  the  higheft 
Degree  to  be  tutched,  in  refpecte  of  Cuntrev,  Libertie, 
Wvfi'e,  Children,  Lands,  Lyffe,  and  (that  wlvchis  efpe- 
ciallie  to  be  regarded  for)  the  Prefervacion  of  the  true  & 
fyncere  Religion  of  Chrifte :  She  looked  that  the  molt 
part  of  them  fhould  haue,  vpon  this  inftant  extraorilinarie 
Occafion,  a  Iardger  Proportion  of  Furniture  both  for 
Hoifemen  &  Footemen,  but  efpecially  Horfemen,  then 
hath  bene  ceriifyed.  ibid. 

55.  Precept  of  Sir  John  Byron  to  the  Juftices  of  Peace, 

requiring  them  to  receyve  fo  much  of  the  Countrey  Money 
by  them  affeffed,  towards  the  furnilhinge  of  500  Soul- 
diers  within  Lancafhire  for  her  Majefties  Service  in  Scot¬ 
ian  de,  as  may  ferve  to  buye  them  Armour  &  Weapon, 
&c.  70. 

56.  Another  from  Sir  John  Byron  &  Sir  Richard  Shir- 
burne,  to  the  fame ;  31  Marche,  158S.  requiring  them, 
&  all  other  Gentlemen,  &c.  within  the  Hundred  or  Sal¬ 
ford,  to  be  at  Prefton  24  of  the  nexte  Aprill,  wiih  all 
Dimilaunccs,  Petronelles,  Light  Horfes,  or  any  parte 
of  the  25  Dymylaucts  lafte  irupofed  the  Countie  of  Lan¬ 
cafter  for  her  Majefties  Service  towards  Scotlande  7c.  b. 

57.  Another,  from  the  fame,  to  ihe  fame,  &  of  the 

fame  Date;  appointing  a  Mufter  of  the  Footmen  of  the 
faid  Hundred,  to  be  had  at  Wygan,  on  26  of  the  next 
Aprill :  and  more  particularly,  of  thofe  Souldiers  which 
were  lately  apointed  for  her  Majefties  Service  into  Scot¬ 
lande,  with  their  Furniture,  6cc.  71. 

58.  Letter  of  ihe  Judges  Clenche  and  Rodes,  to  Sir 

John  Byron,  &c.  upon  occafion  of  the  exceflive  Number 
of  Ale-howfcs  &  Bakers  in  Manchefter.  Requiring  them 
to  rtpayre  thither ;  to  difeharge  fuch  as  they  ihould  find 
ufelcls ;  and  to  preferybe  certen  Orders  to  be  obferved 
for  fuche  as  they  fhould  allowe  of.  71.  b. 

59.  Letter  of  Ferdinando  Lord  Strange,  to  the  Juftices 

of  Peace  within  the  Hundred  of  Salford,  21  June  1588. 
Requiting  them  to  caufe  to  be  made  readye  all  fuche 
Beacons  as  were  next  adjoyning  vnto  them,  and  the 
Walche  to  be  kept  at  euerie  one  of  them.  Alio,  to  or¬ 
der  the  Cunftables  to  take  all  y  die  &  vagi  ante  perfonnes 
within  their  Townfhippes  &  Hamletts ;  and  to  take  & 
examine  all  Newes  6c  Tale-Carriers,  &  other  infolent 
Perfons  that  fhould  rayfe  anic  Rumours  amongft  the  L  om- 
mon  people.  72. 


Num.  1926. 

60.  letter  of'  Richard  Holland  Sheri  tfe  of  Lancafhire, 

to  the  Juftices  of  Peace  within  the  Hundred  of  Salford, 
28  November  1582.  requiring  them,  to  attend  the  Earl 
of  Derby,  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the  County,  at  Ormef- 
kirke,  to  confider  of  Yieanes  to  rayfe  a  certen  Number 
of  (ufficient  &  able  Souldiers,  for  the  Queens  Service  in 
the  Realmeof  Ireland.  72.  b. 

61.  Letter  of  the  Lordes  of  the  Councel,  to  the  She- 

riile  &  Juftices  of  Peace,  within  the  Countie  of  Lancafter, 
2  >  June  1  -82.  letting  forth  that  the  obftinacie  and.  evil! 
Example  of  the  principal!  Perfons  Recufants,  in  everye 
Countie,  doth  great  lie  incorage  th ’inferior  foarte  to  con- 
tyn ue  in  theire  Dilbbedience  :  and  therefore  their  Lord- 
ftiips  direct  tv  appoint  a  Method  how.  the  faid  Principal! 
I  unions ;  beinge  of  the  qualitic  or  Gentlemen  and  vpwards, 
and  Ladies  &  eiitlewomen-Widdi  wes)  be  ymmediatelie 
proceeded  withall,  vpone  the  Statute  for  the  retayninge 
of  her  Majefties  Subjects  in  theire  due  Obedience,  to 
Com  ittion  6c  Outlawry.  73. 

62.  Letter  of  Sir  John  Byron  to  ihe  Juftices  of  Peace 

within  the  Hundred  of  Salfi.'rde,  28  February,  1587,  re¬ 
quiring  them  to  meet  at  Manchefter,  together  with  all 
Gentlemen,  Freehoulders  &  others  chargable  as  well  with 
any  parte  of  the  25  Dimilances  lafte  impofed  vpon  them, 
■as  with  any  Dymylances,  Light  Horfes,  Armour,  and 
W capon  whati’oeuer  for  Footmen ;  there  to  be  viewed  by 
Sir  Edward  Stanley  Kt.  74. 

63.  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Councill,  to  the 

Sheriffe  6c  Juftices  of  Peace  within  the  Counties  o  I.an- 
caiter  6c  Chefter,  10  1'ebriiary  1586.  Recommending 
vnto  them  the  due  Obfervacon  of  the  Orders  made  the 
lafte  Yeare,  for  the  reflrainte  i  f  ki Hinge,  vtteringe,  & 
eatinge  of  Flefhe,  in  the  tyme  of  Lente  &  other  prohi¬ 
bited  dayes  ;  the  rather  in  refpeft  of  the  great  Mortalitye 
of  Sheepe  &  other  kynde  of  great  Cattle,  generally  al- 
moft  throwghout  the  Realme;  &ofDearthe  &Scarcetye 
aifoeof  other  kynde  of  Viftualles  at  this  tyme.  Re- 
membring  unto  them,  that  there  owne  Example  in  the 
itraire  keepinge  of  theis  Orders,  in  euery  of  their  owne 
Howfes,  will  greatly  further  the  obfervinge  of  the  fame 
amongeft  the  meaner  Soarte.  74.  b. 

64.  Leiter  of  Henry  Earl  of  Derby,  to  the  Highe  She- 
riffe,  His  Deputie  Lieutenants,  &  the  refte  of  the  Juf¬ 
tices  of  Peace  in  Chcfhire,  i4Febr.  1 586.  Requiring,  them 
to  a  (Tumble  themlelves  together,  &  take  prefent  Courfe 
for  (uppreftinge  falfe  Rumours,  Sc  Punifliment  of  the 
Authors  thereof ;  and  efpecially  to  take  Order  for  Rc- 
leefe  of  ihe  Poore,  in  ihis  tyme  of  Scarcetie-  75.  b. 

65.  I.etter  of  Henry  Earl  of  Derby,  to  divers  of  the 
principal  Gentlemen  in  <  helhire,  26  Febr.  1586.  being 
of  the  fame  Tenor  with  that  abovementioned  at  §  48. 

7(- 

66.  Anfwer  of  the  SherifFe  &  Juftices  of  the  Peace  of 
C.hefhire,  to  the  Letter  Cent  unto  them  by  the  Lords  of  the 
C.ouncell,  towchinge  the  abatinge  of  exceflive  Pryces  of 
Corn  and  Graine  :  dated  17  Febr.  1586.  and  certifying 
the  great  Care  by  them  taking  in  that  neceflary  Affair.  78. 

67.  Notes  or  Memorandums  taken  at  Northwiche, 

17  Febr.  1586.  concerning  Enormities  of  Badgers,  Ale- 
howfe-kcepers,  Bakers,  Bruers,  See.  78.  b. 

68.  Rules  or  Orders,  figned  by  Henrie  Earl  of  Derby, 

and  Sir  Francis  Waliingham,  for  Reformacon  of  the 
Defaultes  of  Free-holders  at  the  Quarter-Seflions  ;  of 
Conftables  ;  6c  Juftices  of  Peace.  jg' 

69.  Of  the  Enormities  of  the  Sabbothe;  with  the 

Meanes  howe  to  refourme  the  fame.  Alfo  about  Baf- 
tards  Sc  Vagabonds.  This  Piece  is  figned  by  many  Lan 
cafhire  Gentlemen.  gD. 

70.  The  Condicon  of  a  Recogn:fance  fett  d owne  6c 
agreed  vpen,  by  Ferdinando  Lord  Strange,  Sc  the  reft 
of  her  Majefties  Juftices  of  Peace  within  the  Countie  of 
Lancafter  :  to  be  taken  of  all  that  nowe  or  hereafter  fhall 
be  allowed  to  keepe  Ale-howfcs  wiihin  the  faide  Countie. 

81. b. 

71.  Blank 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  rg:6. 

71.  Blank  Precept  for  levying  two  Efficient  2c  able 
fugle  Men,  of  honelte  behaviourc,  within  the  Towne- 
lhippe  of  ....  to  be  appointed  to  lervc  her  Ma- 
. 

83. 

7:.  Letter  from  R.  B.  to  the  Conftables  in  the  Parllh 
of  Ecck-s  ;  commaunding  them  to  geveNotyce  2c  Warn- 
inge  to  all  Gentlemen  2c  others  within  the  faid  Pari  Hi, 
chargeable  with  Dimilauncts,  Petronelles,  Light-Iiorfes, 

I  to  be  %  ic.ved  before  Sir  Edward  Sanlejj  at  Prd  ton,  upon 
a  certain  day.  ibid. 

73.  Another  fr  >m  (the  fame  R ,  B.)  Sir  Richard  Brere- 

toii,  to  the  Conftables  of  YVorfley,  &c.  geven,  anno  30 
Eliz.  commaunding  them  to  geve  Notice  &  Warninge 
to  all  Gentlemen  within  their  Townfhippe,  havinge  any 
Landc,  to  appcarc  at  Preflon,  thcigofJulv,  before  the 
Lord  Strange.  S'1-,  b. 

74.  Another,  from  the  fame,  to  the  Conftables  of 

.Comms 

to  levy,  within  their  Townfhippe,  the  Money  taxed  to- 
wardes  keeptnge  <1  the  Waiehe  of  the  Beacone  of  Ry- 
foi  bringinge  the  Armour  from  Croffe-hall. 

ibid. 

75.  Another,  from  the  fame,  to  the  Conftables  of 
Woriley,  2c c.  Commanding  tlient  to  geve  Warning,  with¬ 
in  their  lownelhip,  to  all  Gentlemen,  Freehoulders  2c 
others  chargeable  with  any  parte  of  the  25  Uimilances 
laftc  impofed  vpone  them,  as  with  any  Dimilaunces,  Light- 
horfes,  Armour  2c  Weapon,  for  Footmen,  wherewith 
they  be  anie  wayes  chardged,  by  Statute  or  otherwife,  to 
come  to  Manchefter,  by  fuclt  a  day,  there  to  be  viewed 
by  Sir  Edward  Stanley,  Kt.  Geven  1"  Marcij  138S.  84. 

76.  Another  from  tlie*  fame  to  the  fame  :  geven  9 

April!  1588.  commanding  them  to  geve  monicion  & 
warninge  to  all  Gentlemen,  Freehoulders,  and  all  other 
perfonnes  whatfoever,  chardged  by  Statute  or  otherwife, 
with  footmen,  Armour,  &  Weapon,  within  the  Pari fh 
ofEccles,  to  be  at  Wygan  upon  a  day  certain  there  to  be 
vewed  before  Sir  Edward  Stanley  Kt.  As  alfo  all  thole 
Soldiers  within  the  faid  Parifh,  (with  their  Furniture,  & 
the  Money  levied  for  them)  which  were  latelie  appointed 
for  her  Majefties  Service  towards  Scotlande.  ibid. 

77.  Another,  from  certain  Jultices  of  the  Peace,  to 
the  Conftables  of  Three-Hultons,  30  April  1588.  com¬ 
manding  them  with  all  fpeede  to  colleft  the  Somme  of 
4h  1.3s-  *=d.  latelie  impofed  vpon  the  laid  Tovvnefor  the 

inge  of  certen  S(  Idiers,  for  her  Majefties  Sen-ice 
into  Scotlande.  And  to  geve  the  proper  warninge  in 
Order  to  have  their  Souldiers  muftered  at  Wygan.  before 
Sir  Edward  Stanley. 

78.  Warrant  of  Sir  John  Byron,  2cc.  to  the  Cunftable 

of  Barton  fuper  Irwell,  for  collecting  of  Money  towards 
1  .  keeping  of  Richarde  Walewerke  an  Orphant,  Janu¬ 
aries  anno  28  Eliz.  b. 

79.  Another,  from  Sir  Thomas  Holcrofte,  &c.  to  the 

Cunllables  Of  Clifton  A  Pendleton,  25  November,  anno 
29  Eliz.  to  the  ufe  aforefaid.  ibid. 

8  Amwer  of  theCunftables  of  Pendelton,  who  could 

• 

8  1.  Warrant  of  the  Jultices  of  Peace,  to  the  Cunfta- 
bles  &  Church- Wardens,  within  the  Parifh  ofEccles,  3 
Marche,  anno  39  Eliz.  for  levying  further  Summes  to 
tne  ule  aforefaid. 

,  ■  -  I.01*  of  ihe  Council!,  to  the 

Jultices  of  Aflyfes  ol  Ebor.  2c  Cumberland,  £cc.  28  June 
:  pK  dure,  that  at  e\ 

Anyles  to  be  houiden  m  their  Circuits  they  both  Ihoulde 
iuerie,  and  not  to 

• 

£eiorel  -  raolf  befrft  i  liuered.  And  directing  theSt 
how  to  proceed  again  it  uvuers  perfonnes  that  hauc  gone 
a -mute  m  lunt.ry  Counties  of  this  Ueaime,  with  certen 
C  .rnniminons  ot  Deputacon,  vnderthe  Hands  of  feme  of 
tne  Officers  of  Me  Ordynance,  for  die  makinge  of  Sake 


Num.  1926. 

Peter  ;  and  other  Commiftions  for  the  execucione  of 
Penall  Statutes :  by  whofe  Abufes  many  hauebene  trow¬ 
ed  2c  molcfted  contrarie  to  her  Majefties  gracious 
meaning e.  86.  b> 

83  Letter  of  Henrie  Earle  of  Derby  to  Sir  John  Byron 
one  of  his  Depune-Lieutenants  for  I.ancalhire,  2e  to  the 
relle  of  the  Jultices  of  Peace  of  the  Hundreth  of  Salford, 
24  September  1588.  willing  them  to  comende  to  the 
C.lei-g’ie  (upon  tne  overthrowe  of  the  Spanilh  Armada)  to 
fall  to  fome  god  he  Exercyfe  of  Thankfgevinge  for  the 
fame,^  by  Prayer  &  Prcachinge.  88. 

'i  hi;  is  followed  by  a  Lift  of  the  Shippes  &  Men 
ninchc  A  drowned  killed  and  taken,  vpon  the  Coafte  of 
Ireland,  on  the  fide  of  the  Spaniards. 

84-  Letter  of  Sir  John  Byron,  to  the  Conftables  of  the 
Hundred  of  Salforde,  as  it  feemes  ;  19th  November 
158S.  requiring  fpeedy  payment  of  £6:  19  :  10.  being 
part  of  the  Money  already  collected  for  fupplying  the 
Defeftes  Wantes  for  the  full  &  better  furnilhinge  of 
their  Souldiers  appointed  for  her  Majefties  Service  in 
Irelande.  9o. 

W  ith  this,  went  a  Lift  of  the  Defeats  abovemen- 
tioned. 

85.  Another,  from  the  fame,  to  the  Jultices  of  Peace, 
within  the  laid  Hundred;  28  Oftober  1588.  commaund- 
ing  them  to  appoint  &  choofe  14  tall  &  fufficient  fer- 
viccablc  Men,  for  her  Majefties  Service  in  Ireland  ;  and 
to  fee  them  prefently  furmlhed  with  Armour,  Weapon, 

£c  Apparel  1,  with  Conduft-money.  gZ .  * 

Hereunto  is  annexed  a  Lift  of  the  Souldiers  fo 
raifed  ;  &  the  Rate  1  f  the  Money  levied  throughout  the 
Hundred,  for  their  ufe. 

S  -.  Another  fr 1  m  Sir  John  Byron  &  Sir  Richard  Shir- 
burnc,  to  the  Jultices  of  Peace  within  the  Hundred  of 
Salford  ;  1  2  October  1589.  comanding  them  forthwithe 
to  have  in  a  ready!  es  14  Men  lately  appoynted  Souldiers, 
lor  her  Majefties  prefent  &  fpedie  Service  in  Irelande  ; 
under  the  Conduction  of  Mr.  Delves,  with  the  allowed 
Armore,  Weapone,  and  Apparell.  94.  b, 

87.  Money  taxed,  &  to  be  collected,  within  thePa- 
rifhes  of  Manchefter,  Preftwiche,  Ecclcs,  &  Flixtone  j 
towards  the  furnilliing  of  Souldiars  for  her  Majefties 
Service :  to  be  in  iodines  at  Manchefter  vpon  Wed- 

99,  b. 

88.  Lem  r  of  Henry  Earl  ol  Derby,  to  Sir  John  Byron, 
27  November,  1589,  requiring  him  to  keep  Itrift  watch 
Day  &  Night,  thre  ugh  t  his  Divifion,  &  to  flay  all 
fufpefted  Perfons,  &  hrii  g  them  before  ihe  next  Juftice 
of  the  Peace.  This  was  ocamoned  by  a  Rumor,  that 
fundrie  of  thole  who  veie  in  Companie,  and  on  the 
ground  with  the  Baron  of  Walton,  at  the  death  of  Mr. 

J  lowghton,  lay  hydden  in  Lai <  aft  ire,  and  ftirred  abrode 
in  the  Nighte.  gy. 

89.  Letter  of  Richard  Aftiton  Efq:  to  certain  Jultices 

of  Peace,  with  a  Copie  of  the  Letter  abovementioned  ; 
and  recommending  that  Service  to  their  Care,  29  Nov! 
15°(L  ibid. 

90.  Another  from  Henry  Earl  of  Derby,  to  the  Juf- 
tices  of  Peace  within  the  Hundred  of  Salford  ;  3  Decem¬ 
ber  1589.  requiring  them  to  attend  (with  all  the  other 
Juftices  of  the  County)  the  1  oth  of  the  fameMonth  atPref- 
ton,when  the  Coroners  would  meete  &  chardge  twojuries 
(after  Evidence  given)  to  enquyre  towching  the  Deathes  ■ 
of  1  homas  Howghton  Efq;  and cf  one  Richard  Bawdwen, 

97.  b. 

91.  Another,  from  Sir  Richard  Shirbume,  &c.  to 

Richard  Brereton  Efq;  &  other  Juftices  ;  10  December 
1589.  requiring  them  further  to  adjorne  a  Jurie  which 
were  fworne  at  the  laft  private  Seflion  at  Manchefter, 
and  to  attend  the  Earle  of  Derby  at  Frefton,  for  Inquirie 
ol  the  Ryot  commyrred  at  the  Lea.  ibid, 

92-  Another,  mm  Sir  JohnByron,  S:  Sir  Richard 
Shirbume,  to  Sir  Fdmonde  TrafFord,  2c c.  23  Tanuary 
1589.  commanding  them  to  lake  Order  that  the  14  Men 

7  already  I 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


.353 


Num.  tc) 26. 

appoinred  (within  the  Hundred  of  Salford)  for 
her  Majefties  Service  in  Irelaiide,  be  in  a  Readmes:  but 
alfo  to  levy  14  other  tale  &  fufficient  ferviceable  Men, 

&  fee  them  prelently  furnilhed  with  Armor,  Weapone, 

&  Apperell.  98  b. 

93.  Order  of  the  Juftices  of  Peace  of  the  Hundred  of 

Salford,  3 1  Qdlober,  anno  3 1  Eliz.  upon  a  Controver- 
fie,  whether  the  Hamletts  of  Little-Lever  &  Darcie-Lever 
fhould  beare  with  the  Towne  of  Pilkingtone,  or  with  the 
Towne  of  Edgworth  ?  which  Controverfie  they  referre 
to  Mr.  Jullice  Walmifley.  1 00. 

94.  Rate  of  furniflunge  furthe  14  Men,  for  her  Ma- 

jefties  Service  in  Irelande,  out  of  the  Hundred  of  Salford, 
in  Annis  1588  &  1589.  100.  b. 

95.  Soukliours  laftly  appointed.  101. 

96.  Letter  from  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  of  Lancalhire, 

to  the  Juftices  of  Peace  of  Salford-hundred  ;  2  February 
1589.  Commaunding  them  to  geve  Warninge  to  all  fuche 
as  have  beetle  appointed  to  make  Demilance  or  Light 
Horlfe;  to  Ihewe  the  Horffe,  Armour,  Wepen,  Sc  Ryders, 
well  furnilhed,  at  the  next  Muller.  ioi.b. 

97.  Another  from  Henry  Earle  of  Derby,  to  the  fame 

Juftices.  20  February,  1589.  Requiring  them  forthwith 
to  have  in  a  Readinefs,  at  an  Howres  Warninge,  the 
Hundred  Souldiers  furnilhed  for  the  Irilh  Service  the  lafte 
Yeare.  Further  commanding  them  to  feleft  another 
Hundred  Men  vmmediatelie,  for  the  fame  Service ;  and 
to  pay  the  Money  alleHed  for  the  furnilhing  of  them,  to 
Richard  Holland,  Efq;  103. 

98.  Another  from  the  fame,  to  the  fame  Juftices,  as 

it  feeines  ;  27  July  1590.  Dire&ing  them  to  collett  foe 
much  Money  as  hath  formerlie  bene  aHeifed,  toward  the 
Compofttion  for  her  Majellies  Provifion  of  Oxen  :  which 
Compofttion  would  be  inconvenient  Sc  prejudicial!  to  the 
whole  Shire,  if  it  did  not  hould.  1 03.  b. 

99.  Another  from  Mr.  Richard  Holland,  to  Thomas 

Holcroft,  Efq  ;  &c.  30  July  1 590.  concerning  the  Com- 
pofirion  money  abovementioned,  which  he  defireth  may 
be  paid  unto  him,  upon  a  certain  Day.  104. 

100.  Another,  from  Sir  Richard  Shirburne  &  Mr. 

Richard  Idollande,  to  the  Juftices  of  Salford- Hundred  ; 
25  September  1590  :  requiting  their  Prefence  &  Attend¬ 
ance  at  the  next  General  Muller  of  the  Militia  of  Lanca- 
flrire.  105. 

1 01.  Another,  as  it  feems,  from  the  Juftices  of  Salford- 

Hundred,  to  the  Earl  of  Derby  ;  4  October  1390.  be- 
feaching  his  Lordfhip  tu  Hand  favourable  to  that  Hundred; 
and  to  rnoue  the  Lords  of  the  Privie  Counfetl  to  excufe 
their  Non-payment  of  part  of  a  Summe  of  Money  impofed 
upon  them,  by  the  laid  Lords,  towards  the  repayre  of 
the  Bancks  of  Altemouthe ;  which  was  but  a  Pryvat 
Caufe.  105.  b. 

X02.  Another,  from  Henry  Earle  of  Derby,  to  Sir 
John  Savage  Sc  other  Chclhire  Juftices  ;  16  November 
1590.  Signifying,  that  whereas  the  Lords  of  the  Privi 
Counfell  had  required  Him  to  putt  in  a  Rcadines  for 
Service,  not  onlie  the  Trened  Scottilhe  &  Irilhe  Soldiers 
allreadi  chofen  8c  committed  to  Laders ;  but  alfo  the 
Generali  Force  of  his  Livetenantfy  :  foe  that  all  fervicc- 
able  Men,  either  as  Souldiers,  Pyeners,  or  others  may 
know  to  what  Captaynes  to  refort  in  Cafe  of  Invacon 
or  otherwife.  He  therefore  nominateth  them  to  be  Cap¬ 
taynes  &  Leaders  of  the  Generali  Force  of  the  Hundred 
of  Puclowe,  and  of  their  owne  Tenaunts,  Servants,  Sc 
Followers  elce  where  :  willing  them  to  call  together  all 
Perlons  within  the  faid  Hundred,  above  16  Sc  vnder  60 
Yeares,  &  to  enroll  Sc  travne  them,  as  fhall  appertayne. 

1 06.  b. 

103.  Letter  of  Summons,  from  Sir  John  Savage,  to 

the  other  Juftices;  12  November,  1390;  requiring  them 
to  meet  him,  in  Order  to  be  apprii'ed  of  the  Earl  of  Derby 
their  Lord  Lieutenants  Pleafure,  as  appointed  by  the 
Lords  of  Her  Majellies  Counfell.  107.  b. 

104.  Letter  of  Richard  Brereton  Efq;  to  Sir  John 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1926. 

Savage,  16  Januarie  1590.  with  His  Certificate,  import-- 
ing,  that  befides  fo  many  Men  as  he  was  chargeable  by 
Statute,  to  make  furnilhed  ;  and  fuch  as  b'-  trayned 
Soldiers ;  and  thofe  appointed  for  the  Service  of  Ireland 
Sc  Scotland  ;  his  Tenaunts  &  Followers  in  Chclhire  & 
Lancalhire,  amount  to  40  able  Bodies,  unfurnilhed 

108. 

105.  Letter  of  the  Lords  of  the  Councill,  to  the  Juf¬ 

tices  of  the  Peace,  as  it  feemes,  of  the  County  of  ...  . 
29th  Julie,  1590.  Requiring  them  to  caufe  Inquirie  to 
be  made  of  the  Mifdemeanours  &  Abules  committed  by 
the  Purveiours  of  her  Highnes  Houlholde  Sc  Stables ;  as 
alfo  of  all  other  their  MifdemeanourS  Sc  Abules  committed 
Sc  done  in  Faires,  Marketts,  Sc  other  Places :  irom  the 
firft  of  October  1589,  to  the  firft  of  O&ober  1590,  by 
it  felf  :  and  from  thence,  untill  the  day  of  their  endinge 
the  Inquirie.  And  to  certifye  the  fame  in  Writinge,  iub- 
feribed  with  their  Names,  Sc  fealed  in  fume  Boxe  or 
Bagge,  not  to  be  opened,  vntille  it  fhould  come  to  their 
Lordlhippes  Handes.  108.  b. 

106.  Another,  to  the  Highe  Sheriffe,  Cuftos  Rotulo- 

rum,  &  certain  of  the  Juftices  of  the  Couniie  of  Lancafter ; 
2oO£lober,  1592!  Shewing,  that  fundrie  Perfons  beinge 
placed  to  be  Jultides  of  the  Peace,  haue  not  taken  fuch 
Othes,  as  by  the  Lawes  &  Statutes  of  the  Realme,  they 
ought  to  haue  taken,  before  they  might  exercife  fuche 
Office.  Requiring  them  therefore,  to  procure  Seffions  of 
the  Peace  to  be  holden,  &  Warning  to  be  given  to  all  the 
Juftices  of  Peace  within  that  Countie,  to  be  perionally  pre- 
fent  at  the  fame.  That  then,  every  one  of  the  Juftices  there 
prefent,  fhould  be  required  to  take  the  Othe  accuftomed 
for  the  Peace,  and  the  Othe  alfoe  for -her  Majellies  Su« 
premacie.  And  that  they  do  certefy  into  the  Chauncery 
how  many  haue  taken  the  faid  Oathes,  and  the  Names  of 
fuch  who  fhal  1  refufc  or  forbeare  to  take  the  fame.  Which 
Perfons  fo  refufing  or  forbearing,  lhall  be  thereupon 
warned  to  forbeare  th’Exercyfe  of  his  Office,  vntill  he 
be  conformable  and  fwome  accordingly.  '1  he  fame  is 
to  be  done,  to  thofe  who  lhall  not  come,  upon  the  laid 
Warning  given.  As  alfo  to  thofe  who  are  not  refidently 
dwelling  in  the  Countie,  except  Lords  of  Parliament : 
and  to  Recufants,  or  fuch  whofe  Wyves  or  Sonnes  & 
Heires  are  Recufants.  109.  b. 

107.  Henry  Earl  of  Derby,  my  L.  Idvetenants  Letter 

to  his  Deputie  Livetenants  for  Lancalhire,  8  Maie  1 593, 
for  the  accomplilhement  of  her  Majellies  Letter  of  the 
1  of  Maie  1 593.  Requiring  them  with  all  fpeede  poffible, 
to  accomplilhe  and  fullie  aunfwere  the  Service  nowe 
demanded,  according  to  the  Direction  geven  ;  takeinge 
Care  that  both  the  Shires  concurre  and  howlde  one 
Courfe.  Intimating  further,  that  forafmuch  as  there  owght 
to  be  10a  Men  apeece,  in  either  Shire,  for  Iriflie  Service; 
for  eafe  of  the  Countreie,  thofe  Men  and  their  Armour 
be  nowe  imploied,  and  the  Cuntreie  charged  onlie  with 
the  furnifhing  of  fuch  a  Number,  as  will  make  vp  the 
Somme  which  is  nowe  required.  1 1 2.  b. 

10S.  A  Ceppie  of  her  Majellies  Letter  to  my  Lord 
Livetenaunte,  for  the  puttinge  in  readinefs  of  138  Soul¬ 
diers  within  the  Countie  of  Lancafter,  1  May  1593.  Her 
Majeftie  hauing  Caufe  to  doubte  of  feme  Trowbles  to  be 
flirred  in  the  Realme  oflrelande  by  the  Intencon  offome 
Spanilhe  Shippinge,  with  Men  of  Warre,  to  be  lent  into 
Scotlande  ;  and  by  the  waie  to  tulchein  fome  Pourts  in 
the  N orthe  parts  of  Irelande,  with  fome  N umbers  of  Men 
of  Warre,  to  be  alfo  landed,  to  ftirre  vppe  herSnbjefts 
to  fome  Rebellion.  1 13. 

109.  Rates  impofed,  for  furnilhing  the  Souldiers 
above  mentioned.  1 14. 

no.  Sowldiers  chofen  the  laft  of  Maie  1593,  by 
Richard  Hollande  Efq;  one  of  the  Deputie  Livetenauntes 
within  the  Countie  of  Lancafter;  in  the  Parilhes  of  Man- 
chefter,  Eccles,  Preftwyche,  &  Flixton,  for  her  Majef- 
ties  Service  into  Irelande.  Imperf.  1 15.  b. 

hi.  Precept  of  the  Juftices  of  Peace  of  the  Hundred 
4  X  of 


354 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  1926. 

of  Salford,  as  it  feemeth  :  to  the  Church- Wardens  & 
the  fworne  Men  of  the  Pariflie  of  Eccles,  10  Januarie, 
1591.  requiring  them,  at  a  time  prefixed,  to  bring  a 
perfect  Note  of  the  Names  of  all  Howfe-howlders,  with 
their  Families,  being  above  the  age  of  16  Yearcs ;  and, 
in  1  he  mean  time,  to  vfe  fuche  Inquiry,  as  upon  their 
Apparance,  to  be  able  vppone  their  Booke-Othes  to 
deliver  Notice  of  the  faid  Perfons  Conformitic  or  the  con- 
trarie,  in  repairinge  to  the  Churche,  &  Hearinge  of  Dy- 
vyne  Sen  ice.  Her  Majefties  Commiflion  being  to  them  & 
others  directed  for  the  Apprehencon  A  Difcouerie  of  Se¬ 
mina:  ie  Priefts  Sc  Jefuits  ;  and  for  the  Reducinge  to  C011- 
formife,  or  further  Proceedings  with  Recufants.  1 16. 

1  :  2.  Precept  of  Henry  Earl  of  Derby,  to  the  Juftices 
of  Peace  within  the  Hundred  of  Salforde,  14  June  1 593. 
requiring  them  to  aflemble  themfelves  together,  &  fett 
downe  vnder  th^ir  Hands  leverallie,  a  perfect  &  trewe 
accompte,  what  Sommes  of  Moneie  haue  bene  affeffed 
within  the  8  la  it  Yeares,  for  Irifhe  Service  within  their 
feuerall Divicions.  Howe muchehathbene collected;  howe 
it  hath  bene  bellowed  :  and  in  whefe  Hands  anie  remain- 
eth.  IE  hauing  vnderiloode  of  a  Generali  Greeffe  &  Mif- 
lyke  conceayed,  in  that  notwithftandinge  twoe  feuerall 
Allebmento  haue  bene  made  &  collected  throwghout  the 
Shire,  for  the  fiirni filing  of  200  Sowldiers  for  the  Irifhe 
Service,  and  noe  Imploiment  made  at  all  of  them  :  yet 
her  Majeftie  now  requiringe  but  the  furnifhinge  of  138 
Souldiers;  a  newe  Taxacon  is  made  6c  demaunded.  1  7. 

1  13.  Precept  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council], 
to  the  High  Sheriffe  and  Juftices  of  the  Peace  within  the 
C.ounty  of  Lancafter;  27  Auguft,  1397.  Commanding 
them  to  ufc  their  utmoll  Diligence  to  find  out,  repre¬ 
hend  &  punifli  the  meaner  Sort  of  Ingroflers  of  Come, 
N  1 1 ireltallers  of  Markets.  To  fend  up  l'ome  of  the  weal¬ 
thier  and  more  notorious  Offenders ;  and  to  certifie  the 
Names  of  the  reft.  1 1  g. 

1 14.  Precept  of  certain  Lancafhire-Jufiices,  to  the 
Cunllables  of  B.  Geven  13  Marche  Anno  38  Eliz.  re¬ 
quiring  them  to  bringe  before  Sir  rhomas  Gerarde,  Fower 
able  and  fufficiente  Men  of  that  Towne :  and  alfo  to 
levie  &  colleCle  within  the  faidTowne^.  12.  o.  towarde 
the  anninge  &  furnifliinge  of  fo  manie  of  them,  as  Sir 
Thomas  (hall  then  make  choife  of.  j  19, 

t  tj.  Matters  confidered  of  by  the  Judges,  to  be  gene¬ 
rally  e  executed  in  their  Circuits.  120. 

1  id.  Articles  which  the  Cunftables  of  eache  Hundred 
are  to  obferue,  and  to  aunfwere,  at  the  Bcginninge  of 
eyery  Affifes.  j  2 1 .  b. 

117.  Letter  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  to  the 
Juftices  of  Aflyfes  of  Ebor.  &  Cumberland,  &c.  28  June 
1586.  The  fame  with  that  abovementioned,  at  §.82.  123. 

1:8.  Letters  Patents  of  Qu.  Elizabeth,  bearing  Telle 
28  .kuiuarie,  anno  31.  authorizing  George  Euelyn  Ef- 
quier.  Rich.  Hilles,  8c  John  Evelyn  Gent,  to  digg  and 
worke  for  Salt-Pcter,  wherefoever  they  lhoud  think 
meet  and  convenient,  throughout  her  Dominions ;  ex¬ 
cept  in  the  Cittie  of  London  and  2  Myles  diftant,  round 
about  from  the  Walks  of  the  fame  Cittie  ;  and  the  Coun¬ 
ties  M  Yorke,  Northumberland,  Weftmerland,  Cumber¬ 
land,  and  the  Bifhopricke  of  Durham.  124. 

1  '9-  A  Copie  of  tne  Councells  Letters  to  the  Sheriffe 
and  Juftices  of  Peace  of  the  Countie  of  Lancafter ;  for 
the  ivlieffe  of  hurt  and  mavmed  Souldiers  and  Mariners, 
accord.n  ;e  to  the  laft  Statute  :  and  for  difeharging  the 
Beacon  Watches,  29  September  1593.  125. 

X  2o.  A  Copie  of  the  Counfells  Letters  to  the  Juftices 
of  I  eace  of  the  Countie  of  Lancafter,  for  the  Releefe  of 
Nicholas  Whittacrc  (a  Lieutenant,  who  had  bene  hurt 
and  mavined  in  her  Majefties  Service.)  17  Sept.  .  .  126. 

121.  A  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Pry  we  Counfell  • 
concerninge  the  Affeffemeut  of  the  Subfidie,  8  July  1 393] 

126.  b. 

122.  Another  from  the  fame  (to  the  Lancafhire  Juf- 
'■)  requiting  them  to  lee  the  Orders  (herewith  fent) 


Num.  1926 — 1929. 

putt  in  Execution  ;  be:nge  for  the.  reftraint  of  Eatinge 
and  killinge  of  Flelhe  in  the  tyme  of  Lent,  &  daies  pro¬ 
hibited.  19  February  1585.  128. 

123.  Letter  of  certain  of  the  Judges,  to  the  Julices 

of  the  Peace  within  the  Countie-Pallatyne  of  Lauca'lcr  ; 
28th  of  November,  15,6:  putting  them  in  mind  of  their 
Dufies,  to  fee  the  Laws  &  Koyal  Orders  executed  with 
regar  1  to  Badgers  &  Ingroflers  or  Corn,  Foreftallers  of 
Markets,  Tranfporters  of  Corn  beyond  the  Sees,  Typling- 
Houfes,  &  new-cre&ed  Innes ;  loole  People  wandering 
abroad,  calling  themfelves  Souldiers,  or  Egiptians,  and 
other  Rogues.  131. 

124.  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Councill,  to 

the  Juftices  of  Aflifes  of  Ebor.  &  Cumberland,  &;c.  28 
June  1586.  The  lame  with  thofe  before-mentioned,  at 
§.8j.&at§.  117.  133. 

1927. 

A  paper  Book  in  8vo.  wherein  are  contained,  Poems, 
Imprefes.  and  other  Collections  in  Prole  &  Verfe  ; 
written  by  Thomas  Chaloner.  and  Randle  Holme  Se¬ 
nior,  both  Armes-Painters  in  Chefter,  with  other  Notes 
of  lefs  value. 

1928. 

A  thin  Book  in  4to.  being  a  Dialogue  between  R.  &  FI. 
(i.  e.  Randle  &  Holme,  fenior)  upon  the  fubjedl  of 
Predcftination.  In  the  laft  Page,  is  a  Quotation  from 
Arch  Bp.  Ufher,  about  Sancl.fkation. 

1929. 

A  thin  Book  in  4to.  for  the  moft  part,  written  by  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme  Senior,  and  relating  to  the  Hiftory  of  Chef- 
ter-City  and  Places  adjacent ;  as  containing, 

1.  A  Sort  of  Journal  as  to  public  Occurrences,  (writ¬ 

ten  partly  in  Characters)  from  14.  Auguft  1659.  to  19 
Auguft  1662.  I# 

2 .  The  humble  Propofealls.  of  the  well-affected  Citizens 
and  Inhabitants  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter,  for  Garifoning 
the  City  and  Caftleof  Chefter  ;  for  changing  the  Aider- 
men  &  Common-Counfell  thereof  (who  are  charged  with 
complying  with  the  Rifeing  Partie  vnder  Sir  George 
Booth  :)  altering  the  Miniftery  there;  and  rendering 
the  Place  more  ufeful  to  the  Parliament  &  Council  of 
State. 

3.  How  one  Fox  of  Ireland  was  tried  at  Chefter  for 

treafonable  Words,  31  Aug.  1663.  for  which  he  flood 
feme  Hours  in  the  Pillory,  &  loft  his  Ears.  10. 

4.  Memorable  things  iince  (i.  e.  before)  this  prefent 

Yeare  1656.  ,2. 

5.  Remarkables  of  many  Years,  fett  down  at  the  fe- 

veral  Days  of  the  Months  when  they  were  done.  13.  1 

6.  Memorable  things  fince  the  King’s  Death,  1648.  ' 

7.  The  humble  Petition  of  feuerall  of  the  Inhabitants 
of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter,  in  the  behalue  of  themfelves  & 
the  well-affedled  in  the  faid  Cittie,  to  the  Parliament  of 
the  Common-wealth  of  England  :  for  altering  the  Magi- 
ftracy ;  feizing  the  Cittie-Lands ;  and  punching  thofe 
who  were  concerned  with  Sir  George  Boothe.  22. 

8.  Newes  from  Scotlande  :  10  April  1645.  this  is 
fubferibed  V.  P.  (Vavafor  Powell  ?)  and  is  a  lying  Story 
of  an  Army  of  30000  men  raifed  in  Scotland,  &  com¬ 
manded  by  a  Lord  Semple,  to  invade  England,  and  to 
bring  many  Strange  Engines  of  War  along  with  them. 

23. 

9.  Letter  fent  to  Fleetwood  &  Lambert  by  feme  of  the 

Chefter-Saints ;  defiring  that  thofe  who  were  gone  up  to 
London,  in  order  to  excufe  their  late  Conduct,  might 
not  be  heard  ;  but  that  they  &  all  concerned  with  them, 
might  receive  condign  Punifhment,  fuitable  to  their  De- 
merits.  24.  i 

1  o.  Printed  Note  concerning  Bradfhaw’s  Death,  3  r 
October  1659.  25. 

1 5  n-  Private 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


Num.  1929—1933. 

1  r  Private  Letter  of  Intelligence,  toward  the  end  of 
q  Elizabeth’s  Raign.  Amongft  other  matters,  it  fhews 
.how  the  Quarrel  between  the  Earl  of  Northumberland 
&  Sir  Francis  Vere,  began.  2°‘ 

1 2.  A  Lampoon  or  Libell  upon  manyNoblel  erfonages 
of  that  time  ;  written  by  the  fame  Hand.  26.  b. 

i  ?  A  printed  Catalogue  of  the  Bunalls  m  the  City 
ofChefter,  of  the  Plague;  fro  i  the  24  of  June  1647,  to 
the  14th  of  October  1647.  'rhis  is  continued  for  two 
Weeks  longer.  2  7* 

1930. 

A  Book  in  4to.  All  written  by  the  Hand  of  Randle 
Holme  the  younger  ;  Sc  containing, 

His  Collections  from  our  Englilh  Bible,  difpofed 
under  particular  Heads  ;  and  altered  lo,  as  to  be  made 
ul'e  of  in  prayer.  But  in  doing  this  Work,  1  think  he 
hath  putt  down  much,  which  might  better  have  been 
omitted* 

r93 1  • 

A  Boek  in  4to.  written  perhaps  by  Randle  Holme 
junior ;  and  containing, 

A  Theological  Trialogue  between  Ranulphus,  a 
Prdbiterian ;  Holmetius,  a  Cavalier  ;  and  Junerius,  an  j 
Independant. 

19Z2‘ 

A  paper  Book  in  4to.  thus  entituled, 

T.  A  Vie  we  of.  the  prefertt  State  of  Ireland,  difeourfed 
by  waye  of  Dialogue  between  Eudorius  &  Irenius. 

The  Author  of  this  Treatife,  1  take  to  have  been 
Mr.  Edmund  Spencer. 

2.  A  printed  Narration  (or  Chronological  Series)  of 

the  Lords  Lieutenants,  Lords  Deputies,  &  Lords  Juftices 
of  this  Kingdome  of  Ireland,  from  the  yearei50i,to 
A.  D.  1643.  .  91, 

3.  A  printed  Relation  of  certaine  memorable  Accidents 

(chiefly  relating  to  Ireland  ;)  and  at  what  Time  they  hap¬ 
pened.  (This  comes  down  to  A.  D.  1623.)  93-  b* 

4  Printed  Tables  of  the  Yeares,  Monthes  &  Daies, 
wherein  euery  King  of  England,  fince  the  Conqueft,  be¬ 
gan  his  Raigne  :  to  K.  .Tames  I.  95  - . 

3.  A  briefe  printed  Catalogue  of  all  the  Lords  Lief- 
temoits.  Lords  Deputies,  &  Lords  Juftices,  which  haue 
gouerned  in  this  Kingdome  of  Ireland  ;  from  A.  D- 
1501.  to  A.  D.  1604.  95- b- 

'  6.  Collections  touching  Ireland,  taken  from  Camden’s 
Britannia.  97* 

I933* 

AthinHeraldical  Book  in  4to.  confining  of  divers  Trafts, 
written  by  feveral  Hands,  viz. 

1.  Randle  Hoimc’s  Table  of  the  Cotes  mentioned  in 

this  Booke  :  made  A.  D.  1634.  __  i- 

2.  Armes  tricked,  of  YVclfli  Houfes  or  Families ;  dt- 

feribed  in  the  Welfh  Language.  5. 

3.  Some  other  Armes  of  Welfh  Families,  in  Blazon; 

by  Jacob  Chaloner,  as  I  think.  14-  !>• 

'  4.  The  Names  of  fuche  Gentlemen,  (with  their  Armes 
emblazoned)  as  fervyd  Edward  the  fyrft  in  the  Ye  a  re 
,203.  at  the  Conquest  of  North-Wales;  and  remayned 
ther  the  Kynges  Officers  to  kepe  the  Contrey  in  Subjec- 
tyon,  and  to  defend  the  Kynges  Fortes.  1  5. 

5.  The  Armes  of  the  Princes  of  Wales  in  Blazon  ; 

with  thole  of  the  Gentlemen  of  that  Countrey  :  drawen 
out  of  Britifli  into  Englilh  by  Humfre  Lloyd  1 6. 

6.  Armes  in  Blazon  of  many  Englilh  Families  ;  Teem¬ 

ing  to  be  of  fuch  as  fetled  among  the  Welfh,  or  near  them, 
with  the  Names  of  other  Englilh  Families,  whofe  Armes 
were  wanted.  2r* 

7  Juftices  of  the  Peace  in  Brecknock-fliire,  A.  D. 
l6ao.  24> 

8.  Jufticiarii  ad Pacero,  in  Com.  Radnor,  A.  D.  1620. 


Num.  1933 — 1938. 

o.  Jufticiarii  ad  Pacem,  in  Com.  Pembrocke,  A.  D. 

Jo.  .  v  *6- 

10.  Jufticiarii  adPacem,  in  Com.  Monmoutne,  A.  u. 

1620. 

n.  Julticiarii  ad  Pacem,  in  Com*  Glamorgan,  1020* 

■rn.)  .  .  *8' 

12.  Jufticiarii  ad  Pacem,  in  Com.  Merioneth,  1020. 
(torn.)  . .  29* 

Thefelaft  Seftions  feem  to  be  of  the  Hand-writing  ot 
Jacob  Chaloner. 

J934* 

A  thin  Book  in  4to.  written  A.  D.  1613.  and  contain* 
ing, 

An  Explication  of  the  Accidence,  byWay  of  Quef- 
tion  and  Anfvver.  . 

At  the  beginning  Sc  end,  are  fome  Copies  of  the 
Secretary  hand,  poorly  imitated. 

*935-'  .  .  , 

An  old  paper  Book  in  4to.  wherein  is  contained, 

A  Collection  of  Welfh  Pedegrees  ;  narratively 
drawn  up  in  the  Welfh  Language. 

1936-  . . 

A  thin  Book  in  4to.  containing, 

1.  The  cafe  of  Griffith  Hughes  of  Flint-fhire,  who  fuf- 
fred  great  Wrong  Sc  Opnreffion  ;  in  being  forced  to  pay 
a  whole  annual  Chiei  Rent  of  5s.  id.  for  an  Eftate  at 
Llan-verres  in  Denbi  h-fhire,  whereof  he  poffeffed  onely 
a  third  part. 

2.  Matches  &  I> fcents  of  many  Families,  in  Anglefey, 
png.  1.  Carnarvonfhire,  pag.  6.  Merioneddfhirc,  pag.  15. 
Mountgomerylhire,  pag.  25.  Denbighfhire,  pag.  48.  Sc 
pag.  penult. 

3.  Medicine  for  the  Yellow  iannifh  (Jaundies  ?)  pag. 
ult. 

*937*  .  ^  n  . 

A  paper  Book  in  4to.  confifting  of  divers  Tracts,  written 
by  different  Hands,  Sc  bound-up  together,  viz. 

1.  Two  Tables  of  efpeciall  Matters,  as  feem  to  be 
treated  of  in  certain  Books  or  Volumes  written  upon  the 
fubjeft  of  the  Ceremonies  of  the  Church  of  Rome. 

2.  An  imperfect  Treatife  compiled  by  fome  Roman- 

Catholic  Writer,  explaining  the  Ceremonies  ufed  in  his 
Church,  and  many  Ecclefiaftical  Termes :  in  the  wray  of 
Durandus’s  Rationale,  &c.  .  9- 

This  may  be  one  of  the  Tomes  referred  unto  in  the 
Tables  above-mentioned. 

3.  A  Collection  of  Graces,  in  Verfe  &  Profe  ;  Prayers, 
Letters,  Medyfines,  See.  made  by  George  Beilin,  A.  D. 

1595  &  15 9C*  „  ,  I.?2‘ . 

Excerpta  e  Libro  Guidonis  de  Monte  Rochern  qui 
Manii  ulus  Curatorum  inferibitur,  Londini  impreffo  apud 
Ric.  Pvnfon,  A.  D.  1500.  .  22°* 

5  Two  notable  Sermons  made  the  Thirde  be  r  yrte 
Fry  day  es  in  Lent  lafl  part,  before  the  Quenes  Highnes  ; 
concernynge  the  Rcall  Prefentes  of  Chriftes  Body  Sc 
Bloude/  in  the  bleffed  Sacrament ;  and  alfo  the  Maffe. 
By  Thomas  Watfon  DoCtor  of  Divinitie.  222. 

This  feemeth  to  be  only  an  ExtraCt  from  the  Book 
imprynted  at  London,  Anno  Domini  1554-  10  Maii. 
Cum  privilegio  Regina:  Maria;. 

1938. 

A  Book  in  4to.  written  by  feveral  Hands,  and  treating 
of  Law-Matters  in  the  following  order. 

1.  Reports,  in  Law-French,  of  certain  Caufes  tried  in 

Term  Mich.  10.  Jac.  in  Banco  Regis.  _  *• 

2.  A  Table  of  all  thinges  contayned  in  this  booke  fol¬ 
lowing. 

3.  The  Oath  of  an  Attorney.  ie- 

4.  Inftructions  for  Suinge  of  Proceffe  in  the  Common 

Tji  ibid. 

Pleas.  , 

.  What  Pleas  an  Attorney  may  plead ;  and  what  not. 

18  b. 

6.  Inftruftions 


356 


Catalogus  Libroruin  MSS’. 


Nura.  1938. 

6.  Ihftmaions  to  fue  out  a  Recouerie.  2t  h. 

7-  The  order  to  fue  forth  a  Fyne  j 

8.  The  Caufe  wherein  Wage,' of  Lawe  Iyeth. 

g.  Ehe  order  «o  hie  forth  a  Nifi.Prius.  J 

10.  the  way  to  fue  out  a  Supplicavit ;  wlvrcbv  the 

““  berdeSul, 

fcr'the  r“y fllr  OUt«a  ®“Perfaie!ls  ;  and  the  mranes 
tS  fan,  “  CommodjlJe  &  fafelt  way  for  him  t!,at  fueth 

1 2.  Inftmffions  to  fue  for  a  Lunatick.  ~7'2s' 

13.  Inttrufhons  to  begge  a  Ward.  2  ' 

Warie.  hS  Charge  'a  tt,e  obayninge  the  Grante  ofa 

!i-  3?e  °rder  of  Somge  in  the  Exchequer.  ,03b 
the  Eich^ue^  Appearim“  “  S“bWna,  out  of 
17.  Ihe  Charges  of  an  Enrollment  in  the  Efcheque'r. 


1 8.  The  Charges  of  a  Quietus  eft,  in  the  Efcheque’r. 

It).  The  Charges  of  a  Charter- Warrant.  efb' 

ao.  heod.  Cur.  Marefcalli. 

cheqnejhe  Cha's“  of  *®lerifo  Accompt  in  the  Ex- 
T,'  S‘  nl3rgC  °ra  Recouer!=  at  the  Barrc.  la'.’bi 

-a-  lhc  Charge  of  the  Exemplification  of  a  Recoue 
nc,  vnder  the  Great  Seale  of  England.  ° 

24‘  J!'e  C,lar«e°f  a  Great  Seale. 
tionf'  1,leCllar«cs  for  a  fine  for  Licence  of  Aliena- 

tatem.  ^  °f  ’  Fi“  takm  bL  Dedimus  potef- 

T  2p’r'?-l3r  (i'barges  °f a  Line  acknowledged  befonf  mv 
L°Ia  Jothceofthe  Common  Pleas.®  „  ^ 
Barre.  ^  ^  f°r  Ackno“,|‘:dffhg  the  fame  i  the 

tion  m  theEfth1"®'  of  PIe!ldiWe  "f  a  Licence  of  Aliena¬ 
tion  in  the  Efcheqner,  uppon  a  Fyne.  ,  . 

30.  Fynes  of  Writs.  dJ- 

OuicSlar:”™  BreU,'"m  °n'S!nal-  *SigC 

-t'  The  O °n>al' Write  in  Communi  Banco.  37.' 
Singtwrte  ”  S“ma''  Vt'aWrie'  vPPo»  a 

doi4XebcyhaD?sre,;a  Mn-p™s  at  G-'d-ba»h,7Lob;. 

35-  The  Charge  of  a  Nifi-Prius  „  t!,e  Cnntmv.38^' 

39:S:c^f&CWkeofthel:^-  4A: 

Vtiawrie.be  Ctars&  cf  a  Generali  Pardon,  vppon  the 
ofTrefp^FOrmC  °fPro«cJillSi:  WP™  an  Indiftement 
4=-  Fees  belonginge  to  the  Clarke  of  the  Vtlawfe. 

-sssistrstrkns: 

vpp™  S' famrSCS  °f  TraVK  0f  1 “  ^tlawry,  &  Pardon 
4|-  Jhe  Charge  of  a  Supplicavit.  ,  *  g’ 

•m.  fees  belongeing  to  thsShirifie.  4Ls‘ 

48  Fees  beIongmgetotheClarkeSof  the  Peace  „  k 

ChiiceS.'  °W*<  f°r  enrod'I1Se  a  Recognizancet  Ac 

ibid. 

. 


Num.  1038,  r939. 

BenchThe  °rder  0f  Suinge  of  Pru“'"  “  'fe  Kir.™, 
53-  The  Charge  ofa  Special  Bayle,  in  Banco  Regis. 

Bend,1'1'6  Charge  f0r  Tr>’a11  °fa  in  the  Rtng« 

Wards1116  0rder  °f  SuinSe  ProC'S  out  tb=  Com  'f 

of  wkrS'  F°rme  °f  4  Ws  °"  °f  ««  Ki>ga  Lott 
Chancery^  ^  ^  ***  “  a  Sub-pena  ont^f  the 
5S.  Ihe  Charges  of  a  Sub-pena  in  the  Efchcq'um 
J9.  The  Charge  of  a  Special  Dedimus  poteftatm  ’  .6 

F“>  Of 

61.  The  Ordinary  Charges  in  pafiinge  an  Accmr  pt. 

62.  A  Note  of  the  Charges  of  a  Licence  of  Alieution. 

of  R3eqneSte  °f  ^  °f  ,ll£  W'i,K>  “  *e  !  o nr, 

in  tCm  SmlLr  °f  3  C°mmiffi0n  “> tak£  “ 

65.  1  lie  Charges  of  reuerfing  a  General  Ouflowrw 
uppon  an  Ordinary  Capias  Vtlagat.  ‘  h  y 

be£L5  Noteof  the  Char«es  tf  to  Honour  ofBaJuneit 
beftowed  vppon  any  man  by  the  Prince.  ibid  * 

orP  "denrv"°ai  «tain Law-Fotms, 

a3w^S“  Vpp°n  “■ Aai-  °fthe  Cafe,  for 

68.  Placituni  in  Dote.  49* 

69.  Replicatio  ad  eundem.  49‘b‘ 

feueral  Ohliiafi™.0"  VPP°n  “  Affi°n  °f  D*‘  5  'Won 

mBmP  Cmtu“:  ^  ThomamHal^A 

51.  b. 

j93q. 

A  Book  in  4tc 1.  done  by  lever', 1  Hands  wherein  I  find 

upon  a  cl:*  FteabHh'S  A'‘”“  & 

lrkk  01  tlK 

4  ThekCftSeTArx  u  ?SupportersofK.  Jam«t.  1 
wL  Creft,  Labell  &  Badge  of  Henry  Prince  oS 

York  ThC  Cr£fl  &  Labe"  °f  K'  Charfa  '•  »Me  Dukeof 

P  7  ArmeraT  Scyn'our  Duk=  of  Somerfett. 
bliontd  lOTe  Maril“ls  °f  Northampton, 

PaStntf^ifXr^  &  Crefl  ^ CbM,£a 

9.  Another,  with  Quarterings. 

EarT;firde?fsntSy“PPOr“S  °f  ^  ^ 
d-ilban^rDa^r-  ^  &  ^ 

of  fh’s.  Vf  r -r  •  zo?  of  the  Rnfignes  or  Cotes  of  Aimes 
Jacobi  1.  °  1  Ue  of  EnS,ande  &  Scotlande;  temp.  R. 

14.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  ofFamilies.  ^’r 
Dove,  &  Vemey  meS’  &C’  °*De  U  Morc-  Cartier, 


An  Hera  I- 


Bibliothecae 

Harieianse.  55  f 

Nutn.  1940 — 1944* 

Num.  1945 — ■i95i- 

1940. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  4to.  written  by  divers  Hands  ; 
wherein  are  contained, 

1.  The  Armes  of  one  John  Coventrey. 

2.  Epitaph  of  one  Tompfon. 

3.  Series  of  the  Earles  of  Chefter,  with  their  Armes 

in  Blafon.  _  .. 

4.  Alphabet,  (in  Blafon)  of  the  Armes  of  Chelhire 

Monafteries,  Nobility,  &  Gentry.  '• 

c.  Alphabet  (in  Blafon)  of  the  Armes  of  Lancalhire 
Families! 

6.  Beginning  of  an  Alphabet  of  the  Armes  of  Lngliin 
Eamilies  ;  in  Blafon.  4°* 

I94I* 

A  thin  Book  in  4to.  wherein  l  find, 

A  Collection  of  Writings^  of  divers  forts,  to  be 
ufed  as  Prefidents  by  fome  young  Scrivener  or  Attorney. 

1942. 

Avery  thin  book  in4to.  wherein  I  find, 

1.  The  Harangue  to  be  made  at  the  Admittance  of 
a  new  Member  into  the  Society  or  Fellowfhip  of  the 

Free-Mafons.  ,  ,  .  ... 

2.  The  Articles  to  be  obferved  by  the  feveral  Mem¬ 
bers  of  that  Society.  ,  , 

3.  The  New  Articles  ;  &  Form  of  the  Oath  to  be 

taken  at  Admiffion.  ,  „  . 

Whether  this  be  a  Copie  of  that  old  Book  men¬ 
tioned  by  Dr.  Plott  in  his  Staflordfhire  ;  I  cannot  now 
fay. 

1943- 

A  paper  Book  in  4to.  wherein  are  contained, 

The  Original  Accompts  of  Moneys  levied,  or 
paid  to  the  Sequeftrators,  of  Public  Service  done, 
Damages  &  Loffes,  by  plundering  of  the  Scotts,  Kc- 
within  the  Parifh  of  Church-Lawton  in  Chelhire,  A.  D. 
164a,  3,  4?  5>  &  6. 

I  944. 

A  Book  in  4to.  written  by  feveral  Hands  ;  wherein  are 
contained, 

1.  A  Table  referring  to  Things  of  mod  Note  in  this 
booke  ;  made  by  the  third  Randle  Holmes. 

2.  A  Breauarye  of  fome  fewe  Collections  of  the  Citie 

of  Chelter,  gathered  out  of  fome  fewe  Writers,  (by  Mi. 
Robert  Rogers ;)  and  heare  felt  downe,  by  Mr.  David 
Rogers,  his  fon  :  A.  D.  1609.  .  I-„ 

This  Treatife  is  continued  by  the  fame  David  he 
others  to  the  year  1652.  .  „ 

3.  The  Accompts  olTIughDodof  the  Citie  of  Chelter 
Yeoman,  by  him  made  &  deli uered  vnto  Nicholas 4 nee 
of  the  fame  City  Alderman,  in  July  16 29  ;  m  refpect  the 
laid  Dod  was  admitted  by  the  (aid  Nicholas  Ince,  m  the 
tyme  of  his  Majoralty,  to  write  in  the  Office  of  the  I  en¬ 
tice  during  the  Sequdtration  thereof  m  the  fame  Teare, 
by  Order  of  Affcmbly,  the  20th  of  February  1 626.  109. 

4.  A  Difcourle  or  Relacon  (among!  other  thmges)  ot 
the  ancient  &  moderne  Fees  illuinge  out  of  the  Courts 
held  at  the  Common  Law  within  the  Citie  of  Chelter  : 
as  well  in  Actions  Reall  as  Perfonall.  And  parte  ot 
which  Fees  are  belonginge  vnto  the  Right  Worlhiplulls 
the  Major  &  Recorder  of  the  laid  Ciltie  for  the  tyme 
beinge  ;  one  other  parte  thereof  vnto  the  Worlhipfull 
Sheriffs  of  the  fame  Cittie  ;  and  one  other  parte  thercolf 
vnto  theire  Servant  the  Clerke  of  the  Pentice  tor  the  tyme 

^5?  The  humble’ Peticon  of  Hugh  Dod  late  Clerke  of 
the  Pentice.  .  123. 

(.  Part  of  an  Order  made  at  an  Affembly  mthe  Com¬ 
mon  Hall  of  Fleas  within  the  Cittie  of  Chelter,  20  Febr. 
1626,  againft  Mr.  Robert  Brerewood  Elquier,  Clerke  oi 
the  Pentice. 

Cat.  Harl.  W-v  11. 

1945. 

A  Book  in  4to.  now  almoft  all  torn  away  ;  jet  here  rej 
mains  fome  few  godly  Poems  perhaps  of  theiecond 
Randle  Holmes,  part  of  one  of  his  setters,  &  L  . 
of  the  Names  of  People  invited  to  fome  Funeral!,  as 
alfo  fome  few  Heraldical  Drawings  done  with  Black 
Lead,  fcarce  worth  the  mentioning. 

1946. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  4to.  feeming  to  have  been  of  the 
Hand  of  Thomas  Chaloner.  It  contains. 

The  Armes,  In  Colors,  of  the  old  Founders  ot 
Weldi  Families:  beginning  with  Brutus. 

14.  B.  The  Written  account,  in  this  Exemplar,  is 
deficient ;  but  may  be  ftipplied  from  other  Copies. 

1947* 

An  Heraldical  book  of  Velum,  in  4to.  written  &  painted 
bv  Mercury  Patten,  Blu-mamel,  A.  D.  1000  ,  t 
which  he  hath  prefixed  this  Title,  Nomina,  Infigma, 
Etymologise,  Inflgniumq;  Defcriptiones,  Gal  ice,  La- 
tine,  et  Angliee,  uniufcujufq;  Scuti  pertmentis  aa  dig- 
niffimum  virum  Thomam  Holcroft,  in  Comitatu  Lan- 
callrenfi,  Armigerum. 

1948. 

A  paper  Book  in  4to.  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  David 
Rogers  :  wherein  are  cont;  ned, 
r.  The  Charter  of  the  Cittie  of  Chelter  ;  beinge  the 
mode  principall  Charter  graunted  by  Kinge  Henry  me 
Seventh.  In  Englith  :  imperfect  at  the  end. 

2.  A  Breuarye  of  fome  Collections  ot  the  molt  < 
chant  &  famous  Cittie  of  Chelter  ;  collefted  by  the 
Reuerend  Mr.  Robert  Rogers  j  and  reduced  into  eleven 
Chapters,  by  his  fonne  Dauid. 

*949-  ..  s 

A  thin  Book  in  4to.  (fomewhat  damaged  by  Moilture ;) 
wherein  I  find, 

1.  A  Collection  of  Medicinal  Receipts,  in  Welth  ; 

written  by  William  C  •  •  •  A.  T).  1604. 

2.  Defeat t  of  the  Britith  Kings  and  Princes,  from 
Brutus  to  Rhefe  Gryg  who  died  A.  D.  1233. 

1950. 

A  thin  Book  in  8vo.  on  the  out-fide  of  which  I  find,  an 
old  parchment  fragment  ot  fome  Interlude,  which  be¬ 
fore  the  Reformation,  were  often  played  ml  ageants 
publickly,  &  in  the  Streets  of  London,  Chelter,  L.o- 

ventre,  and  other  populous  Cities. 

Within,  there  is  a  Trail  much  more  modem,  & 
written  upon  Paper,  enhiui  d  a  Charafter  c f  the  <  u sene 
of  Great  Brittaine  ;  1.  f.  oi  Hcnrictta-Mana,  Couio.lto 

K.  Charles  1. 

tgs1' 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  4to.  for  the  mod  part  written  & 
tricked  by  Thomas  Chaloner,  as  it  ieeins  :  wherein  1 
find,  ,  ,  , 

1.  A  Lift  of  the  Knightes  of  the  Bathe  made  at  the 

Coronation  of  King  James,  24  July  1603.  . 

2 .  Knightes  of  the  Bathe  made  at  the  Creation  ot 

Henry  Prince  of  Wales,  A*.“  1610.  . 

Knightes  of  the  Bathe  made  at  the  Creation  of 

Charles  Duke  of  Yorke,  6  January  A°  1604. 

,1.  Knighies  of  the  Bathe,  at  the  Creation  of  Charles 
Prince  of  W ales,  1616. 

5.  A  Lift  of  the  Knights  of  the  Bathe,  made  at  the 

Coronation  of  our  Soueraigne  Lorde  Kinge  Charles  ;  the 
2d  of  February  A"  1625.  *• 

6.  A  Collection  of  the  Armes,  or  Atchievements, 
of  many  Englilh  Families ;  putt  down  promifeuoufly. 

7-  The  Names  of  the  Kingesof  Armes,  Herhanghtes, 
and  Puifuvauntes,  in  Irelande,  aundantly.  4». 

4  y  8.  Armes 

35§ 


Catalogus  Librarian  MSS. 


Num.  1951 — 1954* 

8.  Armes  of  four  Irilh  Earls,  viz.  of  O  Neil,  Bir¬ 
mingham,  Mortimer,  &  Lacie.  5i-b. 

9.  Creations  of  the  Nobility  of  Ireland,  with  their 
Annes  ;  untill  AJ.  1627  :  continued  to  A.  D.  1629. 

52- 

10.  Alphabetical  Table  to  all  the  Armes  preceding. 

73-  b- 

At  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

11.  Armes  of  moll  oftheEnglilh  Nobility,  engra¬ 
ven. 

12.  Names  of  the  Earl  of  Huntington’s  Quarterings. 

1.  b. 


1952. 

An  old  Heraldical  Book  written  upon  Paper  A  now  da¬ 
maged  at  the  lower  edges  :  wherein  I  find, 

1.  A  Receipt  of  a  precious  Water  for  alle  maner 
Seyknes  of  euen  (leg.  Eyen)  that  good  Kyng  Edwarde 
mayd  and  vfyd.  1. 

c.  A  Treatife  of  the  Science  of  Armorie,  divided  into 
two  Books,  whereof  the  Second  wants  the  Conclufion  ; 
but  at  the  end  of  the  Firfl  are  thefe  words,  “  Explicit  liber 
primus,  fcriptus  per  Wyllelmum  Feryby  Canonicum  de 
Thorntona,  anno  Domini  1517,  16  die  mentis  Marcij  : 
Laudes  Deo.” 


1 95  3- 

A  thin  Book  in  410.  wherein  are  entred. 

1.  Ordinances  made  by  the  Right  Honourable  Fran¬ 
ces  Lord  Verulam  Lord  Chancellor  of  England,  for  the 
more  better  &  more  regular  Adminiftration  of  Jullice  in 
the  Chancerie  ;  to  bee  dulie  obferved,  faying  the  Preroga¬ 
tive  of  the  Court. 

2.  A  Table  to  the  fame. 

I954- 

Codex  Juridicus,  et  membranaceus  in  8vo.  diverfis  mani- 
bus  fcriptus  ;  in  quo  leguntur, 

1.  In  Teftamenti  excidio  quid  faciendum.  r. 

Sequuntur  formula;  quredam  Teftamentorum  :  foil. 

2.  Teftamentum  caufa  tranfmeandi.  1.  b. 

3.  Teftamentum  nuncupativum.  ,  2. 

4.  Teftamentum  in  extremis.  ibid. 

5.  Pars  fcripti  Nicholai  Bolnehylle  Efcaetoris  Regij  in 

Com.  Caernervon,  qua  teftatur  fe  liberafle  Jevan  ap  Gruf- 
fyth  ap  Hoelle  plenariam  reftitutionem  diverforum  Tene- 
inentorum  ;  anno  22  R.  Henrici  vi.  3.  b. 

6.  Compoftcio  Monete  et  Menfurarufn.  5. 

7.  Allifa  Panis.  ibid. 

8.  Aftifa  Servisie.  6. 

9.  Qualiter  &  quarePiftores  & Brafiatoris  debent  amer- 

ciari  Judicium  Pdlorie  et  Tumberelli.  6.  b. 

10.  De  Standardis  Arete,  Buflelli,  &  Ulna;.  8. 

Sequuntur  CoIleCtanea  varia  de  Legibus  &  Confue- 

tudinibus  North-Walleniium  ;  puta, 

1 1.  Statuta  de  Rotlielan  ;  anno  12  Edw.  1.  9. 

12.  O nines  Peticiones  Wallenfium  Northe-Wallie, 

exhibite  Domino  Principi  et  ejus  Confilio,  tempore  Par- 
liamenli  Regis  prima  Dominica  Quadragefime, 

Anno  Regni  Regis  Edwardi  33.  31. 

13.  Articuli Efcaetrie.  38.  b. 

14.  Declaraiio  diverforum  Statutorum  atq;  Ordina- 
tionum  ad  Wallenfes  et  eorum  Terras  fpeClantes.  4^. 

15.  Servicia  et  Cuftum.  ad  Caftra  Domini  Principis, 

in  Comitatu  de  Caernarvon  debita.  48. 

16.  De  Seftione  Com.  Caernarvon  (Anglefeye,  & 
Mery  on.)  tenta  apud  Caernervon  coram  J.  dela  Pole  Juf- 
ticiario  Northwallie,  die  Mercurij  proximo  poft  Feftum 
S.  Michaelis,  Anno  regni  R.  Richardi  11.  fexto.  51. 

17.  Breve  Edwardi  Principis  Wallia;  ad  Majorem  & 

Ballivos  Libertatis  Ville  Belli-marifci  direCtum,  fuper 
querelis  Communitatis  Hominum  Wallenfium  Northe 
Wallie.  dat.  apud  Caernervon  20  die  Augufti,  anno 
Piincipatds  fui  quintodecimo.  5 1 .  b. 

18.  Judicium  Carnificum  Sc  Coquorum  tranfgredien- 

tium.  0  . , 


1  Num.  19^4—1959. 

19.  Carta  Belli-marifci.  QuafcilicetRexEdwardusm. 

concedit  communitati  Villa;  prmdiCta;,  quod  nullus  Com- 
motorum  de  Dyndaytho,  Turkelyne,  A  Talebolyone, 
Mercatum  querat  aut  exerceat  aliquo  loco,  nifi  in  Villa 
prediCta.  dat.  anno  regni  fui  39.  52. 

20.  Pro  Communitate  Ville  de  Caernervon  :  qua,  Ed- 
wardus  Princeps  Wallia;  confirmat  Ordinationem  quod 
proavus  fuus  Edwardus  Rex  Anglia;  proclamari  fecit  (ad 
petitionem  Communitatis  Ville  Anglice  de  Caernervon) 
quod  omnes  Homines  Commotorum  Vicinorum  habere 
debent  &  uti  mercatum  fuum  ad  di&am  Viliam,  A  nul- 
libi  alibi,  dat.  apud  Caern.  20  die  Januarij  anno  Princi- 
patus  fui  Wallie,  28. 

21.  Adnotationes  de  Literis  confimilibus  feriptis  pro 

Communitatibus  Villarum  de  Coneway,  &  de  Bdlo-ma- 
r^co*  _  ibid. 

22.  Breve  Domini  Regis :  contra  Tudor  ap  Meredith, 

qui  injufte  &  fine  judicio  diffeifaverat  nonnullos  de  libero 
eorum  Tenemento  in  Mavngoran,  poft  Pacem  Domini 
nuper  Regis  Anglia;,  in  Wallia,  proclamatam,  amio  Regn) 
fui  undecimo.  ’ 

23.  Breve  Regis  Henrici  vi.  direCtum  Efcaetori'  fuo 

in  Comitatu  Caernervon,  fuper  Liberatione  Terrarum  ac 
Tenementorum  Meurici  ap  Gruffuth  ap  Cad.  in  Dynor- 
wyke,  Havet-Reke,  Dolbaderne,  Bonyrvall,  Pentiecol'- 
togyone,  Llanvayr  neftryke,  Ac.  Iiowello,  David,  & 
Meredith,  filijs  ejufdem  Meurici.  Tefte,  &c.  apud  Caer¬ 
nervon,  23  die  Maij  anno  Regni  21.  55. 

24.  Scriptum  Nicholai Bolnehuilc  EfcaetorisDnL  Re^is 

in  Comitatu  Caernervon,  qua  dimittit  ad  fir  mam  Llew- 
ellyno  ap  Madoc  ap  David,  Medietatem  Cafualimn  et 
Efcaetriarum  infra  Commotum  de  Cruthyne,  ad  tenni- 
num  quatuor  annorum.  dat.  8  die  Februarij  anno  22 
R.  Henrici  vi.  56.  b. 

25.  Breve  Regis  Henrici  vi.  quo  illi  preeipit  quod 

Gwladus  vidua  quondam  Hoelli  ap  Meuric  ap  Gruffuih 
rationabilem  dotem  fuam  de  Terris  et  Tenementis  quon¬ 
dam  viri  fui  in  Dynorwyke,  Dolbaderne,  &  Llanvair, 
affignet  &  liberari  faciat,  fecundum  Legem  &  Confuetu- 
dinem  Principatus  fui  North-Wallie.  Tefte  fe-ipfo,  apud 
Caernervon,,  22  die  Maij,  anno  regni  fui  21.  58.  b. 

J955- 

A  paper-Book  in  thin  8vo.  wherein  are  fett  down,  Col- 
lettions,  as  it  feems,  from 

1.  Thomas?  Shelton’s  Characters  for  Short-Writing, 
Anno  1639. 

2.  Jofiah  Rocks  Characters  for  Short-Writing,  Anno 
'.689. 

3.  Bp.  Wilkins’s  Real  Character. 

!95  6- 

A  paper-Book  in  i2mo.  wherein  I  find, 

1.  An  Alphabet  of  (he  Armes  of  Cornifh  Families,  in 
Blazon  ;  befides  which,  fome  of  them  are  alfo  tricked. 

2.  Erroneous  Alphabets  copied  from  Duret,  &  perhaps 
from  others  ;  all  crofted  out- 

3.  At  the  other  end  of  the  book  are  Tricks  of  Armes 
aferibed  to  Jarveis,  Geirvcis,  Trevinnard,  Ac. 

1 957' 

A  paper-Book  in  1 2mo.  unbound  A  torn  ;  wherein  are 
fome  few  Armes,  and  boyifh  Pictures.  It  ferved  alfo 
in  Randle  Holme’s  Family  for  him,  his  Wife,  or 
Maids,  to  fett  down  their  Memorandums  of  Douieitick 
Concerns. 

1958. 

A  Parcel  of  unbound  Papers,  in  Svo.  tied  up  together, 

&  containing, 

Divers  Prayers,  Thankfgivings,  Meditations,  Ac. 
written  by  Randle  Holme  the  fecond,  as  I  conjecture. 

T959* 

A  parchment  Book  in  8vo.  wherem  is  entred, 

1.  A  Lift  of  Englifh  Knights  made. by  K.  James  1.  at 
his  Departure  from  Edenburgh  for  England  ;  &  during 

his 


Bibliothecas  Ilarleiance. 


359 


Num.  1959—1967. 

his  Journey  up  to  London ;  ahd  for  fome  time  afterward. 
This  is  preceded  by 

2.  A  Lift  of  the  Knights  of  the  Bath,  made  at  his 
Coronation. 

This  Book  feems  not  now  to  appear  in  its  priftine 
fiiape,  but  to  have  been  thus  reduced  from  a  Roll. 

1960. 

A  thin  paper  Book  in  121110.  moftly  written  by  one  of 
the  Holmes,  &  containing, 

1.  A  Collection  of  Riddles,  with  their  Solutions  ; 
being  fuch  as  young  Lads  and  Laffes  ufe  to  make  fport 
with. 

2.  At  the  end  is  a  Table  to  the  fame. 

1961 . 

An  Heraldical  book  in  1  imo.  written  upon  Paper  in  the 
Wei Ih  Language;  &  containing, 

The  Armes  of  divers  old  Wei fh  Families  ;  rudely 
tricked  &  coloured,  (as  it  feems)  by  William  Kynwall. 
A.  D.  1580. 

1962. 

A  fmall  thin  "1  raft  in  24to.  (fcarcely  worth  the  mention¬ 
ing)  but  thus  entituled, 

Shelton’s  Characters  for  Short- Writing  ;  1639. 

1963. 

An  Heraldical  Book,  thick  &  oblong  ;  wherein  I  find, 
The  Crelts  of  Chefliire-Faniilies,  rudely  tricked 
&  painted,  upon  Paper  ;  being  putt  down  in  way  of 
Alphabet. 

1964. 

A  parchment  Book  in  24to.  given  by  ttie  late  learned 
Doctor  George  Hickes  ;  wherein  is  contained, 

A  Manual  of  Prayers  &  Devotions,  to  the  Virgin 
Mary,  &c.  for  the  molt  part  in  Latin,  but  fometimes  in 
French,  or  with  French  Rubricks  :  before  which,  a  Ca¬ 
lendar  is  prefixed,  ImperfeCt. 

1965. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fol.  ten.  diverfis  manibus  fcrip- 
tus ;  quo  compleCtuntur, 

1.  Tituli  et  Ordo  Munimentorum  Monafterij  See. 
WerburgeCivitatis  Ceftrenfis  ;  cujus  in  Ecclefia,  (difio- 
luto,  ut_  ajunt,  Monafterio)  Sedem  Epifcopalem  pofuit 
R.  Henricus  vm. 

2.  Liber  Irrotulatorius  Cartarum  ejufdem  Monafterij, 
ad  initium  ufq;  Regni  Regis  Edwardi  1.  cum  Additioni- 
bus  quibufdam,  e  quo  quamplurima  Curiofa,  Scituq; 
digniffima  poffunt  erui.  Notandum  vero,  Cartas  heic 
rariffime  a  Capitead  ealeem  exhiberi  integras,  fed  tantum 
earum  partes  praicipuas,  in  peculiares  Abbatum,  uti  vi- 
detur  Ufus  fele&as  :  quibus,  urgente  aliqua  gravioris 
Momenti  caul'S,  ad  perluftrandas  Autographas  in  fecre- 
tioribus  Monafterij  Archivis  reconditas,  perfacilis  femper 
patebat  aditus. 

1  966. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  now  imperfect,  and  almoft 
fpoiledby  moifture  ;  wherein  i  find. 

The  Baronage  of  Robert  Cooke  Clarencieux  ;  with 
Additions  &  Continuations,  and  a  Table  at  the  end  ; 
begun  to  be  written  Sc  painted  by  Thomas  Chaloner,  Sc 
continued  by  his  foil  Jacob  Chaloner,  Randle  Holme  the 
fecond  and  others. 

J967- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  fol,  de  plurimis  Librorum  fragmen- 
tis,  Epiftolis,  alifq;  laceris  chartulis,  nunc  fimul  com- 
pactis,  conftans ;  in  quo,  multa  ad  Antiquitates  Iiif- 
toriamq;  Civitatis,  Comitatus,  Familiarium,  Monaf- 
teriorum,  Villarum,  atq;  Eccleljarum  parochialium 
Ceftrenfium  pertinentia,  pofiint  inveniri.  fcil. 

1.  Collectanea  ex  Rotulis  Litterarum  Patentiam  R. 
R.  llenrici  vn.  Henrici  via.  Edwardi  vi.  Maris,  Eliza- 
3 


Num.  1967. 

bethac,  &  Jacobi  1.  de  diverfis  Terris,  Domibus,  Eccle- 
fijs,  Monafterijs,  alijs  poflellionibus,  ab  ijfdem  Principi- 
bus  conceffis. 

2.  Adnotationes  de  varijs  Placitis  in  Curia  Com.  Cef¬ 
trenfis  tentis,  teinporibus  R  R.  Henrici  via.  Edw.  vi.  ct 
Marine.  ’  2I> 

2-  Excerpta  nonnulla  e  Cartulario  S.  M arise  de  Caftle- 
acre  penes  Rememoratorem  Regis  in  Scaccario:  ad  prai- 
nobilem  Warennorum  familiamVpedtantia.  27. 

N.  B.  Ille  ipfe  Liber,  five  Regiftrum  de  Caftle-Acre, 
jam  nunc  in  Harleyana  Bibliotheca  reperitur,  notatus 
inibi  97.  B.  2. 

4.  Adnotationes  nonnulla;  exigui  momenti;  fuper 
familia  dfe  Strange,  &c.  ibid. 

5.  Excerpta  luper  familia  de  Savage,  ex  libro  quodam 

vocato  Alcock.  in  Archivis  Epifcopatus  Wigornienfis  ; 
manu  Dni.  Gulielmi  Dugdalij.  29. 

6.  De  familia  de  Bradwall.  ^c.  b. 

7.  Difcents,  Church-Notes,  Extracts  from  Old  In- 
ftruments,  &  from  Records  in  the  Tower  of  London  ; 
chiefly  concerning  Chefhire  Families  Sc  Places  :  written 
in  a  bad  hand. 

8.  Littene  Patentes  Regis  Henrici  quibus  Ci vita- 

tern  Ceftrenfem  in  Comitatum  ampliavit,  varifq  ;  Privi- 
legijs  ac  Immunitatibus  condecoravit.  Tefte  Seipfo,  apud 
Ceftriam,  6  die  Aprilis,  anno  Regni  fui  2 1.  50. 

9.  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Charter  to  the  City  of  Chelter, 

in  Englifh  :  bearing  Tefte,  14  June,  in  the. 16th  year  of 
her  Reigne.  55.  b. 

.10.  Notes  taken  out  of  Charters  appertevnynge  to  the 
Cittie  of  Chefter  ;  whereof  fome  were  graunted  by  the 
Earles  of  Chefter,  fome  by  the  Kings  of  England,  &  fome 
by  the  Princes  of  Wales.  g2. 

1 1 .  Extracts  of  fome  old  Deeds,  relating  to  Houfes  & 
Perfons  in  Chefter. 

12.  In  what  manner  every  man  fhould  make  his  lafl 

Will ;  from  Fabians  Chronicle  64.  b. 

13.  Extracts  from  old  Deeds,  relating  to  the  Towns 

of  Clifton  &  Chedle.  S6. 

14.  Some  Original  Letters  from  Sir  William  Dugdale 
to  Mr.  William  Vernon  ofShakerley  in  Lancashire,  upon 
the  fubjedt  of  our  Hiftory  &  Antiquities.  67.  73.  80.  82. 

90.  b. 

1 5.  Defcent  of  Roe.  7 1 .  b. 

16.  Carta  Agnetis  quondam  Uxoris  Hugonis  del  Holes. 

72.  b. 

17.  Extracts  from  fundry  old  Muniments  Sc  public 

Records,  concerning  many  Chefhire  Families  &  Places, 
by  Mr.  Roger  Dodfworth  &  others.  77. 

18.  Extracts  from  many  old  Deeds  tranferibed  by 
Mr.  \\  illiam  Vernon  above-mentioned,  into  his  book 
marked  R. 

They  chiefly  concern  the  Monafteries  of  Trentham, 
Bafingwerke,  Dieulacres,  Bordefley,  Cumba,  Kenel- 
worthe,  Pultone.  g 

19.  Like  extracts  or  Tranfcripts,  from  another  book 

marked  1)  ;  which,  probably  might  belong  to  Mr.  Ver¬ 
non  aforefaid.  j  0  j , 

Thefe  Collections,  do  not  only  concern  many  Che- 
fhire-Families,  but  alfo  the  Townes  of  Somerford  juxta 
Martone,  Namptwich,  Cumbermere-Abbev,  Wych-Mal- 
bank  &  the  Barony  thereof,  Namptwich-Hundred,  the 
Bifhoprick  of  Bath  Sc  Wells,  See. 

20.  Genealogia  Familia:  de  Warburtone.  142.  b. 

21.  Papers  relating  to  the  Caufe  heard  A.  D.  1665, 
between  Thomas  Molineux  Gent.  Sc  Ellen  Rigby  his 
late  Servant,  againft  whom  he  had  fpoken  Words  diffa- 
matory. 

22.  Notes  and  Extracts  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Vernon,  by  the  Hands  of  Sir  William  Dugdale,  Mr.  Ro¬ 
ger  Dodfworth,  See.  °  148. 

23.  Excerpta  nonnulla,  fpeclantia  ad  Foreftas  in  Cef- 

trefhire ;  ex  Rotulo  de  I.Ianharun,  de  anno  29  Regis 
Henrici  in.  154.13. 

24.  P taciturn 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSSi 


3^ 


Num.  1967,  1968. 

44.  Placitum  coram  Confilio  Dni.  Reg  s,  in  Octabis 

S.  Hillarij,  anno  38  R.  Henrici  Hi.  inter  Rogerum  de 
Sandbach  et  Abbatem  de  Deulacreffe,  de  Ecclelia  de 
Sandbache.  _  I55-^- 

25.  Abdra<51a  ex  Recordis  &  alijs  Muftimentis  tam 

publicis  quam  privatis,  fuper  Manerio  &  Ecclefia  de 
Aftebuiy,  Newbold,  &c.  156.  175.  b.  180.  b. 

26.  Succeffio  abbatum  Monafterii  Stax  Werburga; 

Ceftrienfis,  a  Richardo  primo  Abbate,  ufqj  ad  Thomam 
de  Burch,  qui  facias  fait  Abbas  ibidem.  A.D.  1289. 
ficut  inveniebalur  defcripta  in  antiquo  Iibro  in  perga- 
ineno,  in  Mocader.  Cedr.  I7°- 

27.  Some  (hort  Notes  of  a  Lawyer,  relating  to  Pleas, 

See.  in  Chefliire.  171, 

28.  Carta  Regis  Eadgari,  qua  fundavit  Domum  ^pro 

Canonicis  Secularibus)  Sts.  Werbiirgs  dicatam,  in  loco 
qui  dicitur  lgac{\T]\  A.D.  958.  *77- 

29.  Carta  Hugonis  Comitis  Cedrenfis,  de  nova  Fun- 

datiune  Si  Indotarione  ejufdem  Monalterij,  in  ufus  Mo- 
nachorum  Benedictinorum.  A.  D.  1093.  177-^>- 

30.  Tranfcripta  &  abdracta  Recordorum,  ad  diverfas 
Villas  Se  Familias  infra  Comitiun  Ceftrienfem  pertinentia. 

181.  b. 

31.  Declaration  of  the  old  Marks  by  which  Mr.  Ro¬ 
ger  Dodfworth  didinguifhed  the  feveral  Volumes  of  his 
Collections  :  written  by  Mr.  Randle  Holme,  the  third, 
as  I  believe. 

1968. 

A  pnper-Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  Hands ;  & 

feeming  to  have  been  a  Continuation  of  iome  other 

Volume  or  Volumes,  as  beginning  with  fol.  540. 

It  contains, 

1.  Randle  Holmes  the  aid’s  Table  of  the  Ihings  of 
mod  Note  in  this  book. 

Then  follows, 

2.  A  large  Number  of  Old  Deeds,  or  AbdraCts  of 
them,  relating  to  Welfli  Perfons  and  Places,  as  to  Che- 
flure  &  its  Families,  with  many  of  the  Seals  hadily  trie'-  ed: 
ail  which,  were  formerly  in  the  poffeflion  of  Mr.  Randle 
Holme  aforefaid. 

Among  them,  I  take  thefe  following  to  be  the  prin¬ 
cipal!,  viz. 

3.  Cuita,  qua  Alanus  de  Boydell  dedit  fratri  fuo 

Wiilelmo  de  Boydell  Dotlidon  (in  Com.  Cedr.)  tenend. 
de  Ranulpho  Comite  C.cflriax  Tedibus,  eodein  Domino 
Ranulpho,  Domino  Ranulpho  de  Menwarynge  Judiciario 
Cedrite,  Duo.  Roberto  de  Monte-alto,  Duo.  llugone 
Dcfpenfario,  Roberto  Perfona  de  Gropchalle  Scriptore 
hu  us  Script!,  <kc.  544* 

C01  .  it  pleno -Comitatu  Cedr. 

apud  Cedr.  die  Martis  in  fecunda  Septimana  Quadrage- 
iunc,  anno  16  R.  Regis  Heurici  vi.  coram  Ilumfredo 
Duce  Gloucedr.  Judiciario  Cedric, Laurencio  Fitton,  &c. 

545-  b. 

A  Deed  or  Will  oi  Robert  Manwarringe,  who  ac¬ 
knowledged  before  God,  his  Ghodly  Father  Phillip 
Fairden  Prelhitcr,  Fried  cf  Alderfley,  &c.  (in  like  man¬ 
ner  as  tl'.e  Lord  Bilhopp  of  Cheder  had  already  tedified 
by  his  Yv  ritingc  &  under  his  Scale)  that  he  the  faid  Ro¬ 
bert  was  lawfully  wedded  to  Elyn  Walker,  dat.  10  of 
September,  A.  D.  1493.  (Qu-  whether  this  Bilhop 
abovementipned,  fliould  not  have  been  written  Covcn- 
tre  ?)  _  546. 

6.  Carta,  qua  Henricus  (Holand)  Dux  Exonie,  Comes 

Hunting! on  £«;  de  Ivory,  Admirallus  Anglie  Hybemie) 
Sc  Aquitanie,  Dominus  de  le  Sparr,  ac  Condabularius 
Turris  London,  concedh  Thome  Everard  alias  Ducne, 
Exccdrie  Herauldo,  unum  annualem  feodum  10  Libr. 
Sterlingorum.  dat. ann.  31.  Henr. vi.  55i.b. 

7.  An  Indrument  of  Richard  Duke  of  Yorke,  Earle 
of  the  March  &  Uluedre,  haueinge  the  keepeinge  of  his 
right  entirely  wel-beloued  Coufin  &  Son  Henry  Duke  of 
Exeter,  appointing  Rawlyn  Grofvenor  Squier  to  be  Ste- 


Num.  1968 — 1970* 

ward  of  Hope  &  Hopedale  in  the  County  of  Flynt.  dat. 
26  Augud,  ann.  25  Hen.  vi.  ibid. 

8.  Some  other  Indruments  of  the  above-mentioned 

Henry  Duke  of  Exeter.  532. 

9.  Litteive  Palentes  R.  Elizabeths,  pro  Radulfo  Ra- 
venferofte  Armigero  Efcaetore  fuo  in  Comitatu  Flynt. 
Tede,  &c.  27  Novembris,  anno  Regain.  555.  b.  etvid. 

55°-  b. 

10.  Litterte  Patentes  R.  Henrici  vm.  quibus  ad  fir- 
mam  dimittit  Petro  Stanley  Armigero,  uni  Generoforum 
Hodiariorum  Cameras  lute,  Manerium  five  Dominiuiil 
de  Ewlowe  in  Com.  Flynt ;  Molendinum  de  Flynt ;  nec- 
non  omnia  Amerciaments  Placit.  Sc  Perquifita  Curiae 
Villas  de  Flynt,  una  cum  Tolnet  Mercatorum  et  Nundi- 
narum  ibidem.  Tede,  &c.  7  Aprilis,  anno  regni  fui  26. 

Jj-8.  b. 

Here  is  an  hafly  Trick  of  the  County-Seal  of  Cheder. 

11.  A  Leafe  of  certain  Tithes  granted  by  Thomas 
Jackefon  Rector  ofHawarden  in  Flint  (hire,  to  Sir  Tho¬ 
mas  Stanley  Knight,  dat.  2  February  ann.  7  F.liz. 

563. b. 

This  hath,  befides  the  Seals  of  the  Parties,  thatalfo 
of  William  Dov.  neham  then  Bifiiop  of  Cheder. 

12.  Carta,  qua  Robertus  (Parfew)  Ailavenfis  Epifco- 
pus,  cum  conferifu  Decani  &  Capituli  Ecclefia:  fuse  Ca- 
thedralis,  concedit  Edwardo  Baynton  Militi,  primam  & 
proximam  Advocationem  Ecclefia;  Parocliialis  de  Cayras 
in  Decanatu  de  Tegingi.  dat.  24  die  Julii  A.D.  1 538. 

56S.  b. 

The  principal  Places  mentioned  in  the  Collection  of 
Charters  aforelaid,  are  Kynerton,  Dodledone,  Adon, 
Hawardyn,  Mohait,  Hope,  Hopedale,  North-wich, 
Flynt,  Brettone,  Eulowe,  Mancote,  Conway,  Denbigh, 
Lions  or  Holt,  Horton,  &c.  Then  follow, 

13.  Ordinances  provided  in  Eader-Tearme,  anno  44 
Eli/.,  by  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  Thomas  Egerton  Kt. 
Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great  Seale  of  England,  for  the  re¬ 
medy  of  fundry  Abufes  in  the  Court  of  Chauncery. 

575-  b. 

14.  AbflraCt  of  an  Agreement  made  between  Sir  Lau¬ 

rence  Smith  Kt.  Mayor  of  Cheder,  See.  and  Thomas 
Poole  and  Robert  Fulwood,  Painters,  for  the  annuall 
painting  of  that  Cities  four  Giants,  one  Unicorne,  one 
Dromedary,  one  Luce,  one  Camell,  one  Afie,  one  Dra¬ 
gon,  Six  Hobby-horfes,  and  Sixteen  naked  Boyes.  dat. 
2i  April,  A.  D.  1564.  57  6. 

1969. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  modly  written  by  the  Hand  cf 
Griffith  Hughes  ;  it  contains, 

1 .  A  Table  directing  to  the  Coats  of  Armes  mentioned 
in  this  Book  :  made  by  Randle  Holmes  the  third. 

2.  An  Index,  or  Table  to  all  the  Tribes  mentioned  in 
this  Book. 

3.  Defcents  of  very  many  Wclfh  Families  :  among 

which  are  thofe  of  each  of  the  Fifteen  Tribes  of  North- 
Wales,  excepting  one  ?  1  • 

а.  Defcents  of  very  many  Families,  both  Wei  ih  and 

Englifli ;  elpecially  of  fuch  Englilh  as  lived  in  or  near 
Wales.  621. 

5.  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table,  to  the  Tract 
next  following.  C6g.  , 

б.  Defcents  of  many  Welfli  Families  (with  fome  Eng¬ 
lifli  intermixed)  by  another  Hand.  67 1 . 

7.  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Lid  of  the  Pedegrees 
regidred  in  this  Book.  743-  t 

°8.  His  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Places  mentioned  in 
this  Book.  755* 

1970. 

A  Book  in  fol.  confiding  of  leveial  Trafts  bound  up  to¬ 
gether.  In  it  I  lied, 

1.  Compotus  Mini  Lorum  Domini  Principis  Wallis, 
&  Comitis  Cedrenlis,  uti  videtur  ;  ri>  anno  fcilicet  10 
Regis  Henrici  iv.  ufque  ad  annum  7  Henrici  v  *• 


Bibliotheca;  Harleianae. 


361 


Num,  1970. 

This  is  faid  to  have  been  tranfcribed  from  an  old 
parchment  Book,  formerly  kept  in  the  Abbey  of  St  Wer- 
burgh  in  Chefter, 

2.  Arreragia  computorum  diverforum  Miniftrorum  de 

Flint,  ad  feftum  Sti.  Michaelis  Archangeli,  anno  Regni 
Regis  Edwardi  Quarti,  duodecimo,  &c.  11. 

3.  Recepta  Exituum  Comitatus  de  Flint,  anno  14  R. 

Edwardi  iv.  &c.  H* 

4.  The  Mife  for  the  Kings  &  Queenes  Majeftie.  25. 

5.  How  200  pounds  were  to  be  raifed,  for  one  Hun- 

dreth  men.  25.  b. 

6.  An  Affeflment  for  furnifhing  Eightfcore  Men,  & 
Eight  men,  with  46s.  8d.  every  man  ;  February,  1 557. 

ibid. 

7.  Valor  diverforum  Maneriorum,  Villarum,  Caftro- 

rum,  &c.  in  Comitatu  Flynt,  parcelle  Poffeflionum  Co* 
miris  Palatini  Ceftrie  &  Flint.  27. 

8.  Notes  touching  Armes  fent  to  Breme  ;  what  hap¬ 
pened  to  them  ;  &  of  Souldiers  that  died.  29. 

9.  A  Coppy  of  a  Letter  written  by  the  Lords  of  his 

Maje fly’s  Privy  Counfcll,  to  the  Eaileof  Bridgewater 
Lord-Prefident  of  Wales,  concerning  trayned  Bands, 
dat.  27  April  1635,  3°-. 

10.  A  Coppy  of  the  Lord-Prefidents  Letter  to  his 

Deputy-Lieutenaunts  in  the  County  of  Flint  ;  upon  the 
fame fubjett.  Dated,  4  Maij  1635,  3I-b« 

1 1.  The  Names  8c  Sirnames  of  all  fuch  Cleargiemen 
&  Ecclefiaftical  Perfons  within  the  County  of  Flint  and 
Dioceffe  of  St.  Affaph,  as  are  charged  to  find  any  Horfes 
or  Armes  (fent  down  by  the  fame  Lord-Prefident.) 

Next  follows,  32.  b, 

12.  A  Tradt  (moftly  in  the  Welfh  Language)  and 
treating  of  Armes  and  Pedegrees  ;  tranfcribed  by  Thomas 
Chaloner  of  Chefler,  King  of  Armes  for  Ireland,  from 
the  Book  which  Guttun  Owen  wrote  \vith  his  own  hrnd  ; 
with  fome  Additions. 

Therein  I  obferve,  the  Armes  of  the  five  Royal 
Tribes  of  Wales,  in  Blazon.  33. 

13.  The  Armes  of  the  Fifteen  Tribes  of  North-Wales, 

in  Blazon.  ibid. 

14.  Defcents  of  the  Princes  of  Wales.  .  34* 

15.  Defcendants  from  Buchan,  a  Prince  in  South- 

Wales.  34”  b* 

16.  Defcendants  from  Kaw.  35*  b. 

1 7.  Pedegree  of  our  King  Edward  the  Confeffoy,  in 

Wei  fit,  with  Defcents  of  other  Englifhmen.  36. 

18.  Defcents  of  divers  Wellh  Families.  37. 

19.  Defcents  of  many  Families  in  South-Wales  ;  with 

fome  other  Places  intermixed.  4°  b. 

20.  Of  the  Fifteen  Tribes  of  North-Wales.  45. 

N.  B.  The  Original  Book  of  Guttun  Owen  above- 

mentioned,  is  now  in  the  polfelfion  of  my  worthy  Friend 
Mr.  Mofes  Williams  ;  9  Dec.  1718. 

2 1 .  Defcendants  from  particular  Perfons,  both  Englifh 

and  Welfh,  noted  according  to  the  refpe&ive  Places  of 
their  Refidence.  57-  b- 

22.  Defcent  of  Captain  Richard  Owen,  fent  him  out 

of  Wales,  A.  D.  1652.  69. 

23.  Tranfcrips  of,  or  Extradls  from,  fome  Deeds 
relating  to  the  Family  of  Beake  or  Caernarvon  : 
with  Tricks  of  the  Seales  j  by  Randle  Holme  the  n. 

69.  b. 

24.  Commifiion  given  to  Capt.  Will.  Davies,  by  Sir 
William  Brereton,  in  order  to  raile  100  Men  for  the 

■  Parliament-Service,  dat.  9  Sept.  1644.  72.  b. 

25.  Atteflatjon  of  the  Service  done  to  the  Parliament, 
bv  the  faid  Capt.  Davies  &  his  Men  :  by  Robert  Venables. 

ibid. 

26.  Names  of  the  Chefhire  Comnfiflioners  appointed 

by  the  Parliament,  for  raifing  their  Proportion  of  the 
6o>ooo  pounds  per  Menfem.  73' 

27.  Extract  from  fome  Deeds  of  Welfh  Perfons, 
’  with  Tricks  of  the  Seals  of  a  Court  holdenin  or  near  the 

Caftellum  Leonum,  (or  Holt-Caftle  )  74,  b. 

Cat.  Ha^l.  Vol.1I, 


Num.  1970,  1971, 

28.  Defcent  of  fome  Welfh  Familie.  75.  b, 

29.  A  pretended  Petition  of  the  Gentrie,  Minifters, 
and  Freehoulders  of  the  County  of  Flint,  again!!  being 
bound  by  Ordonances  in  Parliament,  not  enadted  by  the 
joint  Confent  of  the  King  and  of  both  Houfes.  76.  b. 

30.  Tranfcript  of  the  Roll  of  divers  Courts  held  at 

temp.  R.  Richardi  11.  chiefly  concerning 
Welfh  People  :  made  by  Randle  Holme  Junior,  (vid. 
fol.  90.  b.)  A.  D.  1651.  77 ,90. 

3  1 .  A  large  Pedegree  of  Peirs  ap  David  or  Peirs  Da-, 
vies  of  Chefler  Lynen-Draper  8c  W  eaver,  living  A.  D. 
1635.  faid  to  be  truly  colledted  gathered  8c  fett  downe, 
accordinge  to  the  auntient  Records  of  U  ales,  &  the 
Bookes  of  the  belt  approued  Authors  of  the  Brittifli  Ge-. 
nealogies,  by  Evan  Lloyd  of  Pojey  in  the  County  of  Me- 
rionyth  Gent,  alias  Euan  Lloyd  Geffrey,  Anno  1634  ; 
and  here  inferted  by  Randle  Holme  junior  88.  b. 

32.  Copie  of  Sir  Thomas  Chaloner’s  Will,  dated  16 

November  1615.  91. 

33.  Percells  beinge  at  Firme  in  the  hands  of  the  Re-, 

cevor  of  Ol'waflrey,  tern.  R.  Marise.  92.  b. 

34.  Of  a  Temped  of  Hail,  bigger  than  Tennis-balls, 

which  deftroyed  the  Come  in  the  Parifh  of  Llanraiad.  26 
July,  A.  D.  1556-  ibid. 

35.  Covenants  made  between  Edward  Sutton  Lord 

Dudley  &  Powys,  &  Rafe  Brereton  Squire,  Stewards  of 
the  Lordfhipp  of  Ofwaftree ;  Edward  Trevar,  Con- 
ftableof  the  fame  Lordfhipp  ;  and  John  Trevor  Lieftenant 
there;  touching  the  better  government  of  theLordfhips 
of  Powis  &  Ofwaldeftre,  made  A-  D.  1534.  ibid. 

36.  An  idle  Prophefie,  faid  to  have  been  taken  out  of 

a  booke  of  John  Gray  Lord  Powys  A.  D.  1514.  con* 
ceming  uncommon  occurrences  which  were  to  happen 
A,  D.  1552.  ibid. 

37.  Extradtsfrom  certain  old  Deeds  of  Welfh  people. 

94. 

38.  Petition  of  Robert  Dolben  of  the  Towne  of  Den¬ 

bigh  in  the  Marches  of  Wales,  to  the  Kings  Commiffion- 
ers  (anno  18  R.  Henrici  vn.)  for  a  Sixty-years  Leafe  of 
certain  Lands  within  the  Lordfhip  of  Denbigh,  at  the 
Rents  accultomed.  95. 

39.  Extrad  from  an  old  Court-Roll  of  the  Lordfh$ 
of  Denbigh;  made  by  Randle  Holme  Junior,  A.  D.  1651, 

96.  b. 

40.  Extracts  from  old  Deeds,  &c.  with  Tricks  of 

Seals,  and  fome  few  Defcents,  of  Welfh  People  ;  all  by 
the  Hand  of  the  faid  Randle  Holme.  98.  b. 

Moft,  if  not  all,  thefe  faid  Deeds  do  concern  the 
Town  or  Townfhip  of  Stanfti  within  the  Lordfhip  of 
Bromfeld  in  Denbigh-lhire. 

41.  Rotulus  Curiarum  Anglicanarum  tentarum  apud 
Viliam  de  Hope  Regina;,  comm  Thoma  Archiepifcopo 
Cantuarienfi,  Georgio  Epifcopo  Exonienfi,  Richardo 
F.pifcopo  Sarifburienfi,  Johanne  Neville  de  Montagu 
Milite,  Johanne  de  Audeley  de  Audeley,  Willelmo  Haf- 

tynges  de  Haftyng  Milite,  Ik  Willelmo  Stanly  Milite, - 

anno  Regni  Regis  Edwardi  iv.  fccundo.  (Original)  1 1  r. 

42.  A  few  Notes  concerning  the  times  of  certain  She- 

riffes  of  Flintfhire.  1 1 3.  b. 

43.  The  Names  of  all  the  High  Sheriffs  of  the  County 
of  Flinte,  &  their  Deputy  Sheriffes,  from  the  Ordinance 
of  Wales  anno  32  Hen.  vm.  to  A.  D  1638"  which  the 
fecond  Randle  Holme  had  of  Mr.  Griffeth  ofPanty  Elond. 

1 14. 

44.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Surnames  of  divers 

Families  mentioned  in  this  book,  1 15.  b. 

I97I* 

A  Book  in  folio,  the  greateft  part  of  it  done  by  Mr.  Tho¬ 
mas  Chaloner  of  Chefter  ;  to  which  many  Additions 

&  Continuations  have  been  made  by  the  two  laf^ 

Randle  Holmes  of  the  fame  Place,  Armes-Painters, 

and  others.  It  contains, 

1.  A  Table  of  the  Pedegrees  foon  to  be  mentioned. 

4  ?,  2,  ATabje 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


362 


Num.  1971 — 1974. 

2.  A  Table  referring  to  the  feveral  Coats  &  Crefts 
mentioned  in  the  Book. 

,  A  large  Colleflion  of  Defcents  of  the  Gentry  in 
Il/n  Afire,  Denbigh-fhire,  andotherpartsofNorth-Wale<; 
b  gun  by  Thomas  Chaloner  above-mentioned;  with  many 
Co  itinuations  (even  as  low  as  the  year  1705)  and  other 
Additions. 

Here  are  alfo  fome few  Original  Letters,  and  Extra&s 
from  antient  Evidences. 

4.  A  Table  declaring  the  Names  of  Places  mentioned 
in  this  Collection. 

r972* 

An  Heraldfcal  Book  in  folio,  feeming  to  belong  to  the 
other  lad  defcribed  ;  as  containing, 

1.  A  Table  to  the  Pedegrees  following. 

2.  Another  Collection  of  the  Defcents  of  many  anti- 
enr  Fam  lies  inhabiting  Flynt-fhire,  Denbigh-fhire  &  other 
parts  of  Noith-Wales  ;  like  the  lalt,  begun  by  Mr.  Tho¬ 
mas  Chaloner,  with  many  Continuations  and  Additions, 
(even  down  to  the  Year  1705;)  with  a  fprinkling  of 
Original  Letters,  Grants  of  Armes  and  Cl  efts,  and  other 
Notes. 

3.  A  Table  referring  to  the  Names  of  Places  mentioned 
m  this  Collection, 


An  Heraldical  Eook  in  folio ;  begun  and  carried  on  by 
Mr.  Thomas  ChalonerofChefter,  &  Jacob  Chaloner  his 
Son  ;  and  afterward,  much  encreafed  by  the  Additions 
&Continuationsofthe  two  laft  Randle  Holme’s,  Armes 
Painters  of  Chefter,  &.c.  In  it,  I  oblerve, 

1 .  The  Names  of  the  Hundredes,  Townes,  and  Parifhes 
in  Mountgomeryfhire  ;  A°  1592. 

2.  'Fable  to  the  Pedegrees  entred  into  this  Book. 

3.  Lift  of  the  Juftices  of  Peace  in  Com.  Mungomerv, 
A.  D.  1620. 

4.  Armes,  in  1  rick,  found  in  the  Parifhe  Churche  of 

the  Welche  Poole  in  Com,  Mountgomery,  1 5S4. 

5.  A  large  Coll eftion  of  the  Difcents  of  noble  & 
Gentile  Families  holding  Lands  in  Mountgcmreyfhire 
and  Powys,  with  many  continuations,  even  unto  late 
years.  But  here  are  not  lb  many  particular  Papers  infert- 
cd  into  this,  as  are  in  the  two  preceding  Volumes.  In 
this,  the  molt  remarkable  Paper  is  that  atteffing  the  An¬ 
tiquity  &  Splendor  of  the  Noble  Family  of  Herbert  Earl 
of  Pembroke,  inferted  after  112. 

6.  Table  of  the  Cheifes  of  Families  mentioned  in  this 
Book,  fol,  penult, 

x974-  _ 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fmall  folio,  fnow  confiding  of 
two  Books  bound  up  in  the  fame  Cover  :)  being  begun, 
carried  on,  and  enlarged  by  the  Chaloners  &  Holmes 
abovementioned,  down  to  years  very  much  within 
memory.  Herein,  (having  noted  the  number  of  Leaves 
with  my  Pencil,  afrelh)  I  find, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Anglefey-Pedegrees 

entred  into  this  book.  j  _ 

2.  Table  of  the  Names  of  Perfons  or  Families  in  An- 

glefey,  whofe  Armes  are  tricked  in  the  former  Part  of 
this  Book.  ^ 

3.  Names  of  Places  for  this  end  of  the  Book  :  i.  e. 
relating  to  the  Families  of  the  Ifle  of  Anglefey.  C.  ’ 

4.  Divifion  of  the  County  of  Anglefey  into  Cantreds, 
Commotes,  Parilhes,  &c.  feeming  to  be  dated  as  A  D 

I296-  i,.’ 

5.  Table  of  the  Names  of  remarkable  perfons  mention¬ 
ed  m  the  Anglefey  Defcents,  or  of  others,  which  have 
laterly  been  added  to  them. 

6.  Another  Table  of  the  like  kind.  ,g‘ 

7.  Another  Table  containing  the  Names  of  Perfons 

whofe  Armes  are  tricked  on  this  fide  the  Book  ;  made 
by  Randle  Holme  the  fecond.  A.  D.  1632.  ’  ,8. 

8.  Nomina  Vicecomitum  Comitatus  Anglef.  viz.  ab 
anno  3;  Hen.  vm.  ufque  ad  ann,  43  R.  Eli?.  19.  &c. 


Num.  1974,  1975. 

9.  Rate  of  an  old  T  axation  of  the  principal  Inhabitants 

of  the  Ifle  of  Anglefey.  20. 

10.  Lilt  of  the  Jullices  of  Peace  in  Anglefey,  A.  D. 

1620.  2I# 

1  1 .  Lift  of  the  Juftices  of  the  Peace  for  that  County, 
(with  their  Armes  tricked)  as  they  were  putt  down, 
A.  D.  1601.  ImperfeCt.  2  2 . 

1 2.  Defcents  of  the  Britifh  Kings  &  Princes;  and  more 
particularly  of  the  antient  Families  of  the  Illand  or  County 
of  Anglefey  :  with  fome  few  additions  by  Hands  differ¬ 
ent  from  thofe  abovementioned.  26. 

Among  thefe,  I  obferve, 

1  3.  An  original  Letter  of  John  Williams  of  Rhodo- 
geidio,  relating  to  his  owrn  Defcent ;  wherein  he  cites  the 
booke  of  Extent  or  Survey  of  Northwales,  taken  before 
Sir  John  de  Delves  in  the  26th  Year  of  Edw.  in.  33. 

This  fame  book  is  alfo  cited  fol.  148.  as  the  grand 
extent  of  Northw'ales  :  I  remember  alfo,  that  it  is  quoted 
in  the  Monafticon  Anglicanum,  as  penes  Auditorem  Wal- 
lia:  or  Northwalliie.  In  procefs  of  time,  it  came  into  the 
the  poffefiion  of  the  late  moft  learned  and  diligent  fearcher 
after  old  Books,  Bifhop  Stillingfleet,  of  immortal  Me¬ 
mory  ;  and  was  bought  with  his  other  Manufcripts,  by 
my  noble  Lord  the  prefent  Earl  of  Oxford  many  Years 
ago,  being  inferibed  59C.  1.  in  this  great  Repofitory. 

After  the  faid  TraCt  relating  to  the  Gentry  of  An- 
glefey  ;  I  find  another  like  to  it,  treating  of  Caernarvon- 
lhire,  in  the  Order  following  ;  viz. 

14.  Table  to  the  Carnarvonfhire-Pcdegrees,  foon  to 

be  mentioned.  y 5. 

15.  Coats  of  Armes  for  Carnarvon  :  i.  e.  of  thofe  Per¬ 

fons  or  Families  whofe  Defcents  are  entred  into  this  fol¬ 
lowing  Treatife,  or  Collection.  87. 

16.  Names  of  Places  mentioned  in  Camarvanlhire- 

Pedegrees.  88. 

1 7.  Another  Table  to  the  following  Difcents  of  Car- 

narvonfhire.  94. 

18.  Armes  of  particular  Perfons  or  Families,  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  faid  Defcents.  g8. 

19.  Jufticiarij  Comitatus  Carnarvon,  A"  1641  ;  with 

fome  of  their  Armes  tricked.  100. 

20.  Juftices  of  Peace  in  Com.  Carnarvon,  A0  1620. 

1 03. 

21.  The  Collection  of  Carnarvonlhirc-Delcents,  fo 

often  above-mentioned.  104.  b. 

N.  B.  Some  of  thefe  Defcents  are  continued  down 
unto  late  Years;  one  of  them  to  A.  D.  1696. 

22.  Original  Letter  of  Owen  Smyth  of  Caernarvon, 

exhibiting  a  Copie  of  a  Confirmation  of  Armes  granted 
to  Gruffith  John  Bangore,  by  Guyan  Kyng  of  Armes, 
ann.  35  Hen.  vi.  '  '  Il£> 

1 9  75  • 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  written  by  the  Chaloners, 

fo  often  mentioned,  about  the  year  1620,  and  to  which 

fo  many  Additions  and  Continuations  have  been 

made  by  the  two  laft  Randle  Holmes,  long  afterwards. 

It  contains, 

1.  Defcents  of  many  of  the  Nobility  St  Gentry  who 
have  refided  or  poffeffed  Lands  in  Pembrokfhire,  Caer- 
mardenlhire,  Glamorganlhire,  Brecknoekftfire,  Radnor- 
fhire,  Cardiganfhire,  Munmothlhire,  Herefordfhire,  &c. 
and  otherwise,  on  the  outfide,  entituled  South-Wales 
Pedegrees,  &c.  with  Tricks  and  Blazons  of  many  of  the 
Armes  and  Crefts. 

2.  After  folio  nt,  cojnes  a  Sort  of  Auclarium  of 
Pedegrees  &  Armes  belonging  to  Families  refident  in  the 
fame  Counties. 

3.  A  Table  to  the  Defcents  and  Armes  contained  in 
the  Second  part  of  the  Book. 

4.  A  Table  referring  to  the  Armes  exhibited  in  the 
former  part  of  the  Book. 

5.  A  Table  pointing  to  the  Names  of  the  feveral  Fami¬ 
lies  principal  Perfons  mentioned  in  the  fame  fprmer 
part, 


6.  A; 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


S63 


Num.  1975,  i976- 

6.  At  fol.  4 1 .  I  obferve  a  Copy  of  a  Roll  relating  to 
the  Manor  of  DrifFeld  in  Com.  Glouceft.  being  formerly 
parcel  of  the  Poflefl'iQns  appertaining  to  the  Abbey  of 
Cirenceller. 

1976. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fmall  folio,  begun  and  carried  on 
about  A.  D.  1594.  by  a  Perfon  of  whofe  Hand-writing 
I  have  feen  much,  both  in  this  Library  &  elfewhere  ; 
but  whofe  Name  I  could  never  yet  certainly  recover. 

It  hath  alfo  divers  Additions  and  continuations  from 
the  Hands  of  others.  On  the  Outfide  it  is  thus  enti- 
tutled.  South  Wales  with  Salop  and  Staffordftiire  Pede- 
grees  ;  with  thofe  alfo  of  diverfe  other  Countyes.  The 
Book  begins  from  both  ends  ;  for  what  is  entered 
therein  is  done  in  manner  promifcuous,  and  without 
any  Order  :  And  forafmuch  as  the  Pageing  thereof 
begins  from  what  may  be  called  the  later  or  wrong 
End,  I  {hall  endeavour  briefly  to  deferibe  what  it  con- 
taineth,  in  the  manner  following, 
x.  The  Names  of  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  ;  the  Names 
of  the  twelve  Months  in  Welfh;  and  in  Latin,  with 
their  feveral  Numbers  of  Days  enumerated  :  feeming  to 
haue  been  copied  hy  the  third  Randle  Holme  from  lome 
old  Calendar  written  by  a  Welfh  Hand. 

2.  Pedegree  of  Sir  Chr  ftopher  Hatton '  as  it  was  made 
up  from  Him  and)  confirmed  by  Robert  Cooke  als. 
ClarenfuL,  A.D.  15  4.  faid  to  have  been  copied  from 
the  Originall  sp-  Ja.  Cha  (i.  e.  James  Chaloner;  1 . 

If  this  be  to  be  underttood  of  the  individual  Hand 
which  enr red  this  and  the  following  Defcents,  my  Doubt 
might  be  fotved  :  but  this  Note  being  written  not  by 
this  fame  Hand,  but  by  another,  1  am  not  fatisfied  but 
that  this  C.opie  might  be  taken  from  that  which  James 
Chaloner  made  from  the  Roll,  perhaps  in  loole  fingle 
paper. 

3.  Then  follows  the  promifcuous  Collection  of  Pede- 
grees  abovementioned,  being  of  Englifli  and  Welfh  Fa¬ 
milies,  the  Writer  whereof  ferns  to  have  been  verfed  in 
the  Englifh,  Welfh,  Latin  &  French  Tongues.  3. 

Herein,  befides  the  Armes  &  Crtfts  of  fundry  anti- 
ent  Families,  1  further  obferve, 

4.  The  aforementioned  names  of  the  Months  in  W elfh ; 

with  certain  Letters,  Monograms,  and  Words,  feeming 
to  have  been  copied  from  the  old  Book  or  Calendar 
hinted  at  before,  at  §.  1.  t  23- 

5.  Some  few  Church-Notes  illuflrating  the  Defcent 

of  the  ancient  Family  of  Ballet  of  Blore.  36.  b. 

6.  Some  Welfh  Notes  relating  to  their  Defcents,  &c. 

45.  b.  2.  b. 

Now  beginning  at  the  other  (or  firft)  end  of  the 
Book,  I  find 

7.  A  Table  of  the  Defents  of  this  Booke,  8c  other 
things  therin  ;  made  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  of 
Chcfter. 

8.  An  Alphabet  of  the  Cotes,  Crefls,  or  Quartenngs 
jn  this  booke  ;  made  by  the  faid  Randle  Holme,  1632. 

9.  Armes,  in  Blazon,  of  divers  Perfons  and  Families; 

both  Welfh  and  Englifh,  I4I* 

10.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  feveral  Counties  of 

Wales  &  England,  wherein  the  principal  Perfons  &  Fami¬ 
lies,  whofe  Defcents  arc  entred  into  this  Book,  held 
their  Refidence  ;  whofe  Names,  with  references  to  their 
fakl  Defcents,  do  follow  thofe  of  their  refpe&ive  Coun¬ 
ties.  .,39- 

xx.  Some  other  of  the  Pedegrees  above-mentioned. 

138.  b. 

12.  Les  Nofmes  del  Baronage  d’Angletef re  ;  ouefque 
le  Blafonne  de  lour  Armes.  *  -'4» 

Note,  that  divers  Defcents  of  Families,  ax  inter¬ 
mingled  herein  ;  as  are  alfo  the  Armes  in  Blafon,  of 
many  antient  &  worlhipful  Englifli  Families,  at  1 3 1 .  b. 
*3.  Two  Church-Notes  relating  to  the  Nedehams. 

j  ^2.  b. 


Num.  1976,1977. 

14.  Lift  of  the  Irith  Nobility  ;  with  Pedegrees  inter- 

mixed,  as  before.  11 7* 

15.  Of  Degrees  of  Perfones  vnder  the  Kinge  :  ^ 

Win,  Fletewood  recordator  London.  107. 

16.  A  Collection  of  Defcents  from  the  Reign  of  K. 

Stephen  down  to  that  of  K.  Henry  vi.  (both  inclusive  :) 
fhewing  how  feverall  Baronies  came  to  be  inherited  by 
thofe  who  injoyed  them,  by  right  of  Defcent  from  Fe¬ 
males.  * c  5* 

If  I  miftake  not,  Mr.  Robert  Glover  drew  up  fome- 
what  in  this  kind  ;  or  perhaps  this  is  part  of  that  work. 

17.  More  Welfh  Notes,  relating  to  their  Tribes,  Fa¬ 

milies,  &  Defcents  ;  tranfc  ribed  from  antient  Books,  and' 
extant  in  many  places.  .  9 1  • 

18.  Arma  ;  exveteri  libro  Cambrico  :  i.  e.  Armes  of 
feveral  particular  perfons  of  fhe  Welfh  Nation,  in  Blafon. 


1977. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  which  feems  to  have  been  be* 
gun  about  A.D.  16x1,  by  the  Chaloners,  and  to 
have  been  carried  on  &  continued  by  the  two  laft  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme’s,  even  down  to  the  year  1703.  In  it  { 
find, 

1.  The  laft  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  the  Things  of 

Noie  contained  in  the  beginning  of  this  Book,  before 
the  Pedegrees,  according  to  my  Numeration  of  theLeaves, 
with  Black  Lead.  *•  b* 

2.  Table  to  the  Pedegrees  foon  to  be  mentioned.  2. 

3.  Verfes  in  praife  of  the  Leek,  being  the  Britifh 

Badge.  9* 

4.  Relation  of  Prince  Henries  Sicknefs  &  Death.  10. 

5.  The  Coate  &  the  C.ognifance  of  our  Lord  &  Savior 

Jefus  Chrift.  (very  foolifh  &  ridiculous.)  1 1 . 

6.  Another  ;  devifed  by  the  firft  Foure  Fathers  of  the 

Church,  (as  idle  as  the  former.)  11  •  b. 

7.  Armes,  in  Trick,  of  Britifh  Princes,  Families,  & 

Perfons-  I2, 

8.  Another  Collection  of  Britifh  or  Welfh  Armes  :  by 

the  fame  Hand  :  by  the  Chaloners,  &c,  20. 

9.  Infignia  Anglorum  inhabitaniium  Comitatus  Flynt, 

Denbigh,  See.  in  Wallia.  24. 

10.  Table  referring  to  the  Coats  &  Crefts  entred  into 

this  Book,  2 7* 

11.  Armes  of  the  Welfh  Bifliopricks  ;  of  the  Lords 

Prefidents  of  Wales  ;  and  of  the  Chiefe  Jufticesof  Wales 
&  Chefter,  moftly  tricked  with  Black  Lead,  and  there¬ 
fore  vanifhing  off  the  Paper.  .33* 

1 2.  Armes  (done  with  Black  Lead)  of  the  Four  Princes 

of  Walts;  i.  e.  of  North- Wales,  South-Wales,  Powis, 
&  Glamorgan.  33*  b* 

13.  Names  of  the  Fifteen  Peeres,  or  Tribes,  of  North- 

Waltg.  ibid* 

14.  Names  of  the  old  Earls  of  Chefter  from  Hugh 

Lupus ;  of  his  Four  Barons  ;  of  the  Six  Counties  of 
North-Wales  ;  and  of  the  Welfh  Knights  inhabiting 
therein.  33*  b- 

1 5  Table  referring  to  many  of  the  Principals  or  Ancef- 
tors  of  Welfh  Families,  whofe  Defendants  are  taken 
notice  of  in  this  Book.  _  __  34* 

16.  Avery  large  &  numerous  Collection  of  Welfh 

Pedegree6,  including  alfo  fome  Englifh  Families  who 
have  had  their  Refidence  in  Wales:  whereunto  many 
Continuations  have  been  made.  _  35. 

This  Collection  is  here  Sc  there  adorned  &  improved 
by  Copies  of,  or  ExtyaCts  from  Records,  or  Private 
Deeds  ;  by  fome  Church  Notes  ;  Sf  Original  Papers. 

17.  Names  of  Places  mentioned  in  the  Defcents  of  this 

Book.  2C0. 

18.  A  Table  of  thefe  Defcents  following,  (that  is, 

being  regiftred  in  this  book.)  266, 

jg.  Part  of  another  like  Table.  -  68.  b. 

20.  Pait  of  a  Defcent  of  a  Family  of  Jones.  269. 

AB00H 


364 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1978,  1979. 

1978. 

A  Book  In  folio,  done  by  feveral  Hands,  and  feeming 
to  have  been  collefted  from  divers  others.  In  it  are 
contained  the  following  Heraldical  matters. 

1.  The  Armes  (in  Colours)  of  Wei  h  Houfes  &  Fami¬ 

lies,  together  with  thofe  of  fome  Englifh,  who  have  re- 
fid:  1  Wales.  Some  of  thefe  Armes  are  likewil'e  bla- 
foned.  , 

2.  Among  the  faid  Armes  I  find  fome  fcattered  Pede- 
grees  of  Welfh  Families. 

I  hen  follows  an  older  Tra6l,  or  Colleftion  j  being 
dated  A.  D.  1614.  wherein  are  entered, 

3.  The  Armes  of  Kendrick  hvell,  between  the  quar- 
terings  of  Lloyd  of  Yale  &  Mofton  of  Morton.  50. 

4  Armes  of  the  Bilhopricks  of  St.  David  &  St.  Afaph, 
in  Colors. 

.  5-  Armes  of  Gruffith  ap  Jankyn,  &  ofHerle;  both 
m  Colors  &  in  Blafon.  5 1 .  b- 

6.  Armes  of  Ten  Welfh  Houfes  ;  done  in  the  fame 

manner.  .  ^ 

7.  The  Armes  of  all  the  Lords  Prefedents  in  the  Prin- 

cepalety  of  Walls ;  painted.  53. 

8.  The  Armes  of  all  the  Ch'ife  Juftices  of  Walles  & 

Cnefter  ;  painted  by  the  fame  Hand.  58. 

9.  The  Armes  of  the  Fifteen  Peers  of  North-Wales  : 

painted  by  the  fame  Hand.  02. 

10.  The  Armes  of  the  Eight  Count  Palatins  of  Chef- 

ter  ;  painted  by  the  fame  Hand.  06. 

1  r.  The  Armes  of  the  Four  Barons  of  the  County- 
Palatyn  of  Chefter ;  painted  ftill  by  the  fame  Hand. 

68. 

1 2.  A  Note  how  Nicholas  Robinfon  Bifhop  of  Ban¬ 
gor  is  akinne  &  alide  to  moft  of  the  Gentlemen  in  North- 
Wales  ;  taken  out  of  the  Colleftions  of  William  Kynwal 
remaining  with  Mr.  William  Robinfon  his  Sonne.  68.  b. 
7i.b.  73.  b.  74.  b.  75.  b.  77.  b.  78.  b. 

This  Note  is  a  large  Pedegree  drawn  up  narratively, 
according  to  the  manner  ufed  by  fome  of  the  old  Welfli 
Bards. 

13.  Armes  of  fome  of  the  Principal  Gentry  of  North- 
Wales  ;  painted  in  like  manner  as  the  former.  71,  73 
74,  77».78.  79,  80,  82,  83. 

14.  Some  Welfh  Verfes,  written  by  another  Hand. 

15.  Condition  of  a  Bond,  whereby  Peter  Evans9  Efq; 
was  obliged  to  fave  harmelefs  Griffyth  Hughes  touching 
the  Somme  of  £6.  13.  8.  due  to  the  Office  of  Armes  for 
recording  of  a  Certificate  of  the  daie  of  Death,  place  of 
Burial],  Match,  Yffue  &  Armes  of  Thomas  Evans  Efq: 
deceafed,  &c. 

*  16.  A  Collection  ofDefcents  of  Welfh  Families.  83.  b. 

17.  Other  Defcents  of  Welfh  Families,  moftly  crofled 
out;  as,  perhaps,  being  entred  more  fairly  into  fome 
other  book.  104.  io9_  b 

iS.  Notes  of  the  times,  when  divers  Welfh  Gentle¬ 
men  deceafed.  IO_ 

19.  The  lart  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  Things  of 

moft  note  in  this  faid  Book.  1 , 2.  b. 

20.  His  Table  of  all  the  Pedegrees  &  Coats  in’  tWs 
Booke. 

JI3- 

1 979* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  begun  by  the  Chaloners  ■ 
and  carried  on  by  the  two  lart  Randle  Holme’s  not 
without  the  Addition  of  a  great  number  of  Leaves 
and  Fragments,  which  (in  procefs  of  time)  have  been 
faltened  thereto,  in  fuch  places  as  were  thouoht  proper 
It  is,  Oil  the  outride,  thus  entituled,  r 

1.  Pedegrees  and  Coates  of  feveral  Shires,  both  in 
Lngland  &  Wales. 

Befides  the  faid  Pedegrees,  I  obferve,  in  turning 
the  book  over.  0 

2.  A  triple  Lift  of  Gentlemen  refiding  in  moft  of  our 


Num.  1979,  1980. 

Englifh  Counties,  prefented  to  the  King,  anno  .  .  _ 
Caroli  1.  m  order  to  his  Majefties  marking  one  of  each 
County,  to  lerve  as  Sheriffe  thereof,  the  Year  enfuing. 

3.  How  the  Lord  Mayor,  Aldermen,  &c.  of  the  City 

of  London  difpofed  of  the  104  Black  Gcwncs,  given  them 
by  K.  Edward  vrths,  Council,  upon  occafion  of  the  Fu¬ 
neral  ot  K.  Henry  viii  ;  according  to  the  Prefident  at  the 
Interrement  of  the  noble  Prince  of  famous  memoricKinge 
Henne  the  Seaventh.  l86 

4.  Armes  in  Blafon,  borne  by  different  Families  of  the 

&  Li^he. elg  ’ Lca’ aLee’ Leesh'  Ldshe>  L=reh>  Ley. 

5-  Names  oftbeSheriffes,  A.  D.  1S25.  1  Jacobi’  20. 

6.  Certificate  of  Sir  Archibald  Naper  of  Mcrchifton, 
jetting  forth  the  Defcent  of  Sir  Robert  Naper  Knight  & 
Baronet,  &  of  Sir  Nathaniel  Naper,  from  his  Family,  & 
allowing  them  to  bear  his  Armes,  Supporters,  &  Crert, 
with  their  due  Differences,  dat.  i  June  1623.  23.  vid. 

7-  I^ft  of  the  Sheriffes  in  each  County  or  Shire^n 
England  &  Wales,  A.  D.  1627.  ^4. 

»  8;Sificat“  touching  the  Defcents  of  John  Price, 
&  ot  William  Lloyd,  under  the  Hand  of  Evan  Lloyd  of 
Lrethlon  in  Com.  Denbigh,  Gen.  2c  &  26 

9.  Enumeration  of  the  Titles  of  George  Villiers  1.  Duke 
of  Buckingham,  &c.  b 

10  Confirmation  of  Armes,  Creft  &  Supporters 
gpaRt!ir  lo,&1^R.°^ert  Napper  of  Luton-hoe  in  the  County 
Garter  d’  Kn‘sht  &  Baronet  i  by  si'‘  William  Segar, 

mm1'  P?tltl0n  Jac°b  Chaloner,  to  be  admitted  to  the 
Office  of  I  ortculhs  Purfevante  of  Armes,  voide  by  the 
Death  ofPhilhppe  Holland.  b 

1 2.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Henry  Lilly,  to  Jacob  Cha- 
Joner,  about  making  a  Pedegree  of  the  Family  ofBrom* 

Aldernian6  Epit3phe  of  Sir  Henry  Anderfon  of  London, 

14-  Accompt  of  Moneys  paid  by  Morgan  Price 
William,  to  the  Receivers  of  Sowthe  Wales,  as  being 
part  of  the  Eftate  of  Sir  John  Perot  ataynted.  tic" 
w‘ifl'tS°me  Defcei,ts  ofWcllh  People  (drawn  up  in 
r  v  r,  ,■  „  Inter  18.  &  10. 

„  ReC°rdls  ab(lraaa  de  Cuftodibus  Minoris  Pecie 
tngilli  Regij  ad  Recogntcoes  Debitorum  b 

.7.  Original  Letter  of  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  of 
Chefter,  to  Jacob  Chaloner  in  London;  a  March,  i6zg. 

is.  The  Manner  &  Order  of  going  &  fitting 
Upper  Houfe  of  Parliament,  imperf.  ,  br 

Si/ w-n°'’CerS!'’uS  ?7WiU  tru"’P'd  “P  in  the  Name® 
CoumyrfHefeLrd  CClr  °f  ““W*00™  in  the 

20.  Original  Ha„ds  of  old  Walter  Hopkins  of  Breck¬ 
nock;  Jacob  Chaloner;  &  Richard  Lloyd,  inter  (So. 

21.  Knights  of  the  Garter,  A.  D.  1C26.  inlet  "fsi, 

22.  The  Style  of  William  Herbert  Eari  of  Pentrodce- 

who  died  10  April  A".  1630.  lS 

in  &  Book';"  CLtl; If  h?6™' “  ‘he  ^ 

in  Cw's  Bto£We  “  ‘he  C°tK>  <***  “d  2-terings 

1980. 

A  thin  Book  in  final!  folio,  wherein  are  contained, 
tea1'  A  ?!  „rfc’  or  Kelation  of  the  auncient  A  mederne 
Eftate  of  the  Prmcipallity  of  Wales,  by  Judge  Doderidge. 

n-  The  fame  learned  Judges  Difcourfe  of  the  Dutchv 
or  Cornewalle.  1 

Chert  DifC°Urre  concctn!ng  the  County  Palatine 3of 


9 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


365 


Nura.  1980,  1981. 

At  the  beginning,  the  lad  Randle  Holme  hath  in- 
ferted  his  Ihort  Account  of  the  lhings  of  mod  Note  in 
thh  Book  ;  ot  which  I  (hall  take  no  further  Nonce,  be- 
caufe  the  Book  itl'elf  is  in  Print. 

1981 . 

A  Book  in  folio,  compiled  by  the  connuMui  °f ' T? 
noble  Thomas  Howard  Earl  of  Arundel  &  Surrey, 
Anno  DoS  ,635,  by  John  Davies  of  Mid  eton  t  and 
relates  wholly  to  the  Town  and  Barony  of  Olwelt  e 
in  Shropfhire  :  defcribing  the  antient  &  modern  State 

fSfVe" Semt  MoS  ’Names  of  the  Towne 

&  !.°CerSefo“ons  of  Things  *  Places  remark- 

^  j/wthTCnrlrS,- honour  of  Ofwcdrie,  and  the 
Barons  thereof  mice  the  Conqued  of  England.  »■ 

Next  follows  a  Colleftion  of  Charters  and  other 
writings,  relating  .0  the  Barony  of  Ofwedre,  or  ,0  the 
Barons  thereof-,  being  thus  entuuled  . 

a  Catalogus  Manertorum  qua:  a  Donums  1  nz-A'ams 
ft  Arundeliw  Comitibus  in  Com.  Saloptte  it  alibi  n.fia 
Marchia  Wallin:  tencntur  ;  quotquot  uaquam  mdn  oc- 

CU  SrebExtraaa  fun,  hrec  qux  fequuntur  a 
F-fcheatoris  olEcium  geffit,  mComitatn  Salop,  de  Rotults 

CU,iakSf  l^1  Lands,  Manors,  fa.  held 

^^l^S^isWillelmiM.Ei.z. 
alan  Burgenfibus  fuis  de  Blanc-monder  conceffa. 

7.  C.harta  Edmundi  Comins  Arundell.  Burgenhbus 

Ms  dc  orwaldete  mhsPardon  t0  tlle  Earl  of  Arum 
dell’s  Tenants  in  Wales,  &  the  Marches  thereof^anno 

RC9S.niThomksEarI  of  Arundell  his  Pardon  to  Ms  lea- 
ants  of  Bromfield,  Ofwedre,  &  Chirk  :  anno  7  R.  Hem. 

,V’io.  A  R  eleafe  of  too  lib.  from  Thomas  Earl  of  Aron, 
dell  to  the  Burgetles  of  Ofwedne  :  an.  b  Hen.  IV.  26. 

I,  Kinoe  bichard  the  Second  his  Charter  to  the 
Rurireffes  of  Ofwedrie  :  anno  Regnt  22-  *»• 

’ ,  °  1  homas  Earl  of  Arundell,  & c.  his  Charter  to  the 
Xm  lifh  BurgelTes  of  Ofwedry ;  dat.  1  1  Eebr.  ann.  2. 
Regis  Henrici  tv.  taken  from  the  Inrollment  thereof 
made  in  the  Court  of  that  Town.  33, 

A  Charter  of  Infpexnnus  to  the  BurgelTes  of  the 
{Hid  Town  from  William  Eaile  of  Arundell.  & c.  3l  • 

William  Earl  of  Arundell  lus  Charter  to  the 
Mercers,  Grocers,  Drapers,  &  Iron-mongers  of  Ofwef- 

trie.  ann.  1 9  Henrici  vt.  ,  r 

Armes  painted  in  a  Charter  or  Booke  of  Condi- 
tutions  compiled  by  Order  of  the  Right  Honorable 
Philipp  Earle  of  Arundell  £e  Surrey,  for  the  Burgeffes 

q-jlc  Tenor  of  the  faid  Charter  or  Book,  dated 
11  Maii,  anno  24.  R.  Elizabeths.  .  . 

i7.  a  Revocation  of  the  former  Conftitutions.  dat. 

“/rlbmiom  Henrici  Howard  Comitis  Northampton, 
fuper  Compotum  Roger!  Owen  Mililis,  nnper  Vtcecomt- 
tisPComitatiis  Salop,  computantis  de  exmbus  Odtctj  pim- 
j-q:  vj z  a  fefto  S.  Michaelis  Archangeli,  anno  R.  R. 
nunc  Jacobi  primo,  ufq;  ad  idem  Pedum  tunc  proximo 
fequens,  dc  Tcnentibus  ipfius  Comms  de  Clonne  et  Pur 

^°To  ^Original  Letter  of  John  Davies  the  Compiler  of 
,hi  Book,  to  Thomas  Earl  of  Arundell  &  Surrey  Earle- 
Mardnll  kf  England,  &c.  fetting  forth  that  he  had  ao 
M  1  rtbed  His  Lordfliips  Commaund  m  tranfenbemge 

"emChm,ers  heremforegrauntedby  his  noble  Aunceftors 

tm  the  Towne  of  Ofwedrie,  now  extant  among  then- 
Cat.  Haul.  Vox..  If. 


Num.  19B1 — 1983- 


Records:  the  Coppies  whereof,  togeither  with  fuch 
Notes  and  Obfervations  of  his  owne  (concerning  the  un¬ 
dent  &  moderne  Names  of  Ofwedri and  of  feme 
Places  8c  Things  remarkeablc  in,  &  neare  the  fame  ,  to 
geither  with  a  Ihort  Difcource  of  the  Baronrie  &  all  the 
Barons  thereof,  fince  the  Conqued :)  as  thefcantneffe  of 
the  Times  Sc  Helpes  could  afibord,  all  which  he  humbly 
prefenteth  vnto  his  good  Lordlhip.  This  Letter  is  da  ed 
from  his  poore  Houle  at  Miilton  neare  Ofwedne,  the 
1 5th  of  December,  1 635. 

1982. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  written  by  many  Hands,  and 
relating  to  the  Defcents  and  Armes  of  antient  bhrop- 
fhire-Families.  It  exhibits,  „ 

1.  Alphabetical  lablc  direfting  to  the  C.otes  Creds, 
or  Quarterings  contained  in  this  book,  made  (as  11  k™ ,  J 
about  the  to  December  .63a.  by  the  fecond  Randle 

H°‘mHis  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  Shrop- 
(hire  Perfons  and  Families,  whofe  Defcents  aie  ipecthed 

in  this  book.  .  .  ,  ^ 

3.  Sal'ope-Vifitation,  1623.  or,  as  ,t  ,s  noted  ■ on  the 
outfide,  Shropfhire  PeJegrees  &  Coates,  &c.  begun  to 
be  copied  bv  Mr.  Thomas  C.haloner ;  with  very  many 
Additions  &  Continuations  by  the  Hands  of  the  two 
lad  Randle  Holmes,  Mr.  Richard  Mundy  and  feveral 

others.  ,  .  .  r  , 

Herein  I  find  interfperfed, 

4.  Some  Extracts  from,  or  Tranfcripts  of  old  Family- 
Deeds  ;  as  at  fol.  17.  51.  b.  55.  b.  56.  d.  62.  78.  c. 

c.  Armes  of  Sbopfhire-Gentry,  in  Blalon.  43-  “• 

3  r  44.  b. 

6.  Armes  of  divers  Stalfordfhire  Gentlemen  inBla- 

fon,  (6c  of  Stafford.(Shrop?)lhireKmghts  mjrtck) 

7.  Original  Letter  of  Richard  Mundy Above-men- 
tioned  ;  as  it  Teems,  to  Randle  Holme  of  Cheder  .  dated 

t  q  before  73. 

22  8.U  Armes  of  many  antient  Families,  chiefly  ofthofe 
of  Shropfhire,  both  in  Trick  &  in  Blafon.  103. 

9.  Pedegiees  of  Welfh  Families  ;  peihaps  of  fuch  as 
have  refidtd  in  or  near  Shropfhire. 

This  is  of  Chaloner’s  Hand,  and  feems  to  be  alratt 
diftina  to  itfelf.  This  is  followed  by 

,o.  Animperfeft  lraft,  by  the  fird  Hand  entituled 
The  Visitation  of  Shropfhire  ;  under  which,  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme  hath  written  thus,  ‘  taken  33  Q.  EIiz  ot 
wh  ch  Vifitation  I  knew  not,  before  I  faw  this  Remainder. 
The  Defcents  are,  for  the  mod  part,  dafhed  through  with 
a  Pen;  and  fometimes  hath  the  l.eraldtcal  Note  of  En¬ 
tries  made  into  fome  other  Book,  as  may  be  feat 1  at  the 

bottom  of  fol.  73.  7  3-  b-  <”'•  yS-h'  7.5-,b' 
which  Reafon  I  believe  they  are  the  Ongtnals  fo  far  as 
they  go.  It  is  needled  to  repeat  the  Hand  of  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme  doth  farther  appear  among  thefe  Defcents. 
’Tispity  there  is  no  more  of  this  valuable  ira&,  which 
now  begins  with  folio  72. 

1983. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  which  feems  to  have  been 
contrived,  laid  out,  or  difpofed  by  fome  Armes-pamter, 
and  (as  to  the  greateft  part  ol  it)  performed  by  his 
Apprentice.  It  contains, 

1.  A  large  Collection  of  the  Pedegrees  of  Shropfhire- 
Families,  with  the  Armes  painted,  together  with  fome 
Church-Notes,  &  Extrafts  from  Family-Deeds ;  leemnig 
to  have  been  taken  from  one  of  the  old  Vifitation -books 
of  ihat  Countie  that  is  older  than  the  Vifitation  ot  A.  D. 

l623  This  CollefJion  hath  met  with  great  Improuements, 
not  only  by  Continuation  of  thofe  Defcents,  but  by  the 
Addition  o'f  many  frefh  Pedegrees,  by the  Hands  o  Mr 
Richard  Mundy,  or  Thomas  Knight  Cheder-Hera  , 
Randle  Holme  ni.  and  feveral  others. 

5  A  A 


2,66 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num. 

At  the  End  I  find. 


983 - 1985. 


3.  -The  laid  Randle  Hope's  Table  to  the  Coates  & 
l^relcs  given  in  this  Volume  ;  and 

fluLlfemes!  °f  ‘hC  1>eJ'SreeS’  Whcrdn  m  ^ySup!!r- 

*“  Gounty  on  the  bai^is  °f 

phabe.;'™*  ^  in  ^ivers  Places,  with  the  fold  AI- 

S3,;:,-  teajrftifsfc 

S§s£«S5§ 

co„myhab;5Ttai'(^enr:  t  d  Vir,tation  'l'hk 

at  either  of  thofe  Time..  N^rthdris  “th  f  p"  re8'?red 
to  be  Originals,  &  ThomSi,  ,  thefe  Papers  ieem 
of  them,  (hew  that  thrv  h  /'  better  C  upon  mod 

&  entred’into  fom  &  W  f™'  k™* 

been  added  fmce.  “  lhe  °lhers  ,naf  have 

few5  ChuS-Note  tTv'rT  f*  ,afl>  aPP«r  feme 

SR  •  “  *»»  ggs 

gree  of  Mr,  S.owe's,  Idil  Senr,  ,he  "  ral"  °f?  P“e- 
as  .heySo°utb°/tteS^ 

&  Gen^;  MediLrrCo™LDarml6f  I" 

12th  of  Auguft,  ,596.  n£d  “  Winder  the 

refiding  MSuffolkf/0rfo]fj*':E1J™“  °f  Gentlemen 
this  Book.'1"6  H°lme’5  TaWe  the  degrees  fon^in 

A ChSdand eaTried^o/b1;  h7  'hc  Holmes  °f 
hdc  entituled  ‘Deeds  of  Shrnnf?  °the™>  on  the  °ut- 
buthnperfeaiy,  as  wi„  f„oa 

Note  Hcinf  H°'me's  Aa““*  of  the  things  of  mo(l 
a.  Short  Notes  extracted  front  thofe  antien,  Deeds  I 

14  ’  I 


Num.  1985. 

SF**«»saa» 

ter  Arm.  A.  D.  1583.  ^  ‘  ^rent^a,n  de  Rouctf- 

B^S:s^tr?rs*Ba^d= 

man.  EXlra,SS  ^  Deeds  relati"S  <o  the  Family  of  New. 
ford!  Ex  Cart*s  Pbilhppi  Noell  de  Hilcot  in  Com.TaV. 
Roll  Car“S  Wa,"ri  Ha^cour^deEIIenha!];  «3£ 

J  to-  Fat  Cartis  Sampfonis Erdfwicke de  Standom  Arm. 

De  S,aflirdihire*  ox  Eibro  vocato  Domefdaie. 

-a.  De  Staffordfliire;  ex  Libro  Rube, 

R-  Kdw^rdi  fif K"’ i“  InoqufhbnibU5  ap:iS  tt“or= 

in  Seaceario.  L  non  pTitSd  «“  ***** 

Regti,N&™ervrdeqiUiisto„Trun2,0'Iittra‘aS 

exmandato  Regis  diftrWiMm.,  ’  1  x?fra  etatem  >  qui 
tran.-freiam.um  ad  reuem  Hcnnr^  VjCe.'C°mitem  ad 
contra  Regem  Caftd2Tn,!i  T “  ^oniam, 
ingMfuruseratlpugnaturi:  h°f'tr 

J5’  Fomina  illorum  qui  habent  1  c  T  ,'K  t?11, 

c^zvsj"ira 

nna  cum  NominfbduTTam  Mirta“m  V'ce'omi,i  Stafford; 
Arma  ejufdem  C“!  “  7egX  H~  ad 

17.  Staffordfltire •  Nomina  1  g  ■  O-  au.b. 

cundantSolutionem  Subfid  i  t  ™J  T'1  Pradlitere  fe- 

ginte  Elizabeths:  *  W,s  concefi.  anno  ,8  Re¬ 

ef 

-9-  Difcent  of  Aftleyof  Hii-korton  in  Com.  wLnvi'c. 

AnctmEn^he^um4^rtg  %  ^  *. 

A.  D.  ,6yS,  &c.  y  Mr-  f  bompfon  of  Drayton, 
in  Com0CedrDeedS  ^  “>  ,ho  ™age  «3d  I 
SaV  transcribed' A?  D  ^ Nowpor,  in  Col 

ton?&cSOm£  fcW  DeedS  bating  to  Honkefion  ft 

I  5&Sh  tt  Col^fCH:l^"0is  Walk;5/ ;f 

Afiertor  of  the  Royal  Caufe-1  hv  ?  7? 

Garter,  dat.  ao  DecemS  tfifil  EdWard  Wa"<er> 
ay.  Commiffion  of K  Charles  •  "S'-b- 

Francis  Walker  to  raife  a  Re  '  e‘nPcwermg  the  faid 
of  toco  Men  befides  Officers  ^and".  t  Ec°'l’  confllli,IS 
of.  Given  at  Paris  ’  g  1  be  Co,°nell  there- 

ra£g  ^oFamifll 

M-orS'wt  Col'm: 

from  Roger  de  Somery  Ct  r'  d;versDefcendants 

*n«s,leSinfr,ond,v”eli  'n?ulCti°"S'  “d  «herlvi. 
rell  &  Modes)  and  n!  Cl"S  ?*a™  ,es  (bm  principally,  peVe- 
iet-fhires “d  ^  Cornwall,  Devon,  /’somer- 

"9'  ThefeiU'e  fol,0'rcd  bf  many  othera,  relal5! 

the 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


567 


Nura.  1985 — 1987. 


the  antient  and  noble  Families  of  Courteney,  Molyns 
Botreaux,  Hungerford,  Willoughby,  Haftings,  Talbot. 

30.  PeJegree  pour  le  Defceut  de  Sang  et  de  Terrcs 

pertenant  al  Sr,  The.  Peverell  Chiyaler  it  Margaret  fa 
1  online,  al  Marie  ore  femmeEdw.  Ie  S' de  Huttings  (which 
is  drawn  up  narratively,  in  Englilh.)  268.  b. 

31.  Colleftanea  quedam  tangentia  Stemmata  Domi- 

norum  de  Lumley  ;  excerpta  ex  Chartis  antiquis  et  Mo- 
numentis  dictorum  Dominorum  ;  nono  Decembris  Anno 
,  rdcrvatis  penes  nobilem  virum  Johannem 

de  Lumley  Mi  litem,  Dnm.  etBaronem  de  Lumley.  260 

Among  thef-  Deeds,  are  thofe  alfo  of  the  Families 
ofThwenge  &  lhornt°n  of  New-Caftle  upon  x 
whufe  Hcirefles  were  married  by  the  Lumleys. 

32.  Collecb.nca  qusedam  tangentia  Stemmata  Willel- 

mi  Brereton  de  Brereton  in  Ceftreuii  Provincia  Armigeri: 
excerpta  ex  Chartis  &  P.videncijs  antiquis,  refervatis  penes 
eundem  Will.  Brereton,  A.  D.  1578.  b. 

33-  Notes,  or  Extrads  from  Deeds,  relating  to  the 

bur-name  or  Family  of  King.  6  -0- 

34-  Extrads  from  old  Deeds,  feeming  to  relate  to  the 

Manors  of  Harpetre  or  Eft-harpctre  &  Cadecote,  and  to 
the  Families  who  poffeffed  them,  fuch  as  Devereus,  Hamp- 
*°n,  Gurney,  &c.  305,  309.  b.  310.  b. 

35;  Genealogia  Mathei  dc  Furncaux.  306  b 
'This  is  to  bo  underrtood  of  his  Defendants  who 
claimed  his  Lands. 

36.  Part  of  a  Letter,  flicwing  the  Defcent  of  divers 
noble  ix  wor/lnpful  Perfons,  from  a  Gloucdterfhire 
Gentlemen,  whole  Name  was  thought  to  be  H  haii  ■ 
and  this  from  the  Relation  of  Sir  Richard  Chok  "fome- 
time  Juitice  of  the  Common  Pleas.  oo  b 

Chen'th^^°rt  ^Xtra<*  *rom  Gomcfdei-book,  relating  to 

38.  Other  Extracts  from  antient  Evidences  mlkW 
mention  of  many  noble  Perfonages,  &c.  ,,,  b  6 

a  39-  Coppys  of  Deeds  and  Court-Rolls,  to  pravj  the 
.edegree  of  Parker  of  Audley  in  the  County  of  Staff  rd. 

r, ??'  J°;  hte  Virorum  ;  or  Alphabetical 

Table  of  the  Names  of  Petfons  mentioned  in  this  Book 

f  Place.  Inde*  L°COrUIn  ;  or  like  Table  °f the  Names 

It  may  he  obferved,  that  the  Extrafls  from  Origi- 
al  Deeds  arc  improved  or  adorned  by  Tricks  of  the 

Pp'ndantP,C“S  ^  'h™  reraailli"S  &  thereunto 

1986. 

lRhi?°°Vn  f°l -  written,  perhaps,  by  the  fecond 
kandlc  Holme  and  thus  entituled,  “  A  Breviatofthe 
Bu (hops  of  England,  out  of  the  Workes  of  Francis 

CaUtd  ‘he  Cata,°6“  "f 

This  Breviat  doth  not  ran  through  the  whole  Work- 
M,P,hhKUmnS  'he  Arch-bilhops  of  Canterbury 
1  lho  “‘‘h’P8  of  Lmtdon,  Winchefter,  Ely,  Lincoln 
□ventre  &  Lichfield  with  Cheder,  Sherborn  iSalilbury.’ 

1987. 

P°“,k  “  fol'.,°n  lhe  0Utfide  “*nled  thus, 
Lancalhire-Pedegrees  ;»  and  may  contain,  for  ough 
I  kilo" ,  the  greeted .part  of  the  Vifitation  book  of  that 
County,  compiled  by  William  Flower  Norroy  A  D 
to  w,h,ch  ™T  n«ny  frnft  Pedegrees  have  been 
dd=  Vr  ""m,<;ro,us  Continuations  made  by  the 
two  left  Randle  Holmes  (befides  other  Notes  k  En 

I™fen'eC'’end0''’nt0A'  D'  '7°4'  B"f'des  all  which, 

hi  this  Tab,e  Coates  &  CreIts  trick- 

m  afriwf  •ral?,C  d‘reainS  to  the  Pedegrees.  Both 
fe  at  the  beginning  :  and  in  the  Work  itfdf. 

J.  A  printed  Leaf,  feeming  to  be  a  Specimen  of  a 


Num.  1987,  1988. 

ih?dk  ““P'1"1  “  TI>=  County  Palatine  of  Lancafier 
Trafford  ' 1  ^  S"'‘ng  lhe  Ucfc£:IU  &  Armes  of 

fn,7  T^  Lyno  ort>edegreeofthe  Talebeis,  afterwards 
fumamed  Lancafter:  fignedby  Percivall  Reaghley  A.  D. 

1694.  loofe,  between  fol.  17  and  18.  7 

cs:  rho  Genealogie  of  the  right  worlhipfiill  Familie 
Of  the  Talbots  of  Ball, all  in  the  County  Pahdne  of  Lan 
caltei  ;  lineally  extruded  out  of  auntient  Records,  and 
1  eltimon.es  oivndoubtei  verideby  R(oger)D  odfworth) 
A  1636.  Engraven  m  a  Plate,  and  enlarged  with  nume¬ 
rous  additions,  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  46. 

0.  Mai  k  Amies  of  Winftanly,  by  Mr.  Rich 
Munday  of  London  Harald-Painter.  A.  D  i 610 

7.  A  long  Defcent  of  Bradlhaw  ;  branded  by  this 
following  Note :  This  Defcent  was  given  .0  Jo.  Bradlhaw 
Senant  atjLaw  &  Jultice  ot  Cheder  ;  but  it  is  molt  bale  & 
tade,  and  hath  never  a  true  Defcent  in  it.  RH.  eg.  b.  &  d 
Ped5ree°fLathon,j  colluded  by  illiam  Travel 
(under  faid)  a  louer  of  Armes,  2  Julv  1630.  6-..  b. 

g.  Origmal  Certificates  of  James  Chetam,  &  of  Tho- 
nub  Che’ham  of  Nuthurff,  touching  the  Defcent  of  certain 
others  of  their  Name  &  Family.  g* 

ic.  Original  Letter  of  John  Taylor,  dated  <  Tu!v 
Sankey  Mr‘  H°lmeS  the  Defcent  &  Armes  of 

La"caltire-G£nn-y-  'ricked  hfhe 

1988. 

A  paper  Book  in  fob  confiding  of  divers  particular  Pa 
pers  bound  up  together  ;  or  written  by  feveral  Ti  mjs 
on  the  out-fi.'e  entituled  “  Cateralls  Book  of  the  Anti’ 

mm  of  “f  9hcfl''crl"  by  which  an  intire  Tranf- 
enpt  ot  that  book  is  not  to  be  underdood  :  but  onlv 
an  Extra £t  from  Him,  with  home  other  Colleflioni 

T!i,erfTri1  ma,te,s  which  I  diall 
taxc  Notice  of,  are  thefe  that  follow 

BookeA  Llft  °f  fcUCraU  thhss  of  Note  contain£d  m  'his 

1.  Imperfefl  Lid  of  the  Kings  Offic- , with  their  re 
fpeftive  Fees,  in  Wales. 

O,  “  divers  Chmers  "f  our  Englilh  Kings 

Books  aS‘hey  ^  en,redint0  'bo  Home’s 

an  txaa°  lid  "„dfE,?rf  S„made  ”  0rd£r  »  *e  CompiL 

1 30  Men)  as  they  were  rated,  at  Chridmas  A.  D*  ,s;'a 
North  Cafi°n  °f  the  Commotion  &  Rebellion  in  the 

6  Notes  taken  from  the  Chelhire  Vifitation  books^f 
A.  1) .1566  &  1  580,  by  Mr.  Vincent.  , , 

7.  Epitaphs  upon  the  Lacies  Earles  of  Llneolne,  &'c. 

8.  Incorredf  Verfcs  concerning  the  Abbey  ofStankw- 
which  was  of  the  Lacies  foundation.  J  ,  g  ’ 

9.  Some  Notes  relating  to  the  Monafl^rv  nf  St  w 
burgh  of  Cheder ;  fc  ,o  feme  othS  ife^ra  St 

to  man^oTth °lf  FamikyS  in  Ch£fc  =  0-  £-  '^mg 
Among  them  is  mention  ofa  Deed  of  Domvifc'wh'n 

SotyiT6Ricfrs(af,er  his  ^“0“ 

is.  Armes  of  the  old  Earls  of  Cheder,  tricked^' 

.a.er3Earir:fkCtt!ttltelPrilCe  °f 

15.  Armes 


358 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1988. 

15.  Arines  (or  Badges)  on  the  Blade  &  Pummell  of 
Earl  Randall’s  Sweard  ;  (folfely  enough  fo  called.) 

25.  A 

16.  Armes  in  the  Windows  of  the  Church  ofDarnef- 

bury.  . 

17.  Alphabet,  in  Trick,  of  the  Chefhire  Monaltenes 

8c  Families  Armes.  2 b- 

To  this  old  Alphabet,  the  fecond  Randle  Holme 
hash  put  many  emendatory  Notes. 

lS.  Copie  of,  or  Extiatt  from  a  booke  in  the  Office 
of  Armes,  which  gave  the  Armes  of  the  old  Earles  of 
C. heller  ;  and  of  many  of  the  antient  Chefltire  Gentle¬ 
men.  .  ^8. 

10.  Like  Armes,  from  another  booke  in  the  Office. 

72. 


20.  A  Difcourfe  about  the  Kings  of  Mercia  &  Earls 

of  Cheller  ;  which  may,  perhaps,  be  taken  from  Mr. 
Cathcrals  book.  8 1 .  b. 

Herein  I  obfcrve,  amongft  other  matters, 

21.  A  Supplication  exhibited  to  Kinge  Henry  the  vi. 

by  the  Inhabitants  <  f  the  County  Pallatine  of  Cheller, 
anno  Regni  ejufdem  Regis  29.  8  1.  b. 

Her.  in  they  I'efired  to  be  quitt  from  the  payment 
of  Subfedyes  graunted  by  the  Commons  of  England,  in 
his  Parliamente  late  be  mnne  at  Weflminfltr,  and  ended 
at  Lecefler  ;  the  fa  .0  being  contrary  to. the  Liberty es, 
F  ci  tomes,  and  Franc!  efits  of  the  faid  County  ;  which 
j.,  and  hath  beene  a  County  Pallatine,  as  well  before 
the  Cr.nqueft  of  England,  as  continually  fince  ;  dellindl 
&  ftp  a  rate  from  the  Crowne  of  England :  and  within 
which  v.  ounty  he  &  all  his  noble  Progenit  urs  fithence  it 
came  into  their  hands,  and  all  Rulers  of  the  fame  before 
that  tyme,  have  had  their  heighe  Courts  of  Parliamente, 
to  hould  at  their  Wills,  &c. 

22.  The  Kyngs  Anfware  to  the  faid  Supplication  :  dif- 

charging  the  befeechers  from  paying  toward  the  Subfedy 
abovanentioned.  82.  b. 

23.  The  Kings  Letter  to  the  County;  to  difeharge  them 
of  the  Subfidy.  (Geuen  under  his  Signet  of  the  Eagle.) 

ibid. 


24.  Confirmation  of  the  Libertyes  of  the  County  Pal- 

lat  ne  of  Chefler,  by  Oueene  Elizabeth,  Anno  Domini 
1568.  ~  .  8  3- 

25.  Opinion  of  the  Judges  concerning  this  Counties 

Piivileges.  83.  b. 

26.  That  Richard  Earl  of  Cheller,  ufed  his  Mother 

Ermentrudes  Seal,  before  he  was  knighted  ;  from  the 
Ledger  booke  of  Abington.  85. 

27.  The  Charter  of  Chefhire  confirmed  by  Queene 

Elizaheth  in  the  2d  yeare  of  her  Raigne.  85.  b. 

28.  Dele ript ion  of  the  County-Palatine  of  Cheller. 

98. 

29.  Litterse  Patentes  R.  Ilenrici  in.  quibus  concedit 

Edwardo  filio  fuo  primogenito,  totam  Hiberniam  ;  ex¬ 
cept  is  l-  ivitatibus  Dublyn  et  de  Limerick,  &c.  11  die 
Oclobris,  anno  Regni  38.  I3°\ 

30.  Carta,  qua  R.  Jacobus  1.  de  confilio  et  aflenfu 

Ptadatorum,  Ducum,  Marchionum,  Comitum,  Vice- 
comitum.  et  Baronum  Regni  fui  Anglia:,  in  pleno  Par- 
liamento  convocarorum,  lienricum  filium  fuum  primo- 
genitumPiincipem  WallitE  ec  Comitem  Celtrite  fecit  et 
creavit.  _  _  130.  b. 

o  1 .  Breve  Henrici  Principis  Wallise  et  Comitis  Ceflrite, 
de  llominibus  Comitatus  Ceflr.  verfus  partes  Boreales 
in  Servicio  habendis.  Tefte,  &c.  26  die  Maij,  anno  6 
R.  Henrici  vi.  13 

32  Narratio  de  Inflitutione  et  SuccefTu  Baronum  de 
Halton,  ex  rotulo  amiquo  de  pergameno,  refervato  penes 
Tho.  Starkey  de  Stretton,  132;  et  vid,  fupra  in  Codice. 

131.  b. 

33.  Defcriptio  Genealogie  Comitum  Ceflr.  et  qua  de 

caufa  Comitatus  Ceflr.  devenit  ad  manus  primogenitorum 
Regum  Anglic.  J33*b. 

34.  Inquifitio  capta  .  .  •  anno  16  R.  R.  Ed- 


Num.  1988. 

ward!  1.  coram  Dno.  Reinoldo  de  Gray  tunc  Jufticiario 
Ceflr.  in  pleno  Comitatu  ibidem  ;  qua:  Servicia  deben 
tur  Dno.  Regi  in  toto  Comitatu  Ceflr.  tempore  guerre  in 
Wallia.  _  «34-  1 

35.  De  partitione  Baronie  Vici  Malban.  poll  obitum  j 

Dni.  Willelmi  Malbane.  1 35;  b»  1 

36.  Tranfcript.  Feodorum  in  Com.  Ceflr.  fjeut  inve- 

nitur  in  Rubro  Libro  Feodorum  in  Scaccario  apudWeftm. 
(circa  ann.  16.  R.  R.  Edw.  1.)  . 

37.  Homagia  fadta  Dno.  Edwardo  filio  Regis  Henrici 

hi.  per  Ceftrienfes.  1 37 • 

38.  Nomina  Militum,  Armigerorum,  & c.  Ceftrien- 

fium,  qui  Bona  fua,  Terras  et  Catalla  Dno.  Regi  forif- 
fecerunt  anno  4  R.  R.  Henrici  iv.  137-  b. 

39.  The  order  of  the  going  of  the  States  to  Weltmin- 

fler,  at  the  Coronation  of  K.  Edward  vi.  on  Saturday  the 
1 9  of  February  1546.  but  who  was  nut  crowned  till  the 
next  dav.  1 3^* 

40.  Order  of  placing  of  Lords  in  the  Parliamente,  by 

a  Statute,  in  the  31ft  of  Henry  vm.  and  in  other  Affem- 
blies.  138.  b. 

41.  An  Order  ofPrecedency  of  Eflates.  ibid. 

42.  The  order  of  goinge  to  the  Pailiumente,  in  the 

27  ytare  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  _  J39* 

43.  Narratiuncula  de  Ranulpho  de  Mefchinis  ;  qui 

pofl  fubjugationem  totius  Terra:  de  Stancfmore,  &c.  in 
Ceftrienfem  provinciam  venit,  cujus  (hollibus  profhgatis) 
Comes,  a  Rege  flatim  fa&us  efl.  I39-^)- 

This  is  faid  to  have  been  taken  out  of  an  ould  an¬ 
tient  Parchment,  that  had  beene  a  Leafe  of  fome  ould 
Antient  booke. 

.  4.  Obfervatinn  touching  the  Phrafe  or  Style  in 
Domefday-book,  with  refpect  to  the  Engliffi  who  held 
Lands  at  the  time  of  the  Conquefl :  that  is,  either  as  hold¬ 
ing  the  fame  of  the  Normans  ;  or  difpoflefled  by  them. 
Taken  from  the  beginninge  of  Sir  Tho.  Afton’s  Pedegree, 
anno  1639.  H®-  b. 

45.  Extrads  from  the  fame  book  of  Domefday,  rela¬ 
ting  to  Chefhire.  141.  &  145- b. 

46.  Donationes  quas  Abbatiae  S.  Werbergte  concef- 

ferunt  vel  confirmArunt  Comites  Ceflrenfes,  vel  eorum 
Barones,  &c.  *45- 

47.  Nomina  eorum  qui  per  Comitatum  Ceflrire  Feoda 

Militum  tenebant,  anno  37.  R.  Henrici  in.  e  Libro  Ru- 
beo  in  Scaccario.  •  5 1  •  b- 

48.  Adnotationes  circa  diverforumTenuras  in  eodem 

Comitatu.  ibid. 

49.  Certificate  of  Sir  Richard  Cotton  and  other  Che¬ 

fhire- Juflices  of  the  Peace,  touching  the  Def'cents  of 
Richard  Ley  of  I  ey,  &  of  Thomas  Ley  of  London,  his 
kinfman.  dat.  24EUZ.  152. 

50.  De  Succeffione  et  Armis  Comitum  Ceflrenfium  : 
ex  Charta  leripta  tempore  R.  Henrici  vi.  in,  CullodiaNi- 
cholai  Browne  de  leMerfhein  Com.  Derb.  152.  b. 

51.  Some  Colle&ions  made  from  the  Vintation-flooks 

of  the  County  of  Chefler.  (with  Additions.)  153.  i 

3 2.  Among  thefe,  is  a  French  Deed  of  Margaret  the- 
Relict  of  John  Savage,  whereby  flie  gives  the  Armes  c,f 
her  Father  Sir  Thomas  Danier  (whofe  Heir  fiie  was)  to 
John  Savage  her  fon  ;  dat.  3  Hfenr.  v.  155.  b 

53.  Tranflation  of  the  Charter  whereby  Ranulph  Earl 

of  Cheller  &  Lincolne,  gave  the  Earldome  of  Lincoln! 
to  Hawifia  de  Quintty  his  Siller.  i72*J 

54.  Order  made,  ann.  1  1  Hen.  vn.  by  .  •  .  7 

Stanley  Eerie  of  Derbie  then  Conftable  of  England,  touch- 
ing  the  Difference  to  be  borne  in  the  Arines  of  Sir  Pi-res 
aLeighe,  from  thofe  of  Sir  Thomas  of  Afliton.  185.  b. 

55.  Alphabet  in  Blafon  of  the  Armes  of  old  Chefhire 

Gentry,  takenfrom  the  Parchment-book  of  WiJiam  Bal¬ 
lard  March  King  of  Armes,  (whofe  Defcent  &  Armes 
are  prefixed)  which  book  came  afterwards  into  the 
hands  of  Robert  Cooke  Clarenceux.  ibid. 

56.  The  Names  of  all.  8c  finguler  Knights,  Efquir  s, 
Gentlemen,  &  Free-houlders,  in  the  County  of  Cheller, 

anno 


Bibliothecae  Harieianse. 


3^9 


Num.  1988,  1989. 


57.  Extra&s  from  fundry  old  Deeds  relating  to  the 
Family  ofMainwaring  :  with  fome  Reflections  upon  Mr. 
Sampfon  Erdefvvike  (who  drew  up  their  Pedegree)  as  if 
he  did  not  obferve  the  ordinary  Differences  of  Creffants 
8c  Mollets,  3c  the  like,  for  younger  Brothers,  but  gave 
them  pane  of  their  Mothers  Armes,  added  to  their  owne. 

207. 

58.  Alphabetical  table  referring  to  the  Pedegrees  en- 
tred  into  this  Book.  (Toward  the  end.) 

59.  Alphabetical  table  of  the  Places  mentioned  in  this 
Book.  (Later.) 

I  989. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  feveral  Hands,  and  treating 

(as  is  noted  on  the  back)  upon  the  fubjeft  of  the 

Antiquities  of  Chefter,  from  feveral  Au.hors,  and 

Books  of  good  note  &  ufe,  in  the  manner  lollow- 

ing  : 

i  .  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  the  Things  of  moll 
Note  in  this  Booke  ;  made  A.  D.  1668. 

2.  A  Collection  of  the  Maiors  who  haue  gouerned 
this  City  of  Chefler,  and  the  tymewhen  they  governed  : 
laid  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  to  have  been  written 
by  Mr.  William  Higginfon  Sherifle  of  Chefter.  370. 

This  TraCt  is  not  finifhed  ;  as  giving  only  a  fhort 
account  of  the  Scitu.  lion  £c  Antiquiiie  of  the  Citty,  8c 
fomewhat  of  a  Defcription,  in  generall,  of  the  County  ; 
and  a  brief  Narration  of  its  Earls. 

3.  The  fame  Randle  Holme’s  Notes  out  of  Mr.  Bof- 
tock's  Manufcript  made  per  Henricum  Archidiaconuin 
Huntingdonienfem,  ad  Alexandrum  Lincolnienfem  Kpif- 
copum,  anno  1145,  and  after  continued  by  John  Ma- 
thenfis  a  Monke  of  Deulacres  to  Hen.  in’s  rime.  376.  b. 

Thcfe  Notes  are  very  incorrectly  copied  ;  and  come 
down  to  Iv.  Henry  the  mil’s  time  ;  even  to  the  Battel  of 
Shrewfbury.  (See  more  about  this  MS.  of  Mr.  Bollock’s 
fob  4  3.) 

4.  His  Lift  of  Coroners  of  the  City  of  Chefler. 

383.  b. 

5.  Treafuravs  of  Chefler,  as  I  haue  mett  with  them  in 

record.  3S4. 

0.  Articles  touching  a  Conflables  Office  ;  out  of  Mi*. 
F  lights  bookes.  To  be  given  euery  Conitable  at  tak¬ 
ing-  his  Oath,  in  writing.  3S5. 

7.  Large  Extrafts  made  by  Randle  Holme  out  of  the 

IV.  .!:  Booke  of  Cheller ;  containing  many  material  paffa- 
i  c.-.  of  that  Cities  bufinefs,  from  10  July,  arm.  33  Hen. 
\m.  to  1 8  June  A.  D.  1624.  385. 

8.  An  idle  Account  of  the  feveral  Citties  &  Towns 

throughout  England,  whole  Names  end  with  Cefler,  Chef- 
I  :  ,  or  Caller  ;  as  if  they  were  all  Daughters,  forfooth, 
of  this  our  Mother-City  of  Chefler.  396.  b. 

9.  A  TraCl  concerning  the  Defcription  8c  Iiiflory  of 
the  City  of  Chefler,  wherein  is  much  of  that  of  Mr. 
lligginioii  abovementioned,  recited  verbatim  ;  and  may 
perhaps  be  part  of  fome  other  Draught  of  his  Bock.  397. 

Herein,  (viz.  fol.  307.  b.)  the  Author  cites  the 
Policraticon  of  Roger  of  Chefler,  as  alio  the  Polichroni- 
con  of  Ranulph  Monke  of  Chefler,  thereby  owning  them 
to  have  been  different  men  and  different  book?  ;  about 
which,  I  have  before  given  my  poor  opinion,  in  a  for¬ 
mer  part  of  this  Catalogue. 

10.  'Flic  Succeflion  of  the  Erles  of  Chefter,  colkCled 

out  of  fundrie  Authors,  by  Mr.  Robert  Rogers  fometyme 
Archdeacon  of  Chefler,  and  others.  407.  b. 

11.  Of  thofe  worthie  Perfons  to  whom  the  Erles  com¬ 

mitted  the  Government  of  this  Citie  (viz.  the  Conflables) 
vntill  a  Major  was  appointed  to  be  Cheefe  Governor 
thereof.  As  alfo,  of  the  Steward,  8c  Juflices  of  Chefter, 
down  to  the  Year  1482.  425. 

12.  A  Survay  of  the  River  of  Dee,  which  runneth 

vnder  the  Citie  of  Cheller.  427.  b. 

13.  The  Toll  payable  at  Dee-bridge,  forfundry  Com¬ 
modities,  according  to  aPrefentmentofgrcate  Antiquitie. 


•Cat.  IIarl.  Voi,.  II. 


Nutti.  1989 — 1991. 

*4-  Of  all  the  Wards,  Streetes  &  Lanes  within  the 
Citie  of  Chefler  ;  as  they  were  named  in  the  Dayes  of 
Kinge  Edward  the  Third.  43 1. 

15.  Of  the  Foundation,  &  flrfl  Buildinge  of  fome  of 

the  Chefler-Churches.  434. 

16.  Of  the  Hofpital  of  St.  John  Baptifl,  without  the 

North  gate  of  Chefler.  436. 

1  7.  Succeflion  of  the  Bifhops  of  Chefler.  442. 

18.  Of  the  Eretlicn  of  a  Monaflerie  in  the  Citie  of 

Chefler.  450. 

19.  The  Succeflion  of  the  Abbots  of  St.  Werburg’s 

Monaflery  in  Chefler.  452.  b. 

To  this  is  annexed  the  Award  made  Anno  1  Henrici 
vm.  between  the  then  Abbat  &  Monks  on  the  one  partie, 
8c  the  Mayor  of  Chefter  8c  his  Brethren  on  the  other  ; 
upon  the  feveral  matters  of  Difcord  which  had  arifen 
between  them. 

20.  Of  the  Diffolution  of  Abbeys,  and  of  convertinge 

this  into  a  Cachedrall  Church  ;  placeing  there  a  Dean  8c 
Chapter,  &c.  infteedof  the  Abbot  8c  Covent.  456. 

2 1  The  Succeflion  of  the  Deanes  of  Chefter,  fince 
the  Diffolution  of  the  Monaflerie.  458-  b. 

N.  B-  All  thefe  later  Articles  feem  to  me  but  parts 
of  the  fame  work  ;  whofe  beginning  I  take  to  be  atN°9. 
above. 

22.  The  Names  of  the  Maiors  Sc  SherifFes  of  the  Citie 
of  Chefter,  fince  anno  24  Hen.  111  ;  together  with  relation 
of  fund ry  Matters,  boih  forraigne  8c  domefticall,  which 
happened  fince  the  fame  tyme.  463. 

This  comes  down  no  lower  than  ann.  32  R.  Ed- 
wardi  1. 


1990. 

A  paper  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands  ;  wherein 
1  find, 

1.  Index  alphabeticus  Locorum.  hoc  in  Codice  me- 
moratorum. 

2.  A  View  of  StafFordfhire,  containing  the  Antiquities 
of  the  fame  Countie  ;  written  by  Sampfon  Erdefwicke 
of  Sandon  near  Stafford,  in  the  fame  Countie  Efq;  begun 
about  the  yeare  1593  ;  and  continued  to  his  Death,  which 
happened  in  April  A.  D.  1 603. 

This  Copy  is  enlarged  by  the  Addition  of  the  Names 
cf  Perfons  8c  Places  mentioned  in  each  Page  of  the  Work, 
all  along  in  the  Margins  ;  by  order  of  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme,  as  it  feems. 

3.  The  beginning  of  the  fame  Mr.  Erdefwick’s  De¬ 
fcription  of  Chefnire  ;  being  but  three  Pages  ;  with  the 
like  marginal  Notations  of  Perfons  and  Places.  107. 

4.  Index  Virorum  :  or  rather,  an  Alphabetical  Table 
of  Perfons  Names  (of  both  Sexes)  mentioned  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  Treadles. 

1991. 

A  paper  Book  in  folio,  written  by  different  Hands,  as 

confifting  of  fingle  Copies  of  Chefhire  Wills  &  In- 

quilidons,  long  fince  bound  up  together.  At  the 

beginning,  1  find, 

1 .  The  laft  Randle  Holme’s  Table  directing  to  the 
faid  Inquifitions  8c  Wills  ;  which  are  thcfe  that 
follow, 

2.  Inquifitio  capta  6  die  Augufti,  anno  23  R.  Eliza¬ 

bethan,  poll  mortem  Johannis  Boftocke  de  Churton. 
Gen.  1 . 

At  the  end,  it  appears  to  be  c  Copia  vere  examinata.’ 

3.  Inquificio  capta  die  Jovis  proxima  ante  fcftum  Na- 

tivitatis  S.  Johannis  Baptifte,  anno  8  R.  Henrici  vi.  polt 
mortem  Willelmi  de  Eggerton  de  Bulkyley.  25. 

At  the  end,  is  ‘  Concordat  cum  Recordo,’  &c. 

4.  Inquificio  capta  die  Sabbali  proxime  poll  feftum 

Converfionis  S.  Pauli,  anno  34  R.  Henrici  vm.  poll 
mortem  Johannis  Bothe  Clerici.  26. 

This  Bothe  is  faid  to  have  been  Lord  of  Molington  ; 
&  to  have  held  it  of  Glegge. 

5.  Inquificio  capta  17  die  Aprilis,  anno  41  R.  Eli- 

5  B  zabethas, 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  r  991 . 


zabethcc,  pofl  mortem  Johannis  Manley  de  Pulton  Armi- 
geri.  30. 

This  Inquifition  feeins  to  be  but  the  rough  Draught; 
yet,  at  the  end  it  is  figned  by  Hugh  MafTy,  Sc  others. 

6.  Inquiiicio  capta  die  Lune  proxima  ante  feftum  S. 

Johannis  Baptifle,  anno  20  R.  Henrici  vm.  poll  mor¬ 
tem  Thome  Bothe  Armigeri.  4;.  b. 

In  the  margin  :  written,  {  Examinatur  per  Copiam 
que  capta  fuit  extra  Rotulos  aput  Ceflriam,’  &c 

7.  Inquiiitio  capta  17  die  Aprilis,  anno  41  R.  Eliz- 

abethe,  poll  mortem  Johannis  Manley  de  Pulton  Armi- 
geri.  Cvid.  fupra,  5  5.)  '  47. 

8.  Inquiiicio  capta  1 9  die  Aprilis,  anno  12  Regi.;  Ja¬ 

cobi,  poll  mortem  Johannis  Poole  fenioris,  de  Poole, 
Armigeri.  50. 

At  the  end  of  this  long  Office  is,  ‘  Concordat  cum 
Recordo,’  &c. 

9.  Finalis  Concordia  facia  30  die  Julij  anno  18.  R. 

Elizabeths,  inter  Willelmum  Comitem  Wigornie,  Ed- 
waidum  Comitem  Kurland,  Robertum  Comitem  Ley- 
ceilrie,  Xpoferum  Wraye  Militom,  Egidium  Alin^on 
Mi  litem,  Hugonem  Cholmondlty  Militem,  Johannem 
Talbott  Armigerum,  et  Gcorgium  Carye  Armigerum, 
Querentes  :  et  Johannem  Savage  Militem,  et  Johannein 
Savage  Armigerum,  Derorcientos.  04. 

On  the  outfide,  this  large  Fine  is  thus  entituled, 
‘  Copie  of  the  Fyne  acknowlcged  by  Sir  John  SauageKt. 
lor  the  vfe  of  his  Sone  Mr.  John  Savage,  at  the  tyme  he 
was  maried  to  the  Earles  Nice.’ 


. . n' . jauuaiij,  anno  4  lv.  Jlliza- 

bclhe,  poll  mortem  Jacobi  Merburie  Armigeri.  98. 
This  is  but  a  ffiort  Extract. 

1 1 .  Inquiiicio  capta  1 1  die  O&obris,  anno  35  R.  F.liza- 

bethe  poll  mortem  Willelmi  Marburye  de  Marbury  Ar¬ 
migeri.  At  the  end,  is  ‘  Examinatur  per  me  Johannem 
Yeaidley.  99. 

12.  Inquifuio  capta  27  die  Septembris,  anno  .  .  . 

R.  Caroli,  poll  mortem  Henrici  Brereton.  113. 

I  his  is  an  imperfect  rough  draught. 

13.  Inquiiicio  capta  die  Mercurij  proxime  pofl  fellum 

S.  'Irinitatis,  anno  29  R.  Henrici  vm.  polt  mortem  Jo¬ 
hannis  Alderfey  de  Ceflria.  1 13. 

14.  Inquiiicio  capta  14  die  Septembris  anno  44  R. 
Elizabethe,  pofl  mortem  Agnetis  Mordaunt  vidue.  1 16. 

This  Copic  was  examined  in  the  Court  of  Wards, 
and  attefled  accordinglv. 

IS-  fhc  Will  .  f  Ihomas  Gamull  Recorder  of  the 
Cittie  of  Cheller ;  dated  2  Augufl  1613.  123. 

16.  1  he  Will  of  Sir  John  Davenporte  of  Davenport, 

Knight;  dated  21  July  1625.  j 2-j. 

17.  'Fhe  Will  of  Edmund  Gamull,  of  the  City  of 
Cheller,  Alderman  ;  dated  10  November  1615.  13c. 

This  feems  to  be  the  firfl  Draught  of  that 'Will. 
tS.  Tranflation  of  a  Deed  of  Richard  Coly  a  Kinfman 
to  Robert  C'oly  th’elder  Citizen  of  Cheller,  touching  the 
Sale  of  an  houle  there,  by  the  faid  Richard,  in  purfuance 
of  the  faid  Robert’s  Will.  jig 

19,  lhe  Will  of  Thomas  I.ilcall,  of  the  City  of 
Cheller,  Alderman,  dated  10  0£lober,  1603.  138. 

I  his  hath  been  examined  by  the  Ori  final,  which 
was  (or  is)  upon  Record. 

20  ExtraSs  from  the  Will  of  Dame  Marie  Egerton, 
late  of  Ridley,  widow  ;  dated  18  OSlober,  1597.  114. 

r  ni!  i  R‘ui!te  Rogers  Alderman  of  the  Citie 

of  C.heftur ;  dated  1  Oclober  1539.  146. 

22.  Will  of  Hugh  Robinfon  alias  Chamber,  of  Chef- 

ter ;  dated  10  December  i <335.  j  ,g 

To  this  is  added,  a  Lift  of  the  Debts  owlne  to  him  ■ 
and  an  inventory  of  his  Goods. 

23.  lhe  Will  of  Gabrieli  Wetenhall  of  Namptwich, 

Gentleman  j  dated  ,,  September,  1601.  ,  „ 

=•*•  1?™rh!of  ,ht''Vin  of  William  Gamull  of  the 

(  ime  ot  Utefter,  Alderman;  dated  17  May  16:0. 

riin  .s  much  gnaw«  by  Ratts  or  Mice.  159.  ift 


Num.  Igqi. 

25.  1  he  Will  of  Jane  Chamber ;  dated  6  AptiU  1  74L 

lt?3. 

This  feems  to  be  the  Origi  al  ;  and  the  Probati  n 
of  the  fame  (which  runs  in  the  King’s  Name)  is  attefled 
by  George  Wymifley  Official  of  Chefler. 

26.  lhe  W  ill  of  Ellen  Gamull  Widowe,  late  Wyef 

to  Thomas  Gamull  of  Buerton  Gentleman;  dated  i  May 
anno  3 1  R  Elizabeths.  164. 

27.  lhe  ill  of  Valentine  Broughton  of  the  Cyttieof 

Chefler,  Alderman;  dated  .7  June  1603.  165. 

(  ?8.  An  Abilradte  oute  of  the  fame  W  y II,  touching 
the  Bequefts  by  him  made  to  the  Corporation  of  Chef- 
ter*  ...  172. 

This  is  followed  by  fome  Accompts  relating  to  thofe 
Legacies. 

29.  The  Will  of  Henry  Manley  of  Pulton  ;  dated 

I  April  1525.  174.  b. 

This  is  written  upon  Parchment,  and  feems  to  be 
the  Original,  but  is  imperfedl. 

30.  lhe  Will  of  Rauffe  Gamull  of  Buerton  ;  dated 

II  December  1540.  j^-. 

This  is  the  Original,  and  has  the  Probat  on  the 
backfide. 

31.  The  Original  Will  of  Davyd  Lloyd  of  the  Citye 
of  Chefler  Alderman;  dated  12  November  1  599.  176. 

32.  The  Will  of  Merget  Bamvyll  of  the  Cyttye  ofChef- 

tur,  Wyddowe  ;  dated  3  October  1578.  *  180. 

This  is  the  Original,  and  has  the  Probats  on  the 
back-fide. 

3  3.  The  Will  of  Thomas  Gamulle  of  Buertone  ;  dated 

i3Ju!y  i532.  1 8  « . 

This  Original  is  written  upon  Parchment,  and  hath 
the  Probat  on  the  backfide. 

34.  The  Will  of  John  Boothe  Do£lor  ofDiviaitie  Sc 

Archdeacon  of  Herforde;  dated  8  Augufl  1542.  182. 

This  is  a  Copy  upon  Parchment,  but  is  attefled. 

35.  The  Will  of  Dame  Mary  Cholmondcley  of  Hol- 

fonle,  Widowe;  dated  20  Januarye  1622.  183. 

This  feems  to  be  a  firfl  Draught  and  not  to  be  finifhed. 

36.  The  Wrill  of  Thomas  Bavande  of  the  Citie  of 
Chefler,  Alderman;  dated,  1 5th  Aug u tie,  1564,  185. 

37.  The  Will  of  Robert  Bothe  ;  fecining  to  be  dated 

30  November  1516.  187.  b. 

This  feems  like  to  a  firfl  Draught  only  :  yet  it  hath 
been  fealed. 

38.  The  Will  of  William  Gamull  of  the  Cittye  of 

Cheller,  Alder, nan  ;  dated  A.  D.  161 9.  188. 

This  is  thr  firfl  Draught  only. 

39.  Papers  relating  to  the  Will  of  Jane  Alderfey  dated 

16  May  1621.  200. 

Thefe  are  followed  by  fome  other  Papers,  relating 
to  other  Perfons,  who  (like  her)  were  Benefactors  to  the 
Corporation  of  Chefler. 

40.  The  Will  of  John  Bothe  Doctor  of  Diiiite  Arch- 

decon  of  Herdforth  ;  dated  8  Augufl  1542.  20^. 

This  is  the  Original  written  upon  Parchment ;  & 
hath  the  Probate  on  the  backfide. 

41.  The  Will  of  Thomas  Bedwude ;  dated  the  lafl 

day  of  Marche  1496. — (This  is  a  Copie.)  208. 

42.  The  Will  of  Frances  Gamull  of  the  Cittie  of  Clief- 

ter,  Widdow  ;  dated  9  Augufl  1644.  209. 

This  is  but  part  of  a  rough  Draught. 

43.  The  Will  of  Thomas  Gamull  of  Buerton ;  dated 

28  December  1564.  210> 

This  is  upon  Parchment,  &  hath  the  Probate  under  it. 

44.  The  Will  of  John  Clegge  of  Greyfbye  Gentleman ; 

dated,  7  February  1555.  211. 

This  is  the  Original,  Sc  hath  the  Probate  on  the 
backfide. 

I992-  . 

A  thin  paper-Book  in  large  folio  ;  confifting  of  loofe 

papers  Sc  fragments,  being  Chefhire  Pedegrees  for  the 

mofl  part ;  or  otherwife  in  the  Heraldical  way,  and 

needing  little  more  to  be  faid  of  them.  However, 

before 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


37' 


Num.  1992,  1993. 

before  I  quit  it,  I  (hall  obfeive  thefe  fete  particulars 
that  fellow,  ,  , 

1.  Thelaft  Randle  Holme’s  Table  direding  to  the 
Amies  of  Families  to  be  found  in  the  book. 

2.  His  Table  of  the  Pedegrees. 

3.  His  Lift  of  Things  of  Note  found  here. 

4.  His  Table  dire&ing  to  the  Names  of  Places  men¬ 
tioned  in  Pedegrees  and  Deeds  in  this  Booke. 

5.  Divers  old  Defcents  written  upon  oblong  Leaves  of 
Paper  colored  Red,  in  order  to  the  keeping  of  Leaf  Gold 
therein.  At  the  end  of  this  Note,  “  Thus  fare  out  of  Liber 
BB,  Dni.  Dodfworth.  pag  1.”  (but  fee  more  §.  7.) 

6.  Lift  of  the  Juftices  of  Chefter,  with  Proofs  ;  and 
their  Armes  in  Blafon. 

This  comes  down  to  the  4th  of  K.  Charles  1. 

7.  Randle  Holme’s  Note,  (hewing  that  the  Defcents 
abovementioned  at  §.  5.  were  extracted  from  the  Deeds 
extant  in  the  book  then  Infcribed  GGG.  which  now,  in 
this  Library  is  marked  97.  A.  16. 

8.  Several  Papers  relating  to  the  Defcent  of  Maynwar- 
ing  pag.  24  fee  alfo,  pag.  59,  95,  138. 

9.  Part  of  a  Copie  of  Wynyngton’s  Pedegree,  as  la¬ 
boured  &  judically  fett  downe  by  Mr.  Jo.  Bouthe  of 
'L'wemlowe,  and  approved  by  Sir  Rich.  St.  (  eorgeNor- 
roy.  pag.  36.  (fee  the  other  part  at  pag.  54-) 

1  o.  The  Pedegree  of  Boftoke,  as  defeended  from 
Dutton  Sc  Holland  ;  traveled  &  fett  forth  by  William 
Harvey  alias  Clarenceulx  King  of  Armes  A.  D.  1561. 
pag.  40  (et  vid.  pag.  153)  .  ,  ,  , 

On  the  backfide,  this  Pedegree  is  noted  to  be  much 
miftaken.  - 

11.  Some  Britifli  or  Welfh  Defcents  ;  at  pagg.  50,  61, 

161,  A.  171. 

1 2.  Anfwers  to  fome  of  the  Interrogatories  putt,  con¬ 

cerning  certain  Lande  formerly  belonging  to  the  Monaf- 
tery  ofDeulacres.  60,  69. 

,  -3.  Defcent  of  the  Barons  &  Earls  of  Staflord,  do  vn 
to  the  laft  Henry  Stafford.  72- 

14.  Pedegree  of  Lowe,  as  colle&cd  Laurence  liol- 

lingfhead  Gent.  io.0’ 

15.  Papers  of  the  Defcent  or  Genealogy  of  the  antient 

Family  of  Arderne.  ‘  2  1 

16.  Defcents  of  Vernon,  with  Extracts,  or  Proofs 

from  their  Deeds.  If°‘ 

17.  Defcent  of  Legh  dc  Adlinton ;  fubfenbed  ^ 
moy  Wyllm.  Flower  Efqire  alias  Norroy  Roy  D  armes. 


1993* 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  collefted  or  made  by  feveral 
perfons ;  which  I  fhall  deferibe  in  the  manner  fol¬ 
lowing  :  .  , 

1.  The  Valuation  of  the  Bufhopncks  m  the  Queen  s 
Bookes,  A.D.  1600.  with  *he  Fees  for  them,  paid  to 
the  Pope. 

This  is  written  on  the  waft  Leaf  lining  the  Cover, 
as  it  may  feem,  by  one  Thomas  Barneflon  ;  whofeName 

is  upon  fol.  1.&3.  ,  c  t-  1  i 

2.  The  Armes  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  or  oF  England 
rudely  depicted  ;  as  all  the  reft  are  that  follow.  1 . 

3.  '  1  he  Armes  of  England  (that  is,  with  only  the  Nor¬ 

man  and  Andegavjan  Lions  or  Leopards  :)  again  with 
that  of  Guienne  ;  and  the  -rmes  of  Ireland  :  all  with  the 
modem  Crown  of  England  over  them.  _  2. 

4  Armes,  perhaps,  intended  for  the  Princes  of  Wales: 
being  included  within  the  Garter,  &  under  a  Label  of 
three  points.  The  Supporters  are  two  Stags  ;  and  above 
all  is  the  fame  modern  Crown  of  England.  3. 

Armes  of  the  Univerfity  of  Oxford;  the  Words 
within  the  Book  being  thefe,  “  In  principio  erat  Verbum, 
et  Verbum  erat  apud  Deuin,”  &c.  4- 

Thefe  are  followed  by  the  Armes  of  iuch  Colleges 
as  were  in  being  within  that  Univerfity  A.  D.  1600.  with 
the  Names  of  their  refpedivc  Pounders.  Among  which, 


Num.  1993,  *994- 

thofe  of  Brazen-nofe,  Univerfity,  Ballot,  Merton,  Ex¬ 
eter,  Oriel,  Queenes,  Lincoln,  New,  lrinity,  &  St.  John  s 
Colleges,  are  attended  by  other  Armes  of  particular 
Perfons,  Families,  or  Benefactors,  which  may  have 
been  found  in  them  painted  in  the  Glafs,  or  cutt  in  Stone 
or  Wood.  .  . , 

6.  Armes  of  the  Univerfity  &  Colleges  of  Cambridge; 

but  without  fuch  Attendance.  2°; 

7.  Armes  of  the  Empires  Occidental  and  Oriental,  with 

thofe  of  the  King  of  the  Romans,  France,  England,  and 
many  other  Kingdoms  &  Countreys.  22‘ 

Among  thefe  fome  are  fet  forth  in  falfe  Colors ;  and 
others  feem  to  be  fancied  only.  Here  are  alfo  divers 
Notes  touching  the  Armes  of  Kings,  Pnnces,  &  Coun- 
treys,  taken  out  of  Dr.  Heylyn,  Mr.  Guillim,  ike.  by 
the  abovementioned  Thomas  Barneflon. 

8.  A  Copie  of  C.larenceux  Cookes  Baronage  ;  as  con* 

tinued  to  the  Lord  Gervafe  Clifton.  3°* 

The  Armes  were  begun,  perhaps,  by  him  who 
painted  at  the  beginning  of  the  Book,  who  proceeded  no 
further  than  fol.  34.  from  which,  I  find  no  other  Colors 
expreffed  than  Yellow,  Green  &  Black,  unto  fol.  45- b- 
where  I  perceive  fome  Red,  but  then  it  is  done  with 
common  Raddle.  After  fol.  54,  a.  there  are  but  few  of 
theArmes  given  ;  and  thofe  are,  for  the  moft  part,  only 
traced  with  Black  Lead.  The  Writing  part  of  thisTrea- 
tife  feemeth  to  be  of  the  Hand  of  Thomas  Barneflon. 

9.  A  'l’able  (defeftive)  to  the  Names  of  the  Nobility 

mentioned  in  the  preceding  Work.  73- 

10.  Defendants  from  Rees  Merchan  of  Cliud,  or 

Pedegree  of  John  Davids.  75- 

11.  Names  of  thofe  who  decyded  a  Strife  betwixt 

Maflye  of  Pudington,  &  Maflye  of  Tatton  about  their 
Coate  of  Armes.  lbid-  | 

T994*  ,  .  , 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  fingle  or  particular 
Paper  &Parchmcnt-Writings  ;  for  the  moft  part  bound 
together  long  fince,  and  on  the  out-fide  entituled 
Church-matters,  &  other  things  concerneinge  Abbyes, 
Nunneryes,  &  Religious  Houfes  ;  a  pretty  diftind 
Account  whereof,  here  followeth. 

X,  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  matters  of  moft  Note  in 

this  Book  at  the  beginning.  .  ,  . 

2.  Concerning  the  yearely  Diftnbution  of  the  late 
Revivall  of  150  pounds  by  the  yeare,  in  the  Cathedrall 
Church  of  Chefter,  Anno  158:.  according  to  an  Order 
made  by  the  Lord  ofBurghley,  Lcrd  High  1  hreafurer, 

&  others  her  Majefties  Commiffioners.  261. 

3.  Placita  Com.  Cleft,  coram  Thoma  Duce  Gloucc-ftr. 
Juiticiaric  Ceftrie,  die  Martis  proxime  ante  fcftum  Con- 
ceptionis  beate  Marie  Virginis,  anno  16  R.  Richardi  ti. 

r  262. 

This  (quoth  the  elder  Randle  Holme-)  I  coppyed 
out  of  an  old  Roll  lent  me  by  Dr.  Bridgman  Deane  of 
Chefter,  in  Febr.  A.  D.  1661.  It  relates  a  Trial  between 
the  King  &  Henry  de  Sutone  Abbat  of  Chefter,  for  the 
right  of  Prefentation  to  all  the  Churches  appropriated  to 
the  Abbey  ;  upon  a  fuppofition  that  Thomas  de  New- .. 
porte  a  late  Abbat  (with  the  confent  of  the  whole  Con¬ 
vent)  had  alienated  them  all,  to  John  de  Delves  &  others, 
without  the  confent  of  the  Earl  of  Chefter  the  Founder. 
But  at  length,  after  much  Trouble,  the  Caufe  went  for 
the  Defendant  ;  and  the  King,  who  had  feized  on  the 
faid  Churches,  reftored  the  fame  to  the  Monaftery. 

4.  This  followinge  is  on  the  back  of  the  forfaid  Rolle. 
264.  b.  &  265.  b. 

That  is,  Doquets  of  Bulls,  Charters,  &  other  In- 
ftruments  relating  to  the  faid  Monaftery,  with  directions 
how  or  where  to  find  the  Originals. 

5.  Ifte  funt  Dedme  dominice  que  vocantur  le  Bord* 

land,  de  parochia  de  Kirkby,  ad  opus  fabrice  Ecclefie 
Sande  Werburge  Ceftr.  pertinentes.  2°5- 

6.  Fines  fadi  Domino  Abbati  Ceftr.  per  Tenentesfuos 


37* 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1994-. 

mVillis  fubfcriptis,  28  die  Augufti,  ac  diverfis  diebus 
poilea  [  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  Oflavi,  fexto-decimo. 

267 

This  Teems  to  be  the  Original  Lift,  or  Book. 

7-  Kedditus,  &  Receptiones  Decimarum  Garbarum, 
&c.  Abb.  See.  Werburge  Ceftr.  cum  enumeratione  Feo- 
32?®*  J*d'?rumi  Donorum,  et  Expenfarum  neceffa- 
riarum  ab  Abbate  folvendorum.  „g- 

Parc H°lme  “P''ed  fr°m  °ne  °fhis  °";  0'd 
r  Terrarum  et  Tenementorum  que  pertinent 

Sci  MM,  I'"''  M°Sa,,erii  S“'  Werburge  Ceftr  a  Feito 
no  'ft  “  anno  Regm  Regis  Henrici  Scxti  poll  Con- 

'  Vlcefimo  r‘™°  :  idem  feftum  proxime 

icquuis  per  union  annum  integrum.  28t 

i  his  is  the  Original  written  on  Parchment.  ' 

<)■  Compotes  Johannis  Ley  Prioris  Monafterii  Sanfle 
We, binge  Ceftr.  ac  Cuftodts  Fabrice  &  Operis ijufdem 
Mona  a  fertoSci.  Michael!.,  Archangel!,  anni  R.R 
Hei  ne  v  i.  port  conqucftum  Anglic  vicefimo  quarto ; 
!  "  “  tuM  P'^ine  fequens,  anno 

hu^ruin  a  Vm-  V“ie^t>  Per  annum 

?ohl!Not«'!!l!Slhn  °rj&in?J.  Written  upon  Parchment. 

I O;  botes  taken  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  from 

on  the  Hffl '7  B°°k:  .of  *=  Church  of  St?Mmy 

by  Ri'hnrH  1°  Wllch  was  bcSun  to  be  written 

Mw,A“?b  Z™  °ut  of  the  Kegifter-booke  of  St. 

1  -n’-'  iNV'  l6i9'  per  mc  Panum.  Holme,  toy. 

1  nis  Book  li  as  written  by  the  fame  Perfon,  and  in 
the  fame  h  ear  wnh  the  former  ;  and  perhaps,  may  be  the 

mna'rkabl"  “"““S  Abflraai'  or  ^  are 

.StanioJeT^^1  U'ajBh|°f  "  [nrtlliritit>"  concerninge 
rhSTr  {t’r“d  dlvers  other  Abbey.lands  pur 
chaled  by  George  Colton,  &  fold  again. 

rn:Ld'0Tmd,:S  "K  ^nke  Book  of  *e  Church  of 
Lngland  ,  fomc  Notes,  by  an  Hand  not  tile  mo#  legible 

CI,efterDmTr  “T -tl,=  F?i!nda,!°n  of  the  Bilhoprict’of 
Carif  lol  °*  '■  "'“burg's  Church  into  a 

5  '  by  K  Henry  vm.  with  the  Endowment  of  the 

lame .  bearing  1  efte  a  Augufti,  anno  Regni  2 ,.  , 

Indenture  ^fTV  Copie  (now  in  four  pieces)  of  an 

Will  m  Civft  n"’  '  errtbri  t5.e  riSht  "  orfhippfull 
t  i  n  CMe  i’,rane  of  'be  Cathedral!  Church  of 
CmfiH  ’  and  *1  Cha|lter  of  tlle  iame  place  ;  for  diverfe 
SSrT”  rvmf5  V  and  eipec’al!ie  in  Confide- 
racons,  of  the  Lings  Graces  feucrall  I.ctters  of  Requefts 

6  Contemplations,  by  th'aftem  of  ins  mod  honorable 
pnvey  Counctll  to  them  in  that  behailfe  directed  ■  do 
dymyle,  graunte  fett,  le„.  &  to  farme  betake %mo 
Jonn  Caulucley  Elquior  the  Kings  Graces  Servant  it 

LanT’ren  &  T-rme  of  Fifric  Yores,  many 

the  Exoi  ri  nrS’-Ar  meU,luned  m  former  Leafes,  after 
=«  ■  all  m  Z  II  P  “  Zaff  ;  “ith  «<>«  -ban  un 
ward,.  dated  d  A“Suft’  ann.  s  Ed. 


Nura. 


'99+- 


loofe. 


This  Leafe  is  now  in  four  pieces  of  Parchmm,'  and 

C  'LQ"hrieiar!!inS  uP°n  certain  Letters  from  the 
’  wbffb>'  ‘he  K,nS  did  diiafforeft  totam  Terrain 
r“d“  1  1  anni  at-  idle  de  Dale,  and  freed  the  Fame 
u  potura  Servientiiin.  Iame 

17.  Exeinpl.ncat!.,  R  ordorum  fuper  Placito  de^Ou'o 
Warranto  Rnbe.ius  de  Swinnerton  clamavft  haber^ 
tenure  totam  I  crrani  Hum  A  Feodum  fuum  de  Barew 

^ZdZrdi'Z;jI';'a:'?Ut“rei  a™=7 

Herein,  1,  alfo  the  Charter  of  Ranulph  EarZof 

acrtci  (granimg  thole  Pnvileges  to  theLands  of  Bairow) 

H  mioned  produced  at  the  Trial  aforefaid. 


w'n’  AT-F°P'e  °J  tllc  In^enture  whereby  Mr.  Richard 
Walker  Deane  of  the  Cathedral!  Church  of  Chefter  & 
the  Chapter  of  the  fame  (after  divers  Leafes  of  thefr 
Lands,  1  enements  8<c.  within  their  Balywicke  of  Chefter 
&  Upton,  to  Richard  Dutton,  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter 

-h“  a~d 

19.  A  Copie  of  the  Leafe,  whereby  Mr.  William  Cliff 

Cheft°err0/.brrr’hDea,,e  f  **  C^"  Chumh  of 
R  ioh  ri  n  ChapIer  «»  !  luce,  did  1,-tt  vn to 

R  chaid  Dutton,  all  their  Meffiiaglv,  Lands,  Ac.  fi  tr 
lying  &  being  m  the  Cittv  of  Ciielter,  ami  the  1  -„iu 
held  Prccintt-  imdCeuiim  f  r„  ” 

fcorcYccrs,  paying  the  yeiuly  Rent  of  , 

dat.  ,  December,  anno  j  R.  Ldwurdi  vu(vld.  L£ 

SHaAKasKSi 

money  could  not  be  inZoyZ^ceoX'Tv;  bec'amfo  [l.ofe 
m  whofo  Handes  the  fame  is,  will  pay  nmiher  sZke  ^r 

the  J"  ,hc  ^ans!"si  is  n  Lift  of  the  faid  LegaciesZdth 
the  Names  of  thofe  who  bequeathed  them. 

21.  Copie  of  the  rnquifition  taken  upon  the  ahove 
mentioned  Petition,  before  the  Bilhop  of  Chefter  &  other' 
Com, mft, oners  for  p,ous  Ul'es,  3,  March  ,640.  ,6, 
aa.  Origmal  Citation  of  John  Brideeman  Bifhinof 
Chefter,  fo,  many  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Bimbu-y  Pan'ili 
within  divers  downihips,  whole  Names  are  expLfei II 

pear^before  r  “  annexeJ  'hereunto  1  ,0  ap. 

pear  before  him  or  ins  Commilliries  in  tiie  Church  of 
ACfon,  on  the  asth  of  November  ,h,„.  '  ,  ° 

Rilh3'  nf  th7  PfqurHtion  taken  before  the  faid 

cE  HoiZfoChSr’^'"’  “  I,lhabit-;  rf 

Joh„4R?r‘Zal  °l  Richard  Grimefdich4& 

John  Rycrofte  taken  before  the  fiune  Bifhop  of  chc-iter 
at  Wigan  23  May,  A,  D.  ,62S  (toucluni  Lands  be’ 
queathed  by  Thomas  Juhnfon  to  the  Poor  of  Appleton  ) 

banb^^GZ,Z;;:r;dZI';Zti;liiG'3";‘- 

Joh|u  c^^rlaStr^S 

^^“'cby^h'e'confirnted^th^bctpl^  wliic^h^ 

Uncle  Thomas  Johnfon  made  of  his  Hoifte  and  I  and  in 
ApIe.on,  ,0  the  ufe  of  the  Poor  of  theParifl  oFcmpnall 
&  iown  of  Apleton.  Provided  that  he  &  his  HdT? if 
they  pieafedy  fhould  pollefs  the  faid  Ueufe  and  l  ands 
•  7  S&S  Y,t7  fhe  annual  R““  °b ee  1 4-  dated 

.  26;  Draught  of  an  Order  of  the  Commiffionem  a',i 
pios  Ufua  for  fettling  the  aforefaid  nTS  Z 
Thomas  Johnion  k  eoman,  to  ihe  i’oere  of  the  Purift,  of 
GroppeAalfo&TowneM^f^^, 

mateUhebH°Ur\and  Ij,I,d  tbpvementioned  were3  eft, 

1  ° b=  worth  rant.  £,8.  ye,  willed  by  the  deceafed 
Tern,,  -  f  Ae  Rate  0f£t4.r  ann.  ?o  thW  the 
itmaunt  might  bee  the  better  able  10  pay  the  faid  Rent 

27.  Draught  of  the  Inquiiition  taken  24  Juiy  tS2S 

before  the  fame  Bilhop  of  Chefter  &  others  Z  ’ 
Commiffionersad  piosUfus;  wherein  the  Will  of  the 
laid  i  homas  Johnion  is  recited.  « 

28.  Rough  Draught  of  the  Will  laft  aboye-memfoned. 

3$5- 

29.  George 


Bibliothecae  Harleiatise. 


Num.  1994- 

29.  George  Vemoun's  Opinion  upon  the  Exceptions 

which  Sir  William  Sneades  Councell  taketh  agaynft  the 
Allignement  or  Grant  made  by  Richard  Dutton,  of  Cou- 
chetts  Hay  to  the  faid  Sr.  William.  386. 

30.  A  Bill  in  the  Chancery*  exhibited  by  Edward 

Dutton  Alderman  of  Chefter  (fon  of  Richard  Dutton 
Efq;)  Plaintiff;  againft  Raffe  Sneade  Efq;  (fon  of  Sir 
William  Sneade)  and  others  claiming  under  him,  De¬ 
fendants  ;  about  the  right  of  Poffeffion  of  a  parcel  of 
Land  formerly  called  the  Crofts,  or  Touchets  Hey,  & 
then  known  by  the  Name  of  Cowchetts  Hey,  &c.  which 
the  Deans  and  (  hapters  of  Chefter  had  granted  for  fuc- 
ceeding  terms  of  Years  to  the  faid  Richard,  Sir  William, 
Raff-,  and  others  :  together  with  the  Anfwers  of  the 
fever  all  Defendants  ;  and  a  Brief  of  fevtral  of  the  faid 
Conveyances.  ,,g_ 

.3.1-  4  F)eedof  Gift,  whereby  Richard  Dutton  of  the 
Curie  of  Chefter  Alderman,  gave,  granted  &  afligned 
his  Eftate  real  &  perfonall  to  EJward  Dutton  his  young- 
elt  Son,  and  of  the  fame  putt  him  in  prefent  Potleflion, 
by  the  deliuery  of  one  goulde  Ringe.  Provided,  that 
it  1  he  Donor  thould  affure  unto  his  faid  Son  an  Annuytie 
of  Flue  Shyllyngs,  iffueinge  out  of  his  Lands,  &c.  within 
the  faid  Citrie  ot  Chefter,  during  his  Life  :  then  this  Gift 
to  be  void,  dat . June,  anno  15  R.  Eliz.  397. 

3  2.  A  Copie  of  a  Leafe,  whereby  Mr  Wyllyam  Cliffe 
Doctor,  of  La  we,  Deane  of  the  Cathedrall  Churche  of 
Chefter,  and  the  Chapter  of  the  fame  place,  grant  and  lett 
to  far  me  unto  Richard  Dutton  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter 
Draper,  all  theire  Meffuages,  Lands,  Tenements,  &c. 
within  the  Cittie  aforelaid,  or  ells  wheare,  as  menconed 
m  a  Scedulethearunto  annexed,  for  the  Terme  of  Three¬ 
score  Yeares.  Yeldinge  &  payinge  therefore  yerelie 
£49  :  5  :  5-  dated  1  December,  anno  5  R.  Edwardi  vi 
(vid.  fupra,  §  19.)  3gg.  * 

N.  B.  In  the  annexed  Schedule  the  Sum  total  of 
the  feveral  Premifll-s  amounteth  to  hut  £48  :  10:  5. 

33.  Inftruclions  for  a  Byll  in  the  Star-Chamber  againft 

Hugh  Calvely  of  Lea,  and  Richard  Maddocke  of  Lea 
Newbold  his  Servaunt,  at  the  Suit  of  Edward  Rullell  of 
Chefter,  Gent.  /)02- 

7’his  Paper  fets  forth  divers  great  Abufes&  Injuries 
done  by  the  laid  Hugh  (then  one  of  the  Deputyes  1  .ief- 
tennants  for  the  County  of  Chefter)  unto  Mr.  Ru  ell, 
and  others  ;  upon  occafion  of  his  procuring  an  Align¬ 
ment  of  a  Leafe  of  a  Meffuage  with  certain  Grounds  in 
Churcbenheath,  wherein  certain  Years  remained,  as 
t.;  :i  unexpired,  which  were  lett  by  the  Deane  and  Chnp- 
:er  of  the  Cathedrall  Church  of  Chrift  &  our  bleffed 
Lady  Mary  the  Virgin,  at  the  yearly  Rent  of  £3  :  6 :  8. 

34.  Original  Articles  of  Agreement,  betweene  Wil¬ 
liam  Smith  of  Carre  in  the  Parifh  of  Audley  in  the  Countv 
of  Stafford,  Schoolemaifter  ;  and  Arthure  Babbington  of 
Audley  aforefaid,  Hufbandman.  dated  10  Aprill,  ann. 

19  R.  Jacobi  1.  404.' 

1  hefe  exprefs  the  Covenants  made  between  both 
parties,  upon  Babington’s  taking  part  of  Smiths  houfe 
(called  the  Carre-houfe)  with  the  Crofts.  Orchards,  &c. 
thereunto  belonging,  for  one  year,  at  Fourty  Shillings 
Rent.  0 

35.  Original  Bond  of  Hugh  Salufbury  of  Ecclefton 

in  the  County  of  Chefter,  Gent,  and  of  George  Salufbury 
of  Arebiltoke  in  the  County  of  Flint  Gent,  made  to  Wil¬ 
liam  Wryght  Clerk,  Parfon  of  Warton,  in  the  Sum- of 
^400.  for  performance  of  Covenants,  touching  the 
Tythes,  Glebe-landes,  Landes  Spirituall  &  Temporall 
kc.  belonging  to  the  Churches  of  Kirke-chrifte  in  the 
Ayre,  and  Kirke-marron,  both  in  the  Lande  of  Manne, 
in  the  lies ;  which  Henry  Stanley  Earle  of  Darbye  had’ 
to  Farm  letten  unto  Robert  Salufbury  ofDenbich  Gent, 
to  hold  the  fame,  during  the  Lives  of  divers  of  the  Hand- 
meres  (or  Hanmers?)  dat.  16  die  Marti j,  anno  20  R. 
Elizabethe.  4C^ 

36.  Original  Bill,  figned  by  the  aforefaid  Hughe  Sa- 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  If.  6  I 


Num. 


[994 


lufbury  &  William  Wright,  for  indemnifying  the  faid 
Hughe  k  George  his  Brother,  who  were  bound  for  the 
faid  William,  to  Mr.  Thomas  Lywiell  of  Chefter  for  the 
payment  of  the  Some  of  £192.  dut.  17  Marche,  anno 
27.  Elizabethe.  4Qg 

37.  Articles  of  Agreement  between  Richard  Burches 
Clearke.  Rector  ofThurftafton  in  the  Countie  of  Chefter, 
and  George  Stubbes  of  the  fame  place,  Yeoman  :  where . 
by  the  Rector  mortgaged  his  Tythe-Corne  for  one  whole 
year  to  the  faid  Stubbes  for  £2 6.  dat.  20  Marche,  A.  D. 
1029. 

38.  Draught  of  the  Inftrument  made  upon  the^Con; 
jecration  of  the  Chapell  or  Oratory'  of  the  Holy  Trinity 
in  Great-Lever  in  the  County  of  Lancafter,  by  John 
Bridgman  Biftiop  of  Chefter  ;  who  had  erected  the  fame 
in  his  Manfion-Houfe  there,  which  was  diftant  Seven 
Miles  at  the  leaft,  from  the  Mother  Church,  dat.  24 

MaijA  D.  ,634.  4o8. 

1  his  is  written  upon  Parchment. 

39.  Order  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer  of  Chefter,  upon 
the  Suit  between  Thomas  Glover  Clerke  Parfon  ofKirkby 
alias  Weft-Ktrkby  in  the  County  of  Chefter,  Plaintiffe  , 
andStrWtlliam  Mafiye,  Kt.  &c.  Defendants  ;  touching 
the  Reclorye  &  Church  aforefayde,  &  Tvthes  of  the 
fame,  which  Sir  William  Sc  thofe  vnder  whom  he 
claymed,  had  enjoyed  by  the  Space  of  80  years  Sc  vp. 
wards,  by  virtue  of  a  Leafe  of  the  PremiiTes  granted  by 
Richard  Walker  Clerke  then  Parfon  of  the  fayde  Church 
and  confirmed  by  the  then  Bilhopp  of  Chefter,  &  by  the 
Deane  &  Chapter,  Patrons  of  the  faid  Church  The 
Court  adjudging  the  Caufe  for  the  Defendant,  uS  Ofto- 
bris  anno  9  Regis  Caroli  1 . 

40.  F.xtraa  from  a  Leafe  granted  by  William  Clyffe 
Dean  of  Chefter,  k  the  Chapter  thereof,  to  Rowland 
Stanley  of  Hooton  in  the  Coumy  of  Chefter,  Lfq  ;  all 

r?hrS  f  C01‘nf’  Hey’  HenJPe  &  Flax,  called 
Bordland- 1  yeths  in  the  Townfhips  of  Little  Caldey 
Greate  Caldey,  Newton  with  the  Winges,  Laverton 
^euMidi'^reat  Meoles  k  Grevelby  within  the  Parifh 
•  }VeR-K!(by  ;  and  a,f°  the  Bordland  Tythes  of  Irbv 
w-thm  the  Parifh  of  Thuftanton,  &  Woodchurch,  &c  for 
thel’ermeof  jt  yeares,  at  the  annual  Rent  of  fomPounds- 
in  Confideration  of  a  Surrender  made  by  the  faid  Row¬ 
land  of  a  Leafe  or  Covent-Seale  granted  vnto  one  Thomas 
ByiJcenhead  by  the  late  Abbat  k  Covent  of  Chefter,  anno 
30  Hennci  vtu.  of  a  Meafe  or  Cell  call'd  the  Houfe  of 
Hiltefl-,  and  of  divers  1’ieths  within  the  Parifh  of  Weft 
ivirkby,  m  the  Townthipp  of  Irby,  in  the  Parifh  of  Wood- 
church  k  1  hurftanton,  in  Wyrall,  &c.  for  Ct  Yeares 
datecl\  '.3  March,  anno  6  R.  Edwardi  vi.  4og.  b.  * 

,  JJhis  is  followed  by  aScedule  giving  a  particular  of 
ine  lithes,  &c-  granted  to  the  faid  Mr.  Stanley. 

41'  Dnwghl  of  an  Inftrument,  whereby  Anne  Ireland 
ot  Chefter,  Widowe,  (in  confideration  of  the  Some  of 
£46;  1  i  :  4.)  grants  unto  Hughe  Dod  of  Chefter  Gent 
her  Rite  reft  in  the  Remainder  of  a  Leafe  for  61  yeares’ 
of  a  Manfion-houfe  adjoyninge  to  the  Churche-yard  of  the 
College- Churche  of  Saynt  John  in  Chefter,  granted  by 
Dr.  David  1  ole  latePrebendarye  of  the  faid  College  and 
confirmed  by  the  Dean  &  Chapter  thereof,  anno  „  R 
Hennci  vm.  at  the  annual  Rent  of  ao  Shillings,  dat' 

3  December,  A.  D.  1598.  0  ’ 

42.  Another  Draught  of  certain  Articles  of  Agreement 
between  the  find  Ireland  &  Dod,  for  her  Aligning  the 
Leafe  of  that  Houfe  unto  him.  6  ® ( 

43-  Supplication  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  made  by  Raphe 
Jentns  of  Chefter  Draper ;  reprefenring  that  he  was  law¬ 
fully  poflefled  of  certain  Tenements  built  in  the  Butter- 
hoppes  of  Chefter  upon  the  voyd  ground  formerly  be¬ 
longing  to  St.  John  Baptills  Hofpital  there,  by  virtue  of 
two  Leafes i  of  the  fame  granted  by  1  homas  Crewe  Schol. 
ler,  &  Robert  Jones  Gentleman  late  Maftets  or  Keepers 
Ot  the  faid  Hofpuall :  and  that  about  the  24th  day  of  Fe¬ 
bruary  m  the  31  ft  yeare  of  Highncs  Raigne,  one  Roger 
5  G  Hanmer, 


Mvllrv 


374 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1994* 

Hanmer,  Mirgerye  his  wife,  with  about  20  other  per- 
fons,  rioutoufiy,  forceably,  and  in  warlike  manner  afiein- 
bled  themfelves  and  broke  into  his  Huufe  ;  where  they 
beate  downe  and  evell  intreated  Him  &  others,  carried 
away  Oertaine  parcells  of  Goods,  Sc  committed  other  Ads 
of  Violence.  .  41  ?* 

44.  1  he  Replicacon  of  Sir  Walter  Pye  Kt.  his  Majef- 
ties  Attorney  of  his  Courte  of  Ward es  Sc  Liveries,  by 
the  Relacon  ofSr.  William  Brereton  B.-.rronet,  Plaintifte; 
fo  the  joynte  &  feuerall  Awnfweares  of  Thomas  Walfh,  & 
Edward  Roberts  Defendants,  dat.  30  Maij  1627.  428.. 

This  feems  to  be  the  Original,  Sc  relates  the  Privi¬ 
leges  enjoyed  by  the  Nuns  of  Chefter  at  the  time  of  the 
Diffolution  of  their  Monaftery.  That  with  their  Lands, 
the  faid  Privileges  came  to  King  Henry  viii.  who  granted 
the  fame  (with  the  Scire  of  the  laid  Monaftery)  to  the 
Relators  Anceftors,  &  which  He  &  They  had  enjoyed 
ever  fince.  And  therefore,  that  the  Relator  was  not 
liable  to  pay  Murage,  toward  the  reparation  of  the  Walls 
of  Chefter,  according  to  the  Affeffment  lately  made  by 
the  Mayor  &  Citizens  there,  nor  had  they  lawfull  Power 
to  enter  iherefore  into  the  Premiles,  and  to  diftrein. 

45.  A  Note  of  fuch  Houfes  &  Land  (with  the  Fifhing 
in  Dee)  and  the  Names  of  fuch  Perfops  as  are  now  in 
pofTeflion  thereof;  which  are  leafed  by  the  Deane  & 
Chapter  of  Chefter,  to  Sir  Nicholas  Byron  Kt.  Governor 
of  Chefter,  anno  31  Caroli  1.  for  21  veares.  445- 

This  feems  to’be  copied  by  the  fecond  RandleHoliue, 

&  doth  not  fpecifie  the  feveral  Rents  paid. 

46.  A  Rental  of  the  Deane  &  Chapters  Tennants  in 

Chefter.  45 '■ 

It  contains,  for  the  moft  part,  only  their  naked 
Names. 

47.  Interrogatories  to  be  miniftred  to  Witneftes  pro¬ 
duced  to  be  examined  on  the  part  &  behalfe  of  Thomas 
Wdfh  Sc  F.dward  Roberts  Defendants;  to  the  Information 
of  Walter  Pye  Kt.  his  Majefties  Attorney  of  his  Highnes 
Court  of  Wards  &  Liveries,  on  the  part  &  behalfe  &  by 
the  Relacon  of  William  Brereton  Efq ;  now  Baronet. 

453- 

This  relates  to  §  44,  above,  and  {hews  that  the  Nuns 
did  hold  a  Garden  &  Lands  in  Chefter,  of  the  Mayor  & 
Citizens,  in  Gable-Rent.  Randle  Holme  adds  on  the 
back,  this  further  concerning  Sir  William  Brereton,  “  he 
hath  fince  incroched  much  more  wrongfully  from  the  City, 
in  tyme  of  the  Siege  at  Chefter.” 

4O.  Privileges  of  the  Nuns  of  Chefter  &  their  Fermors 
Sc  Tenants,  by  virtue  of  divers  Graunts  from  the  Kings 
of  England  ;  Sc  Confirmations  thereof  from  the  Kings, 
Princes  of  Wales,  &  Earles  of  Chefter  :  the  Scite  of  whofe 
Monaftery  was  graunted  by  K.  Henry  theEighth,  9  March 
anno  regni  33,  to  Sir  Vrian  Brereton,  to  hold  the  fame 
as  Free,  and  as  freely  difeharged  of  Murage,  Tolls,  &c. 
a  ;  ever  the  faid  Covent  of  Nunnes  held  the  lame.  455. 

On  the  back  it  is  thus  entituled,  “ACafe  delivered  to  Mr. 
Morgan  of  Chefter,  by  Mr.  Brereton;  coneerninge  Tolies 
of  the  Markett  (for  his  Tenants  Corne  to  be  free./’  Thefe 
I, ill  Words  are  added  by  the  faid  Randle  Ilclme,  who 
fubjoyns, 1  Much  Stirr  there  was  about  it ;  never  perfefted.’ 

4<j.  Information  of  the  abovementioned  Sr  Walter 
Pye  exhibited  to  Sir  Robert  Naunton  Kt.  Mafter  of  the 
Court  of  Wards  Sc  Liveries  ;  by  the  Relation,  Sc  on  the 
behalfe  of  William  Brereton  of  Hanford  in  the  County 
of  Chefter  Efq;  touching  the  aforefaid  demand  of  Mu¬ 
ra.;?,  and  his  Tenants  being  diftrain’d.  And  fornfinuch 
as  the  Relator  caimot  have  an  equall  Triall  in  Chefter, 
before  the  Mayor  Sc  other  Officers,  who  are  themfelves 
chargeable  with  Murage,  he  fupplicates  for  Procefs  of 
Privey  Seale  to  be  direfted  to  Thomas  Wellh  &  Edward 
Roberts,  commaunding  them  to  appeare  in  the  faid  Court 
bv  a  certain  day,  See.  456. 

50.  Extracts  from  the  Graunts  abovementioned  in 
§  48.  touching  the  Privileges  of  thefe  Nuns  of  Chefter, 
their  Tenants  Sc  Fermors.  459.  b.  Sec.  backwards,  j 


Num.  1994. 

Thefe  Extracts  Randle  Holme  writes,  were  made 
by  Edward  Whitbie  Recorder  of  Chefter  ;  whofe  remark¬ 
ably  bad  Hand  appears  often  in  this  Book  ;  particularly, 
at  fol.  325. 

51.  A  Commiffion  from  the  Bufhope  for  the  difpofe- 

inge  &  eredtingc  Seats  in  the  Churche  of  St.  Warburge, 
5  Sept.  1624.  Signed  by  the  Bifhop  John  Bridgman,  Sc 
by  Edward  Rufi'ell  his  Regillrar.  472. 

52.  Bill  of  Complaint  exhibited  by  William  Jollie  of 

Leeke  in  the  Countie  of  Stafford  Gent,  to  William  Earle 
of  Derby  and  James  Lord  Strange  his  fonne,  Chamber- 
laine  of  the  Countie  Pallaline  of  Chefter,  again!!  the 
Mayor  Sc  Citizens  of  Chefter,  for  their  entring  into  S: 
taking  pofleffion  of  the  Common  Hall,  antiently  called 
the  Schole-houle,  and  the  Houles  about  it  ;  he  having 
purchafed  the  fame,  for  three  l  ives,  of  Richard  Dutton 
Alderman,  who  had  a  Long  Leafe  of  the  Premifles  from 
the  Dean  Sc  Chapter  of  Chefter.  dat.  29th  day  of  May, 
A.  D.  1638.  475- 

This  is  the  Original. 

53.  interrogatories  to  be  minftred  upon  the  behalfe  of 

the  Dean  Sc  Chapter  of  Chefter,  Sc  Edward  Ruflel,  De¬ 
fendants;  againlt  Dame  Mary  Bently  Widdow,  Foulke 
Salulbury  Alderman,  Kc.  Complainants  ;  about  the  Tith- 
barnes  of  Ledfham  and  Saughall,  with  the  lithes  of 
Letlfham,  Great  Saughall,  Little  Saughall,  and  Cappen- 
hurll.  492- 

54.  A  rough  Draught  of  fundry  new  Statutes,  foi'this 

Church.  403* 

That  is,  a  Draught  of  divers  Bills  to  be  enafted  by 
the  Parliament  of  Ireland,  to  the  advantage  of  the  reform¬ 
ed  orProteftant  Church  there  ;  temp.  R.  Caroli.  1. 

55.  A  Surrender  of  all  the  Lands  belonging  to  the 

Dean  Sc  Chapter  of  Chefter,  by  the  Fermors  of  the  fame; 
made  to  Queen  Elizabeth;  upon  condition;  that  f’ne  fhould 
re-grant  the  fame  to  fome  of  them,  within  twelve  months, 
dat.  2  die  Oiftobris,  anno  21  Elf/..  502. 

56.  Another  Surrender,  to  the  fame  purpofe,  but  by 
different  perfons.  dat.  2  die  Becembris.  anno  22  R.  Eflz. 

.  5*8- 

57.  A  Hefted  Copie  of  O.  I  hznbeth’s  Commiffion  to 

the  Lord  Treafurer  Burleigh  Sc  others,  authorifmg  them 
to  heare  &  determine  the  Matter  St  Cattle  touchinge  the 
Validity  Sc  Invalidity  of  the  Incorporation  Sc  Dotation  of 
the  Dean  &  Chapter  of  Chefter.  and  of  all  other  Matters 
&  Caufes  that  may  be  objected  on  her  behalfe,  on  the 
behalfe  of  the  faid  Dean  Sc  Chapter,  or  on  the  behalf  of 
many  Chefhire  Gentry  or  inferior  Inhabitants  .  in  whole 
Occupation  the  faid  Dean  Sc  Chapter’s  Land-  then  were. 
Tefte,  See.  8  die  Maij,  anno  regni  20.  512. 

In  the  Preamble  fhe  declares,  that  Whereas  her  Father 
did  eredb  a  Deane  Sc  Chapter  in  the  Cathedral  Church 
of  Chefter,  &  did  endow  them  with  Lands  and  Poffdlions 
to  the  dear  yearely  Value  of  £800,  Sc  above;  the  moft 
parte  of  which,  fythen  his  Death,  they  did  (by  Licence  of 
K. Edward  vi.)  demyfe  vnto  S'  Richard  Cotton  Kt.  in  Fee- 
Farme,  for  a  certayne  yearely  Rent :  and  that  the  faid  Sr 
Richard  Cotton,  L  his  form  George  Cotton  afterward 
had  conveyed  a  greate  parte  to  Sir  Hughe  Cholmdey,  Sir 
George  Calveyley,  Sc  others  in  Ftc-Farme,  lo  that  the 
faid  Deane  h  Chapter  haue  nothing  but  a  certayne 
yearly  rent  to  maynteyne  themfelves  withall  :  And 
whereas  the  faid  Deane  Sc  Chapyter  had  beene  humble 
Sutors  vnto  her,  to  haue  the  premifles  reduced  to  thtym 
agayne,  alledging,  that  there  are  fuch  Imperfections  in 
the  Incorporation  Sc  Dotacyon,  that  fhe  might  refume,  & 
take  the  fame  into  her  Hands,  and  after  beftowe  the  fame 
vpon  theym  in  fuch  fort  as  fhe  fhould  thinke  meete : 
She  therefore  caufed  her  Attorney-General  1  to  exhibit 
an  Information  againft  the  faid  Sir  Hugh  Cholmeley, 
Sir  Geo-ge  Calveley,  &c.  but  upon  their  Complaint, 
that  if  the  faid  Suite'  fhould  proceede,  a  greate  Number, 
as  well  Gentlemen  as  others  would  be  putt  to  greate  Sc 
extreameChardges  before  the  fame  Suite  could  bee  ended: 

Therefore 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae, 


375 


Nutn.  1994* 

Therefore  that  the  fame  may  be  fpeedilye  ended,  &  the 
Matter  fully  appeafed,  as  alfo  for  the  Advancement  & 
fpme  Increafe  of  the  Lyveingof  the  faid  Deane  &  Chapy- 
ter,  and  to  the  reafonable  Contentation  of  the  faid  Gen¬ 
tleman,  &c.  She  caufes  this  Commiffion  to  be  ilfued 
forth. 

58.  Certain  Notes  concerning  Inftruments  made  temp. 

R.  Edwardi  vi.  in  order  to  the  Alienation  of  the  Lands 
belonging  to  the  Deane  8c  Chapter  of  Chefter ;  by  the 
fecond  Randle  Holme.  517- 

59.  Liters:  Patentes  R.  Edwardi  vi.  quibus  Licentiam 

concedit  Decano  8c  Capitulo  Ecclefie  Cathedralis  Ceftren. 
quod  ipfi  omnia  Maneria  &  Tenementafua,  8cc.  ad  Eeodi 
iirmatn  dimittere  poffmt  Richardo  Cottone  Militi,  Con- 
trarotulatori  Hofpitij  fui ;  habend.  pro  annuali  Rcdditu 
603I.  1 8s.  tod.  et  per  Servicium  viccfime  partis  vnius 
feodi  Militis.  Tefte,  8cc.  14  die  Maij,  anno  regni  fui  fep- 
timo.  518. 

60.  Scriptum,  quo  Willchnus  Clyft"  Decanus  F.cclefie 
Cathedralis  Ceftr.  et  Capitulum  ejufdem,  conftituunt 
Richardum  Sneyde  8c  Rogerum  Hurleftone  Armigeros, 
fuos  Attornalos  ad  intrandum  in  Maneria  fua,  etc.  dat. 

1  die  Maij,  anno  7  R.  Edwardi  vi.  520. 

61.  Carta  qua  Willelmus  Clyfe  Clericus,  Decanus 

Ecclefie  Cathedralis  Ceflr.  et  Capitulum  ejufdem,  con- 
cedunt  Ricardo  Cattone  Militi,  omnia  Maneria  fua,  etc. 
habend.  predicta  Maneria,  Mefuagia,  Terras,  Tene- 
menta,  Redditus,  Revercoes,  Servicia,  Hereditame/ila, 
Advocationes,  Donationes,  Prelentationes,  Sec.  in  Feodi 
firmam  in  perpetuum.  tenend.  de  Dno.  Rege  per  vice- 
funam  partem  unius  feodi  Militis  :  ac  reddendo  annuatim 
annualem  Redditum  603I.  18s.  tod.  conftituentes  'lho- 
inam  Holcroft  Militem,  et  Ricardum  Clyve  juniorem 
Attornatos  fuos  ad  intrandum  in  predidta  Maneria,  Sec. 
el  plenam  PolTeffionem  inde  capiendum,  et  plenam  8c 
pacificam  Poffeflionem  et  Seifinam  inde  deliberandum, 
dat.  15  die  Maij,  Anno  7  R.  Edwardi  vi.  521. 

62.  Indenture  of  Covenants  grounded  upon  the  former 

Deed,  whereby  the  faid  Dein  &  Chapter  of  C.heftur 
agree  to  fave  hannleffc  the  faid  Sir  Richard  8c  his  Heirs 
of  all  Taxes,  Annuities,  Fees,  and  Incumbrances  what- 
foever  due,  or  to  be  due  or  demandable  from  the  Pre- 
miffes  ;  with  fame  Exceptions.  Alfo,  if  at  any  time  here¬ 
after,  the  Rents  of  the  Premises  fhould  not  amount 
yearly  to  603I.  18s.  tod.  the  Deficiency  fhould  be  allowed 
A'  abated  to  Sir  Richard  accordingly.  Furthermore,  that 
they  will  deliver  up  to  Sir  Richard,  all  Deeds,  Eviden¬ 
ces,  Writings  8c  Charters  which  they  have  concerning 
the  Premilles  ;  and  at  any  time  within  two  yeai'es  will 
fuller  any  fuch  refonable  Thing  8c  Things,  that  for-  Sir 
Richard’s  further  Suerty,  {hall  be  deuifid  or  aduiiid. 
Yeven,  16  Maij,  anno  7  R.  Edwardi  vi.  525. 

63.  Bond  of  the  fame  Dean  8c  Chapter,  of  1000 

pounds,  to  Sir  Richard  Cotton,  for  their  performance  of 
the  faid  Covenants,  dated,  ut  fupra.  529. 

64.  Carta,  qua  Willelrnus  Clyi  Decanus  Ecclefie- Ca¬ 

thedralis  Ceflr.  et  Capitulum  ejufdem,  ad  requificoem 
Regis  et  Coniilij  fui,  perpetuam  Feodi  Firmam  dimittunt 
Richardo  Hurlefton  dePykton  Generofo,  Manerium  fuum 
tie  Edcnlhaghe  alias  Idynfhawe,  et  Viliam  de  Newton 
juxta  Ceflr.  pro  annuali  redditu  27I.  14s.  ..d.  conftitu- 
entes  Richardum  Nuthall  et  Edwardum  Planknay  Gene- 
rofos,  Attornatos  fuos  ad  intrandum,  et  inde  plenam  & 
pacificam  Poifeflionem  8c  Seifinam  deliberand.  dat.  20 
die  Novembris,  anno  4  R.  Edwardi  vi.  530. 

65.  Order  of  the  Commiflioners  mentioned  above  at 
§  57.  upon  their  calling  divers  of  the  parties  concerned, 
of  both  fides,  before  them.  At  which  tyme  it  was  al- 
ledged  that  there  was  D<-fe£te  in  the  Letters  Patterns  made 
by  K.  Henry  vin.  of  the  Dotation  &  Graunt  of  the 
Lands  8c  Poflefiions  made  to  the  Deane  &  Chapter  of 
Chefler,  by  reafon  of  the  Omilfion  of  fome  materiall 
"Words  in  there  Name  of  Corporation,  from  the  true 
Name  by  which  they  were  incorporated  by  other  Letters 


Num.  1994,  1995. 

Patients  of  the  Kynge.  Whereupon,  doubt  was  made 
as  well  of  the  Validitye  of  the  Eflate  of  the  faid  Deane  8c 
Chapter,  as  of  the  faid  Fee-farmers  which  clayme  there 
Eflate  by  Graunt  from  the  faid  Deane  8c  Chapter.  For 
getting  an  Aflurance  from  her  Majeftic  of  all  the  Lands 
8c  PolTeflions  claymed  by  the  faid  Fee-farmers.  For 
raifing  the  Rents,  in  the  grofs  ;  and  laying  the  Sum  to 
be  railed  upon  the  Tenants;  according  to  the  Value  or 
Quantity  of  what  they  held.  dat.  7  Aprilis,  anno  21  Eli* 
zabethe  Regine.  532 

66.  Part  of  a  Leafe,  whereby  Mr.  William  Clyffe 
Doctor  of  Laive,  Deane  of  the  Cathedrall  Church  of 
C.heller,  8c  the  Chapter  of  the  fame  place,  do  lett  to 
Farme,  to  Richard  Dutton  of  C.hefter  Draper,  all  theire 
Meiluages,  Lands,  Tenements,  &c.  lett,  lying,  8c  beinge 
in  the  Cittie  of  C.hefter,  precinfts  of  the  fame,  or  elfe- 
where,  as  fpecified  8c  declared  in  a  Sccdule  to  the  fame 
annexed  ;  unto  th'end  of  Threefcores  yeares j  at  the  an¬ 
nual  Rent  of  Three-fcore  8c  Neene  pounds,  Eighteene 
Pence.dat.  13.  January,  anno  6  R.  Edw.  vi.  540. 

This  is  not  finilhed,  becaufe  it  refers  to  a  former 
Leafe  mentioned  above  at  §  19. 

67.  Exemplification  of  part  of  an  Inquifition  taken  3 1 

Martij  1640,  concerning  the  mind  of  Thomas  Farmer 
Schoole-maller  of  the  free  Grammer-Schoole  of  Witton 
in  the  Countie  of  Chefter ;  who  had  bequeathed  the  yearly 
benefite  of  £50.  toward  the  maintenance  of  a  poore  & 
towardly  Schollar  brought  up  at  the  faid  Schoole,  and 
fent  to  the  Univerfity.  543. 

68.  Extrafls  from  Deeds,  with  other  Notes,  taken 

out  of  a  great  Folio-Booke,  belonging  to  the  Deane  8c 
Chapter  of  Chefter,  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  and 
others.  544. 

The  faid  great  folio  Booke,  feemeth  to  be  the  Leiger 
or  Journal  Book  of  the  faid  Dean  8c  Chapter  ;  wherein 
Minutes  of  their  TranfafUons  &  Affairs  were  orderly  re- 
giftered. 

69.  Extra&s  from  certain  Deeds  found  in  the  hands 

of  the  Sequeftrators,  anno  1657.  571. 

Among  thefe,  mention  is  made  of  the  Collegiate 
Church  ot  St  John  in  Chefter ;  of  the  Brethren  8c  Sifters 
of  the  Fraternity  of  St.  Anne,  therein  ;  of  the  Grange  of 
Stanlowe  formerly  belonging  to  the  Monaftery  of  W bai¬ 
ley,  etc. 


1995. 

An  Hefaldical  Book  in  folio,  on  the  outfide  entituled 
‘  Coates  and  Pedegrees  as  containing, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Cathaloge  of  the  Names  of  the 

Coates  of  this  Roule  :  that  is,  direfling  to  the  Efcocheons 
included  in  the  next  Article,  according  to  the  running 
Numbers  fett  upon  them.  1. 

2.  A  Roll  of  Arines,  as  well  Wellh  as  Englilh,  be¬ 

longing  to  many  antient  Families,  efpecially  thofe  of 
Herefordlhire  :  now  cutt  into  Leaves  8c  bound  up  with 
the  reft  of  the  Book.  3. 

3.  A  large  C.olleflion  of  Pedegrees  of  Noble  & 
Worlhipful  Families,  both  of  England  &  Wales  ;  partly 
extracted  from  Viiitation-books,  particularly  thofe  of 
"York-lhire  8c  Staffordfhire,  taken  in  the  time  of  Queen 
Elizabeth ;  to  which  fome  Continuations  have  been  af¬ 
terwards  made  ;  the  other  part  chiefly  confifts  of  loofe 
Papers  of  Defcents,  Church  Notes,  Sec.  either  bound  with 
or  faftened  to  the  former,  wherein  divers  Entrances  may 
be  obferved  of  the  Hands  of  Richard  Mundy,  Jacob 
Chaloner,  and  others.  Among  them  all,  I  fhall  parti¬ 
cularly  obferve  thefe  only  which  follow, 

4.  Defcent  of  Prince  Henry  from  the  Houfes  of  Lan- 

cafter  8c  York  ;  engraven.  14.  b. 

According  to  the  prefent  Numeration  of  the  Leaves, 

5.  Some  Original  Letters  fcattered  up  8c  down  ;  but 
not  (in  my  opinion)  either  for  the  fake  of  the  Perfons,  or 
importance  of  their  Matter,  requiring  particular  mention  : 
unlefs  we  except  thofe  Papers  relating  to  Mrs.  Jane 


Cataiogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  1995,  1996. 

Shelley,  who  was  the  Heirefs  of  Lengin  (or  L’Engayne) 
of  whom  there  are  likewife  other  Papers  in  this  noble 
Library,  vid.  97.  66.  91, b.  120.  195.  b. 

Thole  that  relate  to  the  faid  Mrs.  Shelley,  may  be 
found  at  fol.  65.  68.  128.  133.  193.  159.  160.  b. 

6.  Copie  of  a  Confirmation  of  Armes,  &  Grant  of  a 
Creft,  to  George  Jenkes  of  the  Countre  of  Salope  Gen- 
tellman,  by  Robt.  Cooke  Clarencieulx.  dat.  iMay  1582. 

140.  et  vid.  140.  b. 

In  the  principal  Letter,  is  an  hafty  Trick  of  the  faid 
Clarenceulx  in  his  Habit. 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  referring  to  the  Pedegrees-  found 
in  this  Book. 

8.  Alphabetical  Table  dire&mg  to  the  Armes  tricked, 

or  otherwil'e  mentioned,  in  the  fame.  165. 

J996. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  a  parcel  of  loofe  Papers 
long  fince  bound  up  together  ;  and  on  the  outfiue 
thus  entituled,  “  Notes  of  leverall  companyes  in 
Chefter,with  their  Sutes  &  Charters.”  The  particulars 
are  thefe  that  follow, 

r.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  Matters  of  moft 
Note,  to  be  found  in  this  Book,  at  the  beginning. 

2.  Interrogatories  to  be  myniflred  to  Wittneffes  to  be 
examined  on  the  parte  &  behalfe  of  Roger  Hurlefton 
Gent-  Complainant;  againft  Thomas  Meoles  &  Robait 
Cherke  Defendants 

This  is  concerning  their  Rights  of  Kflinig  in  the 
Rive?  of  Dee. 

3.  Depoficons  of  Witneffes  taken  in  the  Oueenes 
jefties  Court  of  Exchequer,  in  the  Caftl’e  of  Chefter,  the 
1  2th  daie  of  September,  anno  43  R.  Elizabethe,  vppon 
the  parte  &  behalf  of  Roger  Hurlefton  Gent.  Complai¬ 
nant,  againft  Thomas  Meoles  &  Robert  Cherke  Defen¬ 
dants- 

This  feemeth  So  be  the  original,  and  is  attefted  ac¬ 
cordingly. 

4-  The  Plea  k  Demurror  of  the  Alderm.  Stewards,  & 
Breethren  of  the  Compenny  of  Joyners,  Caruers  &  Tur¬ 
ners,  within  the  City  of  Chefter,  Defendants  to  the  Bill 
of  Complaint  of  William  Smith  Complain'.  5 1 5. 

This  is  a  rough  Draught,  amended  in  fome  places, 
by  Mr.  Edward  Whitbie  Recorder  of  Chefter. 

5.  The  original  Petition  of  the  Company  of  Joyners, 

Carvers,  &  Turners,  to  Thomas  Knowles  Maiour  of 
Chefter,  the  Recorder,  &  Aldermen.  ci8. 

I  his  is  againft  Richard  Bolland,  a  very  refractory 
perfon,  full  of  his  fcoffinge  Tearmes  &  apilh  Toyes,  ftill 
provoking  that  Company  to  daylie  Trouble,  Vexation  & 
Charges,  and  had  vowed  &  fwome  feverall  tymes/he 
would  dee  the  Company  as  much  hurt  as  he  could,  &c. 
for  which,  they  had  fined  him. 

6.  Complaint  of  William  Smith  of  Namptwich 
Joyner ;  to  William  Earle  of  Derby  &  James  Stanley 
Lord  Strange  his  lonne,  Chamberlein  of  Chefter.  520. 

lTns  onginall  Bill  fets  forth  how  the  Complainant 
was  arrefted  in  an  Aftion  of  Trefpafs,  by  the  Company 
ot  Joyners  Carvers  &  Turners,  for  working  in  Chefter 
bang  no  Freeman  ;  and  praying  that  his  Caufe  might 
not  be  heard  before  the  Mayor  &  his  Brethren,  but  in 
an  indifferent  Mace,  that  is  in  the  Court  held  by  the  Juf- 
tices  of  Aflize. 

7.  Draught  of  a  Bill  of  Complaint,  to  the  abovemen- 

tioned  Chamberleyne  of  Chefter,  by  the  Maifter  k  War- 
dens  of  the  Mifteryes  or  Artes  of  Marchant-Drapers  & 
Hollers  of  the  faid  Citty.  r 

This  is  againft  Thomas  Deane,  who  being  made  a 
Freeman  of  ,he  Cary  of  Chefter,  but  not  of  thei?  partial¬ 
ly  Company  i  and  having  clandeftinly  gotten  into  his 
Hands  the  Carters,  Deeds,  Books,  and  other  Evidences 

0fr‘ue  ^  C°W’„lai  ,"'ju,11y  praetifed  &  ufed 
to  fell  all  Sorts  of  Woollen  Cloathes  there  to  their  ex 
tretne  prejudice.  They  therefore  pray,  that  the  faid  Thol 


Num.  1996. 

mas  Deane  may  be  fummoned  to  anfwer  in  their  Lord, 
fttips  Court,  concerning  the  Premifles  ;  and  that  in  the 
mean  time,  a  Reftraint  may  be  putt  upon  him,  to  hinder 
his  further  unlawful  retailing  thofe  Commodities. 

8.  Copie  of  an  Inftrument,  whereby  William  Glafeor 

Mayor,  the  Aldermen,  Sheriffs  &  Common  Counfell  of 
the  fard  Chv,  did  incorporate  William  Alderley  th’yonger 
&  others  of  the  Occupation  of  Lynen-Drapers,  there,  and 
make  the  fame  a  whole  &  full  Occupation  of  it  felfe, 
dnunfte  andfeparated  from  other  Occupations  within  the 
aid  Cittye :  provyded,  that  they  Ihould  not  vtter  or 
left  any  kinde  of  Lynnen  Clothes,  but  onely  Hufwifes 
Clothe  ;  with  other  necelfary  Ordinances,  dat.  4  Octo¬ 
ber,  ann  6  R.  Edwardi  vj.  <-^5. 

9.  The  Drapers  &  Hofiers  Chatter  of  Corporation 

Enghlhed  ;  anlie  farther  phyner  k  better  vnderitandinge 
of  the  Contents  conteyned  in  the  fame.  ^S. 

This  beareth  Tefte  the  12th  dave  of . 'anno 

R.  Elizabeths. 

10.  Billa  pro  Gardian.  Artis  de  les  Merchant-Drapers 

et  Hofyers  infra  Civitatem  Ceftr.  Qucr.  et  Georgian* 
Haftmgs  Deft,  in  Error.  ^9. 

ir.  Supplication  of  the  Cappers  of  Chefter,  to  Dauid 
Middleton  then  (i.  e.  about  A.  D.  1 538.)  Maire,  ik  his 
Co  brethren  :  fetting  forth,  that  whereas  Thomas  Smvthe  ' 
m  tyme  of  his  Mairealtie  (i.  e.  about  A.  D.  1 535.)  had 
onerated  Sc  charged  them  to  brynge  fotthe  a  Playe  ‘  con-  I 
cernynge  the  Storie  of  Kynge  Balake  Sc  Balam  the  Pi  of- 
let,  and  at  the  fame  tyme  promvfed  them  redreffe  as  to  ' 
other  peoples  reteyllynge  of  cowrfe  Wares  vnJer  the  price 
of  1 6s.  the  Dofien,  as  aboue  ;  and  that  as  vet  no  Rcdour-  . 
mation  thereof  can  be  had,  aftur  greate  Inftance  Sc  • 
Requeft  made  :  They  therefore  befeche  him,  other  to 
fe  for  the  Refaurmation  of  the  Premyffes;  or  elles  j 
to  take  no  Difpleafure  with  theyme,  if  they  for  ] 
lakke  of  Habillite  do  net  brvnge  forthe.  theire  favde  ! 
Play.  '  3 

This  feemeth  to  be  the  Original. 

1  2.  Billa  pro  Aldermanno  et  Senefcalfis  artis  Capicia-  I 
riorum,  .vocat.  Le  Cappurs  Crafte,  verfus  Johanliem 
Kylche,  in  Placito  Conventionis  fraftc  :  (anno  4  R  I  'd-  1 
wardi  vi.-) 

13.  Billa  pro  Aldermanno  et  Senefcallis  artis  fine  niif- 

terij  Capiciariorum,  vocat.  Le  Cappars  Crafte,  verfus  I 
Johannem  Kylche  in  Placito  Tranfvreluonis,  ad  dampnum 
100  folidorum.  1 

14.  Billa  pro  Aldermanno  et  SetlefcalKs  artis  Lanin, 
rum,  querentibus  ;  verfus  Laurencium  Rawlinfon  Defen-  I 
dentem;  in  placito  Tranfgreffiouis  fuper  Cafum,  ad  dam.  ! 
nuin  40  folidorum. 

15.  Billa,  pro  Aldermano  artis  Candelariirum,  etl 
Senefcaliis  ejuldem  artis  ;  verfus  Laurentium  R.Jynfon  I 
in  Placito  Trangreflionis  ;  anno  j  R  Edwardi  vt  W  ' 

.  ««•  The  joynte  &  feuerall  Ayde  Prayers  &  Aunfweares  III 
ot  George  Nonv'ood,  Louurence  Ravvlynfon,  Wi’liam  1 
Sconce,  &  Rkharde  Foxeley,  Defendants  ;  to  the  Bill 
of  Complaynt  of  John  Danolde  Alderman  of  the  Arte  or  I 
Myftery  of  Bakers,  and  the  Stewards  of  the  fame  Arte  or  -i 
Miltery.  Complainants.  .  _  I  j 

Setting  forth,  that  forafmuch  as  the  Matters  in  the  I  ! 
faid  Bill  of  Complaint  conteyned,  of  righte  ouohte  to  be  l'” 
determined  elfwhere,  they  defire  to  be  dilmiffed°with  their  '  i 
reafonable  Coftes  :  becaufe  they  are  Inhabitants  k  Dm  el-  ‘ 
lers  within  the  Queens  Mannor  and  Lordfnippe  of  Han-  ! 
bridge,  and  are  cuftomary  Tenants  to  the  fame.  To 
which  her  Noble  Progenitors  among  divers  other  Liber-  II 
tyes,  Fraunchifes,  Vfages,  &  Cuftomes,  to  the  faid  Te-  *31 1 
nants  granted,  gave  them  Liberty  to  make  k  bake  Bread 
to  fell  on  the  two  Merkett  Dayes  weekely,  within 
the  Citty  of  Chefter  ;  and  this  in  Confideration  of  1 

dyvers  Rents,  Cuftomes,  &  Sendees  by  them  p  r'd  &  1 

done,  &c.  v 

17.  Rejoynder  of  the  Tenants  of  Handbridge,  to  the 
Bakers  Replication. 

Demurring  ‘ ; 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


377 


Num.  1996. 

Demurring  to  the  manifeft  Imperfections  of  the  faid 
B  iters  Bill  Sc  Replication  ;  and  (hewing  their  Right  to 
iell  Bread  in  Chefter  as  aforefaid,  by  reafon  of  many 
Grants  from  the  Crown  to  the  Nuns  of  Chefter,  part  ot 
whofe  poffcfiions  Handbridge  was  ;  and  that  the  antient 
Privileges  (till  continue  to  the  Tenants  or  Inhabitants  or 
the  faid  Lordlhip,  notwithftanding  the  Di  (Folution  of  the 
Nunnery.  .  , 

18.  The  Replicacon  of  John  Daneld  Alderman  ot  the 
Arte  or  Myftery  of  Bakers,  Sc  the  Stewards  of  the  fame, 
Complaynants  ;  to  the  joynte  and  feuerall  Avde,  Prayers, 

&  Aunfwers  of  George  Norwoode,  See.  Defendants. 

589- 

Herein  they  deny  that  others  are  Cuftomary  Tenants 
to  the  Queens  Lordfhip  of  Handbridge  ;  or  that  (he  had 
any  Cuftomary  Tenants  there.  Averring  that  they  were 
only  Tenants  at  Will  to  Edmunde  Gamull  Alderman  or 
Chefter  the  Queenes  Fermor  there;  and  therefore  they 
■would  crave  that  the  Defendants  might  be  enforced  to 
Aunfweare,  Sec. 

19.  The  Bakers  Bill  agaynft  the  Queenes  Tennaunts 

of  Handbridge  ;  A.  D.  1589.  exhibited  to  Henry  Earle 
of  Darby  Chaumberlen  of  Chefter.  594- 

This  Bill  Sc  the  former  Replication  are  Originals ; 
but  they,  with  fome  other  Papers  preceding,  are  much 
damnified  by  Moifture. 

20.  Determination  (of  Mr.  Walley  Mayor  of  Chefter, 

Sc  Sir  Francis  Gamul )  by  Virtue  of  a  Reference  from 
Prince  Maurice,  concerning  the  Difference  between  the 
Bakers  of  Chefter  &  Mr.  Commiffary  General  Ruffel, 
who  refufed  to  pay  £66:9:4.  to  them  upon  his  Ma¬ 
jefties  Acct.  although  that  Money  was  their  due.  dat. 

15  May  1645.  598- 

21.  Copie  of  Prince  Maurices  Reference,  above-men¬ 
tioned.  Dat  13  March  1644.  „599-. 

22.  Letter  of  Mr.  Walley  the  Mayor  Sc  Sr.  Francis 
Gamul,  accompanying  the  Bakers  Depofitions,  Sc  Prince 
Maurice  his  Reference,  Sc  requiring  his  fpeedy  Anfwer. 

600. 

23.  Copie  of  an  Order  of  Council,  for  apprehending 

all  fuch  Chefler-Feltmakers  as  did  vfe  the  'trade,  or 
keep  any  Apprentice,  without  having  ferved  Seven 
Yeares  Apprenticelhip  to  that  Trade  themfelves.  dat. 
2gJuiy  1629.  6si. 

24.  Supplication  of  the  Company  of  In-hollers  & 
Cookes  of  Chefter,  to  Ilughe  Glafeor  the  Maior,  Sec. 
(i.  e.  about  A.  I).  1602.)  upon  their  being  prefented  at 
the  Quarter-Seffions,  as  Common  Ale-Sellers  or  liplers 
offending.  And  therefore  praying,  that  either  They 
might  be  difeharged  from  the  faid  Prefentment :  or  elfe, 
that  they  the  Magiftrates  would  proceed  no  further 
therein  vntil  Mr.  judge  Warburton  and  Mr.  Recorder 
(hould  return  ;  or  to  fuller  them  to  travtrs  the  fame. 

25  Original  Bill  of  Complaint,  exhibited  by  the  In¬ 
holders  Sc  Cookes  of  Chefter,  to  William  Earle  of  Der- 
bie,  Chamberlen  of  that  Countie  Palatine,  againft  Mi¬ 
chael  Sheppard,  Glouer ;  Thomas  Stubbes,  Ilufband- 
man  ;  Sc  John  Whitbie,  Sherman  ;  who  had  prefumed 
audacioufly  to  exercife,  for  gaine,  the  Arts  and  Mifteries 
of  Inholders  &  Cookes,  to  their  great  Prejudice.  Signed, 
14  July,  1621.  604. 

26.  Lift  of  the  Inhoulders  &  Cookes  of  Chefter.  625. 

27.  Order  of  Valentyne  Broughton  Mayor  of  Chefter, 

8c  the  other  Magiftrates  there,  upon  occafion  of  the 
Bakers  Complaint  againft  the  In-holders  felling  their  own 
White  Bread,  baked  by  themfelves  in  their  own  Houfes ; 
&  reftraining  them  from  doing  fo,  any  otherwife  than 
by  furnifhing  their  Guefts  at  Dinners  Sc  Suppers.  (A.  D. 
1 584  J  626. 

28. ' Rough  Draught  of  an  Order,  to  the  fame  pur- 

pofe  as  the  former,  explaining  and  confirming  that  made 
anno  21  R.  Henrici  vii.  #  628. 

29.  Another  Draught  of  the  fame  Order  ;  which  was 
made  upon  occafion  of  the  Variance  between  the  Bakers 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1996. 

&  William  Cotgrave  the  Inne-holder.  dat.  8  die 
Aprilis,  anno  28  R.  Elizabethe.  b3  1  * 

30.  Another  Draught  to  the  fame  Purpofe,  and  of  the 

fame  Date.  .  b34* 

31.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Draught  of  a  Petition  to 

Sir  Henry  Hobart,  Sc  others  of  the  Princes  Council  in 
Chefter,  by  the  In-keepers  there,  againft  Sir  Giles 
Mompeffons  Patent  &  Proceedings.  639.  b. 

32.  C.opie  of  the  Latin  Charter,  whereby  the  Brewers 

of  Chefter  were  incorporated.  ^  640. 

33.  Articles  to  be  propounded  by  our  (K.  Charles 
1  .’s )  Commiffioners,  Sc  to  be  obferued  by  all  fuch  Perfons 
as  (hall  be  by  them  compounded  with,  and  allowed  foj* 
common  Maulfters,  Sc  Brewers,  dat.  30  January  1636. 

635*  b- 

34.  Attefted  Copie  of  the  Petition  of  the  In  keepers 

&  Ale-Sellers  of  Chefter,  to  the  Mayor  Sc  Corporation 
there,  praying  to  be  protected  from  the  Vexations  of  the 
Brewers  ;  who  molefted  them,  becaufe  they  brewed  their 
own  Ale  Sc  Beere  for  Sale.  _  b57- 

3 :.  Lift  of  the  feveral  Malfters  dwelling  in  Chefter. 

"  672. 

36.  The  Defence  Sc  Anfweare  of  the  Company  of 

Brewers,  incorporated  by  his  Majefties  Letters  Patterns 
in  the  Citty  of  Chefter,  to  the  Certificate  of  the  Maior 
Sc  Aldermen  of  the  fame  Cittye.  _  _  b74* 

37.  Attefted  Bill  of  Complaynt  exhibited  to  W imam 

Earle  of  Derbye  &  James  Stanley  Lord  Strange  his  fonne, 
Chamberleyne  of  Chefter,  by  Gilbert  Tilfton  ofHawarden 
in  the  Countye  of  Flint,  Collermaker  ;  againft  the  Sadlers 
of  Chefter,  who  had  laid  violent  Hands  upon  him,  as  he 
was  felling  his  Goods  there  on  the  Market-day  Sc  took 
fome  of  the  lame  away  with  them.  675. 

38.  The  Plea  and  Demurrer  of  the  faid  Sadlers,  to 

the  Bill  of  C.onipkv'nt  of  the  faid  Tilfton.  684. 

39.  A  Note  of  fuch  Wares  as  Gilbert  Tilfey  (the 

aforefaid  Coller-maker)  defires  to  fell  in  the  Markctt  at 
Chefter,  belonging  to  his  Trade.  692. 

Here  are  Three  Papers  about  this  matter,  for  the 
mod  part,  written  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby's  hand. 

40.  Part  of  a  Petition  of  the  Gloouers  of  Ireland,  to 

his  Majefties  Farmers,  for  the  prohibbitting  of  Skines  to 
bee  caried  ouer  to  England.  694.  ^9^- 

41.  Petition  of  the  Auncientt  Company  of  Gloucrs, 

(both  Dry  and  Wett  Glouers)  within  the  Citty  of 
Chefter  ;  to  the  Kinges  Majeftie,  againft  a  projefted  Fee 
for  (lamping  their  Leather  ;  at  this  time,  when  by  reafon 
of  their  exceffve  charges  in  procuring  the  fame  (prin¬ 
cipally  from  Ireland)  they  had  much  adoe  to  fupport 
themfelves  and  Families.  b97* 

42.  Petition  of  the  Mercers  and  Ironmongers  within 

the  Cittie  of  Chefter  to  the  Kings  Majeftie  ;  fetting  forth, 
that  divers  Citiizens  Sc  Strangers  not  being  firft  admitted 
into  the  fayd  Company,  have  attempted  to  vfe  Sc  exercife 
the  faid  Trades  and  Mifteries,  to  the  greate  damage  Sc 
hindrance  of  the  Free  Men  of  the  fayd  Company.  And 
therefore  praying  that  lie  would  vouch faffe  vnto  theyme 
his  High  lies  gracious  Letters  Patents,  whearby  the  Free¬ 
men  of  the  fayd  Trades  Sc  Mifteries  may  be  made,  vnited, 
and  incorporated  into  one  Bodie  corporate  Sc-  perpetual! 
Societie  ;  enabled  to  vfe  and  enjoy  iuch  lawfull  Liberties 
&  Priviledges  as  have  been  hcartofore  granted  to  other 
like  Companies  within  the  fayd  Cittie,  vpon  the  like  occa¬ 
fion.  b99’ 

43.  Draught  of  a  Certificate,  whereby  the  Juftices  o. 

Peace,  Aldermen,  Sheriffs-peares,  &  fourtie  beinge  of 
the  Comen  C.ouncell  of  the  Cyte  of  Chefter,  Aldermen 
&  Stuards  of  the  Society es  &  Companyes,  Sc  others, 
Fremen  &  Citizens  of  the  faid  Cytie,  do  declare  divers  of 
the  aniient  Cuftomes,  obferved  Sc  kept  by  the  faid  Com¬ 
panies  there,  dated  ....  Feb.  ann.  12  R*  Jacobi  1. 

r  700. 

44.  Petition  of  the  Company  of  Grocers  of  London, 

and  of  diuers  Apothecaries  of  the  faid  Citie,  to  the 

^  q  Houfe 


37^ 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  tgg6. 

Houfe  of  Commons,  upon  occafion  of  the  New  Charter 
granted  by  K.  James  i.  encorporating  the  Apothecaries 
a-  a  Company  &:  Body  politic  diftindl  of  themfelves,  and 
feparate  from  the  Grocers,  with  whom  they  were  before 
united.  This  Petition  is  printed.  70^, 

45.  Part  of  a  Bill  or  Information,  of  Mr.  Recorder 
Whitbies  Hand,  complaining  of  Mr.  Thomas  Alderfea 
Merchant,  fon  to  Mr.  William  Alderfea  Ironmonger, 
then  Mayor  of  Chefter  ;  who  prefuming  upon  an  Order 
made  ann.  31  R.  Elizabeths,  had  gone  about  to  Retaile 
Ironmongers  Wares,  in  prejudice  to  the  Free-Men  of 
that  Company.  706.  b.  709. 

40.  Draught  of  part  of  an  Anfwer  from  the  Ma*>i- 
ftrates  &  Common  Council  of  Chefter,  to  the  Lords  of 
the  Kings  Privy  Council,  who  had  been  apprifed  by  the 
Mayor  of  divers  Riotts  and  Diforders  committed  there 
upon  occafion  of  Mr.  Thomas  Alderfea  the  Merchants 
venturing  to  exercife  the  Trade  of  an  Ironmonger  alfo, 
by  virtue  of  the  Order  abovemention ed,  which  was  never 
putt  in  praftife,  until  the  then  prefent  yeare  that  Mr. 
Mayor,  m  the  behalf  of  his  own  Sonne,  flirred  the 
Queflion.  ^ 

4 7-  Rough  Draught  (much  amended  by  Mr.  Re- 
coider  Whitbies  hand)  of  the  Company  of  Taylors  of 
tne  City  of  Chefter,  againft  Richard  Calcott  Sc  others 
who  had  intruded  into  their  Trade,  wichout  being  free 
of  their  Company.  ylQ 

4ft-  Carta,  qua  Richardus  Dutton  Major  Civitatis 
C.cltr.  et  Communitas  ejufdem  Civitatis,  ad  feodi  firmam 
dimittunt  Roberto  Hill,  totam  illarn  domum  vocatam 
lhe  laillors  Caryadg-boufe ;  habend.  imperpetnum  : 
reddendo  inde  annuatiin  ad  manus  Thel'aurariorum 
Civitatis  predicle,  ad  ufum  Communitafis,  duos  Solidos 
et  lex  Denarios.  dat.  10  die  Augufti,  anno  16  Regni 
Regme  Elizabethe.  - ,  2 

.  c9"  f?enric°  HuShes  querente  verfus  Aldermannos 
&  berrelc  hallos  artis  del  Taylors,  infra  Civitatem  Cellr. 
Le.endentes,  in  Brevi  de  Errore. 

50.  Placita  Curie  Pcnticij  Civitatis  Ceftrie  tenta  coram 

\  ice-Ccmitibus  Civitatis  predidte,  13  die  Martij,  anno 
42  R.  Regine  Elizabethe;  inter  Aldermannos  et  Senef- 
callos  Artis  del  Taylors  in  Civitate  predicla;  et  Ricardtim 
I yerefon  de  Ceftria,  Taylor,  in  Placito  Debiti  quadra- 
ginta  Solidorum.  714 

51.  Pro  Alderman.  &  Senefchallis  Artis  Scifforum 
Querentibus ;  verfus  Willelmum  Griffith  Defendentem, 
m  Placito  I  ranfgrefiionis,  ad  damnum  CentumSolidoruni 

52.  Papers  relating  to  the  faid  Companies- Suit  wfth 

Henry  Hughes,  and  others.  ^ ,  5 

53.  Armes  of  Horfe-men  Cuiraffiers ;  and  ofaHar- 

gobufier  or  Dragon,  which  hath  fucceeded  in  the  place 
of  Light  Horfemen.  y2Q 

54-  Pro  Alderman.  &  Senefchallis  Artis  del  Smithes 
Cutlers,  Pewterers,  Card-makers,  &  Plummers,  in  Ci- 
TUate  Ceftr.  qui  tarn  pro  feipfis,  quam  pro  confratribus 
iuis  in  hac  parte  fequuntur,  Querentibus  ;  verfus  Johan- 
ncm  Sefton  Defendentem;  in  Placito  Tranfgreifionis  fuoer 
calum,  ad  damnum  Decern  Librarum.  A.  D.  160” 
imperf. 

55-  Pro  AldermamA,  Senefchallis,  et  Con-fr  jribus 

Auium  live  Miftenorum  de  les  Smythes,  Cullers  Pew- 
terers,  &  Card-makers,  in  Civitate  Celtrie,  querentibus  • 
vertus  1  homam  Fletcher  Defendentem,  in  placito  TranT 
gremoms  fuper  Cafum.  n' 

56.  Pro  Alder tnannis  et  Senefchallis  Artium  de 
Smythes  et  Peuterers.  in  Civitate  Ceftrie,  querentes  ■ 
verfus  Hnmfndum  Williams,  in  placito  Tranfgrcflionil 
luper  (..alum,  ad  dampnum  quinque  Librarum.  7z  . 

Sequuntur  et  all's  hujufmodi  Dedarationes,  verfus 
Henncum  Sefton  ;  Matheum  Evans  ;  Robertum  Havnce 
alias  Holbrwk  ;  et  Henricum  Trafforde. 

57.  Pari  of  the  Pedegree  of  Dauenport  of  Calueley. 

731.  b. 


Num.  1996,  1997. 

Then  follow  in  loofe  Papers, 
j8.  Petition  of  Thomas  Tifer  Clothworker,  to  the 
Maior  and  Common  Counfaile  of  Chefter  ;  befeechin* 
their  Worflnps  to  beftowe  the  Fredome  of  the  fame  Citie 
vpon  him  ;  he  having  intermaried  with  an  Inhabitaunts 
Daughter.  13  July  1582. 

jg.  Petition  of  Philfipp  Pierfon,  to  the  fame  ;  felting 
forth  that  he  was  bound  Apprentice  to  an  Ironmonger  i 
and  now,  that  his  Mafter  was  deceafed,  he  prayed  to 

be  turned  over  to  another.  July  ,589..  ,,  ' 

60.  Complaint  to  Sir  John  Savage  Mayor  of  Chefter 
by  Robert  lirowne  one  of  the  Serc'ners,  Sealers  A  R. 
gelters  of  tanned  Lether  &  made  Wares  there;  againft 
one  Michael  Durtovta  a  Frenchman,  who  had  provided 
certame  vnfealed  Leather  redy  to  betranfported  over  Sea 
contrary  to  the  Eftatute  in  that  behaife  provided.  Amt 
the  faid  Michaels  with  divers  others,  had  grievoufiy  af. 
faulted  him,  &c.  „J 

Hi  Lift  of  the  Stewards  of  the  feveral  Companies^ 
Chefter;  taken  A.  D.  1570,  upon  occafion  of  Armour 
that  was  then  to  be  provided.  7  7  .  ^ 

62.  Notes  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  relating  to  the- 
1  rades  and  Companies  in  Chefter,  See.  736.  See 

63.  Names  of  the  Aldermen,  Stewards,  Si  Brethren 

ot  many  Companies  in  Chefter.  ’ 

64.  A  Note  offuchBrothers  as  have  come  into  theCom- 
pany  of  Corvifors,  fmee  the  20th  December  i6oq.  7.-;. 

Here  are  fome  other  Notes  entred,  concern  in?  An- 
prentices  taken,  Sc  Bonds  given  in  the  faid  Company 
ana  alio  of  I  asties  married  about  A.  D.  1600  Sc.  1.6 si, 
who  were  not  members  of  it. 

1 997 • 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  divers  particular  Tratf? 
fragments,  and  loofe  Papers,  bound  up  together  iu 
the  manner  or  order  following  ; 

1.  Thelaft  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  the  Things  of  moft 
Note  in  this  Booke. 

2.  Hiftorical  Notes,  of  Occurrences,  during  or  r° 
lating  to  the  Reigns  of  K.  William  the  Conqueror,  his 
two  Sons,  King  Stephen,  K.  Henry  viii.  Sc  his  children  ■ 
extracted  from  our  Chronicles,  perhaps,  by  fome  Romaa 
Cacholick. 

3.  Feoda  de  Comitatu  Ceftrie,  fecundum  Inquificio- 

aem  factam  per  Alanum  La  Zouch  tunc  Jufticiarium 
(  eftne  ;  circa  annum  Domini  1240.  (colle&aex  rubeo 
Libro  in  Scaccario  apud  Weilmonafter.)  ,-0_ 

4.  Of  what  Parcels  or  Quantities  of  Land  a  Knieht's 

Feedidconfift.  50.  h 

5.  That  by  Aft  of  Parliament  27  Hen.  vm.  every 

Bargaine  Sc  Sale  were  to  be  inrolled.  ibid  1 

6.  Of  Foi-medons  in  Difcender,  Rcmavndcr,  and 

Reverter.  '  _ ; 

tlere  are  like  wife  other  Notes  or  Maxims,  extracted 
from  the  Statutes,  or  from  our  other  Law-Books. 

7.  Colle&ions  from  the  Commentaries  of  Sir  Francis 

Vere,  concerning  the  Defeate  of  Turnehoult  :  &  the 
Battell  of  Newport.  ’  ^4  ' 

8.  The  Supplement  to  the  Difcourfe  of  Sir  Francis 
Vere ;  and  in  particular,  touching  the  laft  Chard  re  in 
the  Battaile  of  Newport;  by  Sir  John  Ogle  then  prefer./. 

64.  b. 

9.  Sir  Francis  Veare  his  part  at  Oftend;  by  Sir  John 

Ogle  then  prefent.  55 

1  o.  The  Pedegree  of  the  Stanleys  :  chat  is,  the  De-, 
feent  of  Henry  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby  (fere  down  naria- 
tively)  as  deduced  from  Numbers  of  great  Perfon ages  ; 
with  a  Declaration  of  the  Right  he  had  to  his  feveral 
Quarterings.  Done  A.  D.  1 590.  73, 

Notwiihftanding  that  this  Trad  is  written  by  a 
good  Hand,  and  that  great  Peer’s  Name  is  fuberibed  at 
the  end,  I  take  it  to  be  but  a  Copie. 

11.  Notes  taken  in  the  Churche  ofBingley  in  Com. 

Ebor.  J  g , 

12.  De. 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


379 


Num.  1997,  1998. 

12.  Declaration  of  the  Defcent  of  William  Norres  of 

the  Speke,  Knight ;  by  him  compiled  &  putt  furthe,  to 
remay ne  for  a  Teftymonie  &  Record  of  Truthe  ;  to  the 
end  his  Children  &  Heyres  might  reade  &  vnderlfond 
the  fame ;  according  to  that  which  he  had  hearde  & 
founde,  either  by  Writing,  Words,  WitneffeS,  Eviden¬ 
ces,  or  other  wayes.  dated  the  fgth  of  June,  A.  D. 
J5*3‘  83.  b. 

13.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  David  Powell  to  Sir  Wil- 

liam  Brereton  Kt.  dated  from  Ruabon,  1  o  January  1591, 
concerning  a  pretended  Charter  of  K.  William  the  Con¬ 
queror,  confirming  to  divers  of  the  Chelhire  Gentry  & 
their  Heires,  the  fame  Armes  which  their  Anceflors  did 
weare,  before  the  cominge  of  Hugh  Lupus  to  that  Coun- 
tne.  That  the  Inftrument  (forfooth  !)  was  verey  faire 
wrytten  ;  and  the  Efchucheons  depi&ed  in  the  Margin  ; 
but  the  Seales  which  had  bene  at  it,  were  altogether 
worne  away.  ^ 

14.  A  Collection  of  Dcfcents,  Welfh  &  Englifh,  efpe- 
cially  of  Chelhire  and  Lancafhire-Families  entred  by  fe- 
veral  Hands,  as  well  by  way  of  Narration,  as  otherwife. 

90.  (et  vid  fol.  83.) 

Thefe  are  all  croffed  out ;  which  I  take  to  be  a  Sign 
of  their  being  entred  fairly,  from  hence,  into  fome  other 
Book  or  Books. 

1 5.  Another  Colleflion  of  Wellh  and  Englilh  Defcents, 

not  crofied  out  as  the  former  ;  but,  however,  noted  by 
the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  to  be  (for  the  mod  part)  extant 
in  fome  others  of  his  Books.  1 24. 

1 6.  Notes  about  the  Sur-names  of  our  Englilh  Families, 

taken  from  Camdens  Remains.  14.I. 

17.  Names  of  the  Conquerors  of  Glamorgan  Sc  Brec- 

knockfhires.  J46.  b. 

t8.  Another  Collection  of  Defcents,  Wrel(h  &  Eno-- 
lilh  ;  like  the  former,  either  crofied  out,  or  noted  to  be 
extant  in  other  Books.  !  4-, 

19.  Yet  another  Colle&ion  of  mix’d  Pcdcgrees  Eng- 

lifli  &  Wellh  ;  done  upon  larger  Paper,  and  all  eroded 
out-  1 65. 

20.  A  Booke  of  Names,  Places  &  Tymes  ;  taken 

out  of  Recordes,  Evidences  &  Offices.  182. 

The  Method  of  this  Traft,  is  to  give  the  Name  of 
the  Place  (which  is  for  the  much  greater  part  in  Chelhire) 
in  pretty  right  Order  of  Alphabet ;  and  then  to  fett  under 
the  Perfons  name  whom  they  found  concerned  there, 
and  the  time  when  :  that  is  fpecifying  the  year  of  the 
King  reigning.  (This  is  difeharged  by  being  cut  Ihorter.) 

-I.  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Pedegrees,  contained  in 
this  book.  209. 

22.  Such  another  Table  referring  to  the  Coates  of 
Armes.  21c.  b. 

1998. 

A  thin  oblong  Book  in  fol.  on  the  outfide,  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme,  thus  intituled,  the  Names  of  the  In¬ 
habitants  of  Chefier,  in  thefeuerall  Wards,  about  A.  D. 

1 600.  but  I  choofe  to  deferibe  it  briefly  in  the  following 
manner  : 

1.  Lilt  of  the  Inhabitants  or  Houfe-keepers  within  the 

Wards  of  St.  Giles,  and  of  the  Holy  Trinity  as  they  were 
aflefled  towards  the  finding  or  providing  of  Armor  or 
Armes,  A.  D.  1 595.  Mr.  William  Aldcrfey  then  being 
Mayor.  l , 

2.  Another  Lift  of  the  Magiftrates,  and  others  of  Chef- 

ter,  but  their  Names  uncharged  :  Mr.  Sheriff  Wirdcn 
being  mentioned  therein,  it  appeareth  that  it  was  made 
A.  D.  1590.  3, 

3.  Another  Lift  of  Perfons  chargeable  with  Shott  ; 
and  from  Mr.  Sheriffe  Ratcliffe’s  being  therein  named, 
it  appeareth  that  the  fame  was  made,  A.  D.  1590.  6. 

4.  Another  uncharged  Lift  of  Inhabitants  Names, 

through  divers  Wards  of  the  City  of  Chefter  j  but  r.o 
Y  ear,  or  Office  being  exprefied,  I  lhall  not  pretend  to 
determine  the  Time  when  it  was  made.  8. 

5.  Another  Liftof  Perions  aflefled,  throughout  certain 


Num.  1998,  1999. 

Wards  in  Chefter  ;  among  which  I  find  mention  of 
Mayfter  Jhon  Smythe,  Tomas  Alderfay,  and  Rauffe 
Alderfay,  Aldermen.  2 ,  _ 

The  laft  of  thefe  was  Sheriffe  A.  D.  1541.  The 
lecond  was  Mayor  A.  D.  1549.  having  been  Sheriffe, 
A.  1).  1538.  The  firft  was  Mayor  A.  D.  1555,  having 
iervea  as  Sheriffe  A.  D  1 546.  But  this  Affeffment  being 
made  when  Rychard  Rauftebon  (or  Rathebone)  was 
Sherreffe,  i.  e.  1547.it  (hewes,  that  divers  in  Chefter  (as 
in  other  places,  become  to  be  Aldermen,  before  they  are 
Mayors.  1 

6.  The  Names  of  Houfeholders  within  St.  Ofwalds 

W.irde  ;  with  their  refpe<£live  Affeflements,  made  when 
Rychard  Bavande  was  Alderman  theareof ;  who  ferved 
as  Sheriffe  A.  D.  1371.  and  was  Mayor  ten  Years  after ; 
and  again  A.  D.  1600.  '  z?m  • 

7.  Uncharged  or  unaffeffed  Lift  of  the  Inhabitants  of  St. 
Jolm  s  Warde,  Mr.  John  Hankye  then  being  Alderman  ; 
who  was  Sheriffe  cf  Chefter  A.  D.  15*6.  and  Mayor 
thereof  A,  D.  157  r. 

A  like  Lift  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Sene  Giles  Warde, 
made  when  Maftar  Wyllyam  Bryde  was  Alderman  there  : 
now  there  being  two  William  Birdes  Tanners,  both  She- 
nffes  of  Chefter,  the  one  A.  I).  1546,  the  other  A.  D. 

1 566  ;  I  fuppofe  this  1  elates  to  the  former,  who  was  alfo 
chofen  Mayor,  A.  D.  1547.  26. 

.  9-  Original  Affeffment  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Sr.  Mar¬ 
tin’s  Ward  toward  the  Reparation  of  the  Walls  of  Chefter; 
figned  by  the  very  lorry  Hand  of  Peter  Diinkwater 
Mayor,  that  is,  A.  D.  1624.  2$. 

10.  Attefted  Copie  of  the  fame,  produced  upon  the 
Suit  (formerly  mentioned,  at  the  book  95.  C.  4.)  be- 
tweeen  Sir  W illiam  Brereton  (or  Sir  Waltar  Pve  for  him) 
and  the  City  of  Cnefter,  upon  their  affeffmg  "&  diftrain- 
ing  upon  his  Tenants,  who  had  refufed  to'  pay  toward 
the  fame  Murage. 

I999- 

Another  oblong  Eook  in  folio,  but  thick!  fli ;  con¬ 
fiding  of  many  Angle  or  particular  Trails  or 
Papers,  long  fince  bound  up  together,  in  the  following 
Order  :  ® 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Notes  Ipecifyinw  ti.e 
Things  of  moft  Note  in  this  Book  ;  at  the  beginning, 

2.  A  true  Rental!  of  all  the  Rentes  of  euery  feuerall 

Eftate  of  the  Delinquents  fequeftrated ;  beinge  in  the 
Deuifion  of  Marce  Jolicoeur  one  of  the  Collators  for 
Namptwich- Hundred,  A.D.  1646.  That  is  to  Hie, 
Namptwich,  Auvefton,  Woufton-wooJ,  Leighton,  cc 
Wyftafton.  K 

Thefe  Delinquents  were  the  Lord  Cholmley,  Mr. 
.....  Mafterfon,  Mr.  Weeuer,  Mr.  Hugh  Wilbiaham 
Sir  John  Perfall,  Mr.  Bromley  of  Bagington. 

3.  Accompt  giuen  in  by  the  Sequefirators,  of  what 
Profit  is  made  of  Puddington-Demaine, '  for  this  Yeare 

1G46. 

4.  Accompts  of  Tho  Hickocke  &  Tho.  Bennet,  Se-  n 

queftrators  for  one  part  of  the  Vpper  Divifion  of  the  ! 
Hundred  ofWirrall;  from  December  1644,  till  Janu¬ 
ary  l645-  9.  .. 

.  5.  Dilburfements  out  of  the  Delinquents  Eflates,  by  the  | . 1 
faid  Sequefirators,  for  the  yeares  1644  &  1645.  1  -■  b. 

6.  Copie  of  an  old  Rental  of  the  Commandery  uf 

Ivclie  in  the  Countie  of  Chefter  formerly  belonging  to 
the  Knights  Hofpitalkrs  of  St.  John  of  Jerufalem°  in 
England.  j8.  A. 

7.  An  Accounte  of  what  Moneys  Capt.  Thomas  Hulfe 

one  of  theCommiflioners  forSequeftrationfor  Namptwich- 
Hundred  hath  receued  for  fequeftrated  Lands  8c  Goods, 
on  Bartomley  &  Copnall-Parifh  ;  and  in  his  Deuefion  in 
Wibunbury-Parifh,  lince  the  xeth  of  Augult  1644,  vntill 
the  24th  of  June  1645.  20. 

/>•  An  Accompt  of  what  hath  bin  rcceued  in  Nampt- 
wich  Hundred  from  the  j6th  September  1645,  t0  the 

48  th 


UMiA  2oi8 


38o 


Catalogus  Libroruin  MSS. 


Num.  1999. 


,  Sri,  of  AprUl  1646,  by  Captaine  Thomas  Hulfe  &Tho- 
,  Hancoke  Colkaors  for  Sequeftratton.  31- 

q  An  Accompt  of  what  hath  bin  difburfed  by  Cap- 
taint  Thomas  Hulfc  &  Thomas  Hancoke  Commiffionere 
lv„  Sequeftration  in  Braxton-Hundred  ;  from  the  itth 
of  September  1645,  to  the  1 8th  ot  Apnl  1646.  38. 

to'.  An  Accompt  of  what  hath  bine  receued  by  Cap¬ 
taine  Thomas  Hulfe  &  Thomas  Hancoke  Colleftors  for 
the  widely  Mize  in  Broston-Hundred  ;  from  the  16th 
of  Sepi  ember  1643,  to  the  2  of  Aprill  1648.  40. 

, ,  An  A  ccompt  of  what  hath  bine  diftmrfed  by  Cap¬ 
taine  Thomas  Hulfe  &  1  homas  Hancoke  Collefters  for 
the  wikeiy  Mize  in  Broxton-Hundred,  from  the  16  of 

September  1645,  to  the  2  of .  .  4'- 

,2.  An  Accompt  of  what  hath  bin  receued  wickeley 
of  the  Eletien  Mizes  of  Broxtou-Hundred,  by  Captaine 
Thomas  Hulfe  St  Thomas  Hancoke,  Coleftors  j  from 
the  1 6th  of  September  1643,  to  the  2  of  Marche  folfcw- 

mSi3.  A  perfite  Accounte  of  what  hath  bin  wlckley  dif- 
burled  u  ihe  Cr.ateky  of  the  el  eauen  Mizes  in  Broxton- 
Hundred,  by  Captaine  Thomas  Hulfe,  &  Thomas  Man- 
coke  Colkaors;  from  the  16th  of  September  1645,10 
the  2  of  Marche  followinge.  .  43-  b- 

I4  A  perfite  Accounte  of  what  hath  bin  receued  by 
Captaine  Thomas  Hulfe  Colector  in  his  Deuefion  m  Brox- 
t un-hundred,  the  Townefhips  exfpreafed ;  by  an  Order 
vnder  the  Hands  of  the  Commetie,  bearing  date  the 
1 8th  of  Tune  1646,  to  the  21  of  July  next  after.  44, 

1  c  A  perfite  Accompte  of  what  Captaine  1  homas 
Hulfe  hath  receued  for  his  Seruis,  as  Captaine  of  a  Foot- 
Company,  from  the  25th  of  March  1644,  to  the  14th  of 
March  1645.  ,  ,  TT  ,r  .  ,T  4  5," 

This  Accompt  is  figned  both  by  Hulfe  &  Hancoke 
above-mentioned. 

16.  A  perfite  Accompte  of  what  my  Othcers  ana 

Souldiers  have  receued,  and  what  is  due  unto  them  in 
Arrears  vnpaid.  .  4^ * 

This  Accompt  was  reed,  by  the  Committee,  k  at- 

17.  A  true  and  perfeft  Accompte  of  all  fuch  Summes 

of  Money  as  haue  been  receiued  by  Collonell  Croxton, 
and  my  felfe  (i.  e.  Robert  Venables,  as  Captaine,  Lieut. 
Collonell  &  Governour)  at  Cholmondeley,  vpon  the 
prepofitions  of  Parliament,  beginning  25  Aug.  1643, 
by  Order  from  Sir  William  Brereton.  47- 

This  Accompt  alfo  includes  their  Difburfements out 
of  the  faid  Money.  . 

18.  A  true  Sc  perfect  Accounte  of  the  time  I  (Robert 
Venables)  haue  ferved  the  State  in  Chcfliire  ;  and  alfoc 
what  Pay  is  due  vnto  me  for  my  Service  accordinge  to 
the  fevetall  places  &  capacities  I  haue  ferved  in.  52. 

This  takes  in  an  Accompt  of  fuch  Moneyes  as  He 
had  receiued  for  &  towards  his  faid  Pay ;  and  being  fworn 
to  (like  as  the  former  Accompts  were)  was  reed.  k  figned 
by  the  then  proper  Perfons.  52-  b- 

1  g  Accoumpts  (both  of  Receipts  &  Difburfements)  of 
Thomas  Hickocke  k  Thomas  Bennet,  from  January 
1645,  till  November  1646,  they  being  Sequeftrators  for 
one  part  of  the  vpper  Divifion  of  the  Hundred  of  Wer- 


1  all. 


55- 


.  _  jj- 

This  was  attefted  upon  Oath  to  be  true,  deliver’d 
in  Sc  figned  accordingly. 

ao.  Accompt  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Frodfliam,  as  to  the 
Moneyes  paid  by  them  according  to  the  Sequeflrators  Or¬ 
ders  ;  or  of  their  other  Ioffes  fuftained  Jrom  the  Parlia¬ 
ment-party.  65. 

This  was  deliver’d  in,  upon  Oath  ;  Sc  figned  accord¬ 
ingly,  25  May  1647. 

21.  A  true  k  perfeft  Accoumpt  of  all  fuch  Summes 
of  Money  as  haue  bene  difburfed  by  Randle  Grafton  one 
of  the  Colle&ors  of  Sequeftred  Eftates  within  the  hundred 
of  Northwych  in  the  County  of  Chefter,  for  the  vfe  of 
the  Common-Wealth.  83. 


Num.  1999. 

2  2  Randle  Grafton  Colle&or  his  Booke  of  Accoumpts 
for  Receipts,  pro  ann,  :64S  &  OvronS  fld=  “P- 

wards  )  96.  b. 

The  Delinquents  whofe  Eftates  were  in  his  clutches 
for  at  leaft  part  of  them)  were  the  Barron  of  Kinderton, 

I  ord  Kilmurrey,  I-ord  Brereton,  Mr.  John  Boothe, 

Mr.  Liverfage,  Mr.  Law.  Winington,  Deane  &  Chapter 
of  Chefter,  Randle  Hardinge,  Mr.  Robert  F.lcocke,  Mr. 
Robert  Carter,  Sir  Thomas  Alton,  Sir  Richard  Lewlbr, 

Sir  Thomas  Smith,  Erie  Rivers  A  Mr.  Saitage. 

2t.  A  Booke  declaringe  what  Rents  A  other  Moneys 
fequeftred  out  of  feuerall  Delinquents  Lands  St  F.tlates 
in  North-wlche-Hundred,  in  C.hefhire,  for  the  Vfe  of 
Kinge  &  Parliament ;  haue  beene  colled  ed  &  recalled 
by  William  Leftwiche,  one  of  the  Sequeftrators  of  that 

Hundred,  A.  D.  1643'  ,  ,  P8', 

Here,  the  principal  Delinquents  were  the  Lord  Chol¬ 
mondeley,  Earle  Rivers,  Earle  of  Derby,  Lord  Brereton, 
Lord  Kilmorey,  Peter  Venables  Efq;  Jeffrey  Shackerley 
Efq;  Thomas' Cholmondeley  Elqt  Peter  Leiceller  Efq, 

&  Hugh  Wilbraham  Efq. 

-4.  A  true  &  perfed  Accompt  of  all  the  Moneyes 
receiued  by  Mr.  Raph  Poole,  Coliedor  for  North-wieh- 
llundred,  from  I  of  March  1644,  to  the  X  of  June  1645. 

»°3- 

This  Accompt  Includes  alfo  his  Dilburfements  dur¬ 
ing  the  faid  Time  :  and  is  followed  by  divers  others  of 
his  like  Receipts  &  Dilburfements  ;  but  being  all  anthill 
the  fame  Hundred,  I  think  their  feverall  Titles  need  not 
be  tranfciibed  here. 

25.  Accompt  of  Mr.  Peter  Bromfield,  A.  D-  1644 
k  1645.  viz.  of  his  Receipts  &  Dilburfements.  1  27. 

This  Man  was  of  the  gainful  Myftery  or  Occupation 
of  Sequeftrators  ;  and  as  to  the  truth  of  his  Accompt, 
would  boggle  as  little  at  an  Oath,  as  Ralph  Poole,  or 
the  other  Saints  abovementioned,  did. 

26.  A  true  and  perfe&Accomptof  all  theMoneyswhich 

haue  beene  receaved  out  of  Delinquents  Eftates  within  die 
Divifions  of  Mr.  Poole,  Sc  Mr.  Grafton,  Collectors  for 
North-wich-Hundred,  from  the  icth  of  April  laft,  tothe 
uth  of  May  A.  D.  1646.  colle a cd  according  to  Order 
of  the  Committee  of  Sequeftraeons  for  the  faid  hundred 
by  Thomas  Bullen.  1 3 1  • 

'1  hen  follows  An  Accompt  how  the  Moneys  afore¬ 
mentioned  have  beene  difburfed  by  the  laid  1  homas 
Bullen  ;  and  it  is  attefted  as  others  preceding,  in  this 
book.  .  _ 

27.  Two  Afleffments  made  for  tbe  (Hundred?)  of 
K  notes  ford  ;  the  3d  of  March  1644;  and  the  laft  of 
April,  perhaps  next  following  ;  figned  by  Jeftery  w  right 
k  others. 

28.  The  Sequeftrators  Accompt  of  the  Lands  taken 

from  the  Lady  Norton,  the  Larle  Rivers,  Mr.  Fowler 
Wallinge,  Mr.  Bauin,  John  Bickerton,  Mr.  Alexander 
Walthall,  Sir  Thomas  Smyth,  &  Mr.  Richard  Wixted; 
exhibited  by  Mare  Jolicoeur  Collector  for  the  Hundred 
of  Namptwitch,  A.  D.  1646;  figned  by  Thomas  Malbont 
&  other  Sequeftrators.  .  x37* 

29.  Rents  of  the  Earle  of  Derby  in  North wich  ;•  re¬ 
ceived  by  the  Sequeftrators,  A.  D.  1644  &  lf>4 5-  J-*  *• 

3c.  Rents,  &c.  of  the  Lord  Brereton  in  Stanthorne, 
Brereton,  Craxton,  k  Eaton,  in  the  fame  years.  141.I1. 

31.  Rents  k  Heriots  of  the  Lord  Kilmorey  in  C.rau- 

nage ;  reed,  as  before.  .  I^2‘. 

32.  Rents  of  Peter  Venables  Efq;  m  Wilton  ;  recei¬ 
ved  in  the  fame  years.  .  ’kid. 

33.  Rents,  &c.  of  Peter  Venables  Efq;  in  Kinderton, 
Newton,  Sprofton,  Sutton,  &  Midkwich  :  reed,  in  A.  D. 

l6 34.  Rents  of  Peter  Venables  Efq;  in  Oclefton,  Brad- 
wall,  k  Loftock-gralam  ;  reed,  as  before.  tt43* 

35.  Rents,  &c.  of  Jeffrey  Shakerley,  Efq;  in  Nether- 
Peuer,  Great Peuer,  Lachedennis,  Alloftocke,  &  Holme: 

recd.A.D.  1644  &  1645.  b- 


Bibliothecae  MarleiansB. 


38i 


Num.  1999* 

36.  Rents,  Debts,  &  Come,  See.  of  Thomas  Chol- 

mondeley,  Efq;  in  North-vvich  &  Laches :  reed.  A.  D. 
1644.  144. 

37.  Rents,  &c.  of  Peter  Leicefter  Efq;  in  Great  Pe- 

ver,  Nether  Pever,  Sc  Shurlache  :  reed.  A.  D.  1644,  & 
1645-  e  144.  b. 

38.  Rents  of  Delinquents  received,  with  the  Dilburfe- 

medts,  in  the  abfence  of  Mr.  Poole;  by  Richard  Brooke 
one  of  hisFellowe-Colle&ors.  A.  D.  1644.  145. 

This  Accompt  being  given  in  upon  Oath,  was  reed. 
&  figned  by  Roger  Wilbraham,  Sec. 

39.  Walter  Heaton’s  Accompt  of  Moneys  received 
from  Delinquents  Eflates  in  Stockport  &  Poynton,  Sc 
Offerton  ;  A.  D.  1644  &  1645.  with  his  Difburfements 
from  the  fame:  deliver’d  in  upon  Oath  Scattefied.  147. 

40.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  &  Cattells  of  Edmund 

Shalcrofv  Re£tor  or  Stockporte,  prifed  Sc  valued  10  Au- 
guft,  1644.  158. 

41 .  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  &  Chattels  of  William 
Downes  of  Worth  Efq;  prifed  &  valued  22  O&ober 

1644-  161. 

42.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cattells  of  Olluer 
Hut ft  of  Poynton ;  prifed  8c  valued  24  Augufl:  1044. 

1  62. 

A  .v  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods'Sc  Cattells  of  Mrs.  Do- 
t  thy  Shirte,  of  Shirte,  Widowe  ;  prifed  Sc  valued  7  Oc¬ 
tober  1644.  164. 

44.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  &  Cattells  of  Francis 
Barton  of  Widforth  ;  prifed  Sc  valued  24.  Augufl  1644. 

160. 

45.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  Sc  Cattells  of  Thorhas 

Allcocke  Jun1.  of  Deaine  Rowe;  pryfed  and  valued  5  Sep- 
teinb.  1644.  167. 

46.  Two  fmall  Inventories  of  Houmphrev  Wood  of 
Poynton  ;  &  of  James  Grindey  of  Vewirte :  A.  D.  1644. 

167.  b. 

47.  An  Inventor)'  of  the  Goods  &  Cattells  oi  Richard 
Barton  of  'Widforth  ;  pryfed  &  valued  24  Aug.  1644. 

j  68. 

48.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cr.ttells  of  John 
Skelhome  of  Poynton  ;  pryfed  8c  valued  26  Septr.  1 644 

168.  b. 

-<;•  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  Sc  Cattells  of  William 
Shirte  ofDifley  ;  pryfed  8c  valued  2  September  1144.  1C9. 

50.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cattells  of  Edmund 
Warren  of  Poynton  Gent,  pryfed  14  October  1644. 

169.  b. 

51.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  &  Cattells  of  Petter 

Skellhorne  of  Prefbery  ;  pryled  &  valued  31  day  of  Oct. 
J644*  170. 

52.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  &  Cattells  of  Edmund 

Warren  of  Poynton  Efq;  pryfed  &  valued  5  Oftober 
1644.  171. 

.  An  Inventory  _  of  the  Goods  &  Cattell  of  John 
Bret,  land  of  i  homecliffe  Gent,  pryfed  £c  valued,  1  April 
l047-  172.  b. 

54.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cattells  of  Robert 
Renlhawe  oi  Northerdine,  pryfed  Sc  valued  9  June  1647. 

17 3.  b. 

55.  An  Inventory  of  -he  Goods  Sc  Cattells  of  John 
Davenporte  of  Widforth  Efq;  pryfed  Sc  valued  11  Novr 

1645-  ‘  1 74.  b. 

56.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  &  Cattells  of  Robert 

Wright  of  Poynton,  Clerke  ;  pryfed  &  valued  27  Jan. 
1  ^44-  175.  b. 

57.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cr.  tells  of  Edward 

Barlowe  of  Poynton,  Taner  ;  pryfed  8c  valued  30  Septr. 
*644.  176. 

58.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  &  Cattells  of  Geor.  8c 
Raphe  Grantham  of  Bredbery  ;  pryfed  &  valued  19  Febr. 

*645.  177.  b. 

An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  Sc  Cattells  of  John 
Haiti  well  of  Lanue-loaid  ;  pryfed  8c  valued  16  Novem¬ 
ber  1 6.;..,.  '  178.  b. 

Cat.  Haul.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  1999. 

60.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  Sc  Cattells  of  Will. 

Hulme  ofWidforthe  ;  prifed  8c  valued  the  3  of  February 
1644.  .180. 

61.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  Sc  Cattells  of  Rodger 
Booth  of  Poynton;  pryfed  8c  vallued  30  Septr.  1644. 

181. 

62.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Catells  of  Humphry 
Blacklhawes  of  Poynton  ;  pryfed  26  Septr.  1644.  182. 

63.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cattells  of  James 
Clarke  of  Prcibery  ;  pryfed  8c  valued  19  Jan.  1643. 

183.  b. 

64.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cattells  of  Ronald 

(Reginald)  Rylle  of  Hiegreaue;  prifed  8c  vallued  13  Feb. 
1646.  184.  b. 

65.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cattells  of  George 
Wattes  of  Adlington  ;  pryfed  8c  vallued  2  Novr.  1644. 

186. 

66.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cattels  of  Will. 
Newton  of  Parke-houfe  ;  pryfed  8c  valued  13  Aug.  1645. 

187.  b. 

67.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  8c  Cattells  of  Thomas 
Pickforth  of  Adlington  ;  prifed  8c  valued  20  Jan.  1645: 

189.  b. 

68.  An  Inventory  of  the  Goods  Sc  Cattells  of  Will. 

Skethorne  of  Stockport  Senr.  pryfed  &  vallued  15  Ottr. 
1646.  190.  b. 

All  thefe  Inventories  were  attefted  to  be  true ;  Sc 
figned  by  the  Committee  accordingly. 

Next  follow  a  number  of  Rentallsof  DelinquentsTe- 
nants  in  Macclesfield-Hundred,  with  a  Table  prefixed  : 
viz.  of  all  fuch  as  are  already  brought  to  the  view  of  the 
Committee  for  Sequefirations :  together  alfo  with  their 
feverall  Rents  and  Daies  whereupon  the  fame  are  pay¬ 
able  :  as, 

6q.  The  Names  See.  of  the  Tennants  of  James  Earle 
of  Darbie,  within  the  Towne  8c  Burrough  of  Maccles¬ 
field,  Sc  Macclesfield  Forreft.  1 93. 

70.  Tenants,  Sec.  of  Thomas  Earle  Riuers,  within  the 
faid  Towne  of  Macclesfield,  &  Macclesfield-Parke.  tq6.b. 

71.  Tenants,  Sec.  of  the  Marquefs  of  Winchefler  in 

the  Parilh  of  Cheadle,  8cc.  198. 

72.  Tenants,  8cc.  of  Sir  Thomas  Wilbraham  Bart,  in 

the  Parilh  of  Mottram  in  Longendale.  203. 

73.  Tenants  &c.  of  Sir  Edward  Fitton  Knt.  8c  Bart, 

within  Gawfworth.  204.  b. 

74.  Tenants,  See.  of  Sir  William  Mafiie.  205.  b. 

75.  Tenants,  8cc.  of  Sir  Hugh  Calueley  in  Mottram 

Andrew,  Sec.  205.  d. 

76.  Tenants,  Src.  of  Edward  Warren  Efq;  withinStock- 

port,  Pointon  Sc  Offerton.  208. 

7-.  Tenants,  See.  of  Robert  Tatton  Efq;  in  Etchells, 
Northerdon,  Kenardye,  8c  Moorefide.  21 1. 

78.  Tenants  &c.  of  Sir  Cycill  Trafford  in  the  Parilh 

of  Winilowe,  &c.  113. 

79.  Tenants,  8c c.  belonging  to  Henbury  Hall.  2.6.  b. 

80.  Tenants,  See.  belonging  vnto  diuers  Gentlemen' 

refpe&iuelye.  2i8.b. 

81.  Tenants,  See.  belonging  to  the  Rectory  or  Par- 

fonage  of  Stockport.  220. 

tt2.  Tenaunts,  See.  belonging  to  Mr.  Roberte  Staple- 
ton,  &  Mr.  Thomas  Stapleton.  221. 

Thefe  Rentals  abovementioned,  were  received  from 
the  Sequeftratours  &  their  Agents,  vpon  Oath,  by  the 
Committee,  24th  ....  1643,  aild  figned  by  them 
accordingly. 

83.  Walter  Heaton’s  Accompt  of  Money  receiued  by 
hint  for  Towles  (f.  Tolls)  Sc  Stallage  for  the  Towne  8c  Ba- 
ronie  of  Stockport  from  9  July  A.  D.  1643,  till  the  19th 
of  December  1644.  222. 

N.  B.  what  is  above,  is  only  the  firlt  branch  of  a 
large  Accompt  of  Receipts  8c  Dilburfements ;  which 
Accompt  being  delivered  unto  the  Committee  of  Sequef- 
tration,  upon  Oath,  was  figned  accordingly  by  thofe 
then  prefent. 

5  E 


84.  The 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1999,  2000. 

84.  The  fur'her  Accompts  of  William  Lettwiche,  de- 
claringe  v  hat  more  Rents  8c  other  Moneys  fequeftred 
for  the  ufi  of  King  8c  Parliament,  haue  beene  by  him 
as  Collectour  for  fome  part  of  North-witch  hundred, 
collect'd  k  received  tor  the  Ufe  atorefaid,  out  of 
the  feuerali  Delinquents  Lands  6c  Eftatesin  that  hundred. 

258. 

The  principal  Delinquents  mentioned  in  thefe  Ac¬ 
compts,  (which  do  like  wile  include  the  laid  Collectors 
Dilburfements)  are  abovementioned  :  relating  to  the  year 

i645-  r 

85.  His  further  Accompts  of  Receipts  from  the  faid 

Delinquents  Eftates,  &  Dilburfements  made  A.D.  1645 
8c  1646.  281. 

All  thefe  his  Accompts,  that  is,  in  this  8c  the  pre¬ 
ceding  Article,  feem  to  have  been  deliver’d  upon  Oath, 
to  the  Committee,  and  figned  by  them  accordingly, 
21  June  164  . 

86.  A  Rental!  or  Booke  declaring  what  old  or  other 

Rents  for  the  Yeeres  1644,  164a,  &  1645,  were  &  are 
payable  to  the  feuerali  Lords,  Gentlemen,  and  others 
Delinquents,  for  their  Lands  Sc  Tenements  fequettred, 
according  to  InftruCtions  of  Parliament  in  that  behaife  : 
and  lying  in  tne  Parilh  ot  Davenham,  and  in  the  Towne- 
fliips  of  Northwich,  Witton  and  Loftockgralam,  Peuer, 
&  Allottocke  ;  all  feituate  in  the  Hundred  of  North¬ 
wich,  &  in  the  Divifion  of  William  Leftwich  Colleiflour 
of  the  fequeftrated  Moneys  &  Rents.  315. 

This  was  deliver’d  in  upon  Oath,  5  September 
1  645  ;  and  figned  by  the  Commillioners  accordingly. 

87.  Accompt  01  the  f  lid  Sequellrator,  or  Collector's 

Dilburfements,  A.  D.  1643.  337. 

Herewith,  is  a  Fragment  touching  his  Receipts 
during  that  Year;  and  another  of  his  Receipts  A.  D. 

88.  Another  Accompt  of  the  faid  Leftwiehe’s  Receipts 

Sc  Dilburfements,  from  the  faid  Delinquents  Elfates,  in 
the  years  1647  8c  1648.  345. 

This  Accompt  was  like  wife  given  in  upon  Oath  ; 
and  figned  accordingly. 

2  COO. 

An  oblong  Ileraldical  book  in  fol.  on  whofe  back  the 
lall  Randle  Holme  hath  written  this  Title,  ‘  Sutes  of 
Coates  ;  &  Coates  of  feuerali  places  :*  which  I  lhall 
prefently  endeavour  to  explain.  But  I  beg  leave,  in 
the  fir  It  place,  to  obferve,  that  it  is  indeed  a  fort  of  an 
Armes  Book  ;  that  the  faid  Collection  feems  to  have 
been  made  (or  at  dealt,  begun)  in  the  time  of  Oueen 
Elizabeth  ;  and  was  rudely  or  haltily  done,  by  feverall 
hands,  fome  of  which  feem  to  be  of  Officers  of  Armes  : 
and  by  this  Mark  x ,  or  this  O,  upon  or  near  to  molt 
of  the  Efcocheons,  the  greatelt  part  of  it  feems  to  have 
been  more  leifurely  &  fairly  entied  into  fome  other 
Book,  for  ready  &c  conftant  Ufe.  Moreover,  at  the 
beginning,  I  find, 

1 .  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Coates  in  this  Booke  ; 
made  either  by  the  faid  Randle  Holme,  or  by  his  ap¬ 
pointment. 

2.  Part  of  the  old  Table,  which  is  almofl  ufelefs  ; 
bccaufe  it  feldoroe  direCts  to  the  Leaves  where  the  de¬ 
filed  Armes  are  to  be  found.  More  of  it  may  be  feen 
at  foiios,  or  pages,  88,  101 ,  8c  109. 

3.  The  Collection  it  l'elf,  which  beginning  in  the  na¬ 
ture  or  manner  of  an  Ordinary ;  was,  perhaps  what 
Randle  meant  by  hisSutes  ofCoates;  which  1  take  to  be  an 
uncouth  expreffion,  fol.  1 .  More  Coates  difpofedin  this  way 
of  Ordinary,  may  be  found  at  folios,  or  pages,  4,  7,  8, 
tc,  12,  16,  20,  22,  38,  41,  52,  57,  72,  Sec.  As  to  his 
expreffion  of  Coates  of  feverall  places  ;  I  underftand 
it  not  as  if  here  was  a  Collection  of  Armes  of  Kingdcmcs, 
Cities,  Monalteries,  Corporation?,  &c.  for  in  truth,  I 
fee  none  luch  :  but  rathe,  that  the  proper  helps  for 
compiling  this  Collection  did  appear,  and  were  made  ufe 


Num.  2  300 - 2  002. 

of  m  feverall  places  ;  as  is  now  and  then  hinted  at  in  the 
book  ;  efpecially  where  we  find, 

4.  Arme  of  thofe  great  Warriors  who  were  prelent 

at  the  Sige  of arlaverocke  in  Scotland  in  the  tyine  of 
King  Edward  the  firft,  Anno  1 300.  23. 

5.  Some  intimation  (the  Writing  not  plain)  as  if  Armes 

were  collected  at  the  Houfe  of  the  Lord  Treafurer  Burgh- 
ley.  82. 

It  is  certain  that  that  great  Man  did  caufe  the  Armes 
of  many  eminent  Perfons  to  be  painted  in  his  Houfe  ; 
which  mav  remain  yet,  for  ought  1  know. 

6.  Henningham’s  Pedegre  :  i.  e.  Armes  only  collected 
from  the  Pedegree  of  Heveningham. 

2001 . 

A  Book  in  folio,  whereinto  the  laft  Randle  Holme  had 
fattened  divers  of  his  loofe  Prints  &  Drawings  ;  which 
feeming  not  properly  to  come  under  the  Denomination 
of  Manufcripts ;  I  (hall  here  forbeai  the  Defcription  of 
them,  and  batten  to  the  next  book. 

2002. 

A  Book  in  folio  confifting  of  many  loofe  Papers  &  TraCts, 
long  fince  bound  up  together,  and  by  the  latt  P  lie 
Holme  entituled  Cheffiire-Deeds.  They  are. 

1.  The  fame  Randle's  Lilt  of  matters  of  moil  Noie 
in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning, 

2.  Litrerte  Patentes  R.  Jacobi  1.  quibus  concedit  Ricard 

Gwynne,  et  ad  firmam  dimittit,  omr.es  illas  Mineras 
Plumbi,  vulgariter  nuncupatus  Myncs  of  Lead,  alias 
Lead  vuri,  alias  owri,  infra  Hundred  de  '•  olehilt  et 
Ruthland  in  Comitatu  Flint  ;  ad  finem  21  anworum. 
reddendo  inde  annuatim  66s.  8d.  Tette.  Confiliario  fuo 
Julio  Cefare  Milite  Cancellario  er  Sub- l  hefaurario  Curie 
Scaccarij  fui  apud  Weft-monafterium,  18  die  Novembris, 
anno  Regni  fui  Anglie  1 1""’.  236. 

3.  Ettimate  of  the  Charge  in  repairing  &  amending  the 

decaied  Rooms  8c  Walls,  ike.  in  a1  d  about  the  Cattle  of 
Chefter;  as  the  fame  was  furveyed  by  Sr  Richard  l’revor 
Sr  Richard  Grofvenor,  Edward  Dodd  Efqr.  k  Richard 
Brevelon  Efq.  239. 

4.  i  he  jointe  and  feuerali  Anfweares  of  Richa;  a  Grof- 

venour  Efq;  and  Sir  Richard  Grofvenor  Knight,  his 
Sonne  &  Heire  apparant.  Defendants  ;  to  the  Bill  of 
Complaint  of  Sir  Robert  L  holmondcley  Barronett,  Com- 

playnani.  241. 

This  rough  Draught  fheweth,  that  Contention  aro'/e 
between  the  faid  Parties,  upon  occafion  of  certain  watt 
Grounds  called  Willey-more  Willey-purfe,  &  Willey- 
pitts,  which  the  Complainant  claimed  as  part  of  his  Maner 
or  Lordfliip  of  Bickley  ;  alledging  that  the  Defendants 
by  fome  cafuall  or  indirect  meanes  had  into  theire  Hands 
divers  auncient  Sc  other  Deeds,  Evidences,  Writin 
Efcripts,  Boundaries,  &  Miniments  touching  &  conccri.- 
inge  the  faid  Manour  or  Lordfliip  of  Bickley,  and  the 
Commons,  Mores  &  Waft  grounds  thereunto  belonginge. 
On  the  other  fide,  the  Defendants  claimed  the  fame  Watt 
Grounds  as  parcell  of  their  Mannour  of  Tufhiiigham.  (f. 
reCfius,  Tuffiingham) 

5.  Purport  of  the  Grant  (abovementioned  at  §  2.)  of 

the  I.ead-Mines  in  CoHhit  &  Ruthland  ;  extracted  from 
the  fame  by  Will.  Hill  Auditor*  6  Auguit  1629;  in 
order  to  a  new  Leafe.  247.  b. 

This  is  attended  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  W  ettons 
Warant  for  making  a  Leafe  of  the  Premiffes  vnto  Rich¬ 
ard  Grofvenour  Efq;  Roger  Grofvenour  his  Sonne,  8c 
Mr.  Thomas  Gamull,  to  hold  the  fame  dureing  their 
Lives,  k  the  Life  of  the  longer  Liver  of  them  :  yielding 
k  paying  the  accuftonied  Rent  8c  a  Fine  of  Tenn  pounds. 

6.  Litterse  Patentes  R.  Caroli  1.  quibus  concedit  Ro¬ 

berto  Brerewood,  Officium  vnius  Jufticiariorum  fuorum 
Comitatuum  Carnarvon, Merioneth  et  Anglefey,  vna  cum 
Feodo  Quinquaginta  Librarum  per  annum  :  habendum 
8c  exercendum  Officium  prediCtum  durante  Beneplacito 
fuo.  Tette,  8c c  6  die  Decembris  A.  D.  1637.  249. 

7.  An 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


383 


Num.  loor. 

7.  An  Aflignment  of  the  remaining  Terme  of  Years 

in  a  Lea I'e  of  all  the  Mines  of  Cole,  Stone  &  Leade  &  of 
the  Materials  to  make  Leade,  within  the  whole  Lordlhip 
of  Bromfeld  &  Yale  in  the  County  of  Denbigh  :  granted 
to  Richard  Grofvenour  of  Eaton  Efq;  deceafed  ;  afligned 
unto  John  Wich  Citizen  of  London,  by  William  Colly 
of  Ecclefton  Gent.  Mr.  Grofvenor’s  Exec '.'tor,  the  10th 
of  March  A.  D.  1633.  .  253* 

8.  Rough  Draught  of  a  Deed  whereby  Sir  Richard 

Grofvenour  of  Eaton,  Knight  &  Baronett,  declares  the 
Ufes  of  the  Leafe  laft  abovementioned,  as  then  lying  in 
Mr.  Colly’s  Hands,  dated  13  March,  1633.  260. 

q.  Exemplar  Indenture  quS  Willelmus  Ruffe  1  Miles 
ft  Baronettu§,  Willelmus  Collins  &  Edwardus  Fenn, 
Generofi ;  concedunt  Francifco  Gamull  Armuero,  '1  ho- 
mte  Bauand  Arm.  ct  Willelmo  Colley  Generofo,  omnes 
illas  Mineras  Plumbi  vulgariter  vocal  as  MynesofLead, 
alias  Lead  vuri,  alias  owri,  five  Rakes  of  Lead,  intra 
Hundred  de  Colchilt  et  Ruthland  in  <  om.  Flint,  habend. 
in  feodi  firm,  imperpetuum.  tenend.  de  Domino  Rege, 
&c.  vt  de  Manerio  fuo  de  Eaft-Greenwich  in  Com-Kanc. 
per  Fidelitatem  tantum,  in  libtro  &  communi  Soccagio. 
Reddendo  inde  annuatim  Dno.  Regi  3I.  6s.  8d.  dat  .  . 

.  .  die . anno  8  Regis  Caroli  1.  26 3. 

10.  A  Deed,  whereby  J  Ihn  Wich  Citizen  of  London 

regrants,  affignes,  &  fects  over  to  William  Colly  of 
Ecclefton  Gent,  the  Aflignment  of  that  Leale  above  rhen- 
tioned  in  §  7.  dated  12  March  1633.  274. 

1 1 .  Draught  of  an  Indenture,  whereby  Richard  Grof¬ 

venour  Efq;  Sonne  &  Heire  apparent  of  Sr,  Richard 
Grofvenour  of  I;  -ton,  K.  igiit ;  bv  the  Appointment  of 
his  faid  Father,  doth  affigne  &  fttt  over  vr-o  Roger 
Hurlton  of  Chefter  Efq;  and  Robert  Bavand  Citizen  of 
London,  all  ihofe  Mynes  of  Lead,  fcc.  mentioned  above 
in  §  5  8c  9.  to  bold  during  the  Life  of  the  faid  Sir  Rich¬ 
ard  (in  cafe  the  terme  of years  he  held  in  the  Kings  Grant, 
thould  be  unexpired  at  the  time  of  his  Deceafe)  to  his  the 
laid  Sir  Richard’s  Dfe  Sc  Behoof,  or  to  fuch  Ufes  as  he 
Ihnuld  appoint :  and  afterwards  to  the  Ufe  of  the  faid 
Richard  his  Son  ;  &  fo  to  Roger  Grofvenour  his  Grand- 
fon,  untill  the  faid  Terme  (hould  be  ended  &  expired, 
dated  the  1  2ih  of  Auguft  1634.  2^3- 

1 2.  Draught  of  an  Indenture  whereby  Francis  Gamull 

Efq;  Thomas  Bauand  Efq;  &  William  ColK  v  Gent,  do 
acknowledge  &  confeffe,  that  the  Mynes.of  Lead,  &c. 
mentioned  above  m  §  9.  were  purchaled  in  their  Names 
with  :h  money  cf  Sir  Richard  Grofvdnour  &  his.Heires; 
that  they  haue  no  Right  or  Title  to  the  Premiffes,  but 
(land  feizcd  of  the  lame  in  Truft  only  ;  which  Tru ft  they 
covenant  to  dilcharge,  accord'ng  as  Sir  Richard  (hail 
limit t  the  fame,  dated  the  9th  of  June,  ann.  12  R. 
Caroli  r.  292* 

13.  C-opie  of  a  Commiflion  of  King  Charles  1.  em¬ 
powering  Randolph  Holme  Mayor  of  Chefter,  Sir  Robert 

5  re  rewood  Kt.  Recorder,  Sir  Orlando  Bridgeman  Kt. 
Attorney  of  his  Court  of  Wards  Sc  Liveries,  8c  Vice- 
Chamberlaine  of  Chefter,  Nicolas  Ince,  Richard  Dutton, 
Charles  Walley,  Randolph  Holme  Senior,  Colonell 
Francis  Gamull,  &  Thomas  Throp  Aldermen  of  the  faid 
Cittv,  to  feize  upon  the  EffedJs  of  abfent  Rebells,  and 
of  fuch  of  their  Adherents  as  were  or  had  been  in  aftual 
Rebellion  again!!  him  ;  the  faid  Effe&s  (of  what  kind 
foever)  bung  within  the  City,  or  County  of  the  Cuy  of 
Chefter ;  or  within  5  Miles  of  the  faid  C  ity  within  the 
County  Palatine  of  Chefter  :  giving  likewife  Commands 
how  thev  Ihould  dilpofe  of  the  fame.  This  bears  Tefte 

Oxford,  the  fnft  of  January,  anno  Regni  19.  299. 

14.  C.opie  of  Daniel  king’s  Certificate  importing  that 

he  had  receiucd  from  Mr.  Randle  Holme,  an  Original 
Grant  under  the  Broad  Seal  &  Hand  of  K.  Charles  the 
Firft  ;  which  he  hoped  to  (hew  to  K.  Charles  11.  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Loyall  Sufferers  of  the  City  of  Chefter. 
dated,  26Julyi6b3.  301.  b. 

This  Grant  1  take  to  be  the  Commiflion  mentioned 


Num.  2002. 

in  the  laft  Seftion  or  Article  :  and  it  may  be  eafily  ima¬ 
gined  that  the  Rebels,  when  gotten  into  Power,  8c  into 
the  Poffeflion  of  Chefter,  would  be  revenged  to  the  utmoft 
of  all  thofe  who  acted  by  its  Color  8c  Authority  :  fo  that 
it  is  no  wonder  if  the  Holme’s  Family  were  fudden'y 
oppreffed,  and  (at  long  run)  brought  to  ruin.  I  remember 
a  Son  of  the  third  Randle  Holme  (who  was  Son  to  the 
fecond,  who  was  Mayor  when  this  Commiflion  was  iffued 
out  ;  who  was  Son  to  the  old  Alderman,  named  in  the 
fame  Commiflion)  and,  I  think,  his  name  was  alfo  Ran¬ 
dle.  fit  was  Tapfter  or  Chamberlain  in  the  Golden 
Talbot  lnne  in  Liverpoole,  A.  D.  1694.  his  poor  Father  1 
the  third  Randle  then  living. 

15.  Interrogatories  to  be  myn-.ttred  to  R  chard  Stock- 

ton,  John  Dawfon,  8c  George  Abraham,  Defendants  ;  at 
the  Suite  ol  Randall  Griffith,  Complaynants.  303.  1 

Thefeare  concerning  the  Waft  grounds  called  Wil-  • 
ley-more,  before-mentioned  in  §  4. 

16.  The  Examinations  ot  the  lame  Dawfon,  Stock- 
ton,  &  Abraham,  Defendants  ;  taken,  in  Chefter,  the  j 
fi r fie  day  of  Auguft  A.  D.  1610.  before  George  Caliiley,  j 
Edward  Dutton,  8c  Hughe  Starkey,  Efquires :  by  force 

of  a  Commiflion  to  them,  &  William  Haflell  Gent,  out 
of  his  Elighnes  Court e  of  Star-chamber,  directed  j  for 
th’Examyning  of  the  faid  Defendants  to  the  Bill  of  Com- 
plainte  of  Randle  Griffith  Complaynaunte.  316. 

17.  Breve  R.  Jacobi  1.  dire&um  Georgio  Calveley, 
Edwardo  Dutton  de  Chefter,  et  Ilugoni  Starkey,  Armi- 
geris,  ac  Willelmo  Haffall  Generofo  ;  pro  Examinatione 
prsedictorum  Johannis  Dawfon,  & c.  Tefte,  &c.  fecundo 
die  Julij,  anno  Regni  fui  Anglie,  &c.  oftavo.  345* 

This  Copie  of  the  Kings  Writ  was  compared  with 
the  Original,  and  attefted. 

iS.  AMappe  or  Survey  ofTuflingham,  as  lying  con-  ; 
tiguous,  or  adjacent  to  Bickley,  made  A.D.  1620  ;  & 
ferving  to  (hew  that  Willey  More  belonged  to  Tufting-  1 
ham,  &.  not  to  Bickley.  347*  b* 

19.  Draught  of  the  Covenants  of  Marriage,  entred 

into  by  Henry  Birkenhed  of  Backford  Efq;  Alice  his 
wife,  &  Henry  their  fonne,  on  the  one  parte :  and  Sir 
Randall  Mainwaringe  of  Peover  Knight,  on  the  Second 
part  :  for  fettling  &  intailing  the  Manor  of  Backford, 
with  other  lands  &  tenements,  Huxley,  Chorleton,  New¬ 
ton  juxta  Tattenhall,  &  Sydenhall,  upon  occafion  of  the 
Marriage  which  had  been  celebrated  between  Henry 
Birkenhed  the  Son,  &r  Margaret  Sir  Richards  Daughter ; 
whofe  Portion  was  £.860.  349* 

20.  Draught  of  an  Indenture  betweeneThomas  Ireland 

of  Bewfey  in  the  Countie  of  Lancafter  Efq;  vppone  the 
one  partye  ;  &  Sir  Richard  Grofvenour  of  Heaton  in  the 
Countie  of  Chefter,  Kt.  Sc  Baronett  ;  Thomas  Standley 
of  Awderley,  &c.  vpponne  th’other  partie  :  for  fettling 
the  Moyety  of  the  Mannour-houfe  of  Bewfey,  with  the 
Lands,  &c.  thereunto  belonging,  upon  the  Marriage 
celebrated  between  the  faid  Thomas  Ireland  and  Marga¬ 
ret  his  wife  ;  whofe  Portion  was  £.1300.  366. 

21.  Placita  de  Seflione  Ceftiie  tenta  apud  Ceftriam, 

anno  Nono  Regni  Anglie,  &c.  Jacobi  1.  coram  Juf- 
ticiarijs  Ceftrie.  368. 

Here  the  Pleas  were  about  certain  Cattel  of  Randle  , 
Griffith  of  Bickley  (formerly  mentioned)  which  grafing 
in  Willey-more,  were  taken  &  impounded  by  John 
Dod  &  other  Bayliffes  of  Richard  Grofvenor  Efq;  in 
Tuffingbam.  Whereupon  the  Contention  arofe,  whether 
Willey-more  belonged  to  Bickley,  or  to  Tuffingham  ; 
and  feems  to  have  been  found  by  the  Jury  for  the  latter. 

22.  Diaught  of  a  Settlement  of  the  Eftate  of  Richard 
Alporte  of  Overton  Gentleman,  confiding  of  the  Man-  j 
nours  of  Overton  and  Ouldcaftle,  with  other  Lands  8c 
Tenements  in  Horton,  Chorleton,  Chocleage,  Tilfton,  I 
Loecroffe,  Edge,  Malpaffe  &  Cudington  ;  upon  occafion  > 
of  theintended  Marriage  of  Richard  Alporte  theSon.  373.  ; 

23.  Copie  of  a  Mandate  of  K.  Charles  1.  diredled  to 
William  Juxon  Bifliop  of  London  his  High  Treafurer  of 

Englandy 


384 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2002. 

England,  and  Francis  Lord  Cottington  Chancellour  and 
Under-Treafurer  of  the  Exchequer  :  commanding  that 
his  Cuftomers  &  other  Officers  lhould  levy  and  take  to 
his  ufe  One  Shilling  ^  Chauldron  of  all  Stone-coales, 
Sea-coales,  Pitt-coales,  or  other  Coales  intended  to  be 
exported  to  Ireland,  the  Ifles  of  Jerfey,  Guernefey,  or 
Ifle  of  Man  ;  over  and  above  the  Duties  hitherto  paid  ; 
in  like  manner  as  all  Coales  defigned  for  Home-vent,  do 
now  pay  an  additional  Shilling  per  Chauldron,  by  virtue 
of  His  Maiefties  Covenant  with  the  Society  of  Cole-Mer- 
ehants  tradeing  to  Nevv-caltle,  Sunderland,  Blythe, 
Nooke,  and  Berwicke,  &c.  dated  30  July  1638.  380. 

24.  Draught  of  an  Agreement,  whereby  Sir  Richard 
Grofvenour  of  Eaton  Knight  and  Baronet,  'conveys  to  & 
fettles  upon  Roger  Hurleton,  &  divers  others  who  had 
been  Sureties  &  ingaged  for  him,  his  Manours  of  Eaton, 
&  Pulton,  with  other  Lands  &  Tenements  in  Pulford, 
Figden,  Bdgreave,  Dodlelton,  Greenwalf,  Kinerton, 
Burdwardfley,  Bickley,  Macefen,  Bradeley,  Stockton, 
W  ;gland,  Foulwdch,  Droifwich,  Kiddington,  Hargreave, 
Churton,  Rowton  alia.  Roe,  Chriftkton,  and  Famedon, 
all  in  the  County  of  Chefter ;  as  alfo,  in  Burton,  Gref- 
foid,  Guerfilt,  Brymbo,  Berffiam,  &  Elaffiam,  all  within 
the  County  oi  Denbigh  :  to  houl’d  the  fame  during 
Twenty,  years  (in  cafe  he  the  faid  Sir  Richard  lhould 
live  fo  long)  and  to  apply  the  Rents  thereof,  as  they 
lhould  accrue,  to  the  Payment  of  his  Debts  :  which 
being  done  they  were  to  rdtore  the  Premiffes  unto  him. 
dated  6  July  16  9.  383. 

25.  Copie  or  Draught  of  an  Agreement,  made  be¬ 
tween  Sir  Richard  Grofvenour  of  Eaton  Knight  &  Ba¬ 
ronet  ;  &  Robert  Bauand  Citizen  &  Dier  of  London  : 

'  elating  to  his  (Sir  Richards)  Leafe-hold-fVlynes  of  Lead, 
See.  in  the  Hundred  Colthilt  &  Ruthlaqd  within  the 
County  of  Hint.  Which  Premifies  he  now  charges  with 
the  Sum  of  1  oco  Markes  as  an  Augmentation  of  his 
daughter  Maries  portion,  and  over  &  above  the  annual 
Summe  of  20  pounds  already,  or  now,  affigned  unto 
her,  from  the  fame  Premiffes.  He  likewife  chargeth 
the  fame  Premiffes  with  £.500  more,  as  an  Augmentation 
to  the  Portion  of  his  Daubhter  Grace.  All  this  on  fup- 
pofition,  that  their  Lives,  or  his  Leafe,  would  con¬ 
tinue  &  hold  out  long  enough,  dat.  18  Juneanuo  12  R. 
Caroli  1.  389. 

26.  Attefted  Copy  of  an  Indenture  of  Sale,  palfed  by 

Richard  Grofvenor  of  Etone  Efquier,  to  Thomas  F.ger- 
ton  Efquier,  Her  Majefties  Solvcitort  Generali  &  Eliza¬ 
beth  his  Wieft  ;  of  certain  Meffuages  with  other  Lands 
&  Tenements  in  Dodlelton,  parcelle  of  the  Poffeffions  of 
the  late  diffolved  Mona  fiery  of  Diewlencreafe,  alias  De- 
lacreffe,  in  the  Countie  of .  Stafforde.  dat.  26  Marche, 
anno  26  R.  Eliz.  ^gS. 

27.  A  Scedule  of  Debts  to  be  paid  forth  of  my  Lands 

leafed.  40 1. 

Thefe  Debts  amount  to  the  Sum  of  £.4 .863.  6s.  8d. 
and  feetn  to  be  what  were  provided  for  by  Sir  Richard 
Grofvenor,  by  his  Indenture  above-nie  .tionedat  §  24. 

28.  Extracts  from  divers  antic:.;  Deeds,  relating  to 
Chelhire-Families,  by  the  fceond  Randle  Holme  ;  per¬ 
haps  entred  more  fairly  into  feme  other  Books.  403. 

29.  Imperfect  Covenants  for  a  Marriage  to  be  cele¬ 
brated  between  John  Wudfalle,  &  Anne  the  Daughter  of 
Rycharde  b  utralle,  whofe  Portion  was  one  Hundreth 
Merks  for  which  fne  w  as  in  have  a  Jointure  in  Meafes, 
Lands  &  Icnemer.ts  of  Inheiiiance,  of  the  clere  yerely 
Valure  of  20  Pounds,  ouer  alle  Charges  &  Repryles. 
Ihefe  Covenants  were  made  about,  or  in  A.D.  1559. 

405. 

30.  Draught  of  the  Award  made  bv  William  Dauen- 
port,  Ron  dull  Lancaftre,  John  Tylftone  &  Thomas 
Hauley,  Arbitrators  betweene  Petre  Strete  of  Chefter 
Bocher,  and  Richard  Browne  of  Boughton  Yoman  ; 
upon  occafion  f  a  certain  Meffuage  in  Boughton  forfaid. 
dated  7  Marche  in  tiiefirft  yere  of  Q.  Elizabeth.  413. 


Num.  2002,  2003. 

31*  Draught  of  the  Award  made  by  Sir  Thomas 
Grofvenour  Knyght,  Arbitratour  betwene  Rauffe  Alder- 
fey  of  Cheftre  Alderman,  and  Thomas  Aldcroft,  con- 
fernyng  the  Ryght,  Title  &  Intereft  of  one  Meafe  in 
Pykton,  within  the  Countie  of  Cheftre.  414. 

32.  Draught  of  an  Indenture  Tripartite  ;  whereby  Sir 

Richard  Grofvenor  Knight  &  Baronef,  was  to  allure 
unto  Sr.  Richard  Broke  of  Norton,  Knight ;  Thomas 
Marbury  of  Marbury,  Efq;  Hugh  Wilbraham  of  Ec- 
clefton,  Efq;  and  William  Barncfton  of  Churton  Gent, 
all  their  Purchafe  of  the  whole  Manor  or  Lordffiip  of 
Tuffingham,  with  other  Lands  and  Tenements  in  Barrell 
&  Grecneley.  dat.  15  March  1631.  4^. 

33.  Breviat  between  John  Starkey  Efq;  Plaintifte,  & 

William  Yonge,  &c.  Defendants  :  concerning  a  Leafe  of 
Knights  Graunge,  made  by  Hughe  Starkie  to  Rower 
Leeche.  _  4,§. 

34.  Exemplification  of  Records  touching  a  Lawfuit, 

about  the  Right  of  Common  in  Kvng’s  Wood,  alias 
Kyngs  londe,  alias  Litill  Saughall  Wood  by  Sauehall  : 
temp.  R.  Elizabethan  422i 

35.  Bill  of  Complaint  exhibited  in  the  Court,  as  to 

Robert  Earle  of  Leycefter  Chamberleyne  of  the  Com. 
Palentyne  of  Chefter  ;  by  William  Crofton  Gent,  one 
of  the  QuenesSerjants  &  Officer  within  the  faid  Countie, 
and  Anne  his  W.ffe,  late  the  Wiffe  of  Alderman  Ratf'e 
Alderfey  decelfed  :  againft  certain  perfoi.s  Tenants  of 
one  Meffuage,  uiverfe  Shoppes,  and  other  Tenements  in 
Chefter,  which  accrued  to  the  laid  Anne  from  the  Pof- 
feffions  of  the  laid  Raffe  Alderfey  :  becaule  of  tin  ir  denial 
to  pay  fome  Rents  due,  upon  the  Inftigation  of  William 
Alderfey,  Son  &  Heire  or  the  faid  Ralle  :  to-  whome  the 
Premyffes  were  to  dil'cend,  in  Reverfion,  after  the  Deaths 
of  the  faid  Anne.  4'>8. 

2OO3. 

A  Book  in  folio  confining  of  many  Tracts  &  loofe  Papers 
long  lince  bound  up  together,  and  by  the  Jaft  Randle 
I-Iolme  entituled  on  the  outlide  Chefter  Cawley  & 
Dee  Milnefs  :  in  turning  over  which,  I  find  the  mat¬ 
ters  following. 

1.  The  faid  Randle  Holmes  Notes  of  thofe  Things 
which  he  thought  molt  remarkable  in  the  Book.  At  the 
beginning, 

2.  The  Accompte  of  the  Executors  of  John  Maffye 

Efq;  who  deceafed  14  October  1  sQi  :  being  made  up, 
or  delivered  in,  the  2  1  ft  of  Aprill  '1606.  620. 

3.  Rents  due  to  the  Rt.  Hon11'-  Richarde  Lorde 
Vifcount  Molyneux,  for  Meadowe  Grounde  and  other 
Demayne-Lands  belonginge  to  Sefton,  Anno  Dni.  1 636. 

6 24 . 

4.  A  Charge  to  Richard  Brereton  Efq;  &  William 

Barnefton  Gent.  Executors  of  the  laft  Will  &  Teftament 
of  the  above-mentioned  JohnMaffy  Efq;  of  their  Receipts 
from  15  October  1591,  vntill  October  16:3  :  for  which 
they  were  to  be  accomptable  vnto  John  Maffy  Efquier, 
Sonne  &  heire  of  the  deceafed.  gjg.  ’ 

5.  AClaufeof  a  Leafe,  containing  Covenants  between 

Sir  William  Norres,  Knyght,  Sc  Jchan  ap  Johan,  to  whom 
Sir  William  had  lett  to  ferme  cer:ain  grounds  in  the 
Town  (hip  of  Burton,  within  the  Lordihip  of  Bromfelde 
&  Countie  ofDenbigh,  at  the  annual  Rent  ot  3s.  4d.  dat. 
29th  of  Maye,  in  anno  5  Edwardi  vi.  632. 

At  the  bottom  of  this  Claufe  is  this  Note,  ‘Copia 
vera,  et  corrigitur  and  yet  it  is  incorrett  enough,  this 
notwithftanding. 

6.  A  Paper,  on  the  backfide  entituled  ‘Old  Rent  <  | 
Hampton.’ 

7-  The  Demefne  8c  Lands  of  Henry  Delves  of  Doding- 
ton  Efq;  rated. 

This  Survey  was  made  &  figned  by  Rychard  Clatton 
Gent.  8c  Thomas  Steele. 

8.  A  particular  of  the  Manor  of  Torbrian,  in  Com. 
Devon,  made  about  A.  D.  1604,  and  then  held  by  the 
4  Lord 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse, 


Num.  2003. 

Lord  Rivers  of  the  Caftle  of  Okington,  at  the  annual 
Rent  of  6s.  8J.  639. 

This  particular  declares  the  Names  &  Ages  of  the 
then  Under-Tenants,  the  Contents  of  their  feveral  Tene- 
ments,  their  annual  Rents,  to  what  the  lame  might  be 
improved,  &  the  Heriotts. 

9.  Alik-  particular  of  the  Manor  of  Ypellpen  in  Com. 
Devon,  held  ,t  the  fame  time  by  the  fame  Lord.  643. 

10.  Another  Particular  of  the  Mannor  of  Torbryan, 

made  in  the  fame  View,  though  not  altogether  in  the  lame 
method,  by  William  Stowell  Gentleman,  Steward  there, 
the  4th  of  Auguft  A.  D.  1640.  651. 

!  1  •  Rates  &  Prices  of  all  forts  of  Poultry  fett  down 
by  Ralph  Freeman  Lord-Mayor  of  London,  8cc.  accord- 
..  o  Prefidents  in  former  time  ;  to  be  obferued  by  all 
Poulterers,  &c.  felling  within  the  Citie  of  London,  & 
Liberties  thereof,  rated  7  January  1633.  662. 

In  the  Preamble  it  is  oblerved,  that  as  the  Lords  of 
the  Privy-Council  had  reformed  many  Abufes,  fuch  as 
the  exceflive  Number  of  Tauernes,  &  immoderate  prices 
cl  ail  forts  of  Provifions  in  Ordinaries  and  Hofteries  : 
and  now  finding  that  the  exceflive  Rates  of  Poultry  of  all 
forts  being  fo  unreafonably  enhaunfed  by  Poulterers  & 
Higlers,  as  to  become  an  intolerable  grieuance  to  the 
Subject,  the  Inconvenience  whereof  reflected  vpon  his 
Majefties  houfliould  :  they  fignified  the  exprefle  Com¬ 
mand  of  his  Majcfty,  that  the  Lord-Mayor,  &c.  fhould 
fett  fit  Prices  for  all  fmall  Acates  and  other  Provilions 
and  to  fett  up  the  fame  in  publike  Tables :  all  perfons 
neverthelefs  having  liberty  to  buy  Poultry  at  lefler  & 
lower  Prices,  as  they  could  furnifh  themfelues.  Thefe 
are  printed  Sheets. 

1 2.  Names  of  the  Aldermen,  Sherefls,  8t  Common 
Council!  ofChefter,  A.  D.  1601.  John  Ratclifle  Mayor: 
when  a  C.lerke  of  Pentice  was  to  be  chofen.  665. 

13.  Copie  of  a  Privy-Seale  of  Qu.  Elizabeth,  directed 

to  the  Mayor,  Aldermen,  Sheriffes,  Peers,  &  Common- 
Councill  ofChefter;  requiring  them  to  lend  Her  100 
Pounds,  to  be  imployed  for  the  neceflary  Defence  & 
Prefervationof  her  Dominions  &  Subjects,  which  Somme 
She  promifeth  to  repay  at  the  end  of  one  Yeere.  Giuen, 
20  September,  anno  Regni  20.  666. 

1 4.  Another  Privy-Seal  from  K.  Charles  1.  to  the  City 

of  Chefter  ;  requiring  the  Loane  of  £100,  for  18 
Monethes.  Given,  the  7th  of  July  1626.'  ibid. 

15.  Petition  of  John  Hannay  of  Gloverftone,  Chap¬ 

man,  to  William  F.arle  of  Derby  &  James  Lord  Straunge 
his  Sonne,  Chamberleine  of  the  County-Palatine  of  Chef¬ 
ter.  Setting  forth,  that  as  he  was  walking  in  Chefter, 
about  his  lawfull  Occafions,  he  was  called  before  the 
Mayor,  and  commanded  to  watch  within  the  Cittye ; 
and  for  refufinge  fo  to  do,  he  was  forthwith  committed 
to  the  Common  Goale  there,  to  his  great  Difgrace  & 
Hindrance  :  He  therefore  prays  that  he  may  haue  his 
Majefties  Writt  of  Corpus  cum  Caufa,  &c.  66 7. 

This  Petition  was  granted  by  the  faid  Earle,  8c  the 
Prifoner  order’d  to  be  bailed,  23  January  1 636. 

16.  Draught  of  a  Plea  upon  an  Indichnent  of  certain 

Perfons  for  a  Trefpafs  by  them  committed.  673. 

Herein,  the  Erection  of  Chefter,  with  certain  adja¬ 
cent  Hamletts,  into  a  County  of  itfclf,  diftjnct  from  the 
County  Palatine,  wiih  the  appointment  of  Sheriffes  & 
Coroners,  by  King  Henry  vn.  anno  Regni  21,  is  efpe- 
cially  mentioned. 

17.  Draught  of  an  Indictment  of  Charles  Wallye,  & 

01  hers  of  Chefter,  for  riotoufly  entering  into  the  Houle 
of  one  James  Boyd  of  Gloverfton  &  taking  a  Diftrefs 
there,  of  his  Goods,  ann.  4  Caroli  1.  686. 

18.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Briefe  &  Notes,  upon 

occafion  cf  the  Suit  commenced  between  Sir  Gilbert 
Ireland  8c  others  Plaintiffes  ;  8c  Richard  Leceftrt  &  John 
Leech  Defendants :  defigned  to  prove  that  the  Inhabitants 
of  Gloverfton,  were  fubjeft  to  the  Afieflments  made  at 
Chefter,  or  by  the  Officers  thereof.  688. 

Cat.  Marl.  Vol.  II. 


385 


Num.  2003. 

19.  Bill  of  Complaint  exhibited  by  the  Maior  8c  Citi¬ 
zens  of  the  Citty  of  Chefter,  to  William  Earle  of  Derbie 
Chamberleine  of  the  County-Pallatine,  againft  one  V\  il- 
liam  Hodges  of  the  Citty  of  London  Marchant,  who 
being  noFree-man  of  the  City  ofChefter,  had  caufed  to  be 
brought  in  by  Sea,  one  Barque  laden  with  Merchandizes 
to  the  Value  of  £3000  ;  for  which  there  was  due  to  the 
Petitioners,  feverall  Subsidies,  Tolies,  and  Cuftomes  (as 
of  lonnage,  Poundage,  Murage,  &c.)  to  the  Somme  of 
jC}°  :  *3-5*  which  he,  at  length,  utterly  refufed  to  pay, 
after  he  had  made  many  folemn  promifes  of  making  due 
payment,  by  a  certain  day.  They  therefore  pray  that  the 
faid  Hodges  might  be  attached  by  his  Body,  8c  enjoyned 
to  putin  good  Suerties,  foranfwering  hereunto,  Sec.  690. 

20.  Copie  of  the  Decree  id  ucd  from  the  Chamberlaynes 

Court,  for  the  City,  againft  the  faid  William  Hodges, 
dat.  22"10  die  Aprilis,  A.  D.  1612.  696. 

The  Defendants  chief  Argument  was,  that  He  was 
a  Free  Citizen  of  London  ;  whofe  Citizens  were  by  many 
Charters  of  our  Kings,  exempted  from  the  payment  of 
any  Tolls,  Subfedies,  or  Cuftomes,  in  any  Port  or  Place 
of  this  Realme.  Now  this  Suit  concerning  all  Citizens 
of  London  trading  to  Chefter,  and  being  of  great  impor¬ 
tance  to  the  faid  City  of  Chefter  ;  it  was  (in  favor  to  both 
Sides)  fuffer’d  to  ripen  8c  grow  to  maturity  by  flow  De¬ 
grees.  At  length  (after  much  Art  and  Trouble  given 
by  Hodges)  the  Court  pronounced  J udgement  againft 
him,  whereby  he  was  to  pay  all  the  faid  Cuftomes,  with 
large  Cofts. 

2 1 .  Lift  of  the  Citty  of  Chefters  Leafes,  Rentalls,  & 

Evidences,  deliuered  to  Mr.  Richard  Dutton,  Mayor  ; 
the  fecond  day  of  January  1573.  698. 

22.  Apart  of  the  Citty  Bill  of  Complaint  againft  Wil¬ 

liam  Glafier  Alderman  &  Vice-chamber  lay  ne  of  the  Ex¬ 
chequer  of  Chefter.  609. 

This  giveth  a  long  detail  of  the  fame  Mr.  Glaziers 
Enormities  ;  letting  him  forth  as  a  very  haughty  8c  paf- 
fionate  Man  ;  and  (what  is  not  very  commonly  found)  a 
particular  Enemy  to  that  City,  of  which  he  himfelfwas 
an  Alderman.  It  wants  the  firft  Leaf. 

23.  A  very  incorrect  &  faulty  Copie  (notwithftanding 

it’s  being  fubferibed  and  attefted  as  “  Copia  vera”)  of  the 
Quo  Waranto  laid  againft  the  Mayor  8c  Citizens  of  Chef¬ 
ter,  by  Prince  Arthur,  12  Augulti,  anno  14  R.  Henrici 
vii.  706. 

24.  Petition  of  the  Comminaltye  of  the  Citye  of 

Chefter,  to  William  Wall  then  Maior,  8c  the  Aldermen 
his  brethren,  (i.  e.  about  A.  D.  1586.)  relating  to  a 
Failure  called  the  Roode  Eye  ;  which,  for  longe  tyme  j 
had  bene  vfed  to  be  fett  to  the  pooreft  Sorte,  for  Cowe- 
pafture  at  a  finale  Rate  ;  and  was  about  to  be  utterly 
taken  from  them,  as  they  apprehended.  722.  b.  ; 

25.  Exemplification  of  Records ;  about  the  Inhabitants 
of  the  County  of  Chefter's  being  bound  to  repair  the 
Bridge  of  Chefter  over  the  Dee,  and  the  Citizens  to  be 
free  :  anno  14  R.  Edwardi  1.  fol.  724.  As  alfo 

26.  Concerning  the  different  Methods  ufed  in  aflefling 

People,  toward  the  reparation  of  the  Sea  bank  atThedel- 
thorpe  in  Lincolnfhire,  anno  x8  R.  Edwardi  1.  72^. 

Thefe  Records  were  attefted  by  Mr.  Arthur  A  garde, 

21  Maij,  A.  I).  1608. 

27.  Term.  Pal'che  anno  13  Caroli  1.  Quo  Warranto 

verfus  Majorem  8c  Cives  Civitatis  Ceftrie.  730. 

To  this  Title  on  the  back-fide,  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme  hath  added  thefe  words,  by  the  Kinges  Atturney 
(viz.  Sr.  John  Bankcs)  to  know  how  they  hould  their 
Priveledges,  as  Vicc-Admirall  in  the  River  of  Dee,  to  ! 
Arnolds-hare.  I  confeue  it  was  vpon  Mr.  Andertons  In¬ 
formation,  when  he  had  a  Pattern  for  the  fame  bufinefle. 

28.  Notes  concerning  the  Privileges  of  the  Mayor  8c 

Citizens  of  Chefter  ;  ex  traded  from  the  old  Charters 
granted  to  that  Cittie  :  together  with  an  Abridgement  of 
Prince  Arthur’s  Quo  Waranto  ifiued  out  againft  them  ; 
and  their  Expofltion  or  reply  to  the  fame.  734. 

5  F  29.  The 


* 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


s86 


Num.  2003. 

29.  The  Clayme  of  the  C  it  tie  of  Chefter,  vppon  a 

Quo  Warranto  brought  againft  them  by  Prince  Arthur, 
anno  14'°  R.FIenrici  vii.  .739- 

30.  Copie  of  a  Bond,  whereby  John  Philhpps  & 

George  Holmes  were  bound  to  the  King,  for  the  juft 
payment  of  the  Cuftomes  to  be  due  from  their  Ship,  upon 
landing  their  Wines  &  Prunes  in  the  Port  of  Chefter,  or 
elfewhere.  dat.  12  January  1613.  >  742- 

At  the  end,  it  is  noted  that  the  Ship  arrived  in  the 
faid  Port,  about  8  days  after,  but  not  paying  the  Duties 
chargeable  upon  their  faid  Commodities,  no  Warrant 
palled  for  the  Difcharge  thereof. 

31.  Covenants  entred  into  by  Sir  Richard  Bulheley  of 

Beomarice  in  the  County  of  Anglefev  Knight,  of  the  one 
Partie  ;  and  certain  Citizens  or  Merchants  of  Chefter,  on 
the  other:  for  fecuring  to  himfelf  the  Pre-emption  of 
French  Prize  Wines,  at  the  rate  of  4  Pounds  Hogf- 
head.  74  -h. 

Note,  Sir  Richard  had  lett  a  I.eafe  to  the  Mayor 
Sc  Citizens  of  Chefter  of  all  Prize  Wines  which  fhould 
be  brought  into  any  of  their  Ports  during  the  Terme  i  t 
9  Yeares,  at  the  yeerelie  Rent  of  32  pounds  ;  out  of 
which,  they  were  to  pay  for  fuch  Wines  as  fhould  arrive 
there,  and  be  approved  by  himfelf  or  his  Servants. 

32.  A  C.oppy  of  the  Kings  Grant  of  the  Prize- Wines, 

(which  Robert  Singleton  had  a  Leafe  of  for  31  Years  ;) 
to  the  Mayor  Sc  Citizens  of  Chefter,  for  ever  ;  paying 
annually  40  Shillings  for  the  fame.  This  grant  extends 
to  fuch  Prize-Wines  as  fhould  be  brought  into  the  Port 
of  Chefter,  or  any  of  the  Creeks  belonging  to  the  fame  ; 
and  beareth  Tcfte,  the  14  December,  anno  Regni  Regis 
Jacobi  1.  Anglia:,  &c.  3.  746. 

33.  Exemplification  of  an  Order  betweene  the  Cham- 

bcrlaine  of  Chefter,  and  the  Maior  &  Sherrifls  of  the 
Cittie  of  Chefter.  Term  Ilillar.  anno  5  Regine  Eiiza- 
bethe.  752. 

This  Order  was  made,  after  a  full  hearing  of  both 
Patties,  appearing  by  their  Deputies,  before  William 
Marques  of  Winchefter,  Lord  high  Treafurer  of  England; 
Sir  Walter  Mildmay  Knight,  Chancellour  of  the  Court 
of  Exchequer  ;  S  r  Richard  Sackville  Knight,  Under 
Treafurer  of  the  fame  Court ;  and  Sir  Edward  Saunders 
Knight,  Chiefe  Baron  of  the  fame  Court  :  by  the  Ad- 
uice  and  Aflent  of  Thomas  Caras  Efq;  Serjeant  at  Law 
to  the  Queenes  Highnes  ,  of  Gilbert  Gerrard,  &  Wil¬ 
liam  Rol'ewell  Efquiers,  her  Graces  Attorney,  Sc  Sol- 
licitour  Generali,  &c.  and  regulateth  the  Privileges 
claimed  on  both  Sides,  directing  alfo  their  refpective 
P radices  Sc  Demeanors,  for  the  future,  that  no  farther 
Debates  or  Contentions  might  arife  between  them. 

34.  Inquifitio  capta  in  Seffione  Pacis  tenta  apud 

Northwicum,  in  .  .  .  feptimana  Quadragefime,  anno 
h  R.  Edwardi  vi.  coram  Hugone  Cholmondeley,  See. 
Jufticiarijs  Dni.  Regis  ad  Pacem  in  Com.  Ceftr.  ubi  Jura- 
tores  dicunt  quod  Edwynus  Leche  de  Ceftr.  Alderman, 
apud  Hole  juxta  Ceftriam,  Vi  et  Armis  quandam  Clau- 
furam  Terre,  ex  hereditate  cujufdam  Hugonis  Chol- 
mondeley  Militis,  fregit  Sc  intravit,  et  Herbam  ibidem, 
cum  averijs  fuis  conculcavit  et  confumpfit.  756. 

1 5.  Placit.  de  Seffione,  tent,  apud  Ceftriam,  3  die 
Odobris,  anno  1  2  R.  Caroli  1  ;  coram  Johanne  Bridge- 
man  Milite  et  Richardo  Prythergh  Armigero,  Jufticiarijs 
Comitatus  predidi  :  ubi  Hugo  Leigh  attachiatus  fuit  ad 
refpondendum  prenobili  viro  Johanni  Comiti  Salopie,  de 
Placito  Ouare  Vi  et  Armis,  in  folo  ipfius  Comitis  apud 
Hoole  in  Com.  Ceftr.  fodh,  et  Terrain  indc  projedam 
(videlicet  100  Carrectatas  Terras)  ad  valenciam  quinque 
Librarum,  cepit  Sc  afportavit.  Sec.  7S7% 

36.  The  joint  &  feuerall  Anfweares  of  William  Sparke 
Maior  of  Chefter,  William  Gamul  Sc  Nicholas  Ince  Al¬ 
dermen,  three  of  the  Defendants  ;  to  the  Information  of 
Sir  Walter  Ince  Knight,  his  Majefties  Attorney  of  the 
Court  of  Wards  &  Liueries,  by  the  relation  &  on  the 
bthalfe  of  John  Earle  of  Shrewlbury  Complainant.  760. 


Num.  2.003. 

This  Suit  was  commenced  in  the  RelgtJ  of  K. 
Charles  1  ;  for  the  fake  of  certain  waft  ground,  Sc  three 
Cottages,  built  by  the  Magiltrates  of  Chefter,  along  the 
Side  of  the  River  Dee. 

37.  Lift;  or  Panell,  of  the  Juries  of  FHnte,  Dcnbighe, 

Chelhire,  ::  Cittie  of  Chefter  ;  together  with  a  Lift  of 
the  Commiffioners  of  Sewers  ;  foon  hereafter  to  be  more 
plainly  mentioned.  ,  764.  et  775.  b. 

38.  An  Lxtrad  from  the  abovementioned  Commiffion 

of  Sewers,  whereby  K.  James  1.  authoriftd  v\  illiam  1 
Earle  of  Derbie,  George  By  (hop  of  Chefter,  Richard  , 
Byffiop  of  S!  Afaph,  Sir  Peter  Warburton  K‘  one  of  the 
Juftices  of  the  Common  Pleas,  Sir  Richard  Lev.  honor 
Knight  Chief  Jufticeof  Chefter,  Sir  Henrie  Townfefvndc 
K'.  one  other  of  the  Juftices  of  Chefter,  the  Mayor  of 
the  Cittie  of  Chefter  for  the  time  being,  Sir  Richard 
Bulkeley,  and  many  others  of  the  principal  Gentry  of 
Chelhire,  Flmtlhire,  &  Denbigh  {hire,  upon  this  his  l  | 
Notification,  that  the  Walles,  Ditches,  Bankes,  Gutters, 
Sewers,  Goates,  Calceis,  Bridges,  Streames,  and  other- 
Defences  by  the  Coafte  of  the  Sea  &  Marche  Ground, 
beinge  &  lyinge  within  the  Lymitts,  extending  from  HjlL 
firye  vpwards,  within  Land,  alonge  the  fame  Ryver, 
unto-  Newe-Bridge  neere  the  Caftell  of  Chirke  in  the 
Countie  of  Denbigh,  by  rage  of  the  Sea  flowinge  & 
reflowinge,  and  by  meanes  of  the  Trenches  of  frefh  Wa¬ 
ters  defcendinge&  having  courfeby  divers  Wayesto  the 
Sea  ;  be  fo  dirupte  &  lacerate  ;  and  the  Comon  Railages 
of  Shipps,  Ballengcrs  &  Boates  in  the  Ryvers,  Streames, 

&  other  Fluds  within  the  faid  Lymitts,  by  meane  of  fet- 
tinge  vpp,  Sc  iuakinge  of  Streames,  Milles,  Bridges, 
Ponds,  Fifti-garthc',  Mildames,  Locks,  Hebbinge- 
Weares,  Hecks  Sc  Flud-gates,  or  other  lyke  Letts,  Ym- 
pedyments  or  Annoyances,  be  letted  or  intervpted  :  foe 
that  greate  &  ineflimable  Damage,  for  Defalte  of  Repa¬ 
ration  of  the  laid  Walks,  Fences  Ditches,  Sc c.  and  alfo 
by  meanes  of  fettinge  vpp  Sc  enlarginge  of  the  faid  Fiflie- 
garthes,  Mil-dames,  Sec.  in  tymes  paftehaue  happened  ; 
and  yet  is  to  be  feared,  that  farre  greater  Hurte, 
Lofie,  Se  Damages  are  ivke  to  enfue,  vnlefle  fpeedie  Re¬ 
medy  be  provyded  :  to  meet  together,  and  call  before 
them  all  proper  Perfons  ;  and  fo  orderly  to  afiefs  all 
fuch  as  fhould  be  liable  thereto  ;  to  fine  Sc  punifh  the 
refraftory  ;  to  provide  fitting  Materials  of  all  kinds  ;  to 
pull  down,  repair,  {Lengthen,  and  enlarge,  in  all  ne- 
ceffiry  places  ;  &c.  until  this  Service  entrufted  to  them 
fhould  be  brought  to  the  defiled  end.  'I his  Commiffion 
bears  Telle,  at  Chefter,  the  29th  of  Augufte  Anno 
Regni  fui  Anglia:,  &c.  quinto.  765. 

On  the  back,  this  Commiffion  is  thus  entituled,  jj 
‘  The  Comition  of  Shewers  about  the  Caufey  inDee.’  Per-  I 
haps  that  might  be  thereby  taken  Care  of)  as  a  principal  1 
Article. 

39.  An  Inquifition  taken  by  virtue  of  the  Commiffion  ] 

afoiefaid  at  Chefter,  16  December,  anno  5  R.  Jacobi  1.  I] 
where  the  Jurors  prefented  the  Weare  of  Richard  Grof-  I 
venour  Efq;  made  between  the  Townefhipps  of  Aldforde  Ij 
&  Eaton,  as  hindring  the  Current  of  Dee- River :  as  alfo  (] 
the  Cawfey  Sc  Floodc-gates  liere  Dee-Bridge,  in  or  nere  j 
Chefter,  as  not  only  hindring  the  paffhge  of  the  faid  J 
River  inlo  the  Sea;  but  upon  all  greate  Land-LL  >:!>-. 
annoying  &  furrounding  of  diuers  lowc  Grounds,  to  the  j 
Damage  of  £  1 00  ^  ann.  befides  other  efTefts  of  the  faid  I 
Weare,  Cawfey  &  Floodgates,  fatal  to  the  Chanel  or  I 
Courfe  of  the  faid  River,  its  Navigation  and  Fiffiing.  I 
They  prefented  alfo  the  New  Key  builded  at  the  charge  of  3 
the  Cittizens  of  Chefter,  as  another  great  annoyance  ■ 
hindrance  to  the  River.  770  *■ 

40.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Inquifition.  779.  1 

41.  The  Cafe  of  the  Mayor  &  Citizens  of  Chefter;  il 

or  (as  the  fecond  Randle  llolme  hath  putt  it  on  the  R 
back-fide)  Breviat  of  the  Maior  &  Citizens,  about  the  (' 
Comition  of  Shewers,  to  fupport  the  Cawfey  from  beinge  j 
pulled  downe  .  Sir  John  Sauage  Maior.  781. 

This  * 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


3S7 


Num.  2003. 

This  Breviat  feems  to  be  very  judicioufiy  drawn  up, 
in  oppofition  to  the  Decree  of  fome  of  the  Commiflionersj 
as  objecting,  among  many  other  reafons  or  arguments, 
that  the  Haven  was  then  but  in  the  fame  Condition,  as 
it  is  deferibed  by  Giraldus  Cambrenfis,  anji  others.  That 
his  Majefties  CuPiomes  at  Cheder,  were  then  greater 
than  ever.  That  the  C.awfey  (which  had  then  been  erect¬ 
ed  above  500  years,  and  was  never  before  complained  of) 
could  not  be  abated  without  dedrudtion  of  the  whole,  & 
lot's  of  ih«  Mills.  That  the  Decree  (as  the  Verdi&s  found 
in  V.  .  i  which  were  contradifted  by  that  found  in 
Cheffer}  was  made  by  Parties  intereffed,  who  follicit- 
cd  the  Caufe,  before  &  fince,  both  the  Commiffion  & 
Decree  :  and  continued  to  profecute  it,  as  Parties.  That 
of  56  Commiffioners,  18  of  Wales,  and  only  fix  of 
C-h.  ihuc  agreed  to  the  Decree  (made  in  the  dark,  &  out 
of  time  ;)  of  which  number  neverthelefs  many  were  not 
a&uaih  pi  efent  at  the  making  of  it,  but  their  Hands  and 
Seales  \  -  re  procured  to  it  afterwards  :  &c. 

42.  '1  he  Cafe  of  the  Cawfay  Sc  Milles  in  Cheder  ;  pre¬ 
sented  '.the  Lords  the  Judges,  13  February  1608.  ySr'. 

This  is  in  purfuance  of  the  Breviat  abovementioned, 
againd  the  Caufay’s  being  prodrated,  pulled  down, 
taken  away,  &c.  &c  figned  by  Sir  John  Doddridg,  Sir 
Henry  Ilobarte,  &c.  7S6.  et  vid.  849. 

43.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Cafe,  fetting  forth  (as 

the  former  did)  that  the  Cawfway,  &  fome  ot  the  Mills 
objected  againd  were  certainly  danding  A.  D.  1 1 1 9.  and 
that  others  of  the  laid  Mills  were  erected  by  Johannes  de 
Scotia  Earle  of  Cheder,  who  died  A.  D.  1237.  to  the 
great  benefit  of  the  Inhabitants  of  that  Countrey,  Sc  elfe- 
where,  without  ever  being  impeached  before.  This  is 
alfo  figned  by  feveral  of  the  Judges.  788. 

44.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  un-figning  Commif¬ 

fioners,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy-Councill,  in  behalf 
of  the  Cawfway  built  upon  a  natural  Rock,  crols  the 
River  Dee.  800. 

This  was  contradi&ed,  as  it  feemes  by  the  then  Earl 
of  Derby,  who  (with  theBilhop  &  Deane  of  Cheder)  had 
confentcd  to  the  pulling  downeol  one  half  thereof. 

4-.  Draught  of  another  Decree  from  the  Commiffion- 
era,  for  the  Salvation  of  the  Caufway  over  the  Dee  (which 
they  obferve  to  be  originally  yfiuing  out  of  a  certaine 
Mere  or  Lake  in  Wales  commonly  called  Pymble-mere, 
falling  down  with  i'uch  violence,  fometymes  vpon  an 
Increafe  ot  Rayne,  and  fometymes  by  Wynde  without 
Rayne,  as  that  the  Grounds  adjoyning  to  thefayd  River 
have  bene  in  auncient  tymes,  as  they  now  are,  vfually 
overflowne  ;  efpecially  thofe  which  are  toward  the  Head 
of  the  faid  River,  many  Miles  above  the  Cawfey)  and  of 
the  Mills  or  Water-workes  fett  up,  in  or  neare  the  fame, 
dated  the  ...  of . A.  D.  1609.  801. 

46.  Atteded  Copie  of  an  Atl  of  AlTembly  made  at 

Cheder,  the  9th  of  Oflober,  1607.  wherein  they  declare 
the  great  reafons  they  had  to  preferve  the  Caufway,  Mills, 
&  Water- works  in  &  adjoyning  to  the  River  Dee  (as  are 
likewife  finely  reprefented  in  the  Draught  lad  above- 
mentioned  i  refolving  that  a  Petition  be  made  to  the 
Kinge  for  a  Superfedeas  of  the  faid  Commiffion  ;  and 
;!-,at  other  Petitions  or  Letters  fhould  be  fent  to  the  Ld. 
Chanceloure  of  England,  the  Lord  T.  eafurer  of  England, 
fhe  Earle  of  Saliibury,  See.  810. 

47.  Draught  of  an  Ad  (or  Bill)  for  Explanation^ 

the  Statute  of  Sewers.  8 1 1. 

This  is  drawn  up,  in  a  View  of  enlarging  the  power 
< jf  the  Commiffioners  of  Sewers  :  but  at  the  back,  there 
put  fome  Notes  dil'proving  it. 

48.  Atteded  Copie  of  an  Ad  of  Parliament  (of  Anno 
3  gi  4  R.  Edwardi  vi.)  intituled  An  Ad  concerning  the 
Citt'ie  of  Cheder,  for  Wearesinthe  River  of  Dee.  815. 

49.  A  Bill  by  the  Clolh-woorkers  for  Confederacy,  to 

pull  downe  the  Cawfey.  832. 

This  Complaint  was  exhibited  by  John  Byngley  & 
other  Clolhworkers  of  Cheder,  toThomas  Earle  of  Dorfct 


Num.  2003. 

Lord  Treafurer,  Sir  Julius  Caefar  Chauncellour  &  Under- 
Treafurer  of  the  Exchequer,  Sir  Lawrence  Tanfiel  Lord 
Chiefe  Baron,  and  other  the  Barons  of  the  fame  Court : 
fetting  forth  the  Antiquity,  with  the  great  Ufefulnefs  Sc 
Convenience  of  the  Cawfway,  with  the  Fulling-Mills  & 
Corn  Mills,  ereded  upon  the  River  Dee, in  or  by  theCity  of 
Cheder.  As  alfo  how  there  had  been  a  Combination  entred 
into,  &  a  Riot  begun  by  a  fort  of  lewd  Perfons,  who  would 
pull  downe  the  Paid  Cawfway  &  Mills,  which  would  be 
not  only  to  the  diffierifon  of  the  King,  but  to  the  de- 
drudion  of  all  the  Clothing  Trade  in  thofe  parts  ;  the 
hindrance  of  his  Majedies  Service  in  Ireland ;  Sc  the 
darviug  of  the  meaner  Sort,  for  want  of  Bread. 

50.  Diver  Draughts,  Cafes,  &  other  Papers  relating 

to  this  matter  of  the  Cawfey  &  Mills.  849. 

51.  Petition  of  the  Maior,  Aldermen,  Citizens  &  In¬ 

habitants  of  the  Citie  of  Cheder,  Sc  of  the  Gentlemen  & 
Inhabitants  of  the  County  Palatyne  of  Cheder,  neere  vnto 
the  faid  Cittie.  857.  b. 

This  is  written  upon  Velum,  and  feemeth  to  be  an 
Original ;  it  is  for  the  Cawfey  Sc  Mills ;  and  particularly, 
againd  Sir  Richard  Trevor  &  other  Welffi  Gentlemen, 
who  fancied  themfelves  either  damnified  or  hindred  by 
their  Handing. 

52.  Petition  of  the  Mcyre  &  Cominalte  of  the  Citie 
of  Cheder  for  the  Cudomes  of  the  Mylnes  to  be  relaxed. 

858. 

This  Petition  was  exhibited  to  K.  Richard  11,  in  the 
2  id  year  of  his  Reign. 

5  j.  Tranflatiou  of  the  faid  Kings  Anfwer  to  the  fore* 
going  Petiiion ;  being  a  Grant,  whereby  lie  releafeth  to 
them  all  further  Toll  for  grinding  theire  Corne  at  his 
Mills  than  the  16th  Grain  ;  but  this  for  Four  Years  only, 
dat.  23  Februarij,  anno  Regni  fui  21.  859. 

54.  The  Cafe  oft'red  by  the  Commiffioners  aforefaid, 

to  the  Judges  ;  being  againd  the  Cawfey  &  Milles  ;  with 
this  Quedion  grounded  upon  it,‘  Whether  Commiffioners 
of  Sewers  haue  by  L  awe  Power,  by  theire  Decree,  to  pull 
downe  &  abate  Ten  Yards  of  the  faid  Cawfey  ?  and  Whe¬ 
ther  this  Decree,  by  the  Lawes  &  Statutes  of  this  Realme, 
may  Sc  ought  to  be  executed,  or  not  ?’  86c* 

This  is  figned  by  Three  of  them. 

55.  The  Cafe  of  the  Mayor  and  Cittizens  of  Cheder, 

containing  a  full  Anfwer  to  the  former.  *  862. 

■  This  is  the  fame  with  that  mentioned  above  at  §  41. 

56.  Breviat  of  the  Maior  &  Citizens  Anfware  to  the 
Objections,  about  the  Decay  of  the  River  of  Cheder, 

This  is  an  Abridgement  of  the  former.  867. 

57.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbie’s  Notes  in  the  fame  Adair. 

869.  et  vide  883. 

58.  The  Caufe  (or  Cafe)  of  the  Mills  &  Cawfey  at 

Cheder.  871. 

This  is  a  rough  Draught,  much  amended  by  Mr. 
Recorder  Whitbie. 

59.  A  Copie  of  the  Commiffioners  Cafe,  above-men¬ 
tioned  at  §  54.  876. 

60.  Anoiher  Copie  of  that  Cafe  above-mentioned  at 
§  42. 

61.  A  fort  of  Brief,  in  defence  of  the  faid  Cawfey  & 

Mills.  878. 

62.  Briefs  of  the  Statutes  of  Sewers  ;  with  the  Com¬ 
miffioners  Quedions  thereupon.  879. 

63.  Commiffion  to  Thomas  de  Pulle,  &  William 

Stanley,  Elquires,  Sc  others  ;  to  enquire,  by  VerdiCl, 
concerning  the  decay  of  the  River  Dee,  &  total  ruin 
of  the  Haven  of  Cheder.  This  bears  Tede  at  Cheder, 
12  October,  anno  2 3  Regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  38 1. 

This  Commiffion  was  grounded  upon  a  Petition  of 
the  Citizens  of  Cheder,  who  alledged  the  faid  misfor* 
tunes  to  be  the  main  occafions  of  the  DefolationN  Mifery 
they  then  labor’d  under  ;  being  then  fo  great,  as  to  dif* 
able  them  from  paying  even  the  Kings  Fee-farire  Rent. 

64.  The  Cafe  of  the  Mayor  Sc  Cittizens  of  Cheder. 

885. 

'ihis 


388 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nurri.  2003,  2004. 

This  is  another  Copy  of  that  mentioned  above,  at 
S  4*- 

65.  Commiflio  R.  Hennci  vn.  direfta  Willelmo  Lin- 
colnienfi  Epifcopo,  Willelmo  Uvedale  Militi,  Georgio 
Bromley  Locumtenenti  Jufticiarij  Ceftria;,  Joanni  Butts 
Auditori  Cell  rise,  et  Radulpho  Birkenhead  ;  qu*l  aftig- 
nat  eos  Jufticiarios  fuos  in  Comitatu  Ceftria?,  ad  fupervi- 
dendum  Aquam  et  magnam  Ripam  de  Dee,  vfque  ad 
quendam  lqcum  vocatum  Le  Point  del  Eyre,  et  defectus 
in  eadem  corrigend.  et  emendand.  ac  debitain  executi- 
onem  faciend.  Et  vlteribs,  ad  fupervidend.  gurgites, 
molendina,  ftagna,  pilos,  et  kidellos  ab  antiquo  tempore 
fad.  et  levat.  ante  tempus  Regis  Edwaidi  filij  Regis  Hen- 
rici,  et  ad  ilia  qua;  invenientur  exceflive  exaltata,  vel 
arclata,  corrigend.  profternend.  et  emendand.  Salva  Tem¬ 
per  rationabili  Subftantia  diclorum  gurgitum,  molendi- 
norum,  ftagnorum,  pilorum  et  kidellorum  ab  antiquo 
fa&orum  et  levatorum.  Tefte,  &c.  apud' Ceftriam, 
24  die  Novembris,  anno  Regni  fui  vicefimo-fecundo. 

890. 

2004.. 

A  book  in  folio  confiding  of  many  (ingle  Papers,  Parch¬ 
ments  &  1  rafts,  long  (ince  fewed  or  bound  up  toge¬ 
ther.  rlhefe  (as  thofe  of  fome  of  the  preceding  Books) 
relate  to  the  Affairs  tranfafted  by  particular  Perfons  and 
Societies  within  the  City,  County,  or  Countie-Palatine 
of  Chelter  :  and,  by  the  laft  Randle  Holme,  is  on  the 
out-fide  thus  entituled.  Notes  and  Charters  of  feverall 
Companys  within  the  Citty  of  Chefter.  But  a  more 
particular  Account  of  its  Contents,  is  this  that  follows. 

1.  'lhe  faid  Randle  Holme’s  Note  or  Table  of  the 
moft  remarkable  things  found  herein  ;  but  without  the 
neceffary  Numbers  of  the  Pages.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  A  Quietus  eft  (from  the  Court  of  Exchequer  at 
Chefter)  to  James  Vaudrey  &  others  tor  impoft  of  Wynes, 
brought  into  Chefter-Port,  anno  9  R.  Elizabethe.  7  )o. 

This  is  the  Original  written  upon  Parchment  ;  the 
Sum  due  to  the  Queen  was^.  1091.  7.  4. 

3.  Original  Petition  of  William  Gamull  &  other 

Vintners  of  Chelter,  to  Charles  Howard  Earle  ofNot- 
t.ngham,  Lord  Highe  Admirall  of  England ;  againft  one 
Button  an  Inne-keeper  ;  who  having  gotten  a  Wine- 
Licenfe,  grew  troublefome  to  the  other  Vintners  ;  indea- 
vouringe  to  confine  them  within  the  Walles  of  the  faid 
City  ;  whenas  they  were  licenfed  (although  at  a  very 
dear  rate)  to  retaile  Wines  not  only  in  the  City,  but 
throughout  the  County  of  the  fame.  7  M- 

lhis  Petition  hath  his  Lordfhips  Order  thereupon, 
underwritten  and  fublcribed  with  his  own  Hand;  whereby 
I  fuppofe  Button’s  Impertinence  was  fufficiently  checked. 

4-  Original  Order  of  the  Privy  Council,  dated  19th 
of  February,  1629.  7Z'y 

This  (hews  that  whereas  the  Kings  Progenitors  had 
made  divers  grants  to  the  Mayor  Sc  Cittizens  of  Chefter 
to  the  vfe  of  the  Company  ofMerchants  there)  for  Tranf. 
portation  of  Calue-lkinnes  from  thence,  the  Creeke,  & 
Members  thereof;  the  faid  Mayor  &  Citizens,  upon  the 
expiration  of  the  lad  grant,  had  deputed  Mr.  Gamull  & 
others,  to  folicit  another  to  the  City,  for  the  ufe  of  the 
faid  Merchants,  as  had  been  ufuall ;  the  nature  of  which 
Service  thefe  good  Men  miftaking,  procured  a  grant  to 
themfelves,  from  Mr.  Maxwell  his  late  Majefties  Patentee 
Ac.  for  tranfportation  of  600  Dicker  of  Calve-(kinns 
yearely  from  the  Porte  of  Chefter.  But  upon  a  full 
hearing  of  this  Matter  before  their  Lordfliips,  it  was  de¬ 
clared.  by  the  faid  Mr.  Gamull,  that  the  faid  grante  was 
by  him  ever  intended  to  be  for  the  brnefitt  of  the  faid 
Company,  in  generall :  and  therefore  their  Lordlhips 
by  this  Order,  took  care  that  they  (hould  have  the 
Benefit  of  it,  or  of  a  new  grant  in  lieu  thereof. 

5.  A  true  Copie  of  his  Majeftie  (K.  James  l’s)  Licenfe 
granted  to  JamesMaxwellc  Elq;  for  the  buying  and  Tranf- 
portinge  of  Calue  ikinnes.  '  . 


Nunl.  2CO4. 

This  fetteih  forth,  that  as  Queen  Elizabeth  had  (in 
the  7th  year  ol  her  R  eigne)  granted  Free  Licence  to  Ar¬ 
thur  Balfano  &  others  of  his  Name  yearly  to  export  6coo 
Dickers  of  Leather  of  Calue-lkinnes,  accompting  Ten 
Dozen  to  every  Dicker,  for  Seaven  Yeares  ;  paying 
therefore  5  Shillings  for  euery  Dicker  :  So  he  now  grants 
to  James  Maxwell  Ffq;  Licence  to  export  Annually 
18000  fuch  Dickers  of  Leather  and  Calue-lkinnes,  during 
the  I  erme  of  21  yeares :  at  the  fame  Price  or  Rent  of 
5  Shillings  per  Dicker.  This  grant  bears  Tefte,  1  2  Ju  ne 
anno  Regni  Angliee,  Ac. 

6.  Original  Bill  of  Complaint,  exhibited  to  Thomas 
Earle  ofDorcettLord  High  Treafurer,  Sir  George  Ho  wme 
Kt.  Baron  of  Barvvicke,  Chauncellour  of  the  Court  of 
Exchequer,  Sr  lhomas  Fleminge  I.ord  chiefe  Baron  of 
the  fame,  and  the  reft  of  the  Barons;  by  Robert  Single- 
ton  h  armour  vnto  his  Highnes  of  the  Impoft;  A  Tonnage 
of  all  French  Wynes  brought  into  the  Port  of  Chefter, 
and  Members  thereof,  in  Michaelmafs-Terme,  anno  2,:'* 
R.  Jacobi  1.  - 

1  his  (keweth  that  the  faid  King  did  let  to  farme 
vnto  Sir  John  Swynnerton  Knight,  all  Subfidyes,  Ton- 
nage,  Ympoft,  &  Dewtyes  of  all  French  &  Reniffi  Wynes 
to  be  brought  into  England  A  Wales  ;  and  that  the  faid 
Sir  John  had  alligned  part,  or  a  Share  of  ik  in  the  faid 
Patent  or  Grant,  unto  him  the  faid  Singleton  ;  that  is, 
of  all  fuch  Wynes  as  (hould  be  brought  into  the  Ports  Sc 
Creeks  of  Chefter,  I.iuerpoole,  Beaumaris,  Conwaye, 
Caernarvon,  ALancafter:  but  that  Randle  Ince  &  divers 
others  had  aftually  brought  fuch  Wynes  into  his  Diftrift, 
refufmg  to  pay  him  the  Duties  they  were  liable  unto  : 
and  that  another  perfon,  one  Owen  Johnes  of  Chefter, 
Mercer,  without  any  Warrant  from  him,  had  compound¬ 
ed  with  divers,  for  his  Dues  upon  fuch  Wines,  toacon- 
fiderable  value;  and  therefore  prays  thataSubpena  mav 
be  direfted  to  all  the  faid  Offenders,  commanding  per- 
fonally  to  appear  in  the  Exchequer  in  Weftminfter,  and 
there  tnanfwer  to  the  Premises. 

7.  The  joynt  and  feuerall  Anfwere  of  Randle  Ince, 
Randle  Fernalle,  &  Owen  Johnes,  three  of  the  Defend¬ 
ants  to  the  Bill  of  Complaynte  of  Robert  Singleton 
Complaynaunte. 

Here  Ince  &  Femalle  plead  that  Singleton  being 
not  the  Kings  immediate  Patentee,  they  think  they  need 
not  anfwer  Him  in  the  Exchequer.  That  they  are  both 
Free  Citizens  of  Chefter,  and  confequently  noi  liable  to 
pay  any  Dutie  whatfoever  for  their  Wines  (by  Virtue  of 
divers  Grants  from  Elizabeth)  efpedally  confidering 
that  their  Veflel  had  but  56  Tonnes  of  Wine  in  her,  & 
not  66  Tonnes  as  was  alleaged.  As  for  Johnes,  that  he 
received  not  fo  much  as  Singleton  charged  him  with  ; 
but  that  which  he  did  receive,  he  wholly  paid  to  Sir 
Richard  Trevor,  and  Sir  William  Morris;  who  (hg 
believed)  might'have  Right  enough  to  lake  it. 

8.  Draught  of  an  Afte  concerneing  matters  of  Aflur- 
ances  vfed  amongft  Merchants.  (  Anno  43  Eliz.  cap.  1  2 . ) 

759. 

Upon  the  Back  is  this  Note ;  I  like  this  Law  for  all 
thinges,  faue  onely  that  I  thinke  there  ought  to  be  Fees 
allowed,  (fuch  as  the  Commiffioners  for  Fees  (hall  Jett 
downe)  for  a  Regifter  &  Officer  of  the  Court  of  A  durance. 

9.  Grant  to  Arthur  Balzano  and  others,  for  Franf- 
porting  of  Calue  (kinnes.  This  was  given  under  the 
Privie  Seale,  the  26  of  February,  anno  7  Regis  Jacobi  r. 

7^.3- 

In  thefe  papers  (which  contain  but  a  fmall  part  of 
the  Grant)  the  Name  is  written  Balfano  ;  and  not  as  juft, 
above,  or  as  in  §.5. 

Th :  Demurrer  of  Rychard  Byrde,  Thomas  Hand, 

&  William  Parnell  of  the  Cittye  of  Chefter  Merchants  ; 
to  the  Bill  of  Complaint  of  Sir  Richard  Calveley  Knight, 
Farmour  of  his  Majefties  Cuftomes  of  Impoft  and  Ton¬ 
nage  within  his  Highnes  Port  of  Chefter.  (Termino 
S.  Michaelis,  anno  3  Regis  Carcli.)  7^7- 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


389 


Num.  2004. 

The  Suit  was  for  the  Impoft,  Cuftome,  &  Subfedye 
for  Fifteene  Tonnes  (fuppofed  to  be  Wines)  entred  for 
Vinegar;  fo  that  the  PlaintifFe  was  not  paid  for  the 
Cuftome  &  Import:  of  15  Tonns  of  Wyne ;  which  15 
Tonnes  of  Wyne  being  thereby  not  entred,  were  become 
forfeite  to  his  Majellie.  Moreover,  the  Defendants 
being  chardged  vppon  a  Penall  Lawe,  in  regard  the  faid 
Cuftomes,  &c.  were  concealed  or  mifentred;  the  Goods  fo 
forfeyted  were  to  bee  recovered  by  Information  in  the 
Kings  Exchequer,  by  A&ion  of  Debt.  And,  for  that 
noe  Perfon  vppon  the  Breach  of  a  Penall  Lawe,  is  c  >m- 
pelled  to  accufe  himfelf,  or  to  bee  examyned  vppon 
Interrogatoryes,  as  the  Complaynant  prayeth  ;  and  that 
If  the  Defendants  haue  offended,  they  are  anfwerableto 
the  Lawe  for  the  fame  :  they  did  demurre,  &c. 

11.  Draught  of  the  Indenture  made  24  of  February 

1624;  Betweene  Sir  Richard  Caulveley  Knight,  Gentle- 
man-Vfher,  Dayly  Wayter  vnto  his  Majeftie  of  the  one 
parte  ;  and  William  Gamull,  William  Alderfey.  Andrew 
Gamull,  Aldermen,  of  Chefter,  &  others.  Merchants  of 
the  faid  Cittie  :  Whereby  Sir  Richard  aflignes  unto  them 
the  Kings  Grant  of  the  Cuflomes,  Imports,  &c.  of  all 
manner  of  French  Wines,  by  whati'oever  meanes  brought 
into  the  Port  of  Cherter ;  for  and  during  the  Terme  of 
Seauen  Yeares.  Yeilding  &  payinge  therefore  yearlie, 
vnto  the  faid  Sir  Richard,  650  Pounds,  and  one  full 
Hoggefhead  of  Wine.  _  773* 

12.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Copie  of  a  Quietus 

ert,  from  the  Exchequer  of  Cherter,  to  feueral  Merchants 
of  Chefter,  for  the  Cuflomes  &  Imports  upon  Wines ; 
annis  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  Reg.  Elizabeths.  791.  b. 

13.  His  Copie  of  Q.  Elizabeth’s  Graunt  for  the  take- 

ing  of  the  New  Cuftome  of  Impoft-Wynes ;  and  her 
forgiueing  the  Merchants  of  Cherter  their  Arreares,  &c. 
anno  Regni  nono.  79?-  b. 

14.  An  original  Mandate,  under  the  Royal  Signet, 

direfted  to  the  Maier  of  the  Citie  of  Cheftre  ;  requiring 
him  to  take  care  that  Hugh  Palmer  who  was  commaunded 
to  appere  before  the  Prive  Counfail  1  (being  artured  to 
come  &  retourne  fuerly  &  faufly,  without  any  Daun- 
gere  for  al  maner  Accions  dependinge  aycnfte  him) 
fhould  make  his  appearance  accordingly,  by  the  Day 
appointed.  7  93* 

15.  The  Replication  of  Roberte  Singleton  Com¬ 
plainant,  to  the  joynte  and  leuerall  Anfweres  of  Randle 
Ince,  Randle  Fernall,  &  Owen  Johnes,  Defendants,  &c. 

799; 

In  this  Draught,  the  Complainant  traverfes  the  faid 
Anfwers  ;  and  Hands  to  the  Award  of  the  Court. 

16.  Part  of  a  Grant  or  Leafe  made  by  IC.  Charles  1. 
unto  James  Maxwell  Efq  ;  one  of  the  Groontes  of  his 
Bed-chamber;  wherein  are  recited  the  abovementioned 
Grants  of  K  James  1.  to  the  Baifano’s,  and  all'o  to  the 
faid  Mr.  Maxwell.  Which  lafl  Grant  this  King  con- 
firmes,  and  frees  him  from  all  manner  of  Arrearages  part, 
which  ought  by  any  means  to  have  been  paid  to  his  Ma- 
jefty,  by  reafon  of  the  faid  Grant :  and  likewife  makes 
Mr.  Maxwell  eafier,  for  the  remaining  part  of  his  Term 
of  at  Yeares,  by  accepting  of  the  ufual  rate  of  5  Shil¬ 
lings  ^  Dicker  in  full  payment ;  and  acquitting  him  for 
the  future  of  all  Cuflomes,  Subfulies,  Imports,  &c.  any 
ways  chargeable  on  his  Calve-lkins.  His  Majefty  doth 
alfo  hereby  renew  the  fame  Leafe,  or  rather  grant 
another  Leafe  for  21  Years  (to  commence  upon  the  ex¬ 
piration  of  the  old  one)  of  the  foie  Licence  of  exporting 
Leather  of  Calve  fkins,  to  the  quantity  of  iScoo  Dicker 

annum,  at  the  faid  rate  of  5  Shillings  qp  Dicker,  in 
lieu  &  in  full  recompenfe  of  all  Cuflomes,  Subfedies, 
Imports,  &c.  chargeable  on  thofe  Goods :  with  a  Pro¬ 
hibition  againft  any  other  Perfons  exporting  the  like 
from  any  port  whatfover,  efpecially  from  that  of 
Chefter.  Soi. 

17.  A  Relation  of  William  Edwards  &  others  Mer¬ 
chants  of  Chefter,  againft  William  Gamull  Alderman  of 
Cat.  Hart.  Voi..  II. 


Num.  2004. 

the  faid  Cittie,  for  the  vndue  procuringe  of  a  Licence 
for  Tranfportation  of  Calue-lkins  from  the  Port  of 
Chefter.  855. 

There  is  fomewhat  relating  to  this  foul  matter, 
fpecified  above  at  §  4.  This  further  fetts  forth  the  Meanes 
he  (this  Mr.  Gamull)  ufed  in  getting  from  Mr.  Maxwell 
&  his  Aftignes  two  grants,  far  the  yearly  Tranfportation 
of  600  Dickers  of  Calue-lkins,  (being  the  chiefe  or  only 
exportable  Commodity  out  of  thofe  Parts)  during  the 
feuerall  Remainders  of  7  Yeares,  &  21  Yeares  ;  paying 
for  euery  Dicker,  vpon  the  entry  thereof,  to  His  Majefty 
5  Shillings ;  and  to  the  faid  Grantours  8s.  4d.  This  is 
alfo  enforced  by  a  more  particular  Charge  againft  Mr. 
Gamull,  {hewing  the  Inconveniences  which  have  enfued 
his  indirett  and  oppreflive  Dealings.  Then  comes  Mr. 
Gamulls  Defence  and  Anfweres ;  with  a  Reply  unto 
them. 

18.  Certificate  of  William  Gamull  &  twelve  other 

Chefter-Merchants  (to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy-Councill) 
againft  William  Edwardes  another  Merchant  there  ;  who 
had  gotten  an  Order  of  Councill  importing  that  what 
Shipp  or  Bark  fhould  be  freighted  by  any  Merchant  of 
Chefter,  for  any  other  place,  ftiould  alfo  take  in  a  pro¬ 
portionable  part  of  the  Goods  ot  the  faid  Edwards,  upon 
his  demand.  They  therefore  declare  that  it  hath  been 
the  ufuall  Cuftome  of  the  faid  City,  that  any  Marchant 
of  the  faid  City  might  affociate  &;  take  to  himfelf  fuch 
Partners  as  he  Ihould  like  of,  to  joyne  with  him  in 
freightinge  of  Shipps,  and  to  trade  into  Forraigne  Parts. 
And  that  yf  att  any  tyme  all  the  faid  Marchants  had 
Freight  in  one  Bottoine,  it  hath  ben  of  Free-Will,  with¬ 
out  Compulfion.  It  beingc  a  free  I.ibertie  &  Priviledge 
that  all  Marchants  within  his  Majeliies  Kingdomes  doe 
enjoy,  dat.  26  Aprill,  1630.  859. 

19.  A  Quietus  eft  to  Peter  Muttone  &  other  Mer¬ 
chants  of  Chefter,  for  Impoft  upon  their  W ynes  brought 
into  the  Port  of  Chefter,  anno  9  R.  Elizabethan.  860. 

This  is  the  parchment  Originall. 

20.  Counterpart  of  an  original  Indenture,  whereby 

William  Gamull  Alderman  &  Merchant  of  Chefter,  & 
others  his  Aflbciates  grant,  to  Edward  Broughton  of 
Chefter  Merchant,  Lycence  to  buy  &  tranfport  from  the 
Port  of  Chefter,  Ten  Dyckers  of  tanned  Calfe-fkins 
yeareley  ;  paying  to  Abraham  Dawes  &  John  Harrifon, 
during  their  terme  in  their  Grant,  and  after,  to  Mr. 
Maxwell,  8  Shillings  and  4  Pence  ^  Dicker,  and  to  the 
King  5  Shillings  :  and  further,  to  pay  his  Proportion 
of  all  Charges  laid  out,  or  to  be  difburfed,  in  for  & 
about  the  two  Grants  obtained  by  Mr.  Gamull.  dated 
the  26  January  1629.  861. 

21.  Original  Indenture  of  Champartie,  whereby 

Thomas  Mylner  of  Nefton  in  the  Countie  of  Chefter, 
Mafter  and  Owner  of  a  certaine  Barke  called  the  Grace 
of  Nefton,  letts  to  freight  the  faid  Barke  to  certain 
Merchaunts  Freightors,  with  one  able  Mafter  &  Sixe 
expert  Maryners  ;  for  a  Voiage  to  Waterford  in  Ireland, 
&  back  again  to  the  River  of  Chefter  ;  for  the  Sum  of 
17  Pounds,  dat.  30  of  Marche,  anno  14  R.  Eliza* 
bethte.  This  is  alfo  upon  Parchment.  862. 

22.  Letters  Patents  (or  Privy  Seale)  of  K.  Charles  1. 
directed  (as  it  feemeth)  to  the  Lord  Treafurer,  the 
Chancellor  and  Barons  of  his  Exchequer  (upon  the 
Inftance  and  Requeft  of  Edward  Dutton  late  Mayor  of 
Chefter,  William  Gamull  and  others  Merchants  there) 
certifying  them,  that  wheras  the  Merchants,  Citizens 
&  Inhabitants  of  Chefter,  had  (within  tenne  Yeares) 
loft  diuers  notable  Shipps  and  Veflells,  &.  greate  Quantitie 
of  their  Goods  and  Merchandizes  vppon  the  Seas,  as 
well  by  Pyrats  as  by  dyvers  other  misfortunes  :  and 
namely,  in  theire  entries  in  and  goings  out  at  the 
Mouth  of  the  Haven  of  the  Porte  of  Chefter,  beinge 
lately  growne  &c  beeome  more  daungerous  for  the 
cominge  in,  &  yffuinge  out  of  Shipps  then  in  tymes 
pall  it  hath  binn  ;  by  reafon  whereof  the  fame  Mar- 

5  G  chaunts 


39° 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2004. 

chaunfs  lie  lately  fallen  into  greatc  Decave :  he  there¬ 
fore  confideringc  the  Inconveniences  that  maye  growe  by 
the  decaye  of  the  Navye  and  Travaley  by  the  Seas  in  thofe 
parties  of  England,  and  myndinge  the  Maintenaunce  of 
the  fame  Merchaunts,  as  well  for  theire  owne  Releefe, 
as  for  his  better  Service  in  ty me  of  Neede,  releafeth 
them  from  all  arrearage  due  for  the  new  Import  upon  all 
Wynes  of  the  growth  of  France  brought  into  the  faid 
Porte,  being  50  Shillings  A  4  Pence  for  euery  Tonne  ; 
and  alfo  acquits  and  difehargeth  them  from  paying  the 
laid  new  Import  for  the  future.  Yeaven  vnder  the  Privy 
Scale  at  Wertminrter,  21  of  Maye,  in  the  nynthyere  of 
his  Raigne.  This  Copy  wanteth  the  firft  Leaf.  863. 

23.  Reprefentation  of  William  Gamull  Mayor  of 
Charter,  A  his  brethren,  to  the  Lord  Treafurer,  as  it 
feemeth  ;  upon  the  Refufal  made  by  the  Officers  of  the 
Curtoms  in  that  Port,  to  accept  their  Entries  of  Calve- 
fkinnes,  or  to  receaue  their  Money  therevppon  due  to  his 
Majertie,  to  theire  greate  hindrance  ;  and  defiring  that 
the  laid  Officers  might  be  required  to  take  fuch  Entries 
of  Skins  as  they  ffiould  make,  by  virtue  of  their  Lycence, 
they  paying  the  Curtome  A  Subkdie  due  unto  his  Majertie 
vppon  the  fayd  Graunte.  And  the  rather,  for  that  (as 
they  vnuer rt and)  the  fayd  Officers  forbearance  was  by 
force  of  his  Lordfliips  Letters  to  them  lately  directed, 
dated,  11  November,  ifcoS.  877, 

•  Draught  of  a  Petition  of  William  Edwards,  Wil¬ 
liam  luce,  A  others,  Merchants  of  Chefter,  to  Tho. 
la  rd  Yilcount  Sauage  Chamberlainc  to  the  Queenes 
Majertie.  _  ^878. 

This  is  of  the  not  very  plain  Hand  of  Mr.  Recorder 
Whitbie,  !o  often  before  mentioned  ;  and  fetts  forth  the 
great  Wrong  done  to  the  Company  of  Merchants  of  Chef¬ 
ter,  &  to  the  Corporation  of  the  faid  Cittie  ;  by  Mr. 
William  Gamull,  who  had  greatly  failed  in  the  Truft  rc- 
pofed  in  him,  as  to  the  procuring  a  new  Grant  for  the 
Tranfportation  of  tanned  Calve-lkins,  after  the  expiration 
of  their  former  Grant.  It  is  therefore  prayed,  that  the 
faid  Mr.  Gamull  ffiould  be  fen t  fur  up,  to  anfwer  his 
faid  Mifdoings,  before  the  Lords  of  His  Majefties  mod 
honorable  Privie  Ccuncil.  vid.  fupra  §  2c,  17,  &  4. 

25.  Original  Bill  of  Complaint  exhibited  by  Sr  Richard 
Calueley  Knight,  Farmer  to  His  Majertie  of  the  Cuftomc-s  ! 
ol  Import  &  Tonnage  within  the  Port  of  Chefter  ■  to  I 
James  Farleof  MarlebroughLord  high  Treafurer  of  Eno-.  | 
land,  S'  Richard  Werton  Knight  Chauncellor  &  Under-  j 
Treafurer  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer,  Sr  John  Walter 
Knight  Lord  checfe  Baron  of  the  lame  Court,  and  the 
reft  of  the  Barons  there.  sg3> 

Here  the  Complainant  fettefn  forth,  that  about  the 
24th  of  April  1627,  one  Cornelius  Anthony  Merchant 
did  arvve  in  the  Port  of  Chefter,  with  98  Tonnes  of 
Wynes  ol  the  growthofFrance,  together  with  certaine 
Vinegar,  &  1  2  Puncheons  of  Prunes ;  being  the  Goods 
ot  Richard  Bird,  William  Parnell,  8c  Thomas  Iiande, 
all  of  C  hefter,  Merchants,  who  b<  ing  confederated  to¬ 
gether  to  delraud  him  the  Complainant  of  his  Duties, 
had  by  fume  cafuall  pr  indirect  means  gotten  into  their 
pollcffion  the  late  Kings  original  Grant  of  the  Curtoms 
of  french  Wines  brought  into  the  Porte  of  Chefter- 
and  had  fecrctly,  in  the  night-tyme,  &  at  other  tv-mes* 
conveyed  away  above  Fifteen  Tonnes  of  the  laid 
Wynes,  on  purpofe  to  dcceave  him  of  the  Import 
thereon  amounting  to  Fourty  Shillings  the  Tonne: 
having  entred  the  lame,  or  the  moft  parte  thereof  fer 
Vinecrer,  inrtead  of  Wynes.  vid.  fupra,  §  iC. 

26.  Draught  of  an  Act  for  the  Reformation  of  Abufes 

inGoul  1-fmithes.  „ 

27.  The  Warrante  for  the  Gould-fmithcs  Chartre  at 
Dublin. 

This  Warrant  is  from  the  Privy-Council  of  Ireland 
3c  directed  to  the  Attorney-Genera)!,  bearing  date  A  d’ 
l&37- 

28.  Petition  to  Mr.  Hare  Hardware  Mayor  of  Cheftre 


Num.  2004. 

and  to  his  wursffiypfull  brethren  all?  by  their  pore  Ora* 
tures  the  wholle  brethren  of  the  Tallo-Chandelers  there’  • 
Shewing,  that  as  the  Magiftrates  did  defire,  that  Candles 
might  befold  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Chefter  for  3d.  the  pound; 
Sc  to  the  Countrey-people  for  4d.  great  deceipt  would 
inhie,  becaufe  the  very  Chcfter-pcople  would  ferve  their 
Countrey-friends  as  well  asthemfelves,  as  had  been  alrea- 
dy  done.  I  hey  piopofe,  therefore  (all  tho  yt  be  to  their 
own  Cofles)  to  fell  generally  for  3  pence-hallpenny  the 
|  poun.de,  and  in  fo  deenge  all  parties  wyll  be  the  belt, 
pleafed. 

|  29.  Pro  Thoma  Marcer  A  Georgio  Moiikcffilde 

Aldermanms  del  Barbore-Surgeors  A  Tallow-Ghaundlers, 
m  Civitate  Certr.  Ac.  querentibus  verfus  Elizabetham 
I  Lowther,  111  Placito  Tranfgreflionis  fuper  Cafum,  ad 
j  damnum  quinque  Librarum.  go ^ 

Ileie  is  a  large  Recital  of  the  Anliquitie  A  Privi¬ 
leges  of  the  Cittie  ol  Chefter;  made,  upon  this  Occafion, 

30.  Ihe  Demurrer  of  .  ...  Rowlinfone,  againrt 
the  Alldermen  A  Stewards  of  the  Occupation  or  Craft 
olC.haundelours  of  Chefter,  whofued  him  for  unlawfully 
felling  Candles  there.  C04  1 

,  3 1  •  Fro  Aldermannis  et  Senefcallis  de  lez  Barbors  et 
failowe  C.haundelours  Civitaris  Ccltrie  Querentibus  ; 
verfus  Willelmum  Gil!,  in  placito  Trangreflionis  fuper 
Calum,  ad  dampnnm  10  Librarum.  occ 

This  is  alfo,  for  Gill's  felling  of  Candles  there,  not 
being  a  Free-man.  This  happen’d  A.  I).  15S5. 

32.  Another  like  Paper,  whereby  it  appears  that  the 

Company  of  Barbour-Surgeons,  Waxc-Chandlers,  A; 
Fallow- Chandlers  of  the  City  of  Chefter,  fued  one  Tho¬ 
mas  Barkham,  1  or  trimminge  Thomas  Ireland  Kin:  A 
others;  he  this  '1  homa.s  Barkham  not  being  a  Freeman. 
(A.  D.  1609.)  qo8. 

33.  Another  Declaration  of  the  Company  of  Tallow- 

Chandlers  A  Barbors  of  Chefter,  againrt  Henry  Hough¬ 
ton,  for  making  &  felling  Candles,  not  being  a  Free¬ 
man  :  anno  1 2  R .  Elizabethan  g ,  , 

1  ■f'x!ra)P  *rom  another,  pro  Aidermennis  et  Senef- 
chall  Artis  1  onion*,  vocat.  Cappers;  verfus  Johann  em 
Lovehelle  Hat-maker.  .  t 

Thisis  for  felling  diuerfaCapicia  pro  horn  inibusapVa, 
vocata Scottisffie  Cappis ;  anno  5  R.  Kdwardi  vi. 

35.  Petition  ot  the  Aldermen  A  Stewards  of  the  Oc¬ 

cupations,  Sciences,  and  Arts  of  Barbours-Surgeons  A 
C.haundelers  of  Chefter,  to  Rychard  Dutton  Efq;  Maior 
the  Aldermen,  Sheriffs  A  Comen  Cmmfaile  of  the  fame, 
again  ft  Lrauncis  Edderman  A  others,  who  daily  prattife 
vie,  A  trade  ilieir  Aries,  Sciences,  ASkylls,  within  the 
‘;:'d  C,;lUe’  not  beins  Frce-men.  Befeaching  therefore  their 
Worfhips  to  graum  and  confirme  viultr  the  Cittie-Seale, 
all  fuch  lefull  Orders.  Deeres,  A  Articles  as  the  Pe'i- 
tioners  ffiould  exhibit  unto  them;  and  aifo  to  unite  and 
annex  them  as  a  Bodv  Politike,  as  other  Occupations 
anu  Arts  of  the.  faid  C-itie  ar  vnited  A  annexed  toge¬ 
ther,  for  their  better  Maintenance.  A.  D.  1574.  914. 

36.  Alien  verfus  the  Imbroderer:-,  Payntors,  A  Bar- 
bors.  A.  D.  ,581. 

1  his  i  homas  Alien  travel-fed  the  Companies  Action, 
and  was  for  Noij-fuiting  ofihem.  qi  - 

37.  Petition  of  Thomas  Clavcr  of  Chefter,  Candel- 

maker,  to  Maifter  Mayre,  A  the  Aldermen  his  bretherne: 
letting  forth,  that  he  was  inforfeid  A  compelled  to  be 
franchefed  in  his  Craft,  and  to  pay  for  his  Fredome  40 
.shillings,  and  aboue  ;  which  was  to  his  greatt  impo- 
uenslhement  A  vtterinuft  vndoyng.  That  he  had  met 
with  divers  other  Afflictions  A  Loffes  in  the  World,  and 
had  been  cart  into  the  North-gate  Prifon  for  Lome  time : 
where  he  befought  them  to  graunt  vnto  him  the  liberties 
of  the  Frce-houie  A  Fry  ion.  a.  L).  1549.  g  [  Q. 

3^-  Paynters  Declaration  agaiulf  (All rev  Bickley  a 
feft  l  tr  &  Sbter’  for  1>U)  nti"Se-  *v-  D.  x  57 2 .  I mper - 

917.. 

39-  'Die 


Bibliothecae  Harleictnse. 


39  s 


Num.  2004,  2005. 

39.  The  City  of  Chefters  Bill  to  the  Judges,  fhewinge 
the  Caufes  of  Thomas  Birchjey’s  Disfranchifement ;  as 

'ir.o-e  of  Two  Trades  :  f  »r  beinge  an  Embroderer,  he 
he  Art  of  Ironmongers  &.  Mercers.  A.  D.  1619. 

9*9* 

This  hath  Mr.  Whitby  the  Recorders  Remarks 
very  legible  on.  the  Out-flde  (yes,  &  in  the  iniide  too; 
with  his  own e  hand. 

40.  A  Copy  of  the  Princes  Counfells  Letter  to  the 

Judges, :  1 1.  Martij  1622.  93?. 

This  was  upon  that  Birch  ley's  affair  ;  whb  being 
disfranchifed  about  3  yeares  before,  had  procured  a  Writ 
out  of  hisHighnes  Court  of  Exchequer  at  Chefter,  for 
his  Reflitution  ;  a  way  of  proceeding  laid  to  be  without 
Precedent.  They  therefore  defire  that  this  matter  may 
be  duly  confider’d,  fo  as  that  the  ancient  &c  lawfull 
Cuflomes  k  Liberties  of  the  faid  Cittie  may  refpeCtively 
be  preferved  ;  yet  without  Wrongs  or  Prejudice  to  anie 
private  perfon.  And  that  the  belt  Courfe  of  their  pro¬ 
ceeding,  might  be  by  a  friendly  Mediation  to  reconcile 
the  Differences,  without  further  Trouble  or  Suit  in 
Lawe.  But  if  any  fhould  be  found  refractorie  to  their  ; 
Orders  k  Arbitrement ;  they  might  expedite  the  Pro¬ 
ceedings  in  the  Caufe,  as  the  Juftnefs  k  Equity  thereof 
fhould  deferve. 

41.  Proceedings  at  an  Affembly  of  the  Chefter  Magis¬ 

trates,  held  in  the  Common-Hall  of  Pleas,  2  A  prill  1619. 
upon  Birchleys  buftnefs,  when  (after  Affirmation  of  the 
antient  Cuftomes  of  the  City)  when,  the  Defendants 
Counfell  being  called,  they  wear  fullie  fatisfyed  with  the 
Order  made  thereupon,  referring  their  Clyent  to  the 
Mercy  of  the  faid  Affembly.  940. 

42.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Reafons  why  Thomas 
Alderfey "Merchant  fhould  not  keepe  Shoppe  to  retayle. 

94J* 

43.  The  Judgement  in  Birchley’s  Cafe  abov.ementiori- 

ed  ;  given,  23  September,  anno  20  R.  Jacobi  1.  for  him 
and  againft  the  City  &  Companies.  942. 

44.  Notes  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  concerning  the 

Proceedings  of  the  Mayor  &  Citizens  of  Chefter.  with 
Birchley,  until  his  Disfranchifement.  944. 

Thefe  he  calls  Inftru&ions  for  the  Return  of  the 
Mayor  &  Citizens  of  Chefter,  to  the  Writt  of  Reftitution 
for  Thomas  Birchley. 

45.  Mr.  J.  War  :  Directions  for  the  Ret.  of  Birchley’s 

Writt.  947. 

46.  A  Writt,  after  Judgment,  of  Reflitution  for  Tho. 

Byrchley,  to  the  Mayor  k  Citizens  of  Chefter.  deliberat. 
Majori  9  Jan.  anno  20  R.  Jacobi.  948. 

47.  Breve  de  Reftitution.  pour  Tho.  Byrchley,  direct 

al  Mayor  k  Cittizens  del  Cittie  de  Chefter.  949. 

This  is  dated  28  November,  ar.no  17  R.  Jacobi  ; 
it  is  an  attefted  Copie  ;  &  hath  Mr.  Recoider  Whitbies 
Notes  upon  it. 

48.  Another  Draught  of  Inflrudions  for  the  Retome 

of  the  Maior  &  Cittizens  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter,  to  the 
Writ  of  Reftitution  for  Thomas  Birchley.  953, 

'1  his  is  amended  in  feme  places,  by  the  fame  ,».r. 
Recorder  V\  hiiby. 

2CO5. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fnl.  quo  continetur  Regeftum 
compotorum  Johannis  Troutbeke,  et  Richardi  Ton- 
ftalle  Mihtis  Camerariorum  Ccmiiatus  Ceftrienfis,  reg- 
nante  Rege  Henrico  vi.  his,  qui  lequuntur,  Titulis 
ordine  difpofitum. 

1.  Recepta  Exituum  Com.  Ceftr.  a  feftoS.  Michaelis, 
anno  2 1  R.  Ilcnrici  vi.  ufque  ad  idem  Feftum  proximo 
fequens.  (Tradatus  wxip.zAo?.)  1. 

u.  Soluliones  fade  per  Johannem  Troutbeke  Camera- 
rium  Ceftr.  nomine  Domini  Regis,  a  fefto  S.  Michaelis 
anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  port  Conqueftutn  vi- 
cefimo  primo,  ufqj  feftum  S.  Michaelis  ex  tuneproxime 
-  3, 


Num.  2005. 

3*  Arreragia  compotorum  diverlorum  Miniftrorurti 
Dni.  Regis  in  Comitatibus  Ceftr.  &  Flynt ;  ad  feftum  S; 
Michaelis  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  poft  Conquef- 
tum  22,  terminato.  9. 

4.  Recepta  exituum  Coinir.  Ceftr.  a  fefto  S.  Michaelis 

anno  22  Regis  Henrici  vi.  ufque,  &c.  14. 

5.  Solucoes  facte  per  Johannem  Troutbeke  Camcrar; 

Cellr.  nomine  Dni.  Regis  a  Fefto  S.  Michaelis  anno  22 
Regis  Henrici  Sexti,  vlq;  feftum  S.  Michaelis  tunc  prox- 
ime  fequens.  1 8. 

6.  Arreragia  compotorum  diverforum  Minirtrorum 

Din.  Regis  in  Comitatibus  Ceftr.  et  Flynt,  ad  feftum  S. 
Michaelis  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  poft  Conquef- 
lum  vicefimti  tercio  terminato.  23. 

7.  Recepta  exituum  Com.  Ceftr.  &  Flynt  a  fefto  S. 

Michaelis  anno  23  Regis  Henrici  Sexti,  vfq;  kc.  28. 

8.  Solucoes  facte  per  Johannem  Troutbeke  Armige- 

rum,  Camerarium  Ceftr.  nomine  Dni.  Regis ;  a  fefto 
S.  Michaelis  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  poft  con- 
queflum  23,  ufq  ;  idem  feftum  ex  tunc  proxime  fe- 
quens.  34. 

9.  Arreragia  compotorum  diverforum  Miniftrorum 

Dni.  Regis  in  Com.  Ceftr.  Sz  Flynt,  ad  feilurn  S.  Michae¬ 
lis,  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  poft  conqueftum  24, 
terminato,  &c.  40. 

10.  Recepta  exituum  Com.  Ceftr.  k  Flynt  a  fefto 
S.  Michaelis  anno  24  Regis  Henrici  Sexti,  vfq;  kc. 

45- 

1 1 .  Solucoes  fade  per  Johannem  Troutbeke  Armige- 
vum  Camerarium  Celtr.  nomine  Dni.  Regis,  a  fefto  S; 
Michael  s  anno  regni  R.  Henrici  Sexti  poft  conqueftum 
24,  ufq;  idem  feftum  tunc  proxime  fequens,  kc.  30. 

12.  Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Regis 

in  Com.  Ceftr.  k  Flynt ;  ad  feftum  S.  Michaelis  anno 
regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  poft  Conqueftum,  vicefimo  k 
quinto  termirtato,  &c.  55. 

1  3.  Recepta  exituum  Comit.  Ceftr.  &  Flynt,  a  fefto 
S.  Michaelis  anno  25  Henrici  Sexti,  vfque  kc.  60. 

14.  Solucoes  fade  per  Johannem  Troutbeke  Armi- 

gerum  Camerarium  Ceftr.  nomine  Dni.  Regis,  a  fefto 
S.  Michaelis  anno  regni-  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  poft  con¬ 
queftum  25,  vfque  feftum  S.  Michaelis  et  tunc  proxime 
fequens.  64. 

15.  Arreragia  compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Regis 

in  Com.  Ceftr.  et  Flynt,  ad  feftum  S.  Michaelis  anno 
regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  poft  conqueftum  26  termi¬ 
nato.  70. 

16.  Recepta  exituum  Coin.  Ceftr.  &  Flynt,  a  feftoS. 

Michaelis  anno  26  °  Henrici  Sexti,  vfq;  feftum  S.  Mi¬ 
chaelis  ex  tunc  proxime  fequens.  &:c.  75. 

17.  Solucoes  fade  per  Johannem  Troutbeke  Arinige- 

rum  Camerarium  Ceftr.  nomine  Dili.  Regis,  a  fefto  S. 
Michaelis  ar.no  regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  poft  conquef¬ 
tum  26,  ufq;  feftum  S.  Michaelis,  kc.  81. 

18.  "Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dili.  Regis 

in  Com.  Ceftr.  et  Flynt  ;,d  feftum  S. Michaelis,  anno 
regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  pole  Conqueftum  27,  termi¬ 
nato.  87. 

19.  Recepta  exituum  Com.  Ceftr.  Sc  Flynt,  a  fefto 

S.  Michaelis  anno  27  Regis  Henrici  Sexti,  ufque  feftum 
S.  Michaelis  tunc  proximi  It-quens.  92. 

20.  Solucoes  fade  per  Johannem  Troutebeke  Armige- 

rum,  Camerarium  Ceftr.  nomine  Dru.  Regis,  a  fefto  S. 
Michaelis  anno  regni  Regis  Henr.’ci  Sexti,  poft  con¬ 
queftum  27  ufq;  feftum  S.  Michaelis  tunc  proxime 
fequens.  97. 

21.  Arreragia  compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Regis 

in  Com.  Ceftr.  &  Flynt,  ad  feftum  S.  Michaelis,  anno 
regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  poft  conqueftum  28  terminato, 
kc.  101. 

22.  Recepta  exituum  Com.  Ceftr.  et  Flynt,  a  fefto 

S.  Michaelis  anno  regni  Henrici  Sexti  poft  Con- 

queft  28,  uinvfq;  idem  feftum  tunc  proxime  fequens, 
&c.  106. 

23.  Sola- 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


^92 


Num.  2005. 

2i.  Solutiones  facte  per  Johannem  Troutbek  Armi- 
gerum  Camerarium  Ceftrie,  nomine  Dni.  Regis,  a  felto 

S.  Michaelis  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  polt  conquef- 
tum  28,  vfq;  feltumS.  Michaelis  tunc  proxime  fequens. 

1 10. 

24.  Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  T)ni.  Regis 
in  Com.  Celtr.  &  Flynt,  ad  feftum  Michaelis  anno  regni 
Regis  Henrici  Sexti  poll  conqueftum,  29  terminato,  &c. 

1 16. 

25.  Recepta  Exituum.  121. 

26.  Solucoes  fafte  per  Johannem  Troutbek  Armige- 

rum,  Camerarium  Celtr.  nomine  Dni.  Regis,  a  felto  S. 
Michaelis  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  pod  Conquef- 
tuni29.  vfq;  feltum  &c.  126.^ 

27.  Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Regis 
in  Com.  Celtr.  et  Flynt  ad  feltum  S.  Michaelis  anno  reg¬ 
ni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  polt  Conqueftum  30  terminato. 

.  1 33-. 

aS.  Recepta  Exituum  Com.  Celtr.  a  felto  S.  Michaelis 
anno  30  Regis  Henrici  vi.  vfque  feftum  S.  Michaelis 
proxime  fequens.  137* 

29.  Solucoes  fade  per  Johannem  Troutbek  Armige- 

fum  Camerarium  Celtr.  nomine  Dni.  Regis  a  felto  S. 
Michaelis,  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  poll  conqueftum 
30,  ufq;  feftum,  &c.  I42- 

30.  Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Regis 
in' Com.  Celtr.  &  Flynt  ad  feftum  S.  Michaelis  anno  reg¬ 
ni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  polt  Conqueftum  31,  terminato. 

148. 

3  r.  Recepta  F.xituum  Com.  Celtr.  a  felto  S.  Michaelis 
anno  31  Henrici  vi.  ufque  feftum  S.Michaelis  ex  tunc 
proxime  fequens.  153’ 

32.  Solucoes  facte  per  Johannem  Troutbek  Armige- 

rum  Camerarium  Celtr.  nomine  Dni.  Regis,  a  felto  S. 
Michaelis,  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  poll  Conquef¬ 
tum  31,  ufque  feftum,  &c.  158.. 

33.  Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Regis 
in  Com.  Celtr.  &  Flynt,  ad  feftum  S.  Michaelis  anno 
regni  Regis  Henrici  vi.  polt  Conqueftum  32  terminato- 

163. 

34.  Recepta  Exituum  Comit.  Celtr.  a  felto  S.Michae¬ 
lis  anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  polt  Conqueftum  32, 
vfq;  feftum  S.Michaelis  tunc  proxime  fequens.  169. 

35.  Solucoes  fatte  per  Johannem  Troutbeke  Armige- 
rum  Camerarium  Celtr.  nomine  Dni.  Regis,  a  felto  S. 
Michaelis  anno  32  Regis  Henrici  Sexti,  vfq;  feftum  &c. 

J74- 

36.  Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Regis 

in  Com.  Celtr.  &  Flynt  ad  feltum  S.  Michaelis  anno 
regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti,  polt  Conqueftum  33  termi¬ 
nato.  200. 

37.  Recepta  Exituum  Com.  Celtr.  a  felto  S.  Michaelis 

Archangeli,  anno  Regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  polt  Con¬ 
queftum  33,  ufque  feftum  S.  Michaelis  ex  tunc  proxime 
fequens,  &c.  206. 

38.  Solucoes  fafle  per  Johannem  Troutbeke  Armige- 
rum,  Camerarium  Celtr.  nomine  Dni.  Regis  a  felto  S. 
Michaelis  anno  33  Regis  Henrici  Sexti,  vfque,  &c.  212. 

39.  Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Regis 
in  Com.  Celtr,  &  Flynt,  ad  feftum  S.  Michaelis  anno 

34  Henrici  Sexti  terminato.  220. 

40.  Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Prin¬ 
cipis  in  Com.  Celtr.  &  Flynt,  ad  feftum  S.Michaelis  anno 

35  Henrici  Sexti  terminato.  224. 

41.  Recepta  Exituum  Com.  Celtr.  a  felto  S.  Michaelis 
anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  poll  Conqueftum  35, 
vfque  feftum  S.  Michaelis  ex  tunc  proxime  fequens.  228. 

42.  Solucoes  fatte  per  Ricardum  Tunftalle  Militem 

Camerarium  Celtr.  nomine  Dni.  Principis  ut  Comitis 
Celtr.  a  felto  S.  Michaelis  anno  35  Regis  Henrici 
vi.  vfque  feftum  S.  Michaelis  ex  tunc  proxime  fequens 
234-  •  ^ 

43.  Arreragia  Compotorum  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Fd- 
wardi  Principis  Wallie  et  Comitis  Celtr,  in  Com.  Celtr, 


Num.  2005 — 2007. 

&  Flynt,  ad  feftum  S.  Michaelis  anno  38  Regis  Henrici 
Sexti  terminato. 

44.  Recepta  Exituum  Com.  Celtr.  a  felto  S  Michaelis 
anno  regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  poll  Conqueftum  38, 
uqfue  feftum  S.  Michaelis  ex  tunc  proxime  fequens. 

253- 

45.  Solucoes  fa£te  per  Ricardum  Tunftalle  Mi!  tern, 
Camerarium  Celtr.  nomine  Dni.  Principis,  a  felto  S.  Mi¬ 
chaelis  anno  Regni  Regis  Henrici  Sexti  polt  Conqueftum 
38,  vfque  feftum  S.Michaelis  ex  tunc  proxime  fequens. 

259- 


2006. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confiding  (for  the 
greateft  part)  of  large  Pedegrees  of  particular  Families, 
both  Englilh  and  Wellh,  cut  into  fcantlings,  fo  as  to  be 
bound  up  together  in  the  prefent  form.  They  are, 

1.  Defcent  of  ^Robert  Harvey  Alderman  of  Chefter, 

extracted  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  from  the  Ge- 
nealogie  made  for  the  Honorable  Sir  William  Hervey 
Knight  &  Baronet,  Baron  Hervey  of  Roos  in  Ireland,  & 
Lord  Baron  Hervey  of  Kidbrooke  in  Kent,  A.  D. 
1638.  1.  a. 

2.  Pedegree  of  Charles  Lord  More  of  Mellyfont  8c 

Vifcount  Drogedagh,  A.  D.  1632.  1.  b. 

This  is  done  by  the  faid  Randle  Holme  ;  but  the 
Armes  are  only  traced  with  Black  Lead. 

3.  Pedegree  of  William  Molyneux  Efquier.  16.  etvid. 
fol.  72. 

This  is  figned  by  W.  Hervy  als.  Clarencieulx  King 
of  Armes. 

4.  Pedegree  of  the  family  of  Egerton,  deduced  by  the 

faid  Randle  Holme  to  the  year  1651.  22. 

5.  Pedegree  of  Alderfey,  down  to  the  year  1641.  40. 

Herein  there  is  fome  trifling  about  the  Etymology 

of  the  name  of  Alderfey,  which  might  really  have  been 
Aldredes-hai ;  in  like  manner  as  Alderfgate  in  London, 
in  old  Writings,  yet  remaining  with  the  Dean  &  Chapter, 
as  alfo  in  other  Hands,  is  written  Aldredef-gate. 

6.  Pedegree  of  Raven  of  Ellworth.  41.  b. 

Here  the  Armes  are  in  Colors  :  but  the  Defcent  it- 

felf  is  noted  to  be  falfe. 

7.  Labored  Pedegree  of  Sir  Robert  Sidney  Knight, 

(who  was  afterwards  Earl  of  Leicefter)  and  of  all  the 
families  from  whom  his  Lady,  as  well  as  hiinfelf,  was 
defeended  ;  made  A.  D.  1598.  54. 

Upon  the  back  fide  of  thefe  Genealogies,  is  a  Defcent 
ofYounge  of  Shropfhire,  deduced  from  many  Welfh 
families. 

8.  The  Genealogie  of  the  auntient  Familie  of  William 

Hughes  of  Llewerllyd  in  the  County  of  Flynt,  Gentle¬ 
man.  84. 

9.  Pedegree  of  Sr  Edward  Conway  K‘  Baron  of  Rag- 
ley  ;  made  (with  the  Armes  in  Trick)  A.  D.  1628. 

97’  b- 

.10.  Pedegree  (with  the  Armes  tricked)  of  the  Noble 
Family  of  Neville.  107.  b. 

At  the  Top  was  a  Note  now  imperfeft,  no  more 
remaining  than  this  which  follows,  ‘  Owte  of  a  old  Role 
on  Parchmentt,  wrought  in  (Colors)  ....  the  Ory- 
ginall  whearof  is  in  the  Handes  of  S'.  John  Danvers  I 

Knight.  This  copied . was  a  Pedegree  re- 

mayninge  fometymes  in  the  Cuftidy  of  John  Nevill  the  j 
laft  Lord  Latymer  of  Snape.’ 

Then  comes, 

1 1 .  The  laft  Randle  Holme’s  Table  of  the  Names  of  ] 
Families  mentioned  in  thefe-Pedegrees- 


2OO7. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands,  moftly  at.  the 
Charge  of  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  being  on  the 
back,  entituled  with  this  only  word  “  Deeds. ”  It  con¬ 
tains  Extracts  from  a  very  great  Number  of  Deeds  & 
other  Inftruments  or  Writings.  Thefe  relate  princi- 

3  pal|y 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


393 


Nam.  2007,  2008. 

pally  to  Chefliire  Families  &Eftates;  with  which  fome 
others  relating  to  Staffordfhire  and  other  Counties  are 
accidentally,  or  unavoidably  intermingled.  It  is  faid,  in 
two  places,  that  it  is  a  Copie  of  Mr.  Vernon  (a  famous 
Antiquaries)  book  infcribed  P.  and  in  the  Margin  follows 
the  Numerical  Order  of  Leaves  in  the  fame ;  to  which 
the  feveral  Tables  or  Indexes  hereof  do  likewife  reler. 

With  the  faid  Extracts,  are  found  fome  Church- 
Notes,  Hiftorical  Obfervations,  Sc  many  Tricks  of  the 
old  Seals,  done  by  Randle  Holme  above-mentioned. 
Among  many  things  worthy  of  Remark,  I  Ihall  take 
notice  of  the  Notes  of  Mr.  Egerton  ("afterward  Lord 
Chancellor  of  England)  then  Council  for  Mr.  Thomas 
Venables  Baron  of  Kinder  ton,  in  order  to  the  Trial 
which  came  on  between  him  &  Philip  Oldfield  learned 
in  the  Law  ;  when,  after  a  Critical  Examination  of  the 
Old  Deeds  produced  by  both  parties,  the  Baron  of  Kin- 
derton  was  allowed  to  remain  Lord  of  the  Manor  of 
Bradwall.  ThefeNotes  are  fucceeded  by  others,  (hewing, 
with  what  Arguments  &  upon  what  Deeds  &  Evidences 
■grounded,  Sr.  William  Brereton  impugned  the  Old  Te¬ 
nures  of  certain  Lands,  at  the  Juries  finding  the  Office 
poll  mortem  Thoms  Venables  Ar.  anno  4  Regis 
Jacobi  1 .  The  firft  of  thefe  may  be  found  at  No.  1 38  •, 
the  other  at  No.  162.  The  Reader  of  them  needs  not 
be  ftartled  at  the  multitude  of  miftakes,  which  he  will 
erceive,  confidering  that  the  Tranfcription  was  done  by 
ackney-pen-men,  who  are  generally  ignorant  enough  ; 
as  alfo  that  they  are,  generally,  fo  plain,  that  the  Senfe 
is  very  obvious  et  intelligible. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  Book  the  Iaft  Randle  Holme 
hath  put, 

r.  An  Imperfeft  Lift  of  the  Names  of  Towns,  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  following  Colle&ions. 

2.  Index  Villarum  ■,  or,  a  more  regular,  full,  and 
Alphabetical  Table  of  the  faid  Towns  Names. 

3.  Index  Viroruin  ;  or,  a  like  Table  direfting  to  the 
feveral  Surnames  of  Families  herein  mentioned. 

4.  The  Names  of  the  feueral  Perfons  from  whofe 
Deeds  Sc  Evidences  thefe  Manufcripts  (i.  e.  Extra&s) 
were  taken.  Sett  down  by  the  third  Randle  Holme, 
A.  D.  1672. 

2008. 

A  book  in  folio,  like  to  the  former  ;  as  bearing  the 
fame  Title  on  the  back,  written  by  the  like  ignorant  & 
carelefs  Hackney-writers,  and  as  1  fuppofe  at  the  fame 
Randle  Holme’s  charge ;  who  hath  putt  this  following 
Note  at  the  beginning  thereof.  ‘  This  is  a  Copy  of  Mr. 
William  Vernons  Liber  H  which  (leg.  and)  is  folio’d  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  booke  in  the  margentof  euery  page.’  It 
chiefly  confifts,  like  that  preceding,  of  Tranfcripts  & 
Extracts  from  Deeds  &  other  Inllruments,  illuftrating 
or  conducive  toward  the  Hiftory  of  Chefliire  Families  & 
Places  ;  and  fomewhat  about  other  places  in  Stafl'ord- 
fhire  :  giving  likewife  fome  Church-Notes  from  Mobber- 
ley  &  Chedle  aforefaid  ;  with  certain  Hiftorical  Obferva¬ 
tions  of  Mr.  Vernon  ;  &  divers  Tricks  of  Seals  by  R. 
Holme.  Before  all,  is  put 

1 .  The  laft  Randle  Holmes  account  of  things  of  moft 
Note  in  this  Collection. 

As  to  the  Collection  it  felf,  I  Ihall  take  particular 
notice,  at  this  time,  of  no  more  than 

2.  The  Charter  of  Altrincham,  as  made  a  Free  Bu- 

rough  by  Hamund  de  Maflle.  3. 

3.  Of  the  Tithes  of  Bowden.  3.  b. 

4.  The  Plea  of  Quo  Waranto  brought  againft  Henry 

Duke  of  Lancafter,  C.onftable  Sc  Marefchall  of  Chefter, 
&  Lord  of  the  Manor  of  Halton,  anno  31  R.  Edwardi 
111-,  with  his  Anfwer.  5- 

5.  Names  of  the  Townes  included  within  the  Baronie 

of  Halton.  9-  b. 

6.  Qu.  Elizabeth’s  Letters  Patents  relating  to  the 

Duchy  of  Lancafter.  10. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.II. 


Num.  2008*  2009. 

7.  Writings  relating  to  the  Barony  of  Kinderton.  1 3-b. 

8.  Writings  relating  to  Northwich,  and  to  the  Leads 

&  Wallings  there.  15  ;  43* 

9.  Collections  relating  to  Midel-wich.  37. 

10.  Baronia  de  Shipbrooke.  42.  b.  44. 

Here  are  many  Evidences  concerning  the  antient 

Family  of  Vernon  ;  and  among  the  reft,  fome  particu¬ 
larly  relating  to  Sir  Rauffe  Vernon  Knight,  &  his  De¬ 
fendants  :  which  Sir  Rauffe  was  a  Ballard,  and  (as  ap¬ 
pears  by  what  I  find)  was  a  vigorous  man.  He  faw  his 
Great  Grandfon  married,  fettled  lands  upon  that 
mariage  ;  (vid.  fol.  47.  b.)  and  lived  Seaven  fcore  yeare 
Sc  ten  yeare  ;  (  vid.  fol.  48.  b.  Sc  the  Chefliire  Vifitation 
books.)  An  inftance  of  Longevity  not  commonlyoblerved. 

1 1.  Charter  of  the  Borough  of  Knottesford,  as  grant¬ 
ed  by  William  Lord  of  Tablcy.  (et  vid.  fol.  78.)  97. 

12.  How  the  90  Years  Leafe  of  the  Tithes  of  Chedle 

became  vacant,  and  the  Tithes  recovered.  132. 

13.  Charter  of  the  Borough  of  Stockport,  as  it  was 
made  a  Free-borough  by  Robert  de  Stockport.  132.  b. 

14.  The  above-mentioned  Randle  Holmes  Index  Lo- 
corum. 

15.  His  Index  Virorum. 

Note,  both  thefe  Alphabetical  Tables  tas  doth  that 
Table  mentioned  above  at  §  1.)  in  their  feveral  Referen¬ 
ces  or  Directions,  do  not  obferve  the  Numbers  put  on 
the  top- corner  of  the  feveral  Leaves ;  but  thofe  lpecified 
in  the  Margins,  anfwerable  to  the  lame  in  Mr.  Vernons 
Book. 

2GO9. 

A  Book  in  folio,  which  the  laft  Randle  Holme  thus 
entituled  on  the  out-fide, {  Charters  &  Privileges  of  the 
County  &  City  of  Chefter,’  &c.  It  confifts  of  many 
Tracts,  written  by  feveral  Perfons,  efpecially  by  the 
fecond  Randle  Holme,  and  afterwards  putt  together 
by  his  faid  fon,  in  the  Order  following. 

1 .  The  laft  R  andle  Holmes  Lift  or  Account  of  the 
Things  of  moft  Note  in  this  Book. 

2.  Quartermafter  Benjamin  Hinde’s  Accompt  of  Mo¬ 
neys  due  unto  him,  given  in  (upon  Oath)  to  the  Com¬ 
mittee  of  Accompts  for  the  Countie-Palatine  of  Chefter, 
26  February  1646. 

3.  Copies  of  Notes  extracted  from  the  Pipe- Rolls,  by 

Mr.  Roger  Dodfworth,  A.  D.  1640.  relating  to  antient 
Families  in  many  Counties.  1 . 

4.  Collectanea  ex  Regiftro  quodam  Prioratus  de  Co¬ 

ventre,  in  Scaccario  remanente,  et  in  cullodia  Reme- 
moratoris  Regis  ibidem,  jo  die  Septembris  A.  D.  1638. 
per  Willelmum  Dugdale  Gen.  3. 

5.  De  Ecclefijs  quibufdam  infra  Comitatum  Warwi- 

cenfem  ;  e  Cartis  in  Thefaur.  Decani  et  Capituli  Ecclefie 
Cathedralis  Lichfeldenfis,  excerpta  per  Willelmum  Dug¬ 
dale  Gen.  A.  D.  1638.  _  3-b. 

6.  Out  of  an  ancient  Manufcript  remayning  in  the 

Cuftody  of  the  Lady  Ann  Ferrers  of  Tamworth-Caftle, 
wherein  is  fett  dnwne  the  Foundation  of  the  Nunnery  of 
Pollefworth :  copied  by  William  Dugdale  Gen.  A.  D. 
1636.  _  3-b. 

7.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Roper.  4. 

8.  ColleCtanea  e  diverfis  Recordis  in  Scaccario,  ut 

videtur.  46  ;  &  5. 

9.  Ex  anonymo  ms.  tempore  Regis  Henrici  11.  con- 

feripto,  de  Regibus  Anglie  et  eorum  geftis,  penes  Samu- 
elem  Roper  Armigerum.  4.  b. 

10.  Ex  Regiftro  Willelmi  Archiepifcopi  Ebor.  6. 

11.  Ex  Libro  Scaccarij.  ibid. 

12.  E  quodam  libro  ms.  in  Officio  Ducatfis  Lancaftr. 

apud  Grayes  Inne  refervato.  ibid. 

13.  In  CiftadeKirkftalle,  inTurri  S.MarieEbor.  ibid. 

14.  Ex  libro  Rubro.  6.  b. 

15.  Ex  Regiftro  Abbatie  de  Ofney  in  Com.  Oxon. 
per  Auguft.  Steward  preftitum  Ro.  D(odfworth)  Gen. 

ibid. 

5  H  16.  E  Cartis 


594 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2009, 

16.  E  Cards  diverfis  penes  Edw.  Fitton  Mil.  &  Ba- 

ronettum,  tranfcript.  per  R.  Dodfworth)  Gen.  A.  D. 
1 635.  ibid. 

17.  E  Placitis  Comitatus  Ceftr.  regnanribus  R.  Ed- 

wardo  hi.  R.  Richardo  11.  et  R.  Henrico  vm.  ibid. 

18.  E  Cards  ....  Halfall  deHalfail.  _  8.  b. 

19.  Collectanea,  maxima  ex  parte,  e  publicis  Recordis 

in  Turre  Londinenli  confervatis  ;  de  temporibus  Regum 
Henrici  11.  Ricardi  1.  Johannis,  et  Henrici  in.  per  Ro. 
gerum  Dodfworth,  ut  videtur.  9. 

20.  Copie  of  a  Mandate  from  K.  Henry  vm.  whereby 
he  commanded  Sr  Rodulphe  Brereton  Knyghte  Cham- 
berleyn  of  Chefler,  to  inftrutt  &c  aflift  his  Commiffioners 
in  levying  the  3000  Markes,  which  the  Inhabitants  of 
that  County-Palatine  had  granted  to  his  father  K.  Henry 
vii.  for  Confirmacon  of  Liberties,  and  Perdon  of  diuerle 
Offences  &  eville  Dedes  committed  &  done  by  them. 

12.  a. 

Next  follow  large  Collections  made  by  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme,  and  moflly  of  his  Hand-writing,  relating 
to  the  City  of  Chelter,  the  County- Paladne,  or  their 
Inhabitants ;  wherein  many  memorable  matters  being 
fpecified,  I  find  myfelf  obliged,  to  make  particular  men¬ 
tion  of  thefe  that  follow. 

21.  That  the  County  of  Chefler  was  once  eretted  into 
a  Principality  ;  namely,  anno  21  Richardi  n.  34. 

22.  How  Juflices  of  the  Peace  came  to  be  inflituted 
in  Chefhire,  Flintfhire,  &  Anglefey,  anno  27  Henrici  vm. 

ibid. 

23.  How  the  Holding  of  Shires  came  to  ceafe,  and 
the  Seffions,  &c.  to  fucceed  them,  anno  32  Hen.  vm. 

ibid. 

24.  How  this  County-Palatine  came  to  fend  two 

Knights,  &  the  Citty  of  Chefler  two  BurgcfTes  to  the 
Parliament  at  Weflminfler.  ibid. 

25.  How  the  Protection  of  Debtors  in  Chefler  came 

to  be  abolifhed  anno  34  R.  Henrici  vm.'  ibid. 

26.  That  the  Original  Seale  of  Chefler,  fhall  be  alfo 

the  Original  Seal  of  Flynt.  ibid. 

27.  That  the  Exchequer  of  Chefler  hath  been  kept  at 

other  Places  during  the  time  of  Plague.  ibid. 

28.  Of  the  Rigor  ufed  by  the  Kings  Commiffioners 

A.  D.  1609,  in  affefling  all  Freeholders  in  Chefhire 
toward  the  Aid  for  making  the  then  Prince  Henrv  a 
Knight.  ibid. 

29.  Breve  R.  Henrici  vi.  pro  certificandis  Nominibus 

illorum  qui  portant  Arma  antiqua,  et  ad  ill.  premu- 
niend.  ad  ferviend.  Reg.  pro  defenfione  Regni,  fecun- 
dum  gradus  fuos  ;  dat.  anno  regni  7.  una  cum  Refpon- 
fione  Vice-comitis  Ceflrienfis.  24.  b. 

30.  Petition  of  the  Freeholders  of  Chefhire,  temp. 
R.  Edwardi  iv.  afl'erting  their  Liberties  &  Privileges ; 
and  particularly  that,  of  not  being  bound  by  any  Att 
of  Parliament  made  out  of  their  own  County.  ibid. 

31.  That  antiently,  the  Juflice  of  Chefler  granted 
Livery  of  Lands  ;  and  the  Conftable  kept  the  Gaole.  35. 

32.  Mandamus  of  K,  Edward  1.  iifued  anno  Regni 
25,  for  Reginald  de  Gray  his  Juflice  of  Chefler  to  make 
Return  of  the  Cuflomes  ufed  within  that  County  Pala¬ 
tine  :  with  the  InquiGtion  made  thereupon.  35.  b. 

33.  De  Judicatoribus  et  Settatoribus  Comitatfts  C.eftr. 

36.  b. 

34.  Redditus  antiquus  vel  annualis  Dni.  Comitis 

Ceflrie.  .  38.  b. 

35.  Novus  Redditus  deExitibus  certis  in  Com.  Ceftr. 

oneratus  fuper  Vice-comitem,  &c.  ibid. 

36.  Redditus  Camerarii  in  Comitatu  Ceflrie.  ibid. 

37.  Rentale  Hundredi  de  Macclesfelde,  tempore  Jo. 

Brunham  Junioris  Camerarij  Ceflrie,  anno  26  R.  Ed¬ 
wardi  hi.  29. 

38.  Redditus  Cameras  in  Comitatu  Ceflrie.  ibid. 

39.  Redditus  Allifus.  ibid. 

40.  That  the  County  and  Citty  of  Chefler  was  a 

Sanctuary.  39.  b. 


Kum.  2009. 

41.  Exemplification  of  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Grant 

made  to  the  Merchants  of  Chdter,  the  lalte  day  of  Fe¬ 
bruary,  the  third  yere  of  her  Reigne;  whereby  fhe 
freed  them  (during  her  pleafure)  from  the  future  Pay¬ 
ment  of  two  Shillings  for  every  Tonne  of  Iron  brought 
into  the  Port  of  Chefler  by  them  ;  which  the  faid  Mer¬ 
chants  had  until  that  time  paid,  more  &  beyond  any 
other  Englifh  Merchants  did  pay.  39.  A. 

42.  A  trew  Coppyof  the  Graunt  of  the  Libertyes  of 

the  County  Palatine  of  Chefler,  confirmed  by  diuers 
Kinges  &  Queens.  This  bearing  Telle,  28  November, 
anno  2  R.  Elizabethan.  146. 

43.  Preamble  to  a  Difmiflion  out  of  the  Chancery, 

by  reafon  of  the  County  Palatin  of  Chefler  ;  20th  Oc¬ 
tober,  anno  15  R.  Elizab’ethe.  1 53. 

44.  A  trew  Grant  of  the  Libertyes  of  the  Citty  of 

Chefler,  and  the  making  of  it  a  County  by  it  felfe, 
diftintt  from  the  County  Palatine  of  Chefler,  by  King 
Henry  vii.  in  the  21  Ycare  of  his  Raigne.  1 54. 

45.  That  the  Citizens  of  Chefler  vied  &  enjoyed 

diuers  Libertyes  a  Guild  Mercatorie,  by  prefeription, 
before  any  Charter  was  granted  to  them.  1 39. 

This  is  followed  by  a  Lilt  of  thole  who  granted 
Charters  to  this  City,  the  firll  of  whom  is  Randulph 
(the  third,  furnamed  Blundtville,  I  luppofej  in  one  of 
whofc  Charters,  then  (Sc  perhaps  now)  remaining,  Randle 
Holme  obierveth,  that  the  fa  id  Earle  granted  to  them 
their  auntient  Libertyes  Sc  Guild  Mercatoriam  ficut 
batten  us  vfi  fuerunt.  '  Might  not  a  Gild  Mercatory  be 
fett  up,  and  other  Privileges  be  granted  by  the  Prede- 
cefTors  of  this  Earle,  and  in  procels  of  time  be  loft? 
Can  the  Exchequer  of  Ch.itcr  produce  regular  Inrol- 
ments  of  all  their  publick  Inllrumcnts  from  A.D.  1 181, 
when  this  Great  Man  came  be  to  Earle?  or  do  we  know 
of  any  Gild-Mercatory  to  have  been  inflituted  but  by 
Authority  ?  Without  Grant  from  the  Prince,  or  States 
of  the  Place,  fuch  a  Brotherhood  would  feem  to  be  but 
a  Rout,  &  an  Unlawful  Aflembly,  and  their  making 
Orders  for  their  own  Regulation,  would  be  but  a  Con” 
bination  to  enrich  themfelves  Sc  opprefs  their  Country¬ 
men  ;  which  one  would  think  could  noc  be  well  relifhed 
by  Authority ;  which  not  being  applied  to  in  fo  weighty 
an  Affair,  had  no  provifion  of  Duties  or  Cuflomes  re- 
ferved ;  and  confequently  would,  at  leaft,  yield  fuch  a 
Gild  no  protettion,  if  it  did  not  loon  deftroy  it.  Vid. 
fol.  12. 

46.  Breviats  of  (or  Notes  from)  the  Confirmations  of 
the  Libertyes  of  Chelter,  out  of  feuerail  Charters,  ibid. 

47.  The  Meyres  &  Bonds  of  the  Circute  of  the  Li- 

bertces  of  the  Citty  of  Chefler  ;  fo  far  as  they  were  writs  j 
in  the  Booke  of  Mr.  Glafier  ;  Lut  fince  added  out  of  the 
Black  Booke,  tempore  Henr.  Gee,  A.D.  1  C40.  162.  1 

48.  Notes  touching  the  Princes  of  Wales  &  their 

Creations ;  the  Earles  of  Chefler ;  £c  Dukes  of  Corn- 
waft.  .  163. 

49.  Petition  of  William  Glafior  Vire-Chamberlayne 
Sc  Deputy  to  (Robert  Dudley,  Earle  of  Leicefter,  Cham- 
berleyn  of  the  County  Palatine  of  Chefter  ;  to  the  Lords 
of  the  Priuey  Councell,  againft  Richard  Dutton  then 
Mayor  of  Chefter ;  who  is  therein  reprefented  as  a  moft 
vile  perfon. 

.50.  Articles  of  Contempt  &  Mifdcmeanures  done  by 
Richard  Dutton  in  the  tyme  of  his  Maioralty,  acainffc 
the  Queenes  Court  of  Exchequer  of  Chefter,  the  Au¬ 
thority  thereof,  and  againft  the  Officers  of  the  fame 
Courte.  _  ibid. 

51.  The  Anfwareof  Richard  Dutton  Maior  of  Chef¬ 

ter,  with  the  Articles  of  Anfware  thereunto  annexed,  in 
Anfware  of  the  Bill  &  Articles  by  William  Glafior  Vice- 
chamberlevn,  exhibited  againft  him.  166. 

52.  Notes  concerning  the  Charters  granted  to  the 

City  of  Chefter;  with  a  Cenfure  on  them,  by  the  Ex¬ 
chequer.  1 69. 

53.  A  Letter  from  the  Councell,  in  Aprill  1574, 

to 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


395 


Num.  2009. 

to  Sir  Walter  Mildraay,  Sir  Francis  Walfingham,  Sir 
William  Cordall  Knight,  &  Thomas  Bromley  Efq ;  for 
the  hearinge  of  the  matter  betweene  the  Vice-Chamber- 
leyn  of  the  Exchequer  at  Chefter,  &c.  and  Mr.  Richard 
Dutton,  Maior  of  the  Citty  of  Chefter.  171. 

This  C.opie  is  not  entire. 

54.  Letter  to  the  Lords  of  the  Priuey  Councell,  by 

the  faid  honorable  Perfons,  in  Aufware  of  their  Letter, 
dated  the  3d  of  April  1574.  172. 

55.  Coppy  of  a  Letter  from  the  Queenes  Priuey  Coun¬ 

fell, ~to  the  Maior,  Aldermen  and  Citizens  of  Chefter, 
for  the  performance  of  their  Lordfliips  Decree,  and  of 
good  Advifment,  &  Admonilion  for  their  former  Of¬ 
fences.  A  D.  1 5  ,-4..  ibid. 

In  this  finart  Letter,  they  are  told  they  muft  fur- 
render  up  the  Queen’s  laft  Confirmation  of  their  antient 
Liberties ;  and  take  out  a  new  one  ;  wherein  the  Claufe 
Praeterea,  which  had  been  indireftly  procured,  &  had 
been  the  principal  occafion  of  the  late  Broils  among 
them,  fhould  be  left  out. 

56.  Notes  for  the  Authority  of  the  Exchequer  of  the 

County  Palatine  of  Chefter  ;  and  the  deniall  of  the  Au¬ 
thority  claymed  by  the  Citty  of  Chefter.  pag.  173.  (et 
vid.  96.  li.22.)  182. 

57.  Notes  of  Records  remayninge  in  the  Exchequer 

of  Chefter,  to  proue  the  Authority  of  the  fayd  Exche¬ 
quer,  from  K.  Richard  the  Seconds  tyme.  1 74. 

58.  Aftes  of  Par  lament  mayntaininge  the  Authoritye 

of  the  fayd  Exchequer.  178. 

59.  Obferuations  or  Notes  taken  out  of  the  Charters 

of  the  Citty  of  Chefter.  ibid. 

60.  The  Proceedings  of  the  Chamberleyn  of  Chefter, 

in  a  matter  in  the  Exchequer  of  Chefter  betweene  Foulke 
Alderfey  Marchant,  &  Thomas  Greene  Tallow-chandler, 
both  Cittizens  of  the  fame  City.  175. 

This  Procefs  ends  abruptly;  and,  as  it  feems,  it 
firft  began  the  Differences  between  the  Officers  of  the 
Exchequer,  and  the  Officers  of  the  City.  It  happened 
A.D.  1562,  when  Richard  Dutton  was  one  of  the 
Shireves. 

61.  A  Writte  of  Rcfumption  of  Honors,  Caftles,  &c. 

by  force  of  an  Ad  of  Parlament  in  the  County  Palla- 
tine  of  Chefter,  6th  September,  30  Hen.  vi.  x8o. 

62.  The  Sheriff's  Returne  of  the  Writt  of  Refumption 

aboue-fayd.  ibid. 

63.  Writt  of  K.  Edward  1.  directed  to  Reginald  de 

Grey  Juftice  of  Chefter,  requiring  him  to  certifie,  by 
Inquifuion  of  the  Cuftoines  of  that  County,  with  regard 
to  the  Lands  of  Heyres  held  of  him  in  Soccage.  Tefte, 
&c.  21  Julij,  anno  Regni  25.  183. 

64.  The  Inquifition  vpon  the  Writt  abouefayd.  ibid. 

65.  Another  Writt  of  the  fame  King,  directed  to 

Richard  de  Mafley  Juftice  of  Chefter,  for  an  Inquifition 
to  be  taken  fuper  Confuetudinem  Comitatiis  Ceftr.  per 
quam  Willelmus  de  Venables  et  Katherina  vxor  ejus,  cla¬ 
mant  habere  jus  prefentandi  ad  Ecclefiam  de  Thornton 
fuper  Moram,  vacantem,  &c.  Tefte,  See.  8  die  Junij,  anno 
Regni  28.  .  r  84. 

66.  The  Inquifition  upon  the  Writt  above.  ibid. 

67.  Forme  of  the  Writt  of  Diem  claufit  extremum, 

vfed  within  the  County  of  Chefter,  anno  6  R.  Ed- 
wardi  n.  185. 

68.  The  Inquifition  upon  the  Writt  above.  ibid. 

69.  Another  like  Writt,  iflued  out  upon  the  Deccafe 
of  Warin  le  Grovenor  ;  anno  35  R.  Edwardi  1.  ibid. 

70.  The  Inquifition  upon  the  Writt  aboue.  ibid. 

71.  Writt  for  Inquifition,  poft  Mortem  Thome  Crue 

deCruein  Com.  Ceftr.  anno  21  R.  Edwardi  1.  186. 

72.  The  Returne  of  the  Inquifition  aboue-fayd,  vpon 

the  Writte.  ibid. 

73.  A  Gr.iunt  made  by  the  Earle  of  Chefter,  of  the 
Wardfhip  of  the  Body  and  Lands  of  the  Heare  of  Rich¬ 
ard  de  Ouldington  ;  .anno  35  R.  Edwardi  1.  ibid. 

74.  A  Decree  in  the  Court  of  Wards  ;  whereby,  it 


Num.  2009. 

appeareth,  that  as  to  the  Lands  houlden  of  the  Kinge  as 
Earle  of  Chefter  by  Knights  Service,  no  Liuery  or  Ouitre 
la  Maine  is  to  be  fued  :  ann.  2  &  2  Phil.  &  Mar. 

ibid. 

75.  Of  a  San£tuarv-Way  called  the  Vouryes,  for 

Dettors  :  which  is  fuch  a  Priviledge,  that  a  Man  may 
goe  all  the  fayd  County  of  Chefter  ouer,  at  Liberty, 
without  any  Interruption  of  the  Law.  187. 

76.  Of  makinge  of  Bayliftsin  the  County  of  Chefter. 

ibid. 

77.  Ofeleiftinge  of  Coronors  for  the  County  of  Chef¬ 
ter.  ibid. 

78.  Pica  in  a  Replevye  for  ftoppinge  of  Ways ;  anno 

.  .  .  .  R.  Edwardi  11.  ibid. 

79.  A  Replevye  of  Cuftome,  of  the  tranfmutation  of 

Eftates  of  Free-hold  :  anno  2  R.  Edwardi  11.  188. 

80.  A  Replevye  by  the  King’s  Writt,  for  a  Diftravne 
taken  in  Cholleigh  :  anno  3  R.  Edwardi  11.  ibid. 

81.  The  Cuftome  for  ftoppinge  of  a  Way  ;  a  Reple¬ 
vye  :  anno  2  R.  Edwardi  11.  189. 

82.  Another  Replevye  for  ftoppinge  a  Way  :  anno 

2  R.  Edwardi  n.  ibid. 

83.  A  Writt  to  Robert  de  Holand  Juftice  of  Chefter, 

commanding  him  to  deliver  up  by  Indenture,  that  Office 
to  Pagan  Tibetot  :  anno  3  R.  Edw.  n.  ibid. 

84.  A  Commiflion  to  the  Juftice  of  Chefter,  to  take 

up  Corne  &  Vi&ualls  for  the  Warrs  in  Scotland  :  anno 
eodem.  I90 

85.  The  Cuftome  for  Felons  Goods  in  Comitatu 

Ceftrie.  ibid. 

86.  The  Cuftome  of  the  Exchequer  at  Chefter,  and 

of  the  County  of  Chefter,  for  Debts.  ibid. 

87.  An  Adion  brought  by  the  Kinge  againft  Ric. 

Done  Keeper  of  De  la  more-Foreft,  for  the  negleft  of 
his  Duty.  ,9,_ 

88.  A  Precept  for  killinge  of  Deere  in  theForreft,  of 

De  la  mara.  ibid. 

89.  A  Replevye  at  Criftleton  taken  for  not  appear- 
inge  on  a  Jury  houlding  Land  vnder  40  Shillings  per  an¬ 
num  in  Soccage-Tenure  :  anno  13  R.  Edwardi  n. 

ibid. 

90.  A  Replevye  for  a  yonge  Steere  or  Ox  taken  at 

Stretton  by  the  Sheriff’s  Bailly,  for  the  Owners  non-ap¬ 
pearance  on  Jury  betweene  party  k  party  :  ann.  1  3  R. 
Edwardi  n.  ‘  ibid. 

9 1 .  A  Prefentment  of  many,  for  Huntinge  in  De  la 

more-Foreft:  ann.  13  R.  Edwardi  11.  \g2. 

92.  Sir  James  Dyer  and  other  Judges  Opinions  for 

the  JurifdiCtion  of  the  County-Palatine  of  Chefter  :  deli- 
uered  the  1  ith  R.  Eliz.  anno  dni.  1 568.  193. 

93.  Prefidents  touching  the  JurifdiCtion  of  the  Coun¬ 
ty-Palatine  of  Chefter.  , 

94.  The  forme  of  a  Bill,  laying  forth  the  Privi- 
ledges  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer  &  County-Palatine. 

204.  A. 

95.  The  Cuftome  of  Chefter  for  taking  away  Glafs 
&  Wanfcote,  by  the  Tenants  who  fett  them  up.  204. 

96.  Cuftome  of  Chefhire  for  the  Examiners  Office. 

.  ibid. 

97.  Exemplification  of  the  Opinion  of  the  Judges  con- 

cerninge  the  Liberties  of  the  County-Pallatine  of  Chefter. 
(vid.  fupra  §  91.)  206.  A. 

98.  iraCf  of  Peter  Leicefter  Efq;  concerning  the  In- 

ftitutions  of  Knights  Templars,  &  Knighis  Hofpitallers 
of  St.  John  of  Hicrufaiem  ;  with  the  Charters  of  Privi- 
ledges  granted  to  the  faid  Hofpitallers;  applicable  to  the 
Town-fhippe  of  Nether-Tabley  in  Com.  Ceftr.  (which 
was  of  thc-ir  Fee)  and  wherein  himfelf  &  his  Tenants  were 
concerned.  32g_ 

This  was  tranferibed  from  the  Original  (which  was 
written  A.D.  1649.)  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme, 
A.  D.  1650. 

99*  Carta  quaFrater  Nicholaus  Valens  Magifter  Do- 
mus  Hofpitalis  Jerufalem  in  Com.  Ceftr.  recepit  Symonem 
t4  filiurn 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


396 


Num.  2009,  201G. 

filium  Mar.  de  Bertumley  in  Defenftone  fua  et  Cuf- 
todia.  _  333. 

100.  Inftrumentum  quo  Frater  Georgius  Sutton  Miles, 
et  Magifter  de  Burton  S.  Lazari  Jerufalem  in  Anglia,  et 
ejufdem  Loci  Con  fratres,  innotefcunt  fe  in  eoruni  C.011- 
fraternitatcm  recepifle  Dnm.  Willelmum  Browne,  fuo. 
ruinq;  Privilegiorum,  Indulgentiarura,  ac  aliorum  Pie- 
tatis operum  participem  in  omnibus  fecifte.  dat.  to  die 
Junij  A.  1).  1486.  (cum  Abfolutionis  formula.)  335. 

101.  A  Schedule  of  all  the  Lands,  Meadowes,  and 
Yards,  within  the  Towne-fhip  of  Great  Caldy,  alias 

!  Caldy-Grange,  out  of  which  doe  iffue,  arife,  renue  & 
growe  certen  Tythes  of  Corne,  Hey,  Flax,  and  Hemp, 
commonly  called  Boardland  Tythes.  336.  b. 

Phis  is  followed  by  certain  other  Inftruments,  re¬ 
lating  to  the  Tithes  of  Kirby  alias  Weft-Kirbyi  n 
Com.  Ceflr.  which  Parifli  comprehendeth  the  Towne- 
fliips  of  Kirby,  Meoles  parva,  Meoles  magna,  Hoofe, 
Calday  parva,  Caldy  magna,  Neuton,  Francby,  & 

'  Grefby. 

102.  Indenture  concerning  the  Boardland  Tythes  of 

Wood-church  in  Com.  Ceftr.  which  the  Dean  and  Chap¬ 
ter  of  Chefter  had  lett  to  Richard  Dutton  Alderman  of 
Chefter,  15  April,  anno  5  R.  Caroli  1.  338.  b. 

There  followeth  fome  Notes,  fhewing  what  hap¬ 
pened  thereupon  (as  alfo  a  Bill  of  Complaint  concerning 
them  at  page  340.  A  ) 

103.  Copie  of  the  Order  8c  Decree  of  Richard  Vaug¬ 

han  Bifhop  of  C.hdler.  made  30  Aug.  ann.  24  R.  Eliz. 
&  regulating  the  Affair  of  the  common  Stock  (lirft  given 
by  one  Goodicer  of  Barnfton)  for  buying  of  Cows  to  the 
ufe  of  the  poor  Inhabitants  within  the  8  Townefhips  of 
the  Parifli  of  Woodchurch.  338.  A. 

2010- 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  by  divers  hands  ;  and  on  the  out- 
ftde  thus  entituled,  ‘  Chefliire  Domesday  Booke ;  with 
an  Alphabate  of  all  the  Townes  in  the  laid  Shire.’ 
But  in  turning  it  over,  I  lind  therein  the  following 
matters. 

1.  The  laft  Randle  Holmes  Lift  of  the  things  of  Note 
i  n  this  Book. 

2.  Series  Pontificum  Romanorum  a  D.  Petro  Apoftolo 
ufq;  ad  Pium  iv.  folijs  tranfpofitis  dtferipta. 

3.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  all  the  Townes 

&  Villages  in  the  feverall  Hundreds  of  the  County  of 
Chefter.  179. 

This  is  faid  to  be  taken  ex  Libro  pergam -penes  D. 
Will.  Vernon  remanente,  fcil.  ColleClorum  Subfidi  trium 
millium  Marcaruin  per  Comitatum  Ceftr.  anno  5  Edwar- 
di  iv. 

4.  The  Names  of  all  the  Townes  &  Lordfliipps  in  eich 

Hundred  within  the  County-Palatyne  of  Chefter,  with 
the  Hamletts,  Manfion-houfes,  &  Free-holds  ;  with 
other  places  of  Note  within  euery  Towne  or  Lordfliippe  ; 
Anno  1662.  1 8 1. 

This  is  much  enlarged  by  the  laft  Randle  Holme  : 
but  notwithftanding  the  foregoing  Title,  takes  in  only 
the  Hundreds  of  Bucklow  &  Macclesfield.  Howbeit, 
there  follow  like  Surveys  of  others,  with  other  Dates ;  as. 

5.  Wirral  Hundred  ;  anno  1668.  193-b. 

6.  Namptwich  Hundred  ;  anno  1666.  198. 

7.  Northwich-Hundred;  Edefbery-Hundred;  &Brox- 

ton-Hundred  ;  anno  1671  :  and  Chefter-City,  without 
date.  202.  b. 

8.  A  trew  Coppy  of  that  Extract  of  Domefday-booke 

(fo  much  as  conferneth  Chefliire)  remayninge  in  the  Cuf- 
tody  of  the  Kinges  Remembrancer,  and  belonginge  to 
the  Exchequer  at  WeftminfEer ;  which  booke  is  called  the 
lefler  Domefday-booke.  230. 

This  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  tranferibed  from 
Mr.  Peter  Leicefters  Copie  ;  which  he  examined  with  the 
Record,  the  9th  of  July  1646.  232. 

9.  Certaine  Parcells  (relating  to  Chefliire)  tranferibed 


Num.  2010,  2011. 

out  of  the  greater  Domef-dei -booke,  remaininge  in  the 
Tally-Office  ^i.  e.  the  Office  of  the  Chamberlayne  of  the 
Exchequer)  at  Weftminfter.  242. 

In  the  two  preceding  Articles,  the  obfolete  or 
GJoflary-words  are  endeavoured  to  be  explained. 

Within  this  TraCl  I  alfo  find,  but  out  of  place, 

10.  The  Complaint  of  the  Men  of  Middle-wich  againft 
the  Abbat  of  Darnchale,  & c.  from  the  Records.  250.  b. 

1 1.  The  Names  and  Number  of  the  Lords  8c  Owners 

of  Salt-houfes  in  North-wich.  251. 

1  VerdiCt  of  a  Jury  touching  the  antient  Cultomes 
of  the  Borough  of  North-wich  ;  found  12  Auguft  1641, 
and  prefented,  in  order  to  be  inferted  in  the  booke  of 
Cuftomes  &  Orders  for  that  Burrow.  251. 

1 3.  Ex  majori  Libro  de  Domes-day  ;  viz.  de  Terra 

inter  Ripam  et  Merfarn,  quae  nunc  eft  pars  Agri  Lancaf- 
trienfis.  252. 

14.  Some  few  Notes  touching  the  Hundreds  of  Che¬ 
fliire,  by  the  third  Randle  Holmes.  257. 

15.  AbftraClum  five  Epitome  Libri  deDomes-dei  (quan¬ 
tum  feilicet  ad  Ceftre-lcire)  fecundum  ordinem  Villarum 
in  unoquoque  Hundredo  ;  cum  Nominibus  eoruni  qui 
ejufdem  Villas  tenuerunt,  tarn  tempore  Edwardi  Regis 
qui  Confeflbr  dicebatur,  quam  tempore  Wiltelmi  Cou- 
queftoris,  fub  cujus  Regno  ifte  liber  faClus  eft.  258. 

This,  as  the  Trails  9  &  1  3  above,  is  the  Hand  of 
the  fecond  Randle  Holme ;  and  hath  alfo  the  Corrections 
of  his  Soil. 

16.  The  Proportion  of  the  Ould  Hundreds  in  Che- 

fhire,  to  the  New  Hundreds.  2 77. 

17.  Notes  relating  to  Domes-dci  Booke,  its  Name, 

Ufe,  8cc.  ibid. 

18.  Here  are  more  Extracts  from  thence,  ftill  relating 

to  Chefliire :  which  being  added  to,  or  conlidered  with 
what  is  above  mentioned  at  §  8  &  9.  will  afford  a  pretty 
good  Copie  of  that  molt  antient  Record,  fo  far  as  it  re- 
lateth  to  this  County.  Which  ExtraCls  the  faid  Randle 
Holme  the  fecond  took  from  a  Copie  of  Doines-dei  as 
to  this  Countie,  tranferibed  from  the  Record,  from  Mr. 
Peter  I.eicefter  &  Mr.  William  Vernon,  at  the  price  of 
Eight  Pounds,  by  Mr.  Scipio  l’Efquier  then  Under-Cham- 
berlayne  of  the  Exchequer,  and  was  compared  with  the 
Record  itfelf  by  the  fame  Mr.  Leicefter.  275. 

Herel  cannot  but  wifli,  that  lioneft  Randle  had  been 
as  good  a  Copift  as  Scipio  l'Efquire  was. 

Now  come  fame  loofe  Papers  lying  at  the  end;  being 

1 9.  The  laft  Randle  Holme’s  beginning  of  a  Tranfla- 
tion  of  the  Chefhire  in  Domes-dei. 

20.  Names  of  Freeholders  in  divers  Parifhes  or  Hun¬ 
dreds  in  Chefhire. 

2 1 .  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  many  antient  Chefhire  Fa¬ 
milies,  who  took  their  Surnames  from  Townes. 

201  t. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,,  confuting  (for  the  greateft 
part)  of  a  mixed  Collection  of  i’edegrees,  drawn  out 
firft  upon  large  Papers,  which  have  been  fince  cutt 
into  lefler  Pieces,  and  bound  up  together  as  a  Book  of 
a  moderate  Volume.  In  the  whole  lobl'erve, 

1.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Letter  (as  Deputie  to 

the  Office  of  Armes,  in  Chefhire,  Lancafhire,  &c.)  to 
the  Lady  Sherburne,  late  Wife  to  Sir  Richard  Sherburne 
Kt.  dated,  3  May  1638.  1. 

This  was  to  demand  the  Fee  due  to  the  Office  for 
entring  her  Hufband’s  Funeral  Certificate. 

2.  The  Genealogie  or  Pedegree  of  Sir  Chriflopher 
Trentham  of  Rocelter  in  the  County  of  Stafford  Knight; 
now  livinge  anno  1649;  collected  8c  drawhe  by  (the 
fame)  Randle  Holme  of  the  Cilty  of  Chefter  Alderman. 

i.  b.  3.  b.  5.  b.  7>b. 

3.  The  faid  Randle  Holme’s  Receipt,  for  £3.  6.  8.  as 

the  Fee  for  the  Funerall-Certificate  of  Rafe  More  of  the 
Hall  of  Heath  in  the  County  of  Chefter,  Gent,  dated, 
26  February  1637.  2.  b. 

tj  4.  Some 


Bibliotheca?  Harleiann?. 


397 


Num.  2011. 

4.  Some  broken  Notes  of  Chefliire  &  other  Defcents, 

by  Ran.  Holme,  & c.  3.  B.  3.  D.  5.  B.  7.  A. 

5.  Quarterings  of  Sir  Richard  Houghton  of  Hough¬ 
ton.  3.  C. 

6.  A  Defcent  expreffinge  how  the  Lady  Anne  Sawer 

is  rightfull  Heyre  Generali  to  the  Blood,  auncient  Patry- 
mony,  &  Coale  Armore  of  Humphrey  Haughton  of 
Manchefter,  her  Great  Grandfather :  exemplified  from 
the  Records  of  the  Heralds  Office,  9  Aprilis  A.  D.  1627, 
by  Jo.  Philipott  Soinerfett.  3.  C.  b. 

7.  Funeral  Certificate  of  ....  Speed,  made  by 

John  Alton.  3. 

8.  Defcent  of  John  Manley,  of  Huxley.  5.  A. 

9.  Randle  Holme’s  Letter  (imperfed)  to  S'  Gilbert 

Houghton  Knight  and  Baronet,  defiring  him  forthwith 
to  fend  his  fathers  Funeral  Certificate,  and  £.6.  13.  4. 
being  the  Fee  incidental  to  his  Fathers  Degree,  which 
was  that  of  an  Eiquire  ;  or  otherwile,  laying  before  him 
the  danger  of  contefling  the  matter  in  the  F.arl-Mar (halls 
Court.  5. 

10.  Defcent  of  Lacy  Earl  of  Lincoln  with  fome  Notes. 

6.  A. 

11.  Defcent  of  Bollock.  7.  B. 

12.  Randle  Holme’s  Letter  to  Mrs.  Manwaringe, 

dated,  9  March  1637,  defiring  her  Hulbands  Funeral 
Certificate,  &  the  Fee  of  £.3:6  :  8.  for  enrolling  the 
fame  in  the  Office  of  Armes;  being  dew  for  a  Gentleman, 
becaule  he  was  buried  with  Armes  •,  els  it  had  byn  but  40 
(hillings.  Randle  complains  that  one  Dutton  made  the 
Efcocheons,  it  being  his  own  bufinefs,  as  Deputy,  to  do 
all  matters  of  that  kind  ;  and  therefore  threatens  poor 
Dutton.  9- 

Here  are  more  Scraps  of  fuch  like  Letters  from 
Randle  to  others  ;  which  I  omitt,  as  being  too  imperfed. 

13.  A  Print  containing  the  Genealogy  of  the  Royal 
Familie,  from  K.  Edward  iv.  to  K.  Charles  1.  and  his 
ion  Charier  Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards  K.  Charles  n. 

1 1.  A. 

14.  Sternma  Sacrum  ;  The  Royall Progenie.  1  f.  B. 
This  is  another  Print ;  engraven  by  i&gid.  Fleming. 

It  begins  higher  than  the  Conqueft  ;  and  is  carried  on 
to  K.  Charles  n.  but  not  without  feveral  manifeft  errors. 

15.  Pedegree  of  Cokeyne,  done  upon  Parchment.  12. 

16.  Defcent  ffiewing  how  Sir  William  Brereton  of 
Brereton  is  defeended  from  Hugh  Kiviliock  Earl  of 
Chefter  15.  B.  (with  other  genealogical  Notes  prefixed.) 

17.  Notes  8c  Defcent,  for  8c  of  the  Family  ul  Yonge. 

(vid.  infra  §  22.)  15.  C  :  16.  A,  &  B  :  18.  b. 

18.  Pedegree  of  Cockayne.  16.  18.  20.  21. 

19.  Les  Mahons  que,  par  Mafles,  font  foriis  de  la 

tres  noble  Maifon  de  Lufignan,  18.  A. 

This  is  a  tatterd  old  piinted  Paper,  cut  into  pieces, 
but  giving  the  Armes  of  the  feverall  Houfes  ;  done,  in 
French,  by  Eftienne  de  Lufignan,  Dodeur  de  l’Ordre 
des  Freres  Prefcheurs  ;  with  an  impertinent  Dedication 
prefixed. 

20.  The  Genelogie  of  the  worffiipfull  8c  auncient 

Families  of  the  Wynyngtons  &  Leaftwiches  of  Leaftwich 
in  the  Countie  of  Chelter  ;  contynued  vntill  this  yeare 
1597.  24- 

21.  Defcent  of  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby  ;  on  the  back 
of  the  fonner. 

22.  Part  of  the  Defcent  of  Younge.  29.  B. 

This  belongs  to  thofe  Papers  above-mentioned  at 

§  1 7.  and  has  (on  the  back)  fome  Notes  written  by  the 
Hand  of  Sr  William  Dugdale;  as  I  before  obferved  fome 
others  on  the  back  of  16.  A. 

23.  Pedegree  of  Arden  of  Warwick-fhire,  Cade,  8cc. 

34.  b.  vid.  48.  b. 

24.  Part  of  a  Defcent  of  Walker.  47.  B. 

25.  Defcent  of  Hocknell  of  London,  Merchant ;  by 
the  fecond  Randle  Holme  (on  the  other  fide  the  leaf) 

2 6.  Pedegree  of  Caldecote  Sc  Gamul ;  by  the  fame 

50- 

Cat.  IIarl.  Vol.  U. 


Num.  201 1,  201 2. 

27.  Defcents,  8c  little  Notes  conducing  to  a  Pedegree 
of  Stanley  (on  the  back  Tides  of  the  former  Papers). 

28.  Pedegree  of  Eaton  &  Bafkervile,  made  A.  D. 
1603;  &  fince  copied  by  the  fame  Randle  Holme.  62.  A. 

29.  Pedegree  of  the  Noble  Family  of  Nevil,  8c  of 

Smith.  62. 

30.  The  Genelogie  of  the  worffiipfull  8c  auncient  ( 

Families  of  the  Boftocks :  contynued  vntill  the  yeare 
1630.  78.  b.  80.  b.  b 2.  b.  84.  b.  86  b.  88.  b.  90.  b. 

92.  b.  94.  b.  &  96.  b. 

31.  Pedegree  of  Richard  Grofvenor  of  Eaton  Efq.  98. 

32.  Pedegree  of  Salulbury  ;  on  the  back  of  the  fame 
Papers. 

3}.  Pedegree  of  Brettarghe  of  Brettargheffioult ;  and 
on  the  fucceeding  backfides  of  Papers,  1 13.  b. 

34.  Pedegree  of  Dod  of  Edge.  1  24.  b. 

35.  Pedegree  of  Butler  of  Afton  in  le  Wales  in  Com. 
Northampton;  copied  by  the  faid  Randle  Holme.  1 26.  b. 

36.  The  third  Randle  Ilolmes  Alphabetical  Table  of 
the  Sur-names  of  Families,  mentioned  in  the  preceding 
Pedegrees. 

201  2. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confiding  chiefly  of  old 
8c  large  Pedegrees  both  of  Welfh  8c  Engliffi  Families, 
made  by  different  Perfons  at  different  times  ;  cutt  into 
lefler  portions,  and  (with  other  papers)  long  fince 
bound  up  together  in  the  order  following  ; 

1 .  Imperfett  Draught  of  the  Pedegree  of  Mulyneux. 
1,  3,  7,  9,  8c  11,  t  2.  according  to  the  new  Numeration 
with  Black  Lead. 

2.  The  Genealogey  of  the  worfliipfull  Mr.  Henrey 

Maynwaringe  of  the  Realme  of  Ireland,  A.  D.  1608. 
(Imperf.)  5.  b. 

3.  Fragment  of  a  Difcent  of  Rowley  8c  Rode.  6. 

4.  Genealogia  prteclarse  et  antiqute  Familiaj  de  Stanley; 

deferipta  rogatu  egregij  viri.  D.  Rollandi  Stanley  Domini 
de  Stanley  8c  de  Hoton  ;  per  Willelmum  Flower  Norroy 
et  Robertum  Glover  Soinerfett,  A.  D.  1580.  15. 

On  the  backfides  of  thefe,  and  fome  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  Leaves,  are  fragments  of  particular  Defcents,  not 
(in  my  poor  opinion)  worthy  of  any  fpeciall  mention. 

5.  Pedegree  of  Tannatt,  or  Tanatt  j  a  Welfh  Family. 

22. 

6.  Pedegree  of  Wilbraham.  28. 

7.  Pedegree  of  Warren  of  Stockport  8c  Poynton,  la¬ 
boured  A.  D.  1580.  33-  b. 

8.  Defcent  of  Mylneton.  40.  b. 

9.  The  Genealogie  of  the  Honourable  Thomas  Lord 

Fairfax  of  Denton,  Baron  of  Cameron.  42. 

10.  Theaunticnt  Genealogie  or  Pedegree  of  the  right 

worfhipful  Familey  of  the  Mandleys  of  Mandley  (/.  /. 
Mandley)  in  the  County  of  Chefler  ;  made  A.  D.  1638. 
by  Randle  Holme  of  Cheller,  Deputy  to  the  Office  of 
Armes,  who  had  feene  the  Originall  Deeds  and  Records 
that  proved  the  fame :  and  confirmed  by  Sir  Henry  S'. 
George  Norroy  44.  b. 

Intermixed  with  this,  I  find, 

1 1 .  Part  of  the  Defcent  of  Maflye  of  Padington,  taken 

A.  D.  1626.  45- 

1 2.  The  Names  of  the  chief  Peeres  of  England,  being 
the  reprefentatiue  Body  of  the  whole  Kingdome  in  Par- 
liamento  Lincoln.  A.  D.  1302.  tempore  Edw.  1.  45.  b. 

13.  The  Lyniall  Defent  of  Mr.  Starkye  of  Darley  or 
Ol  ton  Low'e. 

1 4.  Some  ffiort  Rules  or  Maxims  in  our  CommonLaw; 
moftly,  in  Law-French,  ibid ;  et  pag.  fequent. 

Then  comes, 

13.  The  Petegree  (with  the  Armes  rudely  painted)  of 
Sir  Thomas  Moitonof  Mofton  in  Northe  Wales  Knighte; 
fett  furth  by  Thomas  Jones  of  Tregaron  ;  and  fyniffied 
at  Founteyne-Gate  the  9th  of  Marche  A.  D.  1604.  52. 

This  is  noted  by  old  Randle  Holme  to  be  falfe  ; 
and  as  to  the  general  Character  of  this  Jones  of  Fountain- 
5 1  Gate, 


398 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2012,  2013. 

Gate,  I  think  I  have  remarked  fomewhat  in  one  of  the 
former  Volumes  of  this  Catalogue. 

Herein  I  alfo  find  intermixed, 

1  1 6.  The  Pedegree  of  Greene  of  Congleton,  to  the 

'  year  1650;  by  the  fame  Randle  Holme.  C4.  b. 

1 7.  Pedegree  of  Sir  Robert  Eaton  of  Ecntrv-madoc  ; 

by  the  fame.  '  ^  b. 

Then  comes  on, 

18.  1  he  Genelogye  of  the  worlhipfull  &  auncyent 

Famelye  of  Robert  Dokenfyld  of  Dokenfyld  in  the  County 
of  Chefter,  El'q.  g  r  1 

19.  Pedigree  of  the  Family  of  Warburton  collected 
for  Sir  John  Warburton  Knight,  Lord  of  Arley,  by 
Lawrence  Boftocke  Gent,  examined,  allowed,  &  re¬ 
corded,  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarencieulx,  A.  D.  1574.  72. 

Thefe  two  laft  Pedegree s  are  palled  back  to  back  : 
and  therefore  mull  be  confider’d  accordingly. 

20.  Pedegree  of  Dutton.  ~2  b 

a  1.  Pedegree  (imperfeff)  of  Alton  of  Tixall  or  fik’e- 
flul!)  8o- 

22.  Another  Defcent  of  the  fame  Family.  84.  b. 

23.  Defcent  of  Sutton  of  Gwerhillt  in  Com.  Denbigh. 

24.  Pedegree  of  the  Family  of  Pulteney;  bythe  above- 

mentioned  Randle  Holme.  g(j- 

25.  The  fame  Randle  Holme’s  Genealogie  of  the 

nght  worlhipfull  Sir  Robert  Byron  of  Colwick  in  the 
County  ofNotingham  K1  as  extracted  from  the  Pedegree 
made  for  his  brother  John  Lord  Byron.  88. 

z6.  Pedegree  of  Wynne  of  Caervadwyn  96.  b. 

27.  Another}  contrived  in  a  Circle,  according  to 
the  fancy  often  ufed  by  the  Wellh  Bards  or  Heralds.  00 

28.  Pedegree  of  Thel wall  100.  b. 

29.  Pedegree  of  Savage,  by  William  Smith  Rouge- 

Dragon;  as  I  fuppofe.  IQf 

1  his  is  faid  to*  have  been  made  at  London,  A  D 
1 580. 

Laftly,  follows 

30.  rlhe  third  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table  of 
the  Surnames  of  Families  mentioned  in  this  Volume  : 
but  pointing  to  the  fame  according  to  the  old  Numera¬ 
tion  of  the  Leaves. 


Num.  201  7. 


A  paper  Book  in  folio  (which  1  lhall  not  call  Poetical) 
relating  to  the  feveral  Companies  of  the  City  of  Chefter- 
which  I  having  partly  run  over,  lhall  defcribe  in  the 
following  manner. 

ThxTPr0n"'n,a‘ion  for  Wh!tfone  Playes,  made  by 
William  Newa  11  Clarke  of  the  Pendice,  anno  24  Ilenr. 
viii.  at  the  beginning. 

Il  fets  forth,  that  “  in  ould.  tyme,  not  only  for  the 
Augmentation  &  Increes  of  the  Holy  &  Catholick  faith 
and  to  exort  the  minds  of  common  people  to  cool  iv’ 
notton  &  holfome  Doarine;  but  alfo  for  the  Comon- 
wealth  &  Profpenty  of  this  Cttty,  a  Play  &  Declaration 
diuers  Stones  of  the  Bible ;  beginning  with  the  Crea 
non,  &  Fall  of  Lucifer,  and  ending  with  the  genera'll 

.ludgementof  th  Worid>  to  be  decfared  &  S  ' 

Whitfonne  weeke,  was  deuired  made  by  Sir  Henry 
trances  f°met)'me  Mooncke  there  ;  who  gat  of  Clement 
Rome  1000  dayes  of  Pardon  ■  and  of 
the  Bulhop  of  Chcifer,  at  that  tyme,  40  dayes  Pardon 
to  eucry  perfon  reforting,  in  peaceable  mane),  to  hire 

S'  C  ad  °  V  "’hlCh  ”el’C  in(lic“ted 1°  the  Honor 

of  God,  by  John  Arnway  then  Maior  of  Chefter  his 
Bretheren  jt  whole  Cominalty  thereof ;  to  be  brought 
forth,  declared  &  played,  at  the  Cod  &  Charges  of  the 
Craftefmen  A-  Occupations  of  the  fayd  Cirty,”S&c 
IT  1  L  nd<;™™h  the  Proclamation,  the  Third  Randal 
Holme  hath  wntten  that  Sir  John  Arnway  was  Matr 
A-  D.  1327  &  at  which  tyme  thefe  Pinvoc  ’ 

written  by  Randall  Higgenett  a  Monk  of  Chefter  Abby^ 


2.  The  Banes  which  are  reade  beefore  the  beginnings 
of  the  Playes  of  Chefter,  A.  D.  1 600.  S  S 

Here,  or  in  this  Prologue,  it  is  faid 
“  That  fome  tymes  ther  was  Mayor  of  this  Citie  Sir 
John  Arnway  Knight  :  who  moll  worthilye  content¬ 
ed  hymfelfe  to  fett  out  in  playe 
1  he  Devife  of  one  Done  Rondall  Moonke  of  Chef¬ 
ter  Abbey.” 

This  Rondall  might  be  Hikeden  or  Higden,  for 
ought 1  Know  (vid.  NJ.  2125.  fol.  272.  b  )  and' it  feems, 
that  his  Poetry  &  Language  being  grown  obfoletc,  the 
Draught  was  altered  for  the  Pageants  or  Playes  (as  thev 
are  called)  which  were  to  be  publickly  exhibited,  A.  D. 
1600.  and  then  this  very  uncorreft  Copie  feems  to  have 
been  taken  by  one  George  Beilin,  who  perhaps  might 
haveafted  fome  part  therein.  ThefePlayes  orTnterludes  are 
24m  Number,  and  their  feveral  Titles  are  thefethat  follow 
3.  The  fanners  Playe,  1600.  Pagina  prima  ;  (i.  e 
the  full  Pageant,  or  Pagin)  de  Celt,  Angelorum,  et 
mfirnahum  Spirituum  Creacionc.  1. 

4  l  he  Drapers  Playe.  Incipit  Pagina  fecunda  :  qua- 
liter  Deus  docuit  (f.  creavit)  mundum.  6. 

5.  i  he  Water-leaders  &  the  Drawers  of  Dee,  their 

Playe  ;  about  Noah  k  the  Floud.  b. 

(Here  Noah’s  Wife,  being  as  perverfe  as  Job’s 
iwears  by  Chrilh.)  fol.  i9.  (and  by  St  fohn.  fol.  21.) 

6.  I  he  Barbers  &  Wax-Chaundlers  Playe.  Incimt 

quarta  Pagina;  qualiler  reuerfus  eft  Abraham  a  cade 
quatuor  Regum,  occurrit  ei  Rex  Salem  equitando,  et 
Lothe; ,  23.  b. 

7.  1  he  Cappers  &  Linnen-Drapers  Playe.  Incipit 
1  agma  quinta  de  Moyfe,  et  de  Lege  fibi  data.  3  3. 

_  8.  ihe  Wnghtes  Playe.  Pagina  fexta,  de  Saluta- 
cione  et  Nativitate  Sal vatoris  Jefu  Chrifti.  4 , . 

9.  The  Painters  Playe.  Incipit  Pagina  feptima  de 
Paftonbus. 

1  o.  The  \  inteners  Playe.  Incipit  pagina  oft;  va, 
tnum  Regum  Orientalium  :  1 600.  64. 

11.  The  Marcers  Playe.  Pagina  nona,  de  Prcefenta- 

cione  five  Oblacione  trium  Regum.  7 1 .  b. 

12.  The  Gould-Smythes  Playe.  Pagina  decima,’  oc- 
cifione  Innocentium,  exllerodis  tirannica  perfuafione.  76. 

13.  The  Blacke-Smythes  Playe.  Pagina,  de  Puri- 

ficauone  beate  Virginis  ;  i6co.  83- b. 

1 4-  *  he  Bowchers  Playe.  Incipit  Pagina  duodecima  ; 
Jelus  duftus  eft  in  clefertum  a  lpiritu.  89.  b 

15.  1  he  Glovers  Playe.  Pagina  decima-tertia  ;  de 
coeco,  et  de  refurreftione  Lazare. 

1 6.  I  he  Corvifors  Playe.  Pagina  decima  quarta  ;  de 
Jelu  mtrante  domum  Simonis  I.eprofi,  etc.  104.  b. 

1 7.  I  he  Bakers  Playe.  Pagina  decima-quinta,  de 

Coena  Donum,  et  ejus  proditione.  j ,  ,, 

p.lS*  1  he  FLtchers,  Bowyers,  Cowpers,  &  Stringers 
ilaye.  Incipit  Pagina  decima-fexta  ;  de  paflione  Xpi. 

TI  .  ..  120.  b. 

19.  I  lie  Ire-mongers  Playe.  Incipit  Pagina  de  Cru- 

cfixione  Xpi  ;  et  de  his  que  fuerint  in  eundo  verfus  lo¬ 
cum  Calvarie.  I2 

20.  1  he  Cookes  Playe.  Incipit  Pagina  decima-fepti- 

ma,  de  defeenfuad  Inlerna,  et  do  his  que  ibidem  fiebant 
lecundum  Evangelium  Nicodemi.  j  38. 

21.  The  Skymiers  Playe.  Pagina  decima-oaava;  de 
Refurreftione  Jefu  Chrilli. 

_,,2.2‘  ^at^*eis  Playe.  Pagina  decima  nona  de 
Chnlto,  duobus  difeipulis  ad  Caflellnm  Bmaus  eunti- 
bus,  apparente  ;  et  alijs  difeipulis.  IJ4, 

23.  Ihe T aylors  Playe.  Incipit  Pagina  vicefima,  de 

Alcenfione  Domini.  ,  ^  b 

24.  I  he  Fiftieinongers  Playe.  Incipit  Pagina  vicefima- 

pnrna,  de  Eleftione  Matthia ;  et  de  emiftione  SpiritCis 
Sanfti.  Qualiter  Apoftoli  fecerunt  Symbolum  Apofto- 
heum,  viz.  Credo  in  DeumPatrem,  &c.  1C3.  b. 

25.  The  Cloth-workers  Playe.  Pagina  vicefnna-fe- 
cunda  e  libra  Ezechielis.  Fafta  eft  fuper  me  manus 

Dni. 


Bibliothecas  Harleiante. 


§99 


Num.  20T3 — 2015. 

Dni.  et  eduxit  me  fpiritus  Dili,  et  dimifit  me  in  medio 
campi  qui  erat  plenus  oftibus,  et  circumduxit  me  per  ea, 
mgiro.  (vid.  Cap.  xxxvn.  1.)  i72> 

26.  I  he  Diary  Playe.  Pagina  vicefima-tercia  ;  de 

adventu  Antichrifti.  176;  b. 

27.  I  he  Webfters  Playe.  Pagina  vicefima-quarta,  et 

omnium  poftrema  ;  de  Judicio  extremo.  1 8y. 

2014. 

An  Hiftorical  Book  in  fmall  folio,  all  written  by  the 
Hands  of  the  fecond  &  third  Randle  Holme’s  ;  being 
begun  in  or  before  the  year  of  our  Lord  1 656  (as 
appears,  in  fol.  17.  b.) 

It  is  only  part  of  a  rough  Draught  of  fome  larger 
Work,  which  ieems  to  be  theHiftory  of  the  City  of  Chefter; 
m  order  to  introduce  which,  it  was  thought  fit  to  premife 
fomewha't  touthing  the  Antient  Hiftory  of  Great  Britain 
m  general,  &  of  England  in  particular,  as  may  appear 
by  the  Contents  of  the  feveral  Chapters.  They  are. 
Chap.  1.  The  State  of  Brittaine  in  elder  tymes ;  and 
how  it  is  leated.  r 

Chjp.  11.  The  Names  by  which  this  Hand  hath  biiie 
talled-  .  a.  b. 

Chap.  III.  Of  the  Divifion  of  the  lie  into  Provinces, 
States,  Shires,  2c  Hundreds,  &c.  - 

Chap.  iv.  Of  the  Inhabitants  of  Chefliire  ;  and  from 
whence  they  are  originally  defended.  j  Q. 

Chap.  v.  The  continuance  of  the  Inhabitants  of 
Chefliire  ;  and  the  Countreys  from  which  they  are  faid 
to  be  defcended.  ,g.  b 

Chap.  vi.  Of  the  Languages  vfcd  by  the  people  in¬ 
habiting  Chefliire  ;  theire  efteeme  of  learning,  and  the 
feuerall  wayes  of  Writing,  &  formes  of  Letters  vfed  bv 
them‘  25.  b 

.  LChaP-  VII:  Of  feuerall  Habits  ufed  by  the  people 
inhabiting  this  our  Citty  &c  County.  5- 

Thefe  are  followed  by  a  lliort  Trad  or  Difcourle 
of  the  firft  Foundation  of  Chefter ;  which  concludes  with 
thefe>  words,  «  thus  far  of  the  State  &  Condition 
of  this  Citty  of  Chefter,  dureing  the  Roman  Gouern- 
ment.” 

This  work,  notwithfhmding  the  marginal  &  other 
Citations,  is  almoll  wholly  collefted  from  Books  printed 
m  Enghfii  ;  and  tis  much  pitty  that  thofe  two  induftrious 
men  had  not  Learning, Judgment,  &  Experience  fuflicient 
in  the  feuerall  parts  of  this  their  Undertaking.  Which 
if  they  had  perfevered  in  to  the  end  (notwithiianding  all 
its  defeAs)  might  have  afforded  us  Notices  of  many  things 
that  now  may  not  eafiiy,  if  ever,  be  retrieved.  ’ 


201  5. 

Codex  chartaceus  ac  per-tenuis  in  fol.  quo  continentur 
'•  Statute  Ecclefix  Cathedralis  Chrilti  et  B.  Maria: 
Vtrgtms  Ceftrenfts,  edita  per  fereniflinmm  ac  potentifli- 
mum  1  rincipem  Henricum  Oflavum,  dei  gratia  Anglite 
l'ranate,  et  Hibernia:  Regem,  Fidei  Defenforem,  et  in 
lernl  Ecclefix  Anglican*  et  Hibernia-,  fupremum 
Caput,  ejufdem  Ecclefia;  Ceftrenfts  Eundatorem.  1. 

Nomina  fua  fubfcripferunt,  Nicholaus  Wigorii 
Georgius  Ciceftrenfis,  et  Rkhardus  Cox.  Exemplar  hoc 
refcriptum  fuit  menfe  Augufti  A.  D.  1592. 

I  hey  are  followed  by  a  loofe  Tra£t,  wherein  I 

find, 

2;  Procuratiens  &  Synodalls  within  the  Archdeaconrie 
of  Chefter  due  yerly  at  Eafter,  to  the  Lord-Bufhopp 
there,  A.  D.  1605.  1 

3.  Synodalles  due  in  the  Arch-Deaconrye  of  Rich¬ 
mond,  at  Eafter  1605,  and  foe  yerly.  17.  b. 

4-  Procurations  due  in  the  Ordinarie  and  Tryeneall 
Vifitation  ;  which  was  firfte  holden  A.  D.  1 60  c  •  and 
foe  euery  three  Yeres.  ’2o< 

^5-  Procurations  (&  Synodalls)  due  to  the  Bufhopp  of 
Chefter,  m  his  Ordinarie  •&  Tryeneall  Vyfitation  within 
the  Arch-Deaconrye  of  Richmond,  A.  D.  160c  :  and 
loe  euery  three  Yc-ares.  22- 


Num.  2016. 


2016. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  divers  Tra£ts  relating  to 
the  City  or  Inhabitants  of  Chefter,  or  of  Chefliire,  writ¬ 
ten  by  different  Hands,  and  long  fince  bound  or  putt  to¬ 
gether  in  the  Order  following  ; 

1.  IN otes  of  certain  Interrogatories  relating  to  the  In- 
ventory  of  the  Goods  &  Perfonal  Eftate  of  Randle  Holme 
the  firft  then  deceafed  ;  dated  23  June  1655,  at  which 
time  Randle  Ilolme  the  fecond  was  aged;  and  his 
Ion  Randle  Holme  the  third  was  a  young  Man.  See 
the  firft  Leaf  next  the  Cover. 

2.  Account  of  the  Things  of  mod  Note  in  this  Book. 
On  the  other  fide  of  the  lame  Leaf, 

3-  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Confirmation  of  the  Liberties  & 
Privileges  granted  to  the  County-Palatine  of  Chefter; 
wherein  all  the  former  Charters  are  recited  by  Infpeximus. 
ibis  beareth  Tefte  at  Weftminfter,  28  Novembris,  anno 
Regm  2.  j 

4.  Form  of  a  Difiniflion  out  of  the  Chauncerye,  by 
Chefter  the  Privilege  of  the  Countye-Pallantyne  of 

5;  A  true  Copie  of  the  Graunte  of  the  Liberties  of  the 
Citne  of  Chefter,  and  the  makeinge  of  yt  a  Countie  of 
ytfelfe,  diftincf  from  the  Countie  Pallatyne  of  Chefter  : 
by  K.  Henry  vii.  in  the  2 1  yeare  of  his  Raigne.  1 6 

6.  Notes  relating  to  the  Princes  of  Wales,  and  fliewing 
that  the  1  arhament  hath  not  an  effential  Power  in  creating 
of  them  ;  to  the  Earls  of  Chefter,  &  Dukes  of  Cornwall. 

7.  Some  Hiftorical  Notes  relating  to  Chefter  taken 

out  of  an  ould  Vellome-booke  of  Mr.  John  Go’lbome 
of  Golborne,  A.  D.  1610.  .  ’ 

8.  The  Liberties  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter,  by  prefcrip- 
tion,  before  the  Citizens  had  any  Charter  graunted  them. 


Here  is  mention  of  dyuers  Liberties  &  a  Guvlde- 
Marcatorie.  1 

9.  Lift  of  the  Charters  granted  to  the  Cittie  of 

Chefter.  ibid; 

10.  form  of  the  Warrant  for  fummoning  all  proper 

Officers,  &c.  to  affemble  at  the  Seftions  of  the  Peace  in 
the  City  of  Chefter,  anno  30  R.  Henrici  Octavi ;  with 
the  Return  to  the  fame.  ,  ,  b 

ix.  Nomina  Officiariorum  8c  Miniftrorum  Dni.  Regis 
Coniitatu  Civitatis  Ceftrice,  anno  37  Regis  Henrici 

.  ,  Here  are  alfo  fome  other  Forms  or  Precedents,  ufed 
m  the  Courts  of  the  fame  City. 

12.  Notes  touching  the  Liberties  &  Privileges  granted 
to  the  Citizens  of  Chefter,  in  the  feveral  Chariers.  3  3  b 

13.  1  he  Meyres  &  Bounds  of  the  Circuite  of  the 

Liberties  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter.  .... 

In  this  1  itle  are  four  ofs,  which  feldome  occurrc  fo 
one  after  another. 

rq..  1  etition  of  William  Glafior  Vice-chamberlavne  to 

the  Earle  of  I^ceftre  Chnmberlayne  of  the  County  Pa. 
latyne  of  Chefter,  to  the  Lordes  of  the  Privie  Counfelle - 
wuh  the  annexed  Articles  of  Contempt  8c  Mifdemeanors 
done  by  Rychard  Dutton  in  part  of  the  tyme  of  his  Me- 
raltye,  agaynft  the  Queenes  Courte  of  Exchequer  of 
Chefter  the  Autfhontye  therof,  and  agavnft  ihe  Officers 
of  the  fame  Courte.  ' 

run  lhe,AufVML^re  of  Rychard  Dutton  Maior^of 
Chefter  to  the  Bill  6c  Articles  of  William  Glafior  44 

Girl6’  m1°f  Q-EIi^beth’s  Charter  granted  to  the 

City  of  Chefter,  whereby  the  Citizens  feemed  to  be 
freed  from  the  Chamberlaynes  Court,  and  to  be  fubiefred 
to  the  Jurifduftion  of  the  Chancery  of  England  ;  with 
objections  agamft  the  fame. 

17-  A  Letter  written  from  the  Counfell,  in  April, 
A-1 574  to  Sr  Walter  Myldmay,  S'Fraunces  Wal- 
fingham,  Sr  William  Cordell,  and  Thomas  Bromley  Efq; 
for  the  hearmge  of  the  matter  betwtene  the  Vice-cham- 
3t  ber.’ayne 


400 


Catalogue  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2016. 

bcdavne  of  the  Excheker  at  Chefter,  and  Mr.  Richard 
Dutton  the  Maior  of  the  Cittye  of  Chefter.  52. 

18.  Letter  or  Report  of  the  laid  Commiffioners  to 
the  Lords  of  the  Privie  Council,  dat.  3  Aprill,  1374- 

53* 

19.  A  final  Decree  made  by  the  faid  Lords,  for  the 
maintenaunce  of  thejurifdifition  ol  theCountye  Pallatyne, 
and  conceminge  the  Maior  &  Citizens  obedience  to  the 
fame,  and  the  Reformation  of  dyuers  Offences.  53- b. 

20.  A  Letter  from  the  fame ;  to  the  Maior,  Alder¬ 

men,  &  Cittizens  cf  Chefter,  for  the  performance  of 
theyre  Decree  ;  and  of  good  Advyfement  and  Admo¬ 
nition  from  the  former  Offences,  dat . April 


l57 4- 


l6.  b. 


21.  Of  the  Au&horitye  of  the  Exchequer  of  the 
Countye  Pallatine  of  Chefter  •,  and  the  dcnyall  of  the 
Aucthoritye  claymed  by  the  Cittye  of  Chefter.  59. 

22.  Notes  of  Recordes  remaininge  in  the  Exchequer 
of  Chefter,  to  proovc  the  Auflhoritie  of  the  faid  Ex¬ 
chequer  before  declared,  irom  the  time  of  K.  Richard  n. 

60. 

23.  A£les  of  Parliament  mayntevnmge  the  Aucthoritye 

of  the  faid  Exchequer  of  the  faid  Countie  Pallantine  of 
Chefter.  65. 

24.  Certayne  Notes  taken  out  of  the  Charters  of  the 

Cittie  of  Chefter.  65.  b. 

25.  The  Proceedings  df  the  Chamberlayne  of  Chefter, 

in  a  matter  in  the  Exchequer  of  Chefter,  betweene  two 
Citizens  of  the  fame  Cittie.  66. 

26.  A  Writte  of  Refumption  of  Honors,  Caftells, 

&c.  by  force  of  an  Adte  cf  Parliament,  in  the  Countie 
Pallantyne  of  Chefter.  69. 

27.  The  Sheriffs  Returne  of  the  Watte  of  Refumption, 

above.  69.  b. 

28.  Cuftomes  relating  to  the  Milnes  at  Chefter.  71. 

29.  TheCuftome  of  the  Countye  of  Chefter  for  the 

Lands  of  Heires  &  Gardeins  in  Socage.  ibid. 

This  is  a  Writ  bearing  Telle,  21  Julij  anno  25  R. 
Edwardi  1. 

3c.  The  Inquifition  made  vpon  the  Writt  next  before. 

7i.b. 

31.  A  Decree  in  the  Courte  of  Wards,  whereby  it  ap- 
petuvth  that  of  Lands  holden  of  the  Kinge  as  Earle  of 
Chefter,  by  Knights  Service,  no  Liverie  or  Ouftre  le 
Maine  is  to  be  lued.  (aim.  2  &  3  Phil.  &  Mar.) 

73; 

y.  A  Writte  of  Diem  claufit  extremum,  vfed  within 
rlic  Countie  ot  Chefter  ;  with  the  Inquifition  taken  upon 
it.  ibid. 

33.  A  Grant  made  by  the  Earle  of  Chefter  (the 
Black  Prince,  anno  35  Edw.  ui.)  of  the  Wardfiiippe  of 
the  Bodve  and  Lands  of  the  lleyre  of  Rycharde  Oldiu- 
011.  (with  the  1  iberate  upon  it,)  74. 

54.  The  Writt  for  the  Wardfliip  &  Mariage  of  "l'ho- 
vis  de  Crue’s  three  daughters;  with  the  Inquifition 
iken  thereupon,  anno  22  R.Edwardi  in.  _  ibid. 

35.  The  Clay  me  of  the  Wardfliip  &  Mariage  of  I  lughe 

f ]  rdi  . 

74-  b- 

36.  Specification  of  certain  Liberties  ufed  in  the  Coun¬ 
tie  ot  Chefter.  75. 

37.  A  Remarkable  Tlea  upon  a  Replevyn  ;  anno  2 

R.  Edwardi  n.  _  ibid. 

Some  others  follow,  wherein  the  Cuftome  vppon 
the  "1  rani’imintth  n  ..f  Ellates  '.if  Free-lv-ulde  is  declared, 
as  alio  in  the  Cafe  of  Hopping  of  a  Waie.  (ct  vid.  fol. 

73-) 

38.  A  Writte  of  K.  Edward  in.  to  Robert  de  Holland 

Inftice  of  C  i  viler,  commanding  him  to  delyver  up  the 
laid  Ollice,  and  till  tilings  thereunto  pertaining,  by  In¬ 
denture  to  Pagan  Tibetot  :  Tefte,  See.  24  Octobris, 
anno  Regni  3.  76.  b. 

39.  A  Cummiflion  to  take  up  Come  Sc  Victuals  for  the 
Warrcs  in  Scotland  ;  anno  3  R1  Edwardi  in.  7 7. 

ts 


Num.  2016. 

40.  The  Cuftomes  for  Felons  Goods.  77. 

4 1 .  The  Cuftome  of  the’Jixchecker  at  Chefter,  and  of 

the  Countye  of  Chefter.  77.  b. 

42.  An  Afition  brought  by  the  Kinge  againft  R.ichard 

Donn  Keeper  of  the  Forreft  of  Marra  ;  for  the  neglefit 
of  his  Dutye.  ibid. 

43.  Another  againft  one  for  killing  of  Deere  in  the 

Forreft  of  Mara.  ibid. 

44.  A  Prefentment  againft  manye,  for  hunting  in  the 

Foreft  of  Mara  ;  anno  13  R.  Edwardi  11.  78.  b. 

45.  A  Writte  againft  many  which  hould  (held)  theire 
Lands  in  Capite,  to  come  to  doe  theyre  Homage  Sc 
Fealtie  to  theEarle  of  Chefter,  anno  14.  R.  Edwardi  ir. 

ibid. 

46.  Ad  Inquifition  about  the  Changeinge  an  Highe 

Waye  from  Chirche-Copenhale  10  Wiche-Malbank,  anno  ; 
fupradiCto.  7  9* 

47.  A  Recognizaunce  for  the  Pavement  of  Money 

anno  fupradifito.  79.  b. 

48.  The  Prefentment  of  Ralf  le  Botiiler  for  the  Stop¬ 
page  of  a  Waye  ;  anno  fupradifito.  ibid. 

49.  A  Recognizance  for  a  Debt  to  the  Earle  of  Chef¬ 
ter.  ibid. 

50.  Indifitment;  of  Thomas  Wodenot  for  manye  Mis¬ 
demeanors  :  anno  13  R.Edwardi  11.  ibid. 

5 1 .  Notes  from  tlie  Plea-Roll  of  the  fame  Year,  touch¬ 
ing  Margeria  de  Arderne,  &c.  80.  b. 

52.  The  State  and  Petition  of  the  Caufe  touchinge 
the  Deane  Sc  Chapter  of  Chefter  to  the  Commiflioners. 

82. 

This  fliews  how  Sir  Richard  Cotton  having  a  Defign 
to  get  molt  of  the  Dean  and  Chapters  Lands  info  his 
pofleffion,  procured  Deane  Cliffe  to  be  caft  into  the 
Fleete-Prifon,  &  then  caufed  him,  with  only  two  of  the 
Prebendaries  to  grant  the  faid  Lands  unto  him  in  Ferine, 
at  lefs  than  the  old  Rents  :  who  having  taken  from  the 
fame  all  the  Commodities  he  could,  fold  them  to  certeyn 
Gentlemen  of  Chefhire,  at  not  above  two  Yeares  pur- 
chafe.  Hereupon,  the  fucceeding  Deans  fuing  the  ter¬ 
mors,  with  the  good  liking  of  Queen  Elizabeth  ;  She 
at  length  order’d  the  matter  to  be  heard  by  a  Special 
Commhlion.  More  concerning  this  important  affair,  the 
Reader  may  learn  from  the  following  Titles. 

53.  The  Fee-Fermors  Breviatt  of  the  State  of  the 
Caule  betweene  her  Majeftie  &  them,  about  the  Lands 
late  belonginge  to  the  Cathedrall  Church  of  Chefter.  8a!b. 

54.  The  Auditors  Report  concerning  an  Allowance 

to  be  made  to  the  faid  Dean  and  Chapter.  83. 

55.  Petitions  made  and  exhibited  on  the  behalf  of  the 

Fee-Fermors.  83.  b. 

56.  The  Kings  (i.  e.  K.  Henry  viti’s)  Proportion,  as 

to  what  every  perfon  fliall  be  allowed,  upon  his  Founda¬ 
tion  of  Chefter  Cathedral ;  and  what  Sommes  Sc  Payments 
were  to  be  charged  by  his  Letters  Patents.  84. 

57.  The  Allowance-  which  the  Deane  Sc  Chapter  de- 
maunde,  by  pretence  of  certeyn  Statuts  of  their  Iloufe, 
which  they  aljirme. 

5.8.  Her  Majefties  Commiflion  to  certen  of  the  Lords 
of  her  Privie  Councell ;  who  had  Charge  to  heare  &c 
determyne  the  Caufe  of  Chefter.  ibid. 

59.  Mr.  Attorney-General  Popham  his  Opinion,  touch¬ 
inge  Chefter  Cafe.  85.  b. 

This  (hews  that  K.  Henry  vin.lh’s  Grant  of  Lands 
to  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Chefter  was  void;  becaufe 
the  Words  in  the  Patent  were  only  “  Decano  &  Capitulo 
Keck  lie  C  •  Marie  Virginia  per  Nos 

dudum  crefit.  Sc  fundat . leavinge  out  this 

wo’rde  Cf.strie.”  85.  b. 

6r.  The  Order  fett  downe  by  the  Commiflioners, 

touchinge  the  matter  of  Chefter . Aprilis  1579* 

86. 

61.  The  humble  Petitions  to  the  Commiflioners, 
of  Raphe  Calveley  &  James  Glaleor,  poore  Lcafees  ;  for 
themfelves,  and  the  Reft  of  the  Lealees.  88. 

62.  The 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


401 


Num.  2oi6,  2017. 

62.  The  Words  wherevnto  the  Deane  &  all  the  Pre¬ 

bends  be  fworne  ;  taken  out  of  their  Booke  of  Statuts, 
Cap.  vi.  in  Dimiffi  >ne  Terrar.  89. 

63.  A  Difcourfe  by  William  Glaf^or  &  James  Glafe- 

or,  how  farre  Chefler-matter  hath  proceeded,  what  the 
Value  of  the  Lands  be.  89.  b. 

64.  The  Rentall  of  all  &  finguler  Mannours,  Lands 

Tenements,  &  Hereditaments,  and  all  other  PofTeflions 
whatfoever,  of  the  late  Abbey  of  St.  Warburge  within 
the  Cittie  of  Weft-Chefter  (except  the  Mannours  of 
Abbotts-Cotton,  Churche  Langton,  &  Wefton;  furveyed 
by  William  Bolles,  Efq;  &  John  Wifeman,  anno  32  R. 
Henrici  vm.  9°-  b. 

65.  The  Names  of  theFee-Farmers;  and  what  Landes 

they  houlde  from  the  Churche  of  Cheller.  92.  b. 

66.  A  Surrender  of  Landes  in  Chelhire,  made  to  the 
Oueenes  Majeftie,  by  the  Fee-Farmors  anno  21  R.  Eliz. 

94.  b. 

Note  :  The  Deane  &  Chapter  having  made  a  like 
Surrender,  her  Majeltie  graunted  the  Premiffes  ;  viz.  to 
the  Fee  Farmors  the  Lands;  and  to  the  Deane  &  Chap¬ 
ter  the  Rents  of  the  fayd  Lands. 

67.  The  Attorney  Generali’s  Information  in  the  Fx- 
chcker,  againft  the  Fee-Finnars  ;  anno  1  8  R.  Eliz  96. 

6S.  A  briefe  Abftracle  concerning  ihe  late  Abbey- 
landesof  Cheller,  how  they  hauebinne  enjoyed  fythence 
the  Suppreflionof  the  fame  :  and  proveth  much  to  be  con¬ 
cealed,  fubllrac'ted,  or  wrongfully  deteyned  from  her 
Majeftie.  98.  b. 

9 9.  The  Opinion  of  Serjeaunt  Popham,  touchinge 
Chefter-Cafe.  (The  fame  with  that  above  at  §  58.)  99. 

70.  The  Confirmation  of  the  former  Reafons,  by 
certeyn  Judges  &  others  lerned  in  the  Lawes  of  England. 

100. 

71.  What  followed  upon  the  Information  above  men¬ 
tioned  at  §  66  ibid. 

72.  A  brief  AbftraiEl  concerning  her  Majefties  Graunt 

in  Fee-Ferme  of  all  the  fayd  Lands,  to  Peter  Greye  and 
Edward  Gray,  the  19  Eliz.  too.  b. 

73.  Concerning  the  Reft  of  the  fayd  Abbey-lands, 
vnfold  ;  remayninge  onley  in  Hitchcock  as  Surviver  of 
Bollock;  with  the  Names  of  the  Occupiers  thereof.  10 1  .b. 

2017. 

An  old  Heraldical  Book,  in  final!  folio,  done  by  many 
hands  :  wherein  I  find, 

1 .  The  laft  Randle  Holme’s  account  of  the  Things 
of  Note  in  this  Booke.  At  the  beginning, 

2.  Names  of  Churches  from  which  Notes  have  been 

taken,  and  entred  into  this  Book.  ibid. 

3.  His  Table  to  the  Armes,  & c.  entred  into  this  Bcok. 

4.  A  Fragment  confifting  of  four  Leaves  only,  re¬ 

lating  the  manner  ofK.  Henry  vmth’s  Death;  his  Lying 
in  State;  Sc  carrying  to  St.  George’s  Chapel  at  Windfor, 
to  be  buried.  1 . 

5.  Example  of  the  Hatching  of  Efcocheons,  in  order 

to  ftiew  their  feveral  Colors  ;  done  according  to  the  old 
way,  which  differs  from  that  now  in  Ufe.  9. 

6.  A  very  large  Collection  of  Armes,  and  Crefts,  be¬ 

longing  to  our  Nobility  &  Gentry  ;  together  with  fome 
few  of  Foreigners  all  trick’d  or  blafon’d  promifeuoufly  ; 
&  for  the  molt  part  very  rudely.  9. 

Among  them  I  obferve, 

7.  Armes  of  divers  Families,  with  their  Blafonmenl 
in  French  ;  perhaps  from  fome  Book.  1 1,  19,  31. 

8.  Other  Armes  taken  out  of  annother  olde  Booke  of 

Sr  George  Calveleyes,  a0,  dni  1572.  18,  23. 

9.  Armes  of  the  Companies  of  Drapers,  &  Shoema- 

kers.  _  41- 

10.  Armes  of  many  antient  Chelhire-Families.  43,  93, 

143,205,217. 

11.  Notes  taken  in  Lancaftre-Churche.  44. 

12.  Armes  found  in  an  Houfe,  &  in  the  Churche  of 

Uttcetter  (1.  Utocksrcefter)  A.  D.  1 577.  45. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vox..  II. 


Num.  2017,  2018. 

13.  Armes  in  the  new  Shire-Hall  at  Darbie,  A.  D- 

1 577*  46- 

14.  Supporters,  &  Badges  ufed  by  many  of  our  En- 

glilh  Kings.  48. 

15.  Armes  found  in  the  Priorie  of  Litham,  in  the 

Countie  of  Lancaftre.  53. 

16.  Armes  found  in  the  Churches  of  Kirkham,  A.  D. 

1583.  Swetnamin  Com.  Ceftr.  A.  D.  1582.  &  Alderley 
ineodem  Comitatu,  A.  D.  15S2.  and  at  Han by-Church,  ([ 

A.D.  1589.  ibid. 

1 7.  Armes  of  divers  Chelhire  Families,  from  the  Vifi- 

tation-book  of  A.  D.  1580.  57. 

18.  Armes  in  Davenham- Churche,  &  Towne.  59. 

et  vid.  fupra  49. 

19.  The  Names  of  all  Sorts  of  Seeds  which  are  to  be 

fowen  in  Winter  &  Somer.  61. 

20.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Bunbury.  64. 

2 1 .  Notes  taken  in  Mynlhell  ( Minihull) Churche.  74. 

2?.  Armes  found  in  Prefcot-Churche.  76. 

23.  Armes  in  Mellinge-Chapel ;  Sephton-Churche ; 

and  in  Farneworth-Churche.  ibid. 

24.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Alhebume  in  the 

Peake,  in  Com.  Derby.  77,  &  78. 

25.  Armes  found  in  Aldrydge-Churche  in  Com.  Staf- 

fordie,  ac  dni.  1583.  t  ibid. 

26.  Armes  in  ihe  Church  of  St.  Marie  at  Notii>gham. 

78. 

27.  Armes  in  the  Houfe  of  one  Clowes,  in  Alheburne. 

ibid  j 

28.  Armes  of  Englilh  Bifiiopricks.  79. 

29.  Names  offome  of  thofe  Chieftains,  who  came  into 

England  with  William  the  Conqueror.  80. 

30.  Part  ofa  Delcent  or  Savage.  1  81. 

3 1 .  Church-notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Bf-adburne.- 

S3- 

32.  Armes  in  the  Churche  at  Ofweftrie,  A.  D.  1586. 

ibid. 

33.  Notes  taken  in  the  Churche  of  Melton-Mowbray, 

in  Com.  Leceftr.  A.  D.  158  3.  84. 

34.  Armes  taken  from  Cookes  Baronage.  85. 

35.  Armes  of  many  antient  Families  in  Comitatu  Sa- 

lopie.  105. 

36.  Armes  of  antient  Derby-lhire  Families.  119. 

37.  Armes  of  antient  Families  in  Com.  Warwic.  125, 

i33=,39>  237. 

38.  Armes  of  antient  Families  in  Lancalhire  &  York- 

Ihire.  129,135. 

39.  Armes  of  fome  antient  Families  in  Com.  Nor- 

thampt.  141. 

40.  Armes  of  antient  Families  in  Stafford Ihire.  189, 

213. 

41.  Armes  of  the  Univerfity  &  Colleges  of  Cambridge, 

printed.  220. 

42.  Armes  taken  by  L.  B.  (i.  e.  Laurence  Bollock) 

out  of  Raffe  Trefwelles  boke.  221. 

43.  Armes  of  the  Gentry  of  Leicefter  Ihire.  227. 

44.  Fragmentum  Statutorum  Ordinis  Carthufienfis  in 

membranis.  250. 

20l8. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  divers  Tracts,  or  leffer 
Books,  long  fince  bound  or  done  up  together,  by 
reafon  of  their  Subjedl  ;  which  is  that  of  the  Sequef- 
trators  Accompts  of  what  they  had  plunder’d  the  Roy- 
alills  of,  during  feveral  Years,  in  the  Hundred  of 
Wirral,  within  the  County-Palatinate  of  Cheller;  as 
may  appear  by  the  following  Titles. 

1.  The  Accompts  of  George  Ball,  Thomas  Bennett, 

Richard  Harrifon,  Ik  Roberte  Leene,  fowre  of  the  Se- 
queftrators  for  Wirrall-Hundred,  from  the  6  of  Nov. 
1644.  to  the  26  of  Nov.  1646.  1. 

This  is  the  Originall,  figned  by  all  their  Hands,  & 
delivered  in  upon  Oath,  30  March  1648. 

2.  A  true  Accompte  of  all  fuch  Rents  &  Moneys  as 

5  K  have 


I ;  ■  • 


t 


Catalogus  Librorum 


Num.2018. 

have  ben  receiued  by  Thomas  Brofter  one  of  the  Sequef- 
ratours  for  the  Hundred  of  Worral ;  vntill  Candlmafs, 
1645.  And  alfo  of  his  Difburfements  21. 

This  was  deliver’d  in,  to  the  Committee,  upon  Oath, 
the  3  of  December,  1646. 

3.  The  Accompts  of  Richard  Coventrey  and  Henry 
Ilancocke,  both  of  Receipts  &  Difburfements,  within 
theire  Allotments,  fmce  the  10  of  Nov.  1644.  vnto  the 
22  of  January  1645.  togeather  with  whatt  Rents  were 
found  to  bee  due  &  vnpayed  from  Sir  Thomas  Powell 
his  Tennants,  att  the  29  of  September  A.  D.  1644.  2 9. 

Several  of  the  Accompts  in  this  Article,  are  car¬ 
ried  on  much  lower;  even  to  the  year  1647.  And  they 
being  figned,  were  delivered,  upon  Oath,  to  the  Com¬ 
mittee  of  Accompts  for  the  County  of  Chelter,  20 
March  1648. 

4.  A  true  Accompt  of  Thomas  Kirkes  one  of  the  Se- 

queftratouis  for  the  Hundred  of  Wirehall  ;  of  all  the 
Delinquents  Lands,  old  Rents  &  Goods,  with  their 
Names,  within  his  Divifion,  from  the  24  January  1645, 
vntill  the  24th  of  June  1646.  74. 

1  his  Book  was  delivered  in,  by  Kirkes,  upon  Oath; 
as  part  of  his  Accompts,  13  Aug.  1646. 

5.  An  Acompt  of  the  publicke  Monie  received  &  dif- 

burfed  fmce  the  making  up  of  the  Iaft  Accompts  2 }  Jan. 
1645,  by  1  ho.  Kirks  &  Tho.  Crolle  Sequeftrators  in  the 
Hundred  of  Wirrall  :  unto  the  24  June  1646.  80. 

This  Book,  being  figned,  by  Crofle,  was  deliuered 
vppe  to  the  Committee,  vpon  Oa'he,  13  Aug.  1646. 

6.  A  true  &  perfeft  Accompte  of  Thomas  Kirkes, 
one  of  Sequeftrators  for  the  Hundred  of  Wirehall  ;  of  all 
the  Profitts  of  the  Delinquents  Goods,  Lands,  Rents, 
within  his  Devifion  ;  from  24  June,  vntill  the  25  No- 
vemb.  1646.  together  with  his  Diiburfements.  90. 

This  Accompt  was  delivered  in  vpon  Oath,  3  De¬ 
cember  1646. 

7.  A  true  Accompt  of  Rents  &  Moneys  reed,  by  Tho. 

Brofter,  one  of  the  Sequeftiators  for  the  Hundred  of 
Wirrall  in  the  County  of  Chefter,  fmce  the  2  Febr. 
1645,  vntill  the  25  of  Nov.  1646  :  and  alfoe  the  Dif- 
burfements  of  all  fuch  Receipts.  99. 

'lhefe  Accounts  were  delivered  upon  Oath,  to  the 
Committee,  3  December,  1646. 

8.  An  Acompt  of  what  Monie  hath  beene  receiued 
by  1  homas  Crolle  one  of  the  Committee  for  Sequeftra- 
tions,  in  the  Hundred  of  Wirrall,  from  the  l'equeftred 
F  Hates  in  his  Alotment ;  from  24  June  1646  :  vntill  the 

2  day  of  October  next  following  :  together  with  his  Dif- 

burfements  from  the  fame.  x  IO 

9.  An  Acompt  of  what  Monie  was  reed,  by  Tho. 

Croire  one  of  the  Sequeftrators  for  the  Hundred  of 
VY'irral  ;  fmce  the  fecond  day  of  Oftober,  1646:  vntill 
the  24  day  of  November  following  :  with  his  diiburfe¬ 
ments.  1,6. 

'lhefe  Accompts,  (that  is,  this  &.  the  former)  were 
given  in  vpon  Oath,  to  the  Committee,  by  the  faid  Crolfe 

3  Dec.  1646. 

10.  Ihree  Books  of  like  Accompts  for  the  yeare 

1647,  figned  by  Richard  Johnfon  another  of  the  Sequef¬ 
trators  in  the  faid  Hundred  ;  and  delivered  vpon  Oath 
the  30th  of  March  1648.  122/ 

N-B.  fol.  149  is  tranfpofed,  and  fliould  have  been 
the  firft  Leaf  of  thefe  Accompts. 

t  1 .  A  true  ?:  perfect  Account  of  the  Receipts  &  Dif- 
burleniems  of  Richard  Johnfon  one  of  the  Sequeftrators 
of  the  Hundred  of  Wirrall,  fmce  the  firft  of  December 
1646,  in  the  Office  of  Sequeftrations  :  to  the  1  cth  of 
April  1647.  J 

This  Accompt  being  figned  by  Johnfon,  feems  *to 
have  been  delivered  in,  to  the  Clerks  attending  the  Com- 
mitee  of  Accompts,  go  March  1648. 

1 2.  A  true  &  juft  Acompt  of  all  fuch  Monies  arifeinc 
from  the  Eftates  Rcall  &  Perfonall  of  fuch  Delinquents 
m  the  Hundred  of  Wirrall,  as  hath  beene  received  by 


Num.  2018 — 2020. 


Hugh  Janion  one  of  the  Collectors  of  the  faid  Hundred, 
fmce  the  firft  of  December,  1646  :  untill  the  28th  of 
March  1C48  :  together  with  his  Diiburfements.  163. 

Thefe  Accompts  being  figned  by  Janion  aforefaid  ; 
were  delivered  in  vppon  Oath,  30  March  1648. 

2019. 

A  Theological  Book  in  folio,  written  almoft  wholly  by 
the  Hand  of  Edward  Shawc  of  Halton  in  Chefhire  ; 
who  having  been  Curate  to  Mr.  Jhon  Brcreton  Parfon 
ofMeouftokein  Hatnpfliire,  in  the  Yeare  1576,  be¬ 
came  Chaplain  to  Sir  John  Savage  of  Baraver  in  the 
fame  County,  Knight,  as  may  appear  in  the  Notes  by 
him  written  in  fol.  2.  b.  But  more  particularly  I  find 
therein,  before  the  work  which  commenceth  at  the 
Leaf  numbered  fol.  1. 

1 .  Two  Notes  relating  to  the  faid  Sir  John  Savage  or 
his  Family  ;  Notes  about  a  Comet  which  appeared  A.  D. 
1577  ;  about  the  Death  of  William  Downham  Biftiop  of 
Chefter  ;  and  the  building  of  Frodfhain  Bridge  :  among 
much  Scribble  in  the  firft  unmarked  page. 

а.  Some  Notes  about  Baptifine  ;  with  an  Aftrological 
Table  :  on  the  next  page  tranfverfed. 

Then  turning  back  3  Leaves  you  may  find, 

3.  A  Preface  of  Hugh  Kinge  Mufician,  in  Defence 
of  Dauncing,  and  of  Organs  ;  againft  divers  of  the  Pu- 
ritanically-affeCted  Clergy  ;  feeining  to  have  been  copied 
from  a  printed  book. 

Then  turning  the  book,  as  before,  we  find 

4.  The  Sumnie  &  Content  of  all  the  Holv  Scripture, 
both  of  th’Old  &  New  Teftament- 

5.  Certain  Theological  Verles,  &  lliort  Notes. 

б.  The  Nature  &  Expofition  of  the  12  Signs  of  the 
Zodiac,  applied  to  Mens  Inclinations  &  Tempers. 

7.  Part  of  Wi.  T.’s  (Wll.  Tindale  ?)  Preface  vnto  the 
Reader,  giving  the  Somme  &  Contents  of  the  Scripture 
(the  wrong  fide  upward.) 

8.  Notes  of  no  Relation  to  one  another  ;  and  of  little 
moment. 

9.  Table  fhewing  the  Times  of  the  moveable  Feafts, 
from  A.  D.  1574.  to  15 90.  perhaps  taken  from  the 
Service-booke. 

Then  comes  the  principal  Work  of  the  Book,  being. 

10.  An  Explication  of  very  many  places  or 'lexis  of 

the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  feem  to  be  repugnant  to  each 
other.  . 


11.  Part  of  a  Table  to  the  faid  Work. 


150.  b. 


2020. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  divers  Hands  (but  chiefly  by 
that  of  the  fccond  Randle  Holme)  on  the  out-fide 
thus  entituled,  “  Deeded  concerneing  the  Citty  of 
Chefter;  the  Citty-Lands,”  etc.  which  leaning'  too 
general  I  fhall  take  the  Liberty  of  obferving  thefe  par¬ 
ticulars  that  follow. 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  Things  of  prin¬ 
cipal  note  in  this  booke  :  made  A.  D.  1669. 

At  the  beginning, 

2.  An  Alphabet  of  Men’s  Names  ;  or  of  the  Names 
of  Families,  mentioned  in  this  Book. 

3.  Notes  out  of  a  little  booke  in  the  Maiors  Cheft, 
when  William  Dauifon  was  Maior  ;  an»o  9  Hen  vm. 

390.  A. 

Herein  are  Notes  of  Pleas  in  the  Port-mote-Court 
there,  v.  9.  Richard  Jauyn  for  breaking  a  Welfhman’s 
Head,  fined  in  6s.  8d.  1  ho.  fil.  Willi.  Flelher,  for  break¬ 
ing  Will.  Mercer’s  Head,  3s.  4d.  and  Will.  Mercer  to 
pay  as  much. 

4.  1  he  Manner  of  the  Entrance  of  Free  men  at  a 
Port-moote-Court  :  (or  Freemen  of  ould  how  made.) 

39°-  b. 

5.  A  Precedent  of  a  Man’s  being  made  free,  with¬ 
out  paying  any  Fine  ;  becaufe  his  Father  was  free 
before  his  Birth. 

6.  Notes 


H  I 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


4°  3 


Nam.  2020. 

6.  Notes  out  of  an  other  fmall  Booke  in  Mr.  Maiors 

Cheft.  390.  C. 

Here,  among  other  matters,  I  find, 

7.  That  anno  16  R.  Henrici  vi.  Richard  Playmond- 
flow  of  Chefter,  Clerk,  late  Dean  of  Chefter,  was  fued 
for  Extortion. 

8.  That  the  Sheriffs  held  an  Inquifition  &  Inditements 

without  the  Maior.  396.  C.  b. 

9.  That  anno  17  R.  Henrici  vi.  the  whole  Company 

of  Bakers  were  inditfled,  upon  a  Combination  among 
themfelves.  390.  D. 

1  o.  Cuftomes  of  the  Citty,  payable  for  Goods  carried 
into  Ireland,  and  out  of  Ireland,  by  Pack,  8cc.  390.  E. 

11.  Cuftoms  paid  for  Entrance  of  Shipps  &  Goods 

out  of  Irland.  390.  E.  b. 

12.  Fines  Carnificum  extra  Libertatem.  390.  F.  b. 

Hereby  it  appereth,  the  Buchers  were  fined  that 

fould  within  the  Libertyes  without  Licence ;  and  alfo 
payd  Toleat  Gates: 

13.  Abftrafts  out  of  fome  Roules  in  the  Treafure- 

Howfe  of  Chefter,  taken  A.  D.  1645.  390.  H. 

14.  Lift  of  Writings  or  Inftruments  in  the  Mayors 

Boxes.  390. 

15.  Of  a  Gift  bequeathed  to  the  City  of  Chefter,  by 

Thomas  Alderfey  Citizen  and  Haberdalher  of  London, 
A.  D.  1608.  395. 

16.  Bond  of  the  Companies  of  Wrights,  Sawyers  8c 
Slaters  to  the  Incorporation  of  Chefter,  for  their  future 
better  behaviour,  dat.  20  Oft.  anno  33  R.  Eliz  396. 

17.  Of  the  Gift  bequeathed  to  the  City  of  Chefter, 
by  I’oulk  Alderfey  Alderman,  circa  ann.  1 1  R.  Jacobi. 

400.  b. 

18.  Indenture  concerning  the  Gift  of  Dame  Elizabeth 

Booth  Widow,  to  the  City  of  Chefter,  See.  dat.  14  Jan. 
ann.  1 7  R-  Jacobi  1 .  401. 

19.  Extrafts  from  the  Counterparts  of  Chefter-Cities 

Leafes.  402. 

20.  Agreement  between  John  I  Ioland  Yeoman-Ulher  of 

the  Kinges  Chamber,  8c  the  City  of  Chefter,  who  claimed 
the  Office  of  Gawgerlhipp  within  their  Citty,  as  apper- 
tayning  to  them,  8c  in  their  Difpofition :  which  Office 
being  given  by  the  King  to  Holand,  he  rcleafes  to  the 
Citty,  in  Confideration  of  a  Sum  of  Money,  dat.  3  June 
ann.  30  Hen.  vm.  418. 

21.  Indenture  {hewing  that  Owen  Johnes  did  receive 

for  the  City  of  Chefter,  according  to  the  Direftion  of 
Thomas  Buchurft  Lord  High  Threforer  of  England,  8c 
Sir  John  Fortifcue  Kt.  Chancelor  8c  Under-Threafurer  of 
the  Exchequer,  of  Vincent  Skynner  Efq;  one  of  the 
Officers  of  the  Receipt  of  the  Exchequer,  one  Standard- 
Bufhell.  Gallon,  Quart,  &  Pint,  ofBrafie:  hauinge  her 
Highnes  Stile  &  Armes  imboffed,  8c  in  fundrey  places 
ftamped  with  the  Letter  E  &  Crowne  Imperial!,  and  Ex- 
chequer-Stampe  in  the  bottom  ;  all  meal'ured,  rryed,  8c 
fized,  by  her  Majefties  Standard  ;  in  the  laid  Cittv  of 
Chefter  to  be  fafely  kept,  for  the  Ufe  8c  Profitt  of  the 
Common-Wealth,  according  to  the  Aft  of  12  Hen.  vn. 
For  which  Meafures,  (with  fome  Incidental  Charges)  the 
laid  Owen  Johnes  dilburfed  ^’7.  2.  3.  dat.  4  May  ann. 
44  R.  Eliz.  418.  b. 

Then  follow, 

22.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  Magiftrates  of 
Chefter,  to  fome  Lord  (perhaps,  to  the  Lord -Treafurer 
Burghley)  fetting  forth,  that  their  Butchers  having  lately 
enhaunfed  the  Prices  of  Flefh,  they  were  conftrayned  to 
call  in  the  Countrcy-Butchers,  by  whole  repaire  thither, 
the  Citie  was  better  Sc  more  reafonably  ferved.  And  be- 
caufe  there  was  noe  convenient  place  to  ereft  any  Sham¬ 
bles  within  that  Cittie  ;  and  that  the  ould  Shicr-Hall  (ad- 
joy  neinge  to  the  fame)  being  vneouered  8c  in  ruyn, 
might  be  made  very  commodious  for  fuch  a  purpofe : 
they  humblie  befeeche  him  to  be  a  meane  that  the  Citie 
might  haue  the  faied  decaid  Howfe  and  Rowme,  for  fuch 
Confideracon  as  fhould  be  thoughte  reafonable.  Jnti- 


Num.  2020. 

mating  befides  that  albeit  their  habilities  extended  not 
to  gratifie  his  Lordffiip  in  any  Refpefte  as  they  ought  ; 
yet  did  they  prefume  this  Bouldnefs  to  fende  vnto  his 
honour  half  a  dozen  of  Chelhire  Cheefes.  dat.  4  Febr. 
1578.  420. 

23.  Letter  from  Sir  Hugh  Cholmondeley,  to  the  fame 

Lord  Treafurer,  8c  Sir  John  Fortefcue  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  ;  certifying,  that  the  Mayor  &  Citizens  of 
Chefter  having  obtained  their  Suite  for  tranfporting  the 
old  Shire-hall  into  their  Citie,  and  making  the  upper  part 
of  it  into  a  Garner  to  ferve  for  the  Stowadge  of  her  Ma¬ 
jefties  Corne,  or  other  Provifions  ;  and  a  Flelh-Shambles 
or  open  Markett  underneath  ;  which  had  been  done  with 
great  Expenfe  :  there  was  come  forth  from  their  I  lonors 
a  mean  Proces  againft  the  Maior  8c  Inhabitants  of  the 
Cittie,  for  £.40.  for  the  Price  of  the  laid  ould  Shire-hall, 
as  though  the  fame  had  beene  bought  for  fo  much  money, 
dat.  23  May  1594.  421. 

24.  Another  Letter  of  the  fame,  to  the  faidLord  Trea¬ 

furer,  as  it  feemeth,  certifying,  that  he  had  furveyed  the 
old  Shire  hall,  8c  found,  in  refpeft  of  the  great  Want  of 
fuch  a  Houfe,  to  ferve  for  the  laying  up  of  the  Corne  8c 
Vifttialls  provided  for  her  Majefties  Gatrifon  in  Ireland; 
and  that  the  building  of  the  fame  would  be  very  charge¬ 
able  to  her  Majeftie,  as  it  will  be  to  the  Citizens :  his 
Lordffiip  could  not  any  otherwife  haue  fo  profitablie  8c 
honorablie  bellowed  the  fame ;  as  well  for  the  benefitt  Sc 
furtherance  of  the  Queenes  Service,  as  to  releeue  the  faid 
Cittie  with  a  Roonie  for  an  open  Fleffi-Shambles,  which 
they  ftand  greatly  in  neede  of.  421.  b. 

25.  The  Lord  Treafurer  Burleigh’s  Letter  to  Sir  Hugh 

Cholmondley  Kt.  Surveyor  of  her  Majefties  Lands  in 
Chelhire.  Shewing,  that  notwithftanding  Mr.  G  labour 
8c  Mr.  Bollock  had  a  fort  of  Promife  of  the  preferment, 
before  others  in  buying  of  the  old  Shire-hall ;  yet  being 
moved  by  Letters  from  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  8c c.  to 
permitt  the  fame  to  be  converted  to  fome  neceffaric  ufe  ; 
as  the  vpper  part  to  be  a  Garner  for  her  Majefties  Pro¬ 
vifions,  and  the  lower  part  for  a  Shambles  :  He  requires 
Sir  Hugh,  if  he  knows  not  Caufe  whie  the  fame  were  bet¬ 
ter  to  be  otherwife  imployed,  to  giue  Order  that  the 
Maior  may  proceede  to  the  repaire  or  alteringe  thereof 
to  the  purpofes  aforefaid.  dat.  1  Sept.  1581.  422. 

26.  Sir  Hugh  Cholmondley  s  Letter  to  William  Bird 

Mayor  of  Chefter,  warranting  him  or  his  Deputies,  on 
the  behalf  of  the  Citizens,  to  take  Sc  receive  the  ould 
Shire-Hall,  to  be  forthwith  altered,  converted,  repayred, 
8c  imployed  for  and  to  a  Garner  for  the  Stowage  of  her 
Majefties  Corne,  or  other  Provifions  ;  and  a  Flefli  Sham¬ 
bles  or  open  Market  to  be  made  underneath,  dat.  1  o 
Oftober  1581.  422.  b. 

27.  Notes  relating  to  the  payment  of  £40.  for  the 

faid  old  Shire  hall,  by  the  Mayor  Sc  Citizens  of  Chefter  ; 
and  alfo  ot  £45-  2.  6.  wherein  they  were  amerced  anno 
4  R.  Eliz.  of  which  Sums  they  were  difeharged  18  June 
1594-  ibid. 

Then  follow  more  Abftraftsof  Chefter-City-Deeds, 
among  which  I  particularly  note, 

28.  Some  relating  to  Lands  in  Bcrffiam  in  Com.  Den- 

bigh,  whofe  Names  arc  Wellh.  428.  b. 

Thcfc  Lands  were  purchafed  by  Valentine  Brough¬ 
ton  Alderman  of  Chefter,  and  were  by  him  bequeathed 
to  the  Citty,  to  divers  charitable  purpofes.  Here  alfo 
follow  divers  other  Extrafts  relating  t,o  the  laid  Mr. 
Broughton’s  Will  Sc  Eftate. 

29.  Abftrafts  of  Deeds  relating  to  Yfcoyd  Lands. 

433.  b. 

30.  Short  Notes  extrafted  from  the  feveral.  Charters 
granted  to  Chefter;  irregularly  faftened  in,  at  4^7. 

31.  Abltraft  of  a  Deed  relating  to  an  Houfe  in  Bridge- 
ftreet,  belonging  to  the  Maior  8c  Commonalty  of  Chef¬ 
ter  A.  D.  1423  :  and  afterward  loft  by  them.  441. 

32.  Grant  of  an  annual  Rent-charge  ot  20  Shillings, 
by  Richard  Dutton  Maior  of  Chiller,  Sc  others  ;  to 

2  William 


4°4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2020. 

William  Leech  kc.  for  the  Reparation  of  S'.  Peters  Church 
there  for  ever.  dat.  15  Sept,  anno  16  R.  Eliz.  442. 

This  Mr.  Dutton  &  his  Fellow  Truftees,  were  to 
continue  a  perpetual  Succefiion,  by  electing  new  ones, 
*vhen  the  Majority  of  their  Number  Ihould  be  deceafed. 
But  for  want  of  doing  fo  the  Benefaction  hath  been  loft 
long  fince. 

33.  I  might  have  mentioned  before,  (but  think  it  not 

here  too  late)  An  Inquifition  taken  the  lad  of  May  1624, 
before  Thomas  Fofter  one  of  the  Deputy  Stewards  of 
the  Lordlhip  of  Bromfeld  &  Yale,  in  the  County  of 
Denbigh,  upon  the  Oaths  of  John  Lloyd,  kc.  (all  Welfh- 
men)  fworne  in  the  Court  of  the  Manor  of  Yfcoyd,  for 
fettinge  of  Meres  k  Bounds  of  three  parcells  of  Land, 
late  the  Lands  of  Valentyn  Broughton  deceafed.  To 
which  Inquifition,  the  Steward  above-mentioned  fet  his 
Hand  k  Seal;  but  the  Jury  fett  to  ther  Hands,  and 
lags  for  Seales.  339. 

34.  Indenture  tripartite  made  6  Febr.  *nno  24  Hen. 

vii.  between  Thomas  Smyth  th’elder,  Over-feer  of  the 
Teftament  of  Roger  Smyth  deceafed,  Sir  Henry  Bullinge 
&  Sir  John  Davenport  Chapleyns,  &  John  Harper  Mar- 
chant,  Executors  of  the  fayd  Roger  Smyth  vpon  the  one 
part  :  &  Thomas  Hawardyn  Maior  of  Chefter,  the  Al¬ 
dermen  &  Cominalty  on  the  other  part :  and  Margery 
Priorefle  &  Convent  of  the  Nuns  of  the  Monaftary  of 
our  bleffed  Lady  of  the  laid  Citty  vpon  the  third  part: 
touching  the  Difpofilion  of  the  Charities  left  &  bequeath¬ 
ed  by  the  faid  Roger  Smyth.  444. 

35.  Carta,  qua  Laurencins  Smyth  Arm..et  Willelmus 

Davifon  Aldermannus  Ceftrie,  Cuftodes  five  Magiflri 
Fraternitatis  five  Gilde  Sanfte  Urfule  Sodaliumq  ;  fuarum 
Ceftr.  ac  Fratres  et  Sorores  ejufdem,  concedunt,  quod 
Cuftodes  fiue  Magilhri  Fraternitatis  fiue  Gilde  S".  Vrfule 
fupradiCle  pro  tempore  exiffentes  ;  die  Jovis  proxime 
ante  feflum  Pafche,  in  bora  nona  ante  Meridiem  ejufdem 
diei,  annuatim,  perpetuis  temporibus  futuris,  in  Capella 
S“.  Vrfule  in  Hofpitali  Fraternitatis  ejufdem,  per  viam 
Elemofine.  dabunt  pro  animabus  Fundatorum  &  Bene- 
fadftorum  Fraternitatis  fiue  Gilde  predide,  triginta  De- 
narios  five  Argenteos  vfualis  Monete  Angl'e,  pauperibus 
et  indigentibus  perfonis  exiftendbus  Fratribus  fiue  Soro- 
ribus  Fraternitatis  fiue  Gilde  prediCte.  dat.  1 1  die 
Aprilis,  anno  32  R.  R.  Henrici  OClavi.  445. 

36.  1  xtraCla  A'  Notes  from  the  Citty- Writings, 

relating  to  the  Law-Suit  about  to  be  commenced  between 
the  Citty  &  Sir  Randal  Criie,  for  the  Toll  of  Eft-gate, 
A.D.  1630.  448. 

37.  Collections  from  1  he  Records  of  Pendice-Court, 
by  H.  Dod  Notary-publick.  457.  Among  them  I  find, 

38.  Abftract  of  an  Indenture  whereby  Grace,  Daughter 
to  Henry  Turner  Weaver,  was  bound  Apprentice  for  7 
years  to  Jane  the  Wife  ol  Richard  Bauand  then  Maior  of 
Cheftcr  :  the  faid  Jane  covenanting  to  inftruCt  &  teach  the 
fayd  Grace  in  all  fuch  Trades  (efpecially  Malttinge)  as 
flie  then  vied  ;  and  in  due  manner  to  chaftife  her.  469. 

39.  A  Grant  made  (by  interpofition  of  Money)  by 

Robert  Brerewood  Maior  of  Chelter,  k  his  Brethren,  to 
Rouland  Barnes  of  the  faid  City  Mercer,  freeing  him 
from  bring  impannelled  in  Juries,  or  called  into  the 
Common  Council  of  40,  for  Ten  years  then  next  to  come. 
Which  Covenant,  it  l'eems,  they  kept ;  but  about  13 
year  after,  they  made  him  fem  e  as  one  of  the  Sherifl'es 
of  the  fame  City.  This  Breicwood  was  Mayor  of  Chefter, 
A.  D.  1  583.  465. 

40.  An  Indenture,  whereby  Thom.  Fletcher  of 

Cheftcr,  Alderman,  with  his  Son,  did  grant  to  Peter 
Warberton  one  of  the  Juftices  of  the  Bench,  a  Barne 
&’  fome  Land,  late  parcell  of  the  Poffeffion  of  the  Black 
Friers  in  Chefter.  To  haue  A  hould  the  fame  for  1000 
Yeares  :  paying  yearly  a  Peper-Corne,  if  it  be  de¬ 
manded.  478.  b. 

•  41.  Notes  out  of  Mr.  Thomas  Chaloners  Prefidents  by 
him  made.  484. 


Num.  2020,  2021. 

42.  Breefes  of  Dedes  in  Hands  of  Tho.  Wormincham 

Tayler,  A.D.  1649.  485.  b. 

43.  Collections  made  by  the  fccond  Randle  Holme 

out  of  the  Pentice-Roules,  A.D.  1652.  4S8. 

Now  follow  Copies  or  Extracts  of  divers  matters 
relating  to  the  Admiraltie  in  thofe  parts ;  entred  into  this 
book  by  feveral  Hands  ;  for  inftance, 

44.  Commiflion  ofThomas  Lord  Seymour  of  Sudeley, 

Lord  High  Admiral  of  England,  kc.  whereby  He  ap¬ 
pointed  Sir  Thomas  Holcroite  of  Vale-Royal,  to  be  his 
Vice-Admiral  in  the  Counties  of  Chefter  A  Lancafter. 
dat.  19  die  Junij  A.  D.  1547.  493. 

45.  A  Summons  of  one  Thomas  Radford,  to  appear 
at  the  Court  of  Admiralty  then  held  in  Southwark,  near 
London  bridge,  by  Edward  Clinton  Earl  of  Lincoln,  then 
Lord  High  Admiral  dat.  8  June,  A.  D.  1 575.  494. 

Here  is  a  Trick  of  the  Great  Seal,  which  that  noble 
Lord  ufed  in  the  faid  Court,  as  Admiral. 

46.  An  Inftrument  whereby  William  Stanley  Earle  of 

Derby  Vice-Admiral  of  the  Counties  of  Chefter  &  Lan¬ 
cafter,  conftituted  Thomas  Wyat  Gentleman  his  Procu¬ 
rator,  through  the  fayd  Counties,  dat.  18  Sept  A.  D. 
i635-  494.  b. 

47.  The  Judges  Charge  in  the  Admiralty-Court. 

495- 

48.  Prefidents  ufed  in  the  Admiralty-Court  at  Chef- 

ter*  .  497- 

49.  Admiralty-Statutes,  for  the  Orderyng  of  the  Wa¬ 
ter  of  Cheftre.  '•  499. 

50.  The  olde  Cuftome  &  Lawe  of  Cheftre  for  the 

Water  of  Dee.  499.  b. 

5 1 .  The  Maior  &  Commiilioners  Precept,  for  Appear¬ 

ance  before  them,  about  the  Water  of  Dee  :  A.  D. 
*588.  ibid. 

52.  A  View  taken  of  Flod-yats;  by  thg  Maior  of  Chef¬ 
ter,  &  his  Bretheren,  anno  20  R.  Henrici  vm.  500. 

It  feems,  that  thefe  Flood-gates  have  occafioned 
very  much  damage  to  the  River  ofDee  ;  and  have  been 
one  Caufe  of  its  being  alinoft  choaked  up  with  Sand. 

53.  Letters  Patents  of  K.  Henry  v.  whereby  he  granted 

divers  Liberties  k  Privileges  to  the  Maifter,  Bretherne  & 
Syfters  of  the  Hofpitalle  of  Seynt  Johan  Bapifte,  without 
the  Northgate  of  the  Citie  of  Cheftre  ;  bearing  Tefte 
26  Nouembre  anno  regni  2.  300.  b. 

54.  Notes  &  Abftrads  of  divers  Pleas  held  in  the 

Port-mote-Court  of  Chefter.  501.  512.  b. 

55.  Notes  colle&ed  from  the  Rolls  of  the  Sheriffes 

Court  in  Chefter.  31,, 

Here  it  may  be  obferved,  that 

56.  Anno  28  R.  Edw.  1.  a  man  was  fued  for  Filhing 

in  the  Kings  part,  below  the  Bridge,  &  catching  20  Sal¬ 
mon  worth  20  Marks  ;  and  at  another  time,  a  Salmon 
worth  10  Shillings.  ibid. 

57.  Executors  did  then  fue  in  the  Sheriffes  Court. 

jn.  b. 

58.  A  Mans  Wife  was  Arreft  upon  her  Hufbands 

caufe  ;  but  getting  the  better,  they  were  both  attached 
afterwards.  312. 

59.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  Places 

mentioned  in  this  Book.  3 1 8, 

202  1. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  different 
Works  put  up  together  ;  or  done  by  different  Hands, 
among  which,  I  take  that  of  Mr.  Richard  Scarlate  Citi¬ 
zen  &  Painter-Stay ner  of  London  to  be  the  principal. 
On  the  Outfide  it  is  entituled,  by  the  third  Handle 
Holme,  “  Sutes  of  Coates”:  which  feeming  to  me  not  fuf- 
ficient,  I  prefume  to  deferibe  it  in  the  manner  following  : 

1.  The  faid  Randle  Holme’s  account  of  the  Things 
of  moft  Note  within  this  Booke  ;  wherein  the  method 
obferved  in  the  next  Work,  is  particularly  deferibed. 
At  the  beginning. 

2.  An  old  Ordinary  of  Armes,  roughly  tricked  ; 

4  feeming 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


405 


Num.  202I)  2022. 

feemino-  not  only  to  want  two  Leaves  at  the!  beginning  ; 
but  is  otherwife  imperfed,  &  damaged  by  much  ufe. 

3-  91.  98. 

A  great  part  of  this,  is  of  Mr.  Seagate’s  hand  ;  and 
fome  Additions  have  been  made  thereto  by  the  faid  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme  and  his  father. 

3.  Coates  taken  out  of  Eullar’s  Pifgah-fight,  A.  D. 

1650  (the  Gentlemen  being  all  Citizens  of  London.)  by 
the  fame  Randle  Holme.  60.  b. 

4.  Armes  of  our  Kings,  from  Edward  in.  to  Henry 

viii.  inclufive  ;  impaling  thofe  of  their  Queens  ;  by  Mr. 
Scarlate.  ^4- 

q.  Armes  of  divers  of  our  Nobility  &  Gentry,  mixed  ; 
by  the  lame.  85.  b.  97,  10 1,  11  >,  $  18,  149,  155- 

6.  Armes  of  many  antient  Englilh  Barons.  1 02. 

7.  Arms  of  Sir  Walter  Ra  ley,  with  3  Helmets,  as 
many  Crefts,  and  with  Supporters  ;  printed.  n6.b. 

8.  Fanciful  Arms  of  England,  or  rather  of  Q.  Eliza¬ 

beth  ;  of  many  of  our  Nobility  of  the  Royal  Family  ;  of 
Dukes,  Marquifes,  Earles,  Vi  founts,  Barons  fince 
the  Conqucft :  perhaps  collected  from  fome  Copie  of 
Cookes  Baronage.  123- 

9.  Armes  of  Scots  Nobility,  haftily  trick'd  by  Scarlet 

above-mentioned.  148.  15*9  1 5®* 

N.  B.  the  Scots  Armes  feeme  to  be  all  dafhed  out, 
by  a  crofi.  Itroke,  or  diagonal  line  drawn  through  every 
Efcocheon  •,  which  I  underhand  not  as  if  the  faid  Armes 
;> re  all  f.dfe  ;  but  only  that  they  were  all  fairly  entred 
from  hence,  into  fome  other  Book. 

1  ~ .  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  Families 
vvhofe  Coates  are  extant  in  this  Booke.  158. 


A  Book  in  folio,  written  ("with  Tricks  of  Seales) 
bv  the  i'econd  &  third  Randle  Holme,  &  by  certain 
others  ;  on  the  outfide  thus  entituled,  “  Deedes  of  feuerall 
Chefhire  family.es,  &c.  and  wherein  I  find,” 

1.  The  laft  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  Things  of 
mod  Note  in  tliis  Book  ;  at  the  beginning. 

2.  Extracts  out  of  Mr.  Greene  of  Pulton-Lancelyn’s 

Deeds.  Coppved  A.  D.  1654.  1. 

3.  Extracts  from  certain  Court-Rolls  of  Bebynton, 

Puiton-Lancelyn,  See.  perhaps  in  the  poflellion  of  the 
faid  Mr.  Greene.  5. 

4.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Lancelyn,  Greene, 

&c.  gathered  from  certain  Books  marked  with  Letters  ; 
which  I  take  to  have  been  part  of  the  Collections  either 
of  Mr.  Vernon,  or  of  Mr.  Dodfworth.  7. 

Among  ihefe  are  fome  Church  Notes,  taken  in 
Weftmuifter,  Luffwick  &  Greenes-Norton  in  Com. 
Northampton  and  Bebington  in  Com.  Ceflr. 

5.  Abftracts  from  Deeds  in  the  poflellion  of  Raph 

Lownes  of  Alhley,  anno  1650.  9.  A. 

Thefe  conccrne  chiefly,  the  Family  of  Lancelyn ; 
except  the  laft,  which  is  a  fort  of  Fardon  for  Trefpalfes 
cone  in  the  E’oreft  of  Wirhall. 

6.  Some  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Strange  of 
Knocking,  taken  out  of  an  old  Leger-booke,  belonging 
to  the  Abb<  y  of  I  la; 'Lain,  penes  Ric.  Loudon  de  '1  rent- 
ham  Bart.  A.  D.  1635. 

7.  Notes  relating  to  divers  Chefln're  &  other  Families ; 
found  in  Mr. "William  Vernon’s  book  of  Pedegrees.  ibid. 

8.  Abltradfts  of  Deeds  taken  out  of  a  booke  of  the 

Divifion  of  the  Barrnv  of  Namplwich,  in  Cuftody  of  Sr. 
Ge  )  167 1 .  1 6. 

Moft  of  thefe  rfela  e  to  the  Family  of  Malban. 

9.  ' Note  demon’s  Booke  of 

.  i).  lC/2.  17. 

Here  are  fome  Church-Notes,  taken  at  Winwyke 
&  Rufford. 

ic.  Extracts  taken  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Robert 
Grifl’eth  of  Btomiiall  in  the  County  of  Chelter,  A.  D. 


’  1633 

1 1 


23- 

.  Extrafts  from  many  Deeds  in  the  hands  ofMr. 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  202  2. 

Bruen  of  Bruen-Stapleford  in  Com.  C.ellr.  taken,  anno 
1652.  _  37- 

12.  Extrads  from  Deeds  in  the  pofleflion  of  Mr. 

Thomas  Wettenhall  of  Namptwich,  Anno  1691.  66. 

13.  Lift  of  divers  Deeds  relating  to  the  Eftate  polfefTed 

by  the  Family  of  Wettenhall,  with  fome  Declaration  of 
their  latter  Defcents  :  attefted  &  fubferibed  by  John  Wet- 
enhall.  loofe.  65.  c. 

14.  Copies  or  Abftrads  of  Deeds,  &c.  in  the  Cuftody  j 

of  Sir  Richard  Grofvenor  of  Eaton.  86.  | 

Among  thefe,  I  perceive  fome  relating  to  the  Fifhing 
in  the  River  Dee,  or  to  the  Confervation  of  its  Stream 
&  Chanell :  as  alfo 

1 5.  Orders  for  the  Grand  Sergeant  of  Dee- water  from 

Eaton- were  to  Arnolds-hare.  87. 

16.  The  ould  Cuftom  &  Law  of  Chefter  for  the 

Water  of  Dee.  87.  b. 

17.  Anfwer  of  Robert  de  Eton  to  a  Quo-Waranto 
brought  againft  him,  about  the  Privileges  he  claimed  in 
the  River  Dee  (temp.  R.  Edw.  in.  ut  videtur)  88.  b. 

1 8.  Indenture,  whereby  John  Abbat  ofChefter  granted 

Liberty  to  Richard  Grofvenor  of  Eton,  Squier,  to  make 
&  attach  aWeyre  or  Fifli-yard  in  the  Water  of  Dee,  upon 
the  Sovle  &  Ground  of  his  Convent :  and  alfo  to  make 
alitle  Howfe  on  the  fayd  Ground,  lor  the  fafe  keepinge 
of  the  Fifh  &  Netts  of  the  fayd  Richard,  &c.  together 
with  all  the  Teith-Filh  that  fliall  happen  to  be  taken  in 
the  fayd  Fylh-yord  &  Weyre,  except  of  Picke,  Tench, 
&  Breame  :  for  the  annuall  Rent  of  25  {hillings;  that 
is  to  witt,  for  the  fayd  Attachment  &  Howfe,  20  pence  ; 
and  for  the  fayd  Teyth-Filh  235.  4d.  dated,  6  Septem¬ 
ber,  anno  4"'.  R  Hen.  vm.  89.  b. 

19.  Confirmation  of  the  Golden  Talbot  the  antient 

Creit  of  the  Family  of  Grofvenor,  to  Richard  Grofvenor 
Efq  ;  of  Eaton,  by  Sir  William  Dethick  Garter.  Yeouen, 
20  Auguft,  1597.  90.  b. 

20.  Grant  in  French,  of  a  Creft  to  William  Poole  of 

Poole  in  Wherall  in  the  County  of  Chefter,  Efq;  by 
Thomas  Wryothefley  Garter,  John  Yong  Norrey. 
dated  13  April,  anno  4  R.  Hear.  vm.  gt.  b. 

21.  Deeds  coppycd,  (it  fhould  have  been  faid  ab- 

ftraded)  from  the  Origin  ails  remaining  in  the  Hand  of 
Mr.  Swetenhain  of  Swetenham,  Anno  1663.  121. 

22.  Notes,  &  Abftrads  of  Deeds,  taken  out  of  a 
Booke  of  Mr.  Woodaeits  ;  who  was  one  that  went  in 
the  Vifitation  of  Chelhire  and  Lancafhire  A.  D.  16:3, 
with  Sir  Richard  ot.  George  Norroy,  King  of  Armes. 

124. 

23.  Ex  Cards  Thomce  Woode  de  Batterley,  A.  D. 

1613.  (from  the  fame  Bonk.  1  132.  b. 

24.  Ex  Evidencijs  Ricardi  Walthall  deWyilanlton 

in  Com.  Ceflr.  Gcnerofi,  anno  1613.  (ftill  from  the  fame 
book.)  133. 

25.  l  x  Evidencijs  Rogeri  Wetenhall,  de  Copenhall 
Generofi  ;  anno  Dni.  1013.  (from  the  fame  book.) 

~  *35* 

26.  Ex  Cards  Willelmi  Fullefhurfl  de  Shawe  ;  anno 

1613.  (from  the  fame  book.)  1 35.  b. 

27.  Ex  Cards  Laurentij  Rope  de  Chorleton.  (from 

the  fame  book.)  i36.b. 

28.  Ex  Evidencijs  Magiftri  Brooke  de  Leighton, 

(from  the  fame  book.)  138. 

29.  Ex  Evidencijs  Thomas  Tochet  de  Nether- Whit  ley 
in  Com.  Ceftr.  Arm.  (from  the  fame  book.)  140.  b. 

30.  Inquifition  of  Halton -Tenures  ;  cx  bundello 
Efcaetr.  de  Anno  4  Edw.11.  (from  the  fame  book.)  144.  b. 

£r.  Abftrads  from  other  Deeds  relating  to  Chefliire- 
Families  &  Eftates  ( from  the  fame  book.)  j  46. 

32.  Index  Virorum  :  or,  Alphabetical  Table  directing 

to  the  Names  of  Perfons  mentioned  in  the  preceding 
Colledions.  153. 

33.  Abftracts  of  Deeds  in  the  Cuftody  of  Mr.  Worrall 

of  Midle-wich  ;  taken  out  of  his  Pedegree  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme  17  Novemb.  A.  D.  1686.  164. 

5  L  34-  How 


406  Catalogus  Libroram  MSS. 


Num.  2022—2024. 

34.  How  the  Manor  ofBaddiley  came  to  the  Main" 

warings.  167. 

35.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  Places,  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  preceding  Collections.  1 7 5. 

26.  Deeds  (i.  e.  Extracts  from  them,')  in  poffeffion  of 
me  Randle  Holme  of  the  Citty  of  Chelter  ;  of  my  Lands 
&  Tenements  I  haue  in  feuerall  Streets  in  Chefter,  3  May, 
anno  1693.  182. 

Among  them,  is  a  Copy  of  a  Privy-Seale,  dated 

19  November  1625,  dire&ed  to  Randle  Holme  the  firfl, 
ior  the  Loane  of  i'en  Pounds;  which  was  paid  accordingly. 
He  alfo  paid  Ten  Pounds,  for  his  Contempt  in  not  at¬ 
tending  &  receiueing  the  Order  of  Knighthood  at  his 
Iiighi.els  Coronation,  according  to  the  Law  in  that  Cafe 
provided.  Here  is  alfo  a  protection  granted  to  one  of 
the  Holmes,  by  the  Earl  of  Manchelter,  whereby  he 
was  to  be  free  from  Arrells,  Pannells,  Offices,  &c. 
upon  his  being  fworne  &  admitted  in  the  Place  of  Sewer 
of  the  Chamber,  in  Extraordinarie,  to  his  Majeltie.  dat. 

20  December  1664. 

37.  Breviats  of  all  the  Deeds  of  Purchafe  of  the  Eft- 

gate-llreete  Howfe  ;  and  the  Wainfcote,  Glaffe,  &  Goods 
in  it  :  collected  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  21  De¬ 
cember,  1657.  190. 

This  tradit  hath  many  Additions  made  by  his  Sons 
hand  :  including  what  relates  to  W ater-gate  ftreet,  Go- 
fanna,  Hanbridge,  &  Knuttesford. 

38.  Deeds  &  Writings  of  Concernment  to  the  whole 
Familey  and  Eilate  of  the  Holmes,  of  Chefter.  200. 

Thefe  are  like  AbllraCts  made  by  the  fame  hand. 

2023. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  by  divers  hands,  and  on 
the  out-fide  thus  entituled,  ‘  Liber  Tenures  in  Com. 
Ceftrie,’  etc.  It  was  begun  to  be  written  long  ago, 
and  was  in  the  poffeffion  of  the  fecond  Randle  Holme 
m  the  year  1655,  who  hath  taken  much  pains  in 
noting  down  the  Margins,  the  proper  Names  of  Perfons 
&  Places  :  and  hath  alfo  prefixed  the  Collectors  Title 
to  the  whole  Work,  which  feems  to  have  been  meant 
or  conceived  in  the  Words  following. 

1 .  Liber  Feodorum  Militum  Comitatus  Palatini  Ceftrie, 
per  Thomam  Greene  Feodarium  ibidem  diligenter  col- 
lectus  ex  Recordis  in  Scaccario  Ceftrie  prediCte  remanen- 
tibus,  et  alibi :  et -Baron.  &  Hundred,  feparat.  &  per 
femet  ipfas  collocat.  Et  Comitum,  Dominorum,  Mi¬ 
litum,  Armigerorum,  et  Generoforum,  qui  habuerunt 
aliqua  Maneria,  Mefuagia,  Terras  aut  Tenementa,  in 
Comitatu  preditto,  Nomina  notata  ;  et  per  quod  Servi- 
tium  Maneria,  Mefuagia,  Terre,  et  Tenementa  predict  a 
tenebantur  :  que  omnia  per  Litteras  Alphabeticas  diui- 
duntur,  quo  cicitis  inveniantur.  Et  dedicatur  et  delibe- 
ratur  honorabili  Viro  Willelmo  Cecile  Militi,  principali 
Secretario  Dne.  Regine,  et  Magiftro  Curie  Wardorum 
et  Liberatarum Dne  Regine,  20  die  Ottobris,  anno  Eli- 
zabethe  Dei  graciS  Anglie,  Francie,  et  Hibernie  Regine, 
Fidei  Defenforis.  &c.  Quarto. 

Further,  I  find  therein, 

2.  Index  Virorum,  or  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  Per¬ 
fons  Names  ;  at  the  beginning. 

3.  An  Alphabets  of  l'ownes  Names,  for  this  Booke  ; 
made  anno  1664  ;  at  the  end. 

2024. 

An  oblong  Book  in  fmall  folio,  confiding  of  a  Collection 
of  Prints,  Drawings,  &  Paintings,  mixed  together  ; 
being  fuch  as  was  thought  ufefui  in  the  Bufincfs  of  an 
Armcs-painter.  They  confift  chiefly  of  Frontifpieces, 
Compartments,  Atchieveinents,  Armes,  Devifes,  Sup¬ 
porters,  Mantles,  Helmets,  Proportion  of  fome  Hu¬ 
mane  Bodies,  Habits,  Armor,  Weapons,  Bordures, 
Feftons,  Tombs,  Alphabets,  and  other  matters  of 
Ornament. 


Num.  2025,  2026. 

2025. 

A  Book  in  fmall  Folio,  written  by  the  Hands  of  the 
fecond  &  third  Randle  Holmes  ;  and  on  the  outfide 
entituled,  ‘  Fragments  A  Peeces  of  Broken  Rolks  be¬ 
longing  to  the  Pentice  &  Portmote  Court  in  Chefter 
that  is,  Extracts,  Copies,  or  Notes  taken  from  fuch 
tatter’d  Originals  ;  not  the  Parchments  themfelves. 
In  turning  this  Collection  over,  I  obferve. 

1.  Ihe  laft  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of ‘Things  of 
moft  Note’  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  His  Table  referring  to  the  Lands  in  Chefter  oc  elfe- 
where,  mentioned  in  this  Book. 

3.  Ihe  Collection  itfelf,  which  begins  atfol.  9. 

4.  Indenture  made  8  May  anno  27  R.  Henr.  vin. 
whereby  Edward  Dimock  of  Chefter  Draper,  covenan- 
teth  with  Henry  Gee  Alderman  &  Merchant  of  the  fame 
Citty,  among  other  things,  to  find  an  able  Watch-man 
well  harnifed  yearly,  at  the  Watch  which  is  and  fhall 
be  vfed  to  be  kept  within  the  faid  Citty,  vpon  Chriftmafs- 
Eue  at  night,  and  vpon  S'.  Steuens  day  at  night.  1 1.  b. 

5.  Of  a  Suit  between  Ellen  Plankeney  Adminiftratrix 

to  her  Hulband  Edward  Plankney  Gentleman,  &  Edward 
Plankncy  Yeoman  :  concerning  a  confiderable  Eftate  [ 
(before  parcell  of  the  lands  belonging  to  the  Nuns  of 
Chefter,  &  Monaftcry  of  Birkett  (f.  Birkinhede)  anno 
37  Hen.  vin.  lett  to  ferme  unto  the  deceafed  by  John 
then  Biffiop  of  Chefter,  whofe  Leafe  was  confirmed  by 
the  Dean  &  Chapter.  1 7.  b.  ' 

6.  Extracts  from  fome  Deeds,  relating  to  Lands  once 

poffeffed  by  the  Dean  &  Canons  of  S'.  John’s  College  in 
Chefter.  18.  b. 

7.  Some  others,  relating  to  Filhing  in  the  River  Dee. 

28.  b.  52.  32.  b. 

8.  Suits  turned  from  the  Judges  of  Chefter,  to  be 

tried  in  the  Cities  Court.  28.  b. 

9.  Panells  of  old  Juries  in  Chefter.  30.  b.  34.  35.  b. 
37*  37*  b-  38.  38.  b.  39.  39.  b.  40.  40.  b.  41.  b. 

1  o.  Perfons  prefented  for  Foreftalling  the  Markett  of 
Chefter.  (as  likewife  other  Tran'greffors.)  33. 

11.  Lift  of  the  Bakers  of  Chefter  ;  and  their  Markes 
for  their  Bread  :  from  a  Note  of  Mr.  Chaloners  A.  D. 
J5S9-  41. 

2026. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  feeming  to  have  been  written  & 
tricked  by  the  Hand  of  the  third  Randle  Holme  ; 
who  (in  his  later  time)  wrote  this  Note  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  thereof,  ‘  This  Book  is  my  firft  Collettions  & 
Draughts  for  the  Academie  of  Armory,  Anno  1649.' 
Which  date  lheweth  that  he  began  that  laborious 
Work  when  he  was  very  young.  The  Firft  Part  of 
the  Work  containing  Three  Books,  was  printed  at 
Chefter  for  the  Author.  A.  D.  1 688.  in  folio  :  and 
(notwichftanding  honeft  Randles  manifeft  want  of 
common  J.iterature,  and  the  numerous  Errata  of  the 
Printer,)  is  really  a  very  curious  and  ufefui  Book 
Upon  many  accounts,  although  now  fo  much  negleCkd 
&  worn  out  of  memory,  as  to  be  known  to  few  People 
in  thefe  parts.  And  the  vile  price  it  hath  been  bought 
at,  viz.  eight  Shillings,  being  much  below  the  prime 
cofts  of  Paper  &  Print,  ftiew  that  the  diligent  Man 
muft  have  been  a  great  lofer,  after  fo  many  Years 
pains. 

At  the  end  of  the  Contents  of  the  Firft  Part,  he 
hath  inferted  this  Note.  “  Thus  far  have  I,  with  much 
Coft  &  Pains,  caufed  to  be  printed  for  the  Publick  Be¬ 
nefit.  What  remains  and  is  ready  for  the  Prefs)  is  as 
followeth  in  the  fucceeding  Contents  :  which  (if  encou¬ 
raged  by  liberal  &  free  Contributors)  may  appear  in  the 
World  i  elfe  will  fleep  in  the  Bed  of  its  Conception,  and 
never  fee  the  glorious  Light  of  the  Sun,”  And  indeed, 
that  hath  been  its  Fate  ;  it  is  not  yet  printed,  and  perhans 
never  can  be,  a  great  Parc  of  the  Copy  being  loft  fmee 

the 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse 


Nirm.  2026- 


the  Authors  deceafe.  That  the  Book  did  not  fell,  is 
imputed  to  Randles  original  fin,  Firft  in  caufing  it  to 
be  printed  at  Chefter,  a  great  Way  off ;  and  fecondly, 
forhimfelf;  the  worlt  Article  of  the  Two.  No  wonder 
'therefore,  if  the  Bookfellers  combined  together  (in  his 
Cafe,  as  in  that  of  many  others)  to  damn  a  Book  they 
were  not  concerned  in. 

But  to  return  to  the  Manufcript  now  before  me  ;  I 
obferve  that  the  greatefi:  Part  of  the  Tricks  or  Drawings 
(as  well  as  the  writing)  is  dalhed  through  ;  by  which 
marks  I  underfland  that  the  fame  were  entered  into  fomc 
other  Book  or  Books.  Moreover,  it  may  beremembred, 
that  th  -fe  Collections  are  loofe  and  disjointed,  &  not  in 
the  fame  Order  as  they  are  printed.  Laftly,  that  divers 
of  the  .  swings  belong  to  the  fccond  or  unprinted  part 
of  the  Work. 

I  know  not  if  it  may  be-worth  while  to  merltion  an  ori¬ 
ginal  Lettei  fattened  in  this  Book  written  by  one  John  Price 
Vintner,  and  dated  from  Salop,  .6  November  1617  ; 
wherein,  amongit  other  matters,  he  exprelfeth  himlelf 
thus,  “  You  fay  I  take  vpon  me  to  be  the  Glory  of  the 
North  for  a  Vintnour  :  to  which  I  anfwer.  It  hath  pleafed 
God  that  I  know  non  outt  of  London  or  Brifioll  retorne 
more  money  yearly  then  my  felf:  which  Acount  is 
eaffeley  to  be  fene ;  and  have  don  this  7  yeares,  more 
then  Too  thowfend  Pounds  a  yeare  ....  And  for  ane 
Compackt  or  DJ'aytte,  or  frawdelent  Combynation  be- 
twen  Him  &  Me  ;  Yff  another  man  doo  faye  it,  He  lyes 
in  his  Thrott.  1  Ikorn  that  mind ;  and  yff  he  fay  that  I  ame 
fatisfyed,  he  is  a  velen-lyinge  Ralkali.” . 

2027. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written,  tricked,  and  (in  very 
manv  places)  dalhed  or  croffed  like  the  former  ;  being 
all  done  by  the  third  Randle  Holme;  who  in  his  later 
Years  inferted  the  f  Towing  Note  at  the  beginning. 
‘  This  Book  was  my  fecond  Collection  &  Draughts  for 
the  Academy  of  Armory.’  This  is  confufed  ,and  un¬ 
methodical  enough  ;  and  may  contain  fome  of  the 
matters  by  him  intended  for  the  Second  Volume. 

In  turning  this  Book  over,  among  other  Thin o-s-, 
I  obferve  toward  the  end, 

2.  Explication  of  divers  Old  Terms  ufed  in  Blazon  of 
Armes. 

3-  Defcent  of  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby,  down  to  the  laft 
Earl  William. 

■  .  Defcem1::  from  Thomas  Mofiyn  ;  brought  as  an 
Initance  for  the  iVIarlhalling  of  Coates. 

5.  Armes,  or  Achievement  of  Leukenore,  in  Colors; 
as  exemplified  by  Sir  William  Dethick,  Garter,  A.  D. 
»595- 

6.  Names  of  Writts  ufed  in  our  Englilh  Laws,  ex¬ 
plained. 

7.  Other  Law-Termes  explained. 

8.  John  Watt  his  Accompts  for  what  Proffits  hath  bin 
rayfed  att  Mortherden-Millnes  iince  his  laft  Accompts, 
being  the  24  of  June  1 645,  vntill  the  firft  of  March  1 646! 
(One  of  the  Sequeftrators  ?) 

9.  Terms  ufed  by  Theological  Writers,  &  Canonifts, 
explained. 

10.  Order  of  proceading  at  the  Funerals  of  fundry 

Perfonages,  or  Eftates.  1 

2028. 

Another  of  old  Randle  Holme  the  third’s  Volumes  ;  by 
him  thus  entituled,  *  The  firft  Book  of  the  Academy  of 
Armory,  which  only  treateth  of  the  Honorable  Ordi¬ 
naries  that  is,  containing  only  the  firft  Nine  Chap¬ 
ters  of  the  Firft  Book,  and  adorned  with  the  printed 
Cutts,  inftead  of  Trickings.  It  comprehendeth  alfo  the 
Index  to  the  Firft  Book  :  and  ‘  the  Significations  of 
all  the  Charges  ufed  in  Herauldry,  within  his  firft 
Booke.’ 


Nutn.  2029 — 2035, 

2029. 

Another  like  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  by  poor  old 
Randle  Holme  the  third,  who  (in  his  later  time)  gave 
It  the  1  trie  following,  ‘  The  Manufcript  of  the  Second 
Book  of  1  he  Academy  of  Armory,  to  the  Eleventh 
Chapter  ;  as  it  was  printed.’  Here  are  no  Trickings, 
hut  inftead  of  them  the  printed  Cutts  are  inferred. 
Several  of  the  Leaves  are  damnified  by  the  Fire,  that 
no  lets  fatal  than  frequent  confumer  of  Books. 

I  cannot  forbear  remarking  (and  this  with  Aftonilh. 
ment)  that  nl  the  Firft  Page,  under  the  Title  above-men¬ 
tioned,  is  the  beginning  of  the  Lords  Prayer,  in  Greek 
erroneoufly  written,  but  not  by  a  Greek,  or  in  what  we 
call  a  Greek  Hand. 

Here  the  Third  Article  (if  I  may  fay  fo)  is  mod  im¬ 
pudently  perverted  thus,  isft-'C,  I  fo  it  is  written)’»/3..,k.,'. 
T"  an  horrible  Wickednefs,  in  my  poorOpinion. 

20  30. 

Another  like  bonk  written  by  the  fame  Randle  Holme 
the  third,  and  by  him  thus  entituled,  ‘  The  Manufcript 
Of  the  Second  Book  of  the  Academy  of  Armory  as 

Ch™erPLTr£d  f°r  ‘he  P‘  inlinS  bcSin™S 

2031. 

Another  like  bemk,  written  by  tlte  fame  Hand,  and  thus 
entftuled,  The  Manufcript  of  the  third  Book  of  the 
Cha  ter*  Armory’  as  k  was  printed  to  the  Sixth 

Ihe  (tickings  belonging  to  this  Volume,  areinferted 
nto  fome  of  the  former  ;  and  are  not  fupplied  by  Prints. 

M  ,trmitSn,thf  B°°k  °VCr’  1  obferve  mach  Writing  or 
Matter  dalhed  out;  which  I  l'uppofe  to  be  inferted  in 

Places  more  proper  for  it. 

2032. 

Another  like  book,  written  by  the  fame  Hand,  and  thus 
entituled,  ‘  lhe  Manufcript  of  the  Academy  of  Armory, 
Chap  Xi'v”  'C  Was  f°r  p!'intins  from  Chap.  vt.  to 

.  ,  l!:ls is  1,1  Ehe  fame  Condition  with  the  former ;  and 
with  this  the  printed  Book  ends. 

2033. 

Another  like  Book,  written  by  the  fame  Hand,  and  en¬ 
tituled,  l  ire  Manufcript  of  the  Third  Book  of  the 
Academy  of  Armory,  as  it  was  for  the  Printing,  from 
Chap  xiv.  to  the  enJ.  6 

ft  appeareiji  by  many  fure  Marks,  that  this  Volume 
was  actually  pruned;  but  then,  why  it  v, as  not  bound 
up  with  the  former  Part  of  the  Work,  I  know  not. 

Some  Paragraphs  are  dalhed  out,  becaufe  they  were 
brought  in  elfewhere. 

Here  are  but  two  or  three  Trickings,  and  thofe 
haftily  done  ;  and  no  Alphabetical  Tables  at  the  end. 

2034. 

Another  Book,  being  a  Continuation  of  the  former,  and 
written  by  the  fame  Hand.  The  greatefi  part  of  it 
leemelh  to  have  been  printed  (but  whether  ever  pubUfh- 
ed,  I  cannot  now  fay).  Here  are  fome  Trickings,  haftily 
performed,  and  (for  the  mod  part)  dalhed  out,  as 
having  been  made  ufe  of.  This  Volume  concludes  the 
22  Chapter  of  the  Third  Book. 

2°35- 

A  parcel  of  loofe  Papers,  written  all  by  the  fame  Hand, 
containing  part  of  Randle  Holme’s  Fourth  Book  of 
I  he  Academy  of  Armory,  being  as  yet  unprinted  : 
that  is.  Chapters  iv,  vi,  vm,  ix,  xt,  xii,  &  xm.  or 
pai  t  or  them.  Here  are  fome  Trickings  ;  but,  gene¬ 
rally,  the  Papers  look  as  if  the  laft  Hand  was  not  putt 
to  them.  Ihey  are  followed  by  fome  others,  whereinto 
honeft  Randle  digefted. 

An  Alphabet  or  Table  of  ali  the  Names  of  all  the 

Coa;s 


1* 


408 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  zo 35 — 2037. 

Coats  mentioned  in  the  Firft,  Second,  &  Third  Books, 
according  to  their  feuerall  foiios.  That  is,  taking  in  the 
fecond  part  of  the  third  Book. 

N.  B.  This  not  being  printed,  divers  who  have  the 
Book  were  obliged  to  be  at  the  trouble  of  making  fuch 
a  Table  to  it  for  their  own  ufe. 

2036. 

A  paper  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  by  diuers  Hands  in 
the  Law-French,  but  wholly  relating  to  the  practice 
of  the  Municipal  Laws  of  England  :  feeming  to  be  a 
Collection  of  Cafes  argued  in  Weltminlter-hull,  or  ex¬ 
tracted  from  the  Plea- Rolls  of  either  Bench  there  ;  all 
within  the  Reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  In  turning  it 
over,  I  obferve  the  following  Titles. 

1.  Term  Trin.  &  Mich,  anno  32  Eliz.  in  Banco  Reg. 
This  begins  abruptly,  the  firlt  Leaf  being  wanting. 

In  this  Tract  (at  fol.  6.  b.)  mention  is  made  of  the 
Indictment  of  Sir  William  Dethick,  for  ftriking  in  the 
Palace  of  Weftminfter,  and  of  his  Plea.  This  had  not 
been  remembred  here,  but  that  I  had  been  told  before, 
that  the  Scene  lay  in  St.  Pauls  Church-Yard. 

2.  Term.  Mich.  £cc.  anno  33  Eliz.  in  Banco  Reg.  8. 

3.  Term  Pal’che,  anno  19  Ebz.  in  Bancu  Regis.  57. 

4.  Term.  Hillar.  anno  19  Eliz.  Rotul.  747.  53.  b. 

5.  Term.  Pufche,  anno  24  Eliz.  en  le  Comen  Banke. 

54- 

6.  Hill.  aim.  iS  Eliz.  en  Banke  le  Roy.  EjeCtione 

Firmre  port  per  John  Manninge  vers  John  Androwes,  le 
quel  Cafe  fuit  argue  per  Mead  &  Jeffreys  Serjants,  Hillar. 
18  Eliz.  et  per  le  Bench  Terme  Trin.  donque  prochaine 
mfuant.  57- 

7.  Term.  Mich.  13  Sc  14  Eliz.  73.  b. 

8.  Term.  I’afche,  ann.  24  Eliz.  en  le  Comen  Banke. 

74- 

9.  Ann.  25  Eliz.  John  Stonley  Sc  Fdmor.de  Hartwell 
Sc  auters  Plain liffes,  vers  Tho.  Biacebridge  defend.  77. 

10.  Mich.  25  Eliz.  inter  Haydon  &  Reginam.  81.  b. 

21.  Ann.  25  8:26  Eliz.  82.  b. 

12.  Le  cas  Sir  George  Calvcley  en  Court  de  Gards, 

anno  19  Eliz.  96. 

13.  Ann.  30,  3  t ,  Sc  32  Eliz.  en  Banke  le  Roigne  98. 

14.  Of  Sir  Richard  Chidley’s  (Chudleigh  ?)  in  Englifh 

Pafcli.  36  Eliz.  no. 

1 5.  Brent  &  Segnur  Pawlets  Cafe.  Le  opinion  de  Ed¬ 

mond  Plowdon  lie  Milieu-Temple  Apprentize,  en  vn 
Cafe  touchant  le  teller  de  future  vfes  appoynt  de  furdur  ? 
apres  per  l’ACt  delit.  del  Terr,  ove  Refponfe  a  ceo  per 
Pophain  Attourney  le  Roigne.  1 15. 

16.  Ann.  28  Eliz.  in  Communi  Banco.  122. 

17.  Ann.  29,  30,  28  Eliz.  134. 

18.  Term.  Trinit.  ann.  31  Eliz.  Rot.  154.  in  banco 

Regine  ;  inter  Fenwicke  &  Midforth.  1 55. 

19.  Of  Peters  &  Yorgall's  Indictment  for  feditious 

Words.  157. 

20.  Of  Mr.  Gilford’s  Indictment,  for  being  reconciled 

to  the  Sc'i  of  Rome.  ibid. 

2O37. 

A  Book  in  folio  written  by  divers  Hands  ;  and  on  the  out- 
iide  thus  entitled,  ‘  Euidences  ScOld  Deeds  concerneing 
C.helliire  Families,  See.’  to  which  f  may  add  both  Fa¬ 
milies  Sc  Lands  in  Warwicldhire,  Ker.t,  Lticefterlhire, 
Northamptonlhire,  StafTordfhire,  Shropfnire,  and  other 
Counties  ;  all  which  I  chule  to  del'cribe  briefly  in  the 
manner  following. 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  thofe  Perfons 
Names,  in  whole  Hands,  he  found  the  Deeds  hereafter 
lobe  me  iti  >ncd.  A;  the  beginning. 

2.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  Families  j  ex¬ 
tracted  from  the  fame  Deeds.  This  followed  by 

3.  Another  like  Table  of  the  Names  of  Places. 

Left  the  Perufer  of  this  Volume  fhould  unwarily 
give  too  much  Credit  to  thefe  Tables,  honeft  Randle  hath 


advertifed  us,  that  they  are  both  in  Confufion,  many 
Names  of  Places  being  inferted  into  the  Alphabet  of 
Sur-names  ;  and  many  Sur-names  into  the  Alphabet  of 
Places. 

4.  Mifterton  &  Pultney-Euedences.  i.  e.  Short  Notes 

extracted  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  from  a  great 
Number  of  Deeds,  &c.  relating  to  the  Families  of  Pulte- 
ney,  Napton,  &c.  and  their  Lands  in  Mifterton,  Pulte- 
ney  &  elfewhere.  123. 

5.  Shenly-Euedences.  *33- 

Thefe  are  like  Notes,  and  feem  alfo  to  have  been 

taken,  in  order  to  the  Laboring  a  Pedegree  of  Poulteney. 

6.  Out-Land  Euedences.  15 1  - 

Thefe  Notes  feem  to  belong  to  the  fame  Work ; 

and,  with  the  former,  include  a  great  Number  of  Names. 

7.  Notes  extracted  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  out 
of  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Dauis  of  Alton,  A.  D.  1639.  143. 

148. 

Here  are  fome  Tricks  of  Seals  (ft  he  Notes  relate 
chiefly  to  the  Towns  of  Horton  &  Hertford,  in  Chelhire) 

8.  Extracts  from  16  Deeds  in  the  Hands  of  John 
Edgeley  of  tVJarley,  made  by  the  fame,  A.  D.  1650. 


Many  of  thefe  (with  others  which  immediately  { 
relate  to  the  ft’owne  or  Manor  of  Mcrbury  in  C. 


fol- 

Che- 


low) 
fliire. 

9.  Notes  uppon  Review  of  the  Deeds  ;  relating  to 

the  Family  of  Alton.  J56. 

10.  Alton-Mondrem.  ^  1 57* 

Thefe  Extracts  relate  not  only  to  the  Town  of  A  lion, 

but  to  the  Families  of  Crue,  Mynfnul,  &c. 

11.  Alhley-Evidence.  159. 

Extracts  of  Deeds  relating  to  that  Place. 

12.  Frodlham,  Kingefley,  andNorley.  16 1. 

i.  e.  Extracts  from  Deeds  touching  the  Owners  of 
Lands  there. 

13.  Halton.  165. 

In  the  lame  manner  ;  and  fo  of 

14.  Cheftcr-Evedences.  169. 

J 75.  || 

16.  Another  parcel  of  Extracts  from  Deeds  relating  : 
to  Chirton,  Codington,  Tillton,  Eamdon,  Clacton,  &cc.  ^ 

208. 

1 7.  Strange  Evidences  :  i.  e.  like  Extracts  from  other 

Deeds.  234. 

18.  All  on  Evidence:  i.  e.  like  Extracts  .relating  to  the 

Family  of  Alton  ;  taken  A.  D.  1  35.  270. 

19.  Extracts  from  divers  remarkable  Deeds  of  the  Old 

Earls  of  Chefter,  &c.  by  Mr.  William  Vemonthat  learn¬ 
ed  Antiquary  ;  with  an  Original  Letter  of  his  to  the  fe¬ 
cond  Randle  Holme,  dated  29  Maie  1639.  300. 

20.  ft’he  fame  Randle  Holmes  Extracts  from  the  Evi¬ 
dences  of  Capt.  George  Dimock.  305,, 

21.  His  Extracts  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Thomas  San¬ 
ders  of  Clatterwick,  A.  D.  1649.  309.  b.  321. 

Thefe  as  the  former,  have  Pricks  of  Seals  :  and  are 
followed  by  others  taken  A.  D.  >653,  at  321.  b. 

22.  Pleas  at  the  Portmote  of  Chefter,  with  other  Ex¬ 
tracts  touching  Lands,  fete,  in  Chefter.  324. 

23.  Certain  Iliftorical  Notes  excerpted  by . ! 

33°-  b'  1 

24.  Notes  extracted  by  the  third  Randle  Ilolme, 
A.  D.  1692.  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Tho.  Hulfe  of  Clive. 

33.2-  I 

25.  His  Notes  from  the  Deeds  in  Cuflody  of  Chrilto-  ■ 

pher  Wilfon  of  Bromhed  in  Com.  Ebor.  Gen.  A.  D. 
1670.  347- 

2 6.  His  Defcent  of  that  Wilfon ;  to  whom  he  was 

allied.  _  349- b- 

27.  ExtraCt  cut  of  the  Regifter-booke  of  the  Parochial 
Chapell  of  Bradfield  ;  touching  the  lamily  of  Wilfon. 

351. b.' 

Before  1 1  ifmifs  this  Book,  I  lhall  take  notice  of  foine 
particular  Deeds,  which  I  note  as  uncommon. 

2  28.  A 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


Nuin.  2037,  2038. 

28.  A  Writing  of  Award  by  John  Sauagc  Knight,  &c‘ 

Arbitrators ;  concerning  the  late  Manage  folemnized 
betwixt  William  Poole  &  Elizabeth  Tilfton  :  awarding 
that  both  Parties  lhould  perfoirally  appear  at  the  Bilhops 
Court,  where  William  fliould  exhibit  a  Bill  in  Forme  of 
Law,  &  profecute  it  againft  Elizabeth  :  as  Hie  lhould 
femblably  doe :  that  the  fayd  Mariage  might  be  there 
duly  proved  &  confirmed,  orelfeby  Law  diflolued.  And 
if  it  lhould  be  proven  Good  ;  th  >t  it  fliould  be  kept ; 
but  if  the  Lawes  fliould  judge  a  Divorfe,  then  Elizabeth 
to  pay  /6.  13.  4.  (which  was  done,  as  appears  upon  the 
page  following')  &c.  anno  3  Eliz.  155. 

29.  A  Deed  under  the  Seales  of  24  ‘Witnefies  :  atteft- 
ing  the  Right  which  the  Lords  of  A  lion  had  to  a  great 
Corrody,  in  the  Monaftery  of  Norton,  dat.  27  Edw.  ni. 
274.  (vid.  fob  288.) 

30.  Another  proving  that  Richard  Alton  Efq;  had 

not  that  Allowance  of  Livelyhood  at  Norton,  as  his  Pre- 
decclTors  had:  with  other  matters  againft  that  Monaftery. 
dat.  31  Hen.  vi.  279.  b. 

31.  The  Will  of  Robert  Rogers  Arch-deacon  of  Chef- 

ter  ;  wherein  (after  fetting  forth  his  moft  affined  Confi¬ 
dence  &  Beelefe,  tint  all  the  Sinnes  he  had  committed 
in  this  wicked  World  were  forgiven)  he  bequeaths  ( after 
payment  of  his  Debts  &  Funeral  Expences)  all  his  Goods 
movable  S:  immovable.  Money,  Plate,  Jewells,  Orna¬ 
ments,  Leafes,  Tacks,  Houfchould  Stufie,  Bookes,  Cat- 
tell.  Come,  Debts,  See.  to  his  Wife.  Forbidding  his 
Children,  Friends,  &c.  to  make  any  Claime  to  or  them, 
to  moled  or  trouble  her.  And  if  any  fliould  move  Suit 
or  moled  her,  his  Will  was  that  his  Goods  lhould  be 
fpent  in  that  Caufe.  32©. 

2038. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  fcveral  Hands,  but  princi¬ 
pally  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  ;  on  the  out-fide 
entituled  t;  Cheihire  Evidences,  with  fome  Pecegrees, 
&c.”  but  according  to  its  in-fide,  I  fliali  briefly  deferibe 
it  in  the  manner  following. 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  brief  Lifts  of  the  Re- 
markables  therein  contained.  At  the  beginning, 

2.  Index  Virorum  ;  i.  e.  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  the 
Names  of  Perfons  therein  mentioned.  At  the  next  Leaf, 

Note, that  about  the  middle  of  this,  the  Leaves  begin 
to  be  numbred.  Then  follow  the  Extracts  which  the 
iecond  Randle  Holme  made  from  the  old  Deeds  remain¬ 
ing  with  fimdry  of  the  Cheihire  Gentlemen,  with  Tricks 
of  feveral  .Seals  giving  the  Armes  of  their  refpeclive 
owners,  As, 

3.  Ex  veteri  pergameno  penes  Edwarduin  Fytton  Ba- 

ronettum,  A.  D.  1637'.  8. 

Here  are  the  Boundaries  of  Macclesfield-Foreft  de- 
fciibed. 

4.  Extracts  from  Deeds  penes  eundem,  A.  D.  1636. 

10. 

Among  thefe,  I  obferve, 

5.  A  notable  certificate  made  by  Rich,  de  Chorleton, 
how  Hamo  de  Malfey,  took  the  Seal  of  Hamo  de  Maflcy 
his  Grandfather  (upon  his  deceafe)  and  deliver’d  the 

j  fame  to  Sir  Oliver  de  Ingham,  who  was  laid  to  have 
I  wronged  the  old  Gentleman  :  whereby  Sir  Oliver  had 
1  power  to  feal  what  Writings  he  plcafed  with  that  Seal. 
A.  D.  1375.  ii.b. 

6.  Ex  Evidences  Willelmi  Davenport  de  Bromhale 

Militis,  Anno  1635.  15. 

7.  A  large  Indenture  in  French  between  Edmund  de 

Vernotine,  and  others,  concerning  the  Manor  of  Witton, 
&c.  whereunto  Robert  de  Oggcl  is  a  Witnefs.  dated  ann. 
35.  Edw.  in.  16.  b. 

8. -  Some  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  ofGamul.  16. 

9.  Notes  relating  . to  the  Family  of  Savage.  17. 

1 0.  Extracts  or  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Al- 

dithlegh  or  Audley,  &  Stanley.  18. 

it.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Manley.  19. 

Cat.  Harjl.  Vox..  II. 


12.  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Tabbeleye,  taken 

by  Ja.  Chaloner.  21. 

13.  Extracts  from  Deeds  exemplified  in  the  Pedegree 

of  Sir  George  Calveley  of  Lea.  23. 

14.  F.xtra&s  from  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Hawardyn.  .  24. 

1 5.  Notes  and  Extracts  relating  to  the  Family  of  Hat¬ 
ton.  25. 

1 6.  Extracts  concerning  certain  Law-fuits  about  the 
Lands  of  Thomas  Barow,  fometime  Mayor  of  Chefter. 

26. 

17.  Short  Defccnts  of  the  Family  of  Kinge.  28. 

18.  Extracts  from  Deeds,  concerning  the  Family  of 

Leicefter.  28.  b. 

19.  Extra&s  from  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Leeche.  3  r . 

20.  Notes  and  Extracts  touching  divers  Cheihire  Fa¬ 

milies  (particularly  that  of  Alton)  taken  from  feveral  Au¬ 
thorities.  33. 

2 1 .  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Praers,  or  De 

Pratis.  50. 

22.  Other  Notes  relating  to  Chefliire  Families.  52.  b. 

23.  Notes  touching  the  Families  of  Belton  &  Bunbury 

60. 

24.  Notes  concerning  the  Family  of  Vernon.  65. 

25.  Extracts  from  Deeds,  in  the  pofleflion  of  Sir  John 

Crew  of  Utkington,  relating  to  the  Family  of  Roter  of 
Kingiley,  taken  by  the  third  Randle  Iloline,  A.  D. 
1692.  71.  b. 

26.  Extracts  .  from  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Hulgreve.  74.  80. 

27.  Like  Extrafts  concerning  the  Family  of  Minfhull. 

80. 

28.  J£xtra£ts  touching  the  Family  of  Davenport.  86. 

29.  Codinton  Families  Deeds,  remaining  with  Sir 
Thomas  Alton,  A.  D.  1635.  i.  e.  Extracts  from  them 

87- 

30.  Extracts  of  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of  Be- 

rington  ;  with  a  Pedegree  of  the  fame.  94.  b. 

31.  Noates  of  fuch  Writinges  Sc  Evidences  as  were 

deliuered  by  Peter  Warburton  Efq;  &c.  vnto  Lawrence 
Wynnington,  Efq;  concerning  the  Eftate  of  Peter 
Leighe,  Efq;  deceafed  ;  according  to  an  Order  made 
in  theCourte  cfWards  the  1  ith  of  February  lalt.  (perhaps, 
A.  D.  1629-30.)  97. 

32.  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Goodman.  99. 

33.  Some  Extracts  of  Inquifitions  taken  at  divers  Hal- 

motes  holden  at  Halton  or  Runchorne.  99.  b. 

34.  Extracts  from  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Gamul ;  with  a  Pedegree  feeming  to  be  taken  from  the 
fame.  101.  &  106.  b. 

3  Some  few  like  Extracts  touching  the  Family  of 
Laehecote.  1 04. 

•-6.  Others,  concerning  the  Families  of  Leghe,  Mouldf- 
worth,  Grofvenor,  Biikcnhed,  Bunbury,  Macclesfeld, 
&c.  104.  b.  1 12.  1 15. 

37.  Tranfcript  of  part  of  the  Genealogie  of  More  of 

More-Place  in  Rolvinden  &  Bevinden  in  Kent ;  which 
was  labored  for  Charles  Baron  More  of  Mellifont  &  Vif- 
count  More  of  Droghedha  in  Ireland,  by  John  Phillpot 
Somerfet,  A.  D.  1632.  no.  b. 

38.  Extracts  from  Deeds,  relating  to  the  Family  of 
Ockley  ;  with  a  Ihort  Difcent  made  from  them.  1 12.  b- 

39.  Interrogatories  exhibited  by  John  Done,  Efq; 
Maylter  &  Forrefler  of  the  Forreft  of  Delumere,  on  his 
Majelties  behalfe,  againft  divers  Perfons,  for  Mifde- 
meanours  by  them  committed  againft  his  Maiefties  Game 
in  the  fakl  Forreft,  A.  D.  1626.  together  with  fome  other 
papers  relating  to  the  fame  Mr.  Done  &  his  faid  Office. 

1 19. 

40.  Pedegree  of  the  Family  of  Vernon,  with  fome 

Extracts  from  Deeds  relating  to  the  fame.  1 24. 

41.  Like  Extracts  touching  the  Family  ofWordull. 

126. 

5  M  42.  Like 


Num.  2039. 

19.  Trtiflell’s  Rentall;  anno  11  Hen.  vi.  45*  b. 

20.  Rentall  of  Jo.  Grilfyn  de  Bertherton ;  anno  23 

Rlc-  ”•  ibid. 

Rentale  Jo.  Parker  filij  Nieholai  Parker,  tempore 
46. 


ibid. 

46.  b. 

47* 

47- 


A  Book  in  folio,  on  the  out-fide  entituled,  ‘  Writings, 

Deeds,  Pedegrees  and  Rentalls  of  feverall  Gentlemen 

in  Chelhire.’  It  confifts  of  many  loofe  Papers  &  Tracts 

bound  or  putt  together  in  the  Order  following  :  - 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Lilt  of  the  Things  of 
moll  Note  contained  in  this  Booke  ;  made  by  him  A.  D. 
1669. 

2.  Rents  receyved  by  Mary  Wilbraham  for  the  vfe  of 

her  fon  Thomas,  A.  I).  1620.  &  1621.  1. 

3.  Tethinges  geatherd  in  Poulton  Anno  Dni.  1591. 

4.  Part  of  the  Rentall  of  the  Maner  of  Handbridge, 

once  belonging  to  the  Nunnes  of  Cheller  ;  and  now  in 
the  Kinges  hands,  A.  D.  1 640.  5. 

5.  A  Particular  of  Francis  Gatnul  his  Ehate.  17. 

6.  Accompt  of  Rents  received,  and  of  Arrearages 

due  to  Mr . Bulkelcy,  ....  about  A.  D.  1606.  19. 

7.  A  Lowers  Bill  for  one  Plimley,  who  (with  fome  of 

the  Saluiburies,)  had  infuked  Mr.  Gamul,  anno  9  Ca- 
roli  i.  2i. 

8.  Accompt  of  Mr.  Edward  Webber  Recorder  of 

Chefter’s  Difhurfements,  or  Expences,  upon  a  Journey 
he  made  from  Cheller  to  London,  A  back  again 
ix  Caroli  1.  23. 

9.  Mr.  Harpur  (a  Lawyer’s)  Bill,  in  the  Suits  peren- 

ter  Plymley  A  Salilburie.  25.  b. 

to.  Mr.  John  Poole’s  Accompt  of  Sir  Chriitopher 
Hatton’s  Rents  in  Chefhire  ;  x8  Fcbr.  1583.  27. 

1 1.  Particular  of  Crew  Demtfnes,  as  Lett  A.  D.  1605. 

29. 

1 2.  Rents  of  Barthomley,  payable  at  our  Lady-daie  in 

Harvelt,  A.D.  1604.  31, 

Thefe  are  followed  by  like  Papers  relating  both  to 
Crewe  &  Barthomley. 

13.  Debts  owing  to  Mr.  Richard  Gamul,  16  October 

;  and  to  be  collected  prefentlie.  ^5. 

.  A  Rentall  of  Tullingham,  A  Barchill,  A  Grinley. 

15.  The  Rentall  of  Peter  Dutton  q£  Hatton  Efq;  39. 

16.  A  Particular  of  the  Lands  pofi'elTed  by  William 

Tatron  Efq ;  within  the  Lordlhip  of  Lyttle  Salghawle, 
A.  D.  1 600.  4' 1 . 

17.  Rci’.t-IIennes,  Capons,  &  Salt,  due  to  Judge 

Warburton.  43, 

1  s.  A  Rental  of  all  the  Lands  held  of  William  Lord 
Lovell  be  de  Holland;  fact,  anno  17  Hen.  via.  44.  b. 


1609 

14. 


R.  Henrici  vm. 

22.  Ratcliffe’s  Rentall. 

23.  Whalley’s  Rental. 

24.  Meverall’s  Rental. 

25.  Partrich’s  Rentale,  anno  1 1  Hen.  vi.  _T/ . 

26.  Arrerages  due  from  Captain  Marfhes  Tenants.  48. 

27.  Rental  ofHunanby.  50. 

28.  A  Particular  of  Mr.  Thomas  Gamul’s  Lands  in 

Oulton,  A.  D.  1619.  52. 

29.  Accompts  relating  to  the  Eftate  of  Mr.  Hurlefton 
of  Cheller. 

30.  An  Tnventorie  of  all  the  Goods  A  Cattels,  Ac.  of 
Roger  Hurltoo  of  Cheller  Efq;  taken  6  Decr.  1609.  60. 

31.  A  Survaye  of  the  Demeane  of  Mr.  Arden,  taken 

the  20th  ot  October,  anno  1624.  72. 

32.  A  Survey  of  Bredburie-Demeane ;  perhaps  be¬ 
longing  to  the  fame  Mr.  Arderne.  72.  b.^ 

33*  halfe  Yeares  Rentte  of  all  the  Demeane- 
Iuinds  of  Huxley  ;  fett  by  James  Broltor,  A.  D.  1599. 

74- 

34.  An  Inyentarye  of  the  Goods  A  Chattelles  of 

Richard  Collie  of  Cleworth  (within  the  Diocefe  of  : 
Cheller,)  made  2  3  June  1573.  76.  f 

This  fetts  forth  nothing  befides  a  Leafe  of  the  Man- 
nour  3c  ReCloiye  of  Ince,  valued  at  £.500. 

35.  Lands  in  Childer-Thornton,  defeended  from  Rich¬ 
ard  Fletcher  to  John  Fletcher.  77. 

36.  Sir  i  Ininas  Venables  his  Receipt  for  Rent  paid  by 
1  homas  G  ravofnor  Efq;  upon  account  of  certain  Lands 
held  of  him  in  Belgreue.  dat,  12  June  anno  3  R.  Eliz. 

•  78.  b. 

37.  Particular  of  Tabley  Lands,  before  the  Danyells 

Manage.  79.  b. 

38.  Rents  due  by  the  Tenants  in  Thorneton,  at  Mar- 

tlemafs  lalt,  anno  1624.  80.  b.  1 

39.  Extract  from  the  Inquifition  taken  afrer  the  ^de- 

ceafe  of  Joan  the  Widow  of  Richard  Cotone ;  wherein, 
the  Tenures  of  Cottone,  Ofcrofte,  &  Miltone  are  de¬ 
cked.  _  81.  b. 

40.  Notes  concerning  the  Tenements  held  by  John 

Edwards,  A  Godfrey  Parrye,  in  Grasford.  82.  b. 

41.  A  Note  of  Graffes  grafted  at  Holford  by  Sir 

Richard  Grofvenor,  on  May-clay  i6id.  *83. 

This  hath  an  Account  of  l'uch  other  grafts  as  did 
then  appeare  to  growe  A  breake  out. 

4?-.  Mr.  Hardware’s  Divifion  of  Lands  in  Norley  & 
Kingelley.  84.  b. 

43.  A  Note  of  the  Incroachments  made  by  the  Te¬ 

nants  of  Sir  Richard  Molyneux  at  Thorneton  in  Com. 
Lanc-  '  85.  b. 

44.  Arreagcs  of  Rents  in  C.hefler  &  Handbridge  to 

Mr.  Gamul ;  2  February  103  r.  86.  b. 

45.  The  Survaye  of  the  feverall  Feilds  of  Blacon. 

Lordlhipp.  87.  b. 

46.  Rental  or  Survey  of  certain  Lands  in  Parva  Sal- 
ghall,  Pulton  A  Secam  ;  taken  anno  5  R.  Eliz.  S9. 

47.  Particular  of  the  Lands  held  by  the  feveral  Te¬ 
nants  in  Great  Mollington.  91. 

48.  A  Rental  of  the  Tenements  in  Cheller  A  Hand- 

bridge,  belonging  to  Francis  Gamul  Efq;  93. 

49.  Rents  in  Buerton  payd  to  Mr.  John  Poole  ofPoole 

about  A.D,  1601.  gy. 

50.  Rents  paid  by  the  Tenants  in  Thornton  A  Ilull- 

more  in  Com.  Lane.  99.  108.  b. 

This  is  followed  by  fome  other  Notes  relating  to  the 
Commons  of  Thornton. 

5:.  A  particular  of  parte  of  the  Dcmefne  Lands  of 
Codington.  ioj. 

52.  A  partieder  of  Sir  Thomas  Delues  his  Lands  in 
Buerton.  10-_ 

53^ 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


41  r 


Num.  2039. 

53*  A  particular  of  the  Ground  belonging  to  the  ould 
Hall  of  Poole.  Ic5, 

54.  Note  of  fome  Rents  received  by . A.  D. 

1®1,<  ,  107.  b. 

55*  Declaration  in  Dower,  pro  Sidney  Caluely  Vidua  : 
of  all  Sir  Hugh  Calueley’s  Eflate  in  Che  hire,  See.  toq. 

.  A  'lC-ietlulc  of  divers  Parcells  of  Land  in  the 
Townelbip  of  Newton,  called  Board-land  Ground.  1 1  r . 

57.  Rental  of  the  Lands  of  Hughe  Wilbraham  F.fq; 
held  by  Ins  Tenants  in  Wiftafton ;  with  their  Services; 
A.  D.  163$.  II2 

55.  Rentale  de  Londendale,  anno  nono  R.  Henrici  iv. 

1 13. 

The  Original  to  this,  was  fent  by  Mr.  R.  Bretland  of 
Thorn -cliff  to  Randle  Holme,  as  it  l'eems  ;  A.  D.  k  65. 
Mr.  Bretland  having  fome  Eflate  there  :  and  his  ori- 
ginall  Letter  is  pin’d  to  it. 

59.  Rental  of  the  Lordfliips  of  Witton,  Arlcy,  Alton, 
Crowley,  Budworth,  Antrobus ;  A.  D.  ,'629. 

6  k  a  Note  (written  upon  Parchment)  ofLands  held 
by  Mr.  William  Cotgrave,  in  and  about  Chclfer  k  Har- 
greve,  A.  D.  1601.  ,  oK  , 

6t.  Gueryddy  More’s  Rents.  122. 

62.  A  Note  of  the  Corne-monnv  receued  for  the 

Wor“.  Georch  Eedfhame,  8c  the  Wor".  Thomas  C-a- 
mull,  for  the  Tith  and  outher  Come  growinge  in  the 
Maner  of  Crw  (Lrew  or  Crve)  January  16.6.  133. 

63.  R  ental  of  the  Demeanes  &  of  the  Houles  in  Crew, 

A.D.  1606.  1  of;. 

64.  Mr.  Richard  Grofvenours  Accompt  of  the  Ar¬ 

rearages  of  Rents  due  to  Sir  Hughe  Cholmondek-y, 
from  the  Manours  of  Sutton  and  luce,  k  Rectories  of 
Branboroughe  &  Ince.  1^8.  b. 

65.  Note  of  the  Lands  which  defeended  from  Duel  or 

Booth,  to  Agnes  Booth  the  King’s  Ward.  i4:. 

66.  A  Rentall  of  the  Rents,  Lands,  Sc  Tenements, 

late  the  Inheritance  of  Roger  Har Iron  Efq.  143. 

67.  I  he  Cafe  of  Mr.  Whitby  Recorder  of  Chefler,  as 
Hated  with  relation  to  Mr.  Francis  Gamul,  whole 
Mother  he  had  married;  with  the  Quellions  arifing  from 
the  fame.  &  Mr.  Wandcsford’s  Opinion  thereupon.  143, 

68.  Notes  relating  to  the  Families  of  Maimvarinfr 

Mafly,  &  Leigh.  147°’ 

69.  Notes  concerning  the -Proceedings  of  the  Kings 

Commiffioners  for  Charitable  Ules,  within  the  County 
Palatine  of  Chefler,  in  8c  after  the  year  1630.  151. 

70.  Notes  k  Ex  trails  from  Deeds,  &c.  inferted  into 

Sn-  Thomas  Alton’s  Pedegree,  A.D.  1 635.  , 1; 

71.  Notes  relating  to  many  Bifhops  of  Chefler  ;  taken 

from  Bp.  Godwin*  Sec.  jg.,. 

72.  Original  Mandate  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  to  the 
Mayor  k  Sherifles  of  Chefler,  commanding  them  (vpon 
Paine  of. £., CO)  furthewith  to  dii'charge  Edward  Lloyd 
of  the  action  of  Debt,  commenced  againfl  him  by  one 
Flughc  Trevor.  Ytven  vnder  her  Signet  28  Auguft, 
anno  Regni  10. 

73.  Another,  from  K.  Philip  8c  Qu.  Mary,  to  the 
Mayor  &  two  of  the  Aldermen  of  Chefler;  to  do 
juftice  in  a  certain  Caufe  referred  to  them :  or  elfe,  to 
lay  the  fame  before  the  Counfaill  in  the  Marches  of 
Wales.  Yeven  under  the  Signet,  25  of  January  in  their 
fyrfl  &  fecond  Yeres. 

74.  A  Lawyers  Bill. 

75.  Pills  of  the  Charges  of  Sir  John  Dones  Recovery, 

upon  his  Sons  Mariage.  l6  ' 

76.  Mr.  Richard  Minfhull’s  Original  Letter  to  his 
Son  ;  concerning  the  Defcent  of  his  Family,  dat.  a  Mav 

l6SS-  ,  .68. 

77.  Another  from  the  fame,  to  the  fecond  Randle 
J  Holme;  upon  the  fame  fubject.  dat.  20  May  1656. 

169.  b. 

Another  from  Mr.  John  Wolryche  to  Mr.  Holme, 

|  ahout  getting  ready  Efcocheons  for  the  Funeral  of  one 
b  of  his  Family,  dat.  5  Oftober  1638.  170.  b. 


Num.  2039. 

79-  Notes  made  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  m 
order  to  fatisfie  one  Millington  Coulthurfl  touching  his 
Defcent,  and  part  of  his  Eflate.  171. 

o°.  A  Note  of  Money,  Men,  k  IT-rfe  alread  fub- 
Icribed  Sc  vudertaken,  in  divers  Counties,  for  his  Ma- 
jelues  Service,  fi.  e.  of  K.  Charles  1.)  172. 

8 1  Two  Original  Letters  from  Mr.  James  Phi! lipps 
of  Whitchurch  to  the  fecond  Randle 'Hoi  me,  defiring 
mni  to  fett  forth  his  Pedegree,  upon  Parchment,  as 
hur.  Ia  one  of  them  he 
lncloicd  an  Account  of  iiis  Defcent  as  high  as  the  time  of 
K.  Edward  in.  which  was  as  far  as  he  himfelf  knew  ; 
and  the  Paper  follows  the  faid  two  Letters,  which  were 
written  A.D.  1633.  173. 

S2.  Certificate  of  an  Agreement  made  by  Mr.  1  ho- 
mas  Stanley  for  h;s  Mailer  Sir  Thomas  Gerrard,  Sc 
William  Jewet  Merchaunt,  about  a  parcel  of  Wines, 
which  Jewet  had  fold  to  another,  after  Sir  Thomas  had 
bought  it.  Phis  is  auefted  by  Richard  Fulton  then 
Miuor  of  Chefler,  26  die  Junij,  anno  to  R.  El:z.  176. 

83.  The  Anfwere  of  Randulphc  Lloid  to  the  Bill 

of  Complaynt  of  Elizabeth  Hunt  Wedowe,  who 
claimed  an  Houfe  which  he  had  bought  of  her  Huf- 
band.  J77 

84.  Account  of  certain  Bonds  enter’d  into  by  Sir 

Hugh  Beeflon,  by  rcafon  of  the  Wardfhip  of  Thomas 
Mafterfon.  I7g_ 

85.  Attefled  Copie  of  the  Kings  Letters  Patents, 

whei  cby  he  granted  a  Pen  I  .on  of  f.  200  -q*  annum  to  Sir 
George  Beeflon  Sc  Dame  Eleanor  his  wife,  Sc  the  longer 
Livei  of  them  :  upon  Sir  Hugh  Beeflon’s  Surrender  of 
a  Patent  for  the  like  annual  Penfion,  to  be  received  by 
him  during  the  Lives  of  his  fon  George  Sc  of  Olive 
Bens  ford.  This  beareth  Tefte  the  2  of  Marche,  anno 
ReSni  Jacobi  1.  Icptimo.  ,  7g. 

S6.  R  Pled  between  Roger  Downes  Se  John  Hendon. 

1 8 1 . 

8  7-  Notes  taken  by  Mr.  Whitby  Recorder  of  Chefler, 

at  hisPerufal  of  Mr*.  Hatton's  Heeds.  183. 

88.  I  lie  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  the 

Difcent  of  Gerard.  j  3 

89.  The  Names  of  all  thofe  Gentlemen  that  were 

commanded  by  brands  Earle  of  Shrewfbury  to  attend 
K.  Henrie  the  8th.  with  their  feuerall  Numbers  of  Men 
again  ft  the  Scots,  whoe  were  then  about  to  invade  Entr- 
land-  1867 

90.  Defcent  of  Grofvenour.  187. 

91.  Copie  of  the  fecond  Randle’ Holme’s  Letter  to 

Mr.  Peter  Drink  water  ;  who  (as  it  feemes)  did  ufe  the 
Coat  Sc  Crefl  of  the  Family  of  Derwent  of  Derwent  in 
Com.  Lane.  dat.  12  June  1657.  180.  vid.  2  o  Sc  241. 

9  >.  Some  Defcents  Sc  •  atches  of  the  Family  of  Grof- 

venor,  (with  their  Armes)  noted.  180.210. 

93.  Like  Notes  touching  the  Defcent  of  the"  Family 
of  Leigh  of  High  Leigh  ;  with  their  Armes  Sc  Crefts. 

This  includes  the  feveral  Branches  of  that  antient 
Family  of  Ldgh. 

94-  Draught  of  Randle  Holme’s  Certificate,  that  Mr. 
Lawrence  Leighe  of  Swynhead  was  not  anEfquire :  made 
to  fhew  the  Commiffioncrs  about  Efquiers  Compofitions 
for  their  Eflates,  A.D.  1637.  209 

95.  Order  of  the  Court  of  Wards,  for  the  Delivery 
of  all  Deeds  Sc  Writings  concerning  the  Eflate  of  Peter 

I'1'q;  deceafed>  into  the  Guflndy  of  Edward 
VVhitbyElq;  to  be  by  him  given  in  Evidence,  at  the 
finumg  of  the  Office,  dat.  20  Febr.  anno  5  R.  Carol i  1. 

96.  Agreement  made  by  Sir  Henry  Bunbury,  Richard  1 
Brereton  Efq;  Richard Grofvenor  Jun.  Efq;  Ac.  betweene 

1  nomas  Ihorneley  Sc  John  Thorucley,  touching  certain 
tenements  m  Figden  Sc  Eccleflon.  dat.  28  April  1617. 

97-  Mr*  Whitbies  Letter  to  Hugh  Mainwaririge  the 
7  ^  tings 


I ' 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


K'nvjs  Efcheator,  See.  accompanying  the  Writings  above 
mentioned  at  §  95.  dat.  1"  March  1629.  215. 

If  the  Name  hereunto  fubferibed  be  of  Mr.  Whit- 
bies  Hand-writing  ;  it  ftiews  that  at  one  time  of  his  Life 
he  could  write  plainly,  (vid.  fupra,  §  87.) 

93.  Writings  and  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  &  Eftate 
of  Grofvenor.  r  ,  21  7* 

99.  An  Abftrafte  of  the  Defcents  of  the  now  Erle- 
Marfliall  of  England  Thomas  Howard  Earl  of  Arundel  & 
Surrey,  and  his  Counters  Alethea  one  of  the  Daughters 
of  Gilbert  Talbot  Earl  of  Shrewfbury.  220. 

ico.  A  Letter  of  Mr.  Thomas  Ravenfcroft  to  Captain 
Stopford.  dat.  8  May  1651.  222* 

101.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Stockport.  2  22.  b. 

102.  Extract  from  the  Will  of  William  Offley  Citizen 

Sc  Merchant-Taylor  of  London,  touching  the  Legacies 
bequeathed  by  him  to  the  City  of  Chefter.  _  223. 

103.  Original  Letter  of  William  Walker  to  his  Nephew 

Walker,  deducing  (in  J'pight  of  all  probability  to  the 
contrary,  and  without  the  fupport  of  proper  Authorities) 
that  1  lie  Family  of  Walker,  (which  Name  is  the  fame  in 
lhmification  as  Fuller,)  came  from  Walchere  Biihop  of 
Durham  in  the  Conqueror’s  Time  ;  and  their  Armcs, 
(which  were  about  to  be  confirmed)  from  thofe  of  the 
fame  Prelate.  Such  filly  Stories  can  mean  Perfons  lick 
up  Sc  digeft,  when  they  have  feraped  up  lome  Wealth, 
dat.  20  July  1659.  224' 

104.  Notes  about  other  Benefactions  bequeathed  to 

the  City  of  Chefter.  225* 

!05.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Soley  to  the  third 
Randle  Holme,  about  the  Walkers  Armcs.  dat.  9  Julij 
1659.  r  227- 

,  0 6.  A  Plea  between  the  Maior  &  Citizens  of  Chefter, 
&  William  Hodges,  A.  D.  1612.  about  the  Cuftom  Sc 
Tulls  of  that  City  ;  wherein  is  layd  downe  the  Antiquity 
thereof,  &  Charters  for  it.  ....  22S: 

107.  Ambrofij  Applebei  F.pitaphium  in  ohitum  dignif- 
ftini  Viri  Gulielmi  Malore'i  Mililis,  a  Confilijs  Serenifiime 
Due.  Elizabethe,  in  partibus  borealibus :  qui  ex  hac 
luce  migravit  20  die  Martij  Anno  Dni.  1602.  233.  b. 

"l  his  is  written  in  a  large  Church-Text  Hand  ;  and 
not  in  the  worft  manner. 

ic8.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  George  Hockenhull  to 
John  Wittor,  about  his  Families  &  Aimes,  dat.  9Novr. 
16  38.  234> 

\  -m.  Another,  from  Thom.  Wilbraham  to  (the  fe- 
cond  )  Randle  Holme,  about  one  John  Wettenhall,  his 
Family,  &  Eltate.  dat.  12  January  1640.  235. 

I  1  o.  Abftract  of  the  laft  Will  &  Teftament  of  Randle 

Preltland  of  Preftland  Efq;  dat.  6  Sept.  1567.  236. 

nr.  SomeDefcentsof  the  Family  of  Pemberton.  236.  b. 

I I  2.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Anfwers  to  divers 

Interrogatories  touching  certain  Branches  of  the  Family 
of  Gerard,  and  its  Poffeflions.  237. 

1 1 3.  Short  Notes  touching  theFamily  of  Alderfey.  23S. 

Notes  of  certain  Fine>  leavyed  in  Chefter.  238.  b. 

1 ,  A.  Note  or  Kalendar  of  ihe  Ships,  with  the  Bur¬ 
dens  &  Men,  that  are  10  be  rayfed  in  England  &  Wales, 
by  the  firlt  of  March  1635.  _  239. 

1 16.  An  odd  fort  of  a  Letter  of  Peter  Drinkwater  to 
Randle  Holme,  with  a  Trick  of  the  Armcs  he  defired 
to  bear,  being  vppon  preferment  in  poynte  of  Marriage, 
&c.  dat.  27  April  1657.  241.  vid  fupra  §  90. 

•  •  -.  Abftra&s  of  two  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family 


of  Ferrers. 


i'Cirers.  242. 

1 18.  Notes  gathered  by  Mr.  William  Vernon,  touch- 
i-.v  Church  Hulme,  fic  the  Family  of  Holme.  243. 

"119.  Armcs  of  fomc  few  antient  Families,  haftily 
tricked.  243.  b. 

120.  Valew  of  Earl  Rivers  Eftate  in  Cheftiire.  234. 

1 2 1 .  Valew  of  Lord  De  la  mare’s  Eftate  in  Chefhirc. 


Num.  2040,  2041. 

2°4°. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  being  the  Suite  or  fecond 
Part  of  that  W ork,  which  in  this  Library  is  Infcribed 
N*.  2146.  which  will  (God  willing)  hereafter  be  de- 
feribed  in  its  place.  This  is  written  by  divers  Hands, 
and  hath  had  many  Additions  Sc  Continuations,  made 
unto  it,  even  fo  very  lately  as  A.  D.  1707,  which  was 
not  long  before  its  Owner  the  third  Randle  Holme  de- 
ceafsd.  He  put  upon  its  outfide  this  Title,  ‘  Pedegrees  of 
diverfe  Places:’  by  which  he  meant,  Pedegrees  of  Fami¬ 
lies  dwellingin  divers, or  differentPlaces;  as  well  without 
as  within  the  County-Palatine  of  Chefter.  Many  ofthefe 
are  illuftrated  with  Tricks  of  Armes,  &  Seals,  Extra&s 
from  Deeds,  and  other  Heraldical  Notes,  Sc  principally 
done  by  the  fecond  and  third  Randle  Holmes.  T  his 
might  ferve  as  a  general  Account  of  this  ufeful  Book, 
fince  a  particular  One  of  all  the  Defcents  would  be  too 
tedious:  but  that,  according  to  cuftom,  I  fhall  yet 
acknowledge'that  in  turning  it  over,  L  obferved, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  fable 
of  the  *  Pedegrees’  entred  into  this  Book.  At  the  begin 
ning. 

2.  His  Alphabetical  Table  directing  to  the  Coates  of 
Armes  found  herein. 

3.  Dr.  Iiumfrey  Ridley’s  accouut  of  his  Family, 

written  by  his  own  hand  ;  infertedat.  178. 

4.  Copie  of  the  Certificate  or  Acknowledgment  of 
the  Achievement  properly  belonging  to  Lieutenant  Co- 
lonell  William  Smith  ;  by  William  Roberts  Doftor  of 

fthe  C.iuile  Law,  &  Vluefter  Kinge  of  Armes  of  the  whole 
Kingdome  of  Ireland,  dat.  14  July  1648.  219. 

5.  Armes  in  Blafon,  borne  by  different  Families  of  the 

Name  ofThomfon.  230.  b. 

6.  Armes  in  Blafon,  borne  by  different  Families  of 

the  Name  of  Wood.  -7 9-  b- 

7.  Original  Paper  of  the  Hand  of  Sr.  Edward  Walker 

Garter  ;  defiling  Information  from  Mr.  Hurt  of  Cafterne 
touching  his  own  Family,  who  did  formerly  poffefs  it. 
dat.  23  December  1664.  at  289. 

8.  I  opie  of  a  Citation  of  Sr  Robert  Br.erewood  & 
otrer  Gentlemen,  to  appear  before  the  Committee  for 
Sequeftration  for  the  City  of  Chefter.  dat.  23  Septk  1646, 

292.  b. 

2041. 

A  Book  in  fol.  entituled  on  the  out-fidc  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme  ‘  Certificates  taken  afert'he  Deceafe 
of  Gentlein.  n,  &c.’  and  may  be  divided  into  two 
Parts. 

1.  Funeral  Certificates  of  fomc  of  the  Chefhirc -Gentry 

1 

Deputie  al  Norroy  Roy  Darmes .  being  for  the  mod  part. 
Originals,  S:  many  of  them  attefted  by  the  I  lands  of  the 
Executors  or  neareft  Relations  to  the  deceafed.  r. 

. 

made  to  them  by  the  fecond  Rand)e  Holme. 

2.  The  Regefter-Booke  of  Font  rails  in  the  Counties 

of  Chefter,  Lancafter,  ■ .  North-V  .  .  «,  :  gtu  e  rl  e  2  I 
May  1606.  by  Richatd  S'G  eorge,  Nor  Kii  ;  of  Armes, 

(who  fubferibes  the  Title  thereof  with,  hisov.n  hand)  to 
be  continued  by  his  Deputy  Randal  Holme,  who  v.as 
to  truelie  enter  therein,  from  time  to  time,  the  Armes  &  j 
Creafts,  Match,  Iffue,  Sc  Deceafc  of  all  fuch  Perfons  of 
Coate-Armour  Sc  Worfhipe,  as  it  ft:ouid  pleafe  God  to 
call  out  of  this  tranfttory  Life,  and  fhoui  !  receave  Wor-  j 
fliipfull  F.nterment  according  to  their  Eftates  &  Degrees. 
The  faid  Randall  to  receive  all  No:  rays  Fees,  for  his 
Ule  ;  and  upon  the  finifhing  of  this  Bonk,  to  deliver  the  ! 
fame  to  the  faid  Norroy,  to  be  recorded  A  entred  into  | 
btc  Maipfl-iefi  OHirp.  of  Armes  in  London,  according:  as 


Bibliothecae  Harleiahse. 


413 


Nurn.  2041,  2042. 

been  of  great  Ufe,  if  it  had  been  well  followed  ;  but 
although  the  Regifter  appeareth  to  have  been  Well  begun, 
the  Armes  being  painted,  the  Certificate  fairly  copied  6cc. 
honed  Randle  Holme  the  firft  fooii  found  thofe  labo¬ 
rious  Articles  to  be  unneceffiry,  there  being  but  5  Af- 
chievements  painted  :  and  with  the  fecond  Inltance  he 
failed  as  to  the  writing-part,  there  being  ho  more  of  his 
Copies.  But  then  in  order  to  carry  on  the  Regifter,  he 
palled  the  Original  Certificates  fin  like  manner  as  was 
done  by  thofe  of  W.  Grafton  abovementioned '  upon 
another  book  ;  but  not  always  in  exad  order  of  time, 
thefe  Certificates  feem  to  be,  for  the  molt  part,  drawn 
up  by  the  aforefaid  Randle  Holme  the  fil'd;  as  may 
appear,  by  comparing  them  with  one  mbferibed  with  his 
Name,  at'  fol.  52.  and  fome  Emendations  have  been 
made  to  them,  and  additional  Certificates  inferted  by  his 
Son  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  as  at  23.  42-  b. 

3.  The  Fees  to  be  demanded  by  the  faid  Deputy  to 
Norroy,  upon  thefe  mournful  Ciccafions,  are  Ipecified,  at 

5  4.  The  Book  upon  which  all  the  Certificates  are  palled, 
is  an  imperfect  Copie  of  Cooke’s  Baronage. 

2042. 

A  B  10k  in  folio,  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  on  the 
ouifide  thus  entituled,  “  Lancafhire  Deeds,  See.’  by 
which,  we  are  to  u.iderfland,  copies  of  or  Extrads 
from  Seals,  with  other  Note-,  Papers,  'l  ricks  of  Seals 
&  Monuments,  relating  chiefly  to  Perfons  or  Places  in 
Lancafhire  ;  and  colLded  for  the  moll  part,  by  the 
faid  R  mdle,  or  by  his  father  Randle  the  fecond. 
But,  foraftnuch  as  this  Account  may  be  deemed  too 
general.  I  fliall  take  the  Liberty  of  putting  down  what  I 
pat  ticula’ly  remark  therein  ;  as  followeth, 

1.  Ti.  iphabetietd  Tables  of  Perfcns  &  Places  men¬ 
tioned  in  Lhis  Book,  are  not  here;  but  are  to  be  tound 
in  another  Volume  of  the  Work  whereof  this  is  a  part, 
now  inferibed  06  C.  25. 

а.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Catalogue  of  the 
Things  of  moll  Note,  entred  into  this  Book;  at  thebe- 
ginning. 

3.  Lift  of  the  Free-holders  Names  thoughout  Lanca¬ 
fhire  ;  taken  \.D.  1600.  85. 

4.  Nomina  Villarum  infra  Comitaium  Lancaftrix,  204. 

5.  Lilt  of  the  Parilh- Churches  throughout  the  County 

Palatyne  of  Lancafhire,  with  the  Hundreds  they  are  in; 
and  what  Townelhips  are  in  each  Parilh,  ex  libro  W. 
Vernon  Gen.  A.  D.  1668.  208. 

б.  Extrads  from  fome  Deeds,  belonging  to  the  Talbots. 

213. 

7.  Carta  R.  Richardi  hi.  quA  concedit  Thornre  Tal¬ 

bott  Militi,  pro  bono  ac  gratuito  fervicio  luo,  in  captura 
magni  Adverfarij  fui  Henrici  nuper  de  fado,  fed  non  de 
jure,  Regis  Anglice,  fibi  ac  bona;  memoriae  Edwardi 
Regis  iv.  impenfo,  quadraginta  Libras  annuatim  perci- 
piendas  de  exitibus  Comitatus  Palatini  Lancaftriae.  dat. 
2  Augufti,  anno  Regni  fecundo.  ibid. 

8.  Original  Letter  of  Doctor  Richard  Keurden  of  Pref- 
ton,  to  Randle  Holme,  dated  10th  January  1664,  defir¬ 
ing  him  to  lend  him  what  he  had  of  Coll.  Worden’s 
Defcent ;  and  alfo  to  fend  him  his  old  Role  or  Bundle 
of  Tranfcripts  concerning  Fazakerley’s& Walton’s  Lands. 
Adding  that  Mr.  Townly  and  himfelf  were  in  hotr  pur- 
fuit  of  their  Countryes  Affaires,  and  in  reti  ming  the 
Glory  of  their  Palatine  out  of  Monumental  Allies  :  being 
able  to  proue  their  County  a  Palatinate  Jurifdidion  under 
Rog.  Pidavenfis,  before  the  Grand  Survey  of  Domef- 
day's  Record  in  the  Exchequer,  and  forfeted  before  that 
time  ;  reltored  againe  in  William  the  fecond’s  lime  ; 
forfeited  again  by  Pidauenfis  at  the  Battell  of  lenerch- 
brey,  in  the  beginning  of  Henry  the  firfl :  bellowed 
then  on  Stephen  before  he  was  King  ;  and  continuated 
for  his  Raigne  in  his  Ion  Will.  Comes  Boloniae  et  Mori- 
toniee,  lil  about  5th  of  Richard  the  firfl;  then  giuen  to 

Cat.  Harl.  V01..II. 


Num.  2042. 

Jo.  Earle  Morton  ;  afterwards  to  P.  of  Sauoy  ;  and  by 
Henry  in.  conferred  on  Edmund  Crouch  hack  their  firfl 
Earle  by  Charter ;  though  fome  of  the  latter  had  not 
their  Jura  Regalia,  as  at  firft.  2 14-  , 

y.  Part  of  a  Lift  of  the  old  Fines,  or  Pedes  Finium 
remaining  of  Record,  in  the  Exchequer  of  Cheiter,  as 
it  feemeth.  .  .  215- 

10.  A  Kalender  of  the  Euidence  of  Roger  Kirkby  Efq. 

23x*  . 

11.  Extra£ls  from  3  Deeds  of  Colewyke  &  Byron 

with  a  Trick  of  the  Seal  of  John  Byrune.  233. 

12.  A  Trick  of  an  old  Pidure  of  a  Knight  kneeling 

armed  in  a  Shirt  of  Mail,  with  a  Tabard  over  it,  of  an 
old  Falhion,  &  without  Sleeves.  On  the  Tabard  are  his 
Armes,  but  not  ex  prefled  as  in  an  Efcocheon,  or  as  in 
the  way  ufed  in  later  times.  Yet  in  his  left  Hand  he  holds 
up  an  Efcocheon  with  his  Armes  according  to  the  antient 
manner.  233. 

This  is  faid  to  be  taken  from  the  North-Window  of 
the  Church  of  Colwick,  in  Notinghamfhire. 

13.  Extrads  from  the  Notes  incerted  by  Mr.  Vincent 

in  the  fide  of  Standifhes  Pedigrey  :  one  of  which,  is  the 
Receipt  of  Thomas  CarltonVickar  of  the  Church  of  Crof- 
ton  which  he  gave  for  the  Relique  of  S‘  Lawrence’s 
Head,  brought  out  of  Normandy  by  Sir  Rouland  of 
Standifh.  dat.  2  March  1442.  239  A. 

14.  Extrads  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Maghull  of  Mag- 

hull,  taken  A.  D.  1639.  248. 

Among  thefe,  divers  relate  to  the  antient  family  of 
Molyncux. 

15.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Biron,  colleded 

from  the  great  Pedigree  of.  that  Family,  which  was 
labor’d  for  Sir  john  Biron  Knight  of  the  Bath,  A.  D. 
1627.  263. 

6.  Excerpta  ex  Colledionibus  Rogeri  Dodfworth 
de  Hut  ton-grange  in  Com.  Lancailr.  24  Maij  1629.  272. 

1’hefe  are  Extrads  from  Deeds  relating  to  divers 
Families. 

17.  Extrads  from  the  Deeds  of  Samuel  Bifpham  of 

Billinge  in  the  County  of  Lancaller,  Efq;  with  his  Pedi¬ 
gree  colleded  out  of  Evidences,  and  other  authentick 
matter  of  Record,  by  Sir  Henry  Sl  George  K‘  Norry 
King  at  Armes,  Anno  1640.  273. 

18.  Confirmation  of  the  Armes,  with  a  Grant  of  an 

Augmentation  10  the  fame,  and  a  Crell,  unto  the  afore¬ 
faid  Samuel  Bifpham  Efq;  by  Sr  Henry  Sl  George  Norroy. 
dat.  1  January  1640.  278.  b. 

19.  Pedigree  of  the  Family  of  Dauntefey  281. 

20.  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Prefton.  282. 

Or  rather,  a  Genealogical  Scheme  (hewing  the  De- 

feendants  from  Thomas  Prefton  of  Prefton  Patrick,  Sc 
Leavens  in  Wefttnerland. 

21.  Short  De’cenfs  of  Byram,  &  of  Byrom  284.  b. 

22.  Defcent  of  the  noble  Family  of  Ogle,  down  to 

William  Duke  of  Newcaftle.  285.fi. 

Part  of  this  is  faid  to  have  been  copied  from  thofe 
Papers  of  Mr. Ogle  which  he  took  from  his  Deeds,  A.  D. 
1611;  and  is  continued  to  A.  D.  1645. 

2  v  Extrads  from  the  antient  Deeds  of  the  faid  Noble 
Family  ;  with  Tricks  of  fome  of  the  Seals.  286.  b. 

24.  Indentura  inter  Willehnu 'it  More  Arm.  Majoreni 
Ville  de  Leuerpole,  et  Communitatem  ejufdem  Ville,  ex 
una  parte,  etWillelmum  Molvneux  Militetn,  ex  alterA; 
dat.  5  die  Odobr.  anno  15  k-  Henrici  vm.  287.  b. 

25.  Deeds  copied  by  me  R.  Holme  of  Chefler  Aider- 

man,  remayning  in  the  Hands  of  Henry  Beardfwurth 
now  of  Cheiter  &  of  Layland  in  Com.  Lancailr.  3  Sep¬ 
tember  1650.  288. 

To  this  Title,  the  fame  Randle,  afterwards  (being 
almoll  afleep,  as  I  fuppofe;  added  thefe  Words,  written 
verbatym,  for  the  very  firft  of  them  begins  thus,  ‘  Sciant 

etc.  ego  Robertus” - &  others  in  the  fame  manner  ; 

fo  that  fome  of  them  are  only  Extrads,  and  not  written 
verbatym. 

5  N  a 6.  Defcent 


4J4 


Catalogus  Libroram  MSS, 


Num.  2042,  2043. 

26.  Defcent  oF the  Family  of  Beardefworth.  288  b. 

27.  The  fame  Randle  Holme’s  Extracts  from  divers 

Deeds  in  the  pofleflion  of  James  Stopford,  Efq;  made  in 
tfie  month  of  March  1650.  291. 

28.  Literae  Confraternitatis,  quibus  Johannes  Prior 

localis  Ordinis  Fratrum  Heremitarum  S.  Auguftini  Con- 
ventus  Stafibrdie,  accepit  Johannem  Bakehoufe  et  CYce- 
liam  uxorem  fuam,  in  Fratefnitatem  ejufdem  Domus. 
dat.  A,  D.  1361.  292.  b. 

29.  Extracts  from  Deeds  in  the  Cuftody  of  Mr.  Wil¬ 
liam  Rauen  of  Ellworth.  308. 

30.  Extracts  from  Deeds  in  the  Cuftody  of  Mr.  James 

Jolly  of  Manchefter,  made  by  the  faid  Randle  Holme  ; 
A.  D.  i6j2.  309. 

31.  Extracts  from  Deeds  in  the  pofleflion  of  Mr.  Ri¬ 

chard  Jackfon  alias  Kauerden,  Dodler  of  Phifick,  made 
by  the  fame  Randle  Holme,  in  January  1 6 53.  3  16. 

32.  Notes  coppyed  out  of  the  fame  Dr.  Jackfon’s  Col¬ 

lections,  that  were  written  with  his  owne  hand  :  by  the 
fame  Randle  Holme.  326.  b. 

33.  Coppies  of  Deeds  taken  by  Dr.  Jackfon  alias  Cuer- 

den.  329-  b. 

34.  Mundana  mutabilia,  Ethlestgphylax  :  A  De¬ 

claration  how  God  hath  preferved  the  Family,  Kindred, 
or  Pofterity  of  Etheleflon  (now  called  Elfton)  in  a  compe¬ 
tent,  though  variable  Eftate,  for-a  longe  Tyrnej  as  the 
fame  hath  bin  collected  from  fundry  parcells  of  ancient 
Evidences  by  William  Elftone.  336. 

This  Treatife  was  written  by  Mr.  Elflon  A.  D.  1  625, 
as  appears  in  fol.  338  b.  fk  339.  but,  in  this  Copie  is 
carried  down  no  lower  than  ann.  2  R. Elizabethan.  The  fe- 
veral  Families  of  whom  it  treats,  feem  to  have  been  of  the 
lefler  Gentry  ;  and  Mr.  Ellton  himfelf  feems  by  his  man¬ 
ner  of  Writing,  to  have  been  not  only  a  pious  man,  but 
alfo  well  ikillcd  in  the  Laws  of  this  Realm. 

35.  ExtraCts  from  old  Deeds  found  in  the  pofleflion  of 

feveral  Perfons,  whofe  names  are  omitted.  363. 

Thefe  relate,  principally,  to  .lie  Families  of  Faza- 
kerley  &  Wabon  :  as  alfo  to  divers  of  the  old  Inhabitants 
of  the  Town  of  Liverpole. 

36.  Walton  Deeds.  373. 

Thefe  are  ExtraCts  from  old  Deeds  chiefly  relating 

to  the  Family  of  Walton  :  and  alfo  to  thofe  of  Clayton, 
Prefton,  &c. 

37.  ColleCtanea  de  Honore  Lancaftrias,  ex  libro  Jo- 

hannis  Hide  de  Urmefton  Arm.  383. 

2043, 

A  Book,  in  folio,  confuting  of  divers  Tracts,  partly 
Hiftorical  &  partly  Heraldical,  bound  up  together  in 
no  good  Order ;  many  of  which  are  neither  perfeCt, 
nor  written  by  the  fame  Hands.  However,  they  may 
be  defaribed  thus, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  the  Things  of 
molt  Note  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  An  AlphabeticalTable  of  the  Families  Names,  whofe 
Pedigrees  may  be  found  in  this  Book. 

3.  A  like  Table  pointing  to  the  Armes  entred  herein. 

4.  A  briefe  Journal  of  the  Seige  againft  Lathom-Hall, 

Anno  1644.  j 

5.  Short  Difcourfes  upon  thefe  feveral  Titles,  viz. 
Gentleman,  Knight,  Baronet,  Prince,  &King;  withfome 
mifcellaneous  Notes,  &  an  original  Letter  of  one  Samuel 
Clarke,  intermingled. 

6.  Of  the  Antiquity  &  Conftitution  of  our  Parlia¬ 
ments.  .  20.  b. 

7.  A  perfeCt  Lift  of  the  Names  &  Sur-names  of  the 

Knights  &  BurgelTes  for  this  County  &  Burrough  of 
Derby,  as  they  were  chofen  to  attend  that  Parliament 
holdenat  Wefttninfter,  3  Nov.  1640.  t2. 

8.  An  unfinilhed  Draught  of  the  Market-houfe  of  Lich¬ 
field.  2  4. 

This  belongs  to  an  imperfeCt  Account  of  the  befieg- 
ing  of  Lichfield-Clofe,  A.  D.  1642.  written  by  fome 


Num.  2043. 

Cavalier,  who  had  more  Zeal  than  Learning  (et  vid. 
plurafol.  38.) 

9.  Names  of  the  Knights  &  Gentlemen  refident  in 
Derbyfhire,  as  returned  into  the  Exchequer,  anno  12 
Regis  Henrici  vi.  o2. 

1  o.  A  Fragment  of  an  Account  of  the  Siege  of  La* 
thom-Houfe,  A.  D.  1644.  gg. 

This  was  different  from  that  abovementioned,  at  §  4. 

11.  A  Lift  of  thofe  Leicefter-fhireGentlemen,  who  com¬ 
pounded  with  theParliamentfor  theirEftares,  atGoldfmith’s 
Hall  in  London,  during  the  time  of  the  Civil  War.  38  b. 

12.  Part  of  a  Lift  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council 

to  K.Charles  n.  defigned  to  fet  forth  their  Titles,  Crea¬ 
tion,  Armes,  &c.  (but  little  is  done)  46. 

13.  Notes  about  John  of  Gaunt,  &  his  fen  K.  Henry 

iv.  (Ihort)  48. 

1 4.  Defcent  of  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby  (Imperfect  at 

the  end)  '  ibid. 

15.  Defcent  of  Ferrers  Earls  of  Derby.  48. 

1 6.  Imperfedt  Tricks  of  two  Corporation-Seals,  fol.  54. 
(perhaps  of  Kendal  in  Wcftmoreland.  vid  fol.  91.  b.) 

17.  An  imperfeCt  &  un-leamed  Eflay  towards  an  Hif- 
tory  of  the  County  of  Wcftmoreland,  and  of  the  Noble 
&  Worlhipful  Families  therein  refident  fol.  56.  (90,  which 
follows  57.  b.)  58.  84.  88.  90.  ( 1 27, which  follows  9 1 .  b.) 

18.  Of  the  Lord  Keeper  Sir  Edward  Littleton  (Lord 

Littleton  of  Mounflow)  his  exemplary  Loyalty  to  K. 
Charles  1.  6c>  ‘ 

19.  Defcent  of  Lenox  Earl  of  Richmond,  with  Notes. 

60.  b. 

20.  Defcendants  from  Edward  Seymour  Lord  Protec¬ 

tor,  down  to  Francis  Duke  of  Somerfet ;  which  Title 
he  had  not  until  the  .year  1 675.  g.. 

21.  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Bcrtu.  64. 

22.  Some  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Boyle.  Earl 
of  Burlington,  as  defeended  from  that  (if  ClitFord.  66.  b. 

&  67. 

23.  Others  relating  to  that  of  Bourchier,  Earl  of  Bath. 

68. 

2  A- - Wryothefley,  Earl  of  Southampton. 

68.  b. 

Sackville,  Earl  of  Dorfet.  70. 

Cavendifh,  Earl  of  Devonfhire.  72. 
Carey,  Vifcount  Falkland  ;  Earl  of 


25- 

26.  ■ 

27. 


Dover  ;  &  Earl  of  Monmouth. 


7  3- 


28.  - - Hamilton,  Duke  of  Hamilton  &  Earl 


of  Cambridge. 
29. 


3°- 
3»- 
32. 
3  3- 


Digby  Earl  rfBriftol. 

■  Fane,  Earl  of  vv  cftinerland. 

■  Howard,  Earl  of  Berkelhire. 

•  Savage  Earl  Rivers. 

•  Dormer,  Earl  of  Carnarvon. 
Blount,  Earl  of  Newport. 
Howard,  Duke  of  Norfolk. 


75- 
76. 
77- b. 

78. 
78.  b. 
82. 
8.3- 

-  .  83.  b. 

Thefe  laft  Notes  are  almoft  wanting.  The  principal 
Reafon  of  treating  of  thefe  Noble  Families  abovemen¬ 
tioned,  feems  to  be  their  Attachment  to  the  Caufe  of 
their  Soveraign  King  Charles  1.  and  their  refpeCtive  Sub- 
feriptions  made  at  York,  for  bringing  each  fuch  a  Num¬ 
ber  of  Horfemen  completely  furnifhed  to  his  Afliftance. 

36.  Larger  Notes  (but  fometimes  erroneous)  touch- 

the  Defcent  of  Nevil,  Earl  of  Wcftmoreland  (and  feeming 
to  belong  to  the  Tradt  mentioned  above  at  §  17)  84. 

37.  Some  others,  relating  to  the  Fanes  Earls  of  Weft- 

moreland  :  and  likewife  to  the  fame  Tract.  83. 

38.  Armes  of  divers  of  the  Nobility,  ufed  in  the  Def¬ 
cent  of  Talbot  Earl  of  Shrewfbury. 

3 9.  Defcents  of  many  StafFordfhire  Families,  with  fome 
Notes  &  Tricks ;  feeming  to  be  taken  from  old  Vifita- 
tion-books  of  that  County.  They  are  placed  partly  in 
Alphabetical  Order  ;  and,  the  Leaves  being  tranfpofed, 
the  Tradt  doth  not  begin  at  fol.  94,  where  is  the  Defcent 
of  Fowler  :  but  at  fol.  i36.  b.  where  we  meet  with  that 
of  Adderley  (vid.  etiam  fol  104.  &  ,y2.  ,58  &2io.b  ) 

3  40.  Notes 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


Num.  2043,  2044. 

40.  Notes  relating  to  Cumberland,  and  to  fevcral  an¬ 

ti  nt  Families  there,  being  of  the  fame  inaccurate  Perfo'n 
who  as  above  is  faid,  did  endeavor  to  write  about  Wclt- 
moreland.  102.  et  vide  164. 

41.  Part  of  a  Lilt  of  the  Chcfhire  gentry  who  com¬ 

pounded  with  the  Parliament,  for  their  Eltates,  at  Gokl- 
fmiih’s  Hall  in  Loudon,  during  the  time  of  the  Civil- 
Warres.  1 18.  128.  (vid.  fol.  167.) 

42.  Notes  illafirating  the  difeent  of  the  Noble  Family 

of  Tufton,  alias  I'oketon.  ,20> 

4.1  •  Others  relating  to  that  of  Poulet  Baron  of  Hinton 
St.  George.  ,32. 

44-  — 7 -  Pierpont,  Marquis  of  Dorchefter,  & 

Earl  of  Kingfton.  ,3^  et  ,33 

45.  -  Coventrie,  Baron  of  Ailcfborough.  il-. 

46.  - Savile,  Earl  of  Suffcx.  t^6.  b. 

47-  — ; - *  Mohuii.  Baron  of  Oakhampton.  138. 

48-  - Eeigh,  Earl  of  Chichefter.  135. 

49.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Earls  of  this  Towne  of  Not- 

inghani  ;  with  a  brief  hiltoricall  Colledion,  fetting  forth 
their  Loyalty,  Anftes,  Wives.  &  Deaths.  °,40, 

50.  Succeffion  of  the  Earls  of  Derby  imperfect.  141'. 

51.  A  Note  relating  to  the  honorable  Life  of  George 
Savile,  late  Marquis  of  Halifax. 

52.  An  Account  of  the  High  Sheriffs  of  Deibyfhire, 

during  the  Reign  of  K.  Charles  1.  ,4-1. 

53.  Notes  relating  to  the  Derby Ihire-Baronets,  and 

their  behaviour  toward  K.  Charles  1.  ,4n. 

5J-  Notes,  like  thofe  before  remembred,  relating  to 
the  Family  of  Paget,  Baron  of  Beaudefeit.  153. 

55.  Like  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Rich,  Earl 
of  Warwick,  ilvb 

56- - Belafyfe  Vifcount  Fa  Icon  berg,  Ac.  1 .  7. 


57 
58.  ' 
59-  ‘ 
60.  - 
6  r.  - 
62.  • 


Brugges ,  Lord  Chandos.  1 5  8 .  b. 
Capell,  Farl  ofFffex.  16,. 

Cary,  Vifcount  Falkland.  162. 

Cromwell,  Earl  of  Arglafs,  169. 

Leigh,  Baron  ofStonlev.  173.  b. 
Sutton,  Lord  Lexington  (imperfeft) 

63.  Imperfect  Notes  concerning  the  Nottinghamfhire 
Baronets,  and  their  behaviour  toward  K.  Charles  1 .  184. 

^64.  Notes  like  thofe  above,  relating  to  the  Family 
of  Stanhope.  F.ai  1  of  Chefterfield.  (imperfect.)  j  9 \ 
('5;  He  Epifcopis  Lichfeldenfibus  A  Coventrenfibus  : 
a  Duina,  ufq;  ad  Ricardum  Peche.  2cS.  ' 

66.  The  printed  Alphabetical  Table  to  John  G  will  ini’s 
difplay  of  Heraldry.  22  , 

2044. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  feveral  TraSs  &  loofe 
Papers  bound  up  together,  being  written  by  the  fecond 
R.  r.dle  Holme,  and  others  ;  on  the  back-lide  thus  cn- 
tituled,  «  Deeds  of  Abbeys  A  Priories,”  Ac.  wherein 
I  find. 

The  third  Randle  Holmes  Account  of  the  Things 
of  molt  Note  in  this  Book  :  at  the  beginning, 

2.  Index  Locorum;  or  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  the 
Names  of  Places  mentioned  herein. 

Nc.a,  ioHowsa  large  Collection  cfNotes  and  Char¬ 
ters,  with  Tricks  of  many  of  their  Seals ;  gathered  from 
many  Perfons  and  Places,  and  may  be  accounted  for  in 
the  following  manner. 

3.  How  Hugh  Lupus  Earl  of  Chefter  gave  his  Eftate 
in  Scipena  to  the  Abbey  of  Abendon,  manu  cultellum 
Atari  fuperponendo  ;  with  his  F.piftle  to  the  Abbat 
Rainaldus,  lliewing  upon  what  Terms  he  would  part 
with  it.  Taken  out  of  the  Leiger  of  the  Abby  of  Ab- 
bingdon  remaineing  in  Cotton’s  Library,  A  noted,  Clau¬ 
dius  C.  9. 

4.  Carta  quA  Hugo  cognomento  Kivelioc  Comes  Cef- 

trenfis,  concefiit  Ecclefiam  Bettesfordiae  Priori  et  Ca- 
nonicis  de  Trentham.  jbjj. 

This  Coppy  (fays  the  fame  Randle)  I  received  from 


Num.  2044. 


Sir  Simon  d’Ewes  :  whofe  Tranfcript  of  it  may  be 
found  in  this  Library,  at  37  B.  13.  fol.  216.  b. 

5.  Carta  quA  Ranulfus  Comes  Ceftriee,  dedit  Cevte 

Ridel  fiha:  Comitis  Hugonis,  Draipunam,  inlibero  Con- 
jugio,  ficuti  Comes  Hugo  ei  in  libero  con jugio  dedit  et 
conceffir;  _  ihM. 

1  his  I  receuicJ  (quoth  Randle)  from  Sir  Simon 
cl  Ewes,  taken  out  of  a  Manulcrlpt  in  Arundell-houfe, 
wdneh  belonged  aunciently  to  the  Barons  of  Stafford  : 
wherein  the  old  Charters  of  the  Baffets  of  Drayton-Baffet 
were  inrollcd,  about  the  time  of  Richard  11.  (vid  -7  B 

13.  fol.  248.  248.  b.)  ’  07 

6.  Copy  of  the  Charter  whereby  Richard  Earl  of 
(. belter  gave  an  Hide  of  Land  in  Wdemundeflai  to  the 
Mona  fiery  of  Abendon,  anno  6  Regis  Henrici  1.  1.  b. 

-i  Ins  Deed  ccmes  from  the  Cottonian  ms.  before- 
mentioned,  and  is  alfo  tranferibed  into  37.  B.  13.  at  fol. 
r 1 7*  b-  where  a  remarkable  Note  in  the  Cottonian  book" 
is  there  omitted.  It  thews  that  this  Earl  “  nondum  militari 
baltheo  cinchis,”  as  being  under  Age,  had  not  a  Seal  of 
his  own.  but  ufed  that  of  his  Mother. 

7.  Convent io  inter  Comitem  Ceftrke,  et  Robertum 

Comitem  Legecefirife,  et  finalis  Pax  et  Concordia  qua; 
fuit  concefia  ab  eis,  ccram  fecundo  Roberto  Epifcopo 
Lmcolniffi,  et  Hominibus  eorum,  circa  Burgum  et  Do- 
rmnicum  Cafirum  de  Mount-Sorell,  et  Caflrum  de 
Ravenfiona,  Ac.  t  g 

Honeft  Randle  found  the  Original  of  this,  in  Bibli¬ 
otheca  C.ottoniana :  i.  e.  in  the  book  inferibed  Nero  C 
n;.  Cart.  4.  where  I  have  alfo  feen  it.  vid.  Smithi  Catah 
Bibl.  Cotton,  pag.  52.  col.  1. 

8.  Old  Deeds  tranferibed  or  extracted  from  the  great 

Couchir-booke  m  the  Duchy-Ofiice  at  Grayes-Inne 
London.  1  2  ^ " 

They  all  relate  to  the  Family  of  the  old  Earle's  of 
Cnelter. 

9.  Ex  Clauf.  16.  ITcn.  in.  a  Writt  about  putting  Cle 
mentia  the  Widow  of  Ranulf  Earl  of  Chefter,  m  full 
poffcfiion  of  her  Dowry. 

10.  Conventio  inter  Ranulphuin  Comitem  Ceftrie5*et 
Llewdhnum  Pnncipcm  North-walli*,  de  indotatione 
L’.  I  cum  fiha;  Lcueluu  ;  quam  mdem  in  uxorem  Johanni 
de  bcotia,  Comiiis  nepoti,  tradendam  promifit.  ibid 

nt  m  nVcC  Q,fn‘l1.’  J"the  Hands  of  Mr  Somerford 
Oldfield  of  Somerford  m  Chelhire,  A.  D.  1653. 

1  1.  Extracts  from  two  Deeds  relating  to  the  Endow- 
mcnr  or  Settlement  of  the  Abbey  of  Norton  in  Chefhire 
which  was  removed  thither  from  Runcorna.  r  b  ’ 

1  2.  De  partitione  haredita-is  Ranulfi  Comitis  Ceftrii 
inter  tres  filias  fuas.  Ex  Rot.  Clauf.  17.  Hen.  m.  m.  17! 

13.  Extrads  from  the  Public  Records,  &  from  the 

Bodlevan  ms.  Lavd.  K.  84.  concerning  John  le  Scot 
Lari  of  Chefter,  and  the  Lands  given  to  his  four  Sifters 
as  a  Kecompenfe  for  the  County  of  Chefter.  g  ’ 

Thefe  Mr.  Holme  owns  that  he  had  from  the  then 

Mr  Will' lVcmondi'Iei  &  likewife  the  fame  Rec°r*  from 

14.  Notes  relating  to  Cheftire,  and  to  its  antient  Earls 

from  the  fame  Bodleyan  Manufcript ;  and  from  the  fame 
Mr.  Dugdale  too,  as  I  fuppofe.  g  g 

15.  De  Iiugone  &  Ranulpho  lit.  Comitibus  Ceiirii 
adnotationes  bma:  :  ex  Ililloria  aurea  Johamds  AnglicI 
five  Tmumentenfis  us.  in  Bibliotheca  Bodleiana  7  A 

16.  Colleftanea  fuper  Monailerijs  deParco-Creendun, 
parco  fuper  Tamam,  et  de  Maiden-Bradley,  ex  rotulo 
quodam  dtflo  ■  Rotulus  de  Crendon,-  penes  Decanum  & 
Capituiuin  Ecclefite  Cathedralis  Oxon. 

i7;  Excerpta  e  Cards  quibufdam  penes  Chrffloforuh 
Dommum  Hatton,  fuper  Monaftetjis  de  Davintre,  Sand- 
ford,  Hofpitali  S  Wliiani  de  Wigornia,  Ccenobijs  de 
Alvingham  &  hodon  (ubi  de  Famxlijs  de  Bee.  A  Arci) 
oireburne,  (ubi  plura  deFamiliaPortorum,  five  de  Sancto 
Johanne)  Bradleia,  S.  Fridefwida:  Oxon.  ibid. 

18.  Ex- 


1 


Catalogue  Librorum  MSS< 


Num.  20441 

18.  Extracts  from  the  Evidences  of  Mr.  Richard 

Bagod,  principally  relating  to  his  Family,  or  to  the 
Towne  of  Bromley-Bagod.  ].°* 

Thele  were  copied  From  a  Book  of  Mr.  Vi  illiain 
Vernons. 

19.  Collectanea  ex  Libro  Prioratus  Sanfti  Thomre 

Martyris  juxta  Stafford.  _  1 2; 

Collectanea  ex  Libro  Ecclefise  ColIegiatEe  B.  Maria; 
deWarwic.  *4* 

I  fulpeft  that  many  of  thefe  Extracts  from  Deeds, 
included  in  the  two  lalt  Articles,  are  taken  from  the 
Originals,  &  not  from  the  Book  abovementioned  (al¬ 
though  due  Notice  be  not  given)  becaufe  many  have 
I  irticularly  that  of  Johanna 
the  Relift  of  Sir  Robert  de  Harley,  bearing  date  anno 
49  R.  Ediv.  hi.  as  at  f>l.  1  5- b.  etivid.  fol.  18.  b.J 

21.  Colle&anea  ex  Chariis  Edwardi  Alton  de  Fixhall 

in  Com.  Stafford.  16.  b. 

Divers  of  thefe  relate  to  Perfons  &  Places  in  War- 
wick-fliire,  as  well  as  others  in  Stafford  (hire. 

22.  Extracts  from  I'undry  old  Deeds  relating  to  divers 

undent  Families,  asFrevile,  Marmion,  Montfort,  Walflie, 
See.  perhaps  by  Mr.  William  Vernon.  J8.  b. 

2g.  Pars  Carta:  Willelmi  Comitis  de  Warenna,  de 
Fundatione  EcclefitE  S.  Marie  de  Wodkirke.  18.  C. 
This  was  a  Cell  to  the  Priory  ofNollell  in  York- 

Ihire. 

24.  Pars  Litterarum  Patentium  Regis . 

cjuft  conceflit  Henrico  Wyat  Militi,  quod  ipfe  fund  a  ret 
Cantariam  in  Capella  Beate  Marie  Virginis  apud  Melton 
juxta  Gravifendein  Com.  Kancie.  _  18.  C.  b. 

25.  Collectanea  ex  libro  Cartarum  Prioratus  Sanfti 
Thome  Martins  juxta  Stafford,  per  Sampfonem  Erdef- 
ivycke  Armigerum. 

26.  Collectanea  ex  Regiftro  Cartarum  Monafterij  de 

Sibe'onin  Com.  Norfolcienfi.  27.  b. 

Notwithltanding  what  is  above  written,  and  alfo 
afferted  in  the  Monafticon  Anglicanum,  &c.  fome  hold 
the  Scite  of  this  Monaftery  to  be  within  the  County  of 
Suffolk.  Among  thefe  Extracts,  I  more  particularly 
obferve, 

27.  Inquifitio  enpta  apud  Sanftum  Edmundum  pro 

rationabili  Auxilio  levari  do  (per  Hundred  11m  de  Blithmge) 
dj  Feodis  Militum,  ad  Filium  Domini  Regis  primogem- 
tum,  Militem  faciendum  ;  die  Lune  proximo  poll  Feftum 
Tranflationis  Sandi  Thome  Martyris,  anno  R.  R-  Ed¬ 
wardi  hi.  a  Conqueltu,  2r.  3Kh- 

2S.  Feoda  Militum  cum  pertinentijs  ad  Honorem  de 
Eye,  in  diverfis  Comitatibus.  33. 

29.  Part  of  a  Charter  of  Offa  King  of  the  Mercians, 
whereby  he  granted  Eowengelad  (vulgo  Evenlade  in  Com. 
Wigorn.)  Ei'me  Comiti,  PrefeCtoq;  l'uo  dat.  A.  D.  7S4. 

34.  b. 

This  is  faid  to  have  been  taken  from  the  Original, 
by  Edmund  Langley. 

30.  Breve  Regis  Henrici  v.  contra  eos  qui  in  Viagijs 

ipfius,  Arma  et  Tunicas  Armorum  vocat.  Coat-Armorcs, 
in  fe  fumferunt  ;  ubi  nee  ipfi  nec  eorura  anteceffores, 
hujufinodi  Armisac  tunicis  Armorum,  temporibus  retro- 
aCtis  ufi  fuerunt  ....  exceptis  illis  qui  fecum 
apud  bellum  de  Agencourt  Arma  portabant  (E.  Rot. 
Clauf.  5  Henr.  v.  m.  15.)  35. 

31.  Adnotatiuncuke  e  Libro  Feodorum  Flundred.  de 

Drunfetam  et  Nulverton,  24  Edw.  1.  inter  feod.  in  Scac- 
cario.  36. 

32.  Short  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Fitz  Nicholas. 

ibid. 

33.  Colledtanea  ex  Regiftro  Abbatie  deNiewham  in 

Com.  Devon.  ibid. 

This  is  wholly  upon  the  Defcent  of  Courtenay,  from 
Rivers. 

34.  Colleftanea  r  Cartulario  Prioratus  S.  Pancratij  de 

Lewes,  in  pago  Suffexke.  37. 

3^.  Extracts  from  certain  Deeds  which  I  (Randle 


Num.  2044; 

Holme  the  fecond)  had  from  Mr.  Vernon,  relating  to 
the  Familv  of  Lacy,  &c.  5i-b- 

36.  Copie  of  a  Deed  in  French,  whereby  George 

Baudewyn  of  Brugge  conveyed  to  John  Fitz-William  of 
the  More,  the  Manor  of  Overe-Kingefhemede,  with  the 
advowfon  of  its  Chapell,  &c.  dat.  23  May,  anno  31  R. 
Edw.  hi.  52-  b- 

3 7.  Carta  Fundationis  Monafterij  de  Farley,  per  Hum- 

fridum  de  Bohun  11,  Comitem  Heretordis.  53; 

38.  Collectanea  ex  Cartulario  Prioratus  de  Horton  in 

Comitatu  Kancire,  A.  D.  1648.  54; 

39.  Collectanea  ex  Cartulario  Abbathie  de  Salleia  in 

pago  Eboracenfi,  penes  Dnm.  Simonds  D’ewes  Miiitem 
et  Baronettum,  30  Jan.  1647.  _  58.  eto5- 

'1  he  Chartulary  here  mentioned  is  now  in  this  Har* 
levan  I.ihrai y,  inferibed.  35.  A.  13. 

'40.  C  llectanea  e  quodam  Libro  ms.  in  pergamenp, 
cominente  Actus  Curie  Cantuanenfis  tempore  Archiepil- 
copatus  Roberri  Winchelfey  Archiepifcopi  ibidem ;  nunc 
in  Biblioiheca  Lamethana.  _  61. 

41.  Collectanea  e  publicis  Recordorum  Archivis,  &c. 

ad  Darce  inrum  Fatniliam  fpeCtamia.  62.  b. 

42.  Collectanea  ex  Regiftro  Abbatie  de  Bermundc-fev 

in  Com.  S  •  -I  Cuftodia  Dni.  Simonds  D’ewes 

Militi?,  8  Jan.  1647.  66. 

This  Bo  >k  is  not  a  Regifter  of  Deeds,  or  Chartu¬ 
lary  ;  but  a  Chronicle,  or  Book  of  Annals  of  the  Place, 
remaining  now  in  ibis  noble  Library,  inferibed  36.  C.  14. 

45.  ColleCtanea  ex  Libro  ms.  in  pergameno,  cujus 
Tit  ulus  eft,  “  Regiltrum  five  Martirologium  Prioratus  S. 
Trinitatis  Cantuarkc,  in  C.uftodia  Dni.  Simonds  D’ewes 
Militis  et  Baronetti,  27  Jan.  1^47.”  7°- 

I  take  the  Cuftodia  here,  not  to  extend  to  a  pro¬ 
perty,  or  legal  Poffdfion  ;  becaufe,  1 .  No  fuch  book  of 
Sir  Simonds  d’Ewcs  came, flicker  :  and  2.  iuch  a  Book  as 
this,  1  have  perufed  among  theNorfolcian  mss.  in  the  Li¬ 
brary  of  the  Royal  Society  now  fettled  in  Crane  Court  in 
Fleet-flreet,  I  fuppofe  therefore  that  Sir  Simonds  borrowed 
it  of  Thomas  Howard Earl  of  Arundel  &  Surrey,  or  elfeot 
his  fon  Earl  Henry  :  in  like  manner  as  the  Kings  ms.  of 
Matthew  Paris’s  Hiftoiia  Minor,  is  cited  (in  this  ms.  fol. 
69.)  as  in  the  Cuftody  of  the  fame  Sir  Simonds,  28 
Auguft  1  (-48.  which  was  afterward  reftored  to  the  Li¬ 
brary  from  whence  it  was  taken  ;  for,  1  myfelf,  have 
divers  times  feen  and  perufed  it  there. 

44.  E.  Chartis  in  Cuftodia  Sam.  Roper  Armigeri  de 
Kirby-Monachorum  in  psgo  Warwicenfi,  30  Maij  1643. 
fol.  82.  (Molt  of  thefe,  relate  to  the  Priory,  or  Priories, 
of  Chalk  and  Repindone  in  Derby fhire.)  83.  b.  89. 

45.  A  Letter  of  Attorney,  whereby  Matthewe  Mar- 

flon  Gent,  appoints  Edwarde  Lyttleton  Gent,  to  take 
Seilyn  for  him  of  certain  Lands  in  the  Mannour  of 
Mynton  in  the  Parifhe  '  of  Church-Stretton  in  the 
C-ountie  of  Salop,  dated,  26  February,  anno  14  R. 
Jacobi  1.  83.  b. 

46.  Short  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Mytton 

Lyngene.  >  Jhid  • 

47.  Notes  from  two  Inquifitions  touching  the  Family 

of  Cornewall.  ‘hid. 

48.  E  quodam  Cartulario  Prioratus  de  Merton  in 
Com.  Surr.  nuper  in  Bibliotheca  Cottoniana.  84. 

This  book  is  (or  ought  to  be)  there  llill  ;  inferibed 
Cleopatra.  C.  7. 

49.  E  Cartulario  Abbatiae  de  Kirkffid.  ^  87. 

50.  Ex  quodam  ms°  penes  Thomam  Dhm  Brudnell 

Baronem  de  Brudnell-Stanton  in  Comitatu  Leiceftrenfi, 
30  Januarij  1647  >  cujus  Titulus,  The  Leiger-booke  of 
Doddington  in  the  County  of  Huntingdon.  .  89.  b. 

Here  the  Reader,  from  the  word  Leiger-booke, 
need  not  think  that  Doddington  was  a  Mcmaitery,  as  it 
was  not :  but  rather,  that  the  faid  Book  contained  Copies 
of  that  noble  Lord’s  Evidences,  touching  the  whole,  or 
part  of  his  Eftate  ;  at  leaft,  fuch  as  related  to  Dodding¬ 
ton,  which  he  enjoyed,  as  being  defeended  from  Taylard, 
7  Grimbaud, 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


Num.  2044. 

Grimbaud,  &  Kirkeby,  the  Owners  thereof  for  a  very 
long  time  before. 

5 1 .  A  Note  concerning  the  Lordfliipe  of  Great  Bud- 

worth  in  Com.  Ceftr.  hall  of  which,  was  given  by  War- 
burton  of  Arley,  to  the  Priory  of  Norton.  93. 

52.  Iranfcripts  of  Five  Charters  of  fo  many  of  our 

antient  Noble  Men,  that  is,  of  the  firft  William  de 
Mandevilla,  Earl  of  Effex  ;  Henry  de  Lafcy,  Earl  of 
Lincoln  ;  Gilbert  de  Clare,  Earl  of  Penbroc  ;  William 
de  Albini,  Earl  ofSulfex  ;  and  Gualeran,  Earl  of  Mel- 
lent  :  with  Tricks  of  their  Seals,  excepting  that  of  the 
taft*  93.  b. 

Inflead  of  the  Seal  of  Earl  Gauleran,  are  thefe 
Words,  “  This  Seale,  with  its  Endorfe  was  not  drawne  in 
Mr.  Dodfworth’s  booke.” 

53.  Colle&anea  ex  Libro  Cenfuali,  five  Regiftro  Pri- 
oraLus  de  Beluero,  fubordinat.  Abbatim  Sanfti  Albani  ; 
tranfcripta  per  Thomam  Baronem  Brudenell.  96. 

Honeft  Randle  Holme  the  fecond,  took  this  Mo- 
raflery  to  be  that  of  Beverley  in  Yorklhire  ;  wherein  he 
was  widely  miftaken.  For  it  plainly  appears  to  be  that 
of  Belvoir  in  Leicefterlhire. 

54-  Colleftanea  e  Cards  diverfis,  penes  Thomam  Ba- 
ronem  de  Brudenell.  97.  b. 

55.  Extracts  from  a  few  Deeds  relating  to  the  Nun¬ 
nery  of  Blithbury  in  Staffordlhire.  99. 

56.  A  large  Colle&ion  of  Tranfcripts,  or  Extracts  from 
original  Deeds,  with  Tricks  of  very  many  of  their  Seals ; 
faid  to  be  taken  from  one  of  Mr.  Roger  Dodfworth’s 
Books  thus  marked  |~|  of  which,  I  think  I  need  now 
fay  no  more,  (forafmuch  as  very  many  of  the  Originals, 
being  bought  of  Sir  Simonds  D’Ewes  now  living,  are  yet 
remaining  in  this  noble  Library)  than  that  they  relate  to 
the  Monafteries  of  Kirkeby-Monachorum,  Studeley,  El- 
leiham,  Acornebury,  Dora,  Tunftal,  Wederhale,  Ber- 
linges,  Burewelle,  Hacham  or  Hagham,  Bulington, 
Kirkeftede,  Sempingeham,  Bordefley,  Neuhus,  Grene- 
feld,  Suwerk  or  Southwark,  Tanregge  or  Tunregge, 
Coges,  Sewardefley,  Frifetun,  Alnewyke ;  and  that  front 
them,  many  good  materials  may  be  had,  toward  making 
out,  or  illuftrating  the  Defcents  of  the  antient,  noble 
&  honorable  Families  of  Mulbrai,  Cantilupo,  Kaynes 
(de  Kaineto,  Cheyne,  or  Cheney )  Amundavilla,  Clifford, 
Crevequer,  Stafford,  Haya,  Nevilla,  De  Ayncurt,  Kyma, 
Arfic,  Welle,  Orrebi,  Taterfale,  Fitz-Walter,  De  Arci, 
Bee,  Monte-fixo,  Marmiun,  Malet,  Berner,  Ros,  Fur- 
nivalle,  Foliot,  De  la  mare,  Ruffel,  Gofla,  Lafci,  Se- 
grave,  Someri,  Dan-martin,  Wenlok,  Blount,  Mon- 
chenfy,  Tybetot,  Stapleton,  Hoo,  Bohun,  Baiocis, 
Wake,  Burgo,  Port,  Creun,  Monte-begonis,  Perci, 
Vefci,  Wilgebi,  Scoteni,  Mandavilla,  Ver,  Gant,  &c. 

IOC. 

57.  ColleiElanea  £  Cartulario  de  Caftel-Acre.  144. 

Sir  Simonds  D'Ewes  the  Grandfather  feems  to  have 

lent  this  valuable  Manufcript  to  the  fecond  RandleHolme, 
not  long  before  his  deceafe :  and  then  honeft  Randle 
keeping  the  book  as  his  own ;  no  wonder  it  came  not 
among  the  others  bought  of  Sir  Simonds  D’Ewes  the 
Grandfon.  But  in  procefs  of  a  long  time  ;  that  is,  after 
the  death  of  old  Randle  Holme  the  third,  it  did  come 
into  this  Library,  &  is  now  inferibed,  97  B.  2. 

58.  E  Cartulario  Prioratus  S.  Johannis  de  Pontefra&o. 

1 46. 

59.  E  quodam  ms.  manu  recentiori  feripto,  penes 
Johannem  Langley  Armigerum,  A.  D.  1649.  j  47. 

This  Manufcript  contained  Copies  of  many  curious 
Charters,  with  Tricks  of  the  Seals  ;  and  might  be  ofgcod 
TJfe  now,  if  it  were  known  where  it  remains. 

60.  E.  Cartulario  S  .  Marie  de  Kirkefted.  156.  i5S.b. 

61.  Colledanea  e  Cartulario  de  Caitel- Acre.  ibid. 

62.  E  Cartis  Originalibus  nonnullis  in  Biblio.heca 

Hattoniana.  160.  b. 

63.  Colledanea  ex  Originalibus  Cartis  in  -Officio 

Armorum.  ibid. 

Cat.  Hart.  Vol.  II. 


4X7 


Num.  2044 — 2046. 

64.  Ex  Chartis  Originalibus  penes  Dntn.  Symonds 

D’Ewes  Militem  &  Baronettum.  162.  b. 

65.  Certificate  (in  old  Englifh)  to  encourage  all  that 
would  give  or  fend  Gold  or  Siluer,  Broche  or  Ryng,  or 
ony  othere  gud  to  mowntens  of  (i.  e.  amounting  to)  a 
Peny  by  Zere,  in  helpyng  of  Mynflre,  fonded  in  Name 
&  in  Vyrfchype  of  oure  Lady  Seynte  Mary  the  Vergyne, 
Gods  Modyre,  at  Sothewelle,  in  Diocefis  of  Zorke. 

1 64.  b. 

66.  The  Coppie  of  a  Praer  which  her  Majeftie  made 

her  felfe,  and  fayd  it  when  fhe  was  at  the  Sermon  at 
St.  Paules  Croffe  24  of  November  1588.  165.  b. 

67.  Index  Virorum,  i.  e.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of 
thofe  Perfons  Names,  who  are  mentioned  in  this  Book. 
At  the  end. 

2045. 

A  thin  Book  in  folio,  written  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme,  and  containing  fome  part  of  his  Hifloricall 
Collections,  defigned  by  him  to  be  printed,  and  of 
which  he  himfelf  gives  the  following  Account,  in  his 
Dedicatory  Epiftle.  “  The  Subject  Matter  treated  off  is 
a  ffucceffionof  the  cheifjuftices&  their  Affiftants,Cham- 
berleyns,  high  Sheriffs  &  Efchetors  of  the  County 
palatine  of  Chefler  fince  the  Conqueft  as  I  haue  col- 
leded  out  of  good  Authoritys  of  Records,  manuferipts, 
Evedences  &  other  good  notes  I  haue  mett  withall,  in 
my  employment  of  the  Gentrey  of  Chefhir  conferninge 
diuers  pedegreys  I  haue  made  &  abftraded  out  of  their 
ould  deeds  of  graue  Authority  &  Antiquity  for  other 
Authentique  probations.”  But  after  all  this,  it  feems 
to  be  no  more  than  an  heap  of  Materials  towards  an 
Hiftory  of  the  Juftices  of  Chelter,  down  to  ann.  15 
R  Edw.  11.  and  no  lower  ;  with  fome  Notes  touching 
the  antient  Earls  of  Chefter,  and  their  Officers. 

2046. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  feveral  Hands,  and  by  the 
third  Randle  Holme,  thus  entituled  on  the  outfide, 
“  Bills,  Bonds,  Indentures  of  Apprentices,  w  ithin  the 
Citty  of  Chefter.  Alfoe  other  deeds  of  the  Citty,  &c.” 
Thefe  are  no  more  than  Abflrads  of  the  Originals,  with 
hafty  Tricks  of  fuch  Seals  as  remained.  However, 
looking  into  the  Book,  I  find  therein, 

1 .  The  fame  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  the  Things 
of  moft  Note  in  this  Book  :  at  the  beginning. 

2.  His  Lift  of  Chefter-Citty  Lands  mentioned  in  this 
Book.  At  the  next  Leaf. 

3.  Indenture  made  28  April  ann.  12  Eliz.  betweene 

Sr  Rowland  Stanley  K1  George  Calveley  Efq;  &  John 
Cotton  Y eoman;  for  repaireinge  of  the  Highway  adjoin- 
inge  to  Chefter,  called  Huntington-Lane ;  by  the  fpace 
of  2  Miles  &  an  halfe.  1 .  b. 

4.  Indenture  made  10  OCtob.  ann.  18  Eliz.  betweeen 

the  Maior  &  Citizens  of  Chefter  &  Robert  Modefley, 
Sherman :  about  lending  him  part  of  the  200  Markes 
bequeathed  by  Rauffe  Wurfley  Efq;  to  be  imployed  onle- 
ly  in'Cloathinge  ;  and  the  gaine  thereof,  to  be  bellowed 
on  the  poore.  2. 

5.  Indenture  made  2  Aug.  ann.  23  Eliz.  betweene 

the  Maior,  &c.  &  Wiliam  Alderfey  Merchant  j  about  the 
Houfe  of  Correction  in  Chefter.  6. 

6.  Indenture  made  20  June  ann.  8  Eliz.  betweene 

William  Shelley  Efq;  &  Jane  his  Wife,  Daughter  & 
Heire  of  JohnLyngenEfq;  &  Anthony  HarperGent.  about 
a  Demife  of  the  Mannour  &  Townelhip  of  Shelve,  in  the 
County  of  Salop.  12. 

7.  Indenture  made  29  Sepr  anno  27  Eliz.  betweene 
the  Maior  &  Citizens  of  Chefter,  &  Adam  Johnfon, 
Draper,  &c.  about  lending  them  100  Pounds,  given 
to  that  City  by  Sr  Thomas  White  late  Lord  Mayor  of 
London,  to  be  lent  foure  yonge  men  Clothiers,  &  free 
of  the  fame  City,  for  10  years  together,  without  Intereft. 

16. 

8.  A  Deed  whereby  Randle  Mainwaringe  Efq;  fettled 

5  O  th« 


4 1  S’  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2046. 

the  Manors  of  Pever  8c  Badeley  in  Coin.  Ceftr.  upon  Ran¬ 
dle  Brercton  K‘  Sec.  in  Truft,  to  the  Ufe  Se  Behoof  of 
Himfelf;  his  Wife,  &  Children.  1 8. 

9.  Complaint  of  John  Gardyner  Merchant  whofe  Ship 

was  robbed,  &  8  of  his  Men  killed  &  hurt  by  two  Spaniffi 
Pirates  :  praying,  that  (fince  his  endeavors  in  Spain  to 
regain  his  Ship  had  been  in  vain)  that  the  faid  Spaniaids 
might  be  flayed,  when  they  fhould  next  come  to  Chefter, 
and  there  be  obliged  to  anfwer  him.  21.  b. 

This  is  followed  by  K.  Hen.  vm’s.  Mandate  for  that 
purpofe,  dated  anno  Regni  2  1. 

10.  Indentura  fafta  anno  16  R.  Edwardi  n.  inter 
Majorem  et  Cives  Cellrenfes,  et  Johannem  de  Helpefton 
Cimentariuin ;  teflata,  quod  przedi&us  Johannes  pro 
Centum  Libris  Sterlingorum,  faciet  quandam  Turrim  ro- 
tundam,  fpiflitudinis  decern  ulnarum  et  dimid.  cum  Ca¬ 
vitate,  et  altitudinis  24  ulnarum  Regiarum,  a  Sabulone 
cum  quodam  Muro  folido  altitudinis  octo  ulnarum  Regi¬ 
arum,  et  quadam  Porta  ....  Cujufquidem  Muri  folidi 
fpiffitudo  fuiffet  quatuor  ulnarum  Regiarum  :  et  qui  qui- 

dem  Murus  fupercollocatis . fufficienter  batillatus 

ex  utraque  pane,  ita  quod  hij  qui  ibidem  fuerint,  fuffici¬ 
enter  et  fecure  fe  defendere  poffint  ubicunque.  26.  b. 

1 1.  Breve  Regis  Henrici  vm.  mandantis,  quod  Vice¬ 

comites  Ceftria:  ftatim,  ex  parte  fuA  folempniter  et  pub- 
lice  proclamari  facerent  quedam  Statuta  et  Ordinationes 
per  fe  et  de  communi  Alfenfu  Prelatorum,  Magnatum, 
et  Communitatis  Regni  fui,  in  Parliamento  fuo  apud 
Weftmonafterium,  pro  communi  militate  Regni  fui  edit. 
&  provif.  Telle,  &c.  apud  Ceflr.  22  Maij,  anno  Regni 
fui  26.  27.  b. 

12.  An  Indi£lment  of  all  the  Chefler-Butchers,  for 

not  felling  to  furnifh  the  City  with  Beef,  &c.  dat.  ann. 
20  Eliz.  28. 

13.  Complaint  of  William  Stanley  of  Hoton  Squier, 
fhewing  that  one  Richart  Bunbury,  with  20  harneffit 
Men,  in  forme  of  Werre,  came  to  theTownes  of  Wyryn  Sc 
Pickton,  and  there  fought  divers  of  his  Servants,  theym 
to  have  beiten,  maymed,  8c  llayne.  c.  t.  R.  Edw.  iv.  35.  b. 

14.  Breviats  of  Indentures  of  Apprentices.  39. 

15.  Indenture  made  4  April,  anno  4  Eliz.  between  the 

Maior  8c  Citizens  of  Chefter  &  Thomas  Wofewall  the 
elder,  and  Thomas  his  Son,  Mafons :  whereby  thefe 
Mal'ons  obliged  theinfelves,  dureinge  their  Lives,  in  all 
thinges  belonginge  to  a  Mafons  Worke,  fubflantially  to 
make,  repaire,  maintaine,  8c  vpholde,  all  the  walls  of  the 
faid  Cittie ;  in  coniideration  of  an  annual  Fee  of  40  Shi- 
lings,  and  a  Livery  Gowne,  Sec.  40. 

This  Grant  was  furrendred,  2  Jan.  ann.  33  Eliz.  to 
the  then  Maior,  by  Thomas  the  Son,  for  30  Shillings ;  he 
not  being  able  to  performe  the  Covenants. 

16.  Abftra&s  of  feuerall  old  Bonds.  51. 

17.  A  Bond  dated  1  1  May,  anno  15.  Edw.  iv.  where¬ 

by  Thomas  Haydoke  Efq;  was  obliged  to  apere  at  Way  - 
mothe,  with  24  Bowes  well  &  defenfable  arayed  ;  and 
to  obey  the  Lord  Awdeley,  accordinge  as  the  faid  Lord 
was  bounden  to  the  Kinge  in  a  grete  Indenture,  ‘to  doe 
him  true  Service  in  that  Voyage.  60. 

18.  A  Letter  from  John  Dampart  &  Randulph  Men- 
waryng  Efquiers,  RychardDampart  Gentylman,  &  Oliuer 
Swetilam  Yeoman,  to  Mr.  Byrkytt  Recorder  of  Chefter, 
againft  Sr  Richard  Croffe  C.haplen,  who  had  caufed  Sr 
HughBamftone  Perfon  of  Surtnam  to  be  arefted  for  Ten 
Shillings  ;  which  Sum  they  "had  undertaken  to  raife  by 
equal  portions,  dat.  i6December.anno  38  Hen.vm.78.b. 

1 9.  A  Bond  whereby  William  Dungan  of  Dublin  was 

bound  to  the  King,  in  200  pounds,  to  appere  before  the 
Lord  Deputy  of  Ireland  att  Dublin,  in  the  Caftfe,  there 
to  anfwer  to  fuch  Matters  of  Treafon  or  Felony,  as  fhould 
be  objefted  againft  him  ;  and  not  to  departe  without 
Licenfeof  the  faid  Deputy,  dat.  A.  D.  1609.  85. 

20.  Fonn  of  the  Oath  taken  by  eachJuftice  of  the 

Peax  in  the  County  of  Chefter,  temp.  R.  R.  Phil.  & 
Mar.  1 13.  b. 


Num.  2047,  2048. 

2047. 

A  Book  in  folio,  at  the  beginning  whereof  the  third 
RandleHolme  prefixed  this  Title;  “  Bills  &  Bonds  fued 
in  the  Courts  at  Chefter  ;  being  the  Originalls,  and 
bound  up  in  a  Book  containing  from  171  to  423.” 

1.  Thefe  are  all,  in  or  near  the  time  of  K.  James  1. 
and  being  between  mean  perfons  and  relating  to  fmall 
or  common  affaires,  I  lhall  therefore  pafs  them  over  in 
Silence. 

At  the  end  of  the  Book  I  find, 

2.  Interrogatories  to  be  myniftred  to  certen  wytneffes 
vpon  the  behaife  of  John  Leche  Gent.  Playntiffe;  agaynfte 
Thomas  Leeche  &  John  his  fonne  Defendants  :  about 
a  Meffuage  &  Tenents  in  Carden  in  Com.  Ceftr.  423. 

3.  Depofycions  of  Wytneffes,  taken  the  20th  daye 
of  Sept.  ann.  33  R.  Eliz.  touching  the  fame  matters. 

424. 

2048. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  divers  Trails  written  by 
different  Hands,  but  bound  up  together,  and  by  the 
rhird  Randle  Holme  thus  entituled,  “  Iriffi  Baronys, 
and  other  things  concerning  that  Kingdom,  &c.”  But 
I  ffiall  mention  them  more  particularly,  in  the  Order 
as  they  are  now  placed,  thus 

1.  A  Collettion  as  well  of  all  the  Kinges  Majefties 

Offices  &  Fees  in  any  the  Courtes  at  Weftminfter,  as  of 
all  the  Offices  &  Fees  of  his  Majefties  Honourable  Howfe- 
hold.  Together  with  all  Fees  apertaineinge  to  Captaines 
and  Souldiours  haueinge  Charge  of  Caftells  &  Bullworks 
within  the  Realme  of  England.  And  likewife  the  Offi¬ 
cers  &  Fees  of  hisHighnes  Honourable  Howfes,  Parkes, 
Forreils  &  Chafes  within  the  faid  Realme.  20  x . 

2.  Officers  of  the  Exchequer  in  Ireland,  in  the  Tyme 

of  K.  Charles  1.  212. 

This  Tratt  contains  alfo  Lifts  of  other  Officers  then 
employed  in  that  Kingdom,  namely,  thofe  of  the  Kings 
Bench,  Chauncery,  CommonPleas,  Star-chamber,  Court 
of  Wards,  Officers  attending  the  State,  Officers  Provin¬ 
cial,  Officers  of  the  Cuftomes,  Officers  &  Minifters  of 
the  Army,  &  Conftables  in  Forts  &  Caftles  :  being  all 
in  the  Lord  Deputies  Guift. 

3.  The  yearly  Chardge  of  the  now  Farmers  of  his 

Majefties  Cuftomes  for  the  Kingdome  of  Ireland,  for  the 
Officers  Stipends,  fettled  by  Mr,  Cogan  :  and  alfoe  for 
Chardges  of  Cuftome-houfes  &  Store-houfes,  Anno 
1632  ;  with  the  Names  of  fuch  as  haue  beene  formerly 
imployed.  218. 

4.  A  Noate  of  Fees  due  to  the  Water-Bailiffs  of  Dublin. 

225- 

5.  Amount  of  the  Cuftomes  in  the  Port  ol  Dublin, 

A.  D.  1632.  226. 

6.  Unlawful  &  unreafonable  Exattions  Sc  Taxations 

taken  by  the  Cittie  of  Dubline,  to  the  prejudice  cf  his 
Majefties  Cuftomes.  227. 

7.  Amount  of  the  Cuftomes  in  the  Port  of  Wexford, 

A.  D.  1632.  228. 

This  is  followed  by  like  Accounts  of  the  other  Irifli 
Ports. 

8.  Certificate  of  the  Lords  Judges,  &c.  in  England, 
as  to  Cuftomes  payable  in  Ireland  ;  A.  D.  1608. 

253.  b. 

9.  Names  of  Great  Ordinance  of  Brafs,  with  their 

Height  and  Weight ;  and  the  Height  &  Weight  ofShott 
belonging  to  them.  257. 

10.  A  Lift  of  the  Officers,  &c.  of  the  Ordnance  ;  to- 

geather  with  their  feueral  Entertainments  requifite  to  be 
eftablifhed  whilft  the  Army  is  on  Foote.  258. 

11.  Lift  of  the  Officers  in  the  Army  in  Ireland.  259. 

12.  A  Prefident  for  a  paire  of  Articles  for  a  Waiter 

for  the  Cuftomes,  &c.  269. 

13.  A  Deputation  for  a  Waiter  or  Searcher  for  the 

Farmours  of  the  Cuftomes.  27©.  b. 

14.  Articles  fora  Colle&or  of  the  Cuftomes.  271.  b. 

15.  Di- 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse, 


419 


Num.  204.8. 

15.  Directions  according  to  the  Courfes  held  in 

England,  in  Cuftonvhoufes :  the  like  to  be  obferved  in 
Ireland.  273.  b. 

16.  K.  Charles  i’s  Lift  for  Ciuill  Affaires  ;  conteyninge 

the  feuerall  Entertainements  by  the  Yeare,  of  all  Officers 
and  others  feruing  in  his  Courts  of  Juftice  in  the  feuerall 
Prouinces  of  Ireland,  Officers  belonginge  to  the  State, 
Officers  of  his  Cuftomes,  Creation-moneys,  with  other 
Perpetuities  &  particular  Payments  for  Servi  e,  which 
he  required  thenceforth,  to  bee  dulie  p.  id  out  of  his 
Revenues  there  :  A.  D.  1629.  278. 

17.  Alowance  of  monthly  Wages  aboard  His  Ma-* 

jefties  Shipp  The  Ninth  Lions  Whelp.  286. 

This  isfigned  by  William  Brooke,  Mafter. 

18.  A  perticuler  Booke  of  the  Wages  growne  due  to 
the  Lord  Dcputie  (Sir  John  Perrott)  Chiefe  Officers  & 
others  of  her  Majefties  Arm1,  e  in  paye  w  thin  that  Realme 
for  one  haulfe  yeare  contaynenge  184  daies,  beginnenge 
primo  OCIobris  1587,  and  endinge  vltiino  Martij  1488. 

288. 

19.  The  Charge  thac  his  Majefty  is  ar  for  his  Officers 

in  the  Mynt  in  England  yearlie,  for  their  Fees,  together 
with  all  other  Charges.  298. 

20.  The  Charges  that  his  Majeftie  is  at,  for  his  Mynt 

in  Scotland  for  Stipend  &  Fees,  togeather  with  all  other 
charges.  299. 

21.  A  Lift  of  fuch  Officers  with  their  Fees,  Stipends, 
Sc  other  Expences,  conceived  to  be  competent  for  the 
mannadginge  of  a  Mynt  in  Ireland  ;  admittinge  that  there 
be  the  fame  waye  of  coyneinge  in  Ireland  as  in  England, 
both  for  Gold  &  Siluer,  vizt.  without  a  Mill.  302. 

22.  The  manner  of  bringinge  &  deliveringe  of  Bol- 
la'fgne  of  Golde  into  the  Minte  of  England.  304. 

23.  The  manner  of  bringinge  of  Bollaigne  of  Gold  to 

bis  Majefties  Mynt  of  Scotland.  306. 

24.  Concerning  the  Mint  in  Irland.  308. 

25.  The  prices  of  Gould  8c  Siluer  accordinge  to  their 

Finefs,  as  they  arc  now  brought  to  the  Mynte  in  the 
Towre  of  London.  309. 

The  foregoing  Papers  relating  to  Mint-matters, 
feem  to  have  been  written  by  one  Mr.  Munke  Achefon. 

26.  A  Note  of  fuch  Fees  as  are  due  to  a  Seriant  att 

Armes  in  England  ;  and  accuftomed  to  be  taken,  tyme 
out  of  Memo  rye.  310. 

27.  Invoice  of  Henry  Guaden  Mafter  of  the  Ellinor 

of  Weymouth,  as  to  his  Lading  taken  in  at  the  Caribbee 
Iflands,  and  attefted  by  the  Cuftom-houfe  Officers  at 
Kinfale,  27  Aprill  1638.  311. 

i  o  this  Atteftation,  the  faid  Officers  have  putt  the 
Seals  of  their  Offices. 

28.  Draught  of  Sir  John  Lowth’s  Reafons  for  the 

placing  of  Councellors  of  Fee  in  ordinary,  before  the 
Secretaries  of .  313. 

29.  Confiderations  touchinge  the  fuppreffion  of  vnjuft 

Fees,  & c.  29  Maij  1630.  314. 

30.  The  State  of  the  under-Clerks  in  the  Office  of  Six 

Clerks  in  Chancery  ;  temp.  R.  Caroli  1.  316. 

31.  The  Charges,  Loffes,  &  Hinderaunces  which  John 

Owen  Mercer  Defendant  hath  difburfed,  and  bene  put 
vnto,  at  the  fuite  of  Rowland  Barnes  Plaintiffe,  in  an 
Aiftion  de  Ejectione  Firmte  ad  damnum  20  lib.  com- 
menfed  by  the  lame  Rowland,  in  the  Portmote-court 
within  the  Citie  of  Chefter,  whereof  the  faid  Defendant 
is  acquited  by  VerdiCt  of  12  Men.  318. 

This  Paper  is  fubfcribed  by  Davyd  Lloyd  Maior  of 
Chefter,  circa  A.  D.  1593- 

32.  The  Charges  which  William  Pixley  Plaintiffe  hath 
difburfed  in  an  Acilion  of  Debt  of  10  lib.  by  him  comenfed 
in  the  Pentice-Court  within  the  Citie  of  Chefter  ;  againft 
David  Lloyd  Draper  Defendant ;  &  afterwards  removed 
into  the  Port-mote  Court  within  the  faid  Citie  ;  where, 
in  the  faid  Plaintiffe  after  apparaunce  had  recouered  by 
Confeflion  of  the  Defend  aunt,  and  after  Iffue  joyned. 

*5  320- 


Nairn.  2048 — 2050. 

This  paper  is  (igned  Sc  taxed,  by  Rychard  Bavand 
Maior,  circa  A.  D.  1581. 

33;  Tlr  Expences  of  Robert  Fletcher  Efquire  &  Dame 
Mawlde  his  Wyfle  Plaintiffes.  againft  S'.  Hugh  Powell 
Clerke,  Perfon  of  Aftburye,  in  Scaccario  Ceftrie  322. 

34.  Schedula  Expenfarum  Roberti  Rigbij,  contra  Ro- 

gerum  Rigbie  8c  Robertum  Pendlburie  Firmarios  Parci 
de  Weft-floughton  fadarum  8c  faciendarum  :  1  April 
1641.  324. 

35.  The  Courfe  which  is  holden  in  England  for  the 

Profecution  againft  Goods  &  Merchandifes  forfeited  ; 
With  what  Fees  due  for  the  fame  to  the  B,.rons,  &  other 
the  Officers  of  the  Exchequer.  325. 

36.  Bill  of  Mr.  Dea  ies  Charges,  in  his  Suit  againft 

Walley,  Barnes,  8c  Mynfhull,  A ■  D  1613.  327. 

37.  Mr.  Thomas  Gamull  Recorder  of  Chefter  his 

Receipts  &  Dilburfements  in  the  Suite  betweene  the 
Cytie,  and  William  Hodges  of  London,  concerning  that 
Cities  Cuftomes,  A.  I).  1612.  329. 

38.  A  Particular  of  the  Ilalfe  Barroney  of  Coolelavin 

in  theDioces  of  Acho[u]nra,  8c  County  of  Mayo,  or  of 
Siigoe.  332. 

39.  Particular  of  the  Barronie  of  Carbrey  in  the  Dio- 

cefe  of  Elphin.  337. 

4?.  Particular  of  the  Barronie  of  Leyney  in  the  Dioces 
of  Achonra.  3 53. 

41.  Particular  of  the  Barronie  ofTyrreragh,  in  the 

Dioces  of  Killala.  373. 

42.  Particular  of  the  Barronie  of  Terrerill,  in  the 

Dioces  ofF.lphinn,  &  Countey  of  Siigoe.  387. 

43.  Parties  lar  of  the  Quarters  of  Lands  in  each  Bar- 

rony,  within  the  Counlie  of  Rofcomon.  423. 

44.  Particular  of  the  Quarters  of  Land  in  each  Bar- 

rony,  in  the-Countie  of  Mayo.  445- 

45  Particular  of  the  Barronie  of  Corren,  in  theDioces 
of  Achonra.  484. 

46.  A  Boocke  of  eucrie  man  his  particular  Eftate  of 

Lands,  in  the  Barrony  of  Clan-William  ;  conteyninge  12 
Myles  in  Length,  and  6  Myles  in  Breadth.  505. 

47.  An  Alphabetical!  Colledion  or  Lift,  ofBaronetts 

of  Ireland;  finiffied  the  7  of  March  1639.  513. 

48.  A  Booke  of  the  Retumes  of  the  Knights,  Cittizens, 

8c  Burgeffes  of  this  prefent  Parliament  (of  Ireland)  be¬ 
ginning  the  14th  day  of  July,  A.  D.  1634.  519. 

By  divers  of  the  foregoing  Articles-  it  appeareth, 
that  part  of  the  Mattel's  confined  in  this  book,  do  relate 
to  England  ;  although  not  fo  noted  by  Mr.  Holme. 

2°49- 

A  Book  in  folio,  containing  a  great  part  of  an  Engliffi 
Concordance  to  the  Bible,  with  an  Account  of  the 
fcveral  Places  mentioned  therein.  Written  by  a 
Perl’on  who  mentioned  Mr.  Newman  &  Mr.  Wickens  ; 
and  who  (notwithilanding  he  feemed  not  to  have  a 
'  profpeft  of  living  to  publilh  thefe  his  Papers  himfelf) 
hath  neverthelefs  prefixed  a  long  &  pompous  Title  to 
the  fame  ;  which  l  here  omitt,  becaufe  of  the  tedi- 
oufnefs  of  It. 

2050. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  many  Frag¬ 
ments  and  fingle  Papers,  written  by  different  Perfons 
(for  the  molt  part,  during  the  Reigns  of  Queen  Eli¬ 
zabeth  8c  King  Charles  1.)  and  now  bound  up  toge¬ 
ther.  It  is,  on  the  back,  entituled  “  Pedegrees  of  feue- 
ral  places  but  I  rather  choofe  to  account  for  it  in  the 
manner  following. 

1.  Coates  &  Crefts;  i.  e.  an  Alphabetical  Table  of 
the  Names  of  Families,  whofe  Armes  or  Crefts  are  to  be 
found  in  this  Book.  At  the  begining. 

2.  Tranfcript  of  a  Letter  of  Attorney,  whereby  Mrs. 
Jane  Shelley  (the  Heirefs  of  Lengaine)  late  Wife  of  Wil¬ 
liam  Shelley  Efq;  (who  was  attainted)  did  authorife  Rich¬ 
ard  Whittington  Gent.  8c  Richard  Wynter  Clerk,  to 
menage  all  her  Affaires  relating  to  her  Redorye  8c  Per- 

fonage 


4-2.0 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  2050 — 2054. 

fonage  of  Taddington,  &  Mannours  of  Sutton  alias 
Sutton-Frewne,  &  Wedon,  in  the  County  of  Hereford. 

1  3ID- 

Then  follows, 

3.  The  Collection  of  Defcents  aforefaid  ;  the  greated 
part  of  which  relate  to  Chefliire-Families,  but  put  toge¬ 
ther  in  no  manner  of  Order ;  and  being,  all  along,  inter¬ 
mixed  with  thofe  of  Nobility  &  Gentry  of  other  Coun¬ 
ties.  Among  them,  I  obferved  fome  to  be  of  the  hand 
of  Sir  Henry  St.  George  the  elder,  who  was  (in  his  time) 
Garter  King  of  Armes  ;  namely,  at  fol.  431-  and  in  other 
places.  Here  are  alfo  fome  C.liurch-Notes,  and  a  few 
ExtraCts  from  old  Deeds  illudrating  particular  Defcents  : 
and  others  of  them  are  continued  lower,  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme  &  others. 

Interfperfed  among  the  faid  Defcents,  I  find, 

4.  Divers  original  Letters  of  Tenants,  Servants,  Sc 
Friends,  to  Mrs.  Shelley  above-mentioned  (of  which  ho¬ 
norable  Perfonage,  much  matter  may  be  found  in  this 
Library)  the  principal  of  which,  in  my  opinion,  is  that  of 
her  Cozen  Hugh  Walfhe,  at  fol.  432. 

5.  Some  particular  Matters  relating  to  the  Name  & 

Families  ofBotiler.  44^- 

6.  An  engraven  Paper  thus  entituled,  “  An  ExaCt  Ge¬ 

nealogical  Line  of  the  Family  of  the  Talbots  of  Bat  hall, 
drawne  out  of  their  owne  Evidences,  Records,  Sc  other 
Writings  of  vndoubted  Veritie  ;  compofed  by  Mr.  Roger 
Dodfworth  in  Anno  1653:  and  continued  to  A.  D. 
1657.  ..  454-  b. 

7.  An  imperfeCt  Account  of  our  Nobility,  as  created 
by  fundry  of  our  Kings,  with  their  Armes  in  Blalon : 
partly  in  the  method  of  Cookes  Baronage.  533.  b. 

8.  An  Alphabetical  Table  referring  to  the  feveral  Pe- 
degrees  contained  in  this  Book.  At  the  end. 

2051. 

A  Book  in  folio,  without  any  Title-  on  the  outfide,  as 
molt  of  Randle  Holme’s  haue :  but  proves  to  be  part 
of  a  Law-Common  place-book,  begun  in  the  Reign  of 
K.  Henry  vi.  and  enlarged  afterward. 

2052. 

A  Book  in  fol.  written  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  and 
may  be  entituled,  “  A  Difcourfe  of  the  feuerall  Reli¬ 
gions  praCtized  by  the  people  inhabiting  this  our 
County  Sc  Citty  of  Cheder  that  is  of  the  Religion  of 
the  Heathen  Britans  &c  Romans  ;  the  Practice  of  the 
Primitive  Church  Oriental  Sc  Occidental  ;  of  the 
PraCtice  of  the  Church  of  England  from  the  time  of 
the  C.onverfion  of  K.  Ethelbert ;  the  Inditution  of  the 
feveral  Religious  Orders  who  had  any  footing  in 
England  ;  the  Foundation  of  the  Chelhire  Monaderies, 
&c.  In  this  laborious  Work,  I  believe  honed  Randal 
may  have  cited  feveral  Greek  Sc  Latin  Authors  at 
fecond  Hand  ;  that  is,  without  feeing  them. 

2053* 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding,  for  the  mod  part,  of  blank 
Paper.  That  which  is  therein  written,  feems  to  have 
been  done  by  the  hand  of  fome  young  Lawyer,  who 
began  to  make  a  Collection  of  Precedents,  for  his  own 
future  Ul'e.  Thus  he  hath  putt  down  fome  Tranf- 
cripts  or  AbdraCts  of  Conveyances  of  Land,  Bills  of 
divers  kinds,  and  other  Indruments :  which  chiefly 
relating  to  Perfons  and  Places  in  Chefhire;  may,  upon 
fomeoccafions,  prove  not  unworthy  of  being  confulted. 

2054. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  TraCts  Sc  loofe  Pa¬ 
pers  (now  for  the  mod  part,  bound  together)  being 
partly  Originals,  &  partly  Copies  or  Extracts,  taken 
by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  Sc  others ;  and  by  the 
third  Randle,  on  the  out-fide,  thus  entituled,  “  Notes 
and  Charters,  with  feuerall  things  which  esneerne 
the  Companyes  Sc  Occupations  within  the  Ci'ty  of 


Num.  2054. 


Cheder.”  Among  all  thefe,  I  fhall  particularife  fuch  as 

follow,  as  the  principal: 

1 .  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  the  principal 
Matters  contained  in  this  book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Joyners,  Carvers  &  Turners  Charter  ;  granted 
by  Henry  Hardware  Mayor  of  Cheder,  with  the  Aider- 
men,  Sheriffes  Sc  Common  Councell  of  the  fame.  5. 

This  Mr.  Hardware  was  Mayor  A.  D.  1549.  &  A.  D. 

*559*  „  .... 

3.  The  Rates  of  Servaunts  Wages  withm  the  Citty  of 

Cheder,  limited  at  the  general  Sefliones,  anno  12  R. 
Eliz.  5.  2.  b. 

4.  Table  to  fome  book  of  Orders  made  by  the  Magif- 

trates  of  Cheder.  6. 

Thefe  are  followed  by  a  Breviat  of  other  Orders 
made  at  feveral  Aflemblies;  taken  out  of  the  Black  Booke 
in  the  Pentice. 

5.  Extracts  from  the  Company  of  Smiths  Books  of 

Accounts,  &c.  1 1 .  b. 

6.  Prooffes  that  the  Smiths,  Peuterers,  &c.  are  an 

Antient  Company.  30. 

7.  The  Free  Mafons  Orders  and  Conditutions.  33. 

8.  The  Weavers  Charter  :  granted  by  William  Stiles 

Mayor,  with  the  Aldermen  and  Common  Counfel  of 
Cheder,  about  A.  D.  1582.  ImperfeCt.  41. 

9.  The  Bakers  Charter,  granted  by  the  City,  anno  2 

R.  Edw.  iv.  41.  b. 

10.  Prince  Arthur’s  Charter  to  the  Bakers;  granted 

anno  1 1  R.  Henrici  vii.  42. 

1 1 .  ExtraCt  from  the  Charter  granted  them  by  Prince 

Edward,  fonto  K.  Edward  iv.  42.  b. 

12.  K.  Edward  the  vith's  Charter  granted  to  them 

anno  Regni  6.  43. 

13.  The  Bakers' fecond  Charter  from  the  City  anno  6 

R.  Edw.  vi.  44. 

14.  A  Mandate  from  K.  Edward  iv.  againd  thofe  that 

fold  Bread  in  Cheder,  not  being  Free  of  the  Bakers  Com¬ 
pany.  dat.  anno  Regni  3.  45. 

1 5.  Order  of  a  Committee  againd  drange  Bakers  ; 

made  A.  D.  i6;6.  45.  b. 

16.  Original  Letter  (much  damaged)  perhaps  from 

George  Stanley  Lord  Strange,  to  the  Magidrates  of  Chef¬ 
ter,  about  regulating  the  Bakers ;  who  baked  Cakes  and 
Bonnes,  without  any  Aflife  fett  upon  them,  contrary  to 
the  Statute  of  Wincheder.  ibid. 

17.  Charter  of  the  Wrights,  Carpenters,  Slaters,  & 
Sawyers,  granted  by  Robert  Brerewood  Mayor  of  Chef¬ 
ter,  and  the  Magidrates  of  the  fame  ;  about  A.  D.  .  .  . 

46. 

This  Mr.  Brerewood  wss  Maior  of  Cheder,  A.  D. 
1583,  1587,  &  1600.  in  which  lad  Year  he  died. 

1 8.  The  Names  of  the  Companie  of  the  Bakers,  with 
the  number  of  theare  Servaunts  &  Houfhould-people. 

47.  2. 

19.  Names  of  the  Company  of  Bakers.  47.  3. 

20.  The  Marchaunts  Chartre  ;  graunted  by  Qu.  Eli¬ 
zabeth,  anno  Regni  primo.  49. 

21.  Letters  Patents  of  Qu.  Elizabeth,  bearing  Tede 
7  September,  anno  Regni  26.  whereby  die  granted  to 
the  Mere  Merchants  of  Cheder,  liberty  of  trafporting 
10000  Dicker  of  Calve-fkins,  (reckoning  ten  Dozen  to 
the  Dicker)  in  the  time  of  twelve  years  ;  they  paying 
12  pence  per  Dicker  Cudome  for  the  fame  50.  b. 

22.  Carta  qu&  Johannes  Holand  fatetur  fe  vendidiile 

Majori  et  Civibus  Cedrke,  Officium  Gagitoris  vocatum 
Le  Gaugerlhip,  infra  et  per  totam  Civitatem  pradidtam, 
dat  5  Novemb.  anno  30  R.  Henrici  vm.  52.  b. 

23.  Petition,  in  old  French,  of  the  Maior  &  Com- 

munalty  of  Cheder,  to  the  King  ;  for  the  redrefs  of 
Grievances  in  their  Courts  of  Judice.  ibid. 

24.  The  Names  of  the  worlhipful  Companie  of  Mer¬ 
chants  in  Cheder  :  taken  A.  D.  1639.  53. 

25.  The  Names  of  the  Companye  of  Merchants  of 

Cheiter,  temp.  R.  Elizabeths.  54.  2. 

8*  26.  The 


Bibliothecas  Harleiance. 


4zt 


Num.  2054. 

(26.  The  Names  of  the  Companye  of  Brewers  &  Water- 
Carriers.  59.  b. 

27.  Petition  of  the  Water-leaders  &  Drawers  in  Dee,  to 
theMagiftratesofChefter,  for  aCharter;  anno  1587.  59. 

28.  The  Beer-brewers  Charter;  granted  by  the  Ma- 

gift rates,  anno  4  Regis  Jacobi  1,  60. 

29.  The  Mercers  an  I  Ironmongers  Charter  ;  granted 

by  the  Magiflrates  anno  2  R.  Jacobi  x.  60.  b. 

30.  The  Sadlers  Charter  ;  granted  by  the  Magiflrates, 

A.  D.  1640.  6 1.  b. 

31.  Petit  ion  of  George  Bradbury  to  the  Magiflrates, 

again  ft  the  Company  of  Cookes,  Victuallers,  &  In-holders, 
who  had  wronged  him,  as  he  conceived.  64. 

32.  i  he  Drapers  Charter  ;  granted  by  Infpeximus, 

anno  Regni  R.  Jacobi  fecundo.  67. 

33.  Reafons  given  by  the  Company  of  Barber-Surgeons 

&  Chandlers,  why  they  could  neither  in  Confcience  nor 
Reafon,  admitt  John  Hickock  to  be  a  Brother  of  their 
Company,  without  prejudice  of  their  Oathes  ;  infringing 
of  their  Charter  ;  &  vtter  Ruine  of  their  Brother-hood, 
Wives,  &Famileys.  81. 

34.  A  tatter’d  paper,  (hewing  that  the  Company  of 
Cordwainers  or  Shoe-makers  of  Chefter,  were  incorpo¬ 
rated  by  Randle  the  lad  Earl  of  Chefter ;  and  that  they 
granted  to  the  Company  of  Journey-men  to  the  laid  So¬ 
ciety,  to  bear,  in  part,  the  Armes  of  their  Company, 
at  the  Burial  of  any  Journey-man.  dat.  ioNovri652.  S3. 

35.  The  Names  of  all  the  Walkers  &  Sharman  of 

Chefter.  86. 

36.  William  Alderfey  Maior  of  Chefter 's  Relation  cf 
fuch  Diforders  &  tumultuousCarriages  as  haue  byn  com¬ 
mitted  in  Chefter,  by  the  Companye  of  Mercers  &  Ire- 
mongers,  againft  him  ;  againft  his  Government,  as  well 
in  the  Pentice,  where  He  hears  &  decides  Caufes  ;  as 
alfoe  publickly  in  the  Cittie.  dat.  1 4  Martij  1 6 1 4.  89. 
This  is  the  Original,  figned  by  his  own  Hand. 

37.  Thomas  Sayer  Threed-Maker,  his  Petition  to  the 

Magiflrates  of  Chefter,  to  be  made  free  of  that  Citie. 
dat.  22  Octob.  1602.  91. 

38.  Aft  of  the  Affembly  holden  in  the  Common  Hall 
of  Pleas  in  Chefter,  30  July  anno  6  Caroli  1.  upon  a 
Complaint  exhibited  by  the  Company  of  Mercers  &  Iron¬ 
mongers,  againfl  Thomas  Sayer  &  others  of  the  Linnen- 
Drapers  Company,  for  intrenching  upon  their  Trade,  ibid. 

39.  A£t  of  the  Affembly  holden  30  July,  anno  1 1  R. 

Jacobi  1.  upon  the  Complaint  of  the  faid  Company,  againft 
Thomas  Saier,  and  others,  for  intermedling  with  their 
Trade.  91.  b. 

40.  How  the  Company  of  Mercers  and  Ironmongers, 

exhibited  anotherPetition  attheAffembly  holden28  March 
1634,  againft  the  faid  Linnen-Drapers.  ibid. 

41.  Plow  alfo,  at  the  fame  Affembly,  the  Company 

of  vVeauers  &  Silk-weauers  preferred  their  Petition,  againft 
the  faid  Linnen  Drapers,  for  intermedling  with  their 
Trade.  9?. 

Upon  Confideration  had  of  thefe  Petitions,  the 
Court  committed  the  Aldermen  &  Stewards  of  the  Linnen 
Drapers  Company  (one  of  whom  was  Sayer  abovemen- 
tioned)  to  thePrifon  of  the  North-gate,  vntill  they  and 
the  reft  of  the  faid  Company  make  Acknowledgment  of 
their  Faults,  and  contemptuous  Behavior. 

42.  Notes  relating  to  the  Wares  fold  by  the  Linnen 

Drapers,  and  by  Tho.  Sayer  in  particular.  93. 

43.  Another  Petition  of  the  Company  of  Weauers,  & 
Silk-weauers,  againft  the  faid  Linnen-Drapers.  93.  b. 

44.  Depofitions  of  fundry  Witneffes,  concerning  the 
unruly  behaviour  of  the  faid  Linnen-Drapers.  ibid. 

45.  Another  Petition  of  the  Company  of  Mercers  & 
Ironmongers,  againfl  the  faid  Linnen-Drapers.  94.  b. 

46.  The  Petition  of  the  faid  Sayer  &  his  Brethren  in 
Pril’on,  praying,  that  their  Offence  might  be  remitted, 
and  tbemfelves  releafed ;  promifing  not  only  to  make 
what  Acknowledgement  fhould  be  required,  but  that 
they  would  bring  in  their  Company  to  do  the  like.  95. 

Cat.  Haul.  Vol.  If. 


Num.  2054,  2055. 

47.  Act  of  the  Affembly,  holden  14  March  1633,  (the 

fecond  Randle  Holme  being  then  Mayor)  reducing  thefe 
unruly  Linnen-Drapers  to  their  primitive  and  proper 
Bounds.  ibid. 

48.  The  Bakers  Rejoinder  againfl  Forraigne  Bread- 
Sellers  ;  where  theire  Cuftome  &Priuilcdges  are  fet  downe. 


49.  Original  Letter  (but  much  damaged)  of  George 

Lord  Straunge,  to  the  Maire  of  the  Cite  of  Cheflre,  in 
the  behalf  of  Robert  Cokan,  who  defired  to  be  made  free 
of  the  Sadlers  Company  there.  103. 

50.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Rich.  Bird  Maior  of  Chef¬ 

ter,  to  the  Governor  there,  feeming  in  behalf  of  the  Bakers 
at  Gloverftone,  who  defired  to  fue  the  other  Bakers  for 
their  Rights.  104.  b. 

51.  Petition  of  the  Bakers  of  Chefter,  to  Colonell 

Thomas  Croxton  Governor  of  the  City  &  Caflle  of  Chef¬ 
ter,  againfl  the  Bakers  of  Gloverftone.  105.  b. 

52.  Another,  to  John  Brndfhaw  Sergent  at  Law  & 
Cheife  Juflice  for  the  County  Palatine  of  Chefter,  againft 
the  Country  Bakers  felling  at  Boughton  &  Gloverftone. 

106. 

53.  A  Letter  of  the  City  Bakers  enforcing  their  Pe¬ 
titions.  1 07. 

54.  The  Names  of  the  Cotnpanie  of  Shoemakers,  within 

the  Cittie  of  Chefter,  A.  D.  1629.  144. 

55.  The  Names  of  the  Botchers  wyche  liaue  brocken 

Mr.  Maiors  Ailize,  Sc  fowld  ther  Wetted  (Victuals)  at 
exfefive  pryflis  ;  A.  D.  1 560.  149. 

56.  The  Names  of  the  Companye  of  Butchers,  circa 

temp.  R.  Caroli  1.  149.  2. 

37.  Short  Notes  about  the  Painters  Company  of  Chef¬ 
ter.  1 56.  b. 

58.  Notes  taken  out  of  the  Waft  Books  of  the  City  of 
Chefter  :  being  Orders  made  at  different  times.  ic6.  c. 

168. 

59.  The  Painter-G Lifters  Charter,  granted  to  them  by 

the  Magiflrates  of  Chefter,  A.  D.  1536.  156.  d. 

Here  Randle  Holme  hath  imitated  the  Hand  of  the 
Original ;  and  this  his  Tranfcript  is  followed  by  a  Copie 
of  the  fame  in  more  modern  Hand.  At  the  bottom 
whereof  is  a  rude  Trick  of  King  Charles  ii.’s  Seal  as  Earl 
of  Chefter. 

60.  Exemplification  of  the  Painters  Charter ;  anno 
13  R.  Caroli  ii.(to  this  the  la!t  mentioned  Seal  did  belong) 

61.  A  Covenant  between  the  Companies  of  Painters, 
&c.  Sc  of  the  Joyners,  &c.  whereby  the  former  did  dimife 
unto  the  latter  the  nether  Roome  in  the  Tower  called 
Newton’s  Tower  or  the  Phenix  Tower,  for  the  terme 
of  100  years,  at  2s.  per  annum  Rent.  dat.  6  March  1656. 

160. 


62.  The  fecond  Randle  Holmes  Draught  of  the  fame 

Agreement.  162. 

63.  Complaint  of  Will.  Stokes  Joyner,  of  his  beino- 

wronged  in  his  Trade,  by  John  Kempe  Smythe,  A.  D. 

1577-  .  .  i64i 

64.  A  Bill  upon  the  Occupation  of  Shermen.  1  70. 

65.  Agreement  between  George  Cally  &  Robert  Caily 

of  Chefter,  both  B>otheis  &  Muficians  ;  for  their  con- 
forting  together  during  their  Lives,  and  dividing  their 
Gaines,  dat.  25  July  1699.  181. 


2055*. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  thin  folio,  on  the  back,  by  the 
third  Randle  Holme,  entituled  “  Alphabet.  Coats  of 
feveralCountyes.”  But  according  to  rav  manner,  I  (hall 
be  a  little  more  particular,  as  finding  therein, 

1.  The  Names  of  th  Coats  of  the 

Gentry  are  mentioned  in  this  Book  :  putt  down  by  the 
third  Randle  Holme.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Armes  of  the  Gentry  inhabiting  the  Bifhoprick  of 

Durham  ;  written  by  way  of  Alphabet  in  Blazon,  by  the 
faid  Randle  Holme.  1 . 

3.  Alphabet  of  Armes  in  Blazon,  of  the  Gentry  of 

5  P  Lancafhire ; 


4* 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2055 — 2057. 

Lancalhire ;  taken  from  fome  Vifitation-book  of  that 
County.  _  7. 

4.  Alphabet  of  the  Armes  in  Blazon,  of  the  Gentry 

ofLincolnlhire  16. 

5.  Like  Alphabet  for  Cornwall ;  extratted  from  Mr. 

Carew’s  Survey  of  Cornwall.  21. 

6.  Like  Alphabet  for  Chefhire  :  extradled  from  Mr. 

Dan.  King’s  book  printed  A.  D.  1656.  and  from  an  Al¬ 
phabet  of  Mr.  Smith’s.  23. 

7.  Like  Alphabet  for  Warwickfhire.  32. 

S.  Like  Alphabet  for  Yorkfhire;  collected  by  Mr.  John 

Hopkifon,  A.  D.  16 58.  38. 

9.  Like  Alphabet  for  the  County  of  Northumberland. 

49* 

10.  Like  Alphabet  for  Cumberland.  51. 

11.  Like  Alphabet  for  Weftmerland.  52. 

1 2.  Like  Alphabet  for  Staffordlhire.  54. 

Thefe  two  lad  are  fett  down  by  the  third  Randle 

Holme;  that  of  Staffordlhire,  from  a  Vifitation-book. 
2056. 

A  thin  Bonk  in  folio,  on  the  out-fide  thus  entituled  by 
the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  How  to  finde  the  Records 
in  the  leveral  Cuberts  &  Preffes  in  the  Treafury  in  the 
City  of  Chefter.”  Here  lett  not  the  Reader  expe£t 
an  exa6t  or  a  fairly-written  Repertory  or  Kalendar 
to  the  Chefter-Records  ;  but  only  fuel)  loofe  Notes  Sc 
Scraps  which  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  feems  to 
have  takeir  for  his  own  Ufe  only,  when  he  digefted 
thefaid  Records  into  fome  fort  of  Order,  A.  D.  1652 
&  1 65 3,  and  placed  the  fame  into  the  Cup-boards  Sc 
Preffes  then  newly  bought  to  receive  them  ;  after  they 
had  long  layn  in  Confufion,  and  much  endamaged 
both  by  Rain  &  Ratts.  This  is  obfeurely  fett  down 
by  himfelf,  at  fol.  1 .  b.  together  with  the  Orders  to  be 
obferved  by  thefe  who  Ihould  come  to  perufe  the  Laid 
Records  ;  tending  to  the  prefervation  of  the  fame. 

It  is  plain,  that  Mr.  Holme  as  he  went  on  in  this 
Work,  took  Notes  of  the  Names  of  City  Officers,  &c. 
and  of  the  times  when  they  ferved,  in  order  to  compile 
Lifts  of  them  ;  as  may  be  feen  at  fol.  26.  &c. 

2057. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  many  loofe  papers  and 
fingle  Trafts,  written  by  particular  Pei  Ions,  now 
bound  up  together ;  and,  cn  the  out-fide,  by  the  fe¬ 
cond  Randle  Holme  thus  entituled,  “  The  Maiors  of 
Chefter.  The  Charters  of  the  Citty,  with  other  things 
about  the  fame  which  1  lhu.ll  account  for  in  the  man¬ 
ner  following. 

1.  The  thiid  Randle  Holme’s  long  Note  of  the  mod 
remarkable  things  within  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  How  the  Citie  of  Chefter  was  governed  before  there 

was  a  Maior.  1. 

3.  Magiftrates  &  Corporation- Officers  in  Chefter.  2. 

4.  Lift  of  the  feverall  Companies  in  Chefter.  2.  b. 

5.  Endeavors  towards  an  explication  of  cert  . in  old 

Words,  as  Gabel  I,  Rccordator,  Maior,  Sheriffe,  Citie, 
Sc  Guild.  3. 

6.  Notes  of  divers  old  Matters  tending  to  illuftrate 

the  Hiftory  of  Chefter  ;  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme, 
&c.  4. 

7.  Auntient  C.uftomes  in  Games,  vfed  by  Boys  Sc 

Girles  ;  merrily  fett  out  in  Verfe  :  by  the  fame  R. 
Holme.  ro.  b. 

8.  A  Collection  of  the  Maiors  whoe  haue  gouerned 

this  Citty  of  Chefter,  and  the  time  when  they  -gouerned  : 
collected  by  William  Alderfay  Citizen  &  Alderman  there¬ 
of.  1 2. 

This  Tract  gives  a  fhort  Account  of  the  Earles  ;  of 
the  fcveral  Charters  granted  to  Chefter  ;  with  a  Series 
of  the  Maiors  &  Sheriffes,  from  the  firft,  i.  e.  from  anno 
2 6  Henrici  in.  (with  notice  of  fome  remarkable  occur¬ 
rences  happening  in  their  times)  to  A.  D.  1600.  Which 
Scries,  in  divers  places,  is  corrected  or  fupplied  by  the 


Num. 2057. 

aforefaid  R.  Holme  ;  and  by  him  continued  down  tQ 
A.  D. 1658. 

Here  inferted,  I  find. 

The  Order  of  a  publick  Show,  intended  to  have 
been  made  by  the  Citizens,  upon  the  firft  of  Auguft 
1621,  31. 

9.  The  Speeches  &  Paffages  betwixt  the  Earle  Arun- 
dell  (Thomas  Howard)  and  the  firft  Randle  Holme 
Maior  of  Chefter,  19  July  1634.  as  they  were  reduced 
into  Writing  by  Mr.  Maior,  and  the  Sheriffe  his  Sonue, 
i.  e.  Randle  Holme  the  fecond.  fol.  32.  2.  (vid.  97.  B. 
17.  fol.  309.  b.)  The  Sum  of  the  Matter  was  this  ; 
flis  Lordfhip  (then  Earl  Marfhal)  comes  to  Chefter,  and 
his  arrival  there  was  kept  fecret.  Mr.  Maior  not  at¬ 
tending  to  welcome  him  ;  his  Lordfhip  fends  for  him  by 
a  Meflenger  with  a  Warrant.  Mr.  Maior  coming  -with 
his  White  Stafte  in  his  Hand,  the  Earl  faid,  “  Mr.  Maior, 
I  lent  for  you  to  tell  you  your  Offence  you  have  com¬ 
mitted,  in  notgiuing  your  attendance  as  y  u  ought ;  and 
now  do  you  come  with  your  Authority  ?”  and,  with  that, 
fuddeinly  tooke  the  Sraffe  out  of  Mr.  Maiors  hands,  & 
laid  itr  in  theWindowe  faying,  ‘‘1  will  teach  you  to  knowe 
your  Sclfe,  and  attend  t  'eers  of  the  Realme.  '1  hough  I 
care  not  for  your  Obfervances,  yet  becaufe  you  want 
Manners,  I  will  teach  you  fome  ;  and  you  fliall  furl ikt 
heare  from  mee.  I  would  haue  you  knowe,  I  haue 
power  to  committ  you,  to  teach  you  to  knowe  youfelfe 
and  mee  ;  &  to  giue  better  attendance.”  After  many 
Excufes  on  Mr.  Mayors  fide,,  &  Reprimands  on  the 
other,  the  Earl  went  away,  and  Mr.  Maior  paid  the 
Fees  demanded  by  the  Earl-Marfhals  Officers. 

10.  Ordinance  of  the  Lords  &  Commons  in  Parlia¬ 

ment  (dated  1  061.  1646.)  for  putting  all  the  loyal  Citi¬ 
zens  from  their  Offices,  and  putting  others  in  their  Places; 
for  pulling  up  the  Caufway  through  the  River  Dee,  Sc 
for  pulling  down  Dec-Milnes  belonging  to  Mr.  Francis 
Gamull,  and  building  other  Mills  upon  the  Rood-Dee  ; 
and  for  applying  yearly  £5 1 5.  out  of  the  Revenue  of 
the  Dean  and  Chapter  or  Chefter,  to  fome  of  their  Clergy 
and  Schole-mafters  there.  54. 

11.  The  Accounts  of  Thomas  Lyneall,  for  paueing 

the  Street  without  the  Barrs,  and  for  Handbridge,  ann. 
1589  &  1591.  58. 

1 2.  Divers  Proclamations  emitted  by  Maiors  of  Chefter 

temp.  R.  Eliz.  with  regard  to  divers  Bodies  of  Soul- 
diers  arrived  &  quarter’d  there,  in  order  to  their  Tranf- 
portation  into  Ireland.  59. 

Among  thefe,  are  fome  Proclamations  in  the  Names 
of  the  Sheriffes,  about  the  bufinefs  of  their  Office. 

13.  Form  of  the  Bond  &  Condition,  to  be  entred  into 
by  each  Clarke  or  Keeper  of  the  Common-Hall.  6  t  .  b. 

Next  follows  an  old  Latin  Tra6t,  containing  the  fol¬ 
lowing  particulars, 

14.  Libertates  et  Privilegia  Civitatis  Ceftriac  cum  Metis 

et  Bundis  ejufdem  ;  et  Expofitione  Verborum  quorundam 
obfoletorum,  viz.  Sac,  Soc,  &c.  63. 

15.  Carta  R.  Henrici  vii.  Civitati  Ceftrice  fa£ta  et 

conceffa,  anno  Regni  21.  65.  b.  et  fol.  79. 

1 6.  Charters  granted  to  the  faid  City  by  the  old  Earls, 
and  fundry  of  our  Kings  -heir  SucceiTors  ;  and  by  Wal¬ 
ter  de  Lafci.  fol.  69.  With  thefe  Charters  the  Tra6t 
aforefaid  endeth  ;  and  then  come 

17.  Tranflation  of  King  Henry  vii.ths  Charter  above- 

mentioned.  90. 

18.  Original  Writ  of  K.  Edward  vi.  (bearing  Tefte 
22  06tober,  anno  prinjo)  authoriftng  Rale  Goodman 
Maior  of  Chefter,  the  two  Judges  of  Aflize,  and  others, 
to  inquire  of  and  judge  Tray  tors,  Fellons,  See.  96. 

19.  A  Note  of  the  Antiquity  of  the  Citty  of  Chefter 

(feeming  to  belong  to  fol.  6,  & c.)  97. 

20.  A  Shireves  Summon  of  a  Jury  ;  (hewing  where 

the  old  Shire-hall  formerly  flood.  ibid. 

21.  Oueen  Elizabeth’s  Charter  granted  to  the  City 

of  Chefter,  anno  Regni  16.  in  Englifh.  98. 

/  22.  Cu ftoines 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


423 


Nam.  2057. 

22.  Cuftomes,  and  fome  Forms  of  Inftruments,  vfed 
in  Chefter ;  fett  down  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme, 
anno  1644.  104. 

Then  follow  certain  Orders  or  Decrees  made  by  the 
Lords  of  the  Privy-Council,  &c.  upon  occafion  of  the 
Diffention  arifen  between  the  Officers  of  the  Court  of 
Exchequer  at  Chefter,  &  the  Maior  &  Citizens  there  ; 
begun  by  reafon  of  a  Claufe  of  Preterea  artfully  inferted 
into  Oueen  Elizabeth’s  Charter  granted  unto  that  City 
in  anno  quinto  of  her  Reign,  and  for  pacifying  the  fame  : 
being, 

23.1'he  Order  and  Decree  of  WilliamMarquis  ofWyn- 
chefter  Lord  higheTreafaurer  of  England,  8t  others.  1 09. 

24.  Order  made  by  the  Earl  of  Leicefter,  Cham- 

berleyne  of  Chefter,  &  others.  1  x  o. 

25.  The  Earl  of  Ldcefter’s  Letter  to  the  Corporation 

of  Chefter.  dat.  22  June  1 573.  1 10.  b. 

„  26.  Order  of  Privy  Council,  made  9  April  1 574.  1 1 1. 

27.  Opinion  of  Sir  Francis  Walfingham,  and  others. 


28.  Certain  lhort  Notes  extra&ed  by  the  fecond 

Randle  Holme,  from  the  Records  of  the  Portmote  of 
Chefter.  1 14.  b. 

Among  them,  one  fheweth,  that  a  difference  arofe 
between  the  Bowers  Sc  Fletchers  on  the  one  part,  8c  the 
Cowpers  on  the  other  ;  about  carrying  their  Lights  in 
the  Proceffion  on  Corpus-Chrifti-day  :  which  was  de¬ 
cided  by  the  Maior,  anno  1 5  R.  Edw.  tv.  Another, 
that  divers  Wymen  were  indifted  for  being  Whores  to 
feueral  Monkes  of  Chefter  ;  and  their  Abbat  indicted  for 
taking  away  Citty-ftones  about  Northgate,  anno  21  R. 
Edw.  iv. 

29.  Letter  of  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter,  in  Anfwer  to 

zn  honorable  perfon,  who  had  defired  them  to  give  Peter 
Proby  his  Servant  the  Reverfion  of  the  Place  of  Clerke 
of  the  Pentice  (in  which  place  V\  illiam  Knight  had 
ierved  them  diligently  24  years)  or  elfe  to  make  him 
Under-Sheriffe  :  wherein  they  Ihew  him,  that  they  have 
no  Charter,  Record,  or  other  Precedent  to  juftify  them 
in  fo  doing ;  but  would  indeavoar  to  provide  for  him 
fome  other  way.  dat.  28  April  1587.  1  1 5. 

30.  Copie  of  an  Order  of  the  Privy  Council,  made 

29  May  1629.  *n  favor  of  Robert  Brerewood  Efq;  late 
Clerke  of  the  Pentice  in  Chefter  ;  whofe  Fees  were  de¬ 
tained  by  Nicholas  Ince  &  his  Creatures.  115-2. 

31.  Order  of  the  Aflembly  at  Chefter,  made  17  Julie 

1612,  for  cleanfmg,  &c.  Home-lane  ;  which,  by  reafon 
of  certayne  Encroachments,  and  filling  vp  of  the  Diches, 
was  made  in  cffecte  impaffable.  1  [  6. 

32.  Indenture  Tripartite,  made  at  Taperlegh,  anno 
13  tCHenrici  iv.  of  all  Concords,  Trefpaces,  Difcords, 
8c  Defencions  iPlees  of  Land  &  Debt  excepted)  between 
William  Venables  of  Kinderton,  and  all  his  Kinds- 
folkes,  Frends,  &  Affiance,  and  all  other  men  of  his  Re¬ 
tine  w,  and  his  Servants,  of  the  one  Party  ;  and  the  Maior, 
Sheriffs,  &  all  other  Citizens,  &  Men  of  Chefter,  and 
their  Kindfmen,  Frends,  Affinities,  and  other  the  Men  8c 
Seruants  of  the  Retinew  of  the  laid  Maior,  Ac.  on  the 
other  part:  touching  all  Matters  betweene  the  fame 
William,  &  his  Men  8c  Seruant?,  and  the  Men  of  the 
Citty  of  Chefter,  afore  the  Date  hereof,  moued  and  had. 
Which  matters  being  comprimifed  by  the  interpofition  of 
Arbitrators,  cho.'en  by  both  parties,  to  one  part  of  the 
Laid  Indenture  with  the  Prince  (as  Ear  1  of  Chefter)  in  his 
Exchequer  remayninge,  as  well  the  Common  Seale  of  the 

•  fayd  Cittye  as  the  Seale  of  Armes  of  the  fayd  William 
Venables  is  put :  and  to  the  other  part  of  theis  Indentures, 
with  the  fayd  Maior,  Sheriffs,  and  other  Men  of  the  favd 
Cittye  remayninge,  the  Seale  of  Armes  of  the  fayd  Wil¬ 
liam  Venables  is  put:  and  to  the  third  part,  with  the 
layd  William  Venables  remayninge,  the  Common  Seale 
of  the  fayd  Citty  is  put.  ”  117. 

By  this  Agreement,  among  other  Ai  tides,  William 


Num.  2057. 

John  of  Blymhull  was  to  pay  vnto  William  Capper,  fot* 
beating  of  his  Wife,  5  Shillings:  Thomas  Blymffon  to 
pay  to  the  faid  WilliamjCapper,  for  beating  of  his  Wife,  a 
Beuer  ;  Roger  Cotton  to  pay  to  William  Hope,  for  gree- 
uious  beatinge,  to  him  done,  20  pounds,  and  for  amends 
thereof  made  1  o  Mark?. 

Then  follow  Copies  8c  Ext  rads  from  the  publick 
Records  of  Chefter,  among  which  I  obferve, 

33.  Inquificio  poft  Mortem  Margarete,  que  fuit  uxor 

Fulke  de  Pembrige  Militis,  confanguinee  8c  heredis 
Willelmi  Truffell  de  Cublefton,  Militis,  anno  2  R. 
Hen.  iv.  1 19. 

34.  Prefentment  by  a  Jury,  of  a  great  Riot  made  by 
Baldwyne  of  Rudyngftone  Knyght,  8c  his  accomplices, 
ann.  18  Rich.  xi.  within  the  Abbey  of  Chefter,  wherein 
they  perpetrated  many  Vilianies,  for  feveral  days  toge¬ 
ther  ;  deftroying  and  plundering  the  place,  imprifoning 
fome,  hurting  others,  and  billing  one  of  the  Sheriffes. 
In  which  Riot,  he  was  countenanced  by  John  of  Stanley 
Kn  ght,  who  raifed  Soo  armed  men  for  his  affiftance. 

1 19.  b. 

35.  Names  of  the  four  Brethren  which  came  with 

William  the  Conqueror,  to  whom  Hugh  Lupus  gave  the 
Great  Offices  of  his  Earldom.  1 2 1 . 

36.  Tranflation  of  Prince  Edward,  Son  of  K.  Edward 

tit.  his  Charter  to  the  Nuns  of  Chefter;  granted,  14 
December,  ann.  32  Edw.  in.  123. 

37.  An  Inquificion  confernyng  Hole-hethe ;  taken 
anno  13  R.  Edw.  in.  . 

3S.  Prefentment  of  William  Goldfmythe,  8c  ethers, 
for  makyng  of  fals  Coyne ;  namely,  pens,  2  pence, 
groots,  8c  halfpens  ;  as  alfo,  Gyrdels,  Shapes,  8:  Locketts, 
of  a  fals  Mattall  myxtof  Syluer,  Copper,  Leade,  8c  Alke- 
money,  ann.  16  Rich.  11.  1  i 7.  b. 

39.  The  Inquificion  8c  Retnurne  vpon  the  Writt, 

that  no  finall  Marchaundyfe  iliould  be  entred  in  the 
Checkere,  but  before  the  Shiriffc.  1 29. 

40.  An  Inquificion  .taken  anno  29  R.  Henr.  vm. 

appon  the  fighte  of  the  bodye  of  Dougon  Guys  an  Iriffi 
Mariner,  murdered  by  San  John  dc  Saldenor,  (who  fled 
for  the  fame)  within  the  full  See-marke.  1 29.  b. 

The  place  where  this  lull  Sea-marke  was,  was  claimed 
by  the  Bp.  of  Chefter  as  his  ;  but  upon  uiew  of  the  Cities 
Evidences  he  receded. 

41.  A11  Order  taken  by  the  Kings  Commyfficners, 

betwene  the  Recorder  of  C.heftre,  8c  the  Mail-  ec  Com- 
mynalte  there.  130.  b. 

42.  Letter  from  K.  Henry  vm.  (or  K.  Edw.  vi.)  to 

the  Merchants  of  Dublyn,  commanding  them  forthwith 
to  adnihilate  a  penal  Law  they  had  made  among  them- 
felvcs,  for  carrying  no  merchandises  to  Chefter,  for  the 
future  ;  and  this  His  Majefty  enjoins  them  upon  the 
penaltie  of  500  Markes :  their  proceedings  in  that  behalf, 
being  agaynft  the  due  ordre  of  his  Laws,  8c  Juftice,  and 
to  the  grett  hinderauns  8c  prejudice  of  his  Subjects  in 
both  his  laid  Citiez ;  and  ouer  that,  to  his  Lofte  8c  Da¬ 
mage  in  his  Cuftomes.  131.  b. 

43.  His  Letter  to  the  Erie  of  Kvlffare,  Deputye  of 
the  Land  of  Ireland;  enforcing  the  former  Letter.  132. 

44.  The  Lettre  lent  by  the  Citizins  of  Dublyn  vnto 

the  Kings  Grace,  confernyng  the  faid  Confiderat  Ordre 
or  Law.  Denying  that  they  have  made  any  fuch  Law  ; 
but,  neverthelefs,  complaining  of  the  many  illegal 
Exactions,  8:  molt  injurious  ufage  of  the  Chefter-men  ; 
which  had  obliged  them  to  unlade  their  Merchandize  at 
the  Creek  of  Liverpoie,  or  elfewhere;  paying  all  Cuftomes 
demanded  of  them.  132.  b. 

45?.  A  Plea  held  in  the  Court  of  Py-powder  of  Chefter, 
(before  the  Churche-dore  ofSeynt  Peters)  anno  10  R. 
Edw,  iv.  between  two  Su  angers  ;  one  of  which  was 
charged  with,  &  convifted  of  Breach  of  Covenant ;  and 
therefore  judged  accordingly.  133. 

46.  Another  Plea  held  in  the  fame  Court,  anno  49 
R.  Henrici  vx.  upon  a  ccrteyn  playat  of  Dett.  134.  b. 

47.  Opinion 


4*4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  2057. 

47.  Opinion  of  Robert  Kyrke  Clerke  of  the  Merkett, 
touching  the  Allize  of  Bread,  &  Tallow,  in  Chefter. 

*35-  b- 

48.  Letter  of  Prince  Henry,  for  the  Maynetenaunce 

of  our  Libertiez,  in  removing  of  Pleys  :  ann.  7  R.  Hen. 
IV.  136. 

49.  A  Pafle,  fliewing  that  Will.  Paynea  vagrant  & 

ftrong  Beggar,  had  been  whipped  at  Chefter,  according 
to  the  Law,  13  Febr.  anno  29  R.  Hen.  vm.  and  was 
fent  to  Chippen  Warren  in  the  Countie  of  Northamton 
where  he  faid  he  was  borne.  1 36.  b. 

50.  An  Acknowledgement  of  the  Bulhoppof  Chefter, 

by  his  Councell,  That  he  had  no  Right  in  the  Anchorage 
in  the  full  Sea-Marke.  137. 

5 1 .  The  Agreement  betweene  the  Citizens  of  Chefter 
Sc  Wexford ;  for  each  Citizen  to  be  free  from  payinge 
of  Cuftome,  at  the  other  City  ;  anno  30  R.  Henr.  vm. 

ibid. 

52.  Articles  of  an  Order  taken  at  Chefter,  affore  the 

Kyngs  Cominiflioners,  anno  6  R.  Henrici  vm.  by  the 
Maires  Deputie  of  Cheftre,  Aldermene,  &  Comyns  of 
the  fame  C.ile  ;  by  the  Advice  of  their  Counfell,  for  the 
comen  Wele  of  the  feide  Cite,  and  the  Contynuans  of 
Peax  Sc  good  Rule  within  the  fame.  137.  b. 

53.  The  Meires  Sc  Boundes  of  Hull-heithe.  138. 

54.  Letters  Placards  of  K.  Henry  vm.  Given  29 

March,  anno  Regni  14,  inhibiting  the  Maior  to  fuffre 
any  perfon  or  perfons  to  take  any  of  the  Inhabitants  of 
Chefter  from  thence  at  any  tyme ;  except  upon  the 
revocation  of  this  Commandement.  138.  b. 

55.  Carta  R.  Henrici  v.  de  Liberatibus  &  Privilege's 

conceflis  Hofpitali  S.  Johannis  Baptifte  extra  portam 
Borealem  Civitatis  Ceftrie.  139. 

56.  Breve  R.  Edwardi  vi.  aflignantis  Robertum 
Townfend  Militem,  &c.  ad  inquirendum  de  quibufcunque 
Proditionibus,  Mifprifionibus  Proditionum,  Infurrec- 
tionibus,  &c.  Telle,  &c.  22  0£tob.  anno  Regni,  prime. 

ibid. 

57.  Carta  R.  Edwardi  1.  qull  in  recompenfationcm 
unius  Mefuagij,  156  acrarum  Terre,  26  acrarum  Valti, 
Sc  Bofci,  Pilcarie,  communis  Pafture,  et  aliorum 
Afiamentorum,  que  Radulphus  de  Merton  infra  Foreftain 
de  La  Mare  ;  que  Pilcaria,  Communa,  et  Afiamenta  ad 
4  Marcas  &  duos  Solidos  extenduntur  :  concedit  placeas 
fuas  in  Ceftria,  in  quibus  Grangia  Sc  Bovcria  fua  fita 
fuerunt ;  et  82  acras  Terre,  ettresacras  Prati  de  domi- 
nicis  terris  Caftri  fui  Ceftrie,  infra  Infulam  que  vocatur 
Erleseye ;  et  Ballivam  ct  Exitus  Hundredi  de  Caldey, 
qui  extenduntur  ad  quinque  Marcas  per  annum,  &c. 

140. 

58.  An  Inftrument  of  Arthur  Plantagenet  Vifcount 

Lilley,  Sc  Vice  Admiral  of  England,  &c.  fetting  forth 
the  Maior  of  Chefter’s  Jurifdidion,  as  Admiral,  in  the 
River  Dee.  141. 

It  feems,  on  this  Occafion,  the  Maior  8c  Citizens 
of  Chefter  produced  &  laid  before  Mafter  John  Wodhall 
Commiffary  of  the  Admiralty,  all  their  Evidences  re¬ 
lating  to  this  Affair ;  among  which,  one  from  Earl 
Hugh  Lupus  to  the  Maior  of  Chefter  Sc  his  Succeffors 
for  ever,  was  pretended  to  be  one,  and  allowed  accord- 
ingly. 

59.  Inftrumentum  cjufdem  Arthuri  Plantagenet  Vice 
Admiralli  Anglia:,  See.  quo  mandat  vniverfis  &  fmgulis 
Majoribus,  Vice-comitibus,  Ballivis,  Conftabularijs,  Ma- 
rinarijs,  ceterifq;  omnibus  et  fmgulis  fidelibus  Subditis 
et  ligeis  Regis,  per  Mare,  Aquam,  et  Terrain  vbilibet 
conliitu'is,  quatinus  non  omittant,  propter  aliquam  Li- 
bertatem  feu  Franchefiam,  quin  arreftent  ThomamStryn- 
ger,  Richardum  Sympl'one,  et  Thurltanum  Sergant  in 
Comitatu  Ebor.  ubicunque  infra  Juril'di&ionem  Magni 
Admiralli  Angliae,  vel  fuam  fuerint  inventi,  et  eos  falvo 
cullodiri  facerent ;  ita  quod  haberent  corpora  eorundem 
in  Curia  principali  Admiralitatis  Anglie  apud  Bel-key 
juxta  Orton  key  prope  Pontem  London.  15  die  poll 


Num.  2057. 

Arreftum  illorum.  dat.  apud  London.  1  die  April!*?, 
anno  19  R.  Henrici  Vm.  141.  b. 

60.  Concerning  the  Practice  in  the  Port-mote  of 

Chefter.  142. 

61.  A  Writt  of  Quo  Waranto,  to  enquer  what  Cuf- 
tomes  ought  to  betaken  at  the  4  Gates  of  Chefter  143. 

62.  The  Clayines  of  Petre  Thornetone,  of  his  Pri¬ 
vileges  in  Chefter,  anno  14  R.  Edw.  11.  146. 

63.  The  Claymes  of  Robert  Bradforde.  147. 

64.  The  City  of  Chefters  Anfwer  to  the  Quo  Wa¬ 
ranto  of  anno  13  R.  Edwardi  in.  150. 

65.  The  Gaol  e-deli  very  of  the  Caftell  of  Chefter, 

affore  Bartholomew  Burgherfhe  Juftice  of  the  Erie  of 
Cheftre,  anno  22  R.  Edwardi  m.  152. 

66.  A  Prel'entment  for  gryndyng  at  Dee-Milnes,  for 

the  Citizens.  152.  b. 

67.  Anfwer  of  Henry  Prince  of  Wales,  Sc  Earl  of 

Chefter,  &c.  whereby  he  grants  the  Petition  made  to  him 
by  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter,  for  their  Jurildidion  in 
hearing  of  Pleas,  in  their  Portmote-Court,  anno  7  R. 
Henrici  iv.  1  55. 

68.  Notes  relating  to  ihe  Abbat  of  Chefters  Right 

to  a  Pofterne  Gate  in  the  Walls  of  Chefter  ;  as  alfo  to 
another  in  the  Calyard.  155.  b. 

69.  Precedents  or  Forms  of  divers  Inftruments  ul’ed  in 

the  Courts  at  Chefter.  ibid. 

70.  A  Charter  graunlyd  to  the  Citye  for  Recognicion 

Sc  Proportment ;  and  that  the  Juftice  Ihould  furceafe 
to  proceed  in  Caufes  arifinge  in  the  Libertys  of  the 
City.  160. 

71.  Ordinances,  how  Bochers  fliall  fell  Flesfhe,  and 

whatt  Geynes  they.fliall  haue.  160.  b. 

72.  A  Plaint  of  Affizeof  Nouell  Diffein.  161. 

73.  The  Cuftome  of  the  Cittyof  Chefter,  for  Levying 

ofSubfedies,  A.  D.  1588.  162. 

74.  A  Certisficate  for  any  who  liueth  in  the  Citty,  & 
hath  payd  therein,  &  is  taxed  in  the  Cuntry.  ibid. 

75.  A  Grant  by  Edward  the  Black  Prince,  Earle  of 

Chefter,  that  no  Pleas  lhall  be  remoued,-  &c.  and  that 
all  Debtors  which  owe  mony  to  any  Cittizen,  may  be 
attached  at  Shyre-tyme,  or  Affize-weekes.  dat.  anno 
32  R.  Edw.  hi.  162.  b. 

76.  A  Superfedeas,  that  no  Citizens  ftial  be  moleftyd 
for  any  ferren  Indy&ament  :  anno  ij  R.  Rich.  11. 

163. 

77.  Articles  whereof  the  late  diffolued  Houfe  of 

Cheftre,  found  itfelf  greued,  by  the  Maior  &  Comynal- 
tie  of  the  faid  Citie.  163.  b. 

78.  A  Letter  from  the  Prince  of  Wales,  Earl  of 

Chefter,  to  the  Maior  &  Sheriffes  of  Cheftre,  ccm- 
maunding  them  to  procede  to  the  Arraynment  of  Thomas 
Purcell,  Henry  Clynton,  Sc  Perys  Cornwall,  taken  for 
Fel<  nye  ;  according  to  the  Law  and  Cuftome  of  the 
Citie  of  Chefter,  ann.  12  R.  Plen.  iv.  164. 

79.  Divers  Letters  written  to  &  fro,  by  the  Magiftrates 

of  Chefter,  in  defence  of  their  Privileges  ;  and  by  others, 
upon  that  Occafion  ;  anno  6  R.  Hen.  iv.  ibid. 

80.  A  good  Prefident  or  Charge  to  a  Jury  of  Great 

Inqueft,  temp.  Hen.  iv.  166. 

81.  K.  Edward  ill’s  Charter  to  the  City;  6  July 

anno  5.  ibid. 

82.  Writt  of  K.  Henry  vm.  to  the  Maior  &  Sheriffs 
of  Chefter,  commanding  them  to  proclaim  the  feveral 
Schedules  therewith  received  :  anno  regni  35. 

83.  A  Note  fliewing  that  many  of  the  above-mentioned 

Records,  were  copied  or  tranflated  from  the  Black  Book 
of  Chefter,  by  the  Commaundement  of  Henry  Gee 
Maior  of  Chefter,  anno  32.  R.  Henr.  vm.  167. 

84.  Exchete-Landys  in  the  Fyld  of  Chefter.  ibid. 

85.  Of  the  Plaiez  of  the  Countie  of  Chefter,  the 

Tuvlday  next  before  the  felt  of  Saynt  Margarett,  in  the 
15th  yere  ofK.  Edward  111.  167.  b. 

86.  A  Letter  from  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter,  to  the 
Mafter  oftheHofpitalofS'.  John’s  there,  about  tbeNature 

*8  of 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


4^5 


Num.  2057—2059. 

ofthe  Foundation  of  that  Houfe;  temp.  R;Henrici  vm. 

169. 

87.  A  Writ  df  Enquiry  for  Concelment  of  Entrez 
of  a  Ship,  into  tile  Exchecker;  temp.  R.  Heurici  vm. 

169.  b. 

88.  A  (ir.umt  of  Will.  Ikiworthe  Matter  of  S'  Johns 
Hofpital  near  Chefter,  to  his  B:\ilif  or  Fermar.  170. 

8 9.  A  Schedule  of  the  Goods,  Utenfils,  Moneys,  & 

Writings,  deliucr’d  to  Alderman  Parnell,  &  Mr.  Brofter 
Treafurers  of  Chefter.  A.  D.  1644.  17 1. 

90.  Original  Writ  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  &c.  Earl 

of  Chettei ,  about  the  Privileges  of  the  City  of  Chefter  ; 
for  the  Port  mote,  h  againA  the  Exchequer ;  given  29 
Maij,  anno  6  R.  Henrici  iv.  (loofe.)  178. 

[1 1  •  Copies  ol  two  Charters  granted  by  K.  Henry  vi. 
to  the  City  of  Chefter,  annis  regni  23.1k  35.  (lcofe.)  1 79. 

2058. 

A  thin  Book  in  folio,  written  by  federal  Hands,  and  by 
the  third  Randle  Holme,  on  the  back,  thus  entitul- 
led,  Charter  of  London  ;  which  nor  being  fufficiently 
particular,  I  (hall  describe  the  fame  in  the  manner 
following. 

1 .  The  l'a id  Mr.  Holmes  account  of  the  Things  of  mod; 
Note  in  this  Book  ;  at  the  beginning. 

2.  King  Henry  vm.’s  Charter  granted  to  the  C-itty  of 

London  ;  wherein  all  the  Charters  of  our  former  Kings 
(excepting  two  of  K.  William  the  Conqueror)  are  recited 
by  Infpeximus,  &  confirmed.  248. 

3.  Liters  Patentes  Elizabeths;  Regina;,  qua  confirmat 

Carram  Liberatum  ac  Privilegiorum  a  Thoma  Filio-Alani 
Comite  Arundelia**  Burgenfibus  fuis  Villa;-Leonum  in 
Marchia  Wallize  conceffam.  283.  b. 

This  Confirmation  of  the  Liberties  of  the  Town  of 
Holt  in  Denbigh-fhire,  is  not  intire. 

4.  Extradl  made  from  the  aforefaid  Earls  Charter 

(dated  ann.  13  R.  Henrici  iv.)  made  10  July,  1622,  by 
Da.  Speed,  Recorder  of  the  Lordfhips  of  Bromfield  8c 
YaIe-  ....  287. 

5.  Jurifdidionis  Cancellar.  Oxon.  Epitome,  Regum 

nonnullorum  Chartis  (quarum  alia;  funt  Concefliones, 
alia;  Conceflionum  Confirmationes)  nec  non  Ad.  Parlia¬ 
ment.  confirmata.  2go. 

6.  Statute  of  26.  Henr.  vm.  Cap.  6.  againft  Clippers. 
&  Coiners  of  Money,  8cc.  within  the  Marches  of  Wales' 

293. 

7.  Statute  of  34  Henr.  vm.  Cap.  26  ;  for  putting 
the  former  Statute  in  Execution,  within  North- Wales. 

296. 

hat  follows  in  this  Book,  feems  altogether  relat¬ 
ing  to  Ireland  ;  as, 

8.  Carta  Libertatum  concefla  Burgenfibus  de  Dublin, 

per  R.  llenricum  111.  15  Junij,  anno  Regni  13.  297/ 

9.  A  Rate  fett  upon  each  Counrie  within  the  Four 

Provinces  of  Ireland,  according  to  which  they  were  to 
Pay-  .  299. 

to.  Poynings  Ad  of  Refumption  of  all  Honors,  Man- 
nours,  Lordftiips,  Cattles,  &c.  granted  in  Ireland  by 
the  Crown,  fince  the  Reign  of  K.  Edward  11.  made  anno 
10  R.  Henrici  vii.  ^or. 

1 1 .  An  Abftrad  of  the  Charters  of  the  cheife  Townes 
in  Ireland,  and  of  the  materiall  Points  therein  ;  efpeciallie 
touching  Matters  &  Profitts  of  Cuftome,  which  they 
claime  to  haue  to  the  proper  Ufe  of  themfelues,  and 
theire  Townes,  8cc.  203.  b. 

2°59- 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  two  main  Trads,  each 
formerly  diftind,  but  now  fixed  together;  perhaps, 
as  fuppofed  to  have  been  written  by  one  and  the  fame 
perfon,  as  they  feemto  relate  to  the  fame  matter.  The 
firft:  of  them  is, 

1.  A  fort  of  oblong  Pocket-book  in  Svo-  perhaps  writ¬ 
ten  by  the  induftrions  Chefhire  Antiquary  Mr.  Laurence 
Bollock  in  his  youth  or  yonger  years  ;  beginning  with 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.II. 


Num.  2059. 


John  Brock’s  forry  Verfes  upon  the  Worlds  Nine  "Wor¬ 
thies  (fo  called)  whofe  fuppofed  Armes  were  here 
tricked.  j. 

2.  Defendants  from  Thomas  Leghe  of  Legh,  &Johri 
of  Legh  of  the  Bothes  ;  from  a  Memorandum  written 
A.D;i477.  4. 

This  is  followed  by  two  other  Notes  relating  to  the 
fame  antient  Family. 

3-  -A  Note  taken  out  of  the  Feodary  of  Halton  ;  con¬ 
cerning  Nigell  the  firft  Baron  there,  and  his  Pofterity.  8. 

4.  A  peece  of  a  Bede-rowle  belonginge  to  a  Chauntrey 

at  Bowden  ereded  by  Sr  William  Bouth  Knight,  temp. 
R.  Edwardi  iv.  wherein,  many  of  his  near  Relations  are 
particularly  remembred.  12. 

5.  A  Note  relating  to  the  ample  PofTeffions  of  Sir  Wal¬ 
ter  Cokefey  Knight.  14. 

6  A  large  dedudion  of  the  Pofterity  of  Huchon  Ven¬ 
ables.  1  g. 

7.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Straunge  Lord  Kno- 
k«n.  24. 

S.  Other  Notes  relating  to  many  Antient  Families, 
(not  necefiary  to  be  all  particularly  enumerated  here) 
with  Tricks  of  fome  of  their  Seals  6c  Armes.  (et  vide 
fupra  pag.  1 1 .)  2  - 

Among  them  I  find,  Mountford,  Bucley  or  Bulke- 
legh,F.ggerton.  Staveley,  Wetenha!le,Stanley,  Fyton,  See. 

9-  Part  of  the  Tenures  of  the  Fee  of  Halton.  70. 

10.  Notes  taken  from  the  Offices  or  Inquifitions  poll 

Mortem,  remaining  in  the  Efchequer  at  Chefter.  7 1 . 

1 1 .  Extrads  from  Deeds,  relating  alfo  to  many  anti¬ 
ent  Families.  g4. 

Among  thefe  I  find, 

I2-.  The  Names  of  divers  of  the  Sheriffes,  Juftices,  & 
Efcheators  of  Chefter.  95. 

1 3.  Concerning  the  Foreft  of  Maclesfelde,  its  Bounds 

&  the  Townes  feituate  therein.  130. 

This  Pocket-book  is  (as  I  hinted  before)  fucceeded 
by  a  tatter'd  Volume  of  Mr.  Laurence  Boftoc.ks  Collec¬ 
tions*  relating  principally  to  the  ancient  Chefliire-Fami- 
lies  ;  and  is  in  many  places  adorned  with  the  Tricks  of 
antient  Seals,  &c.  in  like  manner  as  the  other  Treatife 
laft  mentioned,  is;  but  being  much  damaged  by  moifture, 
1  fhall  fay  no  farther  of  it,  than  that  it  flill  contains, 

14.  Some  Notes  taken  A.  D.  158/,  in  the  Churche 

of  Alhallowes  Northampton.  146. 

15.  Extrads  from  old  Deeds,  chiefly  relating  to  Che- 

Ihire  Families.  149,  &c. 

16.  Knights  Fees  appertaininge  to  the  Baronie  of  Hal¬ 
ton.  J22. 

1 7.  Townes  within  the  faid  Baronie.  153. 

1 8.  Townes  within  the  Baronie  of  Malpas.  1 54. 

This  is  followed  by  a  Lift  of  the  Men  of  Worfhip 

who  owe  fuit  to  the  Court  of  that  Baronie. 

19.  Townes  within  the  Baronie  of  Namptwich.  ibid. 

20.  Townes  within  the  Baronie  of  Kinderton.  1 55. 

2 1 .  An  Account  of  the  feveral  Officers  appertaining  to 

the  Honor  of  Tutbury,  parcel  of  the  Dutchy  of  Lancaf- 
ter-  155. 

22.  John  Roberts’s  Account  of  the  Defcent  of  Bulke* 

ley  of  Bulkeley.  x  gg. 

23.  Extrad  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  William  Bromley 

ofDemefolde,  taken  A.  D.  1580.  168.  172. 

24.  Extrads  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  John  Starkey 

Lord  of  the  Manor  of  Olton,  A.  D.  1581.  170. 

25.  Extrads  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  John  Alexander 

ofWiftanfton,  A.  D.  1581.  174. 

26.  Extrads  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Sampfon  Erdef- 

wike  of  Sonden,  A.  D.  1580.  178.226. 

27.  Extrads  from  the 'Deeds  of  ...  .  Brefcy  Lord 

of  Wildcattefheth  &  Tiuerton.  182. 

28.  Copie  of  Sir  John  Afton’s  Letter,  to  his  unkle 

Rafe  Delves,  defiring  him  to  folowe  theLawe  to  the  ex- 
tremitie  in  all  caufes;  becaufe  Samfone  Erdefwyke  would 
kepe  no  payment.  194. 

5  Q  29.  De 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


426 


Num.  2059,  2060. 

29.  De  Comitibus  Ccftrie  ;  ex  libro  Roolandi  Stanley 

Militis,  A.D.  1580.  i96- 

30,  Fragmcntum  (male  habitum)  Legendte  S.  Mona- 

cella:  Virginis,  Reguli  cujufdam  Hibemici  iilite,  cui  Prin- 
ceps  Powifia:  Brogwell  Ylkithrog,  dedit  locum  dictum 
Pendant  Melanghell,  ad  inibi  fundandum  ac  coriftruen- 
dum  Sanctimonialium  Monafterium.  198. 

21.  Arines  in  Blazon  of  divers  old  Chefhire-Families. 

203. 

32.  Armes  in  Greys  In  Hall  near  London.  ibid. 
3^?.  Some  Notes  about  the  Family  of  Walleys,  Wallas, 
or  Wallace,  in  Scotland.  205. 

34.  Extracts  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Roger  Wetenhale, 

A.D.  1580.  208.  218. 

35.  Extracts  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Thomas  Brunde- 

ley  of  W  iftantone,  A.D.  1580.  213. 

36.  Extracts  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  William  Brereton 

of  Brereton.  225.  240. 

37.  Notes  taken  out  of  the  laft  Will  &  Teflament  of 

Henry  van  Borlalia  Lord  of  Camphire,  &c.  Great  Grand¬ 
father  to  Mr.  Bollock’s  Father.  227. 

38.  Copies  of  feme  Chefhirc-Deeds  :  with  Seals  fairly 

tricked.  229.  235. 

39.  Extracts  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Ran  Maynwar- 

ing  of  Peuer,  A.  D.  i 580.  233. 

40.  Extracts  from  t lie  Deeds  of  Mr.  Raffe  Dutton  of 

Hatton,  A.  D.  1581.  239. 

4 1 .  Pedegree  of  1  lauckvn  Mainwaringe  of  Pever  &  of 

Badelley.  243. 

42.  Some  other  Defcents  fett  forth  narratively.  245. 

43.  Notes  received  from . Agas  Stationer  in 

Poules  Churche-y.ird,  A.D.  *581.  249. 

44.  A  Large  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Bollock.  251. 
At  the  end  (viz1,  pag.  258.)  Mr.  Laurence  Bollock 

Ihewes  how  he  came  by  this  Defcent  of  his  Family. 

45.  1  he  third  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  the  Things 

of  moll  Note  in  this  Book.  261 . 

2060. 

A  Book  in  folio,  wherein  are  contained  very  ample  Col¬ 
lections  chiefly  relating  to  the  Hiftory  &  Antiquities 
of  Chefter  and  Chelhire ;  written,  perhaps,  by  the 
Hand  or  Order  of  Peter  Leiceller  Efq;  now  although 
I  perceive  that  very  many  particulars  herein,  are  alfo 
extant  in  others  of  Randle  Holme’s  books  (as  being,  it 
may  be,  tranferibed  from  hence,  or  vice  verfa)  I  lhall 
neverthelefs,  account  for  the  fame,  as  follows: 

1 .  A  particulcr  Table  of  thofe  things  that  are  written 
In  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Carta  Fundationis  Abbatire  de  Hulton  (in  Com. 
Stafford),  per  Henricum  de  Audidelege,  A.D.  1223. 

1. 

3.  Abftract  of  a  Compofition  between  the  Abbat  of 

Hulton  &  the  Prior  of  Trentham,  made  A.  D.  1  242  : 
taken  from  the  Original  penes  Rich.  Lcvefon  Militem 
prseclari  Ordinis  Balnci,  A.  D.  1648.  r.  b. 

4.  Carta  R.  Stephani,  facia  Monac'iis  de  Lillelhall. 

ibid. 

5.  Carta  Fundationis  Prioratus  de  Trentham  per  Ra- 
nulfumComkem  Ce!tri:e  ;  cum  Confirmationibus  Thco- 
baldi  Archicpileoni.  ct  Regis  Henrici  11,  ex  Originalibus. 

ibid. 

6.  Cart  .  deC  tatione  Pofieffionum 

Henrici  de  Aldithlega.  2. 

7.  Notes  from  old  Deeds  relating  to  the  Manor  of 

ibid. 

Here  are  ITewiic  Notes,  taken  from  like  an  dent 
;  and  its  ] 

as  alfo  to  other  Staffordlhire-Families,  &c. 

Ex  (  fhonii  \  11  a  Baron  t  • ;  touching 

chiefly  the  Family  of  Dutton.  1  j. 

Tars’s  old 

Earls  of  Derby,  &c.  relating  to  the  Borough  of  Uttoxeter. 

24. 


Num.  2060. 

10.  Extracts  from  Deeds  relating  principally  to  the 

Abbey  ofBafingwerke  &  Family  ofMontealto  or  Mont- 
alt  ;  taken  from  the  Collections  of  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme,  as  it  feemeth.  26. 

11.  AbflraCts  of  feveral  Charters  of  the  old  Earls  of 

Chefter,  granted  to  the  Monaflery  of  Nuns  of  that  City  ; 
with  a  Note  out  of  one  ot  the  faid  Mr.  Holme’s  booksj 
touching  the  fame.  28. 

12.  A  Quo  Warranto  verfus  Abb.  de  Dieulacres.  3 1 . 

13.  ExtraCt  from  the  Feodary  of  the  Ballets  of  Wel¬ 
don,  with  a  fhort  defcent  of  them  from  Hugh  Lupus,  by 
Geva  his  daughter,  whofe  Legitimacy  hath  been  much 
queftioned.  This  ExtraCt  was  had  from  Sir  Simonds 
D'ewes,  as  Mr.  Leiceller  hath  obferved,  pag.  33.  See 
more,  pag.  38. 

14.  Carta  Fundationis  Monaflerij  de  Canevvall,  per 

Geuam  filiam  Hugonis  C.omitis  Ceftrire.  34. 

This,  with  fome  other  Extracts  from  the  Originals 
in  the  pofleflion  of  Sir  William  Pefhale,  were  had  from 
the  Collections  of  Sir  William  Dugdale,  A.  D.  1638. 

1 Ex  Originali  Carta  Fundationis  Prioratus  de  Hen- 
wode  j  in  Cuflodia  Will.  Spooner  de  Henwood  Arm. 

ibid. 

16.  E  Cartis  originalibus,  fuper  Fundatione,  &c. 
Monafleriorum  de  Pinleya,  et  de  Bordeflega  ;  penes 
Edwardum  Cookes  de  Pinley,  Generofum.  ibid. 

1  7.  E.  Carta  Fundationis  Abbatie  de  Stonelc  :  ex  Re- 
giflro  ejufdem  Domus  penes  Thomam  Leigh  de  Stoneley 
Militem  &  Baronettum.  35. 

18.  ColleCtanea  ex  libro  Monaflerij  de  Cumba,  in 

Bibliotheca  Cottoniana.  ibid. 

19.  Collectanea  ex  Regillro  Monaflerij  de  Kenelwonh 
in  cuflodia  Simonis  Clarke  Baronetti,  A.  D.  1 637.  36. 

20.  Fundatio  cujufdein  Celle  Monialiuin  apud  Bret- 

ford.  37. 

All  thefe  laft  Articles  relating  to  Warwickfhire, 
were  taken  from  Sir  William  Dugdales  Collections. 

21.  More  Extracts  from  Deeds  &  Books,  •  relating  to 

the  Family  of  Bafiet  j  made  by  Mr.  Dugdale  &  Sir  Sr- 
monds  D’ewes.  38. 

22.  A  large  Collection  of  Notes  &  Extracts  made 
from  Deeds,  relating  to  the  Abbey  of  Pulton,  or  Die¬ 
ulacres  (to  which  Place  the  Monks  of  Pulton  were  re¬ 
moved)  found  in  the  Chartulary  of  that  Houfe  ;  or  in- 
rolled  in  the  Tower  of  London  ;  or  from  the  Originals 
in  the  pofleflion  of  Somerford  Oldfeld  Efq:  A.  D.  1631. 

4°. 

23.  Dieulacres  Abbathia.  Compotus  Edwardi  Co- 
mitis  Darbie  per  Willclmum  Davenport  depuiatum  fuuin. 

24.  ColIeCtanea  ex  Libro  Abbatis  de  Deulacres,  in 

Cuflodia  Tho.  Rudyard  Gen.  excerpta  per  Johannem 
Booth  Generofum.  53. 

25.  Carta  Fundationis  Monaflerij  de  Lillefhull,  per 

Philippum  de  Belmeis.  54. 

26.  ColIeCtanea  ex  Cartulario  Domus  de  Lillefhull, 

penes  Ricardum  Lcvefon  Militem  B.flnei.  ibid. 

27.  E  Cartis  Originalibus  in  Cuflodia  Simonis  Dewes 

de  Stow-hall  Militis  et  Baronetti,  A.  D.  1646.  excerpta 
per  Petrum  Lcvcefter  Armigerum.  58.  et  63. 

28.  ColIeCtanea  ex  Libro  rubro  remanentein  cuflodia 

Decani  et  Capituli  Ceftrim.  60.  et  75. 

29.  lift  of  the  Deanarics  in  the  County  of  Chefter, 

and  of  the  Parifhes  in  the  fame  Deanaries.  62. 

30.  Carta  Fundationis  Abbatke  Ceflrtnfis,  perEad-:. 

garum  Regem,  A.  D.  958.  66.  . 

31.  Some  Collections  relating  to  Chefter,  beginning 

thus  *  Sanctorum  prilca  authoritate  Patrum,’  made  A.  D. 
1649.  apud  Ccftriam,  from  writings  in  cuflodia  Ran.  j 
Holme  Gen.  67. 

32.  ColIeCtanea  e  Libro  vocato  Prifca  SanCtorum  ; 

de  Ferris  datis  Abbatie  Ceflrienfi ;  remanente  in  Cuflo¬ 
dia  Decani  &  Capituli  Ceftrie  ;  vel  Thorns  Cafe  Gen. 
Clerici  Capituli  prediCti.  68. 

It 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


427 


Num.  2060. 

It  may  be  noted,  that  a  Rcgifter  of  the  Abbey  of 
Chefter,  beginning  thus  ‘Sanftorum  prifca,’  &c.  is  among 
others  of  Randle  Holmes- books,  nowin  this  Library  ; 
marked  96  C.  2. 

33.  Coile&anea  ex  Libro  Euidenciarum,  olhn  fpec- 

tante  Monaflerio  Diva;  Werburgte  Ceftrenfis  ;  penes 
Ricardum Berkenhead,  A.  D.  .380.  86. 

34.  Exccrpsa  de  le  Cowcher  booke  Abbatis  de  Ceflre. 

s7. 

35.  A  breife  Ab (tract  of  the  Lande  k  Poffeffions  be- 

longeing  to  the  late  Abbey  of  A  belter,  fince  the  Sup- 
predion  :  proveinge  then  by,  the  lame  to  haue  bene 
concealed,  withdrawne,  or  vnjultly  dcteyned  from  the 
Queenes  Majeftie,  or  from  her  Highnefs  Father,  Bro¬ 
ther,  or  Sifter.  90. 

This  Title  is  not  full  to  the  purpofe  of  what  follows 
it  ;  which  is,  a  Narration  touching  the  Didblution  of  the 
Monaftery  of  St.  Werburgh  &  Foundation  of  the  Ca¬ 
thedral  Church  of  Chrilt,  &  of  the  Bluffed  Virgin  Mary 
of  Chefter,  by  K.  Henry  vm.  in  the  premifles  of  whofe 
Letters  Patents,  the  word  Ceftrie  (although  afterward 
mentioned  in  the  fame)  was  unhappily  omitted.  It  (hews 
further,  how  ^ir  Richard  Cotton  Comptroller  of  the 
Kings  HoufclioU!  procured  t''e  Imprifonment  of  IV  Clifl'e 
Dean  of  Cheller,  &  of  two  of  the  Prebendaries,  &  by 
Threats  obliged  them,  be  ng  no  lawful  Chapter,  to  grant 
him  the  Fee-Farme  of  the  moll  part  of  their  Poffeffions, 
at  an  annual  Rent  lefs  than  the  Old  Rent  by /Too  ^ 
ann.  Alfo  how  Mr.  Walker  Dean  li lib’s  Sitcceffor  pro- 
fee  u  ted  this  foul  mutter,  but  died  before  Sentence  given. 
Whereupon,  the  Cottons,  perceiving  their  Fee-farme  to 
be  voyde  in  Lawe,  to  furnifh  thctnfelve  with  Money,  & 
to  ftrengthen  their  bad  title  with  Frends,  graunted  the 
greatelt  parte  of  the  fame  to  i'undry  Gentlemen  in  Che- 
Ihire  for  one  or  two  yearcs  (in  monney)  in  handepaide. 
Who,  after  feveral  hearings,  being  likely  to  lofe  their 
Caufe,  gave  fix  yeares  Rent  of  the  faid  Lands  vnto 
Robert  Dudley  Earle  of  Leyceder,  &  fo  got  a  Commiffion 
our,  that  fome  of  Elizabeth’s  privie  Counfayle 
might  haue  the  heaving  thereof,  whereby  the  right 
courfe  of  Lawe  was  It  pped  :  and  then  Petition  was 
made  to  her  Majeftie  for  new  Graunts  of  all  the  faid 
Lands. 

In  this  Traft  there  are  likewife  Copies  of  divers 
remarkable  Writings,  as  1 .  Sergt.  Popham’s  Opinion, 
to  prove  the  Kings  Patent  of  the  Dotation,  through  the 
Omillion  of  the  Word  Cellrie,  to  be  voyde.  2.  'lhe 
Judges  Anfwer  to  the  Earle  of  Leycefter,  who  defired 
their  opinion  in  this  matter,  dat.  1  Dec'.  1576.  3.  A 

breife  Abftvatt  concerning  her  Majefties  Graunt  of  con- 
ce  led  Lands  in-Fee-Farme,  to  Peter  &  Edward  Graye. 
4.  So  much  of  the  faid  Queens  Letters  Pattents  as  con- 
cerne  the  Lands  in  Chefhire  made  otter  by  the  faid  Grayes, 
to  Lancelot  Bollock  Efq;  &  Francis  Hitchcock &c.  5. 
A  Deed  of  Purchufe  for  Boftock  &  Hitchcock  from  the 
Grayes,  enrolled  in  the  Chauncerv,  &c  6.  The  Rental 
of  all  k  fmgular  the  Matmors,  Lands,  &  Tenements, 
kc.  of  the  late  Abbey  of  Chefter,  (txctpt  the  Manour 
of  Abbots-Cotton,  Church-Lawton,  &  Wefton)  furveyed 
by  William  Bolls  Efq;  k  John  Wyfeman,  menfe  Junij 
anno  32  Hen.  vin.  7.  The  Co  •  million  graunted  to  the 
Lords  of  her  .V.ajefties  privie  Counfell,  to  hear  the  matter 
be  v.  hie  Dean  k  Chapter  6c  the  Fee-Fermors.  8. 
A  Declaration  of  the  Caufe  to  the  C.ommiilioners,  by 
the  Deane  k  Chapter.  9.  A  Breife  of  the  Caufe  de¬ 
clared  by  the  Gentlemen  to  the  C.ommiilioners.  10. 
Articles  of  the  Auditor  of  Chefhire’s  Report  to  Sir 
Walter  Mildmay,  he.  touching  the  fame.  it.  Petitions 
exhibited  on  the  behalfe  of  the  Gentlemen  to  the  faid 
Comm i limners.  12.  The  Order  lett  downe  by  the 
Commiflionerff.  13.  The  Surrender  to  the  Queenes 
Majeftie  from  thtt.Fce-Fermours.  14.  Another  Surrender 
from  the  Deane  &  Chapter,  to  the  Queenes  Majeftie. 
15.  A  briefe  Noate  of  the  concealed  Lands,  fold  & 


Num.  2060. 

graunted  inFee-Ferme  by  Mr.Boftocke  &  Mr.  Hitch¬ 
cock  e. 

36.  Colledtanea  ex  Cards  autographis  olim  Monaflerio 

Diva;  Werburga:  Ceftrenfis,  fpectantibus:  deferipta  A.D. 
1649.  "  .  1J5- 

3 7.  ARcntallofthe  Re&orieof  Preftburie,  takenanno 

19  Elizabethe  Regine.  120. 

This  is  followed  by  divers  Notes  fpecifying  the  Value 
of  feveral  other  Reftories  &  Vicariges  in  Chefhire. 

38.  A  Noate  of  fuch  Lands,  Tenements,  Tythes.  Rents, 

&  other  of  the  concealed  Poffeffions  of  the  late  diffolved 
Monafterie  of  S'  Werburg,  now  in  the  poffeffion  of  the 
faid  Deane  &  Chapter,  and  not  conteyned  in  Hitchcocks 
Graunt.  122. 

39.  Copies  or  Extracts  of  Original  Deeds  relating  to 
the  faid  Monaftery,  and  in  the  cultody  of  John  Edwards. 

1 23. 

40.  A  few  Ihort  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Alton, 

collecled  A.  D.  1639,  by  John  Cowpcr,  for  Tho.  Alton 
Baronet.  127. 

41.  More  Copies  or  Abftracts  of  old  Writings  con¬ 
cerning  the  Abbey  of  S'  Werburg  of  Chefter.  128. 

42.  Collectanea deleCowcher- booke  Abbatum  Cellrie, 

in  Cuftodia  Decani  et  Capituli.  135. 

43  Copies  of  fomeWritings  concerning  the  Monaftery 
of  Norton  in  C.heffiire.  1 38. 

Among  them,  is  a  Survey  of  its  Poffeffions,  as  given 
in  to  the  Court  of  Augmentations,  according  as  the  fame 
were  found  in  the  Accompt  of  John  Birkenhead,  4  Febr. 
anno  28  R. Henr.  vm. 

44.  Abftra&s  or  Copies  of  feveral l  other  Writings 

relating  to  the  Monaftery  of  Stanlow',  or  Whalley,  in 
Com.  Lane,  to  which  place  it  was  removed.  146. 

Thefe  were  taken  either  from  the  Originals,  or  from 
the  Chartulary  of  Whalley,  (all  in  the  poffeffion  of 
Sr  Ralph  Affiton)  by  Mr.  Roger  Dodfworth,  A. D.  1627. 
They  begin  with  a  Traft  intituled  De  ftatu  de  Black- 
bournelhirc,  which  ftieweth  that  foon  after  S'  Augultin 
of  Canterbury  came  hither  (into  England)  the  Church 
of  Whalley  was  built,  and  how  the  Rectors  thereof 
were  commonly  called  Deans,  and  were  for  the  molt 
part  married  men,  leaving  the  faid  Reftory  to  their 
Children  or  Relations,  as  in  hereditary  Succeffion. 
Which  cuftom  prevailed  not  only  during  the  time 
of  our  Saxon  Anceftors,  to  the  time  of  the  Con- 
queftj  but  long  after,  even  to  the  time  of  the  famous 
Council  of  Lateran  (celebrated  A.D.  1217,  under  Pope 
Innocent  m.)  by  whofe  Canons,  Ccelibacy  was  enjoyn’d 
to  the  Secular  Clergy.  (See  further  in  this  Catalogue 
Num.  2072  —  2-1.) 

It  may  be  further  noted,  that  mod  of  thefe  Ab- 
ftrafts  have  relation  to  the  noble  Family  of  Lacy  (and 
from  which  Mr.  Dodfworth  made  out  their  Defcent, 
which  may  befeen  at  pag.154.) 

45.  E  quodam  Libro  antiquo  manuferipto,  in  cuftodia 
Ricardi  Lacy  Armigeri,  reperto  inter  Evidentias  patris 
fui  :  per  Rogerum  Dodefworth  Generofum.  152. 

46.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Lacy,  taken  out 
of  Rale  Brookes  Difcovery  of  Errors,  printed  ann.  1594. 

47.  Notes  relating  to  the  Monaftery  and  Maner  of 

Dernhale ;  &  to  Over,  which  was  formerly  a  part 
of  it.  139. 

48.  Extracts  relating  to  the  Monaftery  of  Vale- 
Royal  (to  which  place  the  Monks  of  Dernhale  were 
removed)  and  to  the  Maner  and  Grange  of  Merton. 

1 73" 

49.  Ex  libro  Abbatura  de  Valle  Regali,  vocato  The 

Leger-booke,  or  Green  booke,  remanente  penes  Tho- 
mam  Marburie  Armigerum,  hoc  anno  1624.  174. 

This  large  Tract  contains  not  only  much  ufeful 
matter  relating  to  the  Times  when  the  Abbey  flood  ; 
but  gives  likewife  the  Surveys  or  Valuation  of  its  Pof¬ 
feffions,  taken  after  the  Diffolution  thereof. 

50.  E 


42.8 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  206c- — *2062. 

50.  E  Cards  Autographis  Abbatise  de  Kirke flail  & 

Barnoldefwic  ;  penes  Richardum  Hartley  de  Bemolfwick- 
cotes,  anno  1655  et  Richardum  Towneley  deTowneley 
Arm.  anno  1 658.  216. 

51.  Apographa  feu  Compendia  diverforum  Inftru- 
m.  itoruin  in  Turri  Londinenfi,  five  penes  Galfridum 
Suakerley,  anno  1 63 1 ,  remanentium,  &c.  circa  Bundas 

&.  Div:fas,  &c.  Vafli  de  Rudheath  in  Com.  Ceftrie.  218. 

1’his  TraCt  contains  alfo  many  good  Notes  relating 
to  the  Manors  of  Drakelowe,  Rudheath,  &c. 

52.  Names  of  the  Witneifes  to  the  Renovadon  of 
the  Monaftery  of  Bath,  by  K.  Henry  1.  A.D.  not. 

256. 

53.  Names  of  the  Witneffes  to  the  Foundation-Charter 
of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Norwich,  by  the  fame  King. 

257. 

54.  Short  Note  from  the  Foundation  Charter  of  the 

Abbey  of  Leicelter.  ibid. 

5  5.  Short  Notes  from  the  Charters  of  Foundation  or 
Endowment  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Exeter,  ibid. 

56.  I. ike  fhort  Notes  from  the  Foundation-Charters  of 
the  Monalteries  of  Knarefborowe,  &  Bildewas.  258. 

57.  Genealogia  Fundatorum  Abbatie  S '  Jacobi  de 
Wiggemor,  extraCta  ex  Libro  ejufdem  Abbatie.  259. 

58.  Ex  vetcri  manufcripto  in  Bibliotheca  Cottoniana, 

annotato  CtAvuivs  C.9.  olim  fpeclante  Monaflerio  de 
Abbingdon.  261. 

Thefe  Notes  relate  to  fome  of  the  old  Earls  of 
Chefter  ;  and  are  extant  alfo  in  other  Books  of  this 
Library. 

59  An  alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  Men,  con- 
teyned  in  this  Booke.  Of  Earles,  Archbifhops,  Bilhops, 
Conftables  of  C.helter,  Sheriffs  of  Chefhire,  Conftables 
of  the  Caftle  of  Chefter,  Juftices  of  Chefter,  Chamber- 
laynes  cf  Chefter,  Efcheators  of  Chefter,  &c.  ibid. 

60.  Cuftomes  ufed  in  the  Parifh  of  Davenham,  as 

they  were  certified  upon  Oath  before  William  Bifhop  of 
Chefter,  14  April,  1564.  272. 

61.  Short  Notes  relating  to  the  Monafteries  of  Stan- 

lowe  &  Whalley  ;  and  to  the  Perfonages  of  Backford, 
Wallazie,  andWeuerham.  273. 

2061. 

A  thin  Parchment-Book  in  folio,  confifling  but  of  22 
Leaves,  &  two  annexed  Schedules,  and  thefe  not  all 
coherent,  but  rather  Fragments  faved  from  Deftruc- 
tion.  and  bound  up  together  by  the  care  of  the 
third  Randle  Holme,  who  put  on  the  back  this  Title, 
Chefter-Deeds. 

It  feems  to  be  part  of  a  large  Book  or  Volume, 
whereinto  were  entred  the  feveral  Deeds  or  Conveyances 
of  Houfes,  as  alfo  the  Wills  made  by  the  Citizens  of 
Chefter,  which  were  inrolled  in  the  Portmote  Court 
there,  and  here  copied  in  a  fort  of  Method  ;  namely 
thofe  Mefuages  or  Tenements  as  were  fcituated  in  fuch 
a  Street,  or  in  fuch  a  Lane,  are  here  putt  by  them- 
felves,  under  the  Name  of  the  faid  Street  or  Lane,  as  a 
proper  Title.  Had  this  Work  been  preferved  intire,  it 
would  have  been  of  much  greater  Value. 

2062. 

A  thin  Parchment  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  29 
Leaves,  and  one  Schedule,  being  a  damaged  Copy  of 
an  old  Deed  :  and  written  by  feveral  Hands. 

This  Book  is  that  Regifter  of  the  Abbey  of  St.Wer- 
burg  of  Chefter,  which  was  formerly  known  (&  dif- 
tinguifhed  from  the  others)  by  the  two  firft  Word*, 

*  Sanctorum  prifea,.’  and  contains  AbftraCts  of  the  original 
Deeds  of  the  Founders,  &  Benefactors  to  that  great  Mo¬ 
naftery,  and  Bulls  of  the  feveral  Popes  confirming  the 
fame.  The  Shortnefs  of  which  AbftraCts  feems  to 
lhew,  that  they  were  not  taken  to  remain  in  that  Houfe 
for  ever,  as  Copies  ;  but  rather  to  ferve  the  Abbats  as 
Memorandums,  on  Occafion. 


Num.  2063. 

2063. 

A  paper  Book  in  pretty  large  folio,  written  by  the  Hands 
of  tlie  fecond  &  third  Randle  Holme  and  others  ; 
and  on  the  outfide  thus  emitulcd,  ;  Deedcs  and  other 
Writings  of  feueral  Places,  &c.  Familys,  &c.’  By 
which  is  meant,  Copies  or  AbftraCts  of  Deeds  and 
other  Writings,  together  with  Tricks  of  the  Seals  ; 
collected  or  made  by  the  fame  Mr.  Holme,  or  by  his 
influence,  from  the  Originals  in  the  pofltlfion  of 
feveral  of  his  Friends.  This  Collection  being  large, 
1  fhall  only  give  the  following  brief  account  of  it : 

1.  the  fasd  Mr.  Holme’s  Catalogue  of  the  Things 

of  Note  in  thisBook.  j. 

2.  Lieutenant  John  Radinge's  Account  of  Moneys  he 

had  receaved  for  the  ufe  of  his  Company,  fince  20  May 
1645,  delivered  by  him,  upon  Oath  to  the  Commit’* 
fioners,  and  figned  by  them.  2. 

At  the  End  of  the  Bill  he  writes  thus,  ‘  For  Free- 
quarter  I  leave  to  your  favourable  Con fi deration.’  He 
received  his  Commiflion  from  Sir  William  Brereton, 
who  having  been  the  King’s  Ward,  Tided  with  the  Par¬ 
liament. 

3.  Extracts  from  Deeds  in  the  C’uftody  of  Philipp 

Yonge  of  Kenton,  Elq;  taken  A.D.  1656.  7. 

4-  Commiflion  ofK.  Henry  vii.  to  Sir  William  Yonge 
Sherifle  of  Shropfliire  &  others  ;  authorifing  them  to 
call  before  them  the  Collectors  of  the  Tenth  throughout 
the  faid  County  (which  was  granted  to  him  by  Parliament, 
in  the  4th  Year  of  his  Reign)  and  to  oblige  the  faid  Col* 
leCtors  to  pay  in  fuch  fumes  of  the  faid  Money  as  ft tli 
remained  in  their  Hands.  Yeoven  vndcr  the  Priuey 
Seale,  5  March,  anno  Regni  7.  16. 

5.  The  Cuftoms  ofEdgemonden  in  Com.  Salop,  vfed 

there  tyme  out  of  mynde.  22. 

6.  Extracts  from  Deeds  relating  to  the  Towne  ofNew- 

port  (Novus  Buvgus)  in  Com.  Salop.  23. 

7.  Extracts  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Gamul  of  Salg- 

hall  &  Craball.  39? 

8.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Rich.  Wilfon,  Parfon 
of  Trinity  in  Chefter,  to  Mr.  Gamul,  dated  29  May 
1644,  requiring  him  to  pay  the  Tyth  of  C.rabball,  the 
detaining  whereof,  he  beleues,  is  no  lefs  than  playne 
Sacrilege. 

9.  A  Copy  of  the  Privy-Seal  fent  to  William  Gamul 

Alderman  of  Chefter,  for  the  Loane  of  £13.  6.  8.  to 
K.  Charles  the  Firft.  Given  tg  November  1625.  57. 

10.  Extract  of  an  Indenture  made  3  Auguft  anno  ^R. 

Edwardi  vi.  between  William  Clyff  Deane  of  Chrlter,  &c 
John  Calveky  F.fq;  wherein  the  Boundes  of  the  Demefnes 
of  Saughton-Lordlhip  are  recited.  59. 

11.  AbftraCt  of  the  Inquifition  taken  16  Auguft  A.D. 

1630.  touching  the  Gift  of  ...  .  Goodikar  of  Barn- 
fton  in  the  Parifh  of  Woodchurch,  to  the  Poore  of  the 
fame  Parifh.  1 , 

12.  Draught  of  a  Roman  Altar,  with  an  Infcription 
found  in  digging  of  a  Sellar  in  Chefter,  A.  D.  1693.  80. 

13.  Engliih  Tranflation  of  a  brief  Difl’ertation  made  by 

Mr.  John  Greenhalgh  late  Head  Scholemafter  of  Chef- 
ter,  upon  the  Roman  Altar  dug  up  in  Chefter,  A.  D. 
i^53;  _  80.  a. 

The  Infcription  begins  t.  o.  m.  tanaro:  and  is 
mentioned  in  feveral  primed  Books,  but  perhaps  not  fo 
well  explained  as  here. 

14.  Extracts  from  many  Deeds,  the  Originals  where¬ 

of  were  in  the  Cuftody  of  the  third  Randle  Plolme,  A.  D. 
1667.  (Thefe  ferve  to  prove  the  times  of  many  of  the 
Maiors  &  Sherift’es  of  Chefter.)  81. 

15.  A  Brief  of  K.  Edward  vi.  directed  to  the  Inhabit¬ 

ants  of  the  Counties  of  Chefter,  Salop,  Denbigh,  & 
Flynt,  for  their  refpective  Contributions  toward  the  Charge 
of  building  or  making  a  new  Haven  at  Lightfoote- 
Poole,  near  Chefter:  dated  at  Wrexham  1  June  anno 
Regni  6.  123. 

12  1 6.  AbftraCts 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


429 


Num.  2063,  2064. 

16.  Abftracts  of  old  Deeds  relating  to  the  Town  of 
Barton,  Sc  entred  into  a  Book  anno  5  R.  Henrici  iv.  re¬ 
maining  in  the  poffefiionof  Mr.  Roger  Dodfworth.  149. 

17.  Like  Extracts,  made  from  the  fame  book,  Sc  re¬ 
lating  to  the  Towne  of  Bradford. 

18.  Like  Extracts,  made  from  the  fame  book,  relating 

to  the  Town  of  Irwilham.  l^6. 

iy,  Like  Extracts,  made  from  the  fame  Book,  relating 
to  the  Town  of  Salford.  172.' 

a  -j.  Like  Extracts,  made  from  the  fame  book,  relating 
to  the  Town  of  Manchefter.  1 7 3  ■ 

21.  Among  thefe,  is  a  Deed,  in  French,  whereby 

Thomas  de  Barton  gave  his  Armes  to  John  the  Son  of 
Thomas  del  Bothe  ol  Barton,  his  Heirs  Sc  Affignes  dat. 
29  Sept,  anno  5  R.  Henrici  iv.  *74- 

22.  Quedam  Excerpfa  de  Recordis  remanentibuc  apud 
Cadi' urn  de  Lancaflr.  per  Magrum  Rogerum  Doddef- 
worth. 

23.  Names  of  the  Commiffioners  appointed  for  Mu¬ 
llers  in  each  hundred  of  Lancalhire,  anno  b  R.  Henrici  v. 

.76. 

24.  Collectanea  ex  Chartulario  Abbati®  de  Cocker 

fand.  l78* 

25.  Collectanea  ex  Libro  de  Whallcy.  180. 

26.  '1’ranfcripta  ex  Cards  in  C.uftodia  Richardi  Welt- 
more  de  Midletonjuxta  Lancaftriam,  A  D.  1628.  184. 

27.  Ex  Libro  Abbatie  live  Prioratus  de  Burfcough. 

187. 

c8.  E  Chartis  Willelmi  Chrechley  de  Lee,  A.  D.  1636 


191. 

29.  Ex  Chartis  in  Cuftodia  Joannis  Calveley  filij  natu- 
ralis  Radulfi Cal veley  Domini  de  W  odenmagna,  Ac.  A.  D. 
1634.  „  igi. 

3c.  From  a  Cowcher-book  of  Sir  Raffe  Afheton’s  Evi¬ 
dences,  A.  D.  1643-  1 

31.  Ex  Libro  albo  Radulfi  Adieton  Militis.  199. 

32.  Ex  Chartis  Johannis  Molcroft  de  Morton,  Arm. 

A.  D.  1(535.  2°°- 

3?..  Ex  Euidencijs  Richardi  Bolde  de  Bolde,  Arm. 
A.  D.  1635.  202.  2o6. 

34.  Cart®  de  Burton-head,  in  Sutton.  .  203. 

33.  Ex  Cartulario  Abbati®  S.  Petri  de  Salop,  in  mam¬ 
bas  Ric.  Leuefon  Militis  Balnei,  A.  D.  1638.  226. 

36.  Ex  Libro  de  Laycock.  232. 

37.  Out  of  the  Irrotulary  of  the  Deedes  of  the  Duke 

of  Lancafter,  remayning  amonglt  the  Records  in  the 
Duchie-Office  in  Grayes  Inne.  234. 

38.  Out  of  the  other  great  Coucher-booke  alfo  in  the 

Duchie-Office  at  Grayes  Inne.  238. 

I  believe  that  molt  of  thefe  Extracts  abovementioncd, 
were  made  from  Mr.  Dodfworth’s  books. 

39.  Index  Virorum :  or  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  Mens 
Names,  mentioned  in  this  Book. 

40.  Index  Locorum  :  or  a  like  Table  directing  to  the 
fcvc.nl  Places  herein  mentioned. 


2064. 

A  Book  in  folio,  feeming  to  have  been  written  &  tricked 
by  the  third  Randle  Holme ;  who,  on  the  out-hde 
hath  entituled  it  thus,  ‘c  The  Coppy  of  the  Leager- 
bookes  of  Vale  Royal  1,  Sc  Stanlowe:’  wherein  I  find 

1.  His  Catalogue  of  Things  of  Note  in  this  Booke  :  at 
the  beginning. 

'1  his  Catalogue  fpecifies  many  matters  not  to  be 
found  here  ;  the  Leaves  wherein  they  were  written  being, 
perhaps,  bound  up  in  fotne  other  Book. 

2.  A  Coppy  of  the  Leager  Booke  belonginge  to  the 

Abby  of  Vale-Royall.  **  24'- 

This  was  in  the  Hands  of  Sir  Thomas  Mainwanng 
Baronet,  A.  D.  1662. 

Herein  belides  many  Inflruments  relating  to  the  par¬ 
ticular  Affaires  of  the  Monaftery,  1  find 

3.  Copies  of  i'tveral  Popes  Bulls,  conveying  fundry 

great  Privileges  to  the  Ciflcrcian  Order.  384. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2064 — 2066. 

4.  Exhcnnia  (Xenia)  miffa  Dompno  Petro  Abbati  de 
Valle-Regali,  contra  Eeflum  Affumptionis  Bead  Marie, 

A.  D.  1330.  cum  predis  eorundein.  igg.b. 

Sequuntur, 

5.  Cat  tie  Abbathi®  de  Stanlaw,  ante  Tmnflationem 

ad  Ecclefiam  de  Whalley.  ^  3 0 

Here  are  Tricks  ot  molt  of  the  Seals ;  lo  that  thefe 
Copies  or  Abftratls  were  taken  from  the  Originals. 

6.  Cart®  Donorum  pod  Tranflationem  Abbathi®  a 

Stanlavvc  ad  Ecclefiam  Whallei®.  32c\ 

Divers  of  thefe  feem  alfo  to  be  taken  from  the  Ori¬ 
ginals.  , 

7.  A  Catalogue  of  all  the  Gifts  A  Grants  to  the  Abby 

of  Stunlaw  ;  and  afterward  confirmed  to  V\  bailey,  when 
the  Abby  was  tranfiated  there.  33 2 • 

Thefe  l'eein  to  be  only  the  Titles  prefixed  to  the  feve- 
ral  Charters  as  they  were  entred  into  the  Abbey-Regiftre, 
and  are  Mowed  by  fome  other  Writings  ;  copied,  pro¬ 
bably,  from  the  fame  Book  which  was  in  the  hands  of 
Mr.  Richard  Afiiton  of  Downham,  A.  D.  1658,  as  ap¬ 
pears  in  322  b. 

Toward  the  end,  I  meet  with 

8.  Index  Viiorum  ;  or  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  the 
Sur-names  of  Families' mentioned  in  this  Bonk. 

9.  Index  Locorum;  a  like  Table  containing  the  Names 
of  places,  with  proper  References. 

2065. 

A  Book  in  folio  collected  or  written  by  feveral  Pcrfons; 
namely  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  &  others  ;  by 
one  of  whom  itis  entituled,  on  the  out  fide  “Inquifitions 
fiom  Hen.  hi.  to  Edw..iv.”  of  which,  neverthelefs,  I 
lhall  give  the  following  Accompt: 
j.  Index  Locorum  :  an  Alphabetical  Table,  like  that 
mentioned  at  the  book  above  deferibed.  At  the  beginning. 
Next  after  it  comes, 

2.  Index  Virorum.  8 

I  fuppofe  thefe  Tables  not  to  be  very  exaCt;  becaufe 
the  third  Randle  Holme  hath  thus  written  with  his  black 
Lead-Pencil,  c  Beth  Alphabets  to  be  mended.’ 

3.  Another  Index  Virorum  :  being  perhaps  Names 

omitted  in  the  former.  l7- 

4.  Then  follow  the  Inquifitions  themfeives(ihat  is,  Ab- 
ftraCts  of  them)  collected  from  theRecords  in  the  Tower 
of  London,  the  Treafury  at  Weltniinfter,  Cheiter-Caftle, 
A  the  Exchequer  in  Chelter,  for  the  greateft  part  by 
Mr.  John  Maffy  of  Eggerley,  fometyme  Clerke  of  the 
faid  Exchequer. 

The  Collection  feems  to  have  been  madewholly  upon 
account  of  Perfons  holding  Lands  in  Chelhire  :  but  pro¬ 
ceeds  not  reguladv,  fome  Leaves  being  tranfpofed,  and 
others  added,  at  different  times,  by  the  llcond  Mr.  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme. 

5.  His  Alphabetical  Table,  directing  to  the  feveral 
AbilraCts  of  Inquifitions  extant  in  this  Book.  175. 

6.  An  Index  of  Places,  perhaps  fupplying  the  DefeCts 

in  the  firlt.  17s- 

2066. 

A  Book  in  folio,  belonging  to  that  laft  deferibed,  and 
on  the  out-fide,  by  the  third  Randle  Holme  thus  en¬ 
tituled,  “  Inquifitions  from  the  beginning  of  Richard 
hi.  to  the  end  of  Charles  1.”  That  is,  AbilraCts  of 
Inquifitions  relating  to  thole  Perfor  s  who  held  Lands 
within  the  County  of  Chelter  ;  collected  as  aforefaid. 
The  Book  feems  to  be  written  -by  the  fame  Hands 
as  the  former,  and  confifis  of  thefe  Tracts  following: 

1.  The  Names  of  all  the  Perfons  whofe  Inquifitions  are 
mentioned  within  this  Booke,  collected  by  the  faid  Mr. 
Holme,  A.  1).  1664.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Index  Virorum  ;  as  in  the  former  book. 

'  3.  The  abovementioned  AbltraCts  of  Inquifitions,  be¬ 
ginning  anno  1  R.  Richardi  111.  154* 

4.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Alphabet  of  all  theTownes 
5  R  &  other 


43° 


Catalogiis  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2066 — 2070. 

&  other  Places  mentioned  in  the  feuerall  Inquifitions  with¬ 
in  this  Booke.  Toward  the  end. 

This  is  followed  by 

5.  Ano  her  Index  Locorum,  or  Table  of  Places. 

2067. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  many  different  Hands  and 
by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  on  the  oul-fide  thus  en- 
tituled,  ‘  Laft  Wills  and  Teftaments  of  feuerall  Gen- 
tlemen  m  Ghelhire.”  It  really  confiits  of  divers  Trafts 
7  7. ,  ?Pfrs  .put  together  in  the  Order  following  : 
AnAl.phabeUcal  Table  ofthofe  Perfons Names  whofe 
wins  are  either  copied  or  abbreviated  in  this  Book.  At 
the  beginning.  Then  follow, 

2.  Nomina  Virorum :  or  an  Alphabetical  Table  of 
1  erlons  Surnames.  '1  hen  fucceed, 

3.  The  Wills  abovementioned,  put  together  promif- 
cuoully,  and  without  any  order  of  Time  or  Alphabet. 

Among  them,  I  find, 

4-  The  Names  of  the  jurors  (i.  e.  Lords  aflifting  in 

tr.n.7  uVp°n  the  Aray"m™t  of  Marvyn  Tuchet  Earle 
ol  Caftell-haven,  at  Weftminfter,  2  May  A.  D.  1631. 

6.  A. 

5.  That  Earles  Profeffion  of  Faith.  6.  A.  b. 

6.  V\  ills  copied  out  of  the  great  Regifter-Booke  re- 

maineing  in  the  W.UOffice  within  the  Abbey-Court,  in 
the  Citty  of  Chefter.  J  { 

Some  of  thefe  are  as  high  as  the  year  1519. 

7.  Other  fingle  papei-s  (fome  originals)  being  Wills 

or  relating  to  Wills.  6  279.  A. 

8.  Nomina  Locorum  :  toward  the  end.  ’ 

9-  An  Original  Probat  of  one  Will  j  and  a  Tranfcript 
or  another,  loofe  }  at  the  end.  * 

2068. 

A  Book  in  folio  written  by  feveral  Hands,  and  by  the 
third  Randle  Holme,  on  the  out-fide  thus  entituled 
l-mes  from  the  beginning  of  Edward  r.  to  the  end 
of  Henry  vm  ”  But  I  find  in  it, 

.he'be74ghabe,iCal  Tat”e  “f  NamCS  °f  PlKeS  5  “ 

2  Copies  of  fome  few  Fines  relating  to  Che/hire 
Lands,  of  the  time  of  K.  Henry  the  third.  x 

3.  Abftracts  of  Fines  levied  in  the  Court  at  Chefter 

kX  Fd  *T  of.  K;r:dward  the  hrlt,  to  the  Reign  of¬ 
fing  Edward  vi.  both  mclufive.  b  6 

m±;Alpih?brd7abIe  ot  the  Surnames  of  Families 
mentioned  m  the  aforefaid  Fines ;  at  the  end. 

2069. 

AmTh!,i'lf^r”?uen,byreveralH:lnds>  “d  w°"g- 
o  that  aft  defer, bed.  It  ,s  by  the  third  Randle  Holme 

thus  entituled  on  the  out-ftde,  “  Fines  from  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  Edward  vi.  to  th’  end  of  O.  Elizabeth  “ 
Hut  in  turning  it  over,  I  find  its  Contents  to  be 

Vironim:  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  the 

Au'he  beginidn™  leSmen,'°lledin  ** 

■  v  Anft5?fls  °f  Knes  levled  upon  Lands  St  Tenements 
within  theCounty  Palatine  of  Chefter  from  the  begiS 

Ma,y  '■  “  E"d  of  that  o! 

2070. 

A  Book  m  folio,  written  alfo  by  feveral  Hand®  a  u 

E'!  ther°former- 

STonSlgr1"8  °f  Ja“bi  -  t0  Ch->“ 

1.  Abftrafts,  or  fhort  Notes  ofF?n.=-  ,■ 

&  Tenements  within  the  faid  County-Pidarine  o/cht 
ter,  levied  during  the  Reigns  of  tr  r,„  ,  Chet 

St  K.  Charles  to  the  end  of  April  A.'  D  tiro’'  £rft’ 
a.  Index  Locorum:  or  an^lphabcical^abie  °of 


Num.  2070,  2071. 

Places  Names ;  as  ufual :  toward  the  end,  beincr  fur 
ceeded  by  b 

3.  Index  Virorum  :  a  like  Table  of  the  Sur-names  of 
rerlons  mentioned  in  this  Volume. 

2071. 

A  Book  in  folio,  as  the  former,  written  by  feveral  Hands  ■ 
and  by  the  third  Ranjle  Holmes,  thus  entituled' 

“  Decds  &  other  Charters  of  the  Foundation  &  Dona'- 
tiotls  to  the  Abby  St  Biihoprick  of  Chefter.”  But  this 
not  being  particular  enough  for  the  numerous  Trails 
and  fingle  I  apers  this  Book  now  confiits  of,  I  fiiall 
defcribe  it  m  the  manner  following: 
i .  T  he  third  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  the  Things  of 
molt  note  m  this  Book.  At  the  beginning 
This  is  followed  by 

t  m  InJeX  Ifco™m  :  beInS  indeed,  an  Alphabetical 
table,  not  only  of  Sur-names,  but  of  Matters  "alfo. 

3.  Many  Notes  of  the  fecond  and  third  Randle 

bIf°'meS’  ^LUt  d‘n™  j”  °lde-  to  the  compiling  a  Series 
or  the  Abbats  of  Chefter.  r 

4.  Carta  Regis  Eadgari  qua  fundavit  Monafteriuin 

Moniahum  S.  Werburga;  in  Civitat:  Cclirenfi.  A.  D. 
958-  \ 

5.  Some  Notes  extra  Sled  from  an  old  Ms.  in  the  hands 
of  Mr.  John  Goulborne,  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme. 

A.  D.  1652  j  relating  to  the  Church  of  St  John  in  Chef¬ 
ter,  and  to  Earl  Leofric,  who  was  a  Bcnefaftor  to  it. 

6  Copies  or  ExtraAs  of  many  antient  Deeds  ofthe 
old  Earls  of  l  heller,  &  others  (with  Tricks  of  the  Seals  I 
relatm  a  to  the  Abbey  of  St.  We, -burg  of  Chefter,  its  Li. 

„  rllf  &  P(lv'leges,  &c.  taken  from  the  Originals  in  the  j 
Hands  of  Cap t.  John  Whitworth,  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme.  A.  D  .S49.  j.eta9.b.  I 

Among  thefe  I  alfo  find, 

7  .  The  Charter  of  Randulf  the  third,  Earl  of  Chefter 

made  to  his  Barons,  confirming  their  Courts  &  other 
1  nviieges.  ^ 

vfrlfrierS  Patents  of  [v.  Henry  vni.  (bearing7fte 
at  Walden,  5  Auguft  anno  Regni  33'  whereby  hf  made 
the  Conventual  Church  of  St.  Werburgh,  Epifcopal 
and  placed  a  Billiop,  Dean,  &e.  therein.  11.  b.  et  26. 

9-  Qu.  Elizabeth’s  Letters  Patent  confirming  the  fame 
&  fomewhat  enlarging  the  Endowment  of  the  fame 
Church.  Thefe  bear  Tefte,  2a  December,  anno  Regni 

10.  A  parchment-fragment  of  a  very  good  ’char  1 
tulary  of  Chefter-Abbey,  confifting  of  Si  L  Leaves?  || 

1 1.  Copies  of  fome  old  Deeds  relating  to  St.  Wer- 
;irgs  Abbey,  &  other  Religious  Houfes  ;  from  the  Ori- 

gmals  m  the  Treafury  at  Chefter,  or  with  the  fecond 

Randle  Holme  A.  D.  1652. 

r  “■  p-(:rr;l-ts  lrom  Deeds  entred  into  a  Legier-Book 
of  "'hkhB“kwas  in  the  cuftody 

of  the  third  Randle  Holme,  A.  D.  1668.  -5  1 

13-  a  Coppey  of  (or  rather  Extraft  from)  the  Booke 
commonly  callsd  the  Legier-book  of  S'.  Werburges  in 
Chefter,  being  fairely  written  in  ould  Hand,  in  Parch-  I 
mem  and  beginning  with  Sanflorum  Prifca. 

96  C2  B°°k  ‘S  n°W  “  th“  Librar-V’  and  luleribed 

14.  In  Libro  Rubro'Abbatie  Ceftrie. 

...  1  he  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Note  about  that  Book. 

Xhis  Booke  is  auntiently  written  in  Parchment,  &  eon- 
tayneth  Coppies  of  Sutes  out  of  Courte-Roules,  with 
oft10  of  Deeds  &  other  good  Notes  confeming  J 
^  M°"^ery  of  S-  Werburges.  But  it  is  much  defa°- 
ced,  ilubbcred,  worne,  &  many  Leaves  torne  out  : 
which  makes  it  very  imperfea.  But  what  poffiblv  I 
could  gather,  I  have  (as  neere  as  I  can;  tranferibed  for 
ruture  pofterity,  November  1649. 

By  Court-Roules  above,  I  fuppofe  Mr.  Holme 
meant  Plea-Rolls.  This  tract  feems  to  be  imperfect. 

15.  Ext 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


431 


Num.  2071. 

15.  Extracts  from  other  Deeds,  &c.  relating  to 

Chelter-  Abbey.  1Qo. 

1 6.  Notes  concerning  the  concealed  Lands  in  Chefhire, 

granted  by  Q.  Elizabeth  to  Peter  Gray  &  Richard  his 
1'on  ;  and  by  them,  to  Lancelot  Bollock  &  Francis 
Hitchcock.  103. 

1 7.  The  Deed  of  Purchafc,  &c.  for  Bollock  &  Hitch¬ 
cock  from  the  Grays.  1 03. 

18.  A  breife  Note  of  all  fuch  Parcells  of  the  faid  con¬ 

cealed  Lands,  as  were  fold  &  granted  in  Fee  farme  by 
the  faid  Bollock  &  Hitchcock.  104.  b. 

19.  Particular  Valuation  of  the  Rectory  ofPrellburie, 

anno  19  Elizabethan  Reginan.  105. 

This  Rectory  feems  then  to  have  been  in  the  Hands 
of  the  Lady  Egerton,  who  enjoyed  alfo  many  other 
Advowfons,  Penfions,  See.  arifing  from  Church-Lands  ; 
as  appears  by  that  which  follows  the  Valuation  above 
mentioned.  io^  bi 

20.  A  note  of  concealed  Lands,  Tythes,  See.  in  the 

poffellion  of  the  Dean  &  Chapter  of  Chelter.  ibid. 

2t.  Notes  fee m in g  to  be  collected  from  fome  Char- 
tulary  of  Sl.  Werbuig’s  Abbey.  106. 

22.  A  Confirmatory  Charter  of  Ranulph  n.  Earl  of 
Chelter,  to  the  faid  Abbey  ;  copied  from  the  Original  in 
the  polfeflion  of  John  Edwards  of  Churley.  106.  b. 

23.  Copies  of  certain  old  Deeds  relating  to  the  Church 

of  Altbury.  1Q^ 

24.  A  Copie  of  an  Award  betwixt  John  Abbot  of 
the  Monaflerie  of  Sl.  Warburge,  &  the  Maior  &  Citi¬ 
zens  of  the  Citie  of  Chelter  :  made  anno  1  Henr.  vm. 

13 1 . 

25.  Statura  Ecclefire  Cathedralis  Chrifti  &  B.  Maria: 

Virginis  Celtriae,  edita  per  Sereniinmum  ac  Potentiflimum 
Principem  Henricutn  Odtavum,  136. 

26.  The  latter  part  of  certain  Letters  Patents  made  by 

Queen  Elizabeth  to  William  &  John  Glafeor,  &  to  the 
Dean  &  Chapter  of  Chelter,  anno  Regni  22.  152. 

27.  Qu.  Elizabeth’s  Letters  to  the  Fee  Fermors  of 

the  Church  of  Chelters  Lands  :  bearing  Telle  in  the  22 
year  of  her  Reign.  1 52.  b. 

28.  The  State  of  the  Caufe  touching  the  Dean  & 

Chapter  of  Chelter,  &  their  Lands  ;  as  related  to  the 
Commiflioners.  t b 

29.  'A  Breviatt  of  the  State  of  the  Caufe  betweene  her 

Majeltie  Qu.  Elizabeth  &  the  Fee-Farmers  of  the  Land 
late  belonging  to  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Chelter:  as 
related  by  them  to  the  Commiflioners.  ibid. 

30.  The  Articles  of  the  Auditors  Report  to  Sir  Wal¬ 
ter  Mildmay,  &  the  Mailer  of  the  Routes,  in  the  Caufe 
of  the  Deane  &  Chapter,  and  the  Fee-Farmers.  1 58. 

3 1 .  Petitions  made  &  exhibited  on  the  behalfe  of 

the  Fee-Farmers  of  the  Lands  late  of  the  Deane  &  Chapter 
of  Chelter.  .  ibid. 

32.  Her  Majelties  CommilTion  to  certain  of  the  Lords 

of  her  Privey  Councell,  who  had  to  heave  &  determine 
the  Caufe  of  Chelter,  A.  D.  1579.  1 58.  b. 

33-  Mr-  Serjeant  Popham’s  Opinion  touching  Chelter- 
caufe.  ijp4 

34.  The  Order  fett  downe  by  the  Commiflioners, 
touching  the  matter  of  Chelter,  A.  D.  1579.  x 59.  b. 

35.  The  humble  Petitions,  to  the  Commiflioners,  of 

Rafe  Calvcley  &  James  Glafier  poore  Leflees  for  them- 
lelves  &  the  reft  of  the  Leflees.  160.  b. 

36.  A  Difcourfe  betwene  William  Glaflor  &  James 
Glafeor  his  Sonne,  how  far  Chefter-mattcr  hath  pro¬ 
ceeded,  &  what  the  Valew  of  the  Church-Lands  be. 

16 -. 

37.  The  Rentall  of  all  and  Angular  Manors,  Lands, 
Tenements,  &  Elereditamens,  &  all  other  Pofleflions 
whatfoever  of  the  late  Abby  of  St.  Werburg  of  Chelter 
(except  the  Manors  of  Abbots  Cotton,  Church-Langton, 
&  Welton)  lurveyed  by  William  Bolles  Efq;  and  John 
Wifeman  in  the  Month  of  June,  anno  32  Henr.  vniT 

i6x.  b. 


Num.  2071. 

3S.  The  Names  of  the  Fee-Far  mors  ;  and  what  Lands 
they  hold  from  the  Church  of  Chelter.  162.  b. 

39-  I  he  Surrender  of  the  Abby-Lands  in  Chefhire, 
to  Queen  Elizabeth,  by  the  faid  Fee- Farmers.  163.  b. 

40.  I  he  Bill  about  concealed  Lands  of  the  faid  Abbey. 

164. 

41.  Robert  Hitchcocks  Anfwer  to  the  Bill.  ibid, 
lhis  is  followed  by  fome  other  Anfwers  of  Francis 

Hitchcock,  Lancelot  Bollock,  See. 

42.  A  breefe  Abftract  conferning  the  late  Abbey- 

Lands  of  Cheller  ;  how  they  hauc  byn  enjoyed  fince  the 
Suppreflion  of  the  fame,  A  proued  concealed,  fubltraifted 
or  wrongfully  detayned  from  her  Majeltie  Queen  Eliza- 

beth.  165. 

4.3-  -A  breele  Abllract  conferning  Her  Majelties 
Graunte  in  Pie- Farme,  of  all  the  fayd  Lands  to  Peter 
Grey  &  Edward  Grey,  ann.  9  R.  Eliz.  166. 

44.  Valuation  of  the  Lands  remaining  in  Hitchcock 
(being  the  Suruivor  of  Bollock)  with  the  Names  of  the 
Occupiers.  ibid. 

4 5-  Pofleflions  graunted  by  Bollock  &  Hitchcock  to 
Mr.  Knight.  166.  b. 

Here  is  a  Narration  of  fome  proceedings  in  this 
Caule  hinted  as  eafy  to  be  done  ;  but  Attle  to  the  Ad¬ 
vantage  of  the  Cathedral  Church  which  then  lay  vnpaued, 
like  a  Bame-flower,  or  of  the  Deane  &  Chapter,  who 
weie  not  there  all  the  whole  yeare  except  twenty  dayes 
before  Chriftmafs,  to  l'eceaue  their  Rents,  S:  make 
Diuifion  thereof  amonge  them  :  and  after  whofe  Deathe, 
their  Penfions  might  dye  alfo. 

46.  tv ames  of  Gentlemen  Fee-Farmors,  who  haue 
pure  ha  fed  Hitchcocks  Title  to  flrcngthen  &  makegood 
their  own. 

47.  Names  of  Gentlemen  Fce-Farmors  who  haue  not 

yet  concluded  for  Hitchcocks  Title.  ibid. 

48.  The  Valuation  of  all  the  Bilhopricks  in  England, 

which  they  have  payd  formerly  to  the  Pope :  and  what 
they  were  in  the  yeare  1600,  valued  in  the  Queenes 
Booke.  169.  b< 

49.  Rates  of  the  Tenths  &  Subfidies  paid  in  each 

Deanary  throughout  Chefhire,  to  the  King  &  Billiop  of 
Chelter.  lyQ^ 

50.  Valuation  of  the  feveral  Deanaries  within  the 

Arch  deaconries  of  C.hefter  &  Richmond  ;  as  alfo  of  the 
Bifhopricke  of  Chelter.  ty2, 

51.  Valuation  of  the  feveral  Beneflces  within  the  Bi- 

fhoprick  of  Chelter,  with  their  Tenths,  &  the  Names 
of  their  Patrons  ;  taken  A.  1),  1648.  ibid. 

52.  Notes  concerning  the  Rectory  of  Childwall ;  the 

Prebend  of  Bolton  in  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Lich- 
Aeld  ;  the  Rectory  of  Patricke-Brompton  in  Com.  Ebor. 
and  the  Re&orie  of  Kirkbie-Ravenfmarth  in  eodem  Co- 
mitatu.  j 

53.  Collectanea  e  Regiftris  F.pifcopatus  Conventrenfls 
et  Lichfeldenfis,  in  cultodia  Magri  Archibald  de  Licli- 
feild,  A.  D.  1 649. 

54.  Notes  concerning  the  Originall  of  Chapells.  196! 

55.  A  true  Catalogue  of  all  the  Parilh-Churches  or 

Mother-Churches,  with  all  the  Parochiall  Chapells  within 
the  Mother-Churches,  with  other  Chapells  of  F.afe  & 
Domeltick  Chapells,  within  the  County  Palatine  of 
Cheller,  as  they  lye  in  the  feueral  Hundreds ;  with  all 
the  Townfliips  which  are  in  euery  of  the  faid  Churches 
&  Chapells.  (  This  was  written  by  the  third  Randle 
Holme  A.  D.  1662.)  *  1Q_ 

56.  Index  Virorum  :  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  thofe 
Perfons  Names  who  are  mentioned  in  this  Book.  At  the 
end. 

2072; 

A  Book  in  folio  written  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme, 

and  containing  his  Extracts  from  the  Rolls,  kept 

as  Records  in  Chelter  :  of  which,  I  lhall  give  only  the 

following  brief  account  : 

J.  Tfie 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2072. 

t.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Lilt  of  the  Things  of 
principal!  Note  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Extracts  from  the  Chefter-Rolls  of  ann.  10  Regis 

Edwardi  1 .  1  ■ 

3.  How  Will,  de  Tableley  recover’d  his  Lands,  of 

which  he  had  enfeoffed  Godfrey  Efmerillon ;  being  in 
Prifon,  and  through  conftraint.  4.  b. 

4.  Extracts  from  the  Plea-Rolls  of  the  Court  of  Make- 

lb  field,  for  the  13,  14,  15,  t6,  Sc  18  year  of  K.  Ed¬ 
ward  r .  6. 

Here  we  may  find  that 

5.  Rogerus  de  Monte-alto,  Thomas  de  Orreby,  et 
Ricardus  de  Vernon  Dns.  de  Merpil,  habent  20  Libratas 
Terre,  et  non  Milites.  6.  et  vid.  7.  et  41.  b.  et  42.  b. 

6.  A  large  Prcfentment  was  made  of  many  who  had 

killed  Deer  in  the  Forell  of  Macclesfield.  7.  b. 

7.  That  K.  Edw.  1 .  when  Earl  of  Chefter,  granted  a 

Market  Sc  a  Fair  to  be  kept  at  Stokport ;  at  which,  the 
Men  ot  Macclesfield  ought  to  be  free  from  Toll  &  Stal¬ 
lage.  9. 

8.  The  Abba t  of  Deulacrefle  was  indicted  for  killing 
Sc  carrying  away  two  Stags  from  the  faid  Forell.  9.  b. 

9.  Ho\y  Richard  de  Sutton  being  impleaded  for  hold¬ 

ing  two  Bov. its  of  Land,  formerly  part  of  the  Demefnes 
of  the  Manor  of  Macclesfield;  owned  that  he  could 
produce  no  Charter  proving  his  Right,  becaufe  all.  his 
Muniments  were,  by  misfortune,  burnt  in  the  firft  War 
which  K.  Edw.  1.  had  with  the  Wellhmen.  Upon 
which,  his  Right  was  allowed.  9.  b. 

1.0.  Petition  of  the  Freeholders  in  the  Hundred  of 
Macclesfield,  that  their  appearing  in  Court  upon  Sum¬ 
mons  ihorter  than  ordinary,  for  the  Convenience  of  the 
Oueens  Steward,  lliould  not  be  made  into  a  Prece¬ 
dent.  10. 

1  1 .  Their  Verdict  about  the  method  of  Proceedings 
in  the  Hundred-Courts  of  Chefhire.  ibid. 

12.  How  Richard  de  Vernon  claimed  that  He  Sc  his 
Tenants  of  Merpil  &  Wyberlc,  (hould  be  free  from 
Toll  &  Stallage  in  the  Mercat  of  Macclesfield.  10.  b. 

13.  Privileges  &  Immunities  claimed  by  the  Abbats 

of  Cheiter.  1 1 .  et  vid.  12. 

14  Privileges  &  Immunities  claimed  by  the  Abbats 
ofDeulacres.  n.b. 

1  - .  Adam  de  Wythington,  Bedell  of  the  Hundred  of 
Macclesfield,  in  confideration  of  40  Shillings  (a  round 
Sum  in  thole  times)  refigns  his  Office  folemnly.  ibid. 

16.  IIow  R.uulf  Earl  of  Cheiter  firft  made  Maccles¬ 
field  a  Borough.  12. 

17.  The  Claim  of  Peter  de  Ardern  in  Rode,  Aldri- 

thelega,  &  Makelisfeud.  1 2.  b. 

Then  follow, 

18.  Extratts  from  the  PI  a-RolIs  of  the  County  of 

Chefter,  for  the  15th  year  of  K.  Edward  1.  14. 

19.  Inquifitio  fuper  annuo  Valore  Do  ninij  de  Brum- 

feld  Sc  Yale,  ac  Caftri  de  Dinalbran.  14*  b. 

20.  Robert  Abbat  of  Vale-Royal  was  Baylifle  to 
Roger  Bifliop  of  Covcntre  &  L’chfcld,  as  to  all  his 

1 7.  1). 

ci.  A  flout  Law-fuit  between  the  Abbats  of  Chefter 
A  Bafingwerk,  for  the  Advoufon  of  the  Church  of  Welt- 
Kirkc'oy,  whole  Incumbents  had  in  former  Times  held 
the  fame  bv  hereditary  Succeffion,  untill  the  time  of  the 
Council  held  by  Pope  Innocent  in.  at  the  Lateran -Palace, 
wherein  u  was  enacted  (if  1  may  fo  fay)  that  no  Eccle- 
lir.ltical  Benefice,  for  the  future,  (hould  devolve  by  here¬ 
ditary  Succdfion.  (See  further  in  this  Catalogue,  Num. 
2060 — 44.)  18. 

I  am  informed,  that  fome  late  Clergymen  of  our 
Church,  by  Money,  have  evaded  the  force  of  that  Canon, 
and  fucceeded  their  Fathers  in  the  fame  Benefice  with¬ 
out  fear  or  flume  :  one  example  of  this  kind,  is  now  at 
Covcntre. 

•Then  follow, 

22.  Extracts  from  certain  Plea-Rolls  of  the  County 


Num.  1072,  2073. 

Palatine  of  Chefter,  for  the  15th  &  16th  years,  of  X. 
Edward  1.  £0. 

2  3.  Extracts  from  like  Rolls,  for  part  of  the  16th 
year,  and  the  whole  17th  year  of  K.  Edward,  t.  27. 

Here  I  find, 

24.  A  Copie  of  the  Agreement  made  between  Si tnon 

Abbat  of  Chefter,  &  the  Citizens  of  the  fame  City,  con¬ 
cerning  the  Place  where  the  annual  Fair  of  Sl.  Warburg 
fhould  be  held.  28. 

Then  follow, 

25.  Extra£ts  from  like  Rolls,  for  part  of  the  20th 

year,  &  for  the  2  ift  year  of  K.  Edward  1.  36. 

Here  I  find  mention  of 

26.  A  particular  Privilege  granted  to  the  Abbey  of 

Vale-Royal,  by  the  King  its  Founder.  43.  b. 

Then  follow, 

27.  Extracts  from  like  Rolls,  for  the  22  year  of  K. 

Edward  1.  46. 

Here  I  find, 

28.  A  particular  Protection  granted  by  the  King,  as  to 
the  Goods  Sc  Eftate  of  Henry  de  Lafcy  Earl  of  Lincoln, 
who  was  about  to  make  a  Voyage  to  Gafcoign.  46.  b. 

Then  follow, 

29.  Extracts  from  like  Rolls,  for  part  of  the  fourth 

Year,  &  for  the  fifth  Year  of  K.  Edward  11.  73. 

Among  other  matters  here  is, 

30.  A  View,  or  Court,  held  about  the  expeditating 

of  Dogs.  77. 

31.  A  Writt  iffued  for  arrefting  the  Archdeacon  of 
Chefter  and  his  Clerks,  viz.  Robert  de  Rodefwells  the 
Archdeacon,  Robert  de  Frodefhara.  his  Official,  Will. 
Wyfh,  Rural  Dean  of  Chefter,  Richard  Vicar  of  Aide, 
Lime,  Dean  of  Wich-Malbank,  Sc  Henry  de  Leftewich 
Dean  of  North-Wich,  for  unduly  dragging  the  People 
into  their  Court  Chriftian,  and  (in  order  to  extort  money 
from  them)  compelling  them  to  anfwer,  notwilhftand- 
the  Kings  Prohibitions  to  the  contrary,  upon  Pleas  of 
many  kinds,  not  relating  to  Wills  or  Matrimony,  &c.  | 

81.  b.  et  vid.  76. 

32.  A  Mandate  iffued  for  finding  out  thofe  who  were 

Foreftallers  of  Victuals  j  upon  which  divers  Citizens  of 
Chefter  were  indicted.  83. 

33.  Another,  for  enquiring  after  Felons  Sc  other 

Malefaftors.  S3,  b. 

Next  follow,  but  at  a  diftance, 

34.  Extracts  from  like  Rolls,  tor  part  of  the  Twelfth, 

&  for  the  Thirteenth  Year  of  K.  Edward  in.  111. 

Here  I  obferve,  that, 

35.  When  Oliver  de  Ingham  was  fued  in  his  Abfence 

in  Gafcoigne,  his  Attorney  produced  the  Kings  Pro¬ 
tection  (granted  by  Reafon  of  his  taking  that  Voyage) 
whereby  he  was  freed  from  all  A£lions  except  1  Pleas  de 
Dote,  Unde  nihil  habef,  &  Ouare  impedit,  A  Affifa  Nove 
Difleifine,  &  Ultime  Prefentationis,  for  a  certain  time 
limited.  114.  b. 

36.  How  Robert  Abbat  of  Cumbermere  came  into 
the  County-Court,  bringing  with  him  the  Kings  Charter 
of  Confirmation  of  the  Pofleffions  A  Privileges  granted 
to  his  Abbey,  which  he  defired  might  be  inrolled.  1 16. 

37.  IIow  Will,  de  Sutton  being  arraigned  for  a  Rob¬ 

bery,  pretending  to  be  dumb,  refufed  to  plead,  and 
was  therefore  remitted  to  Prifon,  there  to  fuller  the 

Law.  1 2 1 .  b. 

38.  ExtraCts  from  like  Rolls  of  ann.  42.  44.  &  45.  1 

R.  Edw.  in.  about  a  Way  called  Lode  Way  A  Rode  ! 
Way,  leading  from  Torpurleghc  to  Wynterford-fychc  | 
near  Fariihale.  128.  loofe. 

2073, 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  a  Parcel  of  Prints  A 
Drawings  of  various  kinds,  put  together  without  any 
order  ;  and  being  but  little  expeCted  among  Manu- 
feripts,  I  ffiall  fay  the  lefs  of  them  here  :  obferving  only, 
as  I  turn  them  over  that  I  find,  among  them 
1 1 


1.  A 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


433 


Num.  2073,  2074. 

t.  A  Prim  of  our  bleffed  Savior  crucified  ;  engraven 
by  Theodore  Galle.  1. 

2.  ProfpeCts  of  Ciiurches,  in  feveral  Counties,  engra¬ 
ven  on  ftnall  Plates,  fol.  1.  b.  and  fo  forwards  on  the  fe- 
cond  Side  of  the  Leaf. 

3.  An  hafty,  unfiniflied  Drawing  of  the  In-fide  of  fome 

Popifh  Church.  2. 

4.  The  greateft  part  of  Daniel  Kings  ProfpeCts  of 
Cathedral  &  Conventual  Churches  ;  the  Prints  in  no 
Order,  fol.  3.  and  fo  forwards,  on  the  firft  Side  of  the 
Leaves. 

5.  A  Drawing  of  Comb- Abbey  in  Warwickfhire. 

4.  &  vid.  82. 

6.  Some  little  Drawings  of  Churches.  8.b.  8c  9.  b. 

7.  A  Drawing  of  the  old  Church  of  Sl.  Faith,  as  it 

was  under  Sc  Pauls  Cathedral,  of  London.  1 2. 

8.  Dan.  King,  or  David  Loggans  Print,  giving  various 
Profpects  of  St.  Pauls  Cathedral.  A.  D.  1658  13.  et  68. 

9.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Drawing^  of  feveral 

antient  Buildings  in  Chefter,  as  Churches,  Religious 
Houfes,  C.aflle,  Bridge,  Crofs,  &c.  with  written  Accounts 
of  fome  of  them.  j  4.  b.  &c.  et  vid.  74. 

10.  Ground-plot  of  the  Inner  Ward  of  Denbigh- 

Caltle.  32. 

11.  Ground-plot  of  Norton-Abbey  in  Chefhire. 

32.  A. 

12.  A  Print  of  the  Old  Royal  Exchange  in  London. 

39- 

13.  A  Printed  ProfpeQ:  of  Crew-hall  in  Chefhire  42. 

14.  A  Drawing  &  Ground-piot  of  Wrilhen-Caftle. 

„  43- 

1 5.  Ground  Plots  &  Draught  of  the  Caftle  of  Shot- 

wick.  _  _  _  45.  47. 

16.  Unfiniflied  View  of  Lion-Caftle,  alias  Holt,  in 

Flint  (hire.  46. 

17.  Plot  of  the  Towne  cf  North-Wich  in  Chefhire. 

49.  b. 

1 3.  Seaven  Prints  of  the  Triumphal  Arches,  fett  up 
by  the  Citizens  of  London,  and  through  which  K.  James 

1.  rode,  the  day  before  his  Coronation:  engraven  by 
Stephen  Harrifon.  105.  b.  &c. 

59  Print  of  the  Town  of  Kingfton  upon  Hull  & 
River- of  Humber.  120. 

20.  The  Print  as  reprefenting  Hugh  Lupus  Earle  of 

Chefter  fitting  in  his  Parliament,  with  the  Barons  & 
Abbots  of  his  Countie-Palatine.  122. 

This  is  not  only  bibulous  ;  but  unfkilfully  invented 
or  put  together. 

21.  A  printed  ProfpeCt  of  Chefter,  w'ith  its  Ground- 

Plot,  &c.  123. 

22.  A  printed  Map  of  Chefhire.  124. 

2:.  Several  Prints,  relating  to  the  Ifle  of  Man  ;  per¬ 
haps  by  Wenceflaus  Hollar.  125. 

2a .  A  Print  of  the  Earl  of  Straffords  Execution.  127. 

25.  Printed  Pi ofpects  of  Cambridge  8c  Oxford  ;  with 

the  Anues  of  the  feveral  Colleges  there.  128. 

26.  Small  Views  of  feveral  Churches,  Caftles,  & 

Bridges  j  by  Daniel  King.  130. 

2074. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  fundry  T rafts  8c  fingle 
Papers  (written  by  the  fecond  and  third  Randle 
Holme,  £c  many  others)  and  on  the  out-fide  entituled, 
by  the  perfon  la  ft  mentioned,  “  Deeds  of  feuerall  Che- 
fliire  Families  who  alfo,  in  this  Book,  as  well  as  in 
others,  imitated  his  Fathers  in  giving  Pricks  of  all 
Seals,  as  they  occurred.  In  describing  this  Book,  I 
fliall  proceed  in  the  method  I  have  tiled  with  others 
of  this  kind,  by  obferving, 

1.  ’1  he  third  Randle  Holme’s  Lifts  cf  the  Things  of 
mod  Note  contained  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Index  Locorum  :  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  the 
Names  of  Places  mentioned  in  this  Collection. 

3.  AbftraCt  of  the  Kings  Patent  granted  to  John  Van 
Cat.  Harx.  Vox..  II. 


Num.  2074. 

Haefdonke,  for  inclofing  Saltney  &  Chefter  Marfhes : 
w'hich  Project  came  to  nothing,  by  reafon  of  the  Op- 
pofition  he  met  with  from  the  Free-holders.  122. 

4.  Forme  of  the  Writt  conftituting  a  Shireve  of  Che¬ 
fhire.  124. 

5.  An  Original  Petition  of  Roger  Bothe  Efq;  to  the 

Princes  Counlel  in  the  Marches,  againft  William  Lawn- 
flyn  of  Pulton-Launflyne,  for  occupying  a  certeyne 
Ground  called  Hargreve.  127.  A. 

6.  Copies  of  Sir  Peter  Leicefter’s  Abftracts  of  feveral 

old  Deeds  in  the  pofleffion  of  widow  Glover  of  Pick- 
mere  A.  I)  1 66?.  1 28. 

Thefe  principally  relate  to  the  Town  of  Pickniere, 
8c  to  the  Family  which  took  its  Name  from  it. 

7.  Sir  Peter  Leicefters  AbftraCts  of  divers  old  Deeds 

in  the  pofleffion  of  Sir  Thomas  Mainwaring  of  Petver, 
A.  D.  1656.  130. 

Thele  principally  relate  to  the  antient  Family  of 
Mainwaring. 

8.  Collectanea  ex  Cards  lohannis  Arderne  de  Har¬ 
den  in  Bredburv  Armigeri,  A.  I).  1652.  132. 

Thefe  chiefly  concern  the  antient  Family  of 
Arderne. 

9.  AbftraCts  of  Charters  relating  to  the  fame  Family, 

as  they  were  found  in  the  Collections  of  John  Booth 
Gent.  A.  D.  1 65  3  :  from  a  Book  of  Mr.  Sampfon  Erdef- 
wicke.  136.  b. 

10.  ColleCtanea  ex  Cards  Edwardi  Hide  de  Hide 

Armigeri,  A.  D.  1653.  137.  b. 

'1  hefe  relate  chiefly  to  the  Family  of  Hyde. 

1 1 .  Extracts  from  the  Deeds  of  William  Brereton  of 

Brereton  Efq;  as  they  were  inferted  into  his  Pedegree, 
about  A.  D.  1 578.  142. 

12.  Copies,  or  Extracts,  from  the  Evidences  of  Mr. 

John  Warren  of  Puynton  Baron  of  Stopford,  A.  D. 
I£77*  .  .49.  b. 

Thefe  relate  chiefly  to  the  Family  of  Warren  ;  and 
are  followed  by  fome  other  Extracts  from  Deeds  in  the 
pofleffion  of  William  Aylmer  of  Pcntroughan  Efq;  and 
of  Sir  Arthur  Mainwaring  Kt.  A.  D  157  1. 

13.  UncorreCt  Copies  of  certain  poetical  Charters, 
pre' ended  to  have  been  granted  by  K.  Edward  the  Con- 
feffor,  and  K.  William  the  Conqueror  t-  Norman  Hunter, 
Paulin  Rovdon,  8c  Randolfe  Peperitinge.  151.  b . 

14.  Coppies  of  Deeds  8 c  Notes  belonging  to  the 
Family  ot  Mobberley  of  Mobberley,  A.  1).  658.  152. 

Notwiihftanding  this  Title,  fome  of  the  e  ExtraCts 
were  made  from  Deeds  belonging  to  others ;  as  Mr. 
Danyel  of  Tal  ley,  Mr.  Leicefter  of  Tabley.  Mr.  William 
Vernon,  Mr.  Leicefter  of  Toft ;  befides  others  which 
relate  not  to  that  Family. 

15.  ExtraCts  from  the  Evidences  of  Mr.  Leyccfter  of 
Tofte,  as  they  were  taken  by  Mr.  William  Veinon. 

J57- 

16.  ExtraCts  from  Five  Deeds  in  the  pofleffion  of  Mr. 

Ralf  Snead  of  Kecle  A.  D.  1649.  158. 

They  relate  to  the  Family  of  Leycefler,  & c. 

1  7.  A  fhort  Defcenl  ol  Hugh  Keviliok  Earl  of  Chefter, 
Sc  of  his  Pofterity.  158.  A. 

1 8.  ExtraCts  from  feveral  Deeds  8e  Records,  relating 
chiefly  to  Chefhire  Families  8c  Matters.  158.  B. 

j  9.  ExtraCts  from  Deeds,  with  other  Notes  relating 
to  the  Noble  Eamily  of  Lacy,  &c.  158.  C. 

Here  are  Deeds  and  Records  mixed  ;  and  the  Ex¬ 
tracts  are  made  from  Inftruments  in  the  Hands  of  different 
Perfons,  viz.  Richard  J  ownely  of  Towneley  Efq;  Mr. 
John  Afpinall  of  Standon,  Mr.  Henry  Hil.on  of  the 
Barrow-foid,  John  Nowell  of  Little  Mearley  Efq;  8ec. 

Among  thefe,  I  find 

20.  A  t  opie  of  the  Charter  granted  to  the  Borough 
ofClitherow,  by  K.  Edward  hi.  anno  regni  fui  Anglias 
20.  161. 

Then  follow', 

2t.  Coppys  of  Deeds  &  other  Records  for  rather 
5  S  AbftraCts) 


434 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2074-. 


Abilracts)  taken  out  of  Mr.  William  Vernons  Liber  C. 
all  of  them  concern  Chefhire,  &c.  1 66. 

22.  Here  I  find  fome  Entries  about  the  Church  of 

Namptwich,  procured  from  Mr.  Wilbraham  of  that  place 
and  others.  1 66.  A. 

23.  Carta  Ranulfi  de  Blondevilla  Comitis  Ceftrenfis, 

qua  concedit  multimodas  Libertates  ac  Privilegia  Bur- 
genfibus  fuis  de  Frodelham.  168.  b. 

24.  Charter  of  Qu.  Elizabeth  confirming  the  Privile¬ 
ges  before  granted  to  the  Borough  of  Frodelham  ;  and 
reciting  the  former  Charters  by  Infpeximus.  1 69. 

25.  Carta  Fundationis  Abbatite  de  Puntona  (five  Pul- 
t  ne)  per  Robertun:  Pincernam  Comitis  Cell  rite.  174. 

20.  Carta  Hamonis  de  Mafi'v,  de  eligendis  futuris 
Prioribus  Monailerio  Je  Birkenhed.  174.  b. 

27.  An  Agreement  between  William  de  Tableghe  & 

Richard  de  MalTj  e,  about  the  Profits  accruing  from  the 
Mercat,  Fair,  &  Court,  granted  by  the  King  to  the  faid 
William,  for  the  Town  oi  Knoltesford.  177.  b. 

28.  The  Boundaries  of  the  I.ordlhip  or  Fee  of  Brere- 

ton,  fett  forth  in  a  Charter  of  Hugh  de  Venables,  Lord 
of  Kinderton,  A.D.  1336.  186.  b. 

29.  Boundaries  of  the  Demefnes  of  Croxton  fett  forth 
in  two  Charters  of  Richard  de  Croxton.  188.  1S9. 

30.  Charter  of  Henrie  Lacy  Earl  of  Lincoln  &  Con- 

ftable  ol  Chefter,  whereby  he  made  the  Village  of  Con- 
gleton  a  Free  Borough,  and  gave  its  BurgelTes  many 
Privileges.  194. 

3  Confirmation  of  the  AJvowfon  ofSanbach-Church 
to  the  Abbey  ofDculacres,  by  Richard  Lord  of  Sanbach, 
anno  43  R.  Ilearicim.  194.  b.  et  vid.  195. 

3  2 .  Boundaries  of  Haflelgreve  fpecilied  in  a  Charter 
of  Warin  de  Vermin.  1 95.  b. 

33.  Charter  of  Ranulph  de  Geronijs  Earl  of  Chef- 

ter.  wh.ereby  he  granted  the  Honor  of  Halton  &  Confta- 
blefliip  of  C  heflerto  Eudace  Fita-john.  197. 

34.  Boundaties  of  Chelllord  fett  forth  in  an  Agreement 

between  Simon  Abbat  of  Chefter,  William  Lord  of 
Snellefton,  &  Ralfde  Modburlege.  198. 

35.  A  Protc&ion  granted  to  two  Welfli  Coinmi(fion- 

eis  coming  into  Chefhire  peaceably,  in  order  to  treat  of 
certain  matters  with  the  Commiflioners  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales  as  Earl  of  Chelter.  dat.  23  Junij,  anno  6  R.  Heu- 
vici  iv.  200.  b. 


Thefe  Abftracts  tranferibed  from  Mr.  Vernon’s 
Liber  C.  (as  is  obferved  above  at  §  21.)  concern  not  only 
very  many  antient  Families,  but  all'o  many  particular 
lowns,  &ce.  in  the  feveral  Hundreds  of  Chefhire.  And 
it  is  further  noted,  that  Mr.  Vernon  had  his  Materials 
from  Mr.  Roger  Dodfvvorth  ;  Mr.  Thomas  Marburie  of 
MarburyA.  1).  1626.  Sir  Edmund  Fitlon Baronet,  A.  D. 
1636,  John  Millington,  A.  D.  1647.  Mrs.  Eleanor 
Dutton;  Peter  Daniel  Efq;  A.D.  1638.  Mr  John 
Vav.dray,  A.  D.  1627.  Mr.  William  Haiecourt,  A.D. 
1633.  Sir.  John  Oldfield,  A.D.  1642.  a  Coucher-book 
in  the  Duchy-Office  of  I.ancaftcr  ;  Mr.  Downes  of 
bh  igley,  A.  D.  1654.  Thomas  Cotton  of  Cotton, 
Efq;  A.D.  1649.  Sir  John  Davenport,  A.D.  1623. 
Mr.  John  Booth,  A.  D.  1651.  Mr.  William  Vernon  of 
Shakerlev,  A.  1).  1649.  Henry  Maimvaring  Efq;  the 
Tower  of  London,  &c. 

Then  follow, 

36.  Like  Extracts  from  Charters  &  other  auncient 
Records  remaineing  in  the  Tower  of  London  ;  taken  by 
Mr.  Will.  Vernon,  &  entred  into  his  Liber  C.  201.  b. 

Here  I  find, 

37.  An  Extent  of  the  Maner  of  Frodfliam,  made 

anno  8  R.  Edwardi  1.  Jbid. 

38.  Grant  of  a  Mercat  (&  Fair)  made  by  the  King  to 

the  Monks  of  Chefter,  for  their  Maner  of  BromLurge. 
dat.  anno  8  Edwardi  1.  202> 

39.  Grant  of  a  Mercat  &  Fair,  to  Philip  Burnel  & 
If.  bell  his  Wife,  at  their  Maner  of  MCpas.  uat.  a.ino  9 
.R.  Edwardi  1. 


Num.  207/4. 


40.  Grant  of  a  Fair,  made  by  the  King  to  the  Men 
of  Newcaftle  (under  Lime  ?)  anno  9  Regis  Edwardi  11 

202 

4r-  Grant  of  a  Mercat  Sc  Fair  to  the  Convent  of  Vale- 
Royal,  for  their  Maner  of  Owere  in  Com.  Ceftr.  dat. 
anno  10  R.  Edw.  1.  ibid. 

4~-  Grant  of  a  Mercat  Sc  Fair  to  Hugh  de  Thorperley, 
to  be  held  at  his  Maner  of  Thorperley.  dat.  anno  9  five 
10  R.  Edwardi  1.  ibid. 

43.  Grant  of  a  Mercat  &  Fair  to  Henry  de  Lacy  Earl 
of  Lincoln,  at  his  Maner  of  Congleton  :  anno  to  ejuf- 
dem  Regis.  202.  b. 

44-  Grant  of  a  Fair  to  Robert  Biftiop  of  Bath  & 
Wells,  at  his  Maner  of  Wich  Maubanke  (i.  e.  Nampt¬ 
wich)  dat.  anno  1 1  R.  Edwardi  1.  ibid. 

45.  A  Writ  of  King  Edward  1.  dire&ed  to  Reginald 
de  Grey  Juft  ice  of  Chefter,  commanding  him  to  go  per- 
fonally  to  Overton,  and  there  aftigne  to  the  BurgelTes,  or 
fuch  as  would  become  Inhabitants,  competent  Lands 
within  the  Demefnes  of  Overton  Caftle,  &  Wood  to 
build  them  Burgages  with,  &c.  anno  Regni  2  1.  ibid. 

4f>-  Grant  of  a  Mercat  &  Fair  to  Tho.  de  Aldelim, 
at  his  Maner  of  Aldelym.  dat.  aim.  24  R.  Edwardi  1. 

203.  b. 

47.  Grant  of  a  Mercat  &  Fair  to  Walter  de  Langeton 
Biftiop  of  Coventre  &  Lichfeld,  at  his  Maner  of  Burton 
in  Wirehale  in  Com  Ceftr.  dat.  anno  27  R.  Edw.  i- 

ibid. 


Then  follow, 

48.  Some  other  Extracts  from  the  Records  in  the 

Tower  of  London,  relating  to  Chelhire.  209. 

49.  The  Rental  of  Francis  Earle  of  Shrewfbury,  in 

the  County  of  Chefter,  A.D.  165S.  2.-9.  B. 

50.  The  Bounds  of  Little  Budworth.  209.  D.  b. 

51.  Extracts  from  other  Deeds  relating  to  the  Copen- 

hale  &  other  Places  in  Chefliire.  (  210. 

Among  thefe  I  find, 

52.  A  Note  about  the  Parifh  Sc  Church  of  Crofton, 


21 1.  A.  b. 


Then  come, 

53*  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Charter  of  Confirmation, 
granted  to  the  Burough  of  Macclesfield  ;  wherein  the 
Charters  of  her  Predeceftors  are  recited  by  Infpeximus. 
it  bears  Tcfte,  18  Augufti,  anno  regni  37.  2x3. 

54.  A  like  Charter  granted  by  the  fame  Queen  to  the 

Burough  of  Congleton  :  bearing  'J  efte  9  Junij  anno 
Regni  20:  excepting  that  this  is  in  Englifh,  as  the  for¬ 
mer  is  in  Latin.  217- 

55.  Extracts  from  the  Records  of  the  County-Palatine 

of  Chefter  made  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  A.  I). 
x64o.  219. 

Here  I  find,  among  many  other  matters, 

An  Abftracl  of  a  Deed  bearing  date  anno  28  R. 
Edwardi  111.  to  which  the  Seal  oi  the  City  of  Chefter  was 
appendant ;  upon  the  back-fide  whereof,  is  the  Amies 
of  the  fame  City.  This  fhews  the  Error  of  many,  who 
afterted,  that  the  faid  Armes  were  firft  granted  to  that 
City  by  King  Richard  11.  227. 

.56.  Divers  Precepts  of  Edward  the  Black  Prince  for 
railing  Archers,  &c.  in  Chefhire,  and  fending  them  to 
France  ;  and  for  other  Services.  226.  b.  &c. 

57.  Other  Extra&s  from  the  File  of  Bonds  in  Chcfter- 

Caftell ;  collected  by  the  fame  Randle  Holme,  A.  D. 
1641.  230. 

58.  Notes  concerning  divers  Houfes  in  Chefhire; 

whofe  Titles  were  inquired  after.  234.  A. 

59-  Extra £bs  from  Deeds  in  the  Hands  of  Mr.  Bun- 
bury  ofS.anney  ;  taken  A.  D.  1666.  by  the  third  Randle 
Holme.  235. 

60.  Decree  of  Sir  Robert  Naunton  Kt.  Mafter  of  the 

Court  of  Wards,  touching  the  Claim  of  Mr.  Francis 
Gamul  for  the  Privilege  of  Fifliing  in  the  Cage  and 
Stream-  of  the  River  Dee  ;  anno  9  R.  Caroli  1.  2 .7. 

61.  Carta  qua  Johannes  Abbas  Ceftrice  concedit  Thome 

8  Comiti 


Bibliothecae  Harleiansc 


Num,  2074>  2075^ 

Comiti  Derbie  officium  Senefchalcie  Monafterij  fui,  ac 
omnium  Manerioruin,  Dominiorum,  &c.  fuorum,  pro 
termino  Vitte,  cum  vadijs  five  feodo  40  Solidorum  an- 
nuatim  percipiendorum.  Provifo,  quod  diftus  Comes 
in  aliquo  fe  nonintvomittat  deDimifiione  fiveConcemone 
praeditborum  Manerioruin,  Dominorum,  &c.  dat  20  die 
Novembris,  anno  i  R.  Henrici  Oftavi.  238. 

62.  Litterae  Patentes  R.  Henrici  Oftavi,  quibus  con- 

cedit  Wellelino  Stanley  Militi,  Officium  Vice-comit. 
Comitatus  Palatini  fui  Ceftria;.  Tefte,  &c.  die  20  Be- 
bruarij,  anno  Regni  17.  ^nd. 

63.  Liters  Patentes  R.  Edwardi  vi.  pro  Ereftione 

Scholar  Grammaticalis  in  Macclesfield  infra  Parochiam 
de  Preltbury.  Tefte,  &c.  25  die  Apr'dis,  anno  Regm 
fexto.  *kid. 

64.  Liters  Patentes  ejufdem  Regis,  quibus  confirmat 

Cartam  Ranulfi  quondam  Comitis  Ceftrire,  pro  dea fib¬ 
re  ftatione  Fcodi  Thoms  Difpeufatoris  dc  B.uovve,  ^  Hoc 
fecit  Rex  in  gratiam  Joliannis  Savage  Militis.  lclte, 
&c.  10  die  Martij.  anno  Regni  5.  _  239.  b. 

65.  Nomina  Foreftariorum  Ranulfi  C.eftris.  240- 

66.  Libertates  de  Forefta  de  MacclesfeLua-  ibid. 

6;.  The  Burgers  Oath  of  the  Corporation  of  Maxfeild. 

240.  b. 

6S.  A  Writ  of  Inquirie  for  Concealment  of  Entries  of 
a  Ship  into  the  Exchequer  of  Chefter.  24 1 . 

69.  The  Inquifition&  Retome  vpon  the  fame  Writt, 

that  no  fuch  fniall  Merchandizes  (hall  be  entred  in  the 
Exchequer,  but  before  the  Sheriftes.  ibid. 

70.  How  Alhley,  Affiton,  and  fome  other  Townes  in 

Chcfhirc  are  divided  into  fundrv  Parts  ;  as  being  held 
by  fcveral  Owners  :  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  A.  D. 
1671.  7-43- 

71.  His  Ab drafts  of  Deeds  in  the  poficffion  of  Mr. 
Charles  Wilfon  ofKnutsford,  anno  167 6.  252.  Sc  256. 

72.  Abftrafts  of  fix  old  Inftrumtnts,  in  his  own  pof- 

feflion,  anno  1667.  25^* 

Thefe  all  relate  to  the  Towne  of  Elton. 

73.  Draught  of  the  Inquifition  taken  alter  the  Death 

of  Hugh  de  Holes  Kt.  Lord  of  Elton,  anno  3  R.  Henrici 
Quinti.  Torn.  260.  b. 

~  74.  Part  of  a  Chartulary  relating  to  Lands  lying  in 
Elton,  the  Manor  of  which  was  held,  in  or  about  the 
time  of  K.  Edward  111.  by  Arderne,  Sc  afterward  by 
Wafteneys ;  under  the  Abbat  &  Convent  of  Chefter  as 
chief  Lords.  i<:2. 

This  Fragment  confifts  of  1 1  Leaves  of  very  old 
Paper. 

75.  A  Rentall  of  the  Landes  of  John  Mafiye  late  of 
Coddington  Efq;  (who  deceaftd  the  15  day  of  Oftobcr 

5pi.)  appointed  by  his  lafte  Wyll  is:  leftatnente,  for 
the  levyinge  of  mony  to  the  vie  of  his  Children.  273. 

76.  Payments  made  out  of  the  Lands  of  John  Mafiye 

Efq;  2  76. 

77.  Rents  of  the  Demeanes  of  Crw  (Crew)  at  Mid- 

fomer  1604.  281. 

78.  Moneys  collected  for  the  repair  of  Crofl'c-flatt 

Yate,  and  the  other  Yates  to  the  Bottoms.  286. 

79.  A  Rental  of  all  the  Demcane  Landes  of  Coding- 

ton,  for  the  whole  Yeare  ;  A.  D.  1600.  289. 

So.  Rental  of  Mr.  Fitton  of  Carden’s  Lands.  29 1 . 

81.  Rental  of  the  Townfliip  of  Buerton.  292. 

82.  Parcells  of  Land,  ike.  in  Darley  in  Com.  Ceftr. 

293.  b. 

83.  Towns  in  Adlim-parilli ;  with  their  Rates  in  the 

Mize-books.  294. 

84.  Fragment  of  a  Rental  of  Sir  Richard  Grofvenor’s 

Manoure  of  Macefen,  A.  D.  1618.  295. 

8 5.  Names  of  fuch  perfons  as  are  mentioned  in  this 
Book.  At  the  end. 

2075. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confiding  ofPedegrecs  (or 

rude  Draughts  of  Pedcgrees)  deferibed  on  long  Rolls 


Num.  2075* 


of  Paper,  and  this  on  both  fides ;  now  cut  into  fliorter 
pieces,  &  putt  together  immethodically  :  being  further 
jumbled  together  with  other  loofe  Papers,  and  fo  bound 
up.  This  Colleftion  contains,  fo  far  as  1  can  oblerve, 

1.  The  Defcent  of  Gainull  down  to  Thomas  Gamull 

Recorder  of  Chefter.  7.  5.  3.  1. 

2.  Pcdegree  of  Norres  of  Efpeke-Garfton.  2.  4.  6.  8. 

&  ic. 

3.  Pedegree  of  Stanley  Earl  ofDerby.  16.  14.8c  12; 

4.  Defcents  of  Pulefton,  by  the  third  Randle  Holme. 

15.  A.  15.  B.  &  15. C» 

5.  Dcfcent  of  Gruffith  of  Pantllongdey,  put  down 

narratively,  to  A.  D,  1638.  16. 

6.  A  large  Pedegree  of  Kinardefiey  to  A.  D.  1611. 

taking  in  the  Defcents  of  Balfet  of  Biore,  and  other 
Families.  18.  20.  22.  24. 

7.  Narration  of  the  Dcfcent  of  Robert  Eyton  Efq; 
of  Pentre-Madoc  in  Com.  Salop,  from  Brutus.  1  8.  A  &c. 

8.  Genealogia  preclare  &  antique  Familie  de  Lcftwyche 
de  Leftwyche,  in  Ceftrenfis  Palatinatu.  25.  27.  29.  31. 

33-  33- b-  34- 

9.  A  large  Pedegree  of  Ilefketh  of  Rulford  in  Com. 

Lane.  _  36.  28.30.  32.  33.  33. 

10.  Pedegree  of  Wilbraham.  26.  b.  28.  b.  30.  b.  32.  b. 

1 1 .  Pedegree  of  Bollock;  traveled  Sc  foughte  out  from 
amongeft  mod  auncient  Evidences,  Rccordes,  Sc  Monu¬ 
ments  of  the  Countie  Palatyne  of  Chefter,  &  the  Countie 
ofNotingham,  bv  Laurance  of  Boftoke  Gentleman.  Ex¬ 
amined,  allowed,  recorded,  confirmed,  &  under-written, 
bv  Robert  Cooke,  Clarienciaulx  Principal  Herald  <k  King 
of  Armes,  the  22  daie  of  Jtilye,  A.  D.  1 574.  37.  39.  41. 

43-45- 

12.  The  Defcente  of  Sir  John  Savage  Knight,  made 
in  the  Ycare  1566.  fand  renewed,  A.  D  1582.)  57. 
56.  55.  53.  51.  49.  47.  the  Leaves  being  all  put  the  up- 
lide  downwards. 

13.  Pedigree  of  Shaw  of  Haflington,  colored.  59.  6r. 

14.  Draught  of  a  Pedegree  of  Molineux,  with  fome 

Notes.  63.  65.  67.  69.  71.  73. 

This  feeins  to  be  of  the  Hand  of  Sir  William  De¬ 
thick,  Garter. 

15.  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Pull,  or  Poole  of  Poole, 

with  all  it  branches ,  putt  down  by  the  third  Randle 
Holme.  68. 

16.  Stenfa  antiquac  familke  de  Mafiy  de  Potinton  in 
Palatinatu  Ceftria:.  75.  7“.  79.  80.  80.  b.  82.  84, 

17.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Notes  from  Deeds, 
&c.  proving  the  Dcfcent  of  Wilbraham.  76.  (et  vid  fol. 

76.  B.) 

iS.  Defcent  of  Winnington,  in  its  feveral  branches ; 
putt  down  by  the  third  Randle  Holme.  76.  B. 

19.  Pedegree  of  Powel  of  Horfley,  85.  86.  87.  88. 

89.  90.  91. 92.  93.  94.  94.  b. 
2c.  Sir  Thomas  Chaloner’s  Pedegree  95.  96.  b.  97. 
98.  b.  99.  xoo.  b.  101.  J02.  b.  103.  104.  b.  105.  106.  b. 

108. 

21.  Pedegree  of  Moftyn of  Moftyn,  96.  98.  100.  102. 

103.  b. 

22.  Pedegree  of  Stradling.  104.  This  belongs  to  that 
of  Moftyn. 

23.  A  printed  Brief  granted  by  K.  Charles  11.  to 
the  relief  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Newport  in  Com.  Salop, 
upon  Occafion  of  a  great  Fire  there.  It  bears  Tefte, 
24th  May,  anno  Regni  18.  198.  A.  ic8.  B.  b.  1 10.  A. 

1 10.  B.  b.  1 12.  A.  b. 

24.  Short  Notes  of  Defcents  of  Mafiy,  & c.  ic8.  A.  b. 

no.  A.  b.  1 12.  A. 

25.  Pedegree  of  Herbert  Earl  of  Pembroke,  by  Evan 
Lloyd  Geffrey.  109.  112.114.  116.  118.  1 1 9.  b.  122. 

26.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table  of 
the  Pedegrees  or  Defcents  extant  in  this  Colleftion.  At 
the  end. 


i 


! 


I 


43<5 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2076. 

2076. 

An  Heialdical  Book  in  folio,  on  the  out-fide  thus  entit¬ 
led  by  (he  third  Randle  Holme,  “  Coates  of  the  Nobi¬ 
lity  ;  Knights  of  the  Garter;  and  Lord  Mayors  of  Lon¬ 
don.  &c.”  but  this  not  being  fufliciently  particular,  I 
fliall  defcribe  it  in  the  following  manner, 

1 .  Armes  in  Blazon  of  many  Noble  and  Worlhipful 

Englifli  Families.  1.  &  20.  b. 

It  feems  (hat  thefe  have  been  copied,  and  entred  into 
fome  other  Book. 

2.  Order  ot  the  Funeral  of  George  Talbot  Earl  of 
Shrewfbury  ;  who  died  26  July  anno  30  R.  Hen.  vin. 

4-  b. 

3.  Of  the  Feaft  of  St.  George,  holden  at  Wyndfore, 

22  May,  anno  32  R.  Henrici  viu.  3. 

__  4-  The  Char.ige  that;  belongeth  to  the  making  of  a 
Knight  of  the  Bath  ;  with  the  Fees  ol  ihe  Oflicers  in  the 
Court.  ibid. 

5.  I  he  Defcent  of  Maud  the  Emprefs  &  of  King  Ste¬ 
phen;  bk'm  the  Book  called  Concordanria  Hiftoriarum  6. 

6.  The  Interrment  of  King  Henry  vth.  6.  b. 

7.  How  Sir  RafFe  Grave  being  taken  at  the  Caftle  of 

Bamboroughe,  was  difgraded  ot  the  Order  of  Knight¬ 
hood.  6.  b. 

8.  Coats  of  Armes  &  Badges  (or  Crefts)  of  the  No¬ 
bililies  (i.  e  Knights)  of  the  Garter.  7.  &  22. 

9.  How  the  Ballard  of  Burgoyne  chalenged  Anthonye 

Lord  Scales,  anno  6  Edward  iv.  and  ol  the  Combats 
which  infued  between  them.  8.  b. 

10.  the  Originall  of  Herawids ;  from  Eneas  Sylvius. 

9. 

11.  The  Achcuemc-nt,  conferring  28  Coates,  as  they 
are  marlhalled  &  boren  by  Henry  Stanley  Earle  of  Derby. 

10. 

1 2.  Armes  in  Blafon,  of  certain  Chelhire  Gentlemen. 

1 1. 

T3-  A  Vifitation  made  in  Lancafhire,  &  in  a  parte  of 
Chefter-lhire,  per  Lancaflre  Heraulde,  in  the  24th  yeare 
of  King  Henry  vm.  by  a  fpecialle  Comicion  of  Thomas 
Benalt  alias  Clarencieux  King  at  Armes  of  the  fame 
Province. 

This  feems  to  be  the  Original,  and  William  Fellowe 
perhaps  was  Lancatler-Herald  at  the  time,  who  fet  forth 
the  feveiall  Defcents,  Narratively,  as  the  lieraldical  Peo¬ 
ple  fay. 

14-  Some  Armes  of  Northern  Nobility  &  Gentry,  part¬ 
ly  tricked,  pan ly  in  Blafon.  "  ig. 

15.  List  of  the  Knightes  of  the  Order  of  St.  George 
fit  hence  the  Inftituiion  thereof:  to  near  the  midlt  of  Q. 
Elizabeth’s  reign,  with  their  Armes  in  Blazon,  &  fome 
of  their  Creits  tricked.  26. 

if:.  Armes  in  Blafon,  of  our  Britilh,  Saxon,  Danifli, 
&  other  Kings,  &c.  ^7. 

<7;  Lilt  of  our  Englifh  Dukes  &  Marquifes,  Earls, 
&c.  fmee  theConqueft:  with  their  Arnies blafoned.  ibid. 

18.  Ihe  Style  of  Q.  Elizabeth  Soveraign  of  the  Noble 
Order  of  the  Garter,  and  of  the  Knights  Companions. 

41 .  b. 

19.  Copieof  the  Rollof  Ely,  with  the  Names,  &  Armes 

fforfooth)  of  thole  very  civil  Souldiers,  in  Blafon,  whom 
K.  William  the  Conqueror  lent  to  aliotiate  with  &  (Juar- 
ter  upon  the  Monks  of  Ely.  ^  ^ 

Then  comes  anotherTraft,  by  a  very  different  Hand- 
containing,  '  ’ 

2°.  The  C.refls  &  Badges  of  our  Englifli  Kings,  from 
King  Edward  hi.  to  King  Edward  vi.  indufive ;  paint- 

21.  Armes,  Clefts  &  Badges  of  many  of  our  Nobility 

in  Cotars.  ,  - ’ 

22.  Armes  &  Crefts,  in  Colors,  of  manv  Englifti 
Knights ;  fome  of  whom  were  Lord-Mayors  of  London. 

rl  hefe  are  followed  by  fome  others  only  tricked. 

4 


Num.  2076,  2077. 

2  3.  Printed  Armes  and  Crefts  of  all  the  Baronets  crea¬ 
ted  to  the  Year  1620  ;  being  127  in  number.  176. 

24.  Armes  &  Crefts  of  many  antient  Englifli  Gentle¬ 

men,  taken  by  Mr.  Robert  Glover  Somerfet-Herald,  ex 
libro  antiquo  dim  fpedlanti  Willelmo  Ballard  Armigero 
Marche  Regi  Armorum  partium  Ocddentalium  Regni 
Anglic,  Wallke,  et  Cornubite,  tempore  Regis  Edwardi 
qua«i.  243.  b. 

25.  Alphabetical  Tableof  the  Perfons  Names  mentioned 
in  this  Book.  At  the  end. 

207^. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  feveral  Hands,  and  on  the 

back,  entituled  by  the  third  Randle  Holme  by  this 

cnly  W  ord  Deeds  :  but  I  take  the  Liberty  of  giving 

the  following  Account  of  it. 

1.  The  fame  Mr  Holme’s  account  of  the  Things  of 
moft  Note  in  this  Book.  A  loofc  Paper  at  the  beg 'lining. 

2.  Men’s  Names  :  being  his  Alphabetical  Table  of 
Perfons  mentioned  herein.  In  loofe  Pipers. 

3\  labula  ex  Evidences  Generoforum  ;  Recordis, 
Placitis,  Finibus,  Recognitionibus,  &rc. 

Mr.  Holme  feems  to  have  meant  a  fort  of  Index 
Materiarum. 

4.  Index  Virorum  :  being  another  Table  of  Perfons 
Names  by  the  lame  Hand. 

Then  comes  the  main  Work,  being  flioit  Abftradls 
from  Records  &  other  Deeds  &  Inftruments,  chiefly  relat¬ 
ing  to  Chefhire  ;  in  looking  over  which,  1  choofe  to  give 
the  following  particulars. 

1.  E  Cartis  penes  Paulum  Winington  de  Birches,  Ge» 

nerofum.  1 

2.  E  Cartis  penes  Laurentium  Winington  de  Armitage, 

Generofum.  .  2 

3.  Georgius  Sutton  Miles,  Magifter  Hofpitalis  S  I.a- 

zari  de  Burton,  &  ejufdem  loci  Confratres,  abfolvebant 
l  homam  de  inington  et  Elenam  Uxorem  ejus  an  om¬ 
nibus  Peccatis  fuis,  niii  talia  lunr,  luper  quibus  Sedes 
Apoftolica  fit  confulenda.  dat  A.  I).  1491/  4. 

4.  Extrads  from  feveral  old  Deeds  relating  to  the 

Family  of  Hefwall.  ^ 

5.  Extradls  irom  Deeds  relating  to  the  F  .  .:!y  of  Ve¬ 
nables,  &c.  f, 

6.  Abftra&s  from  Deeds  relating  to  the  Parochial 
Church  of  Rofthorne  :  which,  at  length,  was  given  to 
Chrift-church  in  Oxford,  with  all  its  rights  as  forme. ly 
enjoyed  by  the  Prior  and  Conuent  of  Launda.  8. 

7.  Notes  relating  to  the  Divorce  mr.de  between  William 

Brereton  &  Amilla  Venables,  who  were  1  elated  in  the 
fourth  Degree,  and  how  that  the  Sentence  was  annulled 
by  the  Carmelites  ;  A.  D.  1386.  j.. 

8.  How  Peter  Venables  married  Alice  Singleton,  & 

forfaking  her,  married  Alice  Grieth  :  but,  by  a  Sentence 
of  the  Church,  was  obliged  to  difmifs  his  lull  &  keep  to 
his  firft  Wife,  A.  D.  1468.  l2. 

9.  Note  of  a  Suit  of  one  Wentilian  (perhaps  n  Welfh- 
woman)  againft  Sir  Hugh  Venables,  who  had  betrothed 
hinifelf  to  her  near  28  Years  before,  &  had  begotten 
Children  upon  her.  Hugh  appeared,  owned  the°Chil- 
dien,  but  denied  the  Contraft  :  but,  as  it  feems.  was 
obliged  to  marry  her.  This  happened  A.  D.  1240.  14. 
(et  pag.  15.  where  it  appears  by  the  1  eftimonies  of  manv 
Witnefles,  that  he  was  lawfully  married  to  her  in  the 
Chepall  ofPeever) 

10.  How  the  High- w'ay  of  Huntingdon  near  Chefter 

being  unpaffable  was  repaired  ;  and  what  provilion  was  1 
made  for  kteping  it  good  for  the  future.  2  i . 

11.  Mow  John  Griffin  Efq;  bequeathed  his  purchased 

Lands  to  Eleanor  his  Wife  for  Lyfe  ;  with  Remainder  to 
George  Griffin  his  Baftard  Sonne,  &  to  his  H  eires  & 
Aflignes,  for  ever.  But  after  the  Death  of  Eleanor, 
George  dying  without  Iffue,  thefe  Lands  efcheattd  to 
1  hornas  Venablts  Baron  of  Kinderton;  being  heldof  him 
in  Socage.  ^ ^ 

12.  Ab- 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


12.  Abftra&s  oft)eed  s  in  the  Hands  of  Winington  of 

Artnitage.  36.  (et  vid.  pag.  38.) 

13.  How  the  Barony  of  Witch-Malbanc  was  fold  in 

Parcels.  40.  97.  et  99. 

14.  Extracts  from  Inquifitions,  giving  the  Names  & 

Times  of  many  Efcheators  of  Chefhire.  42. 

15.  How  the  Lord  Vifcount  Cholmondeley  claymed 

Mr.  Partingtons  Chapel  in  Criftleton  Church,  becaufeof 
in  Infcription  there  relating  to  his  Family  ;  and  was  kept 
from  it  with  greate  Charge  &  Expence.  43. 

16.  Collectanea  ex  Cards  in  Cuftodia  Johannis  Goul- 

bourne  de  Milton.  44. 

17.  Colle&anca  e  Cartis  penes  Robertum  Venables  de 

Antrobus.  47. 

1  8.  Abflraft  of  the  Verdift  given  upon  the  Contention 
which  arofe  about  the  Bounds  of  Birchells,  &  Hendebury, 
Pexhulle,  &c.  wherein  the  Common  Heath,  Mores,  & 
Paflure-ground  belonging  to  each  are  declared,  dated  an. 
5  R.  Edwardi  ill.  50. 

This,  and  perhaps  forne  that  follow,  were  taken 
from  the  Originals  in  the  pofleflion  of  Ralf  Leycefter  of 
Toft,  Efq. 

19.  Abftract  of  the  Inquifition  holden  Anno  22.  R. 

Edwardi  1.  in  order  to  find  whether  Henry  de  Lacy  Earl 
of  Lincoln,  or  his  Anceftors,  Conflables  of  Chefter,  were 
accuftomed  to  have  the  C.aialls  of  their  Men  or  Tenants 
being  Felons  &  Fugitives,  which  were  found  within  the 
Fee  or  Liberty  of  Halton.  51. 

20.  Abftratt  of  a  Writ  of  K.  Edward  x.  (bearing  Tefte, 
anno  Regni  50.)  commanding  the  Sheriffe  of  Chefhire  to 
enquire  touching  the  Right  by  which  Hugh  de  Venables 
claimed  to  have  a  Court-Leet,  &  other  Liberties  in  di¬ 
vers  Villages,  as  appendants  to  his  Maner  of  Kinderton. 

.  78' 

Here  &  after,  the  running  number  of  Pages  is  very 
erroneoufiy  putt  down  ;  but  the  large  Table  abovemen- 
tioned  referring  to  it  ;  I  think  it  bell  to  go  on,  without 
altering  them. 

2 1 .  Colledlanea  ci  Cartis  penes  Radulfum  de  Boftock 

de  Moulton  Generofum,  A.  D.  1643.  84. 

22.  E  Cartis  antiquis  penes  Henricum  Vernon  de  Haf- 

lington,  Armigerum,  A.  D.  1643.  87. 

23.  Colle&anea  e  Cartis  penes  ....  Smethwick  de 

Smethwick  ;  fcripta  per  Jo.  Booth  GeneroLim,  A.  U. 
1646.  94.  et  148. 

24.  Colleflanea  Sampfonis  Erdfwicke  Armigeri  fuper 

Stemmate  Familite  de  Vernon,  atq;  congefla  in  parvum 
Iibrum  papyraceum,  jam  nunc  in  manibus  Willelini  Dug- 
dale  Generofi,  fdl.  23  Feb.  1647.  95* 

25.  A  Note,  how  Sir  Thomas  Rothcrick  Kt.  pretend¬ 
ing  to  be  Prince  of  Wales,  was  taken,  &  died  in  Prifon. 
And  how  Owen  Logate  his  fon,  went  into  Dcnmarke 
to  marry  the  Kings  daughter,  where  his  own  Chamber- 
layne  flew  him,  £c  coming  to  England,  tould  the  King 
the  Fore-caftof  thefaid  Owen.  Hereupon,  theKing  feized 
all  his  Lands  in  Chefhire  and  elfewhere  ;  and  exiled 
the  Chamberlaine,  for  that  he  was  falfe  to  his  Mafler. 

98. 

26.  Rentale  de  Willafton,  anno  22  R.  Henrici  vi. 

100. 

27.  Opinion  of  Sir  James  Dyer  &  other  Judges,  con¬ 

cerning  the  Privileges  of  the  County  Palatine  of  Chefler 
(enrolled  in  Chancery)  upon  the  Queen’s  Mandate  of  1 1 
Martij,  ann  1 1°  Elizab.  105. 

28.  Ex  libro  Cartarum  Prioratus  Sti.  Thomte  juxta 

Stafford.  106. 

Then  follow, 

29.  Notes  &  Extracts  from  Original  Deeds,  with  fome 

Tricks  of  Seals,  &c.  107.  113. 

30.  Ex  Cartis  Sampfonis  Erdfwyke,  de  Manerio  fuo 

de  Leghton.  in. 

31.  Ex  Cartis  Thomte  Coton  de  Coton  Armigeri,  A.  D. 

1648  _  _  _  127. 

32.  Brevia  Chartarum  Domini  Vicecomitis  de  Kilmo- 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2077. 

rey  de  Hallum  in  Newton;  ficut  fcripta  funt  in  Libro 
fuo.  138.  187. 

33.  E  Cartis  autographis  penes  Thomam  Mainewar- 
ing  de  Peever  Armigerum,  A.  D.  1648.  141.  160. 

167. 

34.  Ex  Libro  Johannis  Booth  Generofi,  notato  L. 
fcripto  per  Johannem  Woodnot  Generofum.  149. 

35.  Ex  Cartis  dile&i  amici  Henrici  Vernon  de  Hafling- 

ton,  Armigeri  ;  A.  D.  1649.  15 1. 

36.  Intermixed  with  thefe,  are  Abftra&s  of  four  Deeds, 

taken  from  the  Originals  in  the  poffefTion  of  John  Haf- 
wall  of  Alford  Gent,  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  Anno 
1675.  '  152. 

37.  Petition  of  Sir  John  Mainewaring  of  Peever,  to 

K.  Henry  viii.  fetting  forth  that  Sir  John  Mainewaring 
his  Grandfather  borrowed  of  Sir  William  Stanley  Ten 
Marcks,  to  be  repaid  from  the  Blues  of  certain  Lands  and 
Tenements  in  Chorley,  worth  Ten  Marks  per  annum. 
That  thefaid  Sir  William,  by  his  Might  &  Power,  kept 
Poffedion  of  the  Premiffes,  during  the  Life  of  his  faid 
Grandfather,  &  of  John  Mainewaring  his  Father,  and 
until  he  was  atteyntcd  &  putt  to  Execution  ;  and  had 
great  remorfe  for  the  Injury  done  in  this  behalfe.  Howbeit 
Prince  Arthur  was  intitled  to  the  faid  Lands,  which  de- 
fcending  unto  his  Majefly,  they  were  lately  granted 
to  S'  Rauffe  Egerton  K'  wherefore  the  Befeecher  defired 
certain  Lands  and  Tenements  in  Caloue,  of  the  yearly 
Value  of  1 1  Pounds  in  lieu  of  them.  163. 

38.  Ex  Cartis . Ravenfcroft  Armigeri.  164. 

Thefe  alfo  relate  to  the  Family  of  Mainewaring. 

39.  Ex  Cartis  Johanna;  Stapleton  Vidue,  ReliEtte  Ro- 

berti  Burges  de  Over. Peever,  A.  D.  1649.  165. 

40.  Ex  Cartis  Jo.  Warburton  Militis,  per  Laurentium 

Boftocke,  A.  D.  1572.  Et  defcript.  ex  ms.  Boflockij  in 
cuftodia  Sim.  Deures  Militis,  per  Petrum  Leycefter  Ar¬ 
migerum,  A.  D.  1649.  177 . 

Mr.  Boftock’s  faid  ms.  is  now  in  this  Library,  in- 
fcribed  35  B.  22. 

41.  Ex  Cartis  D"na.  Elianorse  Kilmurrey,  Dominasde 

Hatton,  uxoris  Roberri  Domini  Vicecomitis  de  Kilmur¬ 
rey,  per  Petrum  Leycefter  de  Tabley,  Armigerum,  A.  D. 
1649.  179. 

42.  Conceftio  Magiftratus  omnium  Miniftrellorum  et 

Mereticum  in  Com.  Ceftrise.  183. 

43.  Ex  Cartis  Johannis  Danish  de  Darefbury  Armi¬ 
geri  ;  per  Petrum  Leycefter  Arm.  A.  D.  1649.  188. 

et  192. 

44.  Colle&anea  ex  Cartis  Johannis  Mere  de  Mere  Ar 
migeri  ;  per  Petrum  Leyceftr.  Arm.  A.  D.  1650.  189. 

224. 

45.  Breve  R.  Henrici  vi.  quo  (cum  fit  compertum 

quod  W  illelmus  filius  Richardi  Mere,  eft  et  fuit  Fatuus 
&  Ideota  per  decern  annos  elapfos,  ita  quod  Regimen 
Sui-ipfius,  aut  Terraruni  et  Tenementorum,  Bonorum 
feu  Catalorum  fuorum  habere  non  fufficit)  conftituit  Lau- 
rentium  Fitton  Chivaler.  habere  Gubernationem  predi&i 
Willelmi,  et  CuftodiamTerrarum,  &c.  inveniendo  pre- 
fato  Willelmo  et  Uxori  fuas,  et  Familite  ipfius  Willelmi 
rationabiliter  Suftentationem,  &c.  190. 

46.  .Colle&anea  ex  Cartis . Grimfditch 

de  Grimlditch  Generofi  ;  per  Petrum  Leicefter  Arm. 

1 94* 

47.  E  Cartis  penes  ....  Towchet  de  Whitley,  A.  D. 

i649-  _  198. 

4S.  Colledlanea  e  Cartis  penes  Radulfum  Starkey  de 
Newton  juxta  Darefbury,  per  Petr.  Leycefter  Armige¬ 
rum,  Anno  1660.  Iggm 

49-  E  Cartis  penes  Johannem  Wilfon  de  Knotesford. 

20°. 

50.  Ex  cartis  Petri  Legh  de  High-Legh,  Armigeri, 
A.  D.  1650.  201. 

_  5r-  Ex  Cartis  Henrici  Legh  de  High-Legh,  Armige¬ 
ri,  A.  D.  1650.  209. 

52.  Ex  Cartis  Henrici  Legh  de  Weft-hall.  213. 

5  T  53-  Mete 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


438 


Num.  2077. 


53.  Mete  et  Bunde  Manerij  de  Manley  in  Com.  Ceftrie. 

2I9- 

54.  Ex  Cards  Willehni  Oldfield  de  Bradwall,  Armi- 

geri  ;  A.  D.  1651.  231. 

55.  Ex  Cards  Willehni  Vaudra  de  Ollerbarrow  in 

Hale,  Generofi.  236. 

50.  AbftraCts,  from  Letters  Patents  of  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth,  relating  to  certain  Pofleffions  of  the  Cathedral 
Churches  of  Coventre  &  Lichfield.  238. 

^7,  E  Cards  penes  Georgium  Mainewaring  de  Arclyd, 
Generofum  ;  A.  D.  1652.  239. 

58.  Ex  Cards  Richard!  Legh  de  Swine-head,  Gene¬ 
rofi;  ficut  feripta  funt  in  libro  papyraceo,  A.  D.  1653. 

256. 

50.  Ex  Cards  Willelmi  Ravenfcroft  de  Ecclefton, 
A.  D.  1654.  266, 

60.  Ex  Cards  JohnnnisAmfon  de  Leghes,  A.  D.  1 657. 

tranferibed  intoEnglilh  for  his  Ufe.  268. 

61.  Knights  made  by  my  Lord  of  Glocefter,  in  Nut- 

ton-feild  in  Scotland,  A.  D.  1482.  271. 

Here  are  alfo  the  Names  of  the  Knights  made  by 
the  Duke  of  Albany  ;  Knights  made  by  my  Lord  of  Nor¬ 
thumberland;  Knights  made  by  my  Lord  Stanley;  Bane- 
retts;  Baneretts  in  the  Vawards ;  &  Baneretts  by  my 
LordStanley. 

62.  Collections  from  the  Cowcher-booke  of  Noftell- 

Abbey  :  particularly  the  Grant  of  a  Chantrey  in  the  Cha- 
pell  of  Rokedene,  within  the  Parifhof  Wimvicke,  in  the 
County  of  Lancafier,  to  Sir  Robert  Bancfter,  A.  D. 
1284.  ^  280. 

63.  Notes  out  of  Sr  Maries  Tower,  at  York.  281. 

64.  Mr.  Rigbyes  Notes.  ibid. 

65.  Soramaria  deferiptio  Finium  et  Limitum  Parochire 

deWhalley  in  agro  Lancaftrienfi  ;  prout  diftinguiturab 
alijs  Parocr>  '  convicinis.  282. 

6.  Imps,  Notes  touching  the  Divorce  made  be¬ 
tween  Thomas  1  Ieiketh  of  RuiTord  &  Elizabeth  Fleming 
h;.  Wife,  A.  D.  1497.  287. 

•67.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Crofton,  in  Com. 
g  to  the  Family  of  Hefk<  th.  2S8. 

6  .  Lx  C-artis  Chriflofori  Towneley  Generofi.  289. 

69.  Collections  out  of  auncient  Deeds  and  Evidences 

of  ...  .  Trafford  of  Traft'nrd,  extant  A.  D.  1638.  as 
alloe  out  of  the  ancient  Booke  called  the  Blacke  Booke 
of  Traiford  ;  the  Heralds  Booke  ;  Stowe,  &  Flollin- 
fhead's  Chronicles;  and  out  of  Sr  George  Booth  ofDun- 
ham-Mafcy,  &  other  Pedegrees.  292. 

70.  Proofesfor  Alhetonof  Middleton’sPedegree.  299. 

71.  LxtraCts  from  old  Deeds,  fome  in  Engliih,  relat¬ 
ing  to  the  Family  of  Lacy.  320. 

Amongthefe,  are  AbftraCts  of  Indulgences  granted 
to  thofe  who  fliould  pray  for  the  Souls  of  Roger  de  Lacy, 
&  Edmund  de  Lacy,  Conftables  of  Chefter,  See.  323. 

&  329- 

72.  ADifcourfe,  uncorrectly  written,  about  theDuchy 

of  Lancafier.  346. 

The  Author  lived  in  anno  32  R.  Elizabeths,  and 
feems  to  have  been  William  Fleetwood  Recorder  of 
London. 

3.  AbftraCts  of  feveral  Deeds  relating  to  Lancalhire- 


Pcrfons  &  Places. 


355- 


74.  Proofs  of  the  Pedcgree  of  Sir  Richard  Houghton, 
of  lloughton.  Baronet;  drawne  out  of  luquifitions  &  old 
Deed-,  by  Chr.  Towneley  Gen.  A.  D.  1660.  357. 

7  4.  AbftraCts  of  fome  Deeds  in  the  Cufiody  of  Laur. 
Roll  home  of  Atherton,  Efq.  A.  D.  1661.  ^74. 

Thefe  relate  to  the  Families  of  Hotighton  &  Rofethome. 

76.  A  Declaration  of  all  the  Forefts,  Chaces,  & 

Parkes,  out  of  which  the  Chancellor  of  the  Duchy,  At¬ 
torney,  Generali  Receiuour,  and  the  two  Aud'tors  are 
to  hau;  Deere,  Winter  &  Somer.  ^75. 

7 7.  Fees  received  by  the  Officers  of  the  Honor  of  Hal- 
ton,  within  the  Counties  of  Che;hire&  Lancashire.  376. 

78.  Like  Fees  for  the  Honor  of  Lancafier.  ibid. 


Num.  2077,  2078. 

79.  An  Eftimate  of  the  Revenews  of  the  Duchy  of 

Lancafier,  collected  by  the  Receivers  of  the  Honours 
belonging  to  the  faid  Dutchy ;  and  yerely  payd  to  the 
Receiver-Generall.  377. 

80.  AbftraCt  of  the  Inquifition  taken  after  the  Death 

of  Henry  Duke  of  Lancafier.  ibid. 

81.  Collections  from  Henry  Peacham’s  Compleat  Gen¬ 
tleman,  printed  A.  D.  1661.  382. 

82.  Ex  Libro  Ecclefia;  Collegiats  B.  Marie  Warwick 

398. 

83.  Some  few  Defcents.  ibid. 

84.  Extracts  from  old  Deeds,  relating  to  the  Families 

of  Alton,  Bagod,  &rc.  47  0. 

85.  Notes  relating  to  the  Times  of  fome  Juftices  of 

Chefter  ;  and  to  fome  Actions  of  the  old  Earles  of  Chef- 
ter,  and  Princes  of  Wales.  423. 

86.  Collections  out  of  I  Tollinfheads  Chronicle,  of  the 
memorable  ACtes  of  Sir  John  Bromley  of  Bromley  Iv' 
made  Captaine  of  Dampfront  in  France  by  King  Henry  v. 

445- 

87.  ColIcCtanea  e  Cards  penes  Thomam  Smethwick, 

per  Johannem  Booth  Generofum.  .14g. 

8S.  Notes  relating  to  the  Pedegree  of  Lacy,  collected 
by  C.  T.  (i,  e.  Chr.  Towneley)  488. 

89.  Compendium  Carta;  Heinici  dc  Laci,  quit  fuuda- 

vit  Abbatiam  de  Kirkefialle,  A.  D.  1149.  489. 

90.  AbftraCts  of  Original  Deeds  relating  to  Chelhird 

or  Lancalhire  Families  and  Places.  490.  52  c. 

Many  of  thefe  relate  to  the  Monafteries  of  Stanlow 
&  Whalley. 

91.  When  Lancafier  was  made  a  County-Palatine. 

493- 

92.  AbfiraCts,  in-Englilh,  of  certain  Charters  of  the 

old  Earls  of  Chefter,  whereby  divers  Liberties  were 
granted  to  the  Citizens  of  Chefter.  49-. 

93.  Claim  of  the  faid  Citizens,  to  have  a  Major,  two 

Shireves,  &  two  Fairs  yearely.  496. 

94.  Form  of  the  Oath  to  be  taken  by  the  Major  of 

Chefter,  at  his  Admiffion.  495, 

95.  Explication,  or  Claim  of  the  Citizens  of  Chefter, 

upon  the  old  Words  or  Termes  of  Liberties,  ufed  in  the 
Charters  granted  unto  them.  (ImperfeCL)  499. 

I  take  this  Book  to  have  been  copied,  paginating 
from  fome  other  Book  ;  and  this  by  fome  young  Perfon, 
who  has  left  but  too  many  Marks  of  his  very  "reat  Igno¬ 
rance  &  Careleflhefs. 

2078. 

A  Book  in  folio  written,  for  the  greateft  part  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme,  and  bearing  this  Title  following,  “  A 
Generali  Collection  of  all  the  Offices  in  England,  with 
their  Fees  in  her  .Majefties  Guifte  :  which  Ihews  that 
a  great  part  of  this  Book  is  tranferibed  from  the  Book 
of  Fees  made  in  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  the  Re¬ 
mainder  being  added  by  Mr.  Holme,  as  the  Notices 
came  to  Eland.  Thus  this  book  may  be  deferibed, 
briefly,  in  this  manner, 

1.  Mr.  Holme’s  Table  of  the  Contents  :  At  the  be- 
ginning. 

Then,  comes  a  Detail  of  the  Offices  &  Fees  of  her 
Highnes  Courts,  both  of  Juftice  &  Reveignewe  :  viz. 

2.  The  Exchequer  of  London  (at  Weltminfter)  with 

the  Fees  &  Allowances  to  the  Officers  there.  100. 

3.  Cuftomers  &  other  Officers  about  the  Cuftome- 

houfe  in  London  ;  with  their  feueral  Fees,  Rewards  & 
Allowances.  ‘  IOI- 

4.  Cuftomers  &  Officers  in  other  Portes,  with  theire 

Fees  IOI.b. 

5.  Receiuers  of  the  Reveynewes  of  the  Crowne,  with 

their  Fees  &  Allowances.  104. 

6.  The  High  Courte  of  Chauncery,  with  the  Officers 
&  iviinifters  of  Juftice,  their  Fees  &  Allowances.  107. 

Then  follows  a  Lift  of  all  the  Offices  Sc  Fees  ofrer 
Majefties  molt  Honorable  Houlhould  ;  with  their  Re¬ 


wards  &  Allowances. 


r°9* 
7.  AU 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


439 


Nuni  2078. 

7.  All  the  Offices  &  Fees  of  her  Highnes  Townes  of 
Warre,  Caftles,  Bulvvarkes,  &  Fortreffes,  in  the  Charge 
of  Captaines,  Officers,  &  Souldiers  there.  113-  b. 

S.  Her  Majellies  Caftles,  Parkes,  Forefts  &  Chafes, 
■with  the  Fees  &  Allowances  to  the  Keepers  &  Officers 
there.  _  1 1 6.  b. 

Inferted,  negligently,  within  this  Traft,  I  find, 

9.  A  Lift  of  the  Offices  in  the  Kings  Guifteas  Earle 
of  Chefter,  with  their  Fees.  1 1 9- 

The  Book  of  Fees  paid  to  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Offi¬ 
cers  ending  atfol.  120.  b.  next  follow. 

ic.  Fees  payable  to  the  Kings  Officers,  for  creating 
ofaBaronett.  122.  b. 

11.  The  Commiffion  of  King  Charles  1.  dire&ed  to 

Thomas  Vifcount  Savage,  Robert  Vifcount  C.holmonde- 
ley,  Sir  John  Savage,  Knight,  &  many  others  ;  felting 
forth,  that  very  many  of  his  Subje&s  have  been  and  are 
unjuftly  opprelTed  with  exceflive  Fees  extordvelev  ex¬ 
acted  be  received  of  them  by  Attorneys  &  other  Officers 
in  the  Courts  at  Weftminfter,  &  elfewhere ;  and  alfo 
by  Officials,  &c.  in  Ecclefiaftical  Courts  within  both 
Provinces  :  and  therefore  willing  them  to  call  betore 
them  all  proper  Perfons,  by  whole  Teftimonies  the  truth 
might  bell  be  found  out,  and  take  cognifance  of  all  Fees 
demanded  by  all  Officers  fince  the  nth  year  of  Qu. 
Elizabeth,  &  what  new  Offices  had  been  erected  or  elta- 
bliffied  fince  that  time  within  the  Counties  of  Chefter  & 
Flint,  &  City  of  Chefter  :  bearing  'l'efte,  3  January,  anno 
Regni,  10.  12  3; 

The  remaining  part  of  this  Book  feems  to  contain 
the  Returns  made  to  the  Commiffioners  of  Enquiry  for 
the  Counties  &  City  above-mentioned,  or  a  great  Part 
of  them  ;  and  are  comprifed  under  the  following  1  itles. 

1 2.  Lift  of  the  Fees  taken  by  the  Clarke  of  the  Pentice 
in  the  Pentice-Court,  and  other  Courts  in  the  City  of 
Chefter,  as  agreed  upon  and  allowed,  A.D.  1621.  1 25.  b. 

13.  Fees  of  the  Crowne-Mote-Court,  in  the  City  of 

Chefter.  2  b- 

1 4.  Fees  of  the  Clerke  of  the  Pentice  _  127. 

15.  The  Fees  of  the  four  Serjants  at  Mace  in  Chefter. 

128. 

16.  The  Fees  of  the  Shemffs  Officers  inChefter.  ibid. 

1 7.  The  Fees  belonging  to  the  Keeper  of  theNorth- 

Gate-Prifon  in  Chefter.  *28.  b. 

18.  The  Fees  of  the  Conftable  of  the  C.aftle  of  Chef¬ 
ter,  for  the  Prifon-houfe  therein.  ibid. 

19.  The  Leave-lookers  Fees  ;  gathered  for  thevfe  of 

ibid. 

20.  The  Fees  of  the  Officers  of  HisMajefties  Cuftome- 

houfe,  in  the  Port  of  the  City  of  Chefter.  129. 

21.  The  Fees  belonging  to  the  Clearke  of  the  Peace. 

129.  b. 

22.  The  Sherriffe  &Vnder-Shevriffe,  their  Fees,  within 

the  County  of  Chefter.  I3°* 

23.  Fees  due  to  the  High  Sherriffe  of  Chefhire,  called 

the  Sherriffs  Tooth  ;  &  gathered  vearely  by  the  Bail- 
liffs  of  the  County  from  Five  Hundreds.  13 1. 

24.  Fees  of  the  Efcheator-lhipp  of  the  County  Pallatyn 

of  Chefter.  J3®* 

25.  Fees  of  the  Manor  of  Malpas-Court.  ibid. 

26.  Fees  of  the  Court  of  the  Barony,  Mannor,  &  l'ee 

ofKinderton.  *33- 

27.  Fees  in  the  Court  of  the  Barony  of  Dunham- 

Mafiy.  .  *33-  b; 

28.  Feoda  Prothonotar.  et  Clerici  Corone  Comitatus 

Ceftrie.  *35; 

29.  Feoda  Prothonotar.  et  Clerici  Corone  Comitatus 

Flynt.  .  *37- 

•ic.  Feoda  Attornatorum  coram  Jufticiar.  Ceftrie. 

J  138.  b. 

1 1 .  Fees  of  the  Attorneys  in  the  Exchequer  of  Chefter. 

*39- 

32.  Fees  belongingeto  the  Chamberlayne  &  Baron  of 
the  fame  Exchequer.  *b‘d- 


Num.  2078,  2079. 


33.  The  Seale-Keepers  Gratuities.  14°- 

34.  The  Fees  of  the  Bailiff-Itinerant  of  the  County  of 

Chefter.  140.  b. 

35.  The  Examiner’s  Fees.  ibid. 

36.  The  Filizers  Fees.  141. 

37.  Feoda  Inftrumentorum,  Proceffuum,  Articulo- 

rum,  aliorumq;  Geftorum  quorumeunq;  Officiarijs  & 
Miniftris  Ceftrenfium  Epifcoporum  debila,  recepta,  et 
folvi  confueta.  ibid. 

38.  Fees  of  the  Prottors  in  the  Conftftory  Court  of 

Chefter.  141.  b. 

39.  Fees  of  the  Apparitor-Generall,  in  the  Dioceffe 

of  Chefter.  *42- 

40.  Fees  taken  in  the  Court-Barron  of  North-Wich  ; 

belonging  to  James  Lord  Strange.  143-  b- 

41.  Fees  taken  in  the  Court  holden  for  the  Queenes 

Majeities  Mannor  &  Burrough  of  Midle-wich.  ibid. 

42.  Fees  taken  in  Over-Court ;  belonging  to  Edmund 

Pefhall  &  Thomas  Pefhall,  Efqrs.  144-  b. 

43.  Fees  taken  A.  D.  1635-  in  his  Majefties  Court  of 

Record,  for  Thomas  Marbury  Efq;  of  his  Lordfhip  Sc 
Fee  of  Weverham,  with  the  Members  thereof.  1 45. 

44.  The  Fees  of  Dunham  on  the  Hill-Court,  held  for 

the  Earle  of  Shrewefbury.  '  4 5*  b- 

45.  The  Fees  of  Cholmondeley- Court  ;  held  for  the 

Lord  Vifcount  Cholmondeley.  ibid. 

46.  The  Fees  of  the  Court  of  the  Hundred,  Mannor, 

&  Forreft  of  Maxfeild.  146. 

47.  Fees  of  the  Hundred-Court  of  Wirrall,  held  for 

Sir  William  Maffy  of  Puddington.  147* 

48.  Fees  of  Caldy-Hundred,  held  for  William  Glcgge 

of  Gayton  Efq;  _  _  _  ibid. 

40.  Fees  ol  Burton-Court,  held  for  Sir  William  Maffy. 

ibid. 

50.  Fees  of  J.edfham,  &  Puddington-Courts,  held 

for  Sir  William  Maffy.  ibid. 

51.  Fees  of  Warford- Court,  held  for  Sir  William 

Maffy.  ibid. 

52.  Fees  of  Gayton,  &  Mollington-Court,  held  lor 

Mr.  Glegge.  ibid. 

53.  Fees  of  Tattenhall-Court,  held  for  Peter  Egger- 

ton  Efq;  (none  fpecified)  ibid. 

54:  The  Fees  of  Great  Nefton  Court-Leete.  147.  b. 
re.  The  Fees  of  the  Court-Baron  ofThomton-hough. 

ibid. 

56.  Fees  of  the  Court-Baron  of  Shotwick.  ibid. 

57.  Fees  of  the  Court  of  Bekington:  ibid; 

98.  Fees  of  Brumbrough  Court.  ibid. 

39.  Fees  of  Willafton-Court  .  147.  b. 

60.  Fees  of  Dutton,  Bartherton,  and  Leigh  Courts. 

ibid. 

61.  Fees  of  the  Courts  of  the  Manners  of  Wefton, 

Wibunbury,  &  Doddington.  14S. 

62.  Fees  of  Little  Budworth,  Brinftage  &  Upton, 

held  for  the  Earle  of  Shrewlbury  ;  and  for  Dunham  on 
the  Hill.  ibid- 

Here  nothing  is  fpecified. 

63.  Fees  belonging  to  the  Officers  of  the  Admiralty- 

Court,  &c.  148.  b. 

2079. 

A  Book  in  folio,  begun  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  ; 
and  enlarged  by  his  Son,  &  others  by  his  Direction. 
On  the  out-fide  it  is  thus  entituled,  “  Deed  &  Breviats 
out  of  the  Records  in  the  Prothonotary’s  Office  in 
Chefter  Caftle,”  &c  Which  Title  not  being  particular 
enough,  I  chufe  to  deferibe  it  in  the  manner  following, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  the  Things  of 

mod  Note  in  this  Book,  _  *• 

2.  His  Lift  of  Deeds  by  feuerall  Kings  &  Earles  of 

Chefter,  extant  in  this  Book.  2. 

3.  Commiffion  of  Queen  Elizabeth  whereby  She  con- 
ftitutes  Henry  Stanley  Erie  of  Derby,  her  Li'euetenaunte 
within  her  Counties  of  Lankelhire  &  Chelhire  ;^the 

8* 


i 


44° 


Catalogus  Librorurn  MSS. 


Num.  2079. 


Ciiie  of  CheRre  &  Countie  of  the  fame  ;  bearing  Tefte 
the  third  of  Julie,  in  the  27  th  yere  of  her  Reigne.  5. 

4.  The  Deputation  of  the  fame  Lord  Leuetenaunte, 

made  to  Sir  John  Sauage,  8c  Sir  Hughe  Cholmeley 
Knyghts  6.' 

5.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Collections  from  Eui- 

dences,  or  Deeds.  x  j . 

Thc-le,  he  fays,  he  began  to  collect/  A.  D,  1636  ; 
having  fome  part  of  them  from  Mr.  Vernon  ;  and  the 
reft  he  took  from  Original  Deeds,  Rolls,  8cc.  1 1. 

6.  Some  Verfes  written  in  the  Roll  called  Domefdei, 
wherein  many  of  the  old  Chelhire  Charters  were  inralled  ; 
and  which  was  antiently  kept  by  the  Judges.  ibid. 

7.  Carta  qua  Wilte turns  filius  Willelmi  Patricij  Jo- 
hannem  fdium  Roberti  Spine,  nomine  Manumillionis,  a 
domino  fuo  pcnitus  abfolvit,  et  liberum  arbitrium  dat 
eundi  et  redeundi  quocunq;  voluerit,  et  moram  faciendi 
penes  quemlibet  Hominum,  ubicumque  maluerit,  gratia 
20  folidorum  fibi  a  Magiitro  Willelmo  fratre  predifti 
Johannis  oblatorum. 

8.  I.ittera;  PatentesR.  Ricardi  11.  quibus  notum  facit 

fe  fufcepille  in  proteftionemSc  defenlionem  fuam  fpecialem 
Petrum  filium  Galfridi  de  Worberton  et  Margeriam 
uxorem  ejus  ;  Homines.  Tenentes  et  Servientes  fuos. 
Terras,  Res,  Redditus,  et  omnes  Pofleffiones  ipfarum 
Petri  tt  Mai  get  ia  8cc.  Idle,  8cc.  10  die  Decembris,  anno 
Regni  tS.  2Qj 

9.  Idtterse  Decani  de  Frodfham,  quibus  mandat  dif- 

cretis  Viris  Capellanis  Parochialium  Ecclefiarum  de  Bud- 
worth  8c  RoutheRom,  quatenus  moneant  omnes  et  fin- 
gulos  qui  quendam  equum  Petri  de  Worberton  occide- 
runt,  et  Arbores  dudum  crefcentes  fuper  Terras  difti 
Petri  proRernarunt.  et  inde  afportaverunt,  et  alia  diverfa 
damna  eidem  intulerunt  ;  quod  infra  15  dies  Moniciones 
illorum  immediate  fequentes  pro  Damnis  prediftis  pre- 
fatum  Petrum  fatisfaciant  et  emendent,  fub  pena  Excom- 
municationis.  dat.  A.  D.  141 1.  26. 

10.  Carta,  qua  Wentiliana  le  ConRantin,  dat  Johanni 

filio  luo,  duo  Mefuagia  in  Tulfingham,  cum  Holbold  et 
Haibold,  Toletre,  et  Tackfre.  c.  t.  R.  Edwardi  1.  29. 

it.  Extracts  from  theDceds of  .  .  .  Mullington  of 
Mullington,  takenby Mr.  Will.  Vernon,  A.  D.  1639'.  '•4. 

12.  AbRrafts  of  fome  Deeds  with  Robert  Pickin  of 

ARon  in  Com1.  StaRordv  ibid. 

1 3.  AbRrafts  of  Deeds  in  the  pofleRion  of  Starkey  of 

Stretton  in  Com.  CeRr.  taken  by  Mr.  Will.  Vernon. 
A.  D.  1639.  ^  ibid. 

14.  Carta,  quft  Willelmus  Paine  concedit  Philippo 

de  Malo  palfu,  in  feodo  &c  hereditate,  Acquietantiam  de 
Servientibus  pafeendis,  de  Sumagijs,  de  opere  Caltelli, 
et  Molendini,  et  de  omnibus  Servitijs,  confuetudinibus 
et  Demandis,  que  ad  le  pcrtincre  potuerunt,  ratione  4 
Bovatarum  Terre  quas  Philippus  emit  de  Willelmo  Hux- 
ley,  et  4  Bovatarum  Terre  quas  ipfc  Willelmus  emit  de 
David  filio  Wyani ;  quartte  fcilicet  partis  t..tius  Ville  de 
Botwardiflee-Majoris.  ^6 

15.  AbRraft  of  a  Deed  remaining  with  Mr.  Thomas 
Brereton  of  ARiley. 

16.  Some  Extracts  from  the  Great  Rolls  ofK.  Henry 

n.  yet  remaining  of  Record  in  the  Exchequer  at  Weft- 
minRer ;  concerning  the  Honor  of  CheRer.  40. 

17.  ExLibro  veteri  in  manibus  Roberti  Cooke,  aliis 

Clarenfeux,  Regis  Armorum  ;  anno  1587.  ibid. 

18.  A  Breve  of  John  de  Scotia  Earl  of  CheRer  & 

Huntingdon,  about  the  Right  of  Patronage  ofWybben- 
bury-Church.  ; 


t  uaiius  or 


0 ......  mivt.  uccu  m  me 

Randle Mainwaring  of  Peuer  K‘.  A.  D.  1 6 1 2.  .  x 

1 9.  A  Deed  wherein  the  Perfon  firft  named  is  called 
Willelmus  Rufus,  or  Red  Will,  or  Will  with  the  Red 
Hair. 

Here  honeft  Randle  Holme,  to  prevent  the  further 
growth  of  Error,  puts  down  this  notable  Note.  This 
Deed  is  oft  iniRaken  to  be  by  King  William  Rufus  ;  but 


Num.  2079. 

it  was  long  after  his  tyme ;  about  King  John,  or  begin, 
ning  of  K.  Henry  nr. 

20.  Carta,  qua  Jacobus  de  Audithlegh  dedit  Bertra* 

mo  GrifFen,  quietanciam  de  Sexjantibus  fuis  pafeendis  in 
Terra  de  Bertherton,  &c.  Reddendo  vnum  par  albarum 
Cyrothecarum,  vel  vnum  Denarium  annuatim,  pro  difta 
QuietanciaputureSejantiuih  ad  fe  pertinentium.  dat.  Circa 
ann.  26  R,  Henrici  ni.  ibid. 

21.  Doquets  of  fome  old  Deeds  remayning  with 

Thomas  Smy the  Efq.  43. 

22.  Quod  Robcrius  Patric  quondam  Dominus Integre 
Baronie  de  Malo-pafl'u,  forisfecit  eandem  Ranulfo  in. 
Comiti  CeRrie  ;  ex  quo,  idem  Ranulphus,  confenfu  et 
approbation  didli  Roberti,  eandem  equali  partitione 
dividit,  Dno.  Roberto  unam  Medietatem  reRituens  j 
alteram  Medietatem  David  cognomine  Le  Clarke  contulit. 

44. 

23.  E  placitis  Corone,  Term.  Mich.  ann.  it  R  Hen- 

rid  iv.  CeRr.  Rot.  76.  Dns.  Rex  mifit  Breve  fuum  clau- 
fum  Henrico  Filio  fuo,  &c.  Comiti  Ceftrie,  aut  ipfius 
Jufticiario  locumtenenti,  recitando  quod  nuper  mifit,  ad 
profeemionem  Dauid  le  Crue,  et  Willelmi  filii  Nicholai, 
ad  corrigend.  Error,  in  Judicio  reddito  tempore  Regis 
Edwardi  1.  inter  Robertum  de  Harcourt  petentem,  et 
Walterum  de  WorleRon  Sc  Johannem  uxorem  ejus,  te¬ 
nentes  ;  fuper  Terris,  &c.  in  WorleRon.  45. 

24.  Ex  Cards  Magiftri  Delues  de  Doddington  :  pro 

Villa  de  Barksford.  ibid. 

25.  Ex  veteri  pergameno,  five  pedegradu,  remanente 

penes  D.  Willelmum  Brereton  de  Brereton.  52. 

26.  Ex  veteri  pergameno  penes  JohannemoWodenote 

de  Shavynton.  A.  D.  1 599.  ibid,  et  53. 

27.  AbR rafts  of  other  old  Deeds ;  whereof  fome  were 
in  the  polfeRion  •  of  Henry  Mainwaring  of  Camigham, 

53. 

28.  How  the  Stanleys  claimed  20  Markes  yearly,  for 

their  Bailywick  of  the  Foreft  ofWyrehale,  upon  its  1 
deafforeRaiion  by  K.  Edward  ill.  ibid. 

29.  Ex  Cards  Ranulfi  Crew,  Arm.  A.  D.  161". 

fuper  familia  Cottonorum  de  Cotton  in  Com.  Salop,  & 
de  Combermere  in  Comitatu  CeRr.  60. 

30.  How  the  Family  of  Malbanc  procured  or  pur- 
chafed  an  Anniverfary  to  be  celebrated  for  them,  by  the 
Monks  ofWenloc. 

3 1 .  Carta  Convencionis  facte  inter  Dnm.  Ranulfum 

Comitem  CeRrie  &  Lincolnie,  et  Dnm.  Lewelinum  Prin- 
cipem  Northwallie ;  de  futuris  Nuptijs  Johannis  de 
Scoda  Nepotis  predifti  Comitis,  de  Sorore  fua  primo- 
genita,  cum  Helena  filia  ipfius  Lewelini.  63. 

T  his  Tranfcript  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  had  from 
Mr.  Vernon. 

.32.  Carta  Johannis  de  Scocia  Comitis  Ceftrie  & 
Huntingdon,  qui  dedit  Ricardo  Phitun  quietanciam 
puture  Servientiam.  tote  Terre  fue  et  Hominum  fuorum 
in  Ceftre  8c  CeRre-fcire :  et  fimiliter,  quietanciam  Tolneti 
difte  Terre  fue  Hominum  fuorum  :  et  quietanciam  Judi- 
catores  inveniendi  in  Hundredo  de  Macclesfield  de  Feodo 
de  FulRiaw  :  quos  quidem  ipfe  et  Anteceflores  fui  prius 
in  difto  Hundredo  invenire  confueverunt.  64. 

33.  Compendium  Carta  Rogeri  de  Lacy  Conftabu- 

larij  Ceflria,  concedentis  Galfrido  Prepofito"  de  Weuer- 
ham,  totain  Teram  fuam  in  eadem  Villa  .  .  .  .  Et  pre- 
diftus  Galfridus  et  Heredes  fui  tnvenient  Mihi  8c  Here- 
dibus  mcis,  idoneum  Hofpitium,  Ignem,  et  Aquam,  in 
eadem  Villa.  ibid. 

The  original  of  this  Deed  remayned  with  Robert 
Cooke  Clarenfeux,  King  of  Armes :  the  Labell  whereof 
was  a  huge  peece  of  white  Leather,  like  thofe  yet  append¬ 
ant  to  divers  other  old  Charters. 

34.  Abltrafts  from  Deeds  relating  to  Modburlegh-Fa- 
mily  &  Maner  ;  had  from  Mr.  Vernon  A.  D.  1638.  65. 

35.  Expoficio  quorundam  Vocabulorum  in  quibufdam 
Cartis  Libertatum  et  Franchefiarum,  ufurpatorum.  66. 

This  feems  to  have  been  colltfted  from  fome  Plea 
J5  of 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


441 


Num.  2079. 

bf  Quo  Waranto,  concerning  the  Maher  &  Hundred  of 
Macclesfield  in  Chefhire. 

36.  The  Explication  of  divers  other  old  Words  uled 
in  the  old  Charters  ;  taken  from  feveral  Authorities. 

ibid.  &  69. 

37.  Some  Notes  touching  the  Foundatiou  &  Endow¬ 
ment  of  the  Abbey  of  Stanlow  in  Chefhire.  67. 

38.  The  Boundaries  of  the  Wafte-lands  of  Frodfham 

&  Hellbie,  in  Controverfy  betwixt  ....  _  68. 

39.  The  Forme  of  a  Liuery  fued,  of  Lands  in  the 

County  of  Chefler.  69. 

40.  Notes  about  the  Offices  of  Chamberlayne  8c  Juflice 

of  Chefler.  ibid,  (et  vid.  pag.  68.) 

41.  Hiflorical  Notes  relating  to  Chefliire.  70.  (et  vide 

74-) 

Thefe  are  imperfeCt,  and  relate  moflly  to  Chefler, 
and  to  the  antient  Earls  thereof. 

42.  AbftraCts  of  original  Deeds,  whereby  the  Family 

of  Monte-alto  (Mount  alt,  Moulde,  or  Mounaut)  con¬ 
ferred  many  Benefactions  upon  the  Abbey  of  Bafing- 
werke.  72-  B.  D. 

43.  AbftraCts  from  other  Deeds,  in  the  pofleffion  of 

Mr.  Stanley,  relating  to  the  fame  Family.  72.  B. 

14.  Pedeeree  of  the  fame  Family,  deduced  from  the 
Charter.  72-  C-  r 

45.  Rough  Sketches  of  Pedegrees  for  the  Families  of 

Lacy,  Montalt,  See.  73* 

46.  Two  differing  Lifts  of  the  old  Earles  of  Chefters 

Barons.  75-  -A. 

47.  Petition  of  William  Lord  Baron  Breretonof  Logh- 

lyn  in  Ireland,  to  Thomas  Howard  Earl  of  Arundel  Sc 
Surrey,  as  Earl-Marefhal;  complaining  of  the  undue  plac¬ 
ing  of  certain  Pictu  es  &  Armes  in  the  Parliament-houfe 
within  the  Caflle  of  Chefler,  by  Mr.  Glafeor  late  Vice- 
Chambcrlayne  there.  75* 

This  is  followed  by  a  fhort  Narration  of  the  Mattter 
which  enfued  upon  the  Petition  aforefaid  ;  which  was, 
the  placing  thole  Pictures  &  Armes,  according  as  the 
Lord  Brereton  defired.  But  it  being  done  without  the 
knowledge  of  William  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby  as  Cham¬ 
berlayne  of  Chefler  ;  he  commanded  them  to  be  placed 
as  they  were  before,  A.  D.  1624. 

48. '  Lifl  of  the  Deanaries  within  the  County  of  Chef- 

ter  ;  and  of  the  feveral  Parifhes  within  the  fame  Dean¬ 
aries.  7  b* 

49.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  Places  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  fore-going  part  of  the  Book.  76.  b. 

Thenfollows,  as  it  were,  a  Refumption  of  the  Work; 
wherein  I  obferve, 

50.  Abflracts  of  Original  Deeds  late  in  the  Hands  of 

Captain  George  Dimock  of  Chefler  ;  and  now  with  me 
(Randle  Holme  the  fecond)  A.  D.  1648.  78. 

Divers  of  thefe  concern  the  Hofpital  of  S'  John  Baptifl 
in  that  City :  as  alfo  other  Deeds  &  Wills,  relating  to 
the  Citizens  &  their  Families ;  with  Tricks  of  the  Seals, 
See. 

51.  Shorter  Abflracts  of  other  old  Deeds,  taken  by 

the  fecond  Randle  Holme.  89. 

52.  Carta  qua  Hfimundus  de  Macy  Dominus  de  Done- 

ham,  erigit  Viliam  fuam  de  Altringham  in  liberum  Bur- 
gum,  conceditq;  Burgenfibus  ejufdem  varias  Libertates, 
et  Privilegia,  anno  .  .  .  R.  Edwardi  1.  90. 

53.  Literce  Patentes  Edwardi  primogeniti  Edwardi 

OuaVti  Regis  Anglire,  Comitis  Ceflrie,  quibus  perdonat 
Petro  Dutton  Armigero,  mortem  Johannis  Maffy  de 
Grafton,  nuper  felonice  interfeCli  ;  ita  tamen,  quod 
idem  Petrus  flet  ReCto  in  Curia  fua,  See.  Tefle,  See. 
G  Julij  anno  Regni  Patris  fui  22.  93.  B. 

54.  F.xtraCls  from  25  Deeds  formerly  in  the  Hands 

of  the  Lady  Legh  ;  Sc  plundred  A.  D.  1 646.  94. 

Thefe  came  to  the  Hands  of  the  fecond  Randle 
I-Iolmc,  in  the  tyme  of  Warre,  as  he  writes.  95. 

55.  AbftraCts  of  old  Deeds  entred  into  a  Booke  in  the 
Cuflody  of  Ja.  Wright  of  Northwich,  one  of  the  Clerks 

Cat.  Harl.  V01..  II. 


Num.  2079. 


to  H.  Berkenhead  Prothonotary  at  Chefler.  A.  D.  162a. 

97- 

And  here  I  obferve, 

56.  Clamia  Forreflarum  de  Wirhale,  Mara,  et  Mon- 

drem  ;  ac  eciam  aliorum  infra  Foreflas  prediCtas  exiften- 
tium.  (Thefe  Claims  are  thought  to  have  been  made 
temp,  R.  Edw'ardi  111.)  ibid.^  1 

57.  Excerpta  de  Placitis  Comitatfis  Ceflrie,  tends 

apud  Ceflriam,  coram  Rogero  Hillary  Jufliciario  Dni. 
Comitis  Ceflriejdie  Martis  proximo  port  Feflum  Affump- 
tionis  B.  Marie,  anno  27  R.  Edwardi  111.  108. 

58.  Breuates  (i.  e.  fhort  Notes  collected)  out  of  the  Re¬ 
cords  in  Chefler  Caflle.  1 1 1- 

c q.  Ex  Libro  Rubro  irrotulatorio  in  Archivis  Ceftr. 

ibid. 

60.  De  Willeimo  Win-peny,  qui  interfecit  Johannem 

Fabrum  apud  Congleton,  et  pod  faCturn,  captus  fuit,  et 
fimul  cum  Bonis  fuis,  miflus  fuit  adCaftrum  de  Halton,  et 
ibi  detentus.  Poflea,  Ballivi  Dni.  Comitis  Lancaftrie 
de  Halton,  Corpus  prediCti  Willelmi  (eo  quod  fuper  Cu¬ 
riam  ibidem  fe  ponerenolucrit)  ad  Caflrum  Ceflrie  mifit. 
Poflea,  prediClus  Willelmus  fecit  Finem,  pro  Pace  Comi¬ 
tis  habenda.  11 3* 

61.  How  William  de  Huxlegh,  a  notorious  Thief, 

(with  other  Thieves  )  broke  the  C.aflle  of  Halton,  and 
carried  away  with  themGoods  to  theValueof £40.  Which 
William  being  taken,  8c  indiCted  at  the  Affixes,  pleaded 
that  He  was  a  Clergy-man,  8c  confequently  not  bound  to 
anfiver  in  that  Court.  The  Court  then  caufed  open  Cry 
to  be  made,  whether  his  Bifhop  had  fent  any  perfon  to 
demand  him  ;  which  not  appearing,  the  Jury  brought 
him  in  Guilty  of  that,  &  other  Robberies.  115. 

62.  Breve  Edwardi  Comitis  Ceflrie,  &c.  direCtum 
Ricardo  Sutton.  Servienti  Pacis  in  Comitatu  Ceflr.  in 
quo  (quia  nonnulli  MalefaClores  et  Pacis  perturbatores 
Homicidia  et  alia  MalefaCla  perpetraverant  in  Balliva  fua) 
precipit  quod  in  Balliva  fua  inviolabiliter  confcrvet,  See. 
et  quod  prediClos  Malefactores  et  capi,  et  ad  prifonam 
Caflri  Ceflr.  duci,  vel  extra  Patriam  fugari  faciat,  citra 
Feflum  Natalis  Domini;  fubpenaforisfactureBallivefue. 
Tefle,  8cc.  3  Decembris  anno  4  Regis  Edwardi  11.  1 2 1 . 

63.  Willelmus  Walke  appellavit  Adamum  filium  Jo¬ 
hannis  de  Woodhoufes  de  incendio  Domorum  fuarum, 
et  Afportatione  Bonorum  fuorum.  Et  prediClus  Adam 
captus  fuit.  et  ad  Caflrum  Ceflrie  duCtus,  etc.  Et  idem 
Adam  ad  Appellationem  nihil  refpondit,  fed  mutum  fe 
tenuit.  Sed  qui  teflificatum  fuit  Adamum  loqui  poffe, 
fi  vellet,  &c.  ldeo  commiffus  eft  Gaole  ad  Dietam,  See. 
Et  poflea  teftificatur  per  Johannem  le  MorganConftabula- 
rio  Caflri  Ceflrie,  quod  prediClus  Adam  mortuus  eft  ad 
Dietam,  8cc.  Ideo,  8cc.  de  Caftell.  inquirend.  ibid. 

64.  Hugo  Cholmondelege  Serviens  Pacis  prefentavit 
ad  Caflrum  Ceflrie  Caput  Davidis  le  Cooper  decollati  pro 
Burglaria  cujufdam  Domus  apud  Burwardefley,  et  cu- 
jufdam  Domus  apud  Cholmondley,  See.  anno  6  Edw.  11. 

124.  vid.  131.  133.  172. 

65.  Jacobus  de  Coghull,  See.  prefentaverunt  ad  Caf- 

trum  Ceftr.  caput  cujufdam  hominis  capti  fugiendo  cum 
quodam  Equo  furato  ;  et  prefentaverunt  Equum  cum 
Capite.  Qui  quidem  Equus  poflea  vendebatur  per  Came- 
rarium  Ceflrie  pro  5  Solidis.  ibid. 

66.  David  de  Buckley  &  Robertus  de  Woodhull  Servi- 
entes  Pacis  fub  Ricardo  de  Sutton,  prefentaverunt  apud 
Caflrum  Ceflrie  Caput  Thome  Fox  Felonis  et  Fugitivi  ; 
et  nihil  prefentaverunt  de  Bonis.  Ideo  Inquificio,  etc. 

ibid. 

67.  In  a  Suit  tried  anno  3  R.  Edwardi  n.  .  .  .  Abbas 
(de  Valle  Regali)  dicit  quod  Dns.  Edwardus  Pater  Do¬ 
mini  Regis  nunc,  fundavit  Abbatiam  fuam,  et  dotavit  de 
diverfis  Libertalibus,  &c.  per  Cartam  fuam  eis  conccffit 
Catalla  Deodand.  infra  Dominium  ipfius  Abbatis.  et  dicit 
quod  Infortunium  prediCtum  contingebat  in  filo  Aque 
prediCte  (de  Wevere)  Et  quod  filum  8c  curfus  Aque  eft 
infra  Dominium  fuum.  Et  profert  quandam  Cartam  per 

5  XJ  Seipfum 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2079. 

Seipfum  lectam,  fed  Curie  non  oftenfam  nec  liberation. 
Lt  ditftum  eft  eidem  Abbati  per  Jufticiar;  eandem  Cartam 
Curie  liberari,  ad  intranduin  Claufulam,  per  quam  cla- 
mat  Libertatem  predidam :  et  Abbas  hoc  facere  recufans, 
in  Contemptu  Curie  receflit.  Ideo,  de  Libertate  predi&i 
Abbatis  quoad  Catalla  predicta,  ad  Judicium,  ad  proxi- 
inum  Comitatum  &c.  ibid. 

68.  .  .  .  Ricardus  Goyel  Monachus  de  Cumber- 

mere  interfecit  Fratrem  Adamum  Carpentarium,  cum 
quodam  Cultello  ;  et  ftatim,  Abbas  et  Conventus  ejuf- 
dem  Loci  ceperunt  eum,  et  imprifonaverunt  fecund  urn 
Confuetudinem  Ordinis  &c.  (Anno  1  R.  Edw.  11.)  127. 

69.  Allifa  venit  recogn.  (anno  1  R.  Edwardi  11)  fi 

Hamo  de  Mafiy,  &c.  injufte  difleifiverunt  Petrum  de 
Dutton,  de  libero  Tenemento  fuo  in  Worperton,  &c. 
.  .  .  ideo  capiatur  Aififa,  &c.  Et  quia  idem  Hamo 

eft  Baro  Dni.  Regis  et  Tenemcnta  fua  tenet  de  Dno. 
Rege  in  Capite,  per  Baroniam  mediate  ;  et  ad  Affif.  feu 
Jurat  aliqu.  de  aliquibus  Tenentibus  de  Dno.  Rege  in 
Capite,  tends  abl'que  corporibus  Militum  Gladio  cindto- 
rum,  et  difcretis  Hominibus  Comitatus,  non  eft  pro- 
cedendum :  et  Vice-comes  modo  in  Panello  fuo,  retor- 
navit  homines  fimplicis  Status  et  Tenure,  non  Milites, 
feu  Difcretos  Comitatus,  &c.  Ideo  preceptum  eft  Vice- 
Comid,  quod  venire  faciat  ad  proximum  Comitatum, 
duodecim  Milites  Gladio  cindtos  ;  etpreter  illos  viginti- 
quatuor  liberos  et  legales  Homines  ejufdem  ComitatCis 
ad  faciend.  Allif.  &c.  130. 

70.  Refcriptum  Pagani  de  Tibetct  Jufticiarij,  ad  R. 

Edwardum  n.  anno  fui  Regni  4'°.  .  .  .  Quia  Johan¬ 

nes  Anker  captus  fuit,  et  in  Prifona  Dni  Regis  de  Mac- 
clesfeld  adhuc  detentus  eft  per  Appellum  Amide  filie  N. 
de  Falo,  quod  Appellum  adhuc  pendet,  .  .  .  ut 

mihi  videtur,  corpus  predidti  Johannis  apudNotingham, 
ducere  nondebui,  quoufque  Appellum  illud  fuerit  termi- 
natum.  Et  edam,  quia  totus  Comitatus  Celtrie  dicit, 
quod  Comes  Celtrie  eft  Comes  Palatij,  et  habet  talem 
Libertatem,  quod  omnes  Prifones  capd  in  Comitatu 
Celtrie,  five  extra,  coram  Jufticiar.  Ceftrie  infra  Comi¬ 
tatum  predictum  arrenari  et  judicari  debent  ;  et  a  tem¬ 
pore  quo  non  extat  memoria,  arrenari  et  judicari  confue 
verunt,  et  non  alibi  extra  Comitatum  ilium  :  nec  un- 
quam  aliquis  captus  infra  Comitatum  predidtum  pro  ali- 
qua  Felonia,  ad  Sedtam  alicuius,  milfus  fuit  extra 
Comitatum.  Et  quia,  fi  ita  eft,  diet  contra  Statum 
Dni.  Regis  Comitis  Ceftrie  ut  mihi  videtur,  fi  didtum 
Johannem  extra  Comitatum  Ceftrie  mififlem,  de  ficut 
unicuique  verfus  eum  fequenti,  fecundum  Legem  &  Con¬ 
fuetudinem  Patrie,  paratus  fum  Jufticiam  facere.  ibid. 

71.  Defcents  of  Dutton,  Venables,  Lancelin,  Sutton, 
Sec.  feeming  to  have  been  made  out  from  Deeds.  132. 

72.  Placitum  Comitatus  Celtr.  anno  26  R.  Edw.  111. 

de  Contendone  mota  inter  Hundred,  de  Bucklowe,  et 
Hundred,  de  Northwico,  de  Mifa  1 000  Librarum  Dno. 
Comiti  concelfarum.  Jurati  dicunt,  quod  Hundred,  de 
Bucklowe  ad  quamlibet  Mifam  centum  Librarum,  debet 
folvere  20  Solidos  plus  quam  Hundred,  de  Northwico  : 
ita  quod  Hundred,  de  Bucklowe  debet  folvere  ad  quam¬ 
libet  Mifam  Centum  Librarum,  14  Libras ;  et  Hundred, 
de  Northwico,  1 3  Libras,  &c.  j  46. 

The  abovementioned  Extract  from  the  Chefter-Plea- 
Rolls  being  over  ;  I  come  to, 

73.  An  old  Paper  entituled  De  Divifis  etBruera  inter 
Viliam  de  Whitbye,  et  Manerium  de  Stanley,  152.  A. 

Then  follows, 

74.  Another  Alphabetical  Table  containing  the 
Names  of  Places  mentioned  in  this  ms.  from  page  78. 
to  page  1 53.  &alfo  from  page  158.  to  the  end.  153. 

75.  Notes  collected  from  the  Plea-Rolls  of  Chelter. 

158.  A. 

Here  I  obferve, 

76.  The  Claims  of  Liberties  &  Privileges  made  by 

the  Superiors  of  Religious  Houfes,  Noblemen,  Gentle¬ 
men,  &  Officers.  ibid. 


Num.  2079,  2080. 

Then  follow, 

77.  Abftradts  of  old  Deeds  in  the  Cuftodv  o  f  Julm 

Kettell  of  Burfley  (alias  Burwardfley)  made  by  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme,  A.  D.  1641.  160.  A. 

78.  His  Collections  from  the  Deeds  or  F.vedences 

remayning  in  the  Hands  of  Richard  Allen  of  Bolfworth, 
Gent  A.  D.  1640.  x66. 

7 9.  His  Brevietts  of  a  Court-Record  belonging  to 
Chefhire  ;  written  from  Dr.  Cuerden’s  Notes.  168.  A. 

80.  Searches  made  in  (i.  e.  Notes  taken  from)  the 

Records  of  Chefter,  by  Phillip  Ouldfeild  of  Bradwall 
Efq;  learned  in  the  Lawes.  169, 

Among  thefe,  I  find  one,  fhewing  that 

81.  Alicia  que  fuit  Uxor  Rogeri  Turnoke  petit  verfus 

Thomarn  de  Wefte-difh,  tertiam  partem,  &c.  ut  dotem 
fuam,  See.  Et  Thomas  et  alij  veniunt  et  dicunt  quod 
predidta  Alicia  non  debet  inde  Dotem  habere.  Dicunt 
eniin,  quod  Ipfa  in  Vita  predidfi  Rogeri  elongavit  fe  de 
eodem  Rogero,  et  morabatur  in  Adulterio  cum  quodam 
Ricardo  de  Syddinton  apud  Somerford,  et  cum  eo  mo- 
ram  traxit ;  ita  quod  in  vita  ipfius  Rogeri,  nunquam 
fuit  eidem  Rogero  reconciliata  ;  et  hoc  parari  funt  veri- 
ficare  per  patriam.  She  denying  the  Allegations  againft 
her.  They  prove  the  fame  to  the  Jury.  Wherefore  the 
Verdift  went  for  the  Defendants.  175. 

82.  Collectanea  ex  Recordis  remanentibus  in  Cuftodia 

Mag'ri  Bradlhaw  apud  London,  ubi  Liber  vocatus 
Domefday  remanet ;  A.  D.  1632.  176.  A. 

All  thefe  relate  to  Chelhire-matters. 

83.  Ex  libro  antiquo  Richardi  Sneyd  de  Bradwall, 

Armigeri.  _  178.  A. 

84.  Extracts  from  Chefhire  Records.  179.  A. 

85.  Extrafts  out  of  antient  Records,  remaininge  in 

the  Hands  of  Mr.  Thom.  Birkenhed  of  Chefter,  A.  D. 
l637-  131. 

Few  of  thefe  relate  to  Perfons  or  Places  in  Chefhire. 

86.  Ex  Libro  Decretorum  Curia;  Wardorum  et  Li- 

beracionum.  1 84.  B. 

This  relateth  to  the  procefs  of  the  Suit  about  the 
Eftateof  Peter  Shakerley  of  Hulme,  Efq;  a  Ward,  anno 
12  R.  Eliz. 

87.  Extracts  out  of  ould  Parchment  Notes,  in  Cuf- 

tody  of  Mr.  Will.  Brock  of  LTpton  ;  &  were  in  Bookes 
of  Accompts  of  the  Earles  of  Chefter  :  by  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme,  A.  D.  1639.  x 86. 

88.  Extracts  from  Deeds  &  other  Inftrnments,  made 

by  the  faid  Mr.  Holme,  &c.  187.  197.  200. 

89.  Notes  from  an  old  torn  Record,  fhewing  the  Te¬ 

nures  of  many  Freeholders  Lands,  in  the  Counties  of 
Surrey,  Suflex,  Kent,  Huntingdon,  Effex,  &  Flertford , 
taken  by  the  fame,  A.  D.  1639.  189. 

90.  A  fhort  Note  of  the  third  Randle  Holme,  touch, 
ing  the  building  and  Reparation  of  Frodffiam-Bridgc. 

197. 

91.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Perfons  Names 
mentioned  in  this  Book  ;  At  the  end. 

It  may  be  noted  that  mod  of  the  Extracts  entred 
into  this  ms.  as  far  as  page  1 79.  were  copied  from  a 
Book,  which  Mr.  William  Vernon  lent  to  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme,  A.  D.  1636. 

2080. 

A  Book  in  folio  confiding  of  divers  Tracts  put  together 
by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  who  hath  alfo  given  it 
this  Title,  “  Seuerall  Teftimonies  of  the  Cuftome  of 
Chefter,  conceminge  the  takeinge-downe  of  GlafTe 
and  Wainfcote:”  which  Cuftome  I  find  deferibed  in 
the  words  following;  vizt.  t-  That  when,  and  as  often  [ 
as  any  Tenaunte  haueinge  an  Eftate  for  Terine  of  i 
Life  or  Liues,  or  of  Yeares  of  any  Dwellinge-houfe 
or  Buildinge  within  the  faid  City  for  his  owne  conve¬ 
nient  Ufe  within  the  faid  Houfe  or  Buildinge,  fliould 
&  did  ere£t  &  fett  up  upon  any  GlafTe,  Wainfcote, 
Inner  Doors*  Shelues,  Formes,  Dreffers,  &  other  fuch 
10  like 


Bibliotheca;  Harleiana-- 


443 


Buin.  2080,  2081. 

like  Neceflaries :  in  fuch  cafe  the  Teiiante,  his  Exe¬ 
cutors,  or  Affignes,  might  remoue  &  take  away  the 
fame,  or  Sell  8c  Difpofe  thereof,  at  his  or  their  Wills 
8c  Pleafures,  without  Difturbance  of  him  that  Claymes 
the  Reverfion  of  the  faid  lioufe  or  building.”  Which 
Cuftom,  and  the  Littigations  occaftoned  thereby  have 
given  birth,  as  I  conceive,  to  many  more  Tracts  than 
thefe  that  foilow. 

1.  Interrogatories  adminiftred  to  Witnefles  produced 
to  be  examined  vpon  the  parte  8c  behalfe  of  Ellenor  Al- 
cocke  Widowe.  Executrix  of  Thomas  Alcocke  her  Huf- 
band  deceafed,  C.omplainante  ;  againft  Charles  Lewelley 
&  Anne  Salufbury  Widowe,  Defendantes.  Loofe  at 
the  beginninge. 

2.  Depofitions  of  Lettife  Alcock  Widowe  in  that  Caufe. 
Loofe  alfo. 

3.  Interrogatories  to  be  miniftred  toWitnefTes  pro¬ 

duced  on  the  parte  8c  behalfe  of  Thomas  Gamull.  Gent, 
and  William  Fletcher  Inhoulder  Defendants,  againft 
Elianor  Brereton  Widowe,  Coinplainante.  551. 

4.  Depolitions  of  Witnefles  taken  in  the  Kings  Ma- 

jefties  Court  of  Exchequer  at  Chefter,  within  his  Caftle 
there,  the  4th  daye  of  July  A.  D.  i633«vppon  the  parte 
and  behalfe  of  Thomas  Gamull  Gent.  &  William  Fletch¬ 
er  Defendants,  againft  Ellianor  Brereton  Widowe  Com¬ 
plainant  ;  before  Edward  Gregge  Gent.  Examiner  of 
the  fame  Court.  556. 

5 .  Interrogatories  to  be  adminiftred  to  Witnefles  pro¬ 

duced  on  the  Parte  and  behalfe  of  Ellen  Brereton  Wy- 
dowe.  Executrix  of  John  Brereton  Alderman  deceafed, 
Complainant;  againft  Thomas  Gamull  Gent.  8c  William 
Fletcher,  Defendants.  572. 

6.  Depofition  of  Witnefles  taken  in  the  King’s  Ma- 

jefties  Court  of  Exchequer  at  Chefter,  the  27th  of  May, 
1633,  upon  the  part  &  behalf  of  Ellen  Brereton  Wi¬ 
dowe,  Complainant  ;  againft  Thomas  Gamull  Gent.  8c 
William  Fletcher  Defendants  :  before  Edward  Gregge 
Gent.  Examiner  of  the  fame  Courr.  59 1 . 

2081. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  Angle  Tradls  bound 
up  together  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  who  on  the 
back  hath  written  this  Title,  “Dee-Millnes;  Sutes  about 
them.”  But  I  And  therein, 

1.  The  faid  Mr.  Holme’s  Lift  of  the  things  of  moft 
Note  in  this  Book.  Loofe,  at  the  beginning. 

2.  Attefted  Copie  of  Mr.  Francis  Gamull’s  Bill  ex¬ 

hibited  to  the  Chamberlayne  of  Chefter  in  the  Exche¬ 
quer  there,  againft  Edward  Ruflell,  &  others,  who  had 
either  fett  upp  V\  ind-Mills,  Water-Mills,  or  Horfe-Mills 
of  their  own,  in  or  near  to  the  City  of  Chefter  ;  or,  at 
leaft,  carried  their  Corn  to  be  ground  at  the  faid  Mills  ; 
in  prejudice,  as  he  afierts,  to  the  Mills  long  before 
eredfed  near  Chefter-Bridge,  upon  the  River  Dee  (where¬ 
of  he  was  then  Tenant)  being  commonly  known  8c  called 
by  the  Name  of  Dee-Mylnes,  and  which  had,  time  out 
of  mind,  the  Right  of  Multure  8c  Suit  from  all  the  Inha¬ 
bitants  of  Chefter,  excepting  only  the  Tenants  to  the 
Dean  &  Chapter,  inhabiting  without  the  North-gate. 
This  happened  about  A.  D.  1637.  1.  vid.  158. 

3.  An  Order  of  Star-Chamber  (with  the  Seal  affixed) 
dated,  the  6  of  May  1635.  upon  the  Differences  arifen 
betweeen  John  Tyrer  who  had  eredted  W  ater-works 
about  30  Years  before,  at  Dee-Mills  belonging  to  Mr. 
Francis  Gamull,  to  the  great  Commodity  of  the  Inhabi¬ 
tants  of  Chefter  ;  but  to  the  prejudice  of  Mr.  Gamull,  as 
was  aflerted.  Hereby,  the  Lords  took  care  of  the  public 
Commodity  of  the  People  ;  and  left  both  Parties  to  try 
out  their  private  Matters  of  Complaint,  in  the  Exchequer 
Court  of  Chefter,  according  as  they  ihould  fee  Caufe. 

36. 

4.  Interrogatories  to  be  miniftred  to  Witnefles  pro¬ 
duced  to  be  examined  on  the  Behalfe  of  Edward  Whiiby 
Efq;  Recorder  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter,  and  Francis  Ga- 


Num.  2081. 

mull  Efquycr  8c  Alderman  of  the  faid  Cittie  ;  againft 
Phillip  Mamvaringe  Efquyer,  Robert  Ilarvie  8c  Thomas 
Alderfey  Alderman,  and  others.  38. 

It  l'eems  that  Mr.  GamulPs  Grandfather,  or  Father, 
had  permitted  John  Tyrer  to  ereft  Water-Works  in  and 
nere  their  Mills  principally  to  preferue  the  Right  of  Grift 
8c  Multure  to  the  faid  Milnes  ;  and  accordingly,  the  faid 
Tyrer  did  agree  that  all  fuch  as  fliould  haue  Water  from 
the  faid  Workes,  fhould  be  obliged  to  grind  their  Malte 
8c  Com  at  the  faid  Milnes ;  8c  that  fuch  as  refufed, 
fhould  be  debarred  from  haueiug  of  that  Water,  and  their 
Pipes  (if  laid  in)  to  be  cutt  oft' ;  which  Agreement 
had  been  obferved,  and  Mr.  Gamull’s  Rent  paid. 
That,  in  procefle  of  time,  old  Tyrer  being  dead,  Mr. 
Gamull  entred  into  Treaty  with  John  Tyrer  the  Son, 
for  buying  his  Intereft  in  the  faid  Water-works  ;  but  be¬ 
fore  this  was  brought  to  a  conclufion,  Sir  Randle 
Mainwaring  late  Alderman  of  Chefter  &  the  others,  in 
Mr.  Gamull’s  Abfence,  and  without  his  privity,  pur- 
chafed  the  fame  out  of  his  hands.  That  Sir  Randle  and 
his  Partners  acknowledging  the  Place  whereon  the  faid 
Workes  were  erefted,  8c  the  Streame  fervinge  the  fame, 
to  be  Mr.  Gamull’s  Inheritance,  Mr.  Gamull  was  to  make 
them  a  Leafe  thereof,  at  Ten  Pounds  ^  annum  Rent, 
and  they  to  performe  all  fuch  Things  8c  Covenants  as  the 
Tyrers  had  done.  That  after  this,  fome  of  the  faid 
Partners,  vttered  8c  gaue-out  Speeches  againft  Mr.  Ga¬ 
mull’s  Right  of  Grift  and  Multure,  and  faid  that  it  was 
a  Slauery  and  Boundage  that  Men  fhould  be  bounde  to 
grinde  at  any  Mills ;  and  that  they  would  free  8c  difeharge 
the  Citizens  Sc  Inhabitants  of  Chefter  from  th  e  am  1  .*  1 

5.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Francis  Gamull,  to  Sir 

chard  Grofvenor  Knight  8c  Baronet,  his  Father-in-La 
dated  from  Weftminfter,  25  May  1641.  upon  the  pub- 
lick  Occurences  of  that  Time  ;  as  alfo  his  own  private 
Affairs.  91. 

6.  Breviatts  in  the  Sutes  between  Mr.  Edmund  Gamull 

8c  John  I Iankey,  touching  Dee-Millnes.  93. 

7.  An  Original  Inftrument  whereby  Mr.  Alderman 

Gamull  abovementioned,  did  furrendtr  to  Thomas  Ga¬ 
mull  his  Sonne  8c  Heire  apparant,  all  his  Eftate  8c  Inte¬ 
reft  in  8c  to  Dee-Milnes,  8c  all  Fifhings  upon  the  Water 
of  Dee,  8c  in  a  certaine  Poole  called  the  Cage,  with  all 
the  Water-courfes,  Flud-gates,  Cawfies,  Tolies,  Mul¬ 
tures,  Proffits,  8cc.  to  them  belonging.  Given,  20  Marche, 
anno  44  R.  Elizabethan.  96.  b. 

This  Inftrument  is  cancelled. 

8.  Rough  Draught  of  the  Cafe  touching  the  antient 

Cuftome  of  Multure  at  Dee-Milles.  98.  b. 

Then  follow  fome  tranfpofed  Papers,  wherein  are 
contained, 

9.  A  fummary  Recital  of  a  Procefs  between  Raph  8c 
Thomas  Goodman,  Tenants  of  Dee-Milles,  Plaintift'es  ; 
8c  Margaret  Bavand,  8c  others,  Defendants:  for  the  wiih- 
drawinge  Multture  ffomDee-Milnes,  and  carryingCorne 
to  other  Milnes.  In  this  Suit,  when  honeft  Margaret  hap¬ 
pen’d  to  be  caft,  8c  fhe  warned  by  the  Court  to  forbear 
fuch  her  unlawful  Practices  for  the  future  :  the  meek- 
fpirited  Woman  thinking  no  harm  in  being  as  aftive  in 
the  Grinding-Trade  as  fhe  could,  unluckily  fell  into  a 
Contempt  of  the  Court ;  who  (upon  further  Complaint) 
did  on  the  24th  of  March,  anno  13  R.  Elizabethae,  iffue 
cut  an  Attachment  againft  poor  Margery ;  Ordering, 
that  att  her  Appearance  fhe  fhould  be  committed  to  Warde 
in  the  Caftle  of  Chefter,  there  to  be  punifhed  for  the 
Contempt  aforefaid  ;  and  there  to  remaine,  untill  fhe 
fhould  enter  into  Boiind,  with  fufficient  Suerties,  to  per¬ 
forme  the  Order  of  the  Court  before  made  againft  her; 
8c  further,  to  content  8c  pay  to  thePlaintiffes  35  Shillings, 
for  their  Cofts  &  Charges  in  this  Suite  fufteined.  fol. 
109.  (and  fo  to  be  read  toward  the  beginning  of  the 
Book.) 

Then  follow, 

10.  Some  other  Papers,  written  pro  8c  con,  relating 

to 


444 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2081. 

to  the  Suit  between  Mr.  Francis  Gamull,  &  Edward 
Ruffel  &  others  Defend"’  that  one  Dickinfon  &  one  Den- 
fon  were  in  a  fair  way  to  be  hampered,  as  (landing  in 
Contempt,  for  Breach  of  feuerall  Orders  of  the  Court ; 
and  for  fraudulent  Pra&ize  to  defeate  the  faid  Orders. 
&c.  Tranfpofed.  in. 

11.  The  feveral  Anfweare  of  Jane  Davenporte  Wid- 

dowe,  one  of  the  Defendants,  for  her  parte  ;  to  the  In- 
formation  of  Sir  Walter  Pye  Knight,  his  Majellies  Attor¬ 
ney  of  his  Highnes  Courte  of  Wards  &  Liveryes,  Com¬ 
plainant.  dated  the  5th  of  November  1623.  120. 

Here  Mrs.  Davenporte  reprefenteth  that  the  fayd 
Information  was  contrived  k  exhibited  againft  her,  by 
the  onely  meanes  of  Edward  Whitbye  Efq;  (who  had 
maried  Alice  the  Widow  of  Thomas  Gamull  Efq;  which 
Alice  had  purchafed  the  Wardlhip  of  her  Son  Francis, 
then  an  Infant)  who  vppon  fome  caufeleffe  Difpleafure 
by  him  conceived  againft  her,  of  purpofe  to  vex  & 
trouble  her,  and  to  put  her  to  unnecefTary  Charges, 
without  any  juft  Caufe  at  all.  Which  (he  the  rather 
thinketh,  becaufe  there  are  manye  others  named  Defend¬ 
ants  in  the  fayd  Information  with  her,  yet  none  of  them 
are  ferved  with  Procefle  to  anfweare  the  fame,  but  only 
herfelf ;  who  by  Reafon  of  the  weake  (or  poor)  State 
(lie  was  left  in  by  her  Hulband,  is  leaft  able  to  defend 
Suite.  She  owns  that  her  faid  Hulband,  for  his  better 
Advantage,  did  ere<5l  one  Horfe-Milne  for  Malte  upon 
his  own  I.ande  in  Boughton  within  the  Libertye  of  the 
Cittye  of  Chefter,  which  he  quietly  held  during  the  reft 
of  his  Life  ;  &  did  receiue  the  Mulcture  &  Tollc  thereof, 
k  caufed  Malte  to  be  carried  &:  recarryed  into  k  out  of 
the  Cittie  of  Chefter,  as  often  as  Occafion  required, 
without  any  Difturbance.  She  further  difputes  againft 
the  alfertion  of  an  Antient  Cuftome  of  grinding  folely 
at  Dce-Milles  ;  pleading  that  all  the  other  or  Countrey- 
Milles  were  free  for  any  Man ;  k  had  been  fo,  time 
out  of  Memory. 

12.  The  Examination  of  Jane  Davenporte,  Widowe, 

taken  22  of  September  1623,  by  Vertue  of  the  Kings 
Majefties  W ritte  of  Commiflion  out  of  the  Prince  his 
Highnes  Courte  of  Wardes  k  Liveryes  to  them  (the  Com- 
iniflioners)  directed,  vpon  the  Behalfe  of  Francis  Gamull 
his  Majefties  Warde.  141. 

Here  the  Widow  can  remember,  with  much  ado, 
feveral  Matters  which  feem  to  make  againft  her  ;  but  in 
the  main,  keeps  her  Ground  &  her  Right  to  the  Mill, 
with  firmnefs  enough. 

13.  Compendium Inquifitioniscujufdam,  ubi  Juratores 

dicunt,  quod  Georgius  Cotton  fuit  feifitns  in  Domi- 
nico  fun  ut  de  Feodo,  de  et  in  Grangia  vocata  Stanlow- 
grange  in  Com.  Ceftr.  Et  de  k  in  quibufdam  Molendi- 
nis  acquaticis  granaticis  vocatis  Dee-Mills,  et  quadam 
feparali  Pifcaria  in  aqua  de  Dee,  vocata  le  Kings  Poole, 
et  in  le  Cage  ibidem.  Et  quod  predictus  Georgius  Cotton 
et  quidam  Robertus  Bonham,  20  die  Februarii  anno  13 
R.  Elizabethe,  vendiderunt  Johanni  Poole  Armigero  ean- 
dem  Grangiam  :  reddendo  inde  annuatim  prefato  Geor- 
gio  Cotton  13  Libras,  6  Solidos,  et  8  Denarios.  Etpre- 
diftus  Georgius  Cotton,  et  Ricardus  Cotton  filius  ejuf- 
c'.em,  circa  ultimum  diem  Junij  anno  42  R.  Eliz  vendi¬ 
derunt  Thome  Gamull  Generofo  (in  confideratione  600 
Librarum)  Molendina  et  Pifcarias  predial.  reddendo  inde 
annuatim  Centum  Libras.  1-4. 

14.  Papers  about  an  Injun&ion  with  Proclamation, 

againft  the  Inhabitants  of  certain  Townes,  who  for  the 
future  were  to  do  their  Soake  &  Suit  to  ...  Mille. 
dated  from  the  Duchy-Chamber,  Febr.  1632.  1 59. 

15.  The  Cafe  concerninge  Dee  Milnes,  within  the 

Liberties  of  the  City  of  Chefter  ;  now  the  Inheritance  of 
Erancis  Gamull  Ffq.  ,gg_ 

Here  are  alfo  Oueflions  refulting  from  the  Cafe  with 
the  Anfwer  of  a  learned  Council  to  them. 

1 6.  Petition  of  Nicholas  Ratcliffe  &  Mary  his  Wife, 
with  other  free  Citizens  of  Chefter,  to  the  Mayor  k  Al- 


Num.  2081. 

dermen  thereof;  (hewing,  they  had  been  ferved  with  Pro- 
ces  forth  of  the  Court  of  Wards  &  Liueries  at  Weftmin- 
fter,  by  Mr,  Recorder  Whitby  Gardian  of  Francis  Gamull 
Gent,  his  Majefties  Ward  ;  k  praying  they  would  move 
Mr.  Recorder  to  (lay  the  Proceedings  aboue  ;  and  that 
they  might  anfwer  before  their  Worfliips.  A.  D.  1623. 

i69- 

17.  Petition  of  Nicholas  Ratclifle,  &c.  to  the  Aflembly 

of  Chefter,  fetting  forth  their  being  fued  in  the  Court  of 
Wards  at  Weftminfter,  on  the  behalfe  of  Francis  Gamull 
Efq;  his  Majefties  Ward,  for  not  grinding  their  Courne 
at  Dee-Mills.  And  therefore  defiring  the  Advice  &  Af- 
fiftance  of  the  Aflembly,  whereby  they  will  be  guided  & 
dircfled,  as  being  of  the  poorer  Ranke,  &  not  able  to 
(land  out  in  fo  high  a  Courte,  and  vppon  fuch  great 
Charges  as  this  Suite  will  require  ;  being  willing  rather 
to  giue  anie  Satisfaction  that  Juftice  will  exatt,  for  their 
Ignorance  for  the  time  pad,  and  for  the  future  to  yield  to 
the  pretended  Clayme,  then  to  confume  their  Eftates  in 
defence  thereof.  171. 

18.  Lift  of  the  feveral  Windmylls  k  Horfemylls  erec¬ 
ted  near  Chefter.  173. 

1 9.  A  Copie  of  the  laft  mentioned  Petition  ;  which  was 
29  January  1637,  (hewed  to  Witneffes  examined  on  the 
behalf  of  Francis  Gamull  Efq ;  Complainant,  againft 
Edward  Ruffel  Gent.  &c.  Defendants. 

20.  Copy  of  an  Inquifition  taken  at  Hawarden  in 
Flynt-ftiire,  12  December  anno  5  R.  Jacobi  1.  againft  the 
Caufway  &  Weare  made  in  the  River  Dee  ;  which  by 
the  Teftimonies  ofmany  of  the  Wellh  Gentry,  &  others, 
was  found  to  be  the  Caufe  of  the  Overflowing  of  Lands, 
an  Hindrance  to  the  Coming  up  of  the  Fifh,  an  Obftruc- 
tion  to  theNavigation  of  that  River,  &c.  (vid.  infra  §  28.) 

176' 

21.  Tranflation  of  a  Latin  Leafe  of  Dee-Milnes,  with 

its  Fifhing,  Suit,  Court  &  Calfey,  lett  by  Edward  the 
Black  Prince  to  Robert  ofBredonePerfon  of  the  Churche 
ofSeynt  Peter  of  Chefter  k  others  for  Three  Years  ;  at 
the  Annual  Rent  of  190  Pounds,  dat.  29  Sept,  anno  29 
R. Edward  in.  179. 

22.  Atttefted  Copie  of  the  Latin  Enrolment  or  Origi¬ 
nal  of  the  faid  Leafe.  182. 

23.  Tranflation  of  the  Latin  Record  whereby  divers 
were  manucaptors  for  Robert  del  Hope  Deputie  of  Ro¬ 
bert  Caftell  Clark  k  Appruviator  of  Dee-Milles,  under 
Henry' Prince  of  Wales,  See.  for  his  gud  abeyryng  ageynft 
the  faid  Prince,  and  all  Sutours  of  the  Mylnes  afforefaid, 
&c.  23  O&ober,  ann  1 1  R.  Henrici  iv.  (vid.  infra  $  26.) 

'188. 

24.  Abftraft  of  the  Letters  Patents  of  K.  Edward  vi. 

whereby  he  granted  theDee-Milnes,  with  the  Fifliing  there 
ik  of  the  King’s  Poole,  to  Sir  Richard  Cotton  Knight 
Comptroller  of  his  Houfehold,  &  Joan  his  Wife  &  their 
Afligns  (together  with  the  Manor  of  New-hall,  k  certain 
Land  in  Wrenbury)  for  ever,  being  then  of  the  Yearly 
Value  of  1 1  alb.  15s.  2d.  in  full  Recompenfe  of  the  Scite 
and  Capital  Mefuage  of  the  Abbey  of  Borne,  k  of  the 
Lordftn’ps  k  Manors  of  Borne  k  Moreton,  k  ofthe  Rec¬ 
tory  of  Borne,  &c.  within  the  County  of  Lincolne,  &  of 
other  Lands  k  Tenements  within  the  faid  County  of 
Lincolne  fold  unto  his  Majeftv.  Telle,  &c.  24  June, 
anno  Regni  7.  (vid.  infra  §  27.)  190. 

25.  Draught  of  an  Older  of  the  ....  Court  at 
Chefter  (with  th’Advyfe  Sc  Afliftance  of  Henry  Towne- 
fend  Efquyer,  one  of  the  .Tuftices  of  Chefter,  Thomas 
Egerton  Efquyer,  her  Majefties  Solycytour  General,  See.). 
in  the  Caufe  between  Gamull  &  Ilankey  :  made  17  Sep¬ 
tember,  1585.  whereby  Ilankey  the  Defendant  was 
obliged  to  continue  his  Suit  &  Grinding  at  Dee-Milnes, 
the  Fermor  or  Fermors  whereof  were  alfo  obliged  to  be 
contented  with  the  antient  Toll(viz.  the  SixteenthGraine 
only)  k  no  more.  And  whe.vas  Hankey  hath  fett  up 
an  Horfe-Mill  in  Chefter  for  grinding  his  own,  k  other 
peoples  Come  :  It  was  order’d  that  Gamull  (hould  either 

buy 


Bibliothecas  Harleiante. 


445 


Nuni.  2081. 

buy  it  of  Hankey,  or  elfe  receive  a  reafonable  Annual 
Rent  for  the  going  of  the  fame.  199. 

26.  Attefted  Copie  of  the  Latin  Record  mefitioned 

above,  at  §  23.  201. 

27.  Tranflation  of  the  Letters  Patents  of  K.  Edward 
vi.  ivhereby  he  granted  to  Sr  Richard  Cotton  Knight 
Comptroller  of  his  Houfehould,  (in  Confideration  of  the 
Scite  of  the  abovementioned  Abbey  of  Borne,  with  the 
Demeanes  of  Borne  and  Moreton,  the  Redlorie  of  Borne, 
8c  other  Lands  &  Tenements  in  Lincolnfirire)  and  to 
Dame  Joane  his  Wife,  (amongft  other  thinges)  theCorne- 
millnes  on  Dee  river  ;  and  that  Fifh-roome  8c  Fi firing  8c 
Iribertie  to  fifhe  there  in  the  Water  of  Dee ;  and  the 
Fifh-roome  &  Fifhing  of  the  Lumme  called  the  Kings 
Poole  in  Dee  :  To  be  holden  in  Capite,  by  the  Service 
of  the  40th  Part  of  one  Knights  Fee.  Given,  under  his 
Privy  Seale,  23  June,  anno  Regni  7.  (vid.  fupra,  §  24.) 

203. 

cS.  Copie  of  an  Inquifition  taken  at  the  Towne  of 
Lyons  alias  Holt  in  the  Countie  of  Denbigh,  the  14th 
day  of  December  anno  5  R.  Jacobi  1.  where  the  Welfh 
Jury  was  very  vehement  againfl  the  Weare  Sc  Caufeway 
made  in  the  River  Dee,  as  the  only  Caufes  (and  princi¬ 
pally  the  Caufway)  of  the  overflowing  of  their  Land, 
the  lot's  of  their  Fifhing,  &  ruin  of  their  former  Naviga¬ 
tion.  (vid.  fupra.  §  20.)  210. 

29.  Copie  of  an  Inquifition  taken  at  Chefter,  in  the 
Countie  of  Chefler,  the  1 6th  of  December,  anno  5  R. 
Jacobi  1.  againfl  the  Caufe-way  8c  its  Floud-gates  eredled 
in  the  Dee  :  againfl  the  Weare  lately  made  betweene  the 
Townefhips  of  Aldford  8c  Eaton,  by  Thomas  Grofvenor 
Efq;  8c  continued  by  Richard  Grofvenor  Efq;  his  Sonne; 
Sc  againfl  the  new  Key  builded  at  the  Charges  of  the  Ci¬ 
tizens  of  Chefler.  (This  was  for  the  County  of  Chefler) 

21 4* 

30.  Copie  of  an  Inquifition  taken  in  theCommen  Halle 

within  the  Citie  of  Chefler,  the  fame  1 6th  of  December, 
purporting  the  contrary  to  what  was  aflerted  in  mofl  of 
the  former  Inquifitions,  and  drawn  up  in  Defence  of  the 
Fulling- Milles,  Come-* Milks,  Water-Workes,  Sc  Caufey 
eredled  in  the  Dee,  &  Filhings  in  the  fame  ;  the  proffits 
accrueing  by  which  they  value  at  1  oco  Pounds  per  annum 
befides  the  Eafe  &  Benefite  which  the  Inhabitants  of  the 
faid  Cittie  8c  Countrev  adjoyning  do,  in  generall  thereby 
receavc.  216. 

31.  Exceptions  taken  by  the  Counfell  of  Edward 

Ruffed  8c  al.  Defendants,  to  the  Bill,  Orders,  Sc  Proceed¬ 
ings  of  Court,  on  the  behalf  of  Francis  Gamull  Efq; 
Plaintiffe.  222.  b. 

This  is  noted  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby, 
Mr.  Gamulls  Father  in  Law, 

32.  Euidence  concemant  Dee-Millnes ;  in  Mr.  Recor¬ 
der  Whitbies  Hand.  223. 

33.  Anfweares  of  (Mr.  Gamull)  the  Complainant,  to 
thefeuerall  Objections  made  in  behalfeofthe  Defendants: 
noted  alfo  by  the  fame  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby.  223.  b. 

34.  Copie  of  the  Decree  of  the  Kings  Commiffioners 

mads  in  purfuance  of  the  feveral  Inquifitions  above  men¬ 
tioned  ;  and  dated  at  Wrexham  in  Com.  Denbigh,  14 
die  January,  anno  5  R.  Jacobi  1.  228. 

Herein  is  a  Recital,  almoft  Verbatim,  of  thofe Three 
Inquifitions  that  made  againfl  Dee-Milnes,  the  Caufey, 
&  Wear  :  but  when  they  come  to  the  Fourth,  being 
the  Verdidt  of  the  Chefter-Jury,  they  recite  it  not, 
but  fay  They  (i.  e.  the  Chefter-Jury)  have  found  fome 
other  Matters  impertinent  to  then  Chardge,  and  tendinge 
to  maytayne  the  private  Goode  of  fome  Citizens,  there, 
and  not  the  publique  Weale  &  Benefitt  of  the  Cittye  Sc 
Cuntrey.  And  forafmuch  as  the  faid  Weyre,  Caufey, 
8c  New-Key,  are  greate  &  greeivous  Annoyances  vppon 
the  l'aide  Ryver  of  Dee,  and  Cawfes  of  the  feuerall  Hurts 
aforefaid,  They  the  faid  Commiffioners,  after  another 
long  Preamble,  do  order  8c  decree,  that  one  full  Third 
parte  of  the  faid  Weyre  fhall  be  pulled  downe,  and  the 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.2081,  2082. 

River  there,  rhadeopen,  that  one  half  ofthefaidNew  Key 
fhall  be  abated  8c  taken  away  :  that  the  Obftrudlionk  and 
Annoyance  in,  at,  or  neerd  the  Hoult-Bridge,  be  wholly 
remoued  :  and  that  Tenn  Yards  in  length  of  the  faid  Caw- 
fey,  in  the  midle  of  the  Channell,  downe  to  the  bottome 
of  the  Ryver;  fhall  be  pulled  downe  Sc  taken  away. 

35.  Examynations  taken  in  the  Queens  Excheker,  on 

the  behalfe  of  William  Goodman,  8cc.  Plaintiffes,  19  Sept: 
l57° •  .  253- 

In  this  Caufe  Mrs.  Margaret  Bavand  was  Defend¬ 
ant,  being  fued  by  Mr.  Goodman  8:  the  other  Fermors 
of  Dee-Milnes,  for  grinding  Come  belonging  to  the  In¬ 
habitants  of  Chefler  at  Handbach  Water- inline,  and  at 
the  Wind-nrilne  without  the  North  gate  of  Chefler;  being 
both  in  her  Occupation. 

36.  Inquifitio  capta  infra  Caflrum  Ceflrie,  12  die 
Septembris,  anno  4  R.  Jacobi  1.  ad  inquirendum  de  Terris 
et  Tenementis  Georgij  Cottoa  Arm.  convidli  de  Rccu- 
fancia,  in  abflinendo  venire  ad  aliquam  Ecclefiam,  ad 
divinum  Servicium.  (This  is  the  Protc-tvpon,  or  firft 
Draught;  8c  is  much  damaged  by  taking  of  Wet.)  271.  jW  * 

2082. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifling  of  fundry  particular  Tradls 
and  loofe  Papers,  bolind  up  together  by  the  third 
Holme  ;  who,  on  the  out-fide,  nath  given  this  Title 
to  the  whole,  •*  Chefler,  8c  Dee-Mills.”  In  the  in  fide, 
it  hath  this  larger  Title,  “  Dee-Mills  &  Gaufy  ;  feuerall 
things  concerning  Chefter  but  in  turning  over  the 
Book  itfelf,  Ifind, 

1.  The  faid  Mr.  Holme’s  Lift  of  the  Things  of  mofl 
Note  herein  contained  ;  at  the  beginning 

2.  Mr.  George  Ireland’s  Agreement  with  Randle 
Holme,  whereby  Randle  was  to  have  a  New  Leafe  of  his 
Dwelling  houfe,  for  the  Terme  of  three  fuch  Lives  as  he 
fliould  nominate  ;  at  the  old  R  ent,  but  paying  a  Fine, 
dat.  1 1  Septemb.  1 660.  Upon  the  fame  Paper. 

3.  Inquificio  capta  apud  Ceftriam,  anno  28  R.  Ilen- 
rici  vi.  coram  Coniiflionarijs  didti  Dni.  Regis,  per  Sa- 
cramenta  Johannis  Manwaring  Chivaler,  8c c.  qui  di- 
cunt,  quod  dudum  fuit  quidam  Portus  apud  Ceftriam, 
ad  quern  multi  Mercatores  didle  Ci  -itaris  Lellrie,  et  alij 
Regni  Anglie,  et  aliorum  Regnorum  et  Terrarum  com- 
munem  Curfum  et  Recurfum  Tranfuus  et  Revenues 
cum  Navibus  et  Mercimonijs  fuis  habuerunt,  ad  eorum 
grandia  proficua.  Et  quod  per  quinquaginta  annos  et 
amplius,  extitit,  quidam  grandis  Aque  Curfus  didli 
Portus,  per  quern  didli  Mercatores  Curfum  P.;' cur¬ 
fum  habebant,  qui  per  Sabulorutn  Maris  incrementum, 
a  didlo  portu  fubtradlus  fuit  :  ita  quod  nulla  Navis  Mer- 
catoria  per  duodena  Miliaria  didle  Civitati  appropii.  .'.are 
potefl.  Sic  quod  nulla  Navis  Mercatoria  didle  Civitatis 
pertinens  eft,  ad  didle  Civitatis  et  Civiurn  grandia  De- 
trimentum,  Defolaticnem,  et  Depaupertatem.  Et  quod 
tempore  Henrici  iv.  nuper  Regis  Anglie,  fuit  quedam 
Infurredtio  et  Rebellio  ia  Wallia,  qua  durante,  nemo 
didle  Civitatis,  Vidtualia  leu  aliqua  aha  Mercimonia  cum 
ullo  Wallico  vendere  vel  emere  audebat,  fed  diclam  Ci- 
vitatetn,  ut  homines  Guerre  a  Wallicis  indies  et  nodtan- 
tercuftoditbant.  Pro  quibus  caufis,  multi  Cives  et  alij, 
a  didla  Civitate  fubtradli  fuerunt  ;  ita  quod  major  pars 
Civitatis  vaftata,  defolata,  ruinofa,  et  minime  inhabitara, 
per  longum  tetnpus  exiftit.  Sic  quod  didla  Ci vitas  nec 
habilis  nec  fimilis  perdurare,  aut  onus  Regalis  Feodi 
firme  eft  portare,  nili  ad  perpctuain  Adnichilationem  dic- 
torumCivium  in  eadem  Civitate  modo  inhabitantium.  1. 

4.  Mr.  John  Brerewood’s  Allegations,  that  Dee- Mills 

ffiould  pay  nothing  to  the  RepairesofS1.  Mary’s  Church, 
in  whole  Parifh  they  are.  1.  b. 

5.  Projedt  of  an  Adi  for  the  abateing,  and  to  reftraine 

the  new  Eredtion  of  Weres,  Stanks,  Kydells,  and  other 
Obftrudlions  in  great  &  navigable  Rivers.  5. 

6.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Council,  to  ....  requiering  him  diligently  to 

5  X  furvey 


44  6 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  2082. 

Turvey  the  Riuer  of  Dee,  and  the  Haven,  and  to  certifie 
the  trewe  State  of  the  faid  Haven  ;  the  caufe-s  of  the 
Decay  ,  the'  of ;  how  the  fame  may  be  made  good  & 
amended,  without  the  Dcftruttion  of  Dee-Mills;  and 
whether  the  Abatement  or  Pulling  dovvne  of  the  Cawley, 
according  to  the  late  Commiflioners  Decree,  will  not  be 
more  prejudicial!  to  t!..  City  &  Contry  ;  then  the  amend¬ 
ment  of  the  ibid  Hauen  thereby,  will  contervayle  :  that 
there- vpon  fuch  further  Order  &  Direction  may  be  given 
as  may  beft  (land  with  the  common  good  of  the  Cittie 
&  Country,  &  the  Satisfaction  of  thofe,  betweene  whom 
the  Controverfie  dependeth.  12. 

7.  Coppie  of  the  Letter  fent  by  the  Magiflrates  of 

Cheiter,  19  July  1551,  to  the  then  Lord  Treal'urer,  de¬ 
filing  his  Tntercdlion  with  the  King  for  a  Sunt  of  Money 
toward  their  Charge  in  building  an  Haven  (i.  e.  the 
New  Key  in  Wirrall )  all  of  Stor.e-worke,  vpon  the 
Riuer  of  Dee,  in  the  Face  5c  Belly  of  the  Set  ;  which 
woul  I,  at  the  leaft,  amount  to  Five  or  Six  thoufand 
Poundes  :  or  els,  their  prefent  Povertie  would  force 
their  former  Charges  therein  to  bee  but  as  Labor  loft ; 
and  confequently  mult  needs  enfue  the  vtter  undoing  of 
the  whole  Citty,  with  inumerable  hurt  to  the  Country 
adjoyning.  14. 

8.  Part  of  a  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  Lords  of 

the  Privy-Council  to  the  Commiflioners  of  Sewers  for 
the  Counties  of  Chefter,  Flynt  5c  Denbigh  ;  requiring 
them  not  10  abate  the  Cawley,  till  the  whole  buiines 
fliould  b?  heard.  16. 

9.  Plimleys  Affidavit  concerning  the  filhing  by 

Do. -Mi lines;  agarnfl  the  Binglcys,  and  their  Claim  about 
the  Fulling  Milnes,  the  Chamber  &  Orchard  ;  and 
again (1  Richard  Evans  the  Glovers  laying  Sheep-Skins  in 
tile  Dee,  to  hinder  the  Fiflics  coming  up.  dat.  24.  Jun. 
1629.  i3. 

10.  The  State  of  the  Caufe  concerning  the  Millnes& 

Cawfev  at  Cheiter.  20. 

Here  it  is  fhewed  that  Dec-Millnes  &  Cawfey  were 
fett  up  by  Hugh  Lupe,  many  hnndred  yeares  before 
ever  any  Statute  of  Sewers  was  made  ;  and  never  fince 
called  in  queftion.  That  feme  Gentlemen  of  the  partes 
of  Wales  having  Milles  within  4  01-5  Miles  of  Cheller, 
5c  Grounds  vpon  the,  River-fide,  doe  now  (alter  600 
yeares)  erneflly  labour  to  dellroy  the  fame.  To  this 
purpole  they  procured  aCommiflion  of  Sewers  to  them- 
felves  5c  others,  which  (vpon  pretence  of  feme  Annoyan- 
cts  luppofed  to  be  occafioned  by  the  faid  Milles  and 
Cawfey)  they  doe  fo  vyolently  profecute,  as  to  impannell 
Juries,  5c  receaue  Verdicts  in  forrayne  Counties  ;  that 
-ii  the  Cittie,  which  is  the  propper  Countie  (where  the 
pretended  Nufance  is)  being  agaii.ll  them.  That  the  faid 
ComtniUion  did  not  extend  vnto  the  faidMilles  &  Cawfey. 
That  at  the  lad  fitting  of  the  faid  Commiflioners,  being 
the  17  th  of  December,  they  did  iorbeare  to  make  any 
Order  ;  and  ablolutcly  adjourned  the  Courte  vntill  the 
Saturdaie  in  Eafter  weeke  :  notwithdanding  which, 
fome  of  tlie  faid  Commillieners  of  Wales,  fearing  a  Su- 
perfedeas,  verie  lately,  in  private,  mett  together  againe, 
•and  contrary  to  the  exprefle  Direction  of  the  Lord  Trea- 
forer  of  England,  and  their  owne  Agreement,  they  made 
an  abfolute  Decree  for  the  Dedrudion  of  the  faid  Cawfey 
5c  Millnes,  and  publilhed  the  lame.  Whereby  the  Welrti 
People  are  fo  encouraged,  as  to  threaten  to  come  very 
lpeedilye  to  Cheder,  with  great  Multitudes,  to  put  the 
faid  Decree  in  Execution.  So  that  the  Memorye  of 
that  antient  Enmityc  5c  Hodilitye  which  wasfometymes 
betwixt  the  Engliih  5c  the  WeUh  is  revived,  and  the 
myndes  of  the  peaceablie-alfeCted,  much  diftjuieted.  20. 

1 1.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Paper.  22. 

1 2.  An  order  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy-Council,  dated 
13  March  1607,  aml  figned  by  Robert  Cecil  Earl  of 
Salufbury,  concerning  the  Triad  of  the  Caufe  relating 
to  the  Cawfey,  New-Key,  5c  Dee-Mills,  to  be  had  before 
them,  on  the  a;  of  April  next  following  ;  and  in  the 


Num.  20S2. 

meane  Seafon,  the  Commiflioners  of  Sewers'  required  to 
forbeare  to  put  in  Execution  any  order  by  them  lormerlie 
made  concerning  thofe  Matters,  or  to  take  any  other 
Courfe  therein,  by  pretence  of  their  faid  Commiflion. 

24. 

13.  Attefted  Copie  of  the  fame  Order.  26. 

14.  A  tie  led  Copie  of  an  Order  of  the  Lords  of  the 

Privy  Council,  adjourning  their  Hearing  the  Caufe  about 
the  Caufey  &  Dee-Mills,  until  the  2Cth  of  February  next 
following,  dat.  31  January,  1607.  28. 

15.  Another  atteded  Copie  of  the  fame  Order.  30. 

1 6.  Atteded  Copie  of  the  Letter  of  Lord  Chiefe  Judice 

of  England,  the  Lord  Chiefe  Judice  of  the  Common 
Pleas,  5c  the  Lord  Chiefe  Baron,  to  the  Lords  of  the 
Privy  C ouncil :  dated  29  May  1609.  advertifmg,  that 
after  divers  hearings  of  the  Caufe  relating  to  Dee-Mills 
&  the  Caufey  or  Mill-Stank  within  that  River;  the  pe- 
rufal  of  the  leverall  Inquifitions  taken  of  late  before  the 
Commiflioners  of  Sewers  ;  apd  conlideration  of  all  the 
Laws  upon  which  that  Commiflion  was  or  could  be 
grounded;  together  with  the  Commiflion  itfelf,  &  the 
Decree  thereupon  made  :  they  arc  of  Opinion,  that  the 
laid  Commiflioners  of  Sewers'  (for  the  Reafon  they  give) 
doth  not  extende  to  Inch  Auncient  Mills,  Mill-itankes 
and  C  auffcyes,  as  were  erected  before  the  time  of  K. 
Edward  1 .  except  they  have  Ivin  enhaunfed  5c  exalted 
aboue  their  former  height,  and  thereby  made  more  pre¬ 
judicial!  and  hurtfull  then  formerly  they  vote.  In  which 
C  afe  they  are  not  to  be  pulled  downe  from  the  topp  to 
the  Bottome  (as  the  faid  Decree,  now  queftioned,  doth 
appoint)  but  to  bee  reformed  ;  by  taking  away  5c  abating 
the  Excefle  5c  Inhaunlment  o»ely.  *  32.° 

17.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Coun¬ 

cil,  to  the  Judges  mentioned  in  the  laf!  At  tide  recom¬ 
mending,  or  rather  referring  this  Matter  to  their  hearing 
5c  confideration  ;  that  upon  their  Report  given  in.  ihuir 
Lord/hips  might  take  fuch  further  Couri'c  therein,  as 
lhall  be  agreeable  to  Equitic  and  Juft  ice,  dm  6  i\!av 
i6o3.  3,/ 

.  18.  Inflnnces  of  Abufes  done  to  divers  of  the  Inha¬ 
bitants  of  Cheder,  by  the  Partners  in  the  Water-works 

there.  34.  b. 

19.  Original  Petition  of  Randle  Holme  and  fome 
others,  to  Francis  Gamul  Mayor  of  Cheiter,  &  the  other 
Magiflrates  there  ;  letting  forth,  that  fome  private  Pe'r- 
fons  hauing  e  an  1  mere  A  in  the  Water-workes,  haue 
wrongfully  cult  off  the  Petitioners  Pipes,  and  demand  far 
greater  Rents  than  were  formerly  payd  :  praying  there¬ 
fore,  that  fuch  Courfe  may  be  taken,  as  that  what  was 
originally  intended  for  a  publicque  good,  may  not  turn 
to  a  general  Damage ;  and  that  it  may  not  be  in  the 
power  of  thefe  particular  Perfons,  to  impofe  high  Rents, 
or  cutt-off  the  Citizens  Pipes  at  their  pleafure.  34.  A. 

20.  Original  Certificate  or  Warrant  of  John  Talbot 
Earl  of  ShrevMbury,  whereby  he  conflitutcs  John  Kelfall 
of  Miccle-Tralford  Gent,  his  Officer  5c  Agent,  to  over¬ 
fee  his  Eflates  in  the  Coumie-Palatine  of  Chefter,  & 
County  of  the  City  of  Chefter.  dat.  19  July,  1636.  35. 

21.  Bill  of  Charges  in  Writing  to  the  Karl  of  Shrewf- 

buries  Proofs  againlt  the  City  of  Chefter,  5c  theirs  againft 
him-  _  36.  b. 

22.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Bauand  to  Mr.  Recor¬ 

der  Whitby,  dat.  13  Sept.  1634,  relating  to  the  aforefaid 
Bill.  He  had  (it  feems)  by  chance,  taken  too  much. 
And  further  adds,  that  he  had  all'o  of  Mr.  Alderman 
Edwards,  36s.  6d.  which  was  for  his  paines,  and  his 
mans,  for  the  Frameing  5c  Writeing  the  Breuiates, 
This,  Mr.  Edwards  (in  a  maner)  enforced  him  to  take : 
et  quis  nifi  mentis  inops,  &c.  efpecially  in  the  Cafe  of  the 
Cittie  ?  27. 

23.  Notes  taken  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  (per¬ 

haps  from  Books  in  Ins  own  Cuftody  or  Pofleliion)  con¬ 
cerning  the  Hamlet  or  Village  of  Hole  in  Cheftiire,  and 
Lands  held  there.  39.  b, 

24.  The 


Bibliothecae  Harleiante. 


447 


Num.  20S2. 

24.  The  Anfwere  of  William  Goodman,  &c.  to  the 
Bill  of  Complaint  of  Hughe  Cholmeley  Knyghr.  42. 

Here  thefe  Defendants  fett  forth  their  Right  & 
Title  to  their  Failures  in  Hole-IIeath,  as  held  by  l.eafe- 
holdof  the  Mayor  &  Citizens  ofChefter,  who  had  been 
the  Owners  thereof  time  out  of  mind.  They  deny  that 
Sir  Hugh  had  any  Right  to  the  faid  Failures  ;  or  that 
they  with  any  Force  entred  into  the  PrcmilTes,  or  were  of 
any  fuch  force  indicted  :  and  yf  they  were,  or  be,  yt  was 
&  is  wrongfully,  by  the  Syniltre  Labour  &  procurement 
of  the  Complaynaunt,  beinge  of  the  Kings  Jullices  of 
Peaxe  within  the  Countie  of  Chefler,  and  hath  manye 
Jurors  at  his  Comaundemenr,  and  fome  of  them  his 
Servaunts  &  in  his  Liuereys  :  by  real’on  whereof  fuche 
Indyctements  Ivghtly  mayc  be  found  &  taken.  And 
that  if  any  Writt  of  Reftitution  was  granted  to  the  Com¬ 
playnaunt  ;  it  was  by  his  finiltre  Procurement ;  they 
having  ever  lince.  contynued  in  poffellion  of  the  Fre- 
milfes  ;  and  therefore  praycn  to  be  dy filly ffed  oute  of 
the  Courte  with  theire  Colts,  for  their  wrongfull  Vexa- 
cion.  r  42. 

2  5-  I  he  Replication  of  Sir  Hugh  Chomley  Knight, 
to  th’unfwere  of  Wyllyam  Goodman  &  others.  44.  b. 

Here  Sir  Hugh  averts  that  the  Mayor  &  Citizens 
were  but  'Tenants  at  Will  to  his  Anceltors  ;  &  denies 
that  any  fuch  Leales  were  ever  made  as  Were  alledged  by 
the  Defendants  ;  or  that  any  the  Jurors  were  at  his 
Coinmaund.  nient,  &c. 

c6.  Original!  ,,  ;  .  r  of  Sir  Ja.  Milles  to  Sir  George 
Booth  Knight  \- jjarronett,  G’lle<5torof  the  County  of  Chef- 
ter;  w  iie-eoy  th<  Lords  <4  the  Privy  Council  difeharged 
the  Inhabitants  of  Chefler  of  feuerall  Privic  Seales  directed 
to  the™’  f°r  Teurall  Sommes  of  Money  to  be  lent  to  his 
Majeflie.  Notifying  alfo,  that  they  haue  given  Order 
that  a  new  Privie  Seale  be  direfted  vnto  the  Maior,  See. 
of  Chefler  for  1  co  Pounds,  dat.  7  July  1626.  46. 

27.  A  Schedule  of  the  Names  of  the  Maior  Sc  Cittizens 
of  Chefler  difeharged  of  their  feuerall  Privie  Seales.  47. 

The  fum  that  they  were  charged  with,  amounted  to 
upwards  of  500I. 

2b'.  A  perfect  Kalender  of  the  Names  of  all  fuch  Per- 
fons  as  the  Privie  Scales  are  directed  vnto,  within  the 
Cittic  of  Chefler.  dat.  30  December  1625 

Here  the  i’um  total  amounted  to  330I. 

29.  Original  Letter  of  the  Mayor  &  Aldermen  of 

Chefler,  to  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby  &  Alderman  Will. 
Gomull,  dated  15  May,  1626.  concerninge  the  Privie 
Seales  ;  and  defiring  them  to  be  efpecially  cautious  as  to 
the  Lift  they  did  fend  them,  wherein  was  a  fort  of  Valua¬ 
tion  of  the  Eftates  of  the  mod  wealthy  of  their  Inhabitants, 
as  rated  in  the  Subfuly-bookes  ;  leal!  a  dii'covery  thereof 
mould  turn  to  their  Difadvantage.  ’ 

30.  A  Particular  of  Mr.  Glaiior’s  houfe  in  S'  John’s 

Church-yard  :  and  of  other  Houfes,  &c.  belonging  to 
or  near  it.  ,-2  ’ 

31.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Francis  Walfmgham  to  the 
Mayor  and  Aldermen  of  Chefler,  in  behalf  of  Thomas 
Lyneall  his  Servant,  to  whom  they  had  demiled  for  2  1 
ye.ires  a  Failure  adjoyning  to  the  Citie  called  the  Rooddee. 
together  with  fo  much  Land  as  he  could  wir.ne  to  the  faid 
Failure  from  the  Sea,  during  the  :  '  J  Terme.  And  that,  in 
Confederation  of  a  Key  or  Pyle  at  his  Cofls  to  be  made,  for 
Bcatcs  &  Barks  to  vnlade,  at  f.-:l  Sea  vpon  the  faid  Rood- 
dee,  lie  fhouid  haue  4d.  of  c\  jrie  Boate  or  Barkc  palling 
by  with  any  Lading,  during  the  laid  Terme.,  But  that 
Lyncal  being  abk.u  m  IixLim,  'ny  the  l'ecret  procure¬ 
ment  of  fonv  one  vndutiiu:  purfon,  above  too  perkms 
had  been  drawen  together  10  ;  ition  ag'  the  faid  Works; 
and  diverfe  of  ne  Workmen  had  been  driven  to  withdrawe 
themfelves  ;  iheBancks  being  not  thoroughly  perfe&ed 
&  able  to  abide  the  Winter-Storms.  Sr Francis  therefore 
requires  them  to  fufler  I.yneall  quietly  to  enjoy  the  Bene¬ 
fit  Qf  their Demife;  as  ah'  .  1 0 .  .mine  theDiforder  alreadie 
committed,  and  to  punifh  the  OiTeudors  ;  or  els,  to  cer- 


Num.  2082. 

tifie  him  their  Names  that  fo  vndutifully  had  aflembled 
themfelves  to  withftand  fo  good  a  Worke.  dat.  26  Sept'. 

'Sfy-  .  .  54- 

32.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lord  Treafurer  Burghley 
to  Fulke  Alderfey  Mayour  of  Chefler;  requirin'’-  him  tk 
his  SuccefTors  to  be  more  careful  in  the  Overfight  of  the 
Amendment  &  Reparations  of  Wat  field -Pavement,  for 
the  maintenaunce  whereof  Lands  of  good  Value  were 
given  :  and  yet,  through  his  Predeceilours  necligence, 
it  is  not  repay  red  as  it  ought  to  be,  to  the  great  Trouble* 
o.  her  Majefties  Carvages  &  Poll  going  that  way  into 
Ireland,  &  others  of  her  S  bjeels. 

33.  Petition  of  Richard  Treenelde  Pavior,  to  Thomas 

Lynyall  Mayor,  &  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefler ;  Shewing, 
that  as  he  had  brought  the  Stone- Pavement  of  that  City 
into  a  good  State  :  So  he  would,  at  his  own  Charge, 
keep  it  as  well  or  better,  for  the  fame  allowances  as  had 
been  heretofore  made  to  the  like  Workmen.  $'6. 

34.  Draught  of  a  Leafe,  made  9th  Maie,  anno  29 
Elizabethan ;  whereby  ihe  Major  Ik  Citizens  ofChefter 
did  left  to  Thomas  Lvniall  Merchaunt,  for  21  years, 
the  Groundc  called  the  Roode-Eie,  of  late  greativ  decaitd 
&  impaired,  &  like  to  be  more  wafted  :'a  :d  m  conii- 
deration  that  he  fhall  make  afufficient  Key  there,  for  the 
In-gate  &  Out-gate  of  ail  Boats  near  the  Water¬ 
gate  of  Chefler,  in  a  convenient  place  'if  the  laid  Roode- 
Lie  :  they  lett  ti  e  fame  unto  him,  for  the  Terme  atore- 
faid,  with  as  much  Land  of  the  Roode-Eie  as  he  by  his  lu- 
duflry  be  able  to  gain  from  the  River  of  Dee  :  u.geih;  r 
with  a  Payment  of  2d.  to  be  taken  from  every  Boat  going 
in  or  out  laden  :  lie  therefore  yielding  Si  paving  to  them 
20  pounds  per  annum  during  the  laid  'Terme.  60. 

35-  Rejoyndt  r  of  Wylliam  Godeman  Lc  others  to  the 
Replycation  of  Hugh  C.holmdey  Knyght.  6-. 

36.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  K.  Edward  vi.  to  the  Bp. 
of  Chcller  as  it  feemes  :  willing  him  to  take  the  Anfwers 
of  William  Goodman  &  others,  in  the  Caufe  between 
them  &  Sir  Hugh  (.holmondely,  upon  Oath:  and  to 
tranfmitt  the  fame  to  the  Councill  of  the  Marches.  Yeven 
at  the  Caflell  of  I.udlowe  13  November,  anno  regni  5. 

66. 

,  37-  An  Order  of  the  faid  Council  of  the  Marches  taken 
in  the  faid  Suit  depending  ;  dated  31  Jaauarii  anno  6to 
Regis  Ldwardi  vi.  and  lubfciibed  by  John  Evans.  6~ 

38.  Another  Order  of  the  laid  Council  for  draw-rig 
up  a  Letter  in  the  Kings  Name  to  the  Busfhoppe  of  Chel- 
tre  ;  ( vid.  fupra,  §  36.  )  dated,  1 1  Novembr.  anno  c  R 
Ldwardi  vi.  and  fubferibed,  as  before.  Vto 


1\/T  e  .'.  ‘  hi  ms  paid  by  th 

Mayor  &  Citizens  ofChefter,  toward  fome  Subfidie.  69. 

40.  Original  Letter  of  Richard  Egerron  a  Juflice  of 
ihe  Peace,  to  Mr.  Maior  of  Chefler  complaining  of  the 
In  faience  of  Thomas  Johnfon  a  Black  Smithe,  who  had 
mlulted  him  in  a  braveing  manner,  with  evil]  Language 
upon  the  occafion  of  Mr.  John  Cotton’s  having  obtained* 
from  the  City  (A.  I).)  1608.  a  Grant  of  therbage  of 
Huntingdon-Lane.  _  He  therefore  prays  for  Reformation 
01  their  Abufes  offered  vnto  him,  and  that  Mr.  Mayor 
will  take  into  Confideration,  his  Majefties  Declaration  & 
EdiCle  againft  futch  Perfons  as  doe  give  the  Lve  70 

41-  APart  or  Claufe  of  the  Citty  of  Chefters  Charter 
(of  anno  16  Eliz.)  about  Prize-Wvne  &  Iron.  - 

42.  A  Quietus  eft  from  the  Auditor  of  Chefler  to  the 
Shenttcs  oi  Chelter  A.  I).  ,J7S.  loir  the  Kt-Farme  of 
that  yer. 

■  41  4n4cql,ittancc  of  R="dJ«  Ince  Serjeant  at  Mace 
in  Chefler,  for  40  pounds  received  of  Alderman  William 
Gamull,  for  Prize-Sack  e.  dat.  13  September  1639.  y. 

44.  Depofitions  of  WitnefTes  taken  in  the  Exchequer- 
Court  of  Chefter,  6  February  A.  D.  1611.  upon  the 
parte  of  Thomas  Gamull  Efq;  Ales  his  Wief,  V\  i>- 
kam  Alderfey  &  William  Gamull  Aldermen,  Defend¬ 
ants  ;  ggainft  Sir  Richard  Bu.-klow  Knivht,  Complain. 


44* 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2082. 

This  Suit  was  commenced  for  the  Prifage  of  Wynes, 
of  which  Sir  Richard  was  Ferinor  in  the  Part  of  Chefter- 

45.  Notes  taken  from  the  Records  of  Cheiler,  touch¬ 
ing  the  Prife-Wynes  :  and  the  Profits  of  Dee-Milnes.  86. 

46.  Articles  of  Matthew  Anderton  CommilTary  in  the 

Court  of  Admiralty  of  Chefliire  &  Lancafhire,  againft 
John  Taylor  &  Thomas  Helyn,  for  flopping  the  Courfe 
of  the  River  Dee,  &  unlawful  taking  Salmons  &  other 
Fifh,  and  deflroying  the  Fry  thereof.  go. 

47.  Write  of  K.  Charles  i.  in  the  Difpute  between  the 
Exchequer  of  Chefter,  &  the  City  ;  for  the  Office  of 
Vice-Admiral  of  Cheiler.  This  being  againft  the  City. 

92. 

48.  Draught  of  an  Anfwer  to  the  Inconveniences  al- 
Iedged  by  the  Welfhmen,  againft  thofe  of  Chefler,  upon 
occafion  of  the  New  Key,  the  Mills  &  Cawfay,  the 
Weare  at  Eaton,  &  Stoppage  at  Holt- Bridge  :  viz.  the 
Decay  of  the  Haven,  and  Overflowing  of  their  Grounds. 

94. 

49.  Report  of  the  Lawyers,  in  Law  French,  in  the 
Cafe  of  William  Hodges  a  Citizen  of  London,  who  bring¬ 
ing  Wine  into  the  Port  of  Cheiler,  would  not  pay  the 
Murage  aceuflomed,  to  the  Citty  ;  anno  9  R.  Jac.  1  96. 

Here  the  Royal  Charters,  and  thofe  of  the  old  Earls 
of  Chefler  were  confidered^ 

50.  Law-Notes  ofMr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Hand:  on 

the  out-fide,  by  him  entituled,  “  Breve  de  Covenant  al 
Vicecount  de  Ciuit.  Ceftr.”  98. 

51.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Draught  of  a  Letter  (to 

be  fent  in  the  Citties  Name)  to  Sir  Thomas  Sauage : 
being  a  Letter  of  l'hankes  for  the  Bufinefie  of  the  Fines;  j 
with  Information  touching  the  State  of  the  Controverfie 
Concerninge  Glouers-ftone.  100 

5?.  Original  Letter  of  John  Brereton  Maior  of  Chefler, 
to  Edward  Whitbie  Efq;  then  at  the  Temple ;  dated, 

28  May  1624,  acquainting  him,  that  the  laft  Yeare  a 
Writ  of  Couenante  was  di reded  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Chefler, 
for  Levying  of  a  Fyne  before  the  Judges  of  Chefler, 
of  Lands  within  that  Citie  ;  where  the  Mayor  thought 
himfelf  to  be  the  proper  Judge,  and  therefore  was  not 
retorned.  But  that,  at  the  laft  Affizes,  the  Judges 
awarded  a  Capias  againft  the  laft  Shci  ilfes,  whereupon, 
Non  funt  inventi,  was  retorned  ;  but  they  appearing,  an 
Information  againft  them  was  exhibited,  whereunto  a  De¬ 
murrer  was  putt  in,  which  the  Judges  oueruled  ;  but 
vponMocion  &  much  Intreaty,  gaue  day  to  putt  in  a  fpeci- 
all  Plea,  primo  die  prox.  Seff.  Mr.  Whitbie  was  therefore 
intreated  to  acquaint  Sir  Thomas  Sauage  &  Mr.  John 
Sauage  with  this  bufinefle,  and  to  informe  himfelfe  of  the 
meft  fyttynge  Courfe  to  be  helde  herein.  Mr.  Mayor 
writes  further,  that  there  arefome  Cuftomary  Lands  of 
Bromfield,  wherein  Mr.  Valentine  Broughton  had  giuen 
the  Citie  fome  Interefl,  which  Mr.  Broughton  was  about 
ro  procure  in  Leafe,  thereby  to  defeat  the  Citie  of  their 
Right ;  and  defires  that  Sr  Thomas  Sauage  may  be  put 
in  mynde  thereof ;  &  that  his  Care  for  the  Citie  might 
be  intreated.  102. 

53.  Di :la  Tedium  fuper  Materia  exceptiva  et  Ponibus 
declaratorijsex  parte  Cuthberti  Ogl?,  contra  Francilcuin 
Greene  Clericum ;  capt.  23  die  mentis  January,  A  D. 
1639.  coram  venerabili  viro  Edmundo  Mainwaringe 

Legum  Dottore,  &c.  Curite . Epifcopalis  Cef- 

trenlis  Officiali  principali  legitime  fulcito,  in  prefeiltia 
Edvvardi  Morgell  Notarij  publici.  103. 

This  is  about  the  Adminiflration  of  the  Eftate  of 
Mr.  Robert  Whitbye  Alderman  of  Chefler,  father  to 
Mr.  Edward  Whitbie  Recorder  of  Chefler,  who  was  then 
likewife  deceafed. 

54.  Petition  of  Thurftan  Hollinfhed  to  Mr.  Robert 
Brock  Maiour  of  Chefler,  &  to  the  Aflembly  there.  (A.  D. 
1588.)  reprefenting,  that  he  hath  an  Interefl  (for  fome 
Years  to  come)  in  an  houfe  and  certain  Ground  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  C.itie.  That  the  laid  Houfe  being  much  decaied. 

Sc  grown  weak,  muft  be_  pulled  down  to  the  Founda- 


Num.  2082* 

trons,  &  re-built.  In  confederation  of  tlie  great  Charge 
accruing  thereby  to  him,  he  defires  a  new  Graunte  of 
thePremiffes  to  him  &  his  heires  for  ever,  to  be  held 
in  Fee-Farme,  vnder  fuche  reafonable  Covenants,  as 
fhould  be  found  meet.  1 1 1- 

55.  Petition  of  Margery  Whitehead  Widow,  to  Mr. 
John  Smy the  Maiour  of  Chefler,  and  the  Aifembly  there, 
againft  one  Richard  Dutton  Draper  ;  who  had  vexa- 
tioufly  interrupted  her  in  her  peaceable  poffeffion  of  a 
certain  Clofe  lying  without  the  North-gate,  being  parcel 
of  the  Poffeflions  of  the  late  diffolued  Monaftery  of  St. 
Werburge  :  and  that  they  would  take  fuch  Order  with 
thefaid  Dutton  as  that  he  fhould  not  trouble  and  vexe  her 
in  any  foren  Place,  for  any  matter  determinable  in  Chef- 
ter,  without  Licence,  &  good  Caufe  fo  to  do.  113. 

56.  A  Remembraunce  of  fuche  Plate  as  was  geven. 
to  the  City  of  Chefler  by  the  Perfons  vnder-wrytten  ; 
remay nynge  in  the  Kepynge  of  Thomas  Grene  late 
Mayor  ;  and  delyuered  to  William  Snede  ICnyght  now 
Mayor,  1 1  December,  anno  nono  Elizabethe  Regine. 

!I5- 

57.  Letter  of  the  Mayor  of  Chefler  to  Mr.  Alderman 

5  . dated  6  April  1594.  requiring  him  to 

live  in  the  City,  and  to  ferve  in  the  Office  of  Alderman 
according  to  the  Oath  he  had  taken  ;  otherwife  they 
muft  choofe  a  new  Alderman  in  his  Room.  1 1 7. 

58.  P’ragment  of  a  Lift  of  certain  Perfons  of  Chefter, 

who  paid  to  the  Subiidies,  in  April  1629.  1 18. 

50.  A  Note  of  Mr.  William  Styles  one  of  theTrea- 
fii:  ol  Chefter,  written  A.  D.  1581.  wherein  he  gives 

the  certain  Meafures  of  a  parcel!  of  Ground  lying  with¬ 
out  the  Barres  of  Chefter  ;  and  of  which  Alexander 
Coates  had  a  grant  from  the  City.  1 1 9. 

Co.  The  kcoiid  Randle  Holme’s  Certificate  concern¬ 
ing  t!  ■  Words  fpoken  unto  him  by  Sir  Thomas  Smith, 
16  October  1633.  upon  occafion  of  choofing  the  Fourty  ; 
in  which  matter  he  was  refolved,  either  to  have  his  own 
Way  ;  or  elfc  to  be  more  factious  than  he  had  been  be¬ 
fore.  120. 

This  Paper  is  of  Mr.  Holme's  own  Hand,  he  then 
being  one  of  the  Sheriffesof  the  City;  and  is  followed  by, 
A  Copie  of  the  fame. 

6t.  A  Note  touching  the  Lands  and  Tenements  held 
by  George  Ireland  Efq;  at  the  time  of  his  Death,  as 
they  were  found  by  Office,  taken  6  Aprilis,  anno  39 
Elizabethce.  122. 

62.  A  Bylie  of  fuche  thyngs  as  was  laft  in  Mr.  Alex¬ 

ander  Haryefones  Howie  (which  was  Citty-land,  &  turned 
ouer  to  Mr.  Richard  Bauand)  Aprell  1578,  when  his 
Wyffe  went  to  London,  to  looke  for  him.  1 23. 

63.  Coppy  of  a  Bill  of  Alexander  Harrifon’s  Surrender 

of  a  Houfe,  to  Mr.  Bauand,  being  Citty-Land.  A.  D. 
1575.  I24- 

64.  Recital  of  an  Indenture  between  Robert  Walton, 

6  William  Walton  ;  about  the  Alignment  of  a  Tene¬ 

ment  to  the  faid  William  (of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies 
Hand.)  *25. 

65.  Reafons  why  Huntingdon  fhould  not  pay  any 

Mize  or  Taxes  with  Saughton :  fubferibed  by  Thomas 
Wilcocke.  *26. 

66.  Coppie  of  the  Writt  from  the  Chamberlen  to  the 

Sheriff  of  Chefter,  to  attach  the  Maior,  about  the  Vice- 
Admiralty  Bufneffe  of  the  Riuer  Dee,  belonging  to  the 
Citty.  127- 

67.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Francis  Gamull  to  hisFa- 
ther-in-Law' Sir  Richard  Grofvenor,  A.  D.  1631. 

Here  he  mentions  his  Father’s  late  Sicknefs  on  the 
Road  ;  which  Father  could  not  be  Mr.  Thomas  Gamull 
becaufe  he  deceafed  many  years  before;  but  was  Mr.  Re¬ 
corder  Whitbye,  who  married  his  Mother.  Mr.  Gamull 
alfo  complains  of  the  Fifhermen  in  Wales,  who  almoft 
flopped  up  the  River  of  Dee,  and  deftroyed  molt  of  the 
Fifh  that  fhould  come  up ;  and  fhews  that  he  and  Mr. 
Recorder  intend  to  be  even  with  them.  128. 

68.  Two 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


449 


Nuin.  2082. 

68.  Two  original  Receipts  for  moneys  paid  by  Mr. 
William  Gamull  Merchant,  A.  D.  1628.  upon  the  Ac- 
compt  of  Prize- Wines  for  himfelfe  &  others.  1 29. 

69.  A  Note  of  fuch  Fees  as  are  claymed  to  be  due  & 

vfually  taken  by  me  John  Moland  Cleark  of  the  Peace 
for  the  County  Pal.  of  Chefter  ;  and  alfo  by  them  who 
haue  formerly  ben  Clearks  of  the  Peace  of  the  fame 
County.  A.  D.  1635.  t 

70.  Petition  of  Hughe  Dod  of  Chefter,  Scrivener  to 

Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  to  whom  he  had  deliver’d  fundry 
of  the  Records  of  the  Pentice-Court,  which  were  not 
entred,  as  they  ought  to  have  been  ;  k  praying  that  he 
may  have  one  of  his  defiers  mentioned  in  the” Petition  de¬ 
livered  vnto  Mr.  Mayor,  27  June  1631.  i  o, 

71.  Copie  of  the  Petition  laft  mentioned,  which  was 

to  the  Maior  &  Affembly  of  Chefter.  1 ,2. 

Here  Mr.  Dod  (as  in  Confideration  of  Services 
done,  by  difcovering  the  Truth  &  Grounds  of  the  de- 
mands  of  feverall  Fees  taken  in  the  Cities  Courts  in 
Chefter)  defires  they  would  admitt  hym  their  Phylazer 
in  their  find  Courts  :  hee  therefore  yielding  yearelyefto- 
wards  any  good  vfe  fyve  markes  in  money.  Or  elfe, 
their  Confents,  that  he  may  have  the  Reuerfion  of  fome 
fettled  Place  of  Preferment,  fyttinge  for  hym  to  have. 
In  this  paper  is  alfo  a  Copie  of  his  Notes  about  Fees,  as 
aforelaid,  which  he  delivered  to  Mr.  Mayor  ;  &  which 
fliew  that  fome  Corruptions  had  crept  in. 

72.  An  Act  of  AlTcmblie,  which  was  houlden  in  the 

Common  Hall  of  Pleas  within  the  Citie  of  Chefter  2 
June  1618.  , 

By  this  Affembly,  Alderman  Robert  Whitby  & 
Thomas  Whitby  his  fonne  (whole  Actions  had  been  be¬ 
fore  taken  into  Confideration,  at  fundry  times)  were  now 
finally,  for  their  manifold  Offences,  Mifdemeanours,  & 
Abufes,  call  from  and  out  of  their  Office  of  Clerks*  to 
the  Pentice,  and  never  to  be  reftored  thereunto  ;  and  (in 
purfuance  of  certain  Letters  written  from  his  Maiefty') 
Robert  Brerewood  learned  in  the  Laws  was  elected  into 
the  faid  Office  paying  yearlie  to  the  Cittie  20  pounds, 
and  to  the  Sherifles  annually,  upon  the  endinge  of  their 
Office,  10  pounds,  if  the  Lawes  and  Statutes  of  this 
Realme  fliall  permitt  the  fame  payments  to  be  made. 
This  Affembly  likewffi  oider’d  that  a  Table  of  Fees 
ftiould  be  made  for  Mr.  Brerewoods  Direction,  by  the 
Advice  of  Mr.  Maior  S:  his  Brethren  (whereof  Mr.  Juf- 
tice  Warburton  to  be  one  ;  whereby  the  like  Extortion 
&  Increafing  of  Fees  heretofore  ufed  by  the  faid  Whit- 
bies,  maye  hereafter  bee  avovded. 

73.  Copie  of  the  Cit'es  Letter  to  the  King,  who  had 
recommended  one  Hugh  Mainwaringe  to  them  for  their 
Recorder.  They  femonflrate,  that  by  the  Charter  of  K. 
Henry  vn.  confirmed  by  himftlf,  none,  can  be  Recorder 
but  011s  of  the  24  Aldermen  ;  and  none  can  be  Alder¬ 
man,  except  he  be  a  free  Citizen,  which  the  faid  Hugh 
was  nor,  nor  ever  offred  himl'elfin  perfon  to  be  made 
one,  but  was  a  mere  Stranger  to  them  k  their  Corpora-  I 
tion.  And  that  for  the  obiervation  of  the  faid  Charter 
and  all  their  other  Liberties,  they  had  taken  their  Cor¬ 
poral!  Oathes.  They  therefore  defire  leave  to  eledt  a 
man  capable  of  the  Office  by  their  Charter,  there  being 
divers  of  the  Aldermen  who  had  done  good  Service  to 
their  Incorporation,  and  were  euerie  waie  fitt  for  the 
Place,  both  for  their  learninge  in  the  Lawes  ;  their  know¬ 
ledge  &  experience  of  their  Orders  &  Liberties  ;  k  their 
fine critic  in  true  Religion.  ’  ,^6. 

74-  Copie  of  the  Letter  of  K.  Charles  1.  to  the  City 
of  Chefter,  in  anfwer  to  theirs  laft  above-mentioned  ; 
whereby  (being  moued  by  a  Princelike  &  tender  care  of 
the  weale  &  well  Gouernment  of  that  City)  he  is  well- 
pleafed  to  graunte  vnto  'them  their  Election.  Gyuen, 

30  January,  anno  Regni  3. 

7 :  ■  Draught  of  a  Letter  to  be  fent  to  feverall  Aider- 
men  of  Chefter,  who  lived  abroad,  without  paying  Scot  I 
_&  Lot  to  the. Queen  or  to  the  City,  and  avoiding  the  I 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II.  I 


Num.  2082,  2083. 

Charge  of  the  Maiorality  ;  to  lett  them  all  know,  that  if 
they  did  not  come  &  refide  there,  by  a  certain  day,  and 
pay  their  Scot  k  Lot  for  the  time  of  their  Abfence,  they 
muft  and  fhould  lofe  their  Freedomes  of  the  Citv.  dat. 
27  October,  1593.  14'’. 

76.  A  Note  of  the  Names  of  the  Inhabitants  of  St. 
Olwald’s  Warde  within  the  Cittie  of  Chefter :  taken  1 
Juntj  1630.  b> 

77-  A  like  Lift  for  St.  Olliues  (Olaves)  Ward.  146. 

78.  Another  for  St.  Gyles  Ward. 

79.  Another  for  St.  Maries  Ward. 

80.  Another  for  North  Gate- Ward. 

8  i .  Another  for  F.aft  Gate-Ward. 

82.  Another  for  St.  John’s  Ward. 

83.  Another  for  St.  Martins  Ward. 

84.  Another  for  St.  Michael’s  Ward. 

85.  Another  for  Sr.  Brigett’s  Ward. 

86.  Lift  of  the  Bone-lace  Weavers  in  St.  Olaves 

Ward.  j  ^ 

87.  An  Acquittance  of  the  Church-wardens  of  Bow- 

don,  acknowledging  the  Receipt  of  50  Shillings,  bein? 
one  Moitye  of  the  Gifte  of  Dame  Elizabeth  Booth  dc- 
ceafed,  toward  the  Rcleife  of  the  Poor  of  the  Paiiffi  of 
Bowdon  ;  from  the  Treafurers  of  the  Cittye  of  Chefter. 
dat.  30  April!  1633.  loofe.  j  ’ 

88.  Note  about  the  feuerall  Payments  forSaughton  & 

Huntingdon,  temp.  R.  Elizabeths,  loofe.  ,5g. 

89.  Draught  of  a  Letter  (perhaps  from  Mr.  Thomas 

Wilcocke,  above-mentioned  at  §  65.)  to  the  Lord  Chan¬ 
cellor  Elefmere ;  defining  him  to  empower  fome  Che- 
ihire-Gentlemen  to  hear  the  matter  touching  Hunting¬ 
don’s  payment  towards  the  Mizes,  whether  feparately 
from  Saughton,  or  not.  loofe.  1^g/ 

2083. 


*4  7- 
149- 

150. 
,5I* 
152. 
1 53 • 
154.  b. 

*55- 


A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  Trads  &  fingle 
Papers  bound  up  together  ;  and  by  the  third  Randle 
Holme,  on  the.  out-fide  thus  entituled,  “  The  Sutes 
with  feuerall  Cittyzens  concerneinge  their  grinding  of 
Corne  atDee-Mills,  and  no  where  elfe:”  in  the  Defcrip- 
tion  of  which,  I  ffiall  proceed  in  the  ufual  manner  - 
viz1  I  find  therein, 

1 .  Mr.  Holme’s  Account  of  the  Things  of  mod  Note 
in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning,  loofe. 

2.  Interrogatories  to  bemimflred  to  Thomas  Denfon 
one  of  the  Deffendants,  at  the  Suite  of  Frauncis  Gamull 
Efq;  complainant,  vpcnContempt  k  Breach  ofOrder.090. 

It  feems  that  the  Court  made  an  Order  that  this 
Denfon  &  the  other  Defendants  fhould  grind  their  Com 
at  Dee-Milnes,  untill  the  Time  that  that  Caufe  fhould  be 
fully  heard  and  determined  ;  but  Denfon  was  again  pro- 
fecuted  by  Mr.  Gamull,  as  combining  with  the  others  to 
overthrow  that  Order,  and  as  grinding  his  own  Come 
in  the  mean  time  at  Boughton. 

3.  Th’Examinarion  ofThomas  Denfon  one  of  the  De¬ 
fendants,  at  the  Suite  of  Francis  Gamull  Efq;  Complainant 
taken  upon  his  Corporall  Oath,  in  the  Courte  of  Exche¬ 
quer  at  Chefter,  the  14th  of  June  1637.  vpon  Contempte 
and  Breach  of  an  Order.  ^ 

Here  honed  Mr.  Denfon  reapes  great  Advantage  by 
a  bidden  Lofs  of  his  Memory,  a  fudden  MifapprehenBon 
of  Things  &  ftupid  Ignorance,  join’d  to  a  wretched 
Neglea  in  all  his  Servants  &  Friends.  F'or,  he  really 
thought  that  the  flrft  Older  (made  long  before)  had 
obliged  him  to  grind  at  Dee-Milnes,  only  ’till  he  fhould 
have  putt  in  hts  Anfwer :  'So  he  anfwered  forthwith  - 
and  then  ground  his  Gome  at  Boughton,  as  thinking 
hmifelf  fully  difeharged  of  the  Order.  That  as  to  the 
next  Order,  no  body  (neither  at  home  or  abroad)  had 
ever  apprifed  him  of  it,  til!  within  a  very  few  days  laft 
part.  Yet  he  had  happened,  in  this  mean  time,  to  buy 
great  Quantities  of  Malt  of  Mr.  Edwards  the  Milner  of 
Boughton,  and  then  of  his  Wife ;  and  afterwards  had 
bought  Malt  of  others  being  ready  ground  :  and  this, 

5  ^  not 


45° 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2083* 


Num.  208  : 


not  to  evade  any  Order  of  the  Court  In  the  leaft :  but 
only  becaufe  he  conceived  himfelf  better  ufed,  by  thefe 
Ideople  than  by  Mr.  tlamul.  As  for  raiftng  any  joint 
Sum,  toward  the  overthrowing  the  faid  9/d £r.Si  "j 
knows  nothing  of  it :  only,  upon  meeting  with  Richard 
Dickinfon  accidentally,  he  did  not  confent  to  give  Mr. 
Edwards  abovefaid  20  Shillings  (the  other  Defendants 
doing  the  like)  towards  his  Charges  to  London,  to  en¬ 
deavour  that  the  Defendants  mighte  be  at  Ljbertie  to 
grind  their  Cofne  where  they  pleafed.  Nor  did  he  pay 
that  20  Shillings  himfelf,  for  his  Brother  paid  it.  Finally 
he  knows  of  no  Combination  among  the  Defendants,  to 
ftand  out  againft  the  Order  of  the  Court  ;  only  he  is 
refolved  (and  foe  fome  other  of  the  Defendants  haue  fayd 
they  are  refolved)  to  (land  out  againft  the  Complaynant 
in  this  Suite ;  and  to  free  themfeleus  (if  they  can) 
from  beinge  tyed  &  boUnden  to  grinde  at  the  Com¬ 
plainants  Millnes  ;  conceivinge  the  fame  (it  they  lhould 
be  bounde  thereunto)  will  be  much  to  theire  Damage. 

4.  The  further  joy  nt  &  feuerall  Anfweres  of  Andrewe 
Mynfliull,  Rychard  Dickenfon,  &  Thomas  Denton, 
Three  of  the  Defendants  to  the  Bill  of  Complaint  of 
Francis  Gamull  Efqj  Complainant ;  made  unto  feuerall 
Exceptions  exhibited  againft  Three  former  Anfwers  on 
the  faid  Plaintiffes  behalfe.  45°* 

Here  they  alledge,  that  by  Edward  the  viths 
graunting  the  Fee-Simple  of  Dee-Milnes  (to  Sir  Richard 
Cotton  £  Dame  Joan  his  Wife)  Without  refervinge  any 
Fee-farme-Rent  to  the  Crowne  ;  dlverfe  Privileges  Sc 
Rights  incident  to  the  faid  Milnes,  became  to  be  ex- 
tincte,  determined,  &  ended  ;  and  ought  not  to  be 
claymed  by  any  Perfon  or  Perfons,  by,  from,  or  under 
them,  or  in  their  Rights.  And  therefore,  they  deny 
that  Mr.  Gamull  ever  was,  or  could  be  a  Ward  to  K. 
James  or  to  K.  Charles,  by  reafon  of  the  faid  Milnes. 
They  acknowledge  likewife,  that  they  being  Citizens  of 
Chefter,  have,  for  many  years,  ufed  to  grind  their 
Corne  (except  Oats)  both  out  of  &  in  the  City,  at  their 
Pleafure.  But  the  Quantities  of  Corne  by  them  fo 
ground  at  other  Milnes,  they  cannot  fpeeifie,  becauie 

they  kept  no  Account  thereof. 

c.  The  feuerall  Anfwere  of  Thomas  Weauer,  tone  of 
the  Defendants)  for  his  parte,  to  the  Bill  of  Complaint  of 
Francis  Gamull  Efq;  Complainant.  459- 

Here  honeft  Thomas  denies  (at  once)  that  he  euer 
knewe,  heard,  or  believed,  that  there  euer  was, 
is  or  ought  to  be  any  fuch  great  Socke,  Sute,  or  Ser¬ 
vice  toDee-Mylnes,  as  by  the  Bill  is  pretended  ;  or  that 
He  or  any  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Chefter  (except  the 
Abbots  Tenaunts)  ought  to  haue  ufed,  tyme  out  of  mynd 
of  Man,  to  grinde  all  theire  Corne  there.  For  he  fayth 
(and  foe  hopeth  yt  wil  be  proved  in  the  event  of  this 
Suite)  that  there  neuer  was,  is,  or  ought  to  be  any  fuch 
Cuftome  for  Grinding,  or  payment  of  l'olle,  Cuftomes, 
&  Duties,  at  Dee-Mylnes,  as  in  the  Bill  is  vntruly  pre¬ 
tended  :  for  all,  or  mod  part  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Chefter 
Sc.  the  Liberties  thereof,  haue  ever  ufed  &  bine  accuftomed 
to  grind  their  Come,  Mault,  &  Grayne  where  they 
pleafied,  without  Interruption,  or  Clayme,  or  Challenge 
of  any  fuch  pretended  Cuftome.  For  this  Defendant  faith, 
that  for  Three  Yeares  laft  paft,  he  hath  ground  at  another 
Milne,  without  any  manner  of  Interruption  or,Gainfaying 
of  the  Complaynant,  vntill  nowe  of  late.  But  formerly, 
indeed.  He,  in  curtefie,  and  for  his  belt  Conveniences, 
and  vpon  Threats  to  take  away  the  Water  from  him, 
he  did  grind  at  Dee-Mylnes,  where  he  receaved  greate 
Wronge  8c  Prejudice  ;  and  had  his  Maulte  caft,  with 
Shouells,  awaye  before  his  owne  Face  ;  and  was  other- 
wy.e  abufed  by  the  Complaynants  Mylners  &  Servants. 
As  touching  what  Quantyties  of  Corne  he  hath  ground 
awaye  from  Dee-Mylnes,  he  is  not  able  to  give  any 
dyrecte  Anfwere  therevnto.  And  therefore  prayeth  to 
be  difmiffed  with  good  Codes,  for  his  wrongful  Vexa¬ 
tion  in  this  behalfe  moft  vnjuftly  luftayned. 


6.  The  feuerall  Anfwere  of  Elizabeth  Pemberton 
Wyddowe,  one  of  the  Defendants,  for  her  parte,  to  the 
Bill  of  Complaint  of  Francis  Gamull  Efq;  466. 

Herein  is  little  new  Matter.  She  denies  the  Cul- 
tome  :  &  faith  that  aboute  40  Yeares  before The  was  Ser¬ 
vant  to  John  Powell  an  Alehoufe-keeper  in  Chefter,  who 
ground  much  Mault,  &  fent  it  all  to  the  Milnes  111  and 
about  Boughton  ;  and  fo  did  all  the  then  Neighbours. 
That,  formerly,  lhe  was  Tennant  to  the  Complainant 
8c  his  Predecefl'ors  ;  yet  lhe  did  not  then  grind  all,  or  the 
greateft  parte  of  her  Malte  at  Dee-Milnes.  And  fo  for 
fixe  Yeares  &  vpwards,  die  hath  ground  moft  or  all 
her  Malt  at  other  Mylnes.  And  that  many  of  her  Neigh¬ 
bours,  Cittizens  of  Chefter,  who  have  fold  Ale  &  Beare, 

&  vfeii  to  grind  much  Malt  for  20,  30,  or  40  Yeares 
laft  pad,  have  not  fent  any  of  their  Malte  to  the  Com¬ 
plainants  Milnes  to  be  ground. 

7.  The  further  joynt  and  feuerall  Anfweres  of  Eliza¬ 

beth  Pemberton,  Henry  Hazelwall,  &  Katherine  Kinge. 
Three  of  the  Defendants  to  the  Bill  of  Complaint  of 
Francis  Gamull  Efq;  Complaynant  ;  made  vnto  feuerall 
Exceptions  againft  theire  former  Anfweres  on  the  faid 
Plaintiffes  behalfe.  47 x* 

This  is  to  the  fame  purpofe,  and  almoft  in  the  lame 
Words  with  that  at  N°.  4. 

8.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Corbin  to  Mrs.  Alice 

Gamull,  dated  18  July  1614,  wherein  he  advertifes  her 
of  his  Mafters  and  his  own  Diligence  in  ferving  her,  by 
getting  a  Letter  8c  an  Order  from  the  Court  of  Wards 
againft  thofe  who  withdrew  their  Multure  from  Dee- 
Milnes.  48°. 

9.  Examinations  taken  in  the  Queenes  Exchequer,  in  1 

her  Cartel  1  of  Chefter,  on  the  behalfe  of  the  Plaintiffe,  , 
the  21  of  September  1570.  482. 

This  Plaintiffe  was  William  Goodman  then  Fermor  1 
of  Dee-Milnes,  who  fued  Margaret  Bavand  Widow,  for  1 
grinding  the  Corne  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Chefter  at  her  : 
Water-Milne  called  the  Bach-Milne,  and  at  her  Wind- 
Milne  without  the  North  Gate  of  Chefter.  This  Copie  1 
was  made  &  examined  A.D.  1637. 

10.  Copie  of  the  Bill  of  Revival  for  Goodman  againft 
the  Widow  Bavand ;  who  notwithftanding  the  Order  of 
the  Court  (made  anno  9  R.  Eliz.)  for  her  ceafing  to 
grind  the  Comes  belonging  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Chefter, 
at  either  of  her  two  Mills  abovementioned  ;  did  in  mani- 
feft  Contempt  of  the  faid  Order,  continue  daily  8c  openly 
the  faid  wrongful  Pra£tife  ;  and  by  fuch  withdrawing  the 
Multure  from  Dee-Milnes,  took  away  great  part  of  his  ; 

living-  _  . 

1 1 .  E  Compoto  Miniftrorum,  de  anno  23  Regis  Hen- 

rici  vn.  511- 

This  Extraft  gives  the  Names  of  the  termors  ot  I 
Dee-Milnes,  and  of  the  King’s  Poole,  anno  19  R.  Hen- 
rici  vn.  and  alfo  the  Rents  then  paid  for  the  fame. 

1  2.  Breue  R.  Edwardi  1.  quo  (cum  nuper  commiferit 
Magiftro  Ricardo  Ingeniatori  fuo,  Molendina  fua  Ceftrite, 
et  Pifcariam  fuam  in  Aqua  de  Dee,  pertinentem  ad  Pon- 
tem  ultra  Aquam  illam  ;  habend.  uiq;  ad  finem  12  An- 
norum  ;  reddendo  inde  ad  Scaccarium  fuum  Ceftriai 
annuatim  Ducentas  Libras :  Et  idem  Ricardus,  occa- 
fione  Inundationum  Aqua;  praididta;  frequenter  fuper- 
venientium,  Jacturam  &  Dampna  gravia  fuftinuerit,  iicut 
dicit)  mandat  Reginaldo  de  Grey  Jufticiario  fuo  Ceftrie, 
quod  diligenter  inquirat  quantum  Dampni  et  Jadture 
diftus  Ricardus  paffus  fuerit  occaftone  predidta  ;  et  ftl 
idem  Ricardus  inde  Culpa  fuerit,  nec  ne.  Tefte,  See.. 
7  die  Septembris,  anno  Regni  17.  5X3' 

13.  Inquilitio  facta,  eodem  anno  ;  quando  Juratores: 
dixerunt,  quod  poftquam  Dns.  Rex  Molendina  fua  et 
Pifcariam  Pontis  Ceftrie  Magro.  Ricardo  Ingeniatori: 
ad  firinam  1 2  Annorum  tradidirtit :  primo  Annoejufdemi 
firme,  tante  Inundalioncs  aquarum  frequenter  fuperve-. 
nientium  extiterunt,  dum  idem  Ricardus  ftetit  in  Serntioi 
Dni.  Regis  apud  Karnarvan,  quod  crates  pilcarie  fubtus 
*  1  ponteijil 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


451 


Num.  2083. 

pontem  atachiari  non  potuerunt.  Et  quod  gurgites  pif- 
carie  predidte  et  granaria,  cum  parietibus  Molendinorum 
extirpati  et  afportata  fuerunt ;  vnde  idem  Ricardus  damp- 
num  Sc  ja&uram  40  Librarum  fuftinuit.  Item,  quod 
per  tres  annos  fequentes,  dum  idem  Ricardus,  per  vices, 
in  Servitio  Dni.  Regis  ftetitin  Wallia  ;  per  fuper-habun- 
dantes  Inundationes  Aquarum,  gurgites  Sc  crates  pre- 
difte,  una  cum  Calceto  ibidem,  dilFipata  et  afportata  fue¬ 
runt  ;  vnde  idem  Ricardus,  quoad  Pifcariam  predi£tam, 
dampnum  &  jafturam  ad  valentiam  60  Librarum  incurrit. 
Item,  quod  per  tempus  quo  idem  Ricardus  ftetit  in 
Servitio  Dni.  Regis  apud  Troflelan ;  Calcetum  predic¬ 
tum  per  hujufmodi  Inundationes,  dirutum  etafportatum 
extitit  ;  per  quod  Molendina  predi&a  fere  per  unum 
quaterium  Anni  molare  non  potuervnt.  Unde  per  hoc, 
et  tales  Inundationes  frequenter  per  totum  tempus  pre- 
diflum  fupervenientes  ;  Molendina  predi£ta  fepius  abfq; 
Molitione  fteterunt:  per  quod,  ipfe  Ricardus,  quoad 
multuram,  per  tempus  presidium  dampnum  et  jadturam 
ad  valentiam  54  Librarum  optinuit.  512- 

14.  Breve  R.  Edwardi  1.  Reginaldo  de  Grey  Julti- 

ciario  fuo  Ceftric  deftinatum  ;  quo  (quia  Ricardus  le 
Enginur  fibi  fuggeflerat  quod  magna  pars  multure, 
quam  percipere  debet  de  bladis  in  Dominicis  Terris  fuis 
Ceftr.  crefcentibus,  jam  fubtrahitur  eidem,  per  afligna- 
tionem  quam  fecit  quibufdam  Hominibus  parcium  illarum 
de  Dominicis  prediftis,  in  Efcambium  et  Recompenfa- 
tionem  quarundam  aliarum  Terrarum  Abbati  Sc  Conven- 
tui  de  Valle- Regali,  in  augmentationem  Suftentationis 
fue,  per  fefe  aflignatarum)  Volens  inde .  certiorari  ;  ille 
mandat  quod  inquirat  quantum  dampni  idem  Ricardus 
fuftinuerit  annuatim  per  fubftradfionem  multure  predidle  ; 
et  a  quo  tempore  He  fuerit,  per  didtam  aflignationem  fub- 
tradla  ;  et  quantum  multura  ilia  fic  fubtracla  valere  po- 
tuit  fingulis  annis,  a  tempore  fubtractionis  predidle  ;  et 
quantum  valere  poterit  ex  tunc,  per  annum,  et  qualiter, 
et  quomodo.  5 1 3*  b* 

15.  Inquifitio  fadta,  eodem  anno ;  ubi  per  Juratores 

compertum  fuit  quod,  a  tempore  quo  Dns.  Rex  aflig- 
navit  Dominicas  Terras  fuas  Caftri  Ceftrie  Hominibus 
partium  illarum  in  recompenfationem  aliarum  1  errarum 
Abbati  et  Conventui  de  Valle  Regali  aflignatarum  :  Ri¬ 
cardus  L’Enginour  per  fubtradtionem  multure  quam  de 
bladis  Dominicis  Hominum  predi&orum  percipere  de- 
buiflet,  fuftinuit  dampnum  ad  valentiam  58s.  7d.  ob.  Ve- 
rum  quod  non  poteft  eis  conftare  de  multura  temporibus 
futuris.  .  5 1 4* 

16.  Copy  of  a  Lelter  from  the  Commiflioners  ap¬ 
pointed  to  enquire  of  the  Valewofthe  Lands  of  George 
Cotton  of  Warblington  in  the  County  of  Southampton 
Efq;  convidled  of  Recufancy  ;  to  the  Intent  the  King’s 
Majeftie  might  the  rather  chufe  whether  to  refufe  the  20 
pounds  a  Month  ;  or  to  take  two  partes  of  his  Landes  : 
there  being  a  Schedule  annexed  to  the  Commiflion,  con- 
tayning  divers  Ivlannours,  Lands  &  Tenements,  in  the 
County  of  Chefter,  of  greate  valew,  fuppofed  to  be  his 
Poflefiions.  But  thes  Lands,  Sec.  thefe  Commiflioners 
fhew  to  be  the  Lands  given  to  the  Dean  Sc  Chapter  of 
Chefter,  and  were  never  Mr.  Cotton’s  Lands  fince  his 
Convidlion  ;  and  therefore,  they  cannot  be  fett  downe 
by  way  off  Office,  in  particular ;  but  only  in  generality. 

.  5X5- 

17.  Tranflation  of  a  manifold  Complaint  againft  the 

Dee-Milners,  upon  account  of  their  unreafonable  Ex¬ 
tortions.  The  complaint  was  made  fince  an.  10  R.  Ri- 
chardi  11.  .  5*7- 

18.  Abftradt  of  a  Recognizance,  whereby  divers  Per- 
fons  were  bound  for  Thomas  Thometon  Alderman  of 
Chefter,  that  he  fhould  not  carry  out  any  Corne  to  be 
ground  at  any  Mills,  without  the  Franchifes  of  Chefter. 
dat.  14  die  Augufti,  anno  24  R.  Henrici  vm.  52°* 

ig.  Breve  R.  Henrici  ....  diredtum  Johan- 
ni  de  Eaton  cuftodi  riparize  Aquas  de  Dee  ;  quo,  ei 
mandat,  quod  acceptis  Batellis,  Remis,  et  alijs  necelfa- 


Num.  2083. 

rijs,  curfum  Aquas  prasdidas  ferutari  faciat  5  et  fi  quee 
Rethia  &  Ingenia  ultra  medium  curfum  ejufdem  pofita 
invenerit :  fecundum  Confuetudinem  ufitatam,  et  Officij 
fui  debitum,  una  cum  Pifcibus  in  eifdem  mventis,  ca¬ 
piat  j  et  ea  Caftro  Ceftrias,  tanquam  fibi  forisfadla, 
pradentet  in  forma  debita  et  confueta.  _  520.  b. 

20.  Abftrads  of  two  other  Recognifances  (taken 

from  the  Rolls  of  the  Exchequer  of  Chefter)  whereby, 
Richard  Anyon  Sc  others,  were  bound  not  to  convey 
any  Cornes  to  any  forren  Mylle  to  be  grownden,  other 
then  to  the  Kings  Mylnes  of  Dee.  dat.  ann.  20  &  29  R. 
Henr.  vm.  521, 

21.  Abftrad  de  Recorde  &  Evidence,  concernant 
Multure  al  de-Millnes  .  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby.  523. 

22.  Copie  of  an  Order  of  the  Court  of  Wards,  where¬ 
by  Robert  Mawfon,  Sc  others  of  Kighley  in  Yorkfhire, 
were  enjoyned  to  grind  their  Corne  &  Grayne  at  Kigh- 
ley-Milnes  (parcel  of  the  Inheritance  of  Anne  &  Kathe¬ 
rine  Kigheley  her  Majefties  Wards)  in  fuch  forte  as 
they  did  grinde  their  Corne  there,  at  the  time  of  their 
Father’s  Death,  dat.  anno  13  R.  Elizabethas.  525. 

23.  The  joynt  &  feuerall  Anfwers  of  William  Reeve 

&  others,  Defendants,  to  the  Bill  of  Complaint  of  Fran¬ 
cis  Gamull  Efq;  Complainant.  527. 

Thefe  are  in  Defence  of  grinding  the  Chefter  peo¬ 
ples  Corne  at  their Water-inylne  called  Hockenhul-mylne 

24.  Original  Letter  of  Fane  Cotton  to  Mr.  Edmund 
Gamull ;  acknowledging  the  Receipt  of  Rent  ;  &  other- 
wife  relating  to  Dee-Milnes.  dat.  20  Auguft,  1584. 

547* 

25.  A  Note  of  feuerall  Records  taken  out  of  a  Ka- 

lender  of  Mr.  Baker ;  concernant  his  Molyns  et  Pif- 
charie  in  Dee,  &c.  548- 

26.  Order  of  the  Exchequer-Court  of  Chefter,  dated 

19  March  1613  ;  whereby  John  Ratcliffe  &  others,  who 
had  lately  withdrawn  their  Multure  from  Dee-Milnes, 
and  grounde  their  Corne  at  a  Querne  or  Hand-mi lne  fett 
up  by  the  faid  Ratcliffe  ;  were  obliged  to  grind  at  Dee- 
Milnes,  untill  their  Caufe  Ihouldbe  finally  heard.  And 
further,  they  were  likewife  obliged  to  do  to  Mr.  Edward 
Dutton  fuch  Services,  as  were  due  unto  him  by  reafon 
of  theHoufes  they  held  of  him.  550.  et  554. 

27.  Another  Order  of  the  fame  Court,  dated  5 
Aprilis  1616.  Againft  the  faid  Ratcliffe  &  his  aflociates, 
for  Contempt  of  the  Court,  in  not  obeying  the  former 
Order.  Hereby,  Sir  Henry  Townelend  the  Chamber- 
lay  ne  aw'arded  the  faid  Ratcliffe  vnto  the  Cunftable  of  the 
Caftle  of  Cheltcr  ;  and  to  pay  to  the  Kings  Majeftie  for 
a  Fyne,  for  breach  of  the  faid  Order  £6.  13.  14.  His 
Caufe  to  be  tried  at  the  Common  Law,  but  the  Confi- 
deration  of  what  A&ion  to  be  brought,  &  the  manner  of 
Triall,  to  be  fett  downe  at  the  next  fitting  of  the  Court. 
The  Defendants  further  to  pay  to  Mr.  Edward  Dutton 
the  Complaynant  £5-  for  his  Cufts  touchillge  the  Breach 
of  the  faid  Order;  and  to  continue  the  grindinge  their 
Grille  at  Dee-milnes  according  to  the  former  Orders. 

522. 

28.  Sort  of  a  Bill  of  Complaint  of  Mr  Edward  Dutton 

Fermor  of  Dee-Milles,  againft  John  Ratcliffe  &  others, 
for  withdrawing  their  Multure,  and  the  other  Services 
they  owed  him.  dat.  8  March,  1613.  55^* 

29.  A  Bill  of  Hughe  Lloyde  verfus  Piers,  &c.  in  fuite 

de  Molyn  de  Denbigh.  Pafch.  18  Jac.  in  Camera  Scac- 
carij.  _  55^ 

This  is  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  hand. 

30.  Original  Letter  of  ...  .  John  Brereton  to  Mr. 

Recorder  Whitbye,  in  behalf  of  thofe  who  having  with¬ 
drawn  their  Multure  from  Dee-Milnes,  were  under  the 
Lalhof  the  Law,  A.  D.  1637.  5^-°* 

31.  Notes  from  the  Patent-Rolls  of  K.  Edward  vi.  re¬ 
lating  to  divers  grants  made  by  him  to  Sr  Richard  Cot¬ 
ton. 

32.  Interrogatories  to  bee  miniftredto  Richard  Dickin- 
fon  one  of  the  Defendants,  at  the  Suite  of  Francis  Gamull 

Efq; 


45 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2083. 

Efq ;  Complaynant ;  vpon  Contempt,  &  Breach  of 
Order.  563. 

53.  The  Examination  of  Richard  Dickinfon,  taken 
vpon  his  Corpora  11  Oathe,  in  the  Courte  of  Exchequer 
at  Che/ter,  the  7th  of  June,  1637.  upon  the  faid  Inter¬ 
rogatories.  S79- 

Here  Dickinfon  owns,  that  hee,  Thomas  Denfon, 
Andrewe  Mirilhall,  &  Raphe  Drinkwater  (three  others 
of  the  Defendants)  did  find  themfelues  much  agreeved 
that  they  fhould  be  tyed  to  grind  at  the  Complaynants 
Milnes ;  conceyvinge  the  fame  to  be  much  to  theyre  Da¬ 
mage.  And  they  meetinge  with  John  Edwards  of  Bough- 
ton  Gent,  (the  owner  of  Boughton-milles)  did  intreat 
him  to  be  their  Sollicker,  tohelpe  them  that  they  might 
be  at  Libertye  to  grinde  where  they  pleafed.  And  he  was 
contented  to  take  paynes  for  them  therein  ;  and  they 
then  payd  him  20  Shillinges  a-peece  for  or  towards  bear- 
inge  his  Charges.  And  he  did  indeed  then  fay  &  refolve 
that  hee  would  lye  in  Prifon  before  hee  would  grinde  at 
the  Complaynants  Milnes  ;  and  foe  did  fome  other  of  the 
Defendants  fay.  But  none  of  them  faid  that  hee  or  they 
would  not  obey  the  Order  of  this  Courte,  or  vfed  any 
words  againft  this  Courte.  It  feems  this  man  was  very 
ftubborn  ;  he  fent  his  Corne  to  be  ground  at  Boughton, 
after  the  order  of  the  Court  to  the  contrary,  and  was 
therefore  attached  &  cad  into  Prifon.  This  Examination 
is  imperfect  at  the  end. 

34.  Original  Leafe  granted  by  John  Tirer  to  Godfray 

Wynne  of  Chefter  Butcher  &  Maude  his  Wife  ;  of  the 
Water  brought  into  his  Houfe  from  the  Dee ;  for  Five 
years ;  at  the  annual  Rent  of  £i.  6.  8.  dat.  8  January, 
A.  D.  *603.  594. 

35.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  William  Stanley  Earl  of 
Derby  &  C.hamberlayne  of  Chefter  to  the  Lords  of  the 
Privy  Council,  September,  1 633,  by  whom  he  was  directed 
to  hear  the  Matter  between  Alderman  Philipp  Maynwar- 
mg  &  others  (owners  of  the  Water-works  at  Dee-bridge) 
Complaynants  ;  &  Mr.  Francis  Gamul  &  Mr.  Recorder 
Whitby,  Defendants,  certifying  the  State  of  the  fame  • 
and  that  hitherto  he  had  not  found  meanes  to  pacifie 
both  Parties. 

36.  Order  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  in  the 

Matter  deputed  between  the  Parties  aforefaid  :  where 
their  Lordfhips  found  that  the  Matters  contefted  were  of 
Natures  public  &  private.  The  Points  of  a  public 
Nature,  were  the  Water-works,  Streames  of  the  Dee- 
Water,  with  the  Liberties  appertaining  to  them  :  Thefe 
they  refolved  Ihould  continue  for  ever,  to  the  prefent 
Purchafers  &  their  SuccefTors  ;  they  paying  to  Mr.GamulI 
the  old  Rent  of  £5  per  annum,  &c.  and  therefore  they 
order,  that  the  Owners  of  the  faid  Water- Workes  Ihall 
have  free  Liberty,  Ingrefs  &  Egrefs,  &c.  to  repair  & 
amend  the  faid  \\  orks  as  often  as  occafion  Ihall  require, 
without  any  Lett  or  Interruption  from  the  Defendants  : 
they  making  good  to  the  Defendants  any  Damage  that 
Ihall  come  to  their  Mill,  by  reafon  of  the  faid  Water¬ 
works.  As  to  the  Multure  of  Dee- milnes,  Mr.  Gamul 
his  Agreement  with  John  Tyrer,  to  oblige  his  Cuftomers 
to  grind  their  Corne  at  the  faid  Milnes  ;  and  the  aim- 
mentation  of  Tircr's  old  Rent  now  infilled  on  by  Mr 
Gamul ;  being  the  private  points  in  Queftion :  their 
Lordfhips  left  them  to  be  decided  according  to  Juftice 
m  the  Exchequer  Court  at  Chefier.  '  rq7  ’ 

3 7-  Mr.  Francis  Gamull’s  Claim  againft  John  Tirer’s 
I  me  for  the  Water  works  of  Chefter. 

38.  Depofitions,  fhewing  that  in  February  160-  ill 
the  Water  Mills  around  Chefter,  ftood  ftill  by  reafon  of 
the  Froft,  except  only  Chefter-Milles,  as  Randle  Holme 
obferves.  ^co  ^ 

39  Exemplification  of  an  Order  of  the  AITemMy  of 
Chelter  made  19  March  anno  25  R.  Elizabeths:,  upon 
Occafion  ot  Alderman  Edmund  Gamull’s  profecutintr  of 
Alderman  JohnHankye  for  fetting  up  an  Iiorfe-miine  in 
Chefter.  Here  the  Affembly  condefcended  to  one  part 


Num.  2083,  2084. 

of  Hankye’s  Requeft  ;  namely  to  ufe  their  Endeavors  to 
make  Peace  between  them  ;  and  alfj  to  allow  Hankies 
Counfell  Accefs  to  their  Booke  of  the  Inrollments  of 
their  Charters  ;  but  they  refufed  the  other  part,  wch.  was, 
to  make  his  Caufe  the  Cities.  g02  ’ 

40.  Some  few  Notes  taken  from  the  Charters  of  the 
old  Earles  of  Chefter,  relating  to  Dee-Milnes.  63- 

41.  Others,  concerning  Dee  Milnes,  &  the  City-Fee- 

Farmes,  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby.  fo. 

42.  Extract  from  the  public  Rolls,  touching  the  com¬ 

mon  Paflage  over  the  Dee  ;  and  the  Ferme  &  Profits  of 
Dee-inilnes,  in  the  time  of  K.  Edward  m.  60-.  b. 
„.43m  °riSmal  Letter  of  Mr.  Francis  Gamull,  to  Sir 
Richard  Grofvenor  Knight  &  Baronet,  his  Father  in 
Law  upon  his  own  private  Affaires,  dat.  u  Anril 
1641.  J  6  ^ 

44-  Queftions  concerninge  the  Right  of  Grift  7  & 
Muldure  to  Dee-Milnes. 

45.  Extraft  from  the  Accompt  of  Thomas  Danielle 
the  Kings  Receiver  Generali  in  Lincolnfhire,  as  to  the 
i-oeSn-  l,heIVLlrler  of  Bourne,  which  K.  Edward  vi.  had 
of  Sir  Richard  Cotton  in  Exchange  for  Dee-Milnes.  610. 

2084. 

A  Book  in  folio  confiding  of  many  little  Tracts  &  loofe 
1  apers,  bound  _  up  together  by  the  third  Randle 
Holme,  andby  him,  ontheoutfide,  thus  entitled  ‘‘The 
State  of  the  Cawfic  &  Dee-Milles ;  and  the  Sute 
about  them  ”  In  deferibing  the  fame,  I  fhall  proceed 
in  the  ufuall  Method  ;  as  finding  therein, 

:.  I  he  faid  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  the  Things 
of  mod  Note,  in  the  fame.  At  the  beginning.  8 
2.  Defcent  of  Alderfey  &  Leech  of  Chefter! 

tu-h’  B/IC^C  °r  llle.State  of  Caufe  concerninge  the 
Milles  &  Cawfey  of  Chefter.  °  _ 

1  his  is  drawn  up  in  oppofition  to  the  Ccmmi'flion 
of  Sewers  wh.ch  was  authorifedby  Iv.  James  1.  concern¬ 
ing  winch  much  matter  may  be  found  in  the  Books 
90.  C.  22.  &c. 

thc4ii^w:fcVX°bieaions  concerning  the 

5.  Exemplification  of  an  Inquifition  taken  anno  28  R 

Henna  vr.  concerning  the  Decay  of  the  River  &  Haven 
of  Chefter.  f 

6.  Precedents  diewing  how  divers  have  been  prefented 

forobdrua.ng  the  Rivers  of  Thames,  &c.  and  were  ac- 
qmtted.  i(, 

7.  The  Rcafnns  of  the  Decay  of  the  Channell  at  Mof- 

ton-marke,  m  Wales.  l67 

t  S',  ExcePtI0ns  to  the  Cafe  which  was  prefented  to  the 
Lmds  the  Judges,  on  the  behalfe  of  the  Commiftioners  of 
bewers,  that  made  the  Decree  againft  the  Cawfav  in 
Chefter.  L 

9.  Petition  of  the  poore  Inhabitants  within  theTowne- 
fh^ps  of  Farndon,  Clnirton,  &  Aldford,  to  Sir  Richard 
Grofvenor  Knight  &  Baronet,  praying  that  John  Bof- 
vel  might  be  fullered  to  ufe  his  Corricles  over  the  Dee 
whde  Chefter  was  befieged  by  the  Rebells  ;  that  thereby 
1  rovilions  might  be  carried  into  the  City;  and  untill 
uch  time  as  they  might  all  refort  to  Sir  Richard’s 
164J’  aS  aCCuftomed’  This  was  prefented,  7  June 

to.  Account  del  profit  del  I’affage  de  Dee,  quand  le 
Bridge  hut  erupt,  anno  27  R.  Edwardi  hi.  172..  ■ 

11.  Original  Examination  of  Robert  Walton  of 
Northwich  ;  who  fiieweth  the  Caufe  of  the  Decay  of  the 
Rn'cr,  to  have  been  by  Sands,  &  not  by  the  Caw- 

12.  How  the  Froft  in  January  1607,  topped  al/the 
Water-Mills  round  about  Chefter;  fo  that  People  were 
rorced,  in  that  Extremity,  to  bring  their  Corne  to  Dee- 
Mills,  to  be  ground. 

*3-  Certificate  of  Richard  Hafslewall  &  divers  other 
old  Men,  that  the  Cawfey  hath  not  been  raifed  by  Mr. 

Gamull, 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


453 


Nuiii.  2084. 

Gamull,  or  by  any  of  the  Goodmans,  or  any  others 
that  were  owners  thereof,  dat.  1  January,  1607.  178. 

14.  Notes  or  Collections  gathered  for  the  uphold - 
Inge  &  mentayninge  of  the  Cawfey  &  New  Kaye,  againfte 
all  fuche  as  are  Impugners  of  the  fame  ;  with  Reafons 
8c  Allegations  the  better  to  prove  the  fame.  180. 

The  Author  of  this  Tract,  I  find,  was  Mr.  William 
Alderfey,  Alderman  of  Chefter  ;  and  it  feemeth  to  be  of 
his  own  hand-writing. 

15.  Examinations  of  WitnefTes,  all  confentinge  that 

the  Cawfey  is  no  caufe  of  the  Decay  of  C.hefter-River ; 
and  that  the  New  Key  was  very  ferviceable  for  Shipps, 
A.  D.  1607.  182. 

16.  The  Opynion  of  me  William  Alderfey  Merchant 
8c  Alderman  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter;  fett  downe  6c 
wrytten  with  my  owne  Hand,  the  i6th  daye  of  Decem¬ 
ber  A.  D.  1607,  8c  in  the  64th  yeare  of  my  Age.  186. 

This  is  in  Defence  of  tile  Caufey,  New  Key,  8c  Dee 
Milles. 

iy.  His  rough  Draught  of  the  fame  Paper.  188. 

18.  Draught  of  a  Letter  feeming  to  be  of  Mr.  Alder- 

fey’s  Hand,  but  as  in  the  name  of  the  Commifiioners  of 
Sewers  ;  to  the  Lord  Keeper  Ellefmere  ;  propofmg  that 
an  Hearing  might  be  had  before  the  Judges  ;  in  behalf 
of  Dee-Milles,  8c  the  Cawfey.  190. 

19.  Original  Letter  of  Summons  from  George  Lloyd 

Bifhop  of  Chefter  &  others  the  Comtniifioners  of  Sewers, 
to  William  Alderfay  Alderman  of  Chefter,  8c  others, 
requiring  their  appearance,  to  teltifie  their  feveral 
Knowledges,  about  the  laid  Milles,  Cawfey,  New  Key, 
&c.  dat.  16  September  1607.  192. 

20.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  Dean  &  Chapter  of 

Chefter  to  the  Lord  Chancellor,  in  behalfe  of  Mr.  Ga¬ 
mull,  about  the  Cawfey  8c  Milles ;  out  of  which,  they 
have  5  pounds  per  annum,  dat.  3  Novr.  1607.  194. 

21.  Original  I.etter  of  Sr.  William  Brcreton  to  Mr. 

Thomas  Gamull  Recorder  of  Chefter,  who  had  defired 
him  to  certifie  his  Opinion  in  behalf  of  the  Cawfey  ;  but 
Sir  William  feemed  to  have  been  enclined  againft  it.  dat. 
24th  of  January  1 607.  196. 

22.  Copie  of  a  I.etter  from  the  Lord  Chancellor  Fllef 

mere,  to  the  Biftiops  of  S'.  Afaph  8c  Chefter,  S'.  Peter 
Warburton,  8c  others  the  Commiffioners  of  Sewers,  ap- 
prifing  them  how  earneftly  he  had  been  moved  by  Mr. 
Recorder  Gamull  to  award  a  Superfedeas  to  their  Com- 
miffion,  8c  what  potent  Sollicitations  had  been  made  in 
behalf  of  Dee  Milles  &  the  Cawfey,  See.  He  tells  them, 
that  in  this  fo  weighty  a  Matter  they  ftiould  regard  only 
8c  wholly  the  publique  good.  7  hat  they  were  to  re¬ 
forme  all  Obftruclions  8c  Noyanccs  in  the  River  of  Dee 
within  the  ly  mitts  exprefledin  theCommiffion,  not  ayming 
or  pointing  only  or  fpecially  at  any  particular  perfon,  or  at 
any  particular  Place  or  Matter.  And  therefore  it  ought  tobe 
indifferently  &  equally  executed,  for  the  publique  8c  ge- 
jnerall  good  of  the  Countreys  adjacent  to  the  fame  River  ; 
Sc  not  to  beftriftly  or  ftreynablie  extended  to  theis  Milles 
8c  Cawfey  only,  or  fpecially  8c  above  all  other  Noyanfes  in 
that  River  :  nor  to  be  remifslye  or  coldlye  or  partially 
handled  for  any  private  Favour  or  Refpedie  of  Mr.  Ga¬ 
mull,  or  of  any  other.  In  a  Poftcnpt  he  adds,  that 
This  Service  is  ofgreate  Importance,  and  therefore  ought 
to  be  attended ;  and  they  ftiould  fee  that  Juftice  be 
equallye  and  indifterentlye  done,  for  the  generall  Good  : 
and  not  to  abfent  or  withdrawe  themfelves,  nor  to  deale 
carelefsly  or  negligently,  as  he  is  informed  that  fome  of 
them  have  done,  dated  29  November  1607.  197.  A. 

23.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  laid  Commiffioners  of 

Sewers,  to  the  Fords  of  the  Privy  Council ;  dated  4 
January  1607.  acquainting  their  Lordffiips  that  they  had 
by  their  Decree,  order’d  half  the  New  Key,  and  'Pen 
Yards  of  the  Cawfey  to  be  pulled  down,  and  taken 
away.  198. 

24.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Maior  S:  Citizens  of 
Chefter,  to  Robert  Cecil  Earl  of  Salifbury  8c  Lord  High 

Cat.  IIarl.  Vol.IL 


Num.  1084. 

Treafurer,  in  the  behalf  of  the  Cawfey  and  Dee-Mills, 
dated,  31  October,  1607.  200.  373. 

25.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  fuch  of  the  Commiffioners 

of  Sewers,  as  were  for  the  Prefervation  of  Dee-Milnes 
8c  Cawfey,  to  the  Lord  Chancellor  Ellefmere:  dated 
.  .  .  January  1607.  202.  355. 

Herein,  with  the  Reafons  of  their  Opinion,  they 
obferve,  that  notwithftanding  their  Commiffion  was  in 
general  for  the  Reformation  of  all  Obftructions  in  the 
River  of  Dee :  yet  there  are  dyvers  other  Cawleys  & 
Impediments,  not  found  or  mentioned  at  all,  in  anv  of 
the  late  Verdi£ls ;  fome  of  which  were  verie  lately 
erected,  and  are  only  profitable  to  the  particular  Owners 
thereof. 

26.  Copie  of  a  I.etter  from  Hugh  Glafeour  Maior,  Sc 

the  Aldermen  of  Chefter ;  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Councill :  dated,  29  December  1602.  advertifing,  that 
a  Breach,  above  20  yards  broad,  8c  18  foot  deep,  had 
been  made  in  the  middle  of  the  Cawfey,  the  laft  yeare, 
by  the  Violence  of  the  Waters :  whereby  the  going  of 
Dee-Milncs  was  flopped,  and  all  whole  living  depended 
on  them,  in  a  fair  way  to  be  ruined.  And  that  Mr. 
Edmund  Gamull  Fernior  of  the  Corne-Milles  there,  had, 
out  of  his  own  purfe,  expended  above  £  ;oo.  in  repairing 
the  laid  Cawfey  ;  but  that  it  would  require  above  /  too 
more  to  finifh  the  fame.  204. 

27.  Copie  of  a  I.etter  from  Thomas  Sackvile  Earl  of 

Dorfet  Lord  Treafurer,  to  the  Commiffioners  of  Sewers  ; 
requiring  them  to  forbeare  to  inlet  meddle  with  Dee- 
Milles,  or  the  Cawfey  ;  not  doubtin  g  but  that  much 
good  maie  be  done  to  the  River  by  other  meanes,  yf 
with  Diligence  Sc  Indifferencie  they  be  carefull  to  exe¬ 
cute  tile  Auflhoritie  committed  vntothem.  2.  6. 

28.  Draught  of  a  Fetter  from  the  Commiffioners  of 

Sewers  (above-mentioned  at  N-.  25)  to  the  faid  Ford 
Treafurer,  upon  the  fubjeft  of  Dee-Milnes  8c  Cawfey. 
But  adding,  that  the  greate  Neceffity  of  theife  Mills  is 
made  more  manifeft  8c  apparant  to  all  that  dwell  in  theife 
partes  ;  there  being  no  other  Mills  within  Ten  or  Twelve 
Myles  of  Cheffer,  that  could  gryndc  in  this  late  Froft  at 
all  in  effeft,  by  the  Space  of  a  whole  Moneth  together, 
for  want  of  fufficient  Water.  208. 

29.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  Dr.  George  Lloyd 

Bifhop  of  Chefter,  &  Firft  or  Second  of  the  Commiffioners 
of  Seweis,  to  Robert  Cecil  Earl  of  Salifbury  Sc  Principal 
Secretary  of  State  ;  upon  the  old  fubjeCt  of  Dee-Mills 
&c  the  Cawfey,  which  (he  owns)  fome  Gentlemen  of  his 
Country  of  Wales  (devided  from  him  in  Opinion  I  doe 
earnellly  labour  to  deftroy.  And  now  his  Lordfhip 
being  daily  more  Sc  more  confirmed  inhis  formerOpinion, 
as  well  by  his  owne  further  Obfervation,  Sc  Travells  in 
this  Service,  for  his  better  Satisfaction  ;  a-  by  the  late 
greate  Froft  8c  other  Accidents,  whereby  the  Necelhty 
of  the  laid  Milles  is  made  more  apparant  vnto  all,  8c  that 
the  Lode  thereof  would  not  onely  tend  to  the  Difherifon 
of  his  Majefty  in  the  ancient  Rights  &  Royalties  of  the 
Farldome  of  Chefter,  Sc  of  the  Deane  8c  Chapter  there, 
8c  of  divers  poore  Coinpanyes,  8c  paiticular  Perfons ; 
without  any  certayne  afTurance  of  any  Good  to  enfue  : 
but  alfo  to  the  lmpoverilhment  of  the  whole  City  8c 
Country  adjoyning,  which  are  the  better  fupported,  by 
meanes  of  thtis  Mills  Sc  Cawfy,  with  Bread,  Cloth,  Fifh. 
Frefh  Water,  Sc  other  neceflaries.  209. 

30.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  one  employed  for  the 

Citty,  10  the  fame  Earle  of  Salifbury  ;  importing,  that 
now  (after  the  Caufe  had  been  referred  by  the  Lords  of 
the  Privy  Council  to  the  Three  Lords  Chiefe  Juftices, 
w  hereunto  all  parties  then  allented  ;  8c  the  Order  was 
penned  8c  figned:  exception  is  taken  by  the  Gentlemen 
on  the  other  Side,  to  the  Lord  Cooke,  as  not  indifferent 
in  the  Caufe,  for  that  he  (the  Writer)  hath  fome  De¬ 
pendency  upon  him.  Which  Exception,  as  it  is  very 
flrange  againft  One  of  his  Place;  fo,  it  is  molt 
untrue,  a  10. 

5  Z  31.  Original 


45  + 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nurn.  2084. 

31.  Original  I. otter  of  Mr.  Edmund  Gamull  to  his 
Sonne  Thomas  Gamull  Recorder  of  Chefter :  {hewing 
that  his  Adverfary,  Sir  Richard  Trevour  is  profecutiiig 
a  Suit  de  Ideota  probanda  againfl:  Mr.  Pulefton’s  Frend; 
and  to  that  purpofe,  the  Feodary  of  Chefliire  &  other 
Commiffioners  have  taken  an  Office,  wherein  great 
Diforder  hath  arryfen  among  theym.  That  the  Courfe 
the  Welfli  Gentlemen  intend  to  take,  to  abate  the 
Mylnes  to  a  lower  Streame,  to  th’end  the  Caufey  may. 
be  fo  muche  drawen  the  lower  ;  which  platt  will  do  no 
good  at  all  to  any,  except  the  whole  were  pulled  downe. 
For  nowe  ther  is  one  Walk-Mylne,  and  two  Corne- 
Mylnes  cannot  go,  for  want  of  Water.  But  thisDevife 
was  devifed  by  Mr.  Juflice  Warburton  &  others  his 
Neighbours  of  Chefliire.  2 1 1 . 

32.  Part  of  a  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  King  to 

the  Judges,  before  whom  the  Caufe  of  Dee-Mills  &  the 
Cawfey  was  to  be  heard  :  which  he  commendeth  to 
their  Care  &  Confideration.  212.  et  315.  323. 

33.  Letter  of  the  above-mentioned  Bifhop  of  Chefter 
to  the  Lord  Chauncellor  Ellefmere  ;  dated  5  November, 
1607.  fol.  214.  Importing,  that  he  being  named  one  of 
the  Commilfioners  of  Sewers  in  thofe  Parts  ;  did  refolve 
to  obferve  with  all  Diligence  &  Indifference,  fuch  thinges 
as  he  {hold  perceyve  1110ft  materiall  to  be  confidered  in 
the  Service.  And  therefore  made  fome  Journies  along 
the  Water-fide  downe  into  Wirhall  &  elfewhere  for  his 
better  Satisfaction  :  and  having  reduced  his  Obfervations 
into  fome  Order,  in  forme  of  a  true  Relation,  he  fends 
them  to  his  Lordffiip,  by  John  Tyrer  his  Lordfhips  Ser¬ 
vant,  one  of  much  defert  in  Chefter,  for  his  induftrious 
endeavours.  And  reprefenting,  that  as  the  Matters 
fallen  into  Debate  are  of  verey  greate  Importance  :  fo, 
they  are  caryed  on,  on  both  parts  with  fuch  Fervour,  as 
that  he  could  wifh,  for  the  Good  and  Peace  of  both, 
that  by  his  Lordfhips  honourable  Care  &  Wifdome,  a 
good  &  peaceable  Ende  may  be  put  to  theis  Begynn- 
ings  ;  and  thofe  Humours  allayed,  which  were  vntymelie 
moved. 

34.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Thomas  Crue  of  the  Hole, 

to  Mr.  Recorder  Gamull informing  him  that,  it  had 
been  proved  before  the  Jurye,  by  credible  Wytnefles 
fworne,  that  the  fame  Night  the  Caufey  did  breake,  the 
Wattcr  dyd  falle  4  Foote.  And  another  did  wytnes, 
thatwheras  his  Beafl.es  dyd  vfually  drinke  at  Dee,  beinge 
on  the  Land  ;  the  day  after  the  Breache,  the  Ryver 
was  gone  foe  finalle  that  he  was  dryven  with  Faggots  to 
make  waye  for  them  to  go  to  the  Ryver.  And  that 
whereas  the  Bottes  at  Eaton-Boale  Hotting,  over  night, 
vpon  the  Ryver,  the  morning  after  the  great  Breache, 
they  were  one  Land,  and  the  Ryver  did  falle  at  Eaton- 
Boate,  a  Yarde  and  halffe.  He  therefore  defires  (his 
own  Land  alfo  lying  on  the  fame  fide,  &  next  to  the 
Dee,  &  liable  to  Inundations)  to  be  excufed  from  giving 
Evidence  on  Mr.  Gamuls  fide,  as  he  had  promifed ;  for 
if  he  fliould  be  obliged  to  appear,  he  flinuld  be  con- 
Ilrayned  to  declare  what  he  had  above  wrytten  ;  whiche 
wold  be  a  forre  Evidence  againfl  Mr.  Gamull,  which  he 
wold  be  lothe  to  doe.  And  that  he  himfelf  is  hatted  of 
all  the  Towne  like  an  Owle  ys  of  Birds,  becaufe  he  holds 
with  Mr.  Gamull.  2 1 6. 

35.  C.opie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Cittie  of  Chefter  to 
the  Lord  Chancellor  Ellefmere,  dated  31  OClober  1607. 
Setting  forth,  that  certaine  Gentlemen  of  Wales,  intend¬ 
ing  to  improve  the  Proffitts  of  their  owne  Milles,  had 
lately,  upon  a  Petition,  preferred  in  their  own  Names  as 
alfo  in  that  of  the  Citty,  but  without  the  Cities  privity, 
procured  a  Commiffion  of  Sewers  to  themfelues  and  dy- 
vers  others  ;  have  entred  into  the  execution  thereof,  and 
earneftly  endeavoured  the  DeftruCtion  of  the  Dee-Milles 
&  Cawfey;  pretending  them  to  be  the  Caufe  of  many 
great  Annoyances,  though  farre  remote  &  diftant  from 
them.  Alfo  that  Sir  Richard  Trevor,  one  of  the  faid 
Commiffionersj  contrary  to  the  mindes  of  diuers  others 


Num.  20S4-. 

preceding  him  in  Commiffion,  hath  taken  vpon  him  to 
keepe  the  faid  Commiffion  ;  whereby,  he  and  his  Af- 
fociats  are  enabled  to  meete  together,  and  to  make 
Lawes  and  Orders  at  their  pleafures,  for  the  Deftruclion 
of  ihe  faid  Milles  &  Cawfey.  They  therefore  give  Rea- 
fons  to  induce  his  Lordffiip  to  give  Direction  for  a  Super- 
iedeas  to  be  graunted,  to  difeharge  the  faid  Commiffion 
or  elfe  to  exclude  all  fuch  from  intermedling  therein  as 
Judges,  which  haue  any  Grounds  vpon  the  River-fide, 
or  are  othenvife  interreffed  in  the  Caufe,  on  either 
parte.  218. 

36.  Opinions  of  feveral  very  eminent  Lawyers,  that 

the  abovementioned  Commiffioners  of  Sewers,  had  not 
power  to  puli  down,  or  proftrate  the  Cawfey  ;  for  the 
Reafons  they  give.  219.  321.  352. 

Ihefe  Gentlemen  wrote  their  Opinions  with  their 
own  hands;  and  fubferibed  their  Names,  Th. Fofter, 
Jo.  Walter,  W.  Brocke,  Jo.  Brydgeman. 

37.  Mr.  R.  Godfrey’s  original  Opinion,  that  the  faid 
Commiffion  of  Sewers  Ihould  have  paffed  vnder  the  Seale 
ol  the  Countie  of  Denbigh.  And  that  a  Jurie  of  the 
Countie  of  Denbigh  could  not  inquire  about  the 
Cawfey  which  was  in  the  County  of  the  City  of  Chefter. 

223. 

j8-  This  Mr.  Ry.  Godfrey’s  original  Opinion  that 
the  Commiffioners  of  Sewers  might  abate,  corrett,  & 
reforme,  any  Milles  erected  to  the  Lett,  Impediment,  or 
Annoyance  mentioned  in  the  Statute  of  23  Hen.  vm. 
caP-  5-  _  225. 

39-  Queftion,  If  fix  Commiffioners  of  Sewers  make 
Orders  for  the  pulling  downe  of  any  Weare  ;  and  after¬ 
wards  fix  other  of  the  Commiffioners  doe  order  that  the 
fame  Ihall  be  mainteyned  :  Are  the  firfte  Lawes  repealed 
by  the  fecond  ?  or  what  maie  the  Owner  doe,  yf  any 
Attempt  be  made  to  pull  it  downe?  227.  et  290.  338. 

40.  Another  Queftion,  whether  a  Mille  or  Weare  of 

500  yeares  Continuance  in  one  Countie;  might  be 
pulled  downe  accordingly  to  the  Opynions  of  Juries  in 
other  Counties.  233. 

41.  Mr.  Th.  Fofter’s  original  Opinion,  that  the  Cham¬ 
ber  laine  of  Chefter  might  grant  a  Superfedeas  ;  and  that 
therby  the  Commiffioners  Authoritie  would  be  deter¬ 
mined  within  the  Countie  Palatyne.  But  then,  whether 
it  would  be  fitt  &  comelie  for  the  Chamberlaine  to  grant 
a  Superfedeas,  without  the  Privitie  of  the  Lord  Chaun- 
celer  of  Englande,  or  before  his  Lordffiip  ffiould  awarde 
a  Superfedeas  for  the  deterinyninge  of  the  Commiffion 
vnder  the  Great  Seale,  was  to  be  concidered.  229.  et  vid. 

42.  Queftion.  Whether  the  Commiffion  being"  joint 

for  all  three  Counties,  &  not  feuerall  for  the  Countie- 
Palatine  of  Chefter  :  it  oughte  to  paffe  under  the  Seale  of 
the  Countie- Palatine  ?  & c.  230. 

43.  Original  Opinion  of  Serj'-  Richard  Hutton,  upon 

the  Queftion,  whether  the  Commiffioners  of  Sewers,  or 
fome  of  them  might  not  revoke  &  repeal  the  Order  & 
Decree  by  them  made  againfl;  the  Cawfey  :  in  the  Affir¬ 
mative.  dat.  anno  1616.  231. 

44.  Mr.  Tho.  Ireland’s  original  Opinion,  upon  the 
fame  Queftion  ;  concurring  with  the  former.  233. 

4,v  Original  Opinion  of  Sir  Henry  Hobart,  upon  the 
Cafe  abovementioned  at  §  36.  and  concurring  with  Mr. 
Fofter,  and  the  others.  235. 

46.  Original  Opinion  of  Sir  Francis  Bacon,  in  the 
fame  Cafe;  and  concurring  with  the  reft.  237.  319. 

321. 

47.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  William  Brereton  to  Mr. 

Recorder  Gamull ;  as  it  feems,  in  behalf  of  one  of  thofe 
who  had  been  profecuted  for  with-drawing  his  Multure 
from  Dee-Mills  ;  and  was  now  become  walling  to  com¬ 
pound  for  his  former  Delinquency,  and  comply  for  the 
future.  239. 

48.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  George  Lloyd  Bifhop 
of  Chefter,  to  Richard  Bancroft  Arch-bifhop  of  Can¬ 
terbury  ; 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


455 


Num.  2084. 

terbury  ;  in  behalf  of  the  Dee-Mills  &  Cawfey  ;  fome 
time  before  that  Caufe  was  heard  by  the  Lords  of  the 
the  Privy  Council.  239. 

49.  Petition  of  Richard  Cotton.  Thomas  Gamull,  &c. 
to  the  Lords  of  the  Privie  Counfell :  in  Aunfwere  of 
one  other  Petition,  lately  preferred  vnto  their  Honours 
by  Sir  Richard  Trevor  Knight  &  others.  240.  et  vid. 

258. 

50.  Short  Heads  or  Hints,  perhaps  putt  down  by  the 

fame  Mr.  Gamull,  in  order  to  a  Draught  of  that  Petition 
or  of  the  following  Papers.  242. 

51.  Objections  made  by  thofe  of  the  Welfh  fide, 
againll  the  Dee-Mills  &  Cawfey  ;  with  proper  Anfwers 
thereunto ;  which  fufficiently  difeover  their  felf-inter- 
eftednefs,  and  the  irregular  methods  they  took  in  endea¬ 
vouring  to  compafs  their  ends.  245.  et  vid.  253.  et  262. 

280.  282.  288. 

52.  Notes  from  the  Statutes  concerning  Weares,  &c. 

250.  342. 

53.  That  auncyent  Calfeys  are  to  be  preferved  ;  and 

newe  Erections  to  be  pulled  dovvne.  251. 

54.  Matters  to  be  demanded  of  Mr.  John  Leigh, 
touching  the  overflowing  of  his  Grounds  by  the  Dee, 

252. 

55.  That  Dee  Mills  &  Cawfey  cannot  lawfully  be 
pulled  downe  or  abated,  by  a  Commiflion  of  Sewers. 

7  55- 

56.  Copie  of  the  Bifhop  of  Chefter’s  Certificate  to 

the  Lord  Chancellor  Ellefmere,  (abovemen tioned  at 
§  33  ?)  (hewing  the  Obfervations  he  had  made  at  the 
Execution  of  the  faid  Commiflion  ofSeweis,  and  the 
Objections  &  Anfwers  of  both  Parties.  266. 

Some  of  thefe  Papers  feem  to  be  of  his  own  Hand¬ 
writing. 

57.  A  Collection  of  the  Evidences  of  Witnefles,  & 

Confeilions  of  the  Commiflioners,  and  other  Noates  ma- 
teriall.  274. 

58.  The  Names  of  fuch  as  are  to  be  examined,  and 

can  proove  the  Matters  alleaged  in  Defence  of  the  Cawfey. 
With  other  matters  of  this  Cafe  ;  by  what  they  are 
prooved.  276. 

59.  The  State  of  the  Caufe  concerning  the  Milles, 

Water-works,  &  Cawfay  at  Chelter.  284. 

60.  The  Cafe  of  the  Cawfey  and  Milles ;  with  Rea- 

fons  why  the  Commiflion  of  Sewers  doth  not  extend  to 
them.  286. 

61.  Original  Letter  or  Paper  of  Mr.  Thomas  Crue, 
giving  reafons  why  the  Caufey  at  Chefter,  could  not  be 
the  Caufe  of  overflowing  the  Grounds  near  the  Holte. 

292. 

62.  State  of  the  Cafe  relating  to  the  faid  Cawfey  ; 
and  of  the  Proceedings  which  had  been  thereupon. 

294. 

63.  The  State  of  the  Caufe  concerninge  the  Milles  & 

Cawfey  at  Chefter.  296. 

G4.  Other  Papers  written  in  Defence  of  the  faid  Mills 
&  Cawfey.  298. 

65.  Letter  of  Mrs.  Do.  Powell  to  Mr.  Carden;  dat. 

. 1616.  certifying  that  neither  her  Hulband, 

fonne,  or  her  felfe  will  agree  that  the  Cawfey  (hould 
goe  downe.  For  if  the  Water  (hould  not  come  over 
their  Ground,  it  would  be  nothing  but  a  (life  Claye,  and 
would  not  be  worthe  the  fowrthe  parte  that  it  is  now. 
That  all  the  hurt  that  is,  was  done  by  Sir  Richard 
(Trevor  ?)  bv  the  turninge  the  River  Allen,  which  cometh 
with  fwifter  courfe  then  Dee,  &  drowneth  them.  That 
Mr.  Gravefnor  with  his  Weare  dameth  vp  the  River 
Dee  foe,  that  (lie  cannot  haue  her  free  Paflage,  and 
floteth  over  all.  And  that  yf  other  Men  woulde  looke 
to  their  owne  Lodes  by  the  going  downe  of  the  Caufey, 
they  would  not  be  foe  haftie  to  follow  Sir  Richard’s  hu¬ 
mour,  as  they  (halTfinde  the  fmarte,  yf  it  doe  goe.  302. 

et  385.. 

66.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  John  Bingley  to  his 


Niim.  2084. 

brother  Randle  Bingley  at  Chefter  ;  dat.  15  Julij  1619* 
blaming  him  for  intruding  vppon  the  Right  of  yonge 
Mr.  Francis  Gamull,  by  Filhing  in  the  Cage-Chamber, 
which  is  his  Inheritance.  303^ 

67.  Copie  of  another  Letter  from  the  fame,  dat.  2 

June  1614.  defiring . to  defift  from  difturbing 

Mr.  Recorder  Gamut’s  Widow  &  fonne  in  the  quiet  en¬ 
joying  of  fome  things,  &in  the  ufage  of  fuch  Liberties  at 
the  Walke-Mills  which  Mr.  Gamull  heretofore  had, 
either  of  Right,  or  by  Permiflion.  304. 

68.  Examination  of  Richard  Hafslewall  of  Chefter, 

Free-Mafon  ;  who  depofed  that  he  was  a  Workman  at 
the  making  up  of  the  old  Breach  in  the  Cawfey  ;  and 
was  alfo  prefent  at  the  reparying  of  the  laft  Breach.  And 
is  well  allured  that  the  Cawfey  was  not  raifed  or  enhan- 
fed  ;  nor  at  any  tyrne  before,  that  euer  he  heard  of.  Nei¬ 
ther  did  he  euer  knowe  or  heare,  that  there  were  ever 
any  Flood-yates  or  Sluces  within  any  part  thereof.  And 
further,  that  during  the  Tyme  of  the  faide  Breaches,  the 
whole  Curr<  nt  did  rurine  through  the  fame  ;  and  that  no 
Water  att  all  came  neere  either  to  the  Fulling  Milles, 
or  Corne- Mills.  306. 

69.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby 

&  his  Wife  (who  was  Mr.  Recorder  Gamull’s  Widow) 
to  Sir  John  Bingley,  concerning  a  new  Claim  (princi¬ 
pally  devifed  by  his  brother  Randle  Bingley)  8c  infilled 
on  by  the  Sherman  ;  that  is,  of  a  right  to  Filh  betwixt 
the  Cage  &  the  Walk-Millnes  ;  for  which  end,  they 
had  bought  Netts,  &c.  308. 

70.  Prooftes  that  the  Cawfey  was  before  the  Tyme  of 

K.  Edward  1.  and  that  it  was  never  inhanfed,  or  made 
higher.  309. 

7 1 .  Notes  touching  fome  particular  Annoyances  com¬ 
plained  of  at  Holt,  16  September  1607.  31 1. 

72.  Original  Letter  from  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  to 
Robert  Davies,  Efq;  defiring  a  Copie  of  the  Petition 
exhibited  againft  the  Cawfey :  with  Mr.  Davies’s  Anfwer. 

.  3»3- 

73.  Draught  of  a  Petition,  perhaps  of  Mr.  Recorder 

Gamull,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council ;  befeeching 
them  to  referve  the  hearing  of  the  Caufe  about  the  Caw¬ 
fey,  to  themfelves.  325. 

74.  An  A£t  for  the  abateing,  and  to  reftraine  the  new 

Eredion  of  Weres,  Stanks,  Kydels,  &  other  ObftruCtions 
in  Greate  &  Navigable  Rivers.  327. 

75.  Copie  of  the  Superfedeas  to  the  Commiflioners  of 

Sewers,  from  medling  with  Dec-Millnes  8c  Cawfey.  Telle. 
See.  anno  feptimo  R.  Jacobi  1.  229  331. 

76.  Abftiacl  of  a  Superfedeas  ifl'ued  by  Qu.  Elizabeth 

to  her  Commiflioners  of  Sewers  in  Kent.  334. 

77.  Draught  of  an  Order  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council,  dat.  2  Jun.  1609.  concerning  the  Caufe  of 
Dee-Millnes  &  the  Cawfey,  which  they  fully  heard  on 
27  April  1608.  and  then  referred  the  poynte  of  Lawe 
concerning  the  Validity  of  ti  e  Commiflioners  Decree  & 
their  Authority,  to  Sir  Thomas  Fleming  Kt.  Lord  Cheife 
Jufticc  of  England,  Sr.  J'.dward  Coke  Kt.  Lord  Cheife 
Juftice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  &  S'.  Laurence  Tanfield 
Kt.  Lord  C.heife  Baron  of  the  Exchequer  :  who  having 
often  hcaid  the  faid  Caufe,  8c  upon  Confideration  of  the 
Commiflion,  Inquifitions,  and  Decree,  &  of  the  Lawes, 
8c  Statutes  of  Sewers  ;  certified  theyre  Opinion,  for  the 
Lawe,  concerning  the  Premiflts,  the  29  of  May  laft. 
Which  Certificate  being  read,  8c  it  thearby  appearing 
that  the  fayd  Commiflion  dothe  not  extend  vnto  the 
fayd  Cawfey,  &  confequently,  that  the  fayd  Decree  is  not 
warranted  by  J.aw'e:  Their  Lordlhips  mifliking  theife 
Proceedings,  Sc  being  unwilling  to  be  troubled  with  any 
further  Complaynts  in  the  Preiniffes  ;  do  therefore 
Order,  that  the  fayd  Commiflioners  (hall  proceede  no 
further  concerning  the  fayd  Cawfey  8c  Mills  :  and  that 
the  faid  Decree  (for  fo  much  thereof  as  concerns  the  fayd 
Cawfy)  lhall  not  be  putt  in  Execution.  336. 

78.  Names  of  the  Jurors  in  the  Counties  of  Flint  Si 

Denbigh  $ 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


4S6 


Num.  2084. 

Denbigh  ;  when  the  Inquifitions  were  taken  again  ft  the 
Cawfev.  34*  • 

79.  Notes  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby  &  others,  touch¬ 

ing  the  Statutes  of  Sewers,  with  Inferences  drawn  from 
them.  342. 

80.  Memorandums  &  Notes  briefly  putt  down,  &  ap¬ 
plicable  to  this  Caufeof  the  Cawfey.  345. 

8  1 .  Draught  of  a  Petition  to  the  King,  by  the  Mayor, 
Aldermen,  &  Citizens  of  Chefter ;  &  of  the  Gentlemen 
&  Inhabitants  of  the  County  Palatyne  of  Chefler,  nere 
vnto  the  fayd  Citie.  353. 

This  is  for  a  Superfedeas  to  the  Commiffion  of 
Sewers ;  which,  if  not  to  be  obtained,  they  pray,  that 
anew  Commiffion  maybe  awarded  to  his  grave  Judges 
&  others  inhab'ting  in  thofe  partes,  of  learning  &  indif- 
ferency,  not  having  Grounds  vpon  the  River  fide,  nor 
othervvife  interefled  in  the  Caufe  on  either  parte  ;  and 
that  the  Matter  may  be  proceeded  in  according  to  Jultice 
&  Equity. 

82.  Copie  of  the  Certificate  of  the  Judges,  above- 

mentioned  in  §  77.  357.  359,  261.  3C13  3^. 

83.  Copie  of  the  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council,  to  the  Commiffioners  of  Sewers,  dated,  7  Junij 
1609.  requiring  them  not  to  put  their  Decree  in  Exe¬ 
cution,  fo  far  as- it  concerneth  the  Cawfey  ;  nor  to  pro- 
ceede  any  further,  by  pretence  of  their  Commiffion,  con- 
cerninge  the  fayd  Cawfey  Sc  Milles.  367. 

84.  Short  Notes,  feeming  to  relate  to  fome  Law-fuit 

commenced  in  the  Court  of  Exchequer  at  Chefter,  about 
the  Lands  of  Sir  Randle  Egerton.  369. 

85.  Mr.  Recorder  Gamuli’s  Lift  of  certain  Petitions, 

&c.  drawn  up,  upon  occafion  of  the  Commiffion  of 
Sewers.  37  *• 

86.  Petition  (Bill)  of  the  Maior,  Aldermen  &  Citizens 
of  Chefter,  about  the  faid  Commiffion  ;  and  fetting  forth, 
that  it  hath  pleafed  the  faid  Commiffioners  to  forbeare 
to  left  downe  any  Order  or  Decree,  to  the  Intent  that 
they,  or  fome  of  them  may  confer  with  his  Majefties 
Judges  &  learned  Counfell  concerning  the  Cawfey,  See. 
whereby  it  is  like  that  fome  folemne  Debate  may  be  had, 
as  in  a  Caufe  of  fo  great  Waight  is  requifite.  They 
pray  therefore  (William  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby  &  Cham- 
berlen  of  the  County  Palatine  of  Chefler)  to  graunt  a 
Commiffion  vnder  Seale  of  the  County  Palatine,  to  ex¬ 
amine  Witneffes  vpon  fuch  Interrogatories  as  fliall  be 
miniflred  unto  them,  concerning  the  New  Key,  Milnes, 
&Cawfey,  and  the  Commodities  thereby  receavcd  ;  as 
alfo  for  the  malting  of  a  true  Plott  of  rhe  River  Dee, 
that  the  Judges  may  be  the  better  informed  in  the  Caufe. 

37 1.  b. 

87.  The  Subfiance  of  the  Four  Verdicts  about  the 

Cawfey  &  Mills  in  Chefler.  375- 

88.  Original  Letter  of  the  Major  Sc  Alderman  of  Chef¬ 
ter,  to  William  Brocke  Efq;  of  the  Inner  Temple,  &  a 
Member  of  their  own  Body,  dated,  31  O&ober  1607. 
Acquainting  him,  that  Sir  Richard  Trevor  combining 
with  fome  other  Gentlemen  of  Wales,  had  procured  a 
Commiifion  of  Sewers  to  them felves  Sc  others,  with  intent 
to  pull  downe  the  Cawfey  Sc  Dee-Millnes,  vpon  pretence 
of  a  common  good  to  enfue  ;  but  indeed,  either  oute  of 
Malice  to  the  State  of  the  Citie,  or  of  Defier  to  improve 
the  Benefite  of  their  owne  Mylls,  4  or  5  Myles  oil' :  which 
would  tende  to  thevttcr  Ruyne  &  Depopulation  of  the 
Cittie.  They  therefore  defire  his  help,  Sc  committ  the 
Management  Sc  Direction  of  the  Caufe  unto  him  ;  and 
promife  (every  one)  to  requite  his  Kindnefs  as  Occafion 
lhould  be  offered. 

89.  Anfweare  to  the  pretended  Inconveniences,  by 
fetting  forth  the  manie  Profits  corainge  by  the  Millnes  & 
Cawfey. 

90.  A  particuler  of  fuche  Tenements  as  are  our  of 
Leafe,  beinge  in  Little  Budwoorth  ;  withe  the  Nomber 
of  the  Acres,  and  the  yearly  Valew  of  the  fame ;  and  what 
they  are  worthe  to  befouldat  20  yeares  purchafe.  381. 


Num.  2084,  2085. 

9  r .  Original  Letter  of  Summons  from  the  Commiffion¬ 
ers  of  Sewers  to  Alderman  Edmund  Gamull.  dated  18 
Augufl  1 607.  apprifing  him  of  their  having  received  the 
Commiffion,  and  of  their  Intention  to  meet,  for  the 
Execution  of  the  fame,  at  Houlte  and  at  Chefler,  on 
dated  days,  whither  he  might  repair  if  he  thought  fit. 

°38-j. 

Sir  Richard  Trevor’s  Hand  is  not  to  this  Summons  • 
and  the  firfl  that  fubferihed  was  Mr.  Juflice  Warburton’ 
whofe  Head,  Heart,  &  Hand  feem  to  have  been  enraged, 
in  this  partial  Affair,  all  along. 

92.  Another  Original  Summons,  of  the  fame  Com¬ 
miffioners,  to  Mr.  Gamull,  apprifing  him  of  their  In¬ 
tention  to  meet  at  Bangor  in  the  County  of  Flint,  in 
Order  to  putt  their  Commiffion  in  Execution.  384. 

93  Notes  about  the  Lands  lying  near  to  the  River 
Dee,  with  the  Names  of  many  ot  thofe  that  held  them  : 
taken  by  Mr.  Robert  Carden,  &c.  335. 

94.  Names  of  the  Commiffioners  of  Sewers :  many 
of  whom  having  Eflates  in  thefe  Low  Lands,  were  con- 
equemly  interefled  in  the  C-auie,  whereof  they  were 
made  Judges.  7  g 


2085. 

A  Book  in  folio  containing  many  Collodions  illuflrating 

the  Hi  (lory  of  Perfons  &  Places  in  Lancafhire,  See. 

all  which  feem  reduceableto  the  following  Articles. 

1 .  1  he  third  Randle  Holme’s  Account  o the  Things 
of  moil  Note  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Abllradsof  many  Inquifitions  relating  to  old  Lan- 

calhire  Families.  4i0.  439. 

3.  Compota  diverforum  de  Manerijs,  Terris  Abba- 

thiarum.  See.  taken  out  of  a  Booke  written  by  Edward 
Rigby,  anno  3 1  Eliz.  which  was  a  Coppy  of  a  parchment- 
bnoke  remayning  amongll  the  Records  in  the  Dutchy- 
Chamber  at  Weflminfter,  of  the  Tenures  &  Lands  in 
Lancafhire.  4J„ 

4.  A  true  Coppy  of  Barfey  his  Roles  of  Tenures  in 
Lancafhire  ;  remayning  in  the  Court  of  Wards  at  Wefl- 
minfler  :  taken  by  Edward  Rigby,  anno  31  Elizabeth*. 


Lancaflner.fi.  4I6.  b. 

6.  A  true  Copy  of  an  antient  Feodary- booke,  taken 

by  Edward  Rigby,  anno  31  Elizabeth*;  conteynine 
Refpites  of  Homage.  4”ia 

7.  A  Copy  of  an  Exemplification  of  a  Record"  re- 

mayning  in  the  Tower  of  London  (being  the  Inquifition 
taken  alter  (he  Death  of  Henry  Dukeof  Lancafler,  anno 
35  R.  Edwardi  in.)  42„ 

8.  Another  Copy  of  an  Exemplification  of  a  Record 

remayning  in  the  Exchequer  (called  Particule  Compoti 
Johannis  Cockayn  unius  Colledorum  Auxilij  40  Solido- 
rum  de  fingulis  Feodis  Militum  in  Comitatu  I.ancaflrie, 
ad  primogenicum  filium  (R.  Edwardi  111.)  Militem  faci¬ 
endum^  ;  anno  regni  1'ui  20.)  428.  b.  et  5 -<4.  h 

9.  Feodarium  Comitatus  Lancaftrix,  trariflumptum 
de  Libro  Feodorum  in  Scaccario  Dni.  Regis.  429.  b. 

10.  De  ieila  de  Nevill,  de  Serjantijs  Honoris  Lan- 

caitri*.  ■  ^  t  ^ 

11.  Abflracla  Phcitorum  coram  Rege‘,  apud  Eboia- 

cum  ;  in  Libro  Brodfhawe  in  Le  Tallie-Olfice  apud 
Weflm.  439.  b. 

1  2.  Ex  Cartis  R.  Rowflhorne  de  Athertone  Arini[reri. 
A.  D.  1660.  .  443. 

13.  Efcaeta.  (being  Abflrads  of  Records  touching 
Tenures  of  Lands)  taken  from  the  Inquifitions  pofl  Mor¬ 
tem.  lhey  begin  about  ann.  4  R.  Henrici  iv.  and  pro¬ 
ceed  not  in  good  Order,  untiil  the ReignofK. Henry  vm. 
and  they  conclude  in  anno  38  R.  Elizabeth*,  443.  b, 

14.  Termini  Sc  Liberates  Manerij  et  Villat*  de  Man- 

ceftre,  A.  D.  1322.  525.  b. 

15.  Supervifio  Manerij  de  Manchefter,  anno  16  R. 
Edwardi  n . 


527.  b. 
16.  Externa 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae; 


457 


Num.  2085 — 2088. 

i  6.  Exlenta  Terrarum  Comitis  Lancaftrie  in  Wappen- 
tach.  de  Launfdale  in  Comitatu  Lancaftr.  anno  25  R. 
Edwardi  1.  poll  mortem  Edmundi  Comitis  Lancaftrie. 

528.  b. 

17.  Colleftanea  de  Honore  Lancaftrie  ;  ex  Libro  Jo- 

hannis  Hide  de  Urmifton.  Armigeri.  529. 

18.  Index  Virorum  :  or  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  the 
Names  or  Sur-names  of  thofe  Perfons  who  are  mentioned 
in  this  Book  ;  and  alfo  in  that  other  infcribed  96.  B.  7. 

•537- 

19.  Index  Locorum  :  i.  e.  an  Alphabetical  1  able  of 
the  Names  of  Places  found  in  this  Book  ;  as  alfo  in  that 
other  above-mentioned,  whofe  marks  are  96.  B.  7.  At 
the  end. 

2086. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio;  on  the  back  emituled  thus 

“  Lancafhire  Pedegrees  but  within  it  I  find, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Pedegrees  conteyned 
in  this  Booke.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Table,  pointing  to  the 

feveral  Coats  of  Armes  tricked  in  this  Book.  1 . 

3.  A  Table  of  all  the  Places  mentioned  in  all  the  Pe¬ 
degrees  &  Matches  which  are  in  this  Booke.  2.  b 

4.  The  Vifitation  of  the  Countie  of  Lancaftre  made 

by  William  Flower  Efquire,  alias  Norroy  King  of  Armes, 
anno  Domini  1 5,67.  7. 

This  is  all  neatly  written  and  tricked  by  the  elabo¬ 
rate  Hand  of  Robert  Glover  Somerfct-Herald  ;  who  alfo 
afiifted  his  Father  in  Law  Norroy,  at  the  faid  Vilitation  ; 
as  may  appear  by  a  little  Note  in  fol.  12.  b.  And  this 
fine  Copie  is  alfo  the  better  for  certain  Additions  and 
Continuations  infertedby  other  Hands. 

5.  A  Table  of  all  the  Names  &  Sur-names  contained 
in  the  Matches  of  the  feuerallPedegrees  within  this  Booke. 
At  the  end. 

2087. 

A  Book  in  folio,  on  the  back  emituled  “  Inquifitions, 
&c.”  wherein  1  find, 

1.  An  Account  of  the  Five  forts  of  Inquifitions  ifluable, 
after  the  Death  of  the  Kings  Tenants  :  being  in  the 
Hand  of  Robert  Glover  Somerfet-Herald.  At  the 
beginning. 

2.  Nomina  eorum  qui  de  Rege  tenuerunt  inCapite, 
per  Sepvitium  Militare  ;  aut  in  Socagio,  ad  terminum 
Vitae,  per  Magnam  Serjantiam,  Parvam  Serjantiam,  vel 
in  Burgagio :  a  tempore  R.  Henrici  m.  ufque  ad  annum 
14  R.  Edwardi  iv.  inclufive. 

This  whole  work  is  thought  to  be  of  the  Hand¬ 
writing  alfo  of  Mr.  Robert  Glover  abovementioned  ; 
who  hath  likewife  tricked  the  Armes  of  many  Families 
in  the  Margins. 

3.  Index  Virorum  :  or  an  Alphabetical  Table  diretting 
to  the  feveral  Surnames  of  Families  mentioned  in  this 
Book. 

A  like  Table  for  the  Names  of  Places  was  defigned 
to  have  been  put  at  the  beginning  ;  but  it  was  not  done. 

2088. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  a  thin  folio  ;  wherein  I  find  only 
thefe  few  matters  that  follow,  viz. 

1.  The  Names  of  the  Knights  &  Gentlemen  of  Che- 
Ihire,  and  their  Coate  Armors  (in  Blafon)  who,  as  it 
fholde  feeme,  liued  about  King  Richard  11.  and  later 
tymes.  Copied  verbatim  out  of  an  old  Record  found 
with  Mr.  Pulefdon.  At  the  beginning, 

2.  Chelhire  Coates  of  Armes,  of  euery  Hundreth  ; 

painted.  1 . 

This  Trad  goes  through  with  only  the  Hundred  of 
Macclesfield,  &  part  of  that  of  Bucklow  :  but  then  the 
Names  of  Families  in  other  Hundreds  are  fett  down,  and 
many  of  their  Armes  begun  to  be  traced  out  with  Black 
Lead. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  20885  2089. 

3.  The  beginning  or  defign  of  an  Alphabet  of  the 
Chelhire  Gentries  Armes,  to  have  been  painted  within 
printed  Efchocheons,  like  the  former.  1 5. 

This  defign  proved  abortive,  for  the  Names  of  the 
feveral  Families  go  no  further  than  the  Letter  I ;  as 
to  their  Armes  there  are  none  putt  down. 

4-  The  Order  of  the  Proceeding  of  her  Majeftie  from' 
Somerfet-Houfe  to  the  Cathedrall-Church  of  S'.  Pawle  iri 
London,  24  Noveinbris,  1588.  49. 

This  Book  feems  to  have  been  done  (fo  far  as  it 
goes)  by  Thomas  Chaloner,  Ulfter  King  of  Armes 
about  the  year  1590. 

2089. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  (for  the  great  eft  parti  by  Mr. 
Thomas  Chaloner  abovementioned  ;  wherein  I  find, 

1.  Fifteen  different  Coats  of  Armes,  borne  by  the 

Name  of  Molyneux  ;  huffily  tricked  by  the  firft  Randle 
Holme,  who  caiifed  (his  Book  to  be  bound  A.  D.  1634. 
&  his  Name  to  be  (lamped  on  the  out-fide,  with  gilded 
Letters,  fol.  t.b.  looking  for  the  dumber  of  Leaves  at  the 
bottom  of  the  fame,  till  further  warning.  1.  b. 

2.  Armes  of  Quarterings  of  Sir  John  Spenfer,  &  Sir 

diaries  Fox,  hallily  tricked.  ibid. 

3.  Armes  in  Blafon,  of  Englifli  auncient  Earles.  2. 
Among  thefe,  are  fome  put  down,  that  are  neither 

Englifh,  nor  belonging  to  Earles. 

4.  Armes  in  Blazon  of  many  Kinges,  Princes,  & 

Countreys.  3. 

Among  thefe  I  am  affraid  that  fornd  may  be  looked 
upon  as  fabulous. 

5.  Arma  Civitatum  ;  that  is,  of  fome  few  Citties  in 

England  ;  &  of  a  few  places  abroad.  4.  b. 

6.  Series  prifeorum  Ceftrie  Comitufn.  5. 

7.  Armes  of  the  Nine  Worthyes.  ibid. 

Here,  inftead  of  Godfrey  ofBullen,  I  nieet  with 

Gwy  Katie  of  Warwick,  to  whom  are  given  thofe  Armes 
which  are  faid  to  bee  borne  by  Thomas  de  Newburgh, 
who  was  made  Earl  of  Warwick,  about  A.  D.  1229. 

Then  follows,  a  large  Alphabet  in  Blafon,  to  which 
the  following  Title  which  is  put  to  the  beginning  of  the 
Book  doth  peculiarly  belong,  “Coates  Alphabet-wife  in 
England,  Ireland,  &  Wales  ;  colected  by  Thomas  Cha¬ 
loner  of  Chefler  Gentleman,  ini  588May  i°.  and  in  other 
Yeares  after,  by  the  faid  Thomas  Chaloiier,  alias  Ulveflcr 
principal  Herehaught  &c  Kinge  of  Armes  for  the  Realme 
of  Irelande.  After,  continued  by  Randle  Holme  of  the 
Citty  of  Chefter  Alderman,  Maior  of  the  faid  Citty  1633. 
and  by  Randle  his  Sonne,  alfo  Maior  of  Chefter  1643. 
To  whom,  I  make  bold  to  add  the  third  Randle  Holme, 
becaufe  I  difeern  his  Hand -Writing  in  fundiy  places  of 
the  Book. 

To  this  Alphabet,  the  running  Numbers  of  the 
Leaves  are  regularly  putt  at  the  Top,  as  in  other  Books. 

As  to  the  Alphabet  itfelf,  it  is  a  very  large  one, 
and  fit  to  be  confulted  upon  Occafion  ;  but  then  it  is  fo 
very  irregularly  put  down,  by  Mr.  Chaloner’s  making 
but  one  Letter  of  V.  &  W.  and  by  his  &  the  Holme’s 
entring  words  or  Names  beginning  with  the  fame  Letters 
in  many  different  Places  of  the  Book,  that  the  Defign  of 
the  Alphabet  is  thereby,  in  a  manner  deftroyed,  and 
the  Search  after  a  Name  rendred  too  tedicus  &irkfome. 

I  (hall  therefore  make  a  fort  of  a  Table  to  it,  by  which 

1  hope  it  may  foon  become  capable  of  Being  ufed,  and 
thofe  Eie-fores  a  little  palliated. 

The  Table. 

Ab.  1.  Ac.  3.  Ad.  5.  Af.  7.  Ag.6.£.  Ai.  7.  Ak.  8.  Al.  8.b- 
Am.  10.  An.  1 1.  Ap.  13.  Ar.  15.  Af.  17  b.  At.  20.  Au. 

2  1  Aw.  22.  Ax.  22.  b.  Ay.  7. 

Ba.  2.  b.  1 6.  b.  23.  191.  Be.  26.  183.  185.  192.  Bi. 
29.  Bi.  30.  b.  Bo.  18.  b.  32.  Br.  35.  42 .  b.  52.  b.  193. 
Bu.  38.  b.  178.  By.  29. 

Ca.  40.  182.  Ce.  42.  Ch.  5.  b.  43.  60.  b.  Ci.  44.  b.  Cl. 

6  A  45. 


458 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num  2089. 

45.  O.  47.  162.  184.  6.  Cr.  42.  50.  62.  b.  Cu.  51.  b. 
Cy.  4\  -  b.' 

Da.  53.  164.  De.  54.  b.  180.  189.  Di.  56.  Do.  57.  Dr. 
58.  Du.  59.  Dy.  56. 

Ka.  60.  Eb.  6 1.  Ec.  61.  b.  Ed.  63.  Ef.  62.  b.  Eg.  64. 
Ek.  64.  b.  El.  65.  Em.  66.  En.  66  b.  Ep.  67.  Er.  68. 
Ef.  68.  b.  69.  Et.  69.  Ev.  70.  Ew.  70.  b.  Ex.  70.  b.  Ey. 
64.  6. 

Fa.  7 1.  Fe.  72.  Fi.  12.  73.  FI.  75.  Fo.  76.  Fr.  77.  Fu. 

78.  Ft.  12.  73. 

Ga.  20.  b.  78.  b.  Ge,  80.  Gi.  81.  Gl.  82.  Go.  82.  b. 
Gr.  84.  187.  188.  6.  Gu.  85.  b.  Gw.  85.  b.  Gy.  81. 
81.  b. 

Ha.  86.  b.  1 65.. 1 84.  190.  b.  He.  10.  b.  88.  167.  Hi.  89. 
Ho.  1.  b.  31.  6.  go.  Hu.  92.  92.  b.  93.  93.  b.  IIw.  93.6. 
Ky.  S9.  89.  b. 

Ja.  92.  b.  Je.  5S.  b.  93.  93.  b.  Ih.  93.  b.  II.  93.  b.  In. 

94.  Jo.  94.  b.  Ip.  94.  6.  Ir.  95.  b.  If.  94.  b.  It.  95.  Ju. 

95.  Iw.  95. 

Ka.  96.  Ke.  7.  b.  96.  b.  98.  Ki.  62.  97.  b.  98.  98.  b. 
Kn.  99.  100.  Ko.  99.  b.  Kr.  100.  Ku.  100.  b.  Ky.  62. 
97.  b.  98.  98.  b. 

La.  100.  b.  Le.  103.  179.  Li.  104.  104.  b.  190.  Lo.  3.  b. 
105.  Lu.  106.  Ly.  104.  104.6.  iqo. 

Ma.  toy.  168.  171.  b.  Me.  109.  1 1 3.  b.  Mi.  1 10.  1  to.  b. 
Mo.  111.  170.  1 77.  b.  Mu.  i  1 3.  My.  110.  1 10.  b. 

Na.  1 14.  Ne.  1 15.  Ni.  1 16.  6.  No.  11 7.  b.  118 .b.  Nu. 

1 1 8.  6.  Ny.  1  16.  b. 

Ob.  12}.  1 2c.  b.  Oc.  120 .  b.  Od.  119.  119.6.  120. 
120 .  b.  Of.  1:0.  120.  b.  Og.  119.  199.  b.  120.  b.  Ok. 
j  19.  b.  120.  Ol.  119.  1  19.  6.  120.  Om.  120.  On.  1 19. 

199.6.  120.  120.6.  Op.  119.  119.6.  120.  Or.  1 1 9. 
it  9.  b.  120.  120.6.  Of.  119.  1 1 9.  6.  120.  120.6.  Ot. 

1 1 9.  1 1 9.  6.  1 20.  1  20.  b.  Ou.  119.1 20.  1  20.  6.  Ow. 
119.  1 19.  6.  120.  1 20.  6.  Ox.  119.  1 19.  6.  120.  120.  b. 
Oy.  120.  120.6. 

Pa.  4.  6.  22.6.  121.  Pe.  S.  122.  6.  1 7 1 .  Ph.  74.  74.6. 
Pi.  1 24.  PI.  125.6.  Po.  127.  130.  Pr.  128.6.  Pu.  130. 
I’y.  124.  124.4.  123. 

Qua.  131  Que.  i  I.  Qui.  131.  Quy.  131. 

Ra.  132.  Re.  133.  j.  Ri.  134.  4.  135.  135.4.  Ro.  14. 

69.6.  136.  Ru.  137.  Ry.  134.  6.  135.  13c.  6. 

Sa.  137.  4.  172.173.173.4.  Sc.  125.  137.  4.  Se.  61. 
*39*  173-  Sh  61.  6.  14c.  141.  Si.  141.  6.  Sk.  141.6. 
142.  SI.  141.6.  142.  Sm.  142.6.  Sn.  142.6.  So.  143. 
Sp.  144.  Sq.  144.  6.  St.  61.  j 45.  174. 187.6.  Su.  146.  6. 

175.6.  Sw.  146.6.  1 75.6.  Sy.  141.141 .6. 

Ta.  147.  Te.  6.  6.  148.  Th.  13  3.  148.  6.  177.  Ti.  149. 
To.  147.  6.  150.  Tr.  15 1.  1S6.  Tu.  152.  Tw.  152. 
152.  6.  Ty.  149. 

Va.  13.  6.  153.  153.6.  154.  154.6.  181.  181.6.  Ve.  155. 
*55-b-  ]5< 5-  l88-  uf-  1 56. 6.  Vi.  157.6.  158.  1 60.  176. 
186.  6.  Ul.  160.  Urn.  1 59.  U11.  160.  Vo.  158.  6. 176.  6. 
Up.  160.6.  Ur.  159.  159.6.  Uf.  159.6.  16c.  Ut.  160.6. 
Vu.  159.  Vy.  160. 

Wa.  13.  6.  153.  153.  6.  154.  154.  6.  175.  1S1.  181.  6. 
We.  155.  155.6.  156.  188.  Wh.  156.6.  Wi.  52.  6. 

157.  6.  158.  176.  186.  6.  Wn.  159.  Wo.  96.  158.  6. 

176.6.  180.6.  Wr.  159.  159.  6.  VVy.  52.  6.  IC7.  6. 

158.  16c.  176.  186. 6. 

Ya.  161.  Ye.  161.  Yh.  93.  b.  Yn.  iSi.  Yo.  i5i.  Yr. 
161.  \f.  161.  Yv.  161.  Yw.  161. 

Za.  161.6.  Ze.  161.6.  Zo.  161.6.  Zu  161.6. 

2090. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confining  of  many  Ioofj  Ttads&  iingle 
Papers  bound  up  together  without  any  Order ;  and,  by 
the  tLird  Randle  Holme,  on  (he  back  emituled  Deeds 
of  C'hdhire:-  as  to  which,  purfuing  my  wonted  Method, 

I  fliall  give  a  more  particular  Account,  as  finding 
therein,  ° 

1.  The  Laid  Randle  IIclrr.es  Account  of  the  Things 
of  molt  Note  in  this  Bock.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  A  Prohibition  awarded  by  the  Chamberlayne  of 


Num.  2090- 

Chefter,  for  flay  of  a  Trial  in  the  Confiftury-Court  for 
that  Dyoces,  for  Tythe-Herbage  claimed  by  Richard 
Burches  Redor  of  Thurftanton,  of  Thomas  Rathborne 
&  John  Eaton  Defendants,  5  Odober  1630?  1. 

3.  Order  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer  of  Chefter,  made 

1 1  April  1607.  upon  hearing  the  Caufe betweene  Randle 
Griffith  Plaintiff,  &  Richard  Grofvenour,  &c.  Defend¬ 
ants  ;  concerning  Common  of  Pafture  claymed  by  the 
Complaynant,  for  all  manner  of  Cattle,  at  all  tymes  in 
the  Yeare,  in  Willey-Moore,  and  all  other  the  Waft 
Groundes  in  theLordfhip  of  Bickltv  &  Tuffingham  ;  as 
appertenaunte  to  a  Mefuage  in  Willey  aforefaid,  late  in 
the  poffeffion  of  Randle  Brereton  Efq;  whofe  Inheritance 
the  fame  is.  2 . 

4.  Copie  of  the  Indidment  of  William  Griffith  for 
Perjury,  in  the  Caufe  above-mentioned,  7  Odob.  1606. 

4- 

5.  Panell  of  a  Jury  impanelled  upon  feme  Caufe  where¬ 
in  the  Family  of  Cholmonddey  feems  to  have  been  con¬ 
cerned  ;  with  the  Exceptions  taken  againft  many  of  the 
Jurors. 

6.  Exceptions  in  the  behalf  of  John  Davyes  one  of 
the  Defendants ;  agaiuft  the  Indidment  of  Randle  Griffith. 

8. 

Thefe  Exceptions  weare  moved  in  Court  &  allowed; 
&  foe  the  Indidment  qualhed. 

7.  Nomina  Juratorum  inter  Ranulfum  Griffith  que- 

rentem,  et  Johannem  Dod,  Johannem  Davies,  &c.  De- 
fendentes  in  Repleg.  9. 

8.  Original  Acquittance  of  Rowland  Lloyd  &  Hugh 

ap  David  Anwell  of  the  Pariffie  of  Llanvilliarn  in  the 
County  of  Denbigh  Gentlemen,  for  40  Shillings  bequea¬ 
thed  to  the  poor  of  the  faid  Parifh,  by  David  Lloyd  late 
Alderman  of  Chefter.  dat.  21  June,  anno  42  R.  E!iza> 
bethze.  ro. 

9.  The  Accompt  of  John  Sherte  one  of  the  Head 

Conftables  of  Macclesfeld-Hundred;  taken  22  June  1605. 
for  all  fuch  Money  as  he  ftandeth  charged  with,  as  col- 
leded  towards  the  Relief  of  the  infeded  Townes  of  Nampt- 
wyche  &  Northwyche,  by  Order  of  the  Seffions  holden. 
at  Chefter,  10  Odober  1604.  12.  13. 

10.  The  Accompts  of  the  faid  John  Sherc  for  Bridge- 
money  ;  taken  the  daye  Se  yeare  aforefaid.  12.  b. 

1 1 .  The  Accompts  of  Jeffraye  Motterfhed  one  of  the 

Plead- Conftables  of  Maclesfeld  Hundred,  taken  22  June 
1605.  13. 

He  was  Colleague  to  John  Sherte,  in  receiving  8c 
paying  the  fame  Money. 

12.  The  Accompt  of  the  faid  Jeffray  Motterffied,  for 

fuch  money  as  he  hath  receyved  for  Reparacion  of  cer- 
tayne  Bridges  within  his  Divifion.  13.  b. 

13.  Order  of  the  Jufticcs  of  the  Peace,  affembled  25 
Odober  anno  :  R.  Jacobi,  for  levying  the  4th  part  of 
a  Mize,  before  the  10th  of  the  next  November,  for  the 
Releiffe  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Macclesfcld  &  Congleton, 
being  then  vifited  with  Sicknefs :  The  Colltdion  to  be 
made  throughout  the  County  Palatine,  excepting  the 
Hundreds  of  Macclesfeild  &  Northwiche,  Se  the  Town  • 
Ihip  of  Boughton,  which  were  then  likewife  vifited.  16. 

14.  The  Sheriffe  of  Cheftiire  commanded  to  fummon 

a  frefh  Jury,  in  the  Caufe  between  John  Dod,  &  Randle 
Griffith.  1 8. 

This  was  upon  Proof  that  Dod  was  of  kin  to  the 
Sheriffe.  18.  et  vid.  23.  A.  b. 

15.  Indidment  of  John  Davyes  of  Tuffingham  Pluf- 

bandman,  for  Perjury,  in  the  Caufe  between  Randle 
Griffith,  &  Grofvenor,  &c.  1 9. 

1 6.  Confiderations  upon  the  iffuing  of  a  Venire  facias 

for  a  new  Jury  in  the  Caufe  between  Randle  Griffith  & 
Dod,  See.  23.  A.  b. 

17.  Acquittances  given  by  Henry  Delves  the  Feodary, 
for  money  paid  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbie,  in  the  right 
of  Alice  his  Wiefe  farmar  of  parcell  of  the  Lands  of 
FrauncesGamull  his  Majefties  Warde,  10  Julij  1620.  24. 

18.  Other 


Bibliothecas  Harleianpe, 


459 


Num.  2O90. 

1 8.  Other  Receipts  upon  the  fame  Occafion,  figned 

by  Peter  Daniell  Feodary,  1  Junij  1624.  25.  b. 

19.  Original  Acquittances  of  William  Glinne  of  Car¬ 

narvon  Gent.  &  Elen  his  Wief,  for  Fiuc  Merks  be¬ 
queathed  her  by  David  Lloyd  late  Alderman  of  Chefter. 
dat.  23  June  anno  42  Eliz.  26. 

To  this  Receipt  were  Witneffes  George  Lloid  then 
Bilhop  of  Soder  &  Man,  &  J.  Rees  Evans. 

20.  Certificate  of  the  Juftices  affembled  t3  March 

1604.  as  to  the  Moneys  not  paid  in  by  feveral  Hundreds ; 
which  was  order’d  by  two  feuerall  Sefiions  to  be  col¬ 
lected  for  the  Releefe  of  the  infeCted  Towns  of  Maccles¬ 
field  &  C.ongleton.  26.  A. 

The  Sum,  in  the  whole  amounted  to  £77.  1 8.  9. 

21.  Sir  Thomas  Stanley’s  Accompte  of  the  money  by 

him  recey  ved  &  difburfed,  for  the  Releef  of  the  Poore  of 
Macclesfeld  when  th’Infedtion  was  there.  27. 

This  Accompt  was  audited  &  allowed  by  G.  Bouth 
&  Geo.  Leicefter. 

22.  Order  of  the  Juftices,  affembled  24  January"  16 03, 

explaining  a  dubious  expreflion  in  their  former  Order, 
for  collecting  a  fourthe  parte  of  a  Myze,  towards  the  Re¬ 
leef  of  the  Townes  of  Macclesfeld  &  Congleton.  They 
alfo  further  order,  that  another  Afleffment  throughe  the 
whole  County  (except  fuche  Townes  as  are  within  any 
Parifhe  in  Chefter)  of  the  eight  parte  of  the  Myze,  toward 
the  Releefe  of  the  diftrefled  &  vifited  perfons  in  the  Cit- 
tye  of  Chefter,  in  Werral,  &  other  places  near  there  ad- 
joyninge,  then  infcCted  :  and  all  perfons  refufing  to  make 
payment,  to  be  bound  to  the  Aflifes,  there  to  anfwere 
there  Contempts.  Laftly,  that  20  Shillings  of  the  faid 
Collections  be  paid  to  Richard  Werdon  Gent.  Deputy- 
Clerke  of  the  Peace,  towards  his  Paynes  taken  in  this 
bufines.  28. 

23.  The  joynt  &  feuerall  Anfweares  of  Richard  Grof- 
vener  Efq;  John  Dod  Gent.  &c.  Defendants,  to  the  Bill 
of  Complaint  of  Randall  Gryftyth  Complainant  30.  b. 

24.  Exemplificatio  totius  procefl'us  in  Curia  Comiia'us 

Ceftrite,  de  ConcordiA  finali  faCtA  per  Johannem  Tal¬ 
bott  Armigerum  et  Katherina  uxorem  ejus,  vendentes 
Edwardo  Brabazon  Militi  pretio  2000  Librarum,  Medie- 
tatem  Manerij  de  Elton,  cum  decern  Mefuagijs,  decern 
Gardinis,  trecentis  Acris  Terras,  centum  acris  Prati,  tre- 
centis  acris  Paftura;,  et  viginti  acris  Bofci,  cum  pertinen- 
tijs,  in  Elton,  anno  39  R.  Elizabethan  32. 

25.  Exemplificatio  Placid  apud  Ceftriam,  anno  2  1  R. 

Henrici  vm.  qua  Francifcus  Talbot  Dominus  Talbott, 
Gilbertus  Talbott  Miles,  Walterus  Wrothefley,  Philip-, 
pus  Parys,  Fdwardus  Fyttone,  Johannes  Malcy  de  Po- 
dyngton.  Ricardus  Bunbury.  Willclmus  Davenport  de 
Bromhalle,  Joannes  Holcrofte  Senior  Armiger,  et  Ri- 
chardus  Trowtebeke  Gcnerofus  recuperaverunt  verfus 
Ranulphum  Pole  Clericum  Maneria  de  Capenhurft  et 
Buyrton.  ac  viginti  Mefuagia,  duo  Molendina  ventritica, 
unurn  Columbarium,  Mille  acras  Terra:,  fexaginta  acras 
Prati,  mille  acras  Paftura;,  ducentas  acras  Bofci,  ducentas 
acras  Brueras,  centum  acras  Turbaria:,et  quadraginta  So- 
lidos  R  edditus,  in  Nether-pole,  Hoton,  Capenhurft,  Magna 
Nefton,  Bakford,  ThyngwaHe,  Lufkarke,  Bradeley,  'et 
Wodcmrche-  45. 

26.  Originall  Letter  of  Attorney  made  by  Hugh  Wil- 
braham  of  Ecclefton  Efq;  to  Roger  Arrow-lmythe, 
about  an  Ploufe  in  Crue-lane  in  the  County  of  Chefter. 

45- 

27.  Acquittances  for  moneys  paid  by  Alice  Gamull 

Widow,  or  Edward  Whitbie  Efq;  her  next  Hulband, 
Committees  of  the  Body  &  Lands  of  Francis  Gamull  his 
Ilighnes  Warde ;  annis  16:3.  1614.  1615.  1616.  to 
Raphe  Wilbraham  Feodary.  46. 

28.  Inftrumentum  autographum,  quo  Robertus 
Downes  Sub-decanus  ruralis  de  Malpas  &  Bangor  Mona- 
fhorum  concedit  Anns  Nicolls  Vidua;  Adminillrationem 
Bonorum,  et  Catallorum  Johannis  Nicols  rnariti  fui  de- 
fun£ti  dat,  8  Oftubris,  1624.  48. 


Kum.  2090. 

29.  An  indenture  made  27  January,  anno  4  Carol! 

Regis  ;  whereby  Richard  Pemerton  of  Chefter  Gent, 
fold  to  Thomas  Marbury  of  Marbury  Efq;  for  1 30 
pounds,  halfe  an  acre  of  Grownde  beinge  parcell  of  a 
Meadowe  adjoyning  to  the  Riuer  of  Wever  ;  with  thofe 
Wych-houfes  &  Smithie-houfe  that  were  erefted  there- 
vppon,  &  the  Bryne-pitts,  Pannes,  Wallinge,  Boylinge 
&  makeinge  of  Sake  there ;  excepting  two  old  Salt- 
pannes  &  their  appurtenances.  49.  b.  &  92. 

30.  Copie  of  a  Leafe  for  20  yeares,  of  the  fame  half 

Acre  of  Meadowinge  of  Chelhire  Meafure,  granted  to  the 
faid  Richard  Pemberton  Gent,  by  John  Leech  of  Chefter* 
Merchant,  dat.  22  April,  j6 26.  51.  b. 

31.  Copie  of  a  Leafe  made  by  John  Poole  of  Poole 

Efq;  &  John  his  fonne,  to  William  Prickeit  Yemon,  (in 
confideration  of  20  poundcs)  of  a  Mefuage  in  Chefter, 
from  the  day  of  the  deceafle  of  Margeritt  Alderfay  Wi¬ 
dow,  to  the  end  of  nineteen  years  thence  next  enfuing,  at 
40  Shillings  rent  per  annum,  dat.  18  April,  anno  22  R. 
Elizabeths:  52. 

32.  Original  Order  of  Sir  1  homas  Ireland  Vice-Cham- 

berlen  of  Chefter,  obliging  Richard  Holden  &  Adam 
Coller  Plaintiffes,  to  pay  20  poundes  to  Edward  Hulme 
&  Margaret  his  Wife  Defendants,  with  all  their  Cofts  &: 
Damages,  dat.  3  Julij  1624.  54. 

33.  Original  Aquittance  of  Edward  Hollande  Gent, 

for  50  pounds  (part  of  j£ico)  due  from  Alderman  Ed¬ 
mund  Gamull  to  his  Wife,  as  Adminiftratrix  to  John 
Brocke  Gent,  deceafed.  dat.  4  Odober,  anno  38  R.  Eli¬ 
zabetha;.  56. 

34.  Original  Quietus  from  Jo.  Tooke  &  Francis  Curlle 

Auditors  of  the  Couit  of  Wardes,  to  Mr.  Recorder 
Whitby,  for  Rents  of  the  Lands  defcended  from  Mr. 
Thomas  Gamull,  untill  Martinmafs  14  Jacobi.  58. 

35.  Originall  Acquittance  of  Ellys  Vaughan  for  five 

marks  by  him  received  of. Ales  Lloyd  Wyddowe,  as  be¬ 
queathed  to  him  by  his  Unkle  Alderman  Davyd  Lloyd 
of  Chefter.  dat.  11  Junij.  1600.  60. 

36.  Another  original  Quietus  from  the  abovementioned 

Auditors  of  the  Court  of  Wards,  to  Mr.  Whitby,  to 
Martinmafs,  1 9  Jacobi.  62. 

37.  Original  Bond  of  John  Garden  Yoman,  &  Eli¬ 

zabeth  Davies  Widowe,  to  Richard  Bavand  Alderman 
of  Chefter,  for  4  pounds  payable  upon  demand,  dat. 
6  March  1600.  64. 

38.  A  Note,  or  Lift,  of  Bonds  to  bee  deliuered  to 

Mrs.  Elizabeth  Alderfey.  66. 

39.  Original  Acquittance  of  Henry  Delves  Feodary 
for  money  paid  by  Mr.  Whitby  for  the  Lands  of  Fraun- 
ces  Gamull  his  Majefties  Warde.  dat.  1  February  1618. 

.  .  .  67- 

40.  Apographum  Finalis  Concordia;  fii&a:  in  com- 
muni  AulaPlacitorum  Comitatus  Ceftria;,  13  Septembris, 
anno  27  R.  Elizabetha:,  inter  Johannem  Egertone  de 
Olton,  Armigerum.  Georgium  Brereton  Arm.  et  Pe- 
trum  Warburton  de  North-wyche  Arm.  querentes  ;  et 
Petrum  Warburton  de  Arley  Arm.  deforcientem :  de 
Manerijs  de  Warburton,  Alton,  juxta  Budworthe,  Sut¬ 
ton  juxta  Halton,  Wynyngton,  Budworthe  juxta  Afton. 
Marthalle,  Pulford,  Apleton,  Stocketon  Iiulle,  Com- 
berbache,  Norcetts,  Sale,  Stretton,  Halton.  Nether, 
walton,  Newton,  juxta  Darelburye,  et  Wordhulle ;  ac 
de  quingentis  Mefuagijs,  feptem  Salinis,  fepten  Molen- 
dinis,  duobus  Columbarijs,  quingentis  Gardinis,  quatuor 
millibus  Acrarum  Terra;,  mille  acris  patri,  tribus  miili- 
bus  Acrarum  Paftura:,  quingentis  Acris  Bofci,  mille  Acris 
Jampn.  &  Bruera:,  et  quindecim  Libris,  quartuordecim  So- 
lidis,  feptem  Denarijs,  et  uno  Obolo  Redditus.  in  diverfis 
Locis  ;  ac  de  duabus  liberis  Pifcarijs  in  Budworthe-Meyre 
et  de  Communa  Paftura;  in  Wymyncham  ;  nec  non  de 
Advocationibus  Ecclefia:  de  Pulforde,  &  Libera;  Capella; 
de  Warburton,  et  medietatis  Ecclefiee  de  Lymme  ; 
Et  de  n  edietate  Maneriorum  de  Lymme  &  Strettehulle  ; 
ac  de  t'.rtia  parte  Manerij  de  Over-Tibley;  et  de  quinta 

9  parte 


460 


Catalogus  Librorutn  MSS. 


Num.  2090. 

parte  Manerij  de  Caftle  Northwyche  j  et  de  medietate 
unius  Salintc  ih  Northwyche. 

This  great  Fine  is  imperfett,  Sc  the  Leaves  tranf- 
pofed. 

41.  Form  of  a  Leafe  for  Lives.  72. 

42.  Receipts  for  moneys  paid  to  Mr.  William  Brocke, 

&  his  brother  Gregge,  by  Mr.  Alderman  Edmund  G  J 
mull  A.  D.  1596.  74 

43.  Other  Original  Receipts  for  Rent  paid  by  Mr. 
Recorder  Whitby,  for  parcell  of  the  Lands  of  Mr.  Fran¬ 
cis  Gamull :  his  Majefties  Warde,  by  divers  Feodaries. 

t  .  75. 

44.  Notes  /hewing  how  the  Maner  orTownofWin- 

chamhath  been  held.  ^ 

45.  Notes  relating  to  the  Tenement  in  Wincham, 

which  was  bought  of  Sir  Richard  Egerton  ;  and  alfo  to 
Norcotts  Lands  there.  g0  b. 

46.  Recital  of  the  Plea,  between  Peter  Venables  of 

Kmderton  1  fq;  &  Margaret  Wood  Widow,  for  the  Ra- 
vithment  of  Roger  Wood  his  Ward  29  April,  anno  9 
R.  Caroli  1.  g2  y 

47.  Hugh  Awdeley’s  Note  of  fuch  Rents  of  Mr.  Ga- 

mtil  s  Lands  as  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby  was  putt  in  Pro- 
crfs  for,  in  the  Court  of  Wardes ;  and  which  he  was 
forced  to  rjifeharge,  anno  .  8  R.  Jacobi  I.  86. 

48.  A  Draught  of  the  Grant  of  the  Tiths  of  Harden 
f  ont  1  hom'd s  Jackfon  Parfon,  to  Sir  Thomas  Stanley, 
dated  the  2  January,  anno,  leptimo  U.  Elizabethan  88. 

49.  Copie  of  the  Graunt  of  Saughton,  Churchen- 
heath,  Huxley,  8c  Coddington,  by  Henry  Mainewaringe 
Efq;  to  George  Calveley  Efq;  dat.  20  Sept,  anno  8  R. 
Jacobi  1. 

50.  A  Breife  of  Mr.  Bagnalls  Pattents.  93. 

Thefe  were  great  Grants  of  Lands  &  Jurifdidions 

in  Ireland  from  K.  Edward  vi.  NK.Jamesi.ro  the  Bag¬ 
nalls  :  as  to  which,  it  is  in  the  Conclufion,  remarked, 
that  Mr.  Arthur  Bagnall  had  lately  obtained  a  Warrant 
vnder  the  pnvie  Signet  to  pafl'e  by  Letters  Pattents  vnto 
him,  See.  not  onely  all  the  Premiffes  paft  in  the  former 
1  attents,  but  more  Lands,  &  more  large  &  vnufuall  Pri- 
v hedges,  not  fitt  to  be  granted  to  a  fubjett.  Which 
Warrant  hath  been  Rayed  this  halfyeare  and  more,  by 
Diredhon  of  the  Kinge  &  the  Advife  of  the  Lords  Com¬ 
mittees  for  Irilh  Affairs,  as  not  meete  to  be  paft  vnder 
the  Great  Seale,  before  his  Majeftie  be  trulie  informed 
of  the  true  State  thereof  in  euerie  particular. 

51.  An  Agreement,  whereby  in  Confidtration  of 

1 94-  paid  by  Mathew  Holldred  of  Weverham  Clarke 
Richard  Pemerton  of  Chefter  Gentleman,  ietts  his  twoo’ 
Salt-Panns,  with  the  Houfe  wherein  they  were  ;  together 
with  an  Allowance  of  8  Shillings  per  Week  j  for  the 
Termeof  two  Years,  dat.  15  Auguft  1628.  g 6. 

52.  How  Mr.  William  Cotgreve  had  a  Leafe  of  the 

Hall  8c  Yards  at  Churton-Heath  from  Sir  Rowland  Stan¬ 
ley,  for  2i  years;  8c  how  he  &  his  fon  Mr.  Randle 
Cotgreve  pulled  down  the  Buildings,  &  carried  away  or 
fold  the  Materials,  at  their  pleafures.  07. 

53.  The  joynt  8c  feverall  Anfweares  of  George  Bur- 

ches  &  Margarelt  his  Wife,  two  of  the  Defendants  to 
the  Bill  of  Compiaynte  of  Charles  Adams  &  Randle 
Adams  Complaynants.  g 

.  *****  aPPears,  that  Richard  Adams  the  Father  of 

the  Plaintiffes  died  feized  in  Fee  of  the  Perpetual  Advow- 
fon  of  the  Reftory  &  Church  of  Woodchurch  ;  which  he 
left  to  the  behoof  &  benefit  of  his  Children.  That  af 
terwards  Richard  Adams  the  eldeft  Son,  did  give  to 
Margaret  the  Defendant,  his  Fathers  Relict  (ard  as  it 
feems,  but  his  Mother  in  Law)  and  to  her  Hei’res  & 
Aihgnes,  the  faid  perpetual  Advowfon  or  Right  of  Patro¬ 
nage,  to  haue  &  to  houlde  for  ever,  to  her  &  their  owne 
Vle&  Behoofe.  And  that  afterwards,  the  faid  Richard 
the  fon,  made  his  Will,  &  conftituted  the  Jaid  Margaret 
&  Thomas  Bickerftaffe  his  Executors,  &  fhortlv  after 
dyed.  Which  Will  was  proved  by  Margaret  alone,  be- 


Num.  2090. 

caufe  Bickerftaffe  would  not  intermedle.  Then  fhe 
marries  the  faid  Burches,  &  with  him,  fells  the  faid  Ad¬ 
vowfon,  without  making  any  allowance  to  the  Plaintiffes 
or  their  Sifter.  1  his  Tra£t  is  imperfect. 

54  Original  Agreement  between  Mr.  Richard  Worfe- 
lcy  of  Lancafhire,  &  Thomas  Hale  of  Clielhire,  who 
had  married  Mr.  Worl'eley’s  Mother,  dat.  6  Augufte 

119. 

55.  Copia  Placiti  inter  Johannem  Dancafter  ex  una 
parte  et  Hugonem  Calkin  cum  Johanne  Kirfoote, 
fuper  quibufdam  Terris  et  Tenement,  in  Huntingdon 
&  Chcaveley  :  9  die  Aprilis,  anno  14  R.  Caroli  x. 

120.  b. 

56.  A  Copie  of  a  Leafe  made  20  Julye,  anno  6  R. 

Edwardi  vi.  whereby  Maurice  Byrchynffiawe  Clark, 
Prebendary  of  the  Prebend  of  Vaynolle,'  founded  in  the 
Cathedrall  Churche  ol  St.  Affaphe,  dimifed  to-  John 
Salufbury  of  Denbighe  Gent.  Five  portions  of  the  faid 
Prtbende,  vizt.  Vaynolle,  Kyrmiiill,  Devorben,  Peng- 
wtrne  &  Bcdalwethan,  for  Fif  rye  yea  ret :  at  the  annual 
Rent  ol  40  Markes.  ”  1  26.  A. 

57.  Another  Indenture  of  Covenants  between  Richard 

Pemberton  8e  others  touching  the  half  /'.ere  of  Land 
inV  everham,  8c  the  Salt-pits  therein, feveral  times  above- 
mentioned.  dat.  .8  M.y,  anno  1  R.  Caroli  1.  167.^ 

58.  Original  Wiitt  or  Charge  of  Sir  John  Warburton 

Knight  for  the  Kings  Body,  8c  Sheriffe  of  Chdhire,  to 
his  Baylifks  of  Bucklowe-FIundred  :  commanding  them 
to  furnmon  George  Holforde  Knight,  Sc  divers  others 
of  the  principal  Gentry  of  that  Hundred  ;  to  appear  at 
the  next  Shire,  to  lerve  on  the  Jury,  or  to  anfwer  in  the 
Court  at  the  fuits  of  others.  lYy  b. 

59.  Heads  of  the  Declarations  of  John  Dodd  &  others, 

againft  Randle  Gryffith.  ,34.  b. 

60.  Heads  of  Randle  Gryffyth’s  Bill  againft  Richard 
Grofvenor  Efq;  &c.  with  Anfweares,  8cc.  to  the  fame. 

61.  Copies  of  two  Letters,  one  to  Sir  Walter  Mylde- 
may,  the  other  to  Mr.  Attorney  Generali ;  both  dated 
from  the  Writers  (Mr.  William  Tatton’s  ?)  poore  Howffe 
at  Withinfhawe,  16  October  1571.  in  behalf  of  the 
poore  people  of  Great  Salghalle  &c.  who  were  lately  de¬ 
prived  of  their  Common  of  Pafture  (which  they  8c 
their  Predeceffors  had  enjoyed  Tyme  out  of  Man’s’  Me- 
mory)  in  Kingfwood,  by  one  Hally welle,  to  whom  the 
Shireve  of  Chefhire  had  given  poffdlion  of  it.  142. 

62.  Original  Articles  of  Agreement,  concluded  14 

Februarie,  anno  6  R.  Caroli  1.  between  Hugh  Wilbra- 
ham  Efquier,  h  Thomas  Dod  Yoman.  143.  b. 

Thefe  are  about  the  letting  of  part  of  Ecclefton-Hall 
to  Dod. 

63.  Interrogatories  to  beminiflred  vnto  certainc  Witt- 

neffes  produced  to  bee  examined  vpon  the  parte  of  Rich¬ 
ard  Grofvenor  Efq;  8c  Sr.  Richard  Grofvenor  Kt.  his 
Some,  Defendants  :  againft  Sir  Roberte  Cholmeley 
Baronet  Complaynant.  1 44_  b. 

'lhefe  are  about  Willey-More  &  the  Right  of 
Pafture  there  ;  about  which  Randle  Griffith,  8cc.  went 
to  I.aw. 

64  Names  of  Witneffes  examined  in  the  Caufe  be- 
tween  Brereton  8c  Grofvenor.  ,  ^  2#  Jl 

65.  Obfervations.  with  the  Names  of  Witneffes  ex¬ 

amined  in  the  faid  Suit  between  John  Dodd  &  Randle 
Griffith,  &c.  ,.a> 

66.  Draught  of  a  Leafe,  whereby  Peter  Philken  & 

Jane  his  Wiefe,  in  confideration  of  £50.  received,  do 
lett  unto  Raulphe  Davenport,  certain  Lands  in  Alton, 
for  Five  or  Six  Years,  at  a  Pepper  Corne  Rent,  dated 
7  December,  anno  20  R.  Elizabethan  159. 

67.  Original  Quietus  eft,  given  to  Mr.  Recorder 
VVhitby,  for  the  27th  year  of  K.  James  1.  for  his  Farme 
of  Lordlhip  of  Handbridge,  8c  Land  in  Chefter.  165.  A. 

68.  Draught  of  an  Indenture  made  31.  October  anno 
38  R.Htnricivnr.  whereby  Sir  EdmundPechkam  Knight, 

i  the 


NTiim.  2090,  2 o q t . 

the  Kings  Coferer,  grants  the  Cuftody  of  the  Body  & 
Manage  of  Agnes  (falfeley  in  the  Office  named  Anne) 
Bothe,  an  Infant  of  Nine  years  old,  with  an  annual  Rent 
of  40  Marks  during  her  Non-age  ;  to  Antony  Brown  of 
Hempftede  in  Com.  EfTex  Gent,  for  the  Sum  of  400 
Marks.  _  166.  b. 

This  Agnes  was  Coufin  Sr  Heire  to  John  Bothe 
Clark,  &  the  Kings  Ward ;  &  was  fold  feveral  times 
before. 

69.  The  Cafe  about  Knights  Grange  in  the  Parilh  of 

White-gate,  of  which  Hughe  Starky  being  leized  in  Fee, 
did  lettthe  fame  to  Ry chard  Wryght  Citizen  and  Payn 
tour-Meyner  of  London,  the  laft  of  Augufl,  anno  3  R. 
Edwardi  vi.  and  afterward  lett  a  I.eafe  of  the  fame  for  40 
Years,  and  the  Rent  of  £24  per  annum.  And  fo  it  was 
let  from  one  to  another,  untill  it  was  claimed  by  John 
Starkye.  174.  b. 

This  is  written  partly  in  Law-French,  &  partly  in 
Englilh. 

70.  Arti.-k'S  of  Agreement  made  4  October  1619. 

between  Si  Iiarle  rdant  of  Bedford  Kt.  &  Dame 
Elizabeth  his  Wife  of  drone  parte  ;  &  Thomas  Whitby 
cc  Peter  I)i  ink.  water  of  Chefter,  on  th’other  parte  :  for 
&  concern eingc  the  Purchafe  of  part  of  the  Mannour  & 
Lordihippe  or  II amici t  or  Hargrave  on  Worrall,  in  Che- 
ikire.  l75' 

On  the  back,  are  fome  Notes  relating  to  this  Af¬ 
fair,  written  by  the  inimitable  hand  of  Mr.  Recorder 
W hitbv  :  who  took  good  pains  in  fearching  out  the  Title. 

7  1.  The  Bill  of  Robert  Dannolde  Plaintiffe  againfl 
Sir  Richard  Gi  ofvcnor  Knight  &  Baronett,  Edward  Dod 
Efquier,  John  Dod  Gent,  Margaret  Kettle  Widowe,  & 
William  Nevett  Deifendants.  1 77-  fr¬ 

it  fheweth  how  Sir  Richard  had  gotten  a  Leafeof 
Srockton-Farme  in  Broxton  (of  the  yearly  value  of 
£140)  for  21  years  ;  and  combining  with  the  others, 
had  gotten  alio  the  perfonal  Eftate  of  Richard  Phillips 
deceafed  &  Amy  his  V\  yfe,  amounting  to  £2000.  but 
denied  to  pay  £6co  to  the  Plaintiffe,  which  was  due  to 
him  from  the  Deceafed. 

Then  follow.  Sir  Richard’s  Anfweare  ;  the  Plain- 
tiffes  Replication  ;  Sir  Richard’s  Rejoynder,  with  his 
Prooffes. 

72.  Fragment  of  a  large  Writing,  (hewing  how  Sir 
Thomas  Pigott  &  Dame  Suzanna  his  Wife,  Sir  Arthur 
Savage  Kt.  Erafmus  Cope,  Michael  Throgmorton  &  Va- 
lentyne  Pigott  Efqrs;  did  dimife  vnto  Henry  Throgmor¬ 
ton  Efq;  ail  the  Rectcrie  or  Parfonage  of  Olve  (or  Olvey) 
fometimes  belonging  to  the  Monafterie  of  Svon  in  the 
Countie  of  Middlefex  ;  and  what  became  of  it  afterward. 

187. 

7^.  Original  Letter  of  Mr  John  Lechc  to  Sir  Richard 
Grofvenor  Kt.  &  Bart,  defiring  to  be  admitted  his  Tenant 
for  the  whole  Tythes  of  the  Townfliip  of  Glutton,  as 
before  he  had  held  but  the  half.  dat.  17  October  1634. 

189. 

2091. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  particular  Tracis, 
and  fingle  Papers  &  Parchments,  bound  up  together 
in  no  good  Order  ;  but  on  thebackfidc,  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme  entituled,  ‘  Chefter  bufines  &  Toll  of 
the  Eaft  Gate.’ 

Herein  I  find, 

1.  The  fame  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  the  Things  of 
moft  Note  in  this  Book  :  at  the  beginning. 

2.  Original  Articles  of  Agreement,  made  29  Augufl 

1602,  betweene  Alexander  Cotes  Gent.  Sc  William  AI- 
cocke,  before  the  Maior  &  feveral  of  the  Aldermen  of 
Chefter.  1  • 

Hereby,  Alcocke  was  obliged  to  pay  Mr.  Cotes 
£5.  in  confideration  of  his  pulling  downe  a  Shoppe  be¬ 
longing  to  Mr.  Cotes,  and  of  other  Trefpaffes  &  Offences: 
and  had  leave  to  build  it  up  again,  as  good  as  it  was 
before,  at  his  own  Colts  &  Charges. 

Cat.  Harl.  Yol.  II. 


3.  The  Rule  for  the  Judgement  betweene  Birchley, 
&  the  Citty  of  Chefter,  20  Sept.  ann.  20  R.  Jacobi. 

.3* 

4.  An  Order  made  in  behalf  of  Thomas  Wnght 
Keeper  of  the  Prifon  of  the  North-gate  in  Chefter,  com¬ 
plaining  that  hee  is  threatened  to  be  ftied  by  thofe  Perfons 
at  whole  Suites  one  John  F.infdale  lay  Prifoner  there, 
becaufe  he  had  been  fodenly  inlarged.  The  Court  there¬ 
fore  ordered  that  Richard  Einfdale  the  Defendants 
Suerty  in  Court,  fhall  within  Seven  dayes,  bringe  in  the 
Bodie  of  the  Defcndand  into  Court,  or  elfe  an  Attach¬ 
ment  to  be  awarded  againfl  him.  dat.  1  Aug.  1641.  4. 

5.  Queftions  arifing  upon  this  Cafe.  A.  B.  &  C.  at 

a  Scffion  of  the  Peace,  held  within  the  C-ittie  of  Chefter, 
being  indifted  for  common  Cheaters  &  Cofiners,  prout 
per  Inditt.  beinge  feuerallie  atrayned  thereuppon,  doe 
plead  not  guiltie  :  &  A.  forhisTriall  putts  himfelf  upon 
his  Countrey  ;  B.  &  C.  for  theyr  Try  all,  putt  themfelves 
to  the  Mayor  &  Recorder  ;  &l'ometymes  to  the  Bench  ; 
but  will  not,  by  any  meanes,  putt  themfelves  vppon  the 
C.untrey.  Heereupon,  the  Seflions  (accordinge  to  Courfe 
at  other  Tymes)  was  adiourned,  and  all  the  laid  Prisoners 
remanded  to  Prifon.  5. 

6.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby 

to  Sir  William  Johnes  Knight,  one  of  His  Majefties  Juf- 
tices  of  the  Kings  Benche  :  dat.  15  Augufl  1633.  6- 

Defiring  his  Opinion  as  to  the  Oueftions  drawn  from 
the  Cafe  above-mentioned. 

7.  Draught  of  another  Letter,  of  the  fame  Date,  from 

Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  to  Edward  Ihttleton  Efq;  Re. 
colder  of  the  Cittie  of  Hereford.  b.  A. 

This  is  upon  the  fame  Subjed  with  the  laft. 

8.  Copie  of  the  Indidment  of  the  three  Cheaters,  men¬ 

tioned  before  in  §  5.  who  were  Rowland  Doncaiter  of 
London,  l’uftian-maker  ;  Walter  Prellon  of  London, 
Brewer  ;  &  Robert  Leigh  of  W eftminfter,  Baker  ;  in- 
dided  for  cheating  Thomas  Shawe  of  £6.  15.  o.  at  a 
Game  of  the  Cards  called  Oxford-Hazard,  24  June, 
ann.  9  Caroli  1.  7. 

9.  Original  Petition  of  William  Greene  of  I^ondon 

Merchante,  to  the  Corporation  of  Chefter,  defiring  to 
retrieve  fome  of  his  Goods  which  were  feized  by  their 
Officers  as  forfeited  to  the  City,  beinge  Forraine  bought 
&  fould.  30  Aug.  16 15.  8- 

This  has  an  Original  Order  for  reftoring  his  goods 
unto  him  ;  he  paying  Five  Marks  for  the  fame. 

10.  Fragment  of  an  old  Accompt  of  the  Citty  of 
Chefter’s  Rents,  as  it  feemeth,  anno  9  R.  Hcnrici  vn. 

9.  - 

1 1 .  Original  Letter  of  John  Hanmer  to  the  Magiftrates 

(or  Sheriffes)  of  Chefter;  dat.  26  January  1588,  codify¬ 
ing  them,  that  whereas  on  Kenricke  ap  David  is  fued 
before  them  for  certayne  Heringe  by  him  &  others  founde 
vpon  the  Sandes  neare  Flint,  which  himfelf  had  feized 
upon  &  delivered  to  her  Majdlies  Ufe  :  he  thereupon, 
defired  them  not  to  trouble  the  poor  Man  any  further  ; 
but  to  difeharge  him,  as  their  Predeceffors  had  difeharged 
others  upon  his  like  Requeft.  10. 

1 2.  Original  Agreement,  written  upon  Parchment, 

made  20,  September  16  i  1,  by  the  Mediation  of  Sir  Tho¬ 
rnes  Savage  of  Long  Melford  in  Com.  Sufi.  Knight  ; 
whereby  (after  many  Claimes  of  Fees  from  each  Office) 
Robert  Whitbie  &  Thomas  Whitbie  his  Son,  Clerkes 
to  the  Pentice,  obliged  themfelves  (in  lieu  of  all  Demands 
of  Fees)  to  pay  to  Mr.  Thomas  Gamull  Recorder  of 
Chefter,  30  pounds  per  annum.  1 1 . 

13.  Petition  to  William  Lord  Vifcount  Wallingford 
Mafter  of  the  Courte  of  Wards  &  Liveries,  of  Edward 
Whitby  &  Alice  his  Wife,  late  Wief  of  Thomas  Ga¬ 
mull  deceafed  :  praying  that  they  might  be  admitted  to 
Compofition  for  certain  I^ands  &  Tenements  fallen  to 
Francis  Gamull,  the  Kings  Ward,  in  their  Cuftody,  by 
the  Deceafe  of  Mr.  Edmund  Gamull  his  Grandfather* 

12. 

6  B  14-  Original 


462,  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2091. 

14.  Original  Certificate  of  Thomas  Gamul  Fermour 

vnto  her  Majeftie  of  the  Manour  of  Hanbridge,  admitting 
Morgan  Prichard  S>:  Elizabeth  his  Wife  as  Tenants  of 
the  Houfe  in  Handbridge  nere  the  Haughe-Greene,  at 
the  yearly  Rent  of  4  Shillings.  Provided,  that  they  doe 
fufl’er  Ellen  Sutton  to  have  a  convenient  Roomeof  Lodg¬ 
ing  within  the  fayd  howfe  ;  and  to  come,  at  her  pleafure, 
to  the  Pyre  in  the  Howfe.  dat.  8  Aprilis  1600.  13. 

15.  Refponfio  Johannis  Ratcliife  Majoris,  et  Ricardi 
Leicefter  &  Johannis  Leech  Vicecomitum  Civitatis  Cef- 
trie,  et  Cullodem  Gaole  de  North-gate  ejufdem  Civitatis. 

*4- 

This  Anfwer  was  drawn  up  upon  a  fpecial  Cafe ; 
a  Writt  was  ifi'ued  from  the  Chamberlayne  of  Chefter  to 
the  Perfons  above-mentioned,  commanding  them  to  de¬ 
liver  up  the  body  of  Thomas  Cowley,  whom  they  de¬ 
tained  Prifoner  in  North-gate  :  becaufe  none  of  the  King’s 
Subjects  ought  to  be  arretted  or  imprifoned  in  coming 
to  or  going  from  the  Court  of  the  County  Palatine  of 
Chefter,  by  Writt  from  an  Inferior  Court.  The  Maior 
&  Shireves  anfwrr,  that  this  Cowley  is  Prifoner  upon 
Ihree  feveral  Actions  of  Trefpafs  upon  the  Cafe,  &  as 
many  feveral  Actions  of  Debt  ;  and  that  therefore  he 
ought  to  remain  in  Prifon,  according  to  the  Cuftome 
of  the  City.  After  this,  is  a  Claufe,  wherein  it  is  ob- 
ferved,  that  it  was  not  fpecified  in  the  Writt,  that  Cowley 
had  any  bufinefs  at  that  Court. 

16.  Another  Writt  from  the  Chamberlaynes  Court, 

more  exppefs  than  the  former.  j  5.  b. 

Herein  it  is  faid,  “  Et  quia  predictus  Thomas  in 
veniendo  verfus  Curiam  noftram  predidam  ad  profequen- 
dum  verfus  Phomam  Wright,  pro  qnadam  Tranfgreflione 
pu-  ipfum  Ihomam  Wright  perpetrata  contra  pacem  Sc 
dignitatem  noftram,  per  quofdam  malevolos  privilegia 
Curie  noftre  prcdide  ncfcientes  aut  parvi-pendentes  ar- 
reftatus  6c  attachiatus  eft,  ac  in  prifona  infra  Civitatem 
Ceftrie  detentus :  .  .  .  .  Ideo  Vobis  precipimus 

quod  Corpus  ejufdem  Thome  Cowley  a  Prifona  predida, 
fine  dilatione  deliberari  faciatis.” 

17.  Supplication  of  William  Marter  &  his  two  Col¬ 
ognes,  lately  Apprentices  with  William  Smethley  late 
Waite-man,  (i.  e.  Wait.player,  or  Minftrel)  deceufcJ ; 
praying  that  they  might  be  permitted  to  feive  the  City 
in  his  Room. 

iS.  Obfervations  or  Notes  fhewing  how  the  Couit  of 
Exchequer  at  Chefter  came  to  its  greatnefs.  17. 

19.  An  original  Letter  of  Attorney,  whereby  Robert 
Phillips  late  of  Chefter  authorizes  his  Uncle  Humphrey 
Phillipps  to  trail  fact  bufinefs  for  him.  dut.3iJulyi63o.  18. 

20.  An  old  Bill,  whereby  many  perfons  were  prefented 

by  a  Chefter-Jui’y,  as  guilty  of  fundry  Enormities,  firch 
as  felling  Herring  not  iufficiently  failed,  making  Mault  1 
of  wheat,  &c.  1 9  l 

21.  An  Anfwer  of  certain  Defendants  to  a  Plea  made  ' 

againft  them.  2Q 

22.  Original  Acquittances  made  by  David  Speed  Col- 

ledor  of  the  Kings  Rents  of  Howies  &  Landes,  late  par- 
cell  of  St.  John’s  6c  St.  Annes.  The  moneys  beino-  paid 
by  Mrs.  Alice  Gamull  Widow.  '  0  2 , 

2  1.  Finalis  Concordia  fada  in  Curia  de  Portmote"  Ci- 
vitati,  Ceftrie,  tenta  13  die  Januarii,  anno  9  Regine  Eli- 
zabethe,  inter  Graciam  Stanley  Viduam,  et  Edwardum 
btanky  Generolum,  querentes  ;  et  Margaretam  Alcocke 
Viduam,  deforcientem  :  de  uno  Mefuagio,  quatuor  C.o- 
tagijs,  et  t  rib  us  Gardinis  in  Civitate  Ceftrie.  22. 

This  is  the  original  Fine,  written  upon  Parchment.’ 

24.  Placita  Curie  Portmote  Civitatis  Ceftrie  tente 

ffiram  Roberto  Whitbye  Majore,  23  die  Augufti’,  anno 
ii  Regis  Jacobi  i.  °  2 

25.  An  Injundion  from  the  Exchequer  of  Chefter 

forbidding,  under  the  Penalty  of  tool.  Thomas  Chefhire 
Gentleman,  to  try  hisCaufewith  Margaret  Brooke  junior 
m  any  Court  belonging  to  the  Citie.  Tefte,  &c.  i  2  Junij 
anno  19  Regis  Jacobi  1.  1 


Num.  2091.- 

26.  A  Quietus  from  the  Deputy  Auditor,  to  the 
Maior  &  Efcheator  of  C.heftcr,  29  Sept,  anno  32  R. 
Elizabethan 

27.  Original  Petition  of  Richard  Gitten  Gherman,  6c 

Ellyn  his  Wife  ;  to  the  Maior  Sc  Aldermen  of  Chefter, 
complaining  of  Edward  Plankney  Gent,  who  had  granted 
them  a  I.eafe  of  a  Mefuage  Sc  a  Croft  in  Handbrigge : 
and,  after  fome  time,  order’d  the  Stone-Wall  fur- 
rounding  the  faid  Croft  to  be  caft  dovvnc  Sc  carried  awav, 
A.  I).  1549.  38! 

28.  Original  I^etition  of  Elizabeth  Bromley  to'  tire 

Maior  &  Aldermen  of  Chefter,  for  5  Yeares  Rent  of  a 
place  by  her  Cellar-door,  whereon  the  Fifhe-boord  com¬ 
monly  called  the  Kings  Fifhe-boord  nowe  ftandeth-;  and 
that  they  w'ould  take  the  fame  away.  39. 

The  Arrear  was  order’d  to  be  paid,  3  November 
1590  :  but  the  Fifh-board,  I  fuppofe  flood  Hill. 

29.  The  Charges,  I.offes  and  Hindrances  which  Ro- 

bart  Brerewodd  Alderman,  Defendant,  hath  diiburfed, 
fuftained,  &  bene  put  vnto  at  the  fuite  of  Richard  Bre- 
reton  Efquier,  in  an  Aftion  de  ejectione  firme,  to  the 
damage  of  100  pounds,  by  him  comenfed  in  the  Court 
of  Portmote,  22  May,  anno  23  Elizabeths.  40. 

30.  The  Charges,  Lottes,  and  Hindrances  which  after¬ 

wards  removed  into  the  Court  of  Portmote  there,  A.  D. 
'S76-  42. 

Thomas  Jonfon  of  Tranr.or  Defendant  hath  dif- 
burfed,  fuftained,  &  ben  put  unto  at  the  fuite  &  in  the  j 
name  of  John  Poole  of  Poole  Gent,  by  the  Procurement  ! 
of  William  Leche  vnknowen  to  the  faid  Plaintiff,  in  an  i 
Action  of  Debt  of  400  pounds,  by  the  faid  William  j 
Leche,  in  the  name  of  the  faid  John  Poole  comenfed  in 
the  Pentis-Court  within  the  faid  City  ;  and 

31.  Colls  &  Expenfis  made  by  John  Rofinngreve 

in  a  Wryt  ofRepleg.  agaynft  John  Glegg.  45. 

This  large  bill  was  taxed  ;  and  fo  reduced  to  fifty 
Shillings  Value. 

32.  The  Charges  with  Edward  Gruffvth  Plaintiffe 

hath  difbuifed  in  an  Action  of  Debt  of  2c  Maries,  by 
him  comenfed  againfte  Roger  ap  John  Defendante  lii  fte 
in  the  Pentice-Courte  within  the  City  of  Chefter,  and  af¬ 
terwards  removed  into  the  Portemote- Court ;  wherein  the 
Plaintiffe  recovered :  25  September,  anno  23  R.  Eliza- 
bethc.  "  4c. 

Tiffs  Bill  being  found  too  large,  was  much  reduced 
by  the  Maior. 

33.  The  Charges  of  John  Gramvall  Plaintiffe  hath 
diiburfed  in  an  Ad  ion  of  Trefpas  vpon  the  Cafe,  to  the 
Damage  of  300  Markes:  by  him  comenfed  againfte 
Thomas  Sherman  Defendant,  in  the  Pentice-Courr,  &c. 

14  Sept.  1577,  &c.  48.  b. 

This  bill  was  likewife  taxed  &  reduced  by  the  then  Maior. 

34.  The  Affeffment  of  fome  of  the  principal  Inha¬ 
bitants  ofNorthgate-Street.  50. 

This  is  figned  by  Thomas  Smith  Maior,  and  two 
of  his  brethren,  anno  2 1  R.  Jacobi. 

35.  TheCofts  and  Charges  which  William  Wclftiman 

hath  bene  putt  vnto  in  the  Profecution  of  an  Action  of 
Debt  of  £13-  13.  8.  againft  John  Peeres  in  the  Pen- 
tice-Court.  51.  b. 

This  Bill  was  alfo  taxed,  and  in  fome  particulars 
reduced. 

36.  The  Accompt  of  Receipts  &  Payments  of  Roger 

Lightfoot  &  Richard  Smyth  Leave-lopkers  of  Chefter, 
anno  14  R.  Edw.  iv.  52. 

37.  The  Names  of  all  fuch  Beggers  as  byne  admytted 

for  to  begge  within  the  Citie  of  Cheftre,  by  Hugh  Al- 
derfey  Maire  of  the  feide  Cite ;  and  in  what  Parifch  ,  ' 
iches  one  of  theyme  dwellith.  56 

Hugh  Alderley  was  Maior  of  Chefter  A.  1).  1 328. 
1541.  &  154 6.  As  to  thefe  permitted  Beggers,  they 
being  above  60  in  number,  feem  not  to  be  all  native  In¬ 
habitants  of  Chefter,  but  many  to  have  been  Strangers, 

&:  pofliblv  fufferers  by  the  Sea,  or  otherwife.  Indeed  the 

Names 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


463 


Num.  2091. 

Names  of  feveral  feem  to  be  Irifh  ;  &  others  the  fur- 
names  of  gentile  &  honeft  Families. 

38.  Nomina  Quadraginta-virorum  Ceftrue  ;  Nomina 
Servientium  adClavas  etaliorum  Ofllciariorum;  Nomina 
Conftabulariorum,  hoc  anno  t  R.  Elizabethan  58. 

39.  Names  of  the  Poore  in  St.  Gyles  Warde  ;  taken 

28  April  1579,  who  had,  or  had  not  Relief.  59. 

40.  Lids  of  Perfons  paying  to  the  Poors  Rate ; 

(hewing  what  was  charged  upon  them,  and  what  they  did 
pay.  60. 

By  thefe  it  appears  that  A.  D.  1570,  the  Number  of 
Poor  relieved  in  Chefter  amounted  to  120. 

41.  Panellum  ad  inquirendum  pro  Johanne  Saluf- 

burie  Milite,  Fxecutore  Teftamenti  David  Middleton  de- 
fun£ti,  fuper  Breve  de  Elegit,  verfus  Hugonem  Enlowe. 
&c.  69. 

This  is  the  original  written  upon  Parchment  ;  Sc 
fhews  who  were  fworne  Sc  who  not. 

42.  Breif  de  Confpiracy  per  Thomam  Byrchley  Ha- 

berdafher  of  fmall  Wares,  brought  verfus  Sir  Randle 
Mainwaringe,  Sc  other  Magiftrates  of  Cheder :  before 
the  Judges  of  Adize,  becaufe  he  was  dis-franchifed  for 
cxerdfing  two  Trades.  70. 

43.  Order  of  the  Affembly  of  Chefter,  8  April  1623, 

for  the  Rcftitution  of  Thomas  Birchley  to  the  Freedome 
of  the  Citie.  90. 

This  order  came  out  after  that  the  C.itie  had  proved 
before  the  Judges,  two  of  their  Cuftomes,  &  had  their 
Allowance  that  the  fame  were  good  &  agreable  with 
Law.  One  was,  that  none  might  ule  any  Trade,  unlefs  he 
were  a  Free-man  of  the  Citty,  and  alfo  free  of  the  Com¬ 
pany  of  fuch  trade  as  he  would  ufe.  The  other,  that 
none  made  free  of  one  trade  might  ufe  any  other  Trade, 
without  leaving-off  the  lirft  trade,  Sc  being  made 
free  of  the  Company  of  fuch  other  Trade.  So  that 
when  Birchley  was  reftored  unto  the  freedome  of  the 
City,  he  was  not  thereby  reftored  to  any  trade. 

44.  Draught  of  the  Declaration  of  the  Companies  of 

Mercers  &  Ironmongers  againft  Birchley,  for  following 
both  their  trades.  96. 

This  Draught  is,  in  many  places,  amended  by  the 
hand  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby. 

45.  Writt  directed  to  the  Maior  &  Citizens  of  Chefter, 

obliging  them  to  reftore  Birchley  to  the  Freedome  of  the 
City  ;  &  to  fufter  him  to  open  his  Shop-doors  Sc  Win¬ 
dows  again.  Tefte,  See,  23  Septembris,  anno  20  R. 
Jacobi  r.  117. 

46.  Brief  of,  or  for  Hugh  Wilh'atnfon  Alderman 
Plaintiffe,  againft  Thomas  Glafcor  Efq;  &  Grace  Gla- 
leor  Widowe  Defis. 

This  was  in  a  Caufe  of  Debt  for  Goods  taken  upon 
Trull,  which  the  Defendants  were  unwilling  to  pay. 
So  they  put  in  an  Anfwer ;  &  the  Plaintiffe  brings  in  his 
Proofes.  120. 

47.  Draught  of  an  Order  of  the  Citie  of  Chefter,  con¬ 
firming  to  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbie  the  Fees  incident  to  his 
Office,  which  had  been  kept  from  him  ever  fince  Mr. 
Brerewood  had  been  made  Clarke  of  the  Pentice.  1 23. 

48.  The  Aunfwear  of  Sir  Randle  Manwaringe  one  of 

the  Defendants.  124.  b. 

This  is  upon  occafion  of  the  Suit  commenced  by  the 
Whitbies,  after  their  being  turned  out  of  their  Office  of 
Clerk  of  the  Pentice.  And  herein  the  Crimes  Sc  Enor¬ 
mities  committed  by  Thomas  Whitby,  are  pretty  amply 
fet  forth. 

49.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Anfwer.  1 36. 

5c.  A  Piea  between  William  Morris  who  fued  George 

Vanfe  Felt-maker  in  an  Aftion  of  Affault  Sc  Battery. 
The  Caufe  being  tried  the  30  March,  anno  1 1  Caroli 
Regis.  146.  b. 

51.  A  Commiflion  of  K.  James  1.  authorifing  the 
Maior  of  Chefter,  the  Recorder  Sc  others,  to  examine 
upon  Oath,  fuch  as  at  the  Port  of  Chefter,  come  from, 
or  go  to  the  Parts  beyond  the  Sea ;  as  alfo  to  minifter 
*4 


Num.  2091. 

the  Oath  of  Allegiance,  when  it  fhould  be  found  expe¬ 
dient.  Tefte,  See.  16  Marche,  anno  Regni  8.  164.  b. 

52.  Original  Certificate  (figned  by  the  proper  Hands) 

of  the  Maior,  Aldermen,  Sheriffes,  Sherifte-Peers,  Cyti- 
zens,  &  Inhabitants  of  Chefter,  on  the  behalf  of  Aider- 
man  William  Gamull  ;  and  counter  to  the  malicious  In¬ 
formation  of  William  Edwards,  who  had  flandered  him 
as  guilty  of  Oppreflion,  Crueltie,  Tyrannic,  Sec.  dat.  in 
Marche  1624.  1 83.  (v.  §  60.) 

53.  Richard  Mutchell’s  Bill  of  Complaint,  brought 

into  the  Exchequer  at  Weftminfter,  againft  Alderman 
Edmund  Gamull  Se  Thomas  Gamull  Efq;  his  fon, 
Feodary  of  Handbridge :  for  violently  taking  a 'ay  his 
Corne,  and  endeavouring  to  putt  him  out  of  his  Houfe 
and  Lands,  which  his  Anceftors  had  held  of  the  Kings 
Progenitors  time  out  of  mind.  1 84. 

This  wants  foinewhat  at  the  end. 

54.  The  Brief  of  the  Whitbies,  in  Oppofition  to  Mr. 

Brerewood  &  others  Defendants.  20c. 

Here,  contrary  to  what  was  fuggefted  by  Sir  Randle 
Manwaring  (vid.  §  48.)  it  is  affirmed  that  the  Clerk-lhip 
of  the  Pentice  is  one  Office,  and  the  Clerk-lhip  of  the 
Portinote  is  another  ;  diftinct  Sc  feparate  from  it. 

55.  The  State  of  the  Cafe  about  the  Clarklhipp 
of  the  Pentice,  between  the  Whitbyes  Sc  Brerewood. 

201. 

5 G.  Original  Paper  or  Letter  of  Defiance,  directed  to 
Henry  GeeMayre  of  Chefter  (A.  D.  1533.)  by  Rychard 
Cowper  Cytezen  Sc  Groffer  of  the  mo  ft  noble  Citie  of 
London.  203.  b.  (vid.  infra  §  59.) 

It  feems  that  he  had  imported  there  a  large  Quan¬ 
tity  of  Sacks,  Se  other  good  Wines,  in  the  Sale  of  which 
by  wholefale  he  had  been  much  hindred.  And  when  he 
was  willing  to  fell  the  lame,  out  of  his  Cellar,  at  8d.  per 
Gallon,  he  was  likewife  hindred  by  the  Vintners  there  ; 
who  yet  fold  their  own  Wines,  which  were  not  fo  good 
as  his,  at  i2d.  per  Gallon.  Therefore,  for  that  the 
Cytezyns  of  London  ought  to  be  intretyde  Sc  ufyde  after 
the  Preuelege  Sc  Libertyes  that  the  Kyngys  Grace  hathe 
gyvone  Sc  grauntyd  them  in  all  hys  Domynvons;  he  pro- 
duceth  a  Certificate  vndere  the  Seale  oft'  the  fayde  Citie 
of  Londone,  requyring  that  he  may  be  quiete  in  all 
thyngys  as  hyt  conteynythe.  The  contrarye  doyng  he 
protefts  to  complayne  off  them  vnto  the  Kyngs  Grace  & 
to  his  ryall  Counfell  for  his  Remedye  ;  and  to  reccuere 
of  his  Mafterlhipes  Perfone  Sc  Godez,  all  the  Hurtez  Sc 
Damages,  that  in  this  Caufe  he  fhould  fufteyne. 

37.  Petition  to  the  Mayre  Se  C.orilinaltie  of  the  Citie  of 
Cheltre,  by  Robert  Barowe  Alderman  &  Co-Cytyner ; 
praying  their  favor  that  he  might  inclofe  five  Buttys  of 
Lande,  of  his  awen  Landes  &  Inheritaunce  at  Flokers 
broke,  &  injoye  the  Fee-Ferme  thereof.  206. 

58.  Original  Indenture,  made  22  October  1574,  be¬ 

tween  the  Maior  Se  Treafurers  of  Chefter,  concerning 
the  Plate,  &  other  things  which  were  to  be  delivered 
unto  him.  (Torn)  207.  b. 

59.  Copie  of  the  Certificate  of  Sir  Stephan  Pecoke 
Lord  Maior  of  London,  in  the  behalf  of  Richard  Smyth 
Draper,  &  Richard  Cowper  Grocer,  fhewing  that  they 
were  in-regiftered  Citizens  of  London,  and  reciting  fome 
of  the  Privileges  granted  to  that  City  by  the  Kings  Pro¬ 
genitors  :  as  that  the  faid  Citizens  of  London  fhould  be 
free  from  payment  of  all  manner  of  Tolls  &  Cuftoms 
throughout  their  Dominions.  Therefore  defiring  that 
the  faid  Smyth  Sc  Cowper  might  be  every  where  favo¬ 
rably  treated,  and  excufed  from  fuch  Payments.  Given, 
under  the  Seal  of  the  Maioralty  of  London,  3  of  March 
anno  24  R.  Henrici  vm.  (This  is  alfo  torn.)  208.  b. 

60.  Original  Certificate  of  Sir  Richard  Grofveror 

High-Sheriffe  of  Chefhire,  figned  by  himfelf  and  by  many 
others  of  the  beft  Gentry  of  the  County,  in  the  behalf  of 
Mr.  William  Gamull  Alderman  Sc  Merchant  of  Chefter: 
to  the  fame  eft'eft,  as  that  before-mentioned  at  §  52.  dat 
in  the  Month  of  March  1 G24.  2 1  o.  b. 

61.  Rates 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


16, 


Kum.  2091. 

6j.  R;.;.  -  .  i  Servants,  Labourers,  8c  Ilierers  Wages* 
appointed  ai  the  General  Seffions  for  the  Peace  within  the 
Cky  of'Cheihr,  anno  38  R.  Elizabethe.  212.  b. 

Although  this  Table  be  torn  and  much  damaged, 
vet  good  Information  may  be  had  from  it :  the  faid  Wages 
being  dated  by  the  Yeare,  with  Meate  &  Drinck  ;  by  the 
Yeare,  without  Meate  &  Drinck;  and  by  the  Day  with 
Meate  8:  Drinck. 

6 1 .  Exemplification  of  a  Plea  held  in  the  Court-Baron 
of  the  Maner  of  Manchefler  in  the  County  of  Lancafter, 
27  April,  anno  34  R.  Elizabethe,  between  Oliver  Der- 
bilhyre  Junior  of  Worfley  Lynnen-Webfter,  8c  Thomas 
Williams  of  Cheder,  Lynnen-Draper,  for  24  Shillings 
which  Williams  owed  the  PlaintifFe  for  a  piece  of  Linnen 
Cloth.  213.  b: 

63.  Another  like  Plea  between  the  faid  Parties,  for  a 
like  Debt  of  21  Shillings  ;  at  the  fame  time.  215.  b. 

64.  Another  like  Plea  between  the  faid  Parties,  for  a 
like  Debt  of  eg  Shillings  ;  at  the  fame  time.  216.  b. 

65.  Another,  for  Nine  Shillings,  being  Moneys  lent 

to  the  Defendant ;  who,  like  an  honed  Man,  made  no 
Appearance  to  any  of  thofe  Actions ;  and  was  therefore 
amerced  by  Mr.  Steward.  281.  b- 

Thefe  Papers  are  tom  8c  damaged. 

66.  Names  of  {overall  Inhabitants  in  the  feveral  Wards 

of  Cheder.  220:  b. 

6 7.  The  Plainte  of  Sir  Chriftofer  Hatton,  Sir  Edward 

Unton,  Sc  Mr.  Henry  Unton,  againd  Edward  Vere  Earl 
of  Oxford,  for  breach  of  Couenant  about  certain  Lands, 
Tenements,  8c  Offices  in  Cheder.  222.  b. 

68.  Inquifition  taken  at  Cheder,  anno  3  R.  Edwardi 
vi.  upon  Sight  of  the  Corpfe  of  Richard  Sconfe  Carter; 
who,  a  {faulting  one  John  Coke,  was  killed  by  him  (in  his 
own  Defence)  by  a  Blow,  with  a  Stalfe,  upon  his  Head. 

228. 

69.  Part  of  a  Copie  of  a  Deed,  whereby  John  Bruyne 
of  Stapleforde  in  Com.  Cedr.  Efq;  in  Confideration  of 
1 6  Pounds  received,  fold  to  Edward  Plankney  Gent,  cer¬ 
tain  feraps  8c  bitts  of  ground,  in  divers  places.  228.  b. 

70.  IJefeazance  of  a  Bond  made  by  Thomas  Sonky 
to  William  Stete,  who  was  bound  for  him.  229. 

7 1 .  Part  of  a  Letter  {hewing,  that  it  had  pleafed  the 
Kynges  Majedie  to  yeve  vnto  the  Citie  of  Cheder,  ferten 
Trees,  towards  the  makynge  of  a  newe  Haven.  229.  b. 

72.  The  Replication  of  Thomas  Strete,  to  th’Anfware 

of  George  Vernone.  230.  b. 

Here  was  a  Quarrel  between  two  Siders  &  their 
Hufbands,  about  the  Didribution  or  Dividon  of  the 
Mothers  Goods. 

73.  The  Anfwar  of  George  Vernone  to  the  Bylle  of 

Compleynt  of  Thomas  Strete.  232: 

74.  Petition  of  Thom.  Strete  to  the  Maire  Sc  Aldermen 
ofCheftre;  praying  their  Mafterffiips  to  call  George 
Vernone  before  them,  8c  coxnpelle  him  to  delyver  his 
Goods  unto  him  accordyng  to  Judice  8c  the  leafuile  Cu- 
ftotne  off  the  Citie  ;  or  els  to  ihewe  before  their  Mafter- 
ihips  gude  8c  leafuile  Matter,  why  he  ought  notfo  to  do. 

233.  b. 

Here  is  a  little  Inventory  of  the  faid  Goods,  about 
which  the  Ouarell  arofe. 

,75;  Opinion  of  the  Judges,  17  Junij  1636,  upon  the 
Abufe  of  the  Writ  .of  Habeas  Corpus,  which  had  been 
petitioned  for  by  divers  Prifoners  in  the  Plague  times  : 
that  the  Warden  of  the  Fleet  8c  Marffiall  of  the  Kino-s 
Bench  might  remove  their  Prifoners  to  fome  good 
Townes  remote  from  the  Infection,  which  ffiould  be 
afligned  unto  them  ;  where  the  faid  Prifoners  would  be 
kept  fub  arfta  &  falva  Cudodia,  and  not  to  be  as  Iloufe- 
keepers  in  their  own  Houfes,  and  make  the  Infection  a 
Colour  to  abufe  their  Creditors,  8c  delude  the  courfe  of 
judice.  And  that  no  Keeper  of  a  Prifon  is  authorifed  by 
the  Writ  of  Habeas  Corpus  to  give  Liberty  to  his  Prifon¬ 
ers,  but  that  the  fame  is  an  Abufe  againd  the  Law,  and 
an  Efcape  in  the  Keeper.  2  7  . 


Num.  2091. 

76.  Letter  ofSir  Thomas  Coventrye  Lord  Keeper  of 
the  Great  Seal,  to  Sir  John  Bratnfton  Lord  C  heef.  Juf- 
tice  of  England,  dated  19  June  1636:  acquainting  him 
that  his  Majedie  did  exceedingly  approve  the  foregoing 
Opinion  or  Refolution,  and  will  not  recede  from  the 
fame  ;  but  prayes  all  the  Judges  to  obferve  it  condantly. 

235 .  b. 

77;  Litterte  Patcntes  R.  Jacobi  1.  quibus  concedit 
Gabrieli  Marflre  Armigero,  diverfas  Terras  Tenements, 
8cc.  in  Parochijs  Omnium  Sanftorum,  S.  Martini,  S. 
Trinitatis,  S.  Michatlis,  S.  Johannis,  S.  Petri,  et  S.  War- 
burge  in  Civitate  Cedrie,  et  in  Hand  bridge  extra  Mures 
dicle  C.ivitatis  ;  parcdlam  Poffeflionum  nuper  Domus 
Monialium  Cedrendum,  et  podea  parcdlam  Poffeffionuul 
Epifcopatus  Cedrenfis,  tunc  in  manibus  fuis  exidentem, 
pro  termino  triginta  Sc  unius  Annorum  ;  reddendo  inde 
annuatim  £25.  4.  6.  1’ede,  8cc.  22  February  anno 
Regni  22.  236.  b. 

78.  Draught  of  the  Indenture  of  Covenants  between 

Sir  Ranulph  Crew  Kt.  and  the  Maior  8c  Citizens  of 
Cheder  :  whereby  the  dud  Sir  Ranulph  did  quitt  his 
Claim  to  the  Tolls  taken  at  the  Ead-gaie  of  Cheder,  to 
them  8c  their  Succeffors  for  the  annual  Rent  of  £2.  3. 
for  the  due  payment  whereof  they  engaged  an  houfe  in 
Eaft-gate-drect.  241.  b. 

79.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council  to  the  Mayor,  Aldermen,  &c.  of  the  Citty  of 
Cheder,  dated  9  July  1630;  in  the  Caufe  depending 
between  Sir  Ranulph  Crew  &  the  Citty,  about  the  Tolls 
at  Ead-gate.  262. 

Here  the  two  Parties  contradicted  each  other  re¬ 
markably  ;  Sir  Ranulph  maintaining  with  much  Con¬ 
fidence  to  their  Lordffiips,  that  vpon  full  hearing  of  the 
Caufe,  the  Judges  delivered  their  Opinion  for  him  : 
which  report  was  likewife  confirmed  by  Mr.  Litteler  the 
Towne-Clerke  of  Cheder  :  whereas,  the  Citty,  in  their 
Letter,  infinuated  that  the  Judges  deliuered  no  Opinion 
at  all.  I  heir  Lordfhips  had  therefore  required  a  parti¬ 
cular  Certificate  of  the  Judges  touching  that  matter  : 
and  did  alfo  require  them  to  put  the  Judges  Opinion  in 
Execution,  without  further  Difpute  or  Didurbance. 
Their  Lordfhips  further  give  thefc  Gentlemen  to  under¬ 
hand,  that  if  their  faid  Report  diould  prove  to  be  fade, 
they  ffiould  take  juft  Caufe  of  Offence  at  the  faid  Letter’ 
and  again  ft  thofe  that  were  the  Contrivers  or  Counfellors 
thereof. 

80.  Draught  of  the  Reference  of  the  Caufe  about  the 

Eaftgate-Tolls,  to  the  Decifion  of  Thomas  Vifcount  Sa¬ 
vage  C.ouncellour  Sc  Chancellour  to  the  Queencs  Ma¬ 
jedie,  by  Sir  Ranulph  Crew  on  the  one  fide,  8c  by  the 
Major,  Recorder,  8c  of  one  the  Aldermen,  for  the 
City.  dat.  23  February  1630.  263.  b 

81.  Minutes  of  the  Affembly  mett  25  January  anno  6 

Caroli  Regis,  wherein  it  was  agreed  not  to  give  pofleffion 
of  the  Fait  Gate-Tolls,  See.  to  Sir  Ranulph  Crew,  as 
was  required  by  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council ;  but  to 
defend  the  Cities  Caufe,  by  Law.  267.  b. 

82.  Letter  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  to  the 

Judices  of  Affife  in  theCountie  of  Cheder;  dated  the  9 
of  July  1630;  being  the  Letter  abovemen  tjoned  at  ^79. 
wherein,  after  a  long  detail  of  the  Matter,  they  pray 
8:  require  them  to  certide  particularly  in  Writing,  under 
their  Hands,  what  their  Proceedings  were  in  that  Caufe  ; 
and  whether  they  delivered  any  Opinion  therein  ;  and 
what  that  was.  270. 

84.  Draught  of  an  Indenture  cf  Covenants,  made 
.  .  .  April,  anno  26  R.  Elizabethe  ;  between  Tho¬ 
mas  Liniall  of  Cheder  Merchant,  and  .  ...  r 

Freight- Maders  8c  Merchants  :  whereby  Mr.  Liniall  hired 
a  good  Ship  to  them,  of  60  Tonnes  Burthen,  which  they 
were  to  lade  with  their  own  Merchandifes,  and  might 
conduct  the  fame  Ship  into  the  Porte,  Haven,  or  River 
of  Bilbow,  Vermew,  or  Sant  Sabadyans  :  they  paying 
Mr.  Liniall  for  the  ufeof  her  42  {hillings  per  Tonne.  271. 

12  85.  Peti- 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse- 


46S 


Num.  2091 . 

85.  Petition  of  the  Keeper  of  the  Northgate-Gaole  in 

Chefter  ;  defiring  that  it  might.be  putt  into  good  Re¬ 
pair,  wholly  at  the  Citties  colt',  as  had  been  accuftomed, 
without  chardging  him  with  eny  thinge  further,  but  the 
payment  of  the  bare  Rent,  And  the  rather,  for  that  he 
is  both  a  yoiige  beginner,  and  hath  latelye  cntred  the 
Chardge,  and  hath  not  tailed  eny  Fruyts  of  Thryftynes 
therby,  but  only  the  C.ontentacion  in  fettlynge  himfelf  in 
Service,  where  he  purpofeth  to  Ihrowde  himfelf  duringe 
Lief.  278. 

86.  Indenture  made  2  Auguft  1627  ;  between  Rich¬ 

ard  Burde  Marcharir  &  Richard  Pemberton  Gent,  about 
the  Salt-works  at  Weverham,  oftentimes  before  men¬ 
tioned.  278.  b. 

87.  Lift  of  the  Tenants  owing  Homage  to  the  City  of 

Chefter,  A.  D.  1657.  with  the  formes  of  calling  each 
of  them  into  the  Court.  281.  b. 

88.  The  Authentic  Order  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council,  dated  12  January  1630;  requiring  the  City  to 
fuffer  S'.  Randall  Crew  to  take  all  fuch  Tolls  A-  Cuftomes 
as  are  payable  at  the  Eaft  Gate  of  C.hefter,  without  the 
Difturbance  of  the  Citty,  or  any  claiming  from  them  : 
until  they,  by  Suite,  fhall  recouer  the  fame  from  Sir  Ran¬ 
dall.  Their  Lordfhips  alfo  advifed  the  Cittie  to  accept 
a  Leafe  of  2 1  Yeares  from  S'.  Randall  of  all  Tolls  paya¬ 
ble  at  the  Tailgate  ;  and  that  fome  able  &  indifferent 
Perlons  Ihould  reduce  to  a  Certainty  what  Tolls  ought 
\o  be  payd  there,  whereby  the  fame  might  be  fpecified  in 
a  Schedule,  to  be  annexed  to  the  faid  Leafe.  Their 
Lordfhips.  do  alfo  remember  the  Difrefpeft  ftiewed  by  the 
Aflembly  to  their  Board,  and  their  not  conforming  to 
the  Certificate  of  the  Judges  nominated  by  themfelves  ; 
and  yet  for  this  time  pafs  by  the  faid  Negle&s  (for  which 
they  deferued  Blame  6c  Reproofe)  vpon  expectation  of 
their  future  Conformity,  283. 

89.  Indentura  qua  Johannes  deVere  Comes  Oxonie, 
conllituit  1  homam  Bildon  Sc  Hugonem  Bildon  Servientes 
fuos,  ad  occupant! um  Oflicium  vnius  Quatuor  Servien- 
tium  ad  Clavem  Civitatis  Ceftrie.  pro  le  Ellgate-ftrete, 
poll  mortem  Patris  eorum.  Reddendo  fibi  annuatim, 
decern  Solidus,  dat.  5  Decembris,  anno  1  R.  Elizabeths. 

285. 

90.  Letter  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  to  the 

J  uftjces  of  the  Alf.fe  lor  the  County  ol  Chelter,  dat.  20 
November  1630.  291. 

Again  recommending  the  Caufe  about  the  Tolls  at 
Eaftgate  unto  them  at  the  next  .  flifes,  for  making 
Peace  between  both  Parties  :  and  the  propofition  of  the 
Cities  taking  a  Leafe  for  21  yeares  from  Sir  Ranulph  of 
the  faid  Tolls,  vnder  fuch  Rents  &  Covenants  as  they 
Ihould  conceive  fhould  be  fitt.  And  that  as  Sir  Ranulph 
was  very  willing  to  embrace  any  fuch  Courle  of  Quiet- 
nefie  :  fo  their  I'efires  were  to  free  him  from  Suites  & 
Trouble  in  his  olde  Age. 

91 ..  Copie  of  a  Petition  of  Richarde  Litler  Clerk  of 
the  Pentice  of  Cheller  :  praying  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Council,  that  they  would  not  be  his  vndoing,  by  in¬ 
ferring  in  their  Letters  to  the  Citde,  onely  one  part  of 
his  Anfwer  to  their  Lordfhips  Oueftion,  and  omitting 
that  which  he  further  added.  292. 

92.  Original  Letter  of  John  Lord  Talbot  to  the  Maior 
of  Chefter,  dat.  6  December  1556,  defiring  at  the  next 
Chriftmas  Watches  to  be  called  to  do  Homage  for  his 
Houle  (being  a  Gable-Rent- Houfe,  in  his  own  Name,  & 
not  in  that  of  Alexander  Cotes,  or  of  any  other  perfon. 

294. 

93.  Order  of  the  Lords  of  the.  Privy  Council  ;  being 

a  Copie  of  that  abftradtcd  above,  at  N".  88.  296. 

94.  Draught  of  a  Letter,  as  it  leems,  of  the  Maior 
of  Chefter  ;  perhaps,  to  Edward  de  Vere  Earl  of  Oxford, 
dated  13  May  15  0.  certifying  that  Thomas  Bildon  one 
of  the  Serjeants  at  the  Eaft-gate  being  deceufed,  the  No¬ 
mination  to  the  City,  of  a  Succeffor,  devolved  upon  him. 
That  there  was  one  Edward  Wright,  a  Free-man,  fitt 

Cat.  Harl.  Von.  IE 


Num.  2091,  2092. 

for  the  Place.  &  acceptable  to  the  Citie,  whom  he  de- 
fired  might  be  nominated  :  and  that,  fince  the  Place 
mud  be  fupplied,  he  had  furnifhed  the  faid  Wright  with 
a  Gown,  and  order’d  him  to  attend,  untill  his  pleafure 
fhould  be  known.  298.  b. 

95.  Draught  of  a  Plea,  when  Will.  Wylkynfonc  alias 

Edelbury  was  fummoned  to  anfwer  the  Action  of  James 
Wylkynfone,  who  had  loft  an  indented  Deed ;  which 
the  Defendant  having  found,  would  not  deliver  up  :  ann. 
21  Eliz.  302.  b. 

96.  A  Note  of  what  Lands  &  Tenements  belonged  to 

Mr.  John  Brerewood,  in  the  right  of  his  Wife  ;  who 
feems  to  have  been  one  of  Sir  Francis  Gamull’s  Daugh¬ 
ters.  304.  b. 

97.  Draught  of  a  Petition  to  Oueen  Elizabeth  by  fome 

London  Gentleman  ;  fetting  forth  that  John  Gryfi’ythof 
Cayrwvs  in  Flynt-lliire  Efquyer.  had  a  good  Eftate  ;  but 
was  a  baftaid,  and  confequently  could  make  no  Will  : 
that  there  was,  indeed  a  Will  forged  by  Peeres  Gryffyth 
who  was  therein  named  Executor,  and  who  had  feized 
on  the  faid  Eftate,  and  held  the  fame  for  about  five  years: 
which  tending  manifcftly  to  her  Majeftics  Difherifpn  j 
the  Petitioner  humbly  befought  her,  to  give  him  her 
Right,  that  fo  he  might  get  it  for  himfelf.  305.^ 

98.  Accompt  of  Moneys  laid  out  for  repairing  the 
Caftle  of  Chefter  ;  taken  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby.  307. 

99.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lord  Vifcount  Savage  & 

other  Commiffioners  to  the  Maior  &  Recorder  of  Chef¬ 
ter  ;  dated,  19  November  1627  :  requiring  them  to 
Survey  Chefter-Caftle  ;  to  infpett  the  reparations  made 
there  the  Iaft  year,  by  Order  of  Thomas  Steele  Surveyour 
of  the  faid  Caftle  ;  and  likewife  to  take  a  perfect  View  & 
furvey  of  the  Ruynes&  Decaies  of  fuch  perticuler  places 
Sc  Roomes  which  fhould  be  found  moft  vfefull  &  neceffa- 
ry  to  be  repaired  for  the  prclervation  of  the  Records, 
Judges  Lodgings,  Shire  hall,  the  Bridge  and  fuch  other 
necellarie  things.  Buf,  as  to  the  Officers  continually 
ferving  there,  as  the  Prothonotarie,  Con  It  able,  Gay  lor, 
&  others  who  received  particuler  benefit  by  their  Places  : 
they  ought  to  be  charged  with  the  Mainteynance  &  Re¬ 
paration  of  their  feverall  Offices.  308. 

100.  A  Survey  of  the  Decayes  in  the  Caftle  ofChef¬ 
ter  ;  taken  the  28th  of  January  1624.  310. 

101.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Eftimate  of  the  Charge 

df  Buildings  &  Reparations  neceffary  to  be  made  in 
Chefter-Caftle.  312. 

102.  His  Draught  of  a  Letter  to  the  Lord  Savage 
8c  the  other  Commifiioners  abovementioned  at  No.  99. 

3J5- 

103.  Propofals  or  Agreement  of  Rauph  Bouth  for 
making  a  new  Bridge  at  Chefter-Callle-gate,  A.  D.  1628. 

31s. 

1 04.  Papers  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby  about  the  fame 

Affair.  318. 

2092. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confi fling  of  fome  loofe 

Tracts  bound  up  together  by  the  third  Randle  Holme; 

and  by  him,  on  the  out-lide  thus  entituled,  *  An 

Alphabate  of  Coates,  of  diuerfe  Shires,  Sec.  as  being, 

1 .  An  Alphabet  of  Armes  in  Blafon.  1 , 

This  is  faid  to  have  been  written  out  of  other  old 

Alphabets  A.  D.  1560  &  continued  (perhaps  by  Wil¬ 
liam  Smith  Rouge  Dragon,  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  Sc 
others)  to  A.  D.  1640. 

2.  A  large  Alphabet  in  Blafon,  beginning  with  the 

Letter  B.  20. 

This  is  faid  to  have  been  copied  by  William  Smyth 
Rouge  Dragon  aforefaid,  A.  D.  1604.  and,  perhaps, 
may  be  the  foundation  of  his  larger  Alphabet ;  of  which 
a  fair  Tranfcript  is  now  at  Wympole. 

3.  Some  Fragments  of  another  Alphabet,  in  Blafon. 

75*  b- 

6  C  A  Book 


4 <56  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num*  2093. 

2093. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  fingle  Papers  (as 
well  Originals,  as  others)  with  fome  Parchments,  all 
bound  up  together  by  the  third  Randle  Holme  ;  who, 
on  the  back  thereof,  hath  given  it  this  Title,  ‘  Cheder- 
Bufineffe  which,  for  the  fake  of  more  particular  & 
better  light ;  I  {hall  in  turning  over  the  fame,  obferve 
the  feveral  Matters  following. 

1 .  The  faid  Mr.  Holmes  account  of  the  Things  of  mod 
Note  contained  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  faying  of  John  Dauyfon  before  Thomas  Al- 
derfey  Maior  of  Chedre,  confernyng  the  Rent  of  a  Tene¬ 
ment  demyfed  by  William  Glafeour  th'eldre  vnto  Mar- 
garett  Hofalle,  iyjunij  anno  4  R.  Edwardivi.  1. 

3.  Objeclictns  &  Alligacions  ayend  George  Hare- 

browne,  for  fuche  Fees  as  he  demaundeth  ayend  the 
May".  &  Chefyns  of  Chedre.  3. 

This  Harebrowne  was  of  danding  Connfeli  to  the  City, 
but  in  the  time  of  the  riotous  Election  of  Piers  Dutton 
to  be  Major  ;  he  dood  &  pleaded  for  Mr.  Dutton  &  the 
Commons,  againd  the  Maior  &  Aldermen.  So,  when 
they  had  gotten  the  better  in  that  Caufe,  they  were  re- 
folved  to  turn  Harebrowne  out  of  that  place,  which  he 
had  privately  crept  and  gotl  into.  Thefe  Stirs  arofe  about 
anno  8  R.  Henrici  vin.  were  heard  by  the  King  &  Coun¬ 
cil  ;  St  Mr.  Dutton  with  his  Sheriffes  were  turned  out. 

4.  Notes,  Tranfcripts&  Remembrances  in  the  Caufe 

between  Hugh  Hynde  Plaintiffe,  verfus  Johannem  Fernall 
Defendant,  in  Ejectior.e  Firme.  5. 

5.  Original  Bill  of  RauffDone  Efquier,  defiring  that 

the  A&ion  of  John  Tildon  Alderman  might  be  removed 
from  the  Pentice-Court,  to  that  of  Port-mote.  9. 

It  feems  this  Alderman  Tildon  had  gotten  a  Bond 
of£?°;  f°r  payment  of  a  lefs  Sum,  from  the  Petitioner 
&  William  Chauntrell  Efquier,  who  had  offered  to  pay 
what  was  due,  which  Tildon  would  not  accept,  but 
fued  the  other  in  the  Pentice-Court  before  the  Sheriffs 
there  :  minding  throw  the  often  Courts  ther  hofden  ; 
and  the  SimpKchie  of  the  Common  Jurors  there  ;  and 
the  Abfcnce  of  his  Wrtneffes ;  fodenly  to  condempne 
him  8t  his  faid  Surtie,  in  the  faid  AClion,  contrarie  to 
all  Right  &  Judice.  He  therefore  prayeth,  the  faid 
Maior,  by  this  Bill  figned  with  his  Hande  (which  is  figned 
accordingly)  to  commaunde  the  faid  Aftione  with  alle 
the  Circumdances,  into  the  Court  of  Portmote,  to  be 
tried  before  his  Worfliippe  accordinge  to  the  auncient 
Cudome. 

6.  Atteded  Copie  of  an  Order  from  the  Kings  Maief- 

ties  Councelle  in  the  Merches  of  Wales  appointing  Ed¬ 
mond  Gee  Maior  of  Cheder,  Sir  John  Done,  Sir  Phellip 
Egertone  Knights,  &  Richard  Gravenour  Efquier,  to 
hear  8c  determine  the  Caufe  between  Edward  Plankenay 
Plaintiffe,  &  Thomas  Alderfey,  &c.  Defendants,  dat.  2 
December,  anno  4  R.  Edwardi  vi.  j  r. 

7.  A  Mittimus  for  commytting  Richarde  Grigge  to 
the  Pryfonne  of  the  Northgate  :  28  Martij,  anno  1  R. 
Edwardi  vt. 

One  John  Edwards  beyng  accufed  &  indited  of 
Errefey  by  Sir  Richard  Ledfham  Prid,  Sec.  in  the  Pen- 
tice  of  Cheder  before  the  Maior,  Shirreffs,  &  dyverfe 
other  perfons  then  prefent,  openly  faide  &  pronownfed, 
that  there  was  of  the  bed  within  the  Citie  of  Chedre,  of 
as  evyll  Difpoficion,  and  dayly  did  worfe  then  John  Ed¬ 
wards.  And  forther,  openly  laid  that  the  faid  Prid  was 
an  Hore-mayder-Prid. 

8.  Breve  R.  Elizabetha;,  dire&utn  Majori  Civitatis 

Cedric,  Sec.  pro  Taxatione,  Levatione,  &  Colleftione 
prime  Solucionis  tertij  Subfidij,  in  ultimo  Parliamento 
fibi  per  Magnates  et  alias  Communitates  laicas  conceffi! 
Tede,  Sec.  23  die  Julij,  anno  Regni  37.  --  ’ 

'This  is  upon  Parchment,  &  feems  to  be  the  Ori¬ 
ginal. 

9.  Certificate  of  Richard  Rathburne  Maior  of  Cheder 
touching  the  Debt  due  to  Robert  Brerewood  Alderman 

6* 


Num.  2093. 

of  Chsder,  from  Jolm  Luttrel  th’younger  of  Dubline, 
Merchaunt.  dat.  13  September,  anno  41  Elizabeths. 

*4* 

Thefe  Papers  are  much  damaged  by  moidure. 

10.  Writ  for  a  Trial  to  be  had  in  the  Portmote  Court 
of  Cheder,  between  Thomas  Burgh,  k  Thomas  Bun- 
burie  Efq;  about  certain  Mefuages  &c.  in  Cheder. 
Tede,  &c.  24  Oftober,  anno  17  Elizabcthe  Regine.  21. 

1 1 .  Part  of  a  Draught  or  Copie  of  a  Releafe  of  certain 

other  Mefuages  &  Gardens  in  Cheder,  made  by  Thomas 
Buubury  of  Stanney  Efq;  and  Henry  his  foil  &  heir,  to 
William  Ball  Alderman  of  Cheder.  23. 

12.  Draught  of  an  Acquittance  for  £4 G.  16.  2. 

paid  by  the  Sub-Colledtors  of  the  lad  payment  of  the 
Subfidie  within  the  C.ittie  of  Cheder,  to.  William  Stiles 
k  Pauli  Chauntrell  Head-Colle&ors  of  the  fame : 
2  Aprelle  1568.  25. 

13.  Original  Letter  of  George  Stanley  Lord  Strange, 

to  Sir  Richard  Godeman  Maire  of  Chedre  :  defiring  chat 
whereas  Perils  Aslhetone  had  received  certeyn  Stuff  of 
Jynkyn  Trauers  to  make  a  Chaliffe  of :  he  would  caufe 
Perus  to  deliver  either  the  Chalice  riiade,  or  the  duff' 
back.  2  6. 

14.  Original  Bill  of  Edward  Marten  Draper,  to  Mr. 

Robert  Brerewood  Maior  of  Cheder,  pra  ing  that  his 
Caufe  which  was  about  to  be  tried  before  the  Shireves  in 
the  Pentice-Court,  might  be  removed  to  the  Court  of 
Portmote,  Sc  be  tried  before  himfelf ;  the  Petitioner 
fearinge  the  lrmplicitieof  the  comen  Jurors  before  the  faid 
Sheriffs,  and  undifferency  in  his  laid  Caufe  to  be  mi- 
nidred.  27. 

15.  Petition  of  Dorm yc a  Ulter  Phificion,  to  John 

Smythe  Maior  of  Cheder  ;  befeeching  his  Maifterfhippe, 
to  call  before  him  Anne  the  Wife  of  Alderman  Ran  if 
Alderfey,  deceafed,  &  Alderman  Thomas  Alderfey  his 
Executor,  &  oblige  them  to  pay  him  £2.  6.  8.  for 

his  Counfcll  &  help  adminidered  unto  the  deceafed 
during  his  ficknefs.  'I 'he  Petitioner  having  no  foecyalte 
to  charge  the  Executors  with,  for  the  faid  Dctt,  at  the 
Comen  Lawe. 

16.  Petition  of  Richard  Williamfon,  to  Mr.  John 
Fyton  Maior  of  Cheder,  died  with  Margaret  his  Wile 
in  the  Pentice-Court,  in  an  Action  of  Trefpafs  upon  the 
Cafe,  to  the  Damage  of  40I.  praying  that  the  Caufe 
might  be  removed  into  the  Court  of  Portmote.  29. 

17.  Another  upon  a  like  Oceafion.  to  Mr.  Robert 

Brerewood  Maior  of  Cheder,  from  William  Bade  Gent, 
complaining  of  Alderman  William  Walle,  who,  (minding 
the  Petitioners  Difcredit,  Vexation,  8c  Trouble)  had  ar- 
reded  him  in  an  Aftion  of  Trefpafs  vpon  the  Cafe,  to 
the  damage  of  20k  30. 

18.  The  Rates  of  Servants  k  Laborers  Wages,  as 

taxed  and  appoynted  by  the  Magidrates  of  Cheder,  anno 
35  R.  Elizabethan.  31. 

The- Table  is  damaged,  like  that  in  97.  A.  6. 

19.  Nomina  omnium  qui  intrauerunt  in  Libcrtates 
et  Franchefias  Civitatis  Celtrie,  tempore  Thome  Gryne 
Maioris  ejufdem  Civitatis,  anno,  leptimo  Elizabethan. 

32. 

20.  Nomina  omnium  eorum  qui  intraverunt  in  Liber- 

tatem  et  Franchefiam  Civitatis  Cedrie,  tempore  V\  illelmi 
Snede  militis,  Maioris  ejufdem  Ciuitatis,  anno  regni  Dne. 
Elizabethe  Regine,  &c.  o&auo.  37. 

21.  Original  Indenture  or  Agreement  between  Tho¬ 

mas  Lawton  Efq;  Recorder  of  Cheder,  £c  Robert  Whitby 
Clerk  of  the  Pentice  there.  Whereby  Mr.  Recorder,  in 
confideration  of 30I.  to-  be  paid  yearly,  quilted  his  Chiini 
of  all  Fees  in  the  oihers  Office;  and  this,  upon  the  medi¬ 
ation  of  Edward  Dutton  Efq;  Major  of  Cheder,  8c  of  Al¬ 
derman  Wiiliam  Alderfey.  (dat.  27  November,  anno  2. 
R.  Jacobi  1 .)  40.  b. 

22.  Petition  ofEmmeDod  Widdow,  to  Maydr  Rich¬ 
ard  Dutton  Efquier  Mayor  of  Chedre,  A.D.  1 574  praying 
him  to  bynd  her  fonne  Rawfe  &  his  wyfle  Ceffele  of  good 


abenng 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


467 


Num.  2093. 

febering,  for  coming  into  her  Howfe  contrari  to  her  Will, 
and  taking  thence  the  Keyes,  &  many  of  her  Goods,  and 
for  Ceffeie’s  beting  her  forely  with  a  pair  of  Iron  Tongs. 

41- 

23.  The  furvay  of  Trinity-Ward  in  Chefter ;  or  ra¬ 
ther,  the  Conftables  Report  about  it.  42. 

24.  The  fame  Conftables  Lift  of  thofe  who  fold  Ale 

&  Beere  in  the  faid  Ward.  43* 

25.  Panell  of  the  Jury  at  the  Trial  between  William 

Wall  &  William  Ball,  with  the  Verdidt.  44. 

26.  Precept  of  Thomas  Throppe  Maior  of  Chefter, 
to  the  Conftables  of  S'  Ofwalds  Ward,  commanding 
them  to  warne  all  Ale  houfe-keepers  within  the  faid 
Ward,  to  appeare  before  him  in  the  Inner  Pentice  with 
their  Suretyes,  in  order  to  their  entring  into  Recog¬ 
nizances,  according  to  antient  Cuftome  :  and  in  the 
mean  time  to  deliver  unto  him  a  Lift  of  their  Names. 

^  •  45> 

27.  Original  Letter  of  John  of  Stanley  Efquyere 

Bruthere  to  the  Lord  Stanley,  to  Sir  Roger  Ledylhame 
Maier  of  Chefter :  fo  unluckily  damaged,  that  the  full 
purport  of  it  is  not  now  to  be  eafily  had.  46.  b. 

28.  A  Precept  from  the  Court  of  Augmentations,  for 

putting  Edward  Plankney  in  pofleflion  ofPyecroft  in 
Handbridge  ;  and  forbidding  Sir  John  Talbot  th’elder, 
Sir  John  Talbot  the  yongerSc  JohnBreretone  Gentill  man 
to  difturbe  or  moleft  him.  47. 

This  feems  to  be  the  original,  being  written  upon 
Parchment. 

29.  Bill  of  William  Alderfey  Vintener,  then  abfent, 

complaining  of  Henry  Hamnet  Draper,  who  had  fued  him 
in  the  Pentice-Court,  in  an  Adtion  of  Trefpafs  upon  the 
Cafe  to  the  damage  of  500I.  and  thereupon  declared  vpon 
certain  fclanderos  Words  wherein  both  Parties  have 
defcended  to  generall  Blue  :  fo  defiring  that  the  Caufe 
might  be  removed  to  be  tried  in  the  Court  of  Port  mote. 
9  April  1 584.  49- 

30.  Certificate  of  the  Recorder,  Aldermen,  &  Shi- 

revcs  of  Chefter,  teftifying  that  William  Godeman 
Maior  did  breke  vp  the  Kings  Write  &  Proclamationz 
vnder  his  Graces  greit  Seale  ;  and  that  they  were  not 
ftirred  nor  opyned  after-ward,  vntil  the  9th  day  of  July 
anno  5  R.  Edwardi  vi.  5 1 .  b. 

31.  Difpofition  of  Mr.  Robert  Offley’s  guifte  of  1.2 1. 

being  the  profit  of  600 1.  and  of  fome  other  gifts  given  to 
the  City  of  Chefter.  dat.  2  4  December  1621.  53. 

32.  A  Certificate  of  Sir  Gilbart  Knifton,  &c.  in  the 
behalf  of  Robert  Anfworth  Imbroderour  of  Bonfon  in 
Darbeyfhire,  who  was  of  a  true  Converfation  of  Life 
and  Honeftie,  as  they  durft  ingage.  Therefore,  good 
Mr.  Recorder  (fay  they)  lett  this  our  Satifficatt  be  remem- 
bred  &  effectually  performed,  &c.  dat.  28  Maye  1621. 

55-. 

This  notable  Piece  appears  to  be  of  the  Hand-wri¬ 
ting  of  Will.  Buckley  then  Curate  of  Bonfon  aforefaid. 

33.  Petition  of  William  Thickins  Merchaunt,  to  the 

Magiftrates  of  Chefier,  praying  to  be  made  free  of  the 
City,  at  a  reafonable  Price.  56. 

34.  Original  Letter-Teftimonial  or  Certificate  of  Hugh 

Euans  Dean  of  St.  Afaph,  &c.  to  the  Magiftrates  of 
Cheafter.  dated  29  January  1586.  in  the  behalfe  of 
Morice  ap  Roberte  their  Carrier,  who  was  fclandered  & 
vnjuftlie  charged  by  John  ap  Rytherche  with  takinge  of 
his  Purfe,  &  40  Shillings  of  Money  in  the  fame  ;  for 
which  Hander  honeft  Morice  had  brought  an  A&ion  upon 
the  Cafe.  _  57. 

35.  Original  Certificate  of  John  Alderfey  Maior  of 

Chefter,  Sc  his  brethren,  fhewing  that  there  died  of  the 
Plague  in  Chefter,  during  the  laft  Week,  onely  twoe 
perfons  ;  and  in  the  Suburbs  &  Cabbons  remote  from 
the  Cittie,  only  tenn  Perfons  more.  And  that  the 
bearers  of  the  faid  Certificate  had  lodged  there  in  a 
Place  free  from  the  Infection,  dat.  26  June  1604.  60. 

36.  Draught  of  a  Leafe,  made  anno  2 1  R.  Elizabeths: ; 


Num.  2093. 

whereby  William  Leeche  of  Chefter  Vintener,  dimifed 
unto  William  Moldinge  Yoman,  (for  70I.)  the  Remain¬ 
der  of  a  Leafe  of  a  Tenement  in  Tranmer  in  Wirrall, 
which  he  had  taken  of  Richard  Mynfhull  Efquier.  62. 

37.  Short  Petition  to  the  Maior  of  Chefter  &  his 

brethren,  for  the  fympul  Office  of  Bellemonfhyp  of  that 
Ton.  69.  b. 

38.  Original  Petition  of  Robert  Hawkfhawe  to  the 

Maior  8c  Juftices  of  Chefter,  who  having  challenged 
Thomas  Wyatt  a  Clcrke  in  the  Pentice,  was  imprifoned 
in  the  North-gate,  and  likely  to  be  further  trounced : 
acknowledging  his  oflence,  fubmittpig  himfelf,  and  pray- 
ing  (that  by  reafon  of  his  tender  a  ge)  he  might  not  be 
bound  to  the  good  behaviour,  but  releafed  from  his  Im- 
prifonment.  yQ. 

39.  Original  bill  of  Edward  Tompfon  8c  William 

Dod  late  Shereffs  of  Chefter,  about  an  Efcape  of  a  Pri- 
foner  of  Debt ;  which  Debt  Mr.  Foulke  Alderfey  the 
Creditor  had  obliged  them  to  pay,  with  Cofts.  (They 

therefore  defire  Liberty  to  fue  the  faid  Debter  8c  the  Ser¬ 
jeant  in  the  Mayors  Court.)  71. 

40  Entrances  of  many  Adtions  of  Debt,  in  the  Pen¬ 
tice-Court.  72. 

41  •  Petition  of  George  Wood  Malt-maker,  whofe 

trading  in  Chefter  was  mifliked,  becaufe  he  was  a  Fo¬ 
reigner,  albeit  his  Trade  was  noe  Occupation,  Arte,  nor 
Miftery  there  :  praying  however,  to  be  admitted  into  the 
Liberties  &  Fraunchefes  of  the  Citie,  as  a  Free-man,  and 
promifing  good  behavior,  &  a  Fine  of  53  Shillings  &  4 
pence,  and  to  beare  Sc  draw  accordinge  to  his  havinge  8c 
habilitie.  Which  Petition  was  graunted  at  the  Affembly 
held  1 1  July  1 589.  74.  a. 

42.  Original  Petition  of  Robart  Walton,  to  Richard 

Dutton  Maior  of  Chefter;  praying  that  the  Adtion 
which  Margaret  Hewer  had  commenced  againft  him  in 
the  Pentice-Court,  might  be  tried  in  the  Court  of  Port- 
mote.  7 

43.  Original  Petition  of  Phillipp  Peerfon  who  had 

ferved  five  yeres  as  Apprentice  to  an  Iron-monger,  who 
had  lately  given  over  his  Trade  ;  and  could  not  be  re¬ 
ceived  to  ferve  out  his  Time  (or  a  longer  Terme)  with 
any  other  of  the  Occupation :  praying  therefore  to  be 
admitted  to  the  Frecdome  of  the  City.  76.  A. 

This  Petition  was  graunted  the  1 2th  of  September 
1589  :  he  painge  40  Shillings. 

44.  Original  Petition  of  William  Helly  the  yonger, 

who  having  been  daily  attendant  on  the  Maiors  of  Chef¬ 
ter  for  17  yeares,  was  defyerous  to  become  li  ce  of  the 
Citie,  &  to^  trade  &  occupie  as  a  comen  Vidtualler. 
Which  Petition  was  graunted,  13  December  1588.  he 
painge  40  Shillings.  76,  53. 

45.  Original  Bill  or  Petition  of  Edward  Kyllfhe  Sadler, 

who  had  ferved  his  Apprenticefhip  in  London,  Sc  was 
then  a  Journey-man  in  Chefter,  where  he  was  born  : 
praying  to  be  made  free  of  the  City.  76. 

This  was  delivered  in,  the  6  of  July  1582:  but  whe¬ 
ther  granted  or  no,  does  not  appear. 

46.  Bill  of  William  Eaton,  late  vnder-keeper  of  the 
North-gate  Gaile,  Sc  deprived  of  his  place  to  his  vttei* 
vndoing,  as  being  a  Man  of  no  occupation,  nor  fcience, 
nor  having  any  other  meane  to  lyve  :  and  therefore 
praying  to  be  admitted  to  the  Freedome  of  the  Cittie.  77. 

47.  Original  Petition  of  Anthony  Enowes  who  had 

been  long  in  Service  with  the  Righte  Worlhippfull  Mr. 
Robart  Leech  Dottor  of  the  Lawes,  &  others.  Sc  well  be¬ 
haved  himfelf :  but  nowe  being  fomewhat  growen  into 
yeres,  and  mynding  to  match  himfelf  in  mariadg  with  a 
Freemans  Daughter  (being  for  the  Jmperfeftion  con- 
ftrayned  to  give  up  his  Service  :)  prayed  to  be  admitted 
to  the  Freedome  of  the  City,  78. 

48.  Original  Petition  of  John  Sais  alias  Tailer  late 
under-keeper  of  the  Caftle  of  Chefter  :  but  being  fome- 
what  growen  into  Yeres,  and  intermaried  with  a  Free¬ 
mans  Daughter ;  and  conftrained  to  geve  vp  his  Seruis 

for 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


468 


Num.  2093. 

For  the  Imperfections  aforefaid ;  was  become  mofte  de- 
fireous  to  be  made  tree  of  the  Citie.  jg. 

This  was  exhibited  the  6  of  July  1582. 

49.  Petition  of  John  Byllingham  a  Prifoner  for  Debt, 

complaining  of  one  John  Howghton,  of  whom  he  rented 
a  Tenement,  but  was  not  fuffered  to  ufe  it.  80. 

50.  Bill  or  Petition  of  Wyllyam  Robenfone  &  two 

others,  all  poor  Citizens  of  Chefter,  bitterly  complaining 
of  the  Company  of  Bakers  there,  who  had  given  them 
much  Trouble  St  Vexation  by  Law-Suits,  and  were  likely 
utterly  to  ruin  them,  if  the  Magi  Urates  did  not  prevent  it. 
dat.  A.D.  >570.  81. 

51.  Petition  of  John  Barton  Glouer,  vndone  thrughe 

Shurtielhippe,  for  one  Helyn  of  Soghho,  &  others  :  pray¬ 
ing  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter  to  lett  hym  haue  Twentie 
Pounds  of  the  Cities  Money,  vpon  his  Evidences  &  other 
Surances,  for  a  certain  time.  A.D.  1582.  82. 

52.  Supplication  of  Arthur  Chauntrell  to  the  Magif- 

trates  of  Chefter  ;  praying  to  be  freed  from  all  Taxation 
to  the  Poor,  according  to  their  agreement  with  him. 
He  haviug  performed  his  part,  in  bringing  up  &  main¬ 
taining  Roger  Morreye  a  fatherlefs  &  motherles  Childe 
for  about  16  years,  &  had  bound  him  Prentize  in  Lon¬ 
don  to  Alderman  Hart,  8c  obliged  himfelfe  to  fynde  him 
Apparel  for  three  Yeares  yet  to  come.  '  83. 

53.  Draught  of  a  Certificote  of  the  Maior,  8cc.  of 

C.helter;  ftiewing,  that  Robert  Dannolde  Hatmaker,  was 
free  from  the  Plague,  dat.  12  June  1604.  84. 

54.  Part  of  a  Certificate  touching  the  Wreck  of  the 

Barque  Mary  of  Dowglas,  in  her  Voiage  from  Chefter 
to  Barkington  in  Cumberland,  wherein  Mr.  John  Bavand 
had  much  Come  Sc  Grain.  85. 

55.  Letter  of  Complement  from  the  Magiftrates  of 

Chefter,  to  the  Lord  Chauncellour  Egerton  :  dated  1 1 
March  1604.  written  in  order  to  obtain  the  continuance 
of  Favor,  in  their  Bufinefs.  g6. 

55.  Another  to  the  Lord  Cranbume  (Robert  Cecil!, 
then  Secretary  of  State)  thanking  him  for  his  Kindnefs 
{hewn  to  their  City,  upon  the  late  Occafion  of  their  Bu¬ 
finefs.  dat.  11  March,  1604.  87. 

57.  Another,  upon  the  lame  Occafion,  and  of  the 

fame  Date,  directed  to  Sir  Roger  Afton.  ibid. 

58.  Draught  of  a  Depofilion  made  by  William  Ga'r- 

fi.ld,  touching  the  Behavior  of  William  Stiles  Mercer  of 
Chefter,  who  had  commenced  his  Action  of  Debt  of  1 2 
Pounds  againft  John  Afmore  ;  which  Debt  was  the  pro¬ 
per  Debt  of  the  Laid  Garfild,  22  Junij  anno  1  7  R.  Eliza- 
belhat.  gg 

I  hen  follows  a  Collection  of  Papers,  put:  up  toge¬ 
ther,  indeed,  but  all  in  diforder ;  and  relating  to  that 
important  Adair  of  the  Ship-money  leavied  by  K.  Charles 
1.  And  here  we  find  Sir  Thomas  Alton  Baronet,  Farmer 
of  the  Impoftsofthe  French  Wines  brought  into  the  Port 
of  Chefter,  very  angry  at  his  being  rated  by  the  City 
of  Chefter  for  his  faid  Place,  and  blotting  up  a  Quarrel 
between  the  County  and  the  City  of  Chefter  ;  wherein 
he  was  fuppo  ted  by  Sir  Thomas  Delves  then  the  High- 
Shcriffe,  Sir  William  Brereton,  &  other  Gentlemen,  Tome 
of  whom  afterward,  in  the  Civil  Wars  enfuing,  revenged 
themi'eives  both  upon  the  City  &  upon  the  King  too.  This 
matter  being  therefore  fo  remarkable,  I  have  thought  it 
lor  the  beft  to  defcribe  the  faid  Papers  not  in  the  Confu- 
hon  they  now  are  in,  but  rather  iomewhat  toward  their 
Order  oi  time,  whereby  the  clliefeft  parts  of  that  Tranf- 
afhon,  maybe  the  more  eaftly  gathered  up,  St  retained. 
1  nele  Papers  are, 

59.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Councd  d, reeled  to  the  High  Sheriff;  of  Cambridge, 
(hire,  &  dated  the  ...  .  of  December  tfi,4 

Empowering  him,  in  Cafe  the  Ship-money  was  n  t, 
or  mould  not  be  levied  m  Norwich,  Lynne  llegis  Yar 
mouth,  and  Wiibich,  within  the  time  limited  or  the 

Affeffnie.ni  not  made  in  thofe  Plac«.  to  affefs  the  fame 

places  bimfclt.  Sc  to  caufe  the  Magiftrates  there,  with 


Num.  2093'. 

Indifferencie,  to  leavie  the  Money,  by  the  Pooll,  upon 
the  Inhabitants. 

60.  Original  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Council, 

dated  the  24th  of  January  1634:  at  the  bottom,  directed 
to  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  See.  and  to  the  High  Sheriffs  of 
divers  other  Counties  of  Wales  ;  but  on  the  out-fide  fu- 
perferibed  to  the  Maior,  See.  of  Chefter,  the  High. She¬ 
riffs  of  the  Counties  of  Chefter,  Lancafter,  &  Cumber¬ 
land,  8cc.  *75* 

Commending  their  Diligence  in  purfuing  his  Ma- 
jefties  Writt,  &  the  Directions  of  that  Board.  That  his 
Majeftie  would  lend  them  a  Ship  of  400  Tons  ;  but  as  to 
the  £2  2 04.  charged  upon  them,  they  muff  levie  the  lame 
forthwith,  and  pay  it  vnto  the  Officers  of  the  Navie  & 
Ordinance.  And  if  they  fhould  defire  to  know  how  that 
Money  fhould  be  difpofed  of,  they  might  authorife  fome 
one  fkilfull  in  Affaires,  to  fee  hoy/  it  %vas  beftowed. 

61.  Lift  of  feveral  Pcrfons  Names  ;  perhaps,  of  fuch 

as  had  Poffeflions  both  in  the  County  of  Chelhire,  and 
in  the  County  of  the  City  of  Chefter.  104. 

1  2.  Draught  of  a  Certificate  from  the  Magiftrates  of 
Chefter,  certifying  that  A.  B.  of  Chefter  had  paid  his 
Rate  to  the  Ship-money  there,  and  therefore  was  not  liable 
to  be  taxed  elfewhere.  dat . Febr.  1634.  103. 

63.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Afton,  to  Francis 
Gamull  Efq;  Maior  of  Chefter,  dated  17  Sept.  16,5. 

1 37. 

Defiring  him  to  fubmitt  to  the  Lords  Inftructions, 
and  not  to  expedt  to  rate  Men  for  their  Lands  lying  in  the 
County.  The  faid  Inftrudtions,  in  that  point,  being  fo 
expreffe,  that  he  durft  not  admitt  his  Condition  to  ex¬ 
empt  his  Lands  in  the  Countrey,  in  the  Affeflment  of 
the  County  :  it  being  of  prefent  prejudice  to  the  Inhabit¬ 
ants  of  the  Countrey,  &  of  dangerous  prefident  to  the 
Kings  Service  in  all  the  Countries  of  the  Kingdome, 
wherein  there  are  anie  Townes  Corporate,  or  Owners  of 
Lands  living  out  of  the  County. 

64.  Original  t  ertificate  of  the  Maior  &  Aldermen  of 

Chefter,  dated  7  February  1634.  102. 

Teftifying  that  Edward  Whitby  F.fq;  Recorder  of 
Chefter  had  paid  1  :  6  :  8.  being  his  Rate  toward  the 
Ship-money,  and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  charged  in 
any  other  Place  for  that  Service. 

65.  Original  Letter  of  Sr  Thomas  Afton,  to  the 

Mayor,  Recorder  Sc  Aldermen  of  Chefter,  dated  28  Septr 
i635-,  .  .  139. 

This  is  objurgatory  ;  Sc  here  Sir  Thomas  avers  that 
the  Gentlemen  of  the  Countrey  affirme  that  hejuftly 
ft a ted  the  Cafe  to  them  (viz.  the  Maior,  See.)  in  chardging 
them  not  to  fubmitt  to  the  Kings  Writ,  nor  to  the  Lords 
Inftructions.  That  the  Differences  arifing  between  the 
Country  8c  the  City,  from  the  various  Interpretations  of 
them,  were,  de  Quanto,  De  Ubi,  8c  De  Modo.  For 
the  Quantum,  they  will  not  truft  him  the  Sherifte  to  fett 
the  Sum  ;  but  helpe  themfelvesby  the  Inftrudtions,  they 
being  favorable  for  the  Sum  of  300  pounds.  As  to  the 
Ubi,  He  was,  according  to  the  InftruCtions,  to  affeffe 
all  the  Houfes  &  Lands  throughout  the  whole  County  : 
but  that  they  having  Iloufes  S:  Lands  lving  therein, 
liked  not  the  Inflru&ions,  but  returned  to  the  Writt 
becaufe  of  an  Abbreviation  therein,  whereby  they 
would  interpret  Terras  tenentes  in  Civitate  &  in  membrjs 
ejufdem  ;  into  Terrarura  Tenentes,  or  Landholders  :  in 
which  fenfe,  if  they  lived  in  the  Citty,  they  would  rate 
them  as  to  their  faid  Lands,  to  pay  with  the  Citizens,  to 
the  Ccuntrey’s  Ioffe.  That  this  they  would  make,  good, 
by  raifing  the  third  Difteience,  De  Modo,  of  the  Manner 
of  this  Affeflment,  which  they  would  have  to  be  a 
perfonall,  not  a  locall  Charge  ;  at  which  Sir  Thomas 
is  very  angry,  as  being  contrary  to  both  the  Writ  8c 
Inftructions,  as  he  indeavours  to  lhew,  at  length.  Con¬ 
cluding,  that  if  they  conceiue  the  Lords  haue  preferibed 
a  wrong  Courfe,  they  would  doe  well  to  certifie  them 
fo  much,  that  they  may  alter  the  Inftructions  throughout 

the 


Bibliotheclae  Harleianse. 


469 


Niim.  2093. 

the  Kingdom.  Adding  further,  for  doubt  leffe,  ail  other 
Corporations  may  plead  the  fame  Priuiledge  to  exempt 
theyr  Lands  in  the  County,  as  well  as  you  ;  which  if  it 
were  graunted,  in  what  Cafe  would  the  Kings  Service 
be  when  noe  Sheriffe  could  begin  his  AftefTment  till  all 
the  Corporations  had  aftefted,  Ieuyed,  Sc  certified,  what 
Lands  they  would  exempt,  See. 

66.  A  Copie  of  the  fame  Letter.  1 27. 

67.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council 

to  the  Mayor  Sc  Magiftrates  of  the  Citcy  of  Chefler  ; 
dated  the  10th  of  O&ober  1635.  135. 

Acquainting  them,  that  the  High  Sheriff  (Sir  Thomas 
Afton)  had  tranfmitted  to  them,  two  of  their  (the  Cities) 
Certificates  in  the  behalfe  of  Sir  Thomas  Smith  Kt.  &  of 
William  Allen  Gent,  wherein  they  took  the  bouldnes  to 
declare  that  r.oe  perlon,  though  hauing  Lands  &  Eftate 
in  feuerall  places  within  the  County,  ought  to  be  charged 
but  according  to  the  Eftate  only  which  he  hath  in  the 
Place  where  he  refides.  Under  Colour  whereof,  they 
took  upon  them  to  protect  others,  for  their  owne  Ends  ; 
though  to  the  diflervice  of  the  King.  Which  Indifcretion 
&  Prtlumption  as  they  could  not  but  exceedingly  mar- 
vell  at,  8c  fharply  reproue:  fo  if  they  (the  City  )  fhould  per- 
fi/t  therein,  for  that  which  fhould  concerne  themfelves,  or 
mif-leade  others  by  fuch  their  Conceyte  Sc  Example:  their 
Lordlhips  would  call  them  to  a  more  feuere  Account,  as 
well  for  their  pall  as  future  dif-fervice  occafioned  thereby. 

68.  A  Copie  of  the  fame  Letter.  156. 

69.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council 

to  the  Mayor  &  Alderman  of  the  Citty  &  County  of 
Chefler:  dated,  25  January  1635.  129. 

Putting  them  in  mind,  that  whereas  that  Board 
was  very  carefull  to  recommend,  that  the  Cleargie  in 
their  Taxations  &  Aflelfements  for  Shipping,  might  re¬ 
ceive  all  due  Refpeft,  both  to  their  Perfons  Sc  calling. 
Jt  is  now  required  that  they  fhould  examine  Sc  make  Cer¬ 
tificate  vnto  their  Lordlhips,  with  convenient  Expedition, 
what  the  Cleargie  hath  been  aftefted  at,  within  the 
Citty,  for  the  Shipping  Money  charged  thislaft  Yeare. 

70.  Original  Letter  from  Sir  Thomas  Afton,  to  Mr. 
Knowles  Mayor  ofChefter;  dated  27  January  1635.  153. 

Requiring  the  Citty  to  fend  to  him  fpeedily,  the 
300  Pounds  charged  upon  them,  he  being  to  make  up 
his  Accounts.  And  whereas  they  had  charged  him  with 
Five  Pounds,  as  Farmer  of  the  Kings  Cuftomes  in 
Chefter :  he  fays,  he  houlds  by  Pattent  from  the  King, 
difeharged  from  any  manner  of  Taxe,  Chardge,  or  Im- 
pofition,  other  then  the  Rent  referued  to  his  Majeftie  ; 
with  Power  of  Defalcation  of  any  Taxe  whatfoeuer,  that 
fliall  be  impofed  upon  the  fame.  So,  that  what  they 
fhould  impofe,  or  he  pay,  in  this  kind,  muft  be  de¬ 
ducted  out  of  the  Kings  Rent ;  who  then  would  be  paid 
with  his  own  Money  :  and  himfelf  fhould  be  thought  an 
ill  Tennant,  to  permitt  the  Kings  Cuftomes  to  become 
contributary  to  their  Charges.  Therefore  defires  them 
to  revoke  that  AftefTment,  that  he  be  not  conftrayned  to 
cbmplayne  of  fuch  Injuftice,  as  is  neither  oft'red  to  the 
Grand  Farmers  there  (whoe  reape  much  more  benefitt 
then  he  does)  nor  to  the  Farmers  of  his  Majefties  Cuf¬ 
tomes,  in  any  Port  of  England. 

7 1 .  Original  Letter  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Councill, 

to  the  Mayor  &  Alderman  of  the  Citty  of  Chefter;  dated* 
the  8th  of  February  1 635.  I 

Acquainting  them,  that  Sir  Thomas  Afton  ‘had 
complayned  to  the  Board,  that  he  hauing  noe  Houfe  nor 
Lands  at  all  within  the  Jurifdiftion  of  the  Cittie  of  Chef¬ 
ter,  was  (out  of  particular  Indifpofition  towards  him) 
lately  affefs’d  at  Five  Pounds,  towards  the  Shipp  money, 
vnder  pretence  that  he  is  Farmor  of  his  Majefties  Cuf¬ 
tomes  of  French  Wynes  in  the  Northerne  Ports,  which 
he  holds  by  Letters  Pattents,  See.  (as  above  in  the  laft 
Letter)  and  that  nevertheleffe,  they,  in  a  difgraceful 
manner,  fent  their  Common  Sergiants  to  leauy  the  fame 
vpon  him.  But  the  Board  finding  caufe  to  diflike  their 

Cat.  Harl.  Vql.II. 


Num.  2093. 

proceeding,  both  for  the  manner  &  matter  :  and  being 
fatisfied  that  the  Petitioner  ought  not  to  be  charged  in 
Relation  to  the  farming  the  laid  Cuftomes,  did  Will  & 
require  them  to  difeharge  him  of  the  faid  Somme,  &  to 
Leauie  the  fame  olherwife. 

72.  A  Copie  of  the  fame  Letier. 

73.  Original  Letter  from  the  I.ords  of  the  Privy 

Council,  to  the  Maior  8c  Alderman  of  the  Citty  of  Chef¬ 
ter  ;  dated  the  23  February  1631;.  j~Im 

Shewing  that  they  had  conlidered  the  Citties  Letter 
of  the  Sthprefent,  and  approve  theire  Care  8c  good  En. 
deavors,  in  the  bufinefs  of  Shipp-money,  and  would 
reprefent  the  fame  to  his  Majeftie,  vpon  any  good  Occa- 
fion.  Thir  Lord/hips  require  them  to  purfue  their  laft 
Direflions,  touching  Sir  '1  homas  Afton.  And  Ihewing 
that  concerning  the  Refufal!  of  Sir  William  Brereton  or 
his  I  cnants  to  pay  thc-ir  Affeffments  ;  they  needed  not 
to  haue  troubled  the  Board  :  confidcring  the  Authoritie 
giuen  them  by  his  Majefties  Writt,  to  leauye  the  fame 
by  Diftrefle,  or  other  wife. 

74.  Original  Letter  of  the  Maior  8c  Alderman  of 

Chefter  to  Thomas  Bauand  Ffq;  8c  Mr.  William  Ed¬ 
wards  :  dated  the  25  of  March  1 6 36.  q0. 

'1  hanking  them  for  their  great  Care  8c  Paines  taken, 
8c  encouraging  them  to  proceed.  That  they  conceive 
the  Farmors  Certificate  differs  much  from  .Sir  Thomas 
Afton’s  Cafe.  For  they  knowe  not  the  Farmers  Receipts 
nor  whether  they  gaine  or  loofe  by  their  Places.  But 
that  the  cleare  gaine  Sir  Thomas  Afton  receaues  in  that 
Citty,  might  be  demonftiated  ;  and  thence  they  took 
their  Computation  for  his  AftefTment.  Nor  doe  they 
conceiue  anie  Difference  :  but  that  Sir  Thomas  ys  as  well 
lyablc  to  the  AftefTment,  for  his  cleare  games  there  for 
his  Farme  (being  for  certaine  Yeares)  as  the  King’s  Ten¬ 
nants  or  Farmours  of  his  Mannours  or  Lands  are 

75.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Will.  Edwards,  to  Mr 
Recorder  Whitby:  dated  from  London,  4  April  1636.  92.’ 

Shewing  the  'Trouble  that  he  had  met  with  in  this 
their  Difference  with  Sir  Thomas  Afton  ;  againft  whom 
the  Lords  of  the  Council  would  receive  no  more  of  their 
Petitions.  'That  however,  he  had  deliver’d  one,  kneeling 
to  the  Lord  Keeper  who  faid  that  he  and  the  reft  of  the 
Lords  would  mooue  the  King  vppon  Sunday ;  when  he 
attended,  and  found  means  to  proffer  another  to  his 
Majeftie,  and  procured  this  Anfwer,  that  Sir  Thomas 
Afton  muft  pay  the  Five  Pounds  aftefted  on  him  (nolens 
volens,)  in  Enghfh,  againft  his  great  Hart.  That  Sir 
Thomas,  when  he  could  avoyd  yt  noe  longer,  petitioned 
againft  him  ;  upon  which,  the  Lords  appointed  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  Beecher,  8c  Mr.  Nicolas  to  examine  his  Profe.  For 
at  a  meeting  with  Sir  Thomas,  when  Mr.  Bauand  was 
prefent,  he  faid  thefe  Words  without  Paftion,  viz.  Sir 
Thomas,  yt  were  better  all  the  Houfes  in  Chefter  were 
in  the  Riuer,  then  the  Kings  Service  fhould  bencglefted. 

76.  Copie  of  Sir  Thomas  Afton’s  Petition  to  the 

Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  againft  Mr.  Edwards 
written  by  him,  8c  inclofed  in  the  Letter  laft  abovemen- 
tioned.  94.  A. 

Shewing  that  he  being,  by  feuerall  Orders,  dif¬ 
eharged  from  an  AftefTment  putt  vppon  him  by  the  Citi¬ 
zens  of  Chefter  ;  and  that  after  being  by  them  required 
to  pay  the  fame,  he  did  it  to  Mr.  Secretary  Windebanke 
But  that  fince,  his  Majeftie  being  fatisfied  that  noe  Far¬ 
mers  of  his  Cuftomes  in  England,  haue  been  aftefted  in 
any  Port  where  they  liue  not,  only  the  Petitioner,  was 
pleafed  to  caufe  the  Money  to  be  reftored.  Yet  fuch  is 
the  Malice  of  Will.  Edwards  Merchant,  Sollicitor  for  the 
Cittizens,  that  hegiveth  out,  he  will  flay  this  Seaven 
Yeres  but  he  will  haue  yt.  That  he  will  follow  the  Pe- 
tjtioner  cloffe  at  the  Heeles,  and  neuer  leaue  him,  but 
will  haue  yt.  lhat  he  had  rather  fee  the  Citty,  Houfes, 

alles,  8c  all  in  yt,  downe  the  Riuer,  then  he  would  goe 
home  without  v t.  1  ogether  with  fome  Complaints  againft: 
the  Magiftrates,  as  profecuting  him  out  of  Spleene,  See. 

6  1)  77.  Original 


47° 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2093. 

77.  Original  Order  of  Council,  made,  the  King  being 
P'-i-lcn1  :  April  16  36.  &  fealed  with  the  Council-Seale. 

148- 

Importing,  that  whereas  two  Petitions  were  then 
read,  the  one  of  Sir  Thomas  Alton,  and  the  other  of 
the  Maior  Sc  Citizens  of  Chelter,  concerning  the  Pay¬ 
ment  of  Five  Pounds  aliened  upon  Sir  Thomas,  towards 
Shipp-monev,  as  Farmer  of  the  Imports  of  French  Wines 
within  the  Port  of  Chelter  :  it  was  ordered,  after  a  long 
&  feriuus  Debate  &  Confideration,  in  full  Councell; 
(hat  not  only  Sir  Thomas  fhould  forthwith  pay  the  faid 
5  pounds  ;  but  that  all  others  his  Majerties  Farmers 
ought  to  be  aiTelTcd  for  the  Valewes  of  their  Farmes  for 
the  Shipping-money,  both  at  this  time,  or  at  any  time 
hereafter.  With  a  Claufe  for  the  Clerkes  of  the  Council 
to  cal!  Mr.  Edwards  before  them,  and  to  examine  him 
touching  the  offenfive  Speeches  complained  of  by  Sir 
Thomas  Alton. 

Th:s  is  figned  by  Sir  William  Beecher  one  of  thofe 
Clerkes  ;  who  wrote  underneath,  £' Aprill  the  lart  1 636  ; 
vpon  Report  made  to  their  Lordlhips  of  this  bufi- 
nefie,  theyr  I.ordlhipps  did  not  think  fitt  to  make  any 
further  Order  therein.” 

78.  A  Copie  of  the  fame  Paper.  1 10. 

79.  Draught  of  the  Petition  of  the  Maior  &  Citizens 

of  Chefter,  to  K.  Charles  1.  147. 

Setting  forth,  that  where  Sir  Thomas  Alton,  Far¬ 
mer  (by  Leafe,  for  above  25  yeares  to  come)  of  the  Im¬ 
ports  of  French  Wines,  within  the  Port  of  Chelter,  at 
a  certain  Rent  ;  was  (vpon  full  hearinge  befor  the 
Lords  of  the  Piivie  Councell)  direfted  to  pay  ,65.  affeffed 
vpon  him  in  the  faid  Cittv,  towards  the  Ship-money: 
yet  neuerthelefs,  he  refufeth  to  pay  the  fame.  Whereby, 
diuers  Officers  within  that  Cittie,  whoe  haue  willinglie 
made  payment  of  their  Affeffments,  doe  conceaue  them- 
ielues  to  haue  bene  vnduly  aflefled  ;  and  may  hereafter 
refule  to  pay  the  like  AiTeiTinents.  They  therefore  pray 
that  Sir  Thomas  may  forthwith  make  payment  of  the  faid 
Five  Pounds  Affeffment. 

80.  Copie  of  the  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council,  to  the  High  Sheriffe  of  the  County  of  Chelter, 
dated  the  firft  of  October,  :  636.  158. 

In  this  Letter  are  contained  the  Advices  and  Inftruc- 
tions,  which  he  was  prefentlie  to  communicate  with  the 
Head  Officer  of  the  Corporate  Townes,  in  that  County. 
The  County  Palatine  was  to  provide  one  Shipp  of  Three 
Hundred  Tonnes,  furnifhed  with  Men,  Tackle,  Munition, 
Victuals,  See  the  charge  whereof  their  Lordlhips  con¬ 
ceived,  would  amount  to  3000  Pounds  ;  of  which  Sum 
they  thought  the  C.itty  of  Chelter  might  well  beare  260 
Pounds.  '1  hat  fuch  wealthy  Men  as  had  little  Land,  Ihould 
be  particularly  taxed  ;  in  order  to  eafe  fuch  as  having 
Lands,  were  of  weaker  Eftate.  Here  are  ample  Direc¬ 
tions,  how  to  make  the  Affeflment  eafy  &  equal  to  all  : 
but  then,  if  any  Ihould  refufe  or  neglect  to  make  pay¬ 
ment  :  the  Kings  Writ,  fent  with  thefe  Inftrudtions, 
was  to  be  executed  upon  him.  That  it  was  to  be  perti- 
cularly  expreffed  how  much  euerie  Clargie-Manis  rated 
at,  for  hie  meere  Ecclefiaftical  Poffeffions  ;  and  what 
for  his  temporall  &  perfonall  Eftate.  That  forafinuch 
as  the  Privileges  of  the  Clergie  were  not  certainly  decla¬ 
red  ;  his  Majeftie  is  pleafed,  that  for  the  prefent,  they 
fhould  be  taxed,  Sc  make  payment,  as  his  other  Subjetts  : 
but  then,  a  due  Refpe&e  mull  be  borne  both  to  their 
Perfons  &  Caltinge,  not  fufferinge  any  Inequallities  or 
PrelTures  to  be  putt  vpon  them.  His  Majeftie  refolving 
that  thefe  Affeffments  k  Proceedings  lhallnot  be  prejudi- 
ciall,  in  the  future,  to  them,  or  to  any  of  their  Rights  & 
Priviledges,  which  vpon  further  Search,  lhall  be  found 
due  vnto  them.  Here  are  alfo,  other  plain  Inftruclions 
for  the  leauying  the  Money  ;  and  divers  Cafes  which  had 
happened  in  the  former  Years,  to  the  hindrance  of  the 
Service,  are  here  fpecified  &  obviated. 

81.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter 


Nurn.  2093. 

to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  ;  .  .  .  Deck  163d. 

169. 

Complaining  of  Sir  William  Brereton,  who  pro¬ 
tected  his  Tenant  in  his  difobedience  to  the  Kings  Pro*, 
clamation,  by  refufing  to  contribute  toward  the  public 
Watches  j  and  further,  becaufe  Sir  William  had  refufed 
to  paie  his  Affeffment  for  the  late  Shipp-moncy  (although 
he  was  rated  very  low)  by  reafon  whereof  diverfe  others 
who  have  promiled  payment,  are  vnwillinge  to  give  any 
Satisfaction,  vntill  Courfe  be  taken  with  Sir  William. 

82.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  Thomas  Delves  the 
Sheriffe  &  many  of  the  Juftices  of  the  Peace  of  the 
County-Palatine  of  Chefter,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Council:  da:ed,  28  December,  1636.  162. 

Complaining,  that  Sir  Thomas  Alton  beinge  af- 
fefsM  by  the  Countie  toward  the  prefent  Service  of 
Shippeinge  for  his  Farme  of  the  import  of  French 
Wynes  brought  into  the  Countie  &  Port  of  Chefter,  &c. 
and  having  paid  accordingly  :  the  Citizens  of  Chefter 
doe  pretend  to  aferibe  &  draw  to  themfelves  the  eafe  & 
benefitt  of  this  Affeffment,  intending  againe  to  taxe  him 
in  the  Summe  of  Fine  Pounds,  in  affront  for  the  Seruice 
hee  did  when  he  was  Sheriffe,  and  by  way  of  quittance 
with  the  Countrey,  who  would  not  fuller  them  to  dif- 
charge  their  Lands  in  the  County.  Thefe  Gentlemen  do 
therefore  allure  themfelues  that  their  Lordlhips  would 
not  haue  his  Majefties  Seruice  diftuibed  with  fuch  dif¬ 
ferences,  nor  the  Countrey  difeontented  by  fuch  an 
injury,  who  doe  already  conceiue  themlelues  ouercharged, 
in  refpeft  of  their  Neighbour-Counties. 

8  3.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  K.  Charles  1.  to  Sir  John 
Bramfton  Chief  Juftice  of  the  Kings  Bench,  and  all  the 
other  Judges  :  given,  2  of  February,  1636.  172. 

Setting  forth  the  Reafons  inducing  him  to  haue  a 
Royal  Navie  provided,  of  force  Sc  power  fufficient  to 
protect  and  defend  this  Realme.  Aud  that  for  prevent¬ 
ing  of  Errors  he  hau  thought  fit  to  have  their  Advife  as 
to  the  Queftion  inclofed.  The  Sum  of  the  Queflion  was 
whether  he  was  not  the  foie  Judge  of  any  Danger  inv- 
pending  upon  this  Realm,  and  of  the  Means  of  pre¬ 
venting  it :  and  whether  he  could  not  command  all  his 
Subjects  to  contribute  toward  their  common  Defence,  by 
writt  under  the  Great  Seale. 

84.  The  faid  judges  anfweare  y  being  in  the  Affirma¬ 
tive.  dated,  7  February  1636.  172.  b. 

85.  Authentic  Copie  of  an  Order  of  the  Lords  of  the 

Privy  Council :  dated,  17  February  1636.  106. 

Here,  his  Majeftie  being  prefent,  it  was  ordered, 
upon  the  Petition  of  Sir  Thomas  Alton,  &  the  Certificate 
of  the  High  Sheriffe  of  Chefliire,  that  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  Sir  Thomas  Sc  the  City  ol  Chefter  Ihould  be  heard 
at  the  board,  the  7th  of  May  next :  and  in  the  mean  while, 
the  Cities  Affeffment  upon  thcPetitioner,  to  be  fufpended. 

86.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  Thomas  Delves  Sheriffe 
of  Chelliire,  to  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  6  March  1 636.  108- 

Concerning  the  Notice  he  had  given  to  the  Cittie  of 
the  Order  abovementioned  :  and  that  there  were  yet 
other  differences  betwixt  the  County  Sc  the  Cittye :  viz, 
about  the  Cities  clayme  of  Glouers  ftonne,  being  ex¬ 
empted  in  the  Citties  Charter  ;  their  buyeinge  of  the 
old  Shirehall,  which  they  had  made  a  Common  Flail 
of.  Their  Affeffment  of  the  Lord  Bulhopp  of  Chefter  ; 
befides  the  particular  Greeuance  of  Sir  William  Bre¬ 
reton.  That  lor  the  Glouers  Stone,  Sir  Thomas  Afton, 
&  the  Clergie,  he  would  feeke  to  protect  them ;  and 
therefore  defires  for  the  affelfing  of  the  Clergie  they 
would  pleafe  to  forbeare :  otherwife  he  mull  complayne 
of  the  Countreys  wronge,  as  likewile  of  the  Clergies 
fuiferings. 

87.  Original  Letter  from  Sir  Thomas  Delves,  to  Mr. 

Recorder  Whitby,  dated  6  March,  1636.  173. 

Flere  he  enlarges  upon  the  particular  matters  by 
him  fpecified  in  his  Letter  to  the  Maior  ;  withall 
giving  his  Reafons  for  the  Counties  Cl^im  to  the 

Glouers 


Bibliothecas  Harleiance. 


471 


Num.  2093. 

Glouers  ftone,  &  to  the  old  Shire-hall  :  with  a  defire  that 
Peace  might  be  between  the  Countie  &  the  City ;  and 
alfo  between  Sir  William  Brereton  &  them. 

88.  Draught  of  an  Anfwer  frotn  Mr.  William  Edwards 
Maior  of  Chefter  to  Sir  Thomas  Delves  High  Sherifl'e 
of  the  County  of  Chelhire  :  dated,  9  March  1636.  167. 

Importing,  that  the  Citty  knew  noe  difference  betwixt 
the  County  &  them.  1’hat  as  to  Sir  Thomas  Alftoh  his 
Oppofition  to  their  Affeffment,  drew  the  Queftion  to  the 
Privy  Council-board  ;  where,  after  many  hearings,  it  was 
ordered  (his  Majeftye  then  fittinge  in  Counfell)  that  hee 
ought  to  paie  the  laid  Affeffment,  and  did  pay  the  fame 
accordinglie  :  which  the  City  had  reafon  to  thinke  had 
made  a  final  Determination.  That  for  the  Affeffement 
of  the  Inhabitants  at  &  about  Glouers  Stonne  :  they  for¬ 
merly  paid  Subfidies  with  the  Cittie,  contributed  to  the 
Royall  Loane,  and  were  affeffed  vpon  the  two  firft 
Wrytts  for  the  Shipp-moneye,  &  paid  accordingly  ;  and 
are  now  againe  by  them  affeffed  vpon  the  laft  Wrytt. 
But  thefe  being  priuate  &  particuler  Mens  Cafes,  one  of 
Sir  Thomas  Alton,  who  is  little  Relident  ill  the  County  ; 
the  other  of  Sir  Gilbert  Ireland  &  his  fucceffours,  who 
are  Inhabitants  in  another  Countye  ;  they  knowe  not 
how  they  fhould  be  made  Caufes  concerneinge  the  Coun¬ 
tye,  being  not  before  fo  taken  by  any  former  High- 
Sheriffe.  As  for  their  Affeffment  of  the  Clergy,  they 
conceive  they  were  dire&ed  fo  to  do,  and  did  fo,  &  haue 
leuyed  the  Money,  and  will  be  accomptable  to  the  Lords 
for  their  Doeinges.  As  for  Sir  William  Brereton,  they 
finde  him,  in  his  Difpofition,  inclyned  to  Suits  again!!: 
them.  As  for  Peace,  they  defire  it  with  all  men  :  and 
if  he  (Sir  Thomas)  can  take  courfe  to  fettle  thefe  matters 
in  the  fame  ftate  wherein  he  found  them  :  they  fhall  rea¬ 
dily  giue  way  to  any  fittinge  Courfe  for  accommodation. 

89.  Mr.  Recorder  Whilbies  firlt  Draught  of  an  An¬ 
fwer  to  Sir  Thomas  Delves’s  Letter.  1 64. 

Herein  he  defends  the  Citties  Right  as  to  the  mat¬ 
ters  of  the  Glovers  Stone,  &  the  old  Shire-hall. 

90.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  fecond  Draught  of  an 

Anfwer  to  the  fame  Letter,  dat  10  March  1636.  166. 

Here,  thofe  two  matters  are  omitted. 

91.  A  Note  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbie’s  hand,  Ihewing 

when  the  3  Writts  for  Ship-money  came  out;  the  Sums 
charged  upon  the  County  of  Chefter  ;  &  upon  the  City 
&  Liberties  thereof.  And  that  by  the  third  Writ,  the 
County  was  not  charged  fo  high  by  £460.  as  it  was  by 
the  fecond.  101.  b. 

92.  Authentic  Order  of  the  Privy  Council,  made,  (his 

Majeftie  being  prefent)  1 4  May,  1637.  >  4  9. 

Here  Sir  Thomas  Afton’s  Cafe  (who  was  affeffed  ~by 
the  High-Sheriffe,  for  his  Farme  at  £.16.  13.  4.  and 
by  the  City  of  Chefter,  for  the  fame  Farme,  at  £3.  6.  8. 
being  taken  into  confederation  :  vpon  a  full  hearing  or 
Councell  on  both  fides,  &  ferious  Debate,  &  confidera¬ 
tion,  it  was  ordered,  that  in  regard  the  Cuftome-houfe 
is  feituate  within  the  Liberty  of  the  faid  Cittie,  Sir  Tho¬ 
mas  fhould  forthwith  pay  the  £•$.  6.  8.  vnto  the 
Maior  of  the  fame.  And  that  the  High  Sheriffe  of  the 
County  do  take  off  from  him  the  £6.  13.  4.  and  lay 
it  elfewhere.  And  that  henceforth,  Sir  Thomas  &  his 
Succeffors,  Farmers  in  that  Port,  fhall  always  be  affeffed, 
and  pay,  in  that  Cittie. 

93.  A  Copie  of  the  preceding  Order  of  Council.  1 13. 

94.  Copie  of  a  Letter  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Coun¬ 

cil,  fubferibed  by  many  of  the  beft  Gentry  of  the  County, 
againft  the  City  of  Chefter.  !  1  y. 

Here  they  complain  very  heavily  of  the  Counties 
being  injured  by  the  Incroachment  of  the  Citizens  vpon 
their  Rights,  in  the  Cafes  of  the  Bilhop  of  Chefter,  who 
being  affeffed  by  a  Committee  of  the  Clergie,  in  the 
Countie  ;  and  alfo  in  Lancalhire,  where  he  relided  :  was 
neverthelefs  rated  by  the  City  at  20  Nobles,  where  all  he 
received  was  but  40  Shillings  per  annum,  which  (becaufe 
the  Bilhop  had  paid,  with  Tome  Addition)  thefe  Citizens 


Num.  2093. 

would  make  a  Prefident  of.  In  the  bufinefs  of  the  Glo- 
Vers-ftone ;  though  they  allow  the  Inhabitants  to  pay 
with  the  C.itizens  the  Church-duties,  Poors  Rate,  and 
other  Layes  which  concerne  net  the  Countrey  ;  yet  they 
infift  upon  their  holding  one  of  their  Quarter  Seftions 
there,  which  if  it  be  part  of  the  County  of  the  City,  many 
of  their  A£ts  were  void,  as  being  done  extra  Ccmitatum. 
But  they  were  informed,  that  in  a  Cafe  of  like  nature, 
concerning  part  of  the  Countie,  within  the  Cittie  of 
Winchefter  :  their  Lordfhips  exprefsly  ordered  the  Inha¬ 
bitants  to  pay  with  the  Countie,  &  not  with  the  Cittie. 
That  as  to  Sir  dhomas  Alton,  his  Cafe  was  peculiar  ;  noe 
other  Farmer  of  his  Majefties  Cuftomes,  in  any  Port  of 
England,  being  affeff'd  but  only  where  they  live.  There¬ 
fore  they  conceive  this  to  be  done  in  Spleene  &  Affront, 
for  his  Service  done  when  he  was  Sheriffe,  and  by  way  of 
quittance  with  the  Countrey,  becaufe  their  Lands  were 
not  excufed.  With  further  Infinuations  on  then.'  own 
behalf,  and  againft  the  Citizens. 

95.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Letter.  96. 

96.  Copie  of  an  Older  of  the  Privy  Council,  made, 

(the  King  being  prefent)  29  October,  1637.  1 15. 

,  _  I  h‘s  Is  upon  Reading  the  Letter  abovementioned 
appointing  a  Copie  thereof  to  be  delivered  to  fome  of  the 
cheefe  Magiftrates  of  Cheffer  ;  and  refolving  to  giue  a 
Hcariug  to  both  Parties,  by  their  Councell,  the  4th  of  Fe¬ 
bruary  next,  failing  thofe  Poynts  as  haue  bin  already  fe- 
tled,  vpon  full  Hearing  of  both  fides. 

97.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Order.  94. 

98.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Delues,  to  the 

Maior  &  Aldermen  of  Chefter;  dated,  21  December 
l637-  98.’ 

.  Herewith,  he  fent  the  Copie  of  the  Gentries  Letter 
againft  them,  and  the  Order  of  Council  laft  abovemen¬ 
tioned. 

99.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Maior  &  Aldermen  of 

Chefter  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  :  dated  the 
13th  Day  of  Januarye,  1637.  ’ 

Shewing,  that  their  Lord Ihips  having  twice  ordered 
(his  Majefty  fitting  in  Counfell  both  tymes)  that  Sir 
Thomas  Alton  fhould  pay  with  the  Citty  :  They  cold  not 
expett  that  hee,  or  any  other,  wold  haue  taken  that 
boldneffe  to  haue  certified  their  Honors,  that  they  (till 
doe  conceiue  he  ought  not  to  pay  with  the  Citty.  For 
the  other  two  matters  complayned  of,  they  conceiue  they 
were  but  added  to  accompany  Sir  Thomas’s  Complaint; 
who  not  only  drew  the  Letter,  but  alfo  by  himfelfe  & 
fervants  laboured  &  folicited  for  Hands  vnto  it.  Wherein 
for  what  concemes  the  Glouers  ftone.  They  deny  it  to 
be  excepted  out  of  their  Charter  ;  or  that  any  Quarter- 
Seffions  of  the  County  are  holden  there.  That  the  Inha¬ 
bitants  there  doe  pay  Church-Dutyes,  Releefe  for  the 
Poore,  &  other  I.ayes  with  the  City  ;  and  have  hereto¬ 
fore  likewife  payd  with  the  Citty  Subfidies,  the  Roiall 
Loane,  &  Shipp-money  vpon  the  two  firft  Writts;  vntill 
about  the  time  Sir  Thomas  raifed  the  Queftion  concern¬ 
ing  himfelfe,  the  Difference  was  likewife  raifed  concerning 
the  Glouers  Stone,  whofe  Inhabitants  were  affeffed  by  the 
Sheriffe,  att  no  more  than  1 5s.  2d.  That  as  to  the  Bifhop 
of  Chefter,  they  had  proceeded  refpeCtfully  towards  him 
and  according  to  the  Power  given  them,  they  had  affeffed 
Him,  upon  the  two  former  Writts,  &  he  had  paid  both 
the  Afleffments ;  and  have  now  affeffed  his  Lordlhip 
upon  the  laft  Writ,  as  they  conceiue  they  may  lawfully 
doe;  haueing  made  noe  Complaint  againft  him,  nor 
knowing  of  any  he  had  made  againft  them.  As  for  the 
Spleen  &  Affront  to  Sir  Thomas;  the  Injuries,  Incroach- 
ments,  &  Abufes  to  the  Countrey,  &  Differvice  to  his 
Majefty,  they  deny  all  ;  and  fhew  that  Sir  Thomas’s 
Good  Services  were  nothing  worth  :  that  when  he  was 
firft  affeffed  in  the  Citty,  he  made  the  Cafe  for  Himfelfe, 
and  all  his  Majefties  Farmers  of  England ;  and  being 
ouer-ruled  therein,  he  raifes  the  Queftion,  that  he  ought 
to  pay  with  the  Countrey  &  not  with  the  City  ;  whereby 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


47z 


Num.  2093. 

he  putt  them  to  great  Charge  &  Trouble,  which  he  ought 
to  reimburfe.  And  they  pray  that  they  may  execute  the 
Writt  vpon  him  for  his  Afie  Ament,  he  hauing  noe  Caufe 
of  Complaint  at  'eingaflefled  Five  Pounds  forthat,  which 
he  hath  long  clearly  gaytied  /Tooo  q-*  annum  by  ;  and 
for  the  prefent  ycare,  will  gaine  £  1 500  aboue  hisMajefties 
Rent.  Laftly,  they  humbly  pray  to  be  difcharged  of 
Attendance  att  the  Board,  vntill  their  Lordfhips  {hall  be 
certified  what  the  Earle  of  Derbie  and  the  Judges  fhall 
doe  (at  the  Affixes)  vppon  their  Lordfliipps  former  Re¬ 
ference  of  thefe  matters  to  them. 

100.  Copie  of  an  Order  of  the  Privy  Council,  made, 

(his  Majeftie  being  prefent)  27  May  1638.  123. 

Here,  when  the  Gentries  Petition  or  Certificate 
again  ft  the  City  was  taken  into  Confideration,  &  the 
frclh  matters  heard  on  both  fides  :  they  came  to  that 
part  relating  to  Sir  Thomas  Afton  ;  whofe  caufe  having 
been  twice  before  heard  at  that  Board  &  determined, 
his  Majeltie  being  both  Tymes  prefent :  It  was  more 
exprefsly  ordered  by  his  Majeftie  and  their  Lordfhips, 
that  the  laid  Sir  Thomas  Afton  fhal  be  required  to  obferue 
the  faid  former  Orders  in  that  behalf,  and  that  he  fhall 
not  henceforth  prefume  to  trouble  his  Majeftie  or  the 
Board  any  more  with  the  faid  Bufinefs  or  Difference*  : 
and  hereof  the  faid  Sir  Thomas  to  take  Notice,  and  to 
Conforme  himfelf  accordingly. 

1 01.  Sir  Thomas  Altons  Anfwere  to  Mr.  Richard 

Litler  Clerke  of  the  Penrice,  vppon  the  Demand  of  the 
20  Nobles  afiefied  vppon  him  for  Ship  moneys,  within 
the  Citiy  of  Chefter  (Written  by  Mr.  Litler)  4  Junij 
1638.  119. 

That  the  Lords  having  order’d  him  the  Money 
back,  which  he  had  payed  to  the  County  ;  he  hoped  he 
Ihould  not  pay  this,  before  he  receiued  that.  And  like- 
wife  hoped  it  was  not  the  Lords  Meaning-  that  he  fhould 
pay  it  to  the  City  there  ;  but  here  (in  the  County)  where 
he  was  afleffed.  And  if  his  Anfweare  liked  11s  (the 
City)  not,  We  (the  City)  might  take  the  Benefitt  of 
the  Writt,  or  what  other  courl'e  we  thought  fitt :  for  he 
was  a  Subject. 

ro2.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Afton  to  Mr. 
Litler;  dated,  4  June  1638.  121. 

Giving  his  Anfwer  in  Writing  to  the  Meflage  or 
Demand  abovementioned ;  the  Subftance  of  it  being 
that  he  does  not  difobey  the  Orders  of  the  Privy 
Council,  but  (as  farr  as  in  him  lyes,  hath  conformed 
himfelfe  to  them  ;  as  he  fhall  make  manifeft  to  their 
Lordfhips,  if  they  pleafe  to  call  him  to  any  further 
Anfweare.  As  to  the  Five  Markes  impofed  vpon  him 
by  the  Mayor  of  Chefter  -r  He  fays  he  will  not  oppofe 
any  power  given  Mr.  Mayor  by  the  Writt:  but  wifhes 
he  may  take  Satisfaction  at  Chefter,  according  to  the 
Diredtion  of  that  W ritt. 

103.  Authentic  Order  of  Council,  made,  (his  Ma- 

jefty  being  prefent)  15  July  1638.  141. 

Upon  the  Petition  of  the  Mayor  Sc  Citizens  of 
Chefter,  fhewing  that  Sir  Thomas  Afton  hath  not 
hitherto  payed  the  feverall  Afrdfments  for  Shippe-money 
charged  vpon  him,  notwithftanding  that  the  fame  hath 
bene  feverall  times  demaunded,  according  to  three 
feverall  Orders  formerly  made  :  his  Majefty  &  the  Board 
having  coniidered  of  the  faid  Complaint,  do  ftraightly 
charge  Sc  require  the  faid  Sir  Thomas,  forthwith  to  pay 
to  the  Mayor  of  Chefter  the  faid  AfleiTments,  without 
further  Delay,  as  he  will  aunfwere  the  contrary  at  his 
perill. 

104.  C.opie  of  Mr.  Recorder  of  Chefter’s  Letter  to 

M1.  Bavand,  fans  date;  concerning  a  Letter  of  Attorney 
to  be  fent  by  the  City,  empowering  him  &  Mr  Walker 
to  receive  Sir  Thomas  Alton's  Shipp-money,  with  Di¬ 
rections  how  to  make  the  previous  Demand  upon  Sir 
Thomas  (fince  Mr.  Litler  had  made  fome  blunder  in  the 
bufinefs)  and  how  to  ufe  the  faid  Letter,  in  cafe  of  Sir 
Thomas’s  Refufal.  5  *  111. 


Num.  2093. 

105.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Afton,  to  M  „• 

Walker,  fans  date.  i  2 5. 

He  is  lorry  to  have  been  abfent,  when  Mr.  Walker 
came  to  Ihew  him  the  Lords  laft  Order  for  his  Payment 
of  the  Money.  But  hauing  fecne  a  Coppy  of  the  Cittyes 
Petition,  wheervpon  it  is  grounded  (which  he  finds  fuita- 
ble  to  the  reft  of  theyr  allegations  agaynft  him,  maliti- 
ous  &  untrue)  and  knowing  that  the  Kings  Seruice  is 
not  concerned,  (his  Money  being  all  payd)  he  has  not 
oppos’d  the  three  Orders,  as  is  fifffely  luggefted.  Nor 
does  he  deny  the  legal  Power  of  his  Majefties  Writt,  but 
wifh’d  M  .  Mayor  to  take  fatisfaction  at  Chefter.  And 
hauing  already  finished  the  Writt  by  paying  a  greater 
Proportion  in  another  place,  which  cannot  be  repayd: 
he  mull,  in  this  Cafe  putt  him  felfe  vpon  the  Juftice  of 
the  Board,  &  humbly  reftr  him  ielfe  to  theyr  Lordihips 
Cenfure. 

106.  An  open  Note,  without  date,  written  by  Sir 

Thomas  Afton  to  M‘.  Walker :  defiring  him  to  lcaue  a 
Noate  of  the  Date  of  his  Letter  of  Atturney,  and  the 
times  of  the  two  AfleiTments,  as  exprefled  in  the  fame  ; 
that  lie  might  drawe  an  Acquittance  accordingly  ;  and 
the  whole  Money  Ihould  be  paid.  12  5.  A. 

107.  Sir  Thomas  Aftons  Draught  of  the  Acquittance 

above-mentioned,  dated  6  Auguft  1638.  152. 

By  the  payment  of  this  Money,  amounting  to  no 
more  than  ^8:  6:  8.  I  fuppole  an  end  was  putt  to 
this  tedious  &  caltLy  difference  ;  concerning  which,  there 
being  no  more  Papers  in  the  prefent  Book  :  I  fhall  pro¬ 
ceed  to  deferibe  what  remains,  in  the  order  as  they 
fucceed  one  another.  Thus,  the  Firlt  which  occurs*, 
is 

108.  Original  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council,  to  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  dated,  28  Febr. 

16241  ...  177‘ 

Requiring  Prouifion  to  be  made  of  twoe  Barques 
for  the  tranfportation  of  Ten  Cart-loads  of  Armesy 
&  Apparell  for  550  Men  (in  the  fame  manner  as  is. 
to  be  done  at  Leverpoole)  to  the  Ports  of  Dublin  & 
Knockfergus  in  Ireland,  before  the  20th  of  Marche, 
next,  being  the  day  of  the  Souldiers  Rendezvous. 

109.  Original  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council,  to  the  Mayor  of  Chefter,  dated  18  Febr- 

1624.  .  179. 

Requiring  the  City  to  provide  Shipps  &  Victualls 
fufficient  for  the  Tranfportation  of  550  Souldiers  into  Ire¬ 
land,  by  the  20th  of  Maiche,  at  the  rate  of  2s.  6d.  a 
Man  for  Tranfportation,  &  2 s.  6d.  for  Vittualls  :  and  in 
Cafe  of  unforefeen  Delay,  to  victual  them  at  8 d.  a  Man 
per  diem,  dureing  their  abode.  They  were  alfo  to  pro¬ 
vide  Barques  at  prices  reafonable,  for  the  Armes  &  Ap¬ 
parell,  mentioned  in  the  laft  Letter  :  and  to  certifie  the 
whole  Charge  to  the  Councell  of  Warr,  in  Order  to  be 
repaid  by  the  Trealurers  of  the  Subfedie  Moneys. 

1  10.  Petition  of  the  City  of  Chefter,  to  the  King,  in 
behalf  of  Richard  Drihurit  Inn-holder,  &  one  of  their 
Common  Council,  who  had  fuffered  a  great  Lofs  by  Fire 
to  the  Value  of  £200.  and  to  the  utter  undoing  of  him- 
felf  &  familie  :  praying  his  Highuefs  of  his  fpeciall  Grace 
&  Royall  Companion,  to  graunt  his  molt  Charitable  & 
Fauourable  Letters  Patents  for  the  Repayer  of  the  faid 
poore  Mans  Lofle.  181- 

hi.  Certain  Original  Examinations,  taken  before  the 
Maior  See.  of  Chefter,  30  July  1625.  concerning  Mrs. 
Townfend  Ryxton,  who  died  at  Lichfield  in  her  Return 
home  from  London  ;  and  was  fuppofed  to  have  received 
fome  Abufe  or  Violence  from  a  Carrier,  in  the  way. 

183. 

1 1 2.  The  whole  State  &  Proceeding  of  the  Caufe  con- 
cerninge  the  Survey  of  Hanbridge,  anno  22  R.  Jac.  1. 

190. 

This  is  chiefly  with  regard  to  Margaret  Browne, 
who  fought  to  oult  Mr.  Francis  Gamul  (then  the  Kings 
Ward)  out  of  his  Eftate  in  Hanbridge. 

xi  3.  Mr. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae 


Num.  2093. 

113.  Mr:  Recorder  Whitbies  Breife,  in  the  fame 

Caufe.  192. 

1 1 4.  Les  Grounds  de  mon  (Mr.  Recorder  Whitby) 

Refponfe,  fur  queux  ieo  refufe  dcllre  Examine  al  Cotn- 
miflion  de  Sieur  Noye.  1 94. 

1 1  5.  Inftru&ions  for  a  Motion  for  Edward  Whitby 
Efq;  in  Camera  Scaccarij,  25  Novemb.  ann.  2  Caroli. 

195- 

Here  the  Attorney  General  profecuted  by  Infor¬ 
mation.  The  Suit  being  fet  on  foot  by  Gabriel  Marihe 
Efq;  who  fought  to  take  a  Leas  of  the  Lands  at  Han- 
bridge  of  the  King,  ouer  M'. Francis  Gamut’s  head; 
and  alfo  claimed  his  Lands  of  Inheritance  there.  Mr. 
Recorder  therefore  moved,  that  the  faid  Ward  might 
be  made  party  to  this  Suite,  to  maintaine  his  owne  Right 
&  Inheritance. 

1 16.  Notes  conccminge  the  Tender  of  Hanbridge- 

Rent ;  and  the  Paflages  at  the  Execution  of  the  Com- 
iniflion  of  Survay,  fitten  at  the  Common  Hall  of  the 
Citty  of  Chefter,  13  Qftober  1624.  197. 

Here  M'.  William  Holland  one  of  the  Commilfion- 
crs,  was  very  hott  againft  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby. 

1 1 7.  Notes  relating  to  Mr.  Piankey’s  LeafeofPIan- 

bridge,  from  the  Crown  ;  &  other  matters.  200. 

1 18.  Particulars  of  Marfhes  Claim  ;  by  Mr.  Recorder 
Whitby. 

119.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  to 

Sir  Thomas  Savage  Knight  Sc  Baronet,  dat.  18  Nov. 
1624  202. 

Shewing  that  vppon  late  misinformations  to  Sir 
Richard  Wefton  C.hancellour  of  th’Exchequer,  two 
feuc-rall  Commillions  haue  beene  diredted  to  S'  Randall 
Mainw'aringe,  See.  whereby  younge  Mr.  Gamull  hath  not 
onlie  beene  fought  to  be  impeached  in  his  Inheritance  ; 
but  alfoe  traducements  to  bee  lavd  on  his  Father  & 
Grandfather.  Yet  the  Yflue  in  both  fuch,  as  the  Profe- 
cutor  hath  fought  to  fupprelTe,  and  flay  the  givinge  vppe 
of  anie  Verdicts.  The  lirlt  Stirrer,  was  Widdow  (Mar¬ 
garet)  Browne  (a  revoultinge  Tennant)  now  feconded 
by  William  Orton  another  of  the  Tenants.  He  there¬ 
fore  defires  Sir  Thomas’s  lawfull  Favour  &  Aftiftance,  as 
the  Cafe  (hall  require.  She  and  her  Comrade  being  both 
gone  to  London,  to  rayfe  forne  Courfe  for  a  third  Pur- 
fuite  in  this  bufmefle. 

1 20.  Articles  whereupon  feme  of  the  Commiflioners 

do  examine  Witneffes.  203. 

1 2 1.  Articles  concluded  vpon  the  6th  of  May  1584. 

betwene  Mr.  Robert  Brerwood  Maior  of  Chefter,  Sc  his 
Brethren;  Sc  Allen  Waymale  Mafon :  concerning  an 
Houfe  of  Stone  to  be  made,  by  him.  205. 

This  Houfe  of  Stone  was  the  Iloufe  or  Conduit, 
fett  up  at  the  High  C.rofs. 

122.  A  Nott  of  Agrcment  with  Jhon  Sonderfon,  17 

Julye  1584.  207. 

This  is  for  making  Water-works  at  Boughton. 

123.  Articles  concluded  5c  agreed  vpon  the  nth  of 

January,  anno  1 5  Eliz.  betwene  Richard  Dutton  Efq  ; 
Maior  of  Chefter,  Sc  his  Brethren  ;  and  Peter  Morice  ; 
for  the  ereftion  of  a  Condift,  to  ferue  the  faid  Citie 
W'iih  Water  continually,  forever.  209  b. 

1 24.  Another  Copie  of  the  fame  Articles.  2 1 1. 

125.  Accompts  of  Moneys  expended  by  the  City,  in 

building  the  Conduift  abovementioned.  2 1 4. 

126.  Original  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council  to  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  dat.  9  April 
1590 .  _  221. 

This  relates  to  the  Cities  providing  for  the  Tranf- 
porting  1 00  Men,  (to  be  raifed  by  the  Earl  of  Pem¬ 
broke)  into  Ireland,  to  be  employ'd  in  the  Service  there. 

127.  Enformations  prefentede  to  the  Queues  Ma- 

iefties  Counlaill  in  the  Marches  of  Wales,  on  her  Eigh¬ 
ts  behalf,  againll  Rob.  Harvye,  John  Barton,  Sc  Will. 
Snrthe,  three  of  the  Occupation  of  Glovers  of  Chefter, 
ip  Novr  1563.  223- 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2093. 

This  Complaint  was  occafioned  by  certain  uproars 
made  by  the  Glovers,  &c.  (by  the  encouragement  of 
Mr.  William  Alderfey  againft  the  Magiftrates,  at  their 
Ele£tion  of  a  New  Mayor,  in  the  room  of  Mr.  Randulph 
Bamville. 

128.  Petition  of  certain  Citizens  of  Chefter,  who  had 

Subfcribed  a  Certificate  in  the  behalf  of  Mr.Glafeor 
(with  whom  the  City  was  in  Suit)  againft  the  Magiftrates: 
acknowledging  their  fault  Sc  offence,  worthely  deferving 
Disfranchiiement :  and  fuhmitting  themfelves  to  any  Fine 
or  Imprifonment,  provided  they  were  not  disfran- 
chifed.  225. 

129.  Draught  of  Inftru&ions  for  a  Motion  (in  the 
Profccution  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  5c  Mr.  Francis 
Gamull  his  Son  in  Law,  about  the  Lands  at  llanbridge) 

1.  That  the  Attorney  Generals  Information  may  be 
amended :  2.  That  the  Evidences  may  not  be  brought 
in.  227. 

130.  Directions  to  the  Auditor,  conccrningc  the  Al¬ 

lowance  of  £3:  10:  4.  vpon  payment  of  Iiandbridge- 
Rent,  by  the  liiid  Mr.  Gamull.  dal.  3  October, 
1624.  228. 

131.  Exemplar  authenticum  Tnquifitionis  captce  apud 

Ceftriam  21  die  Januarij,  anno  R.  Jacobi  20;  ubi  Jura* 
tores  prefentant,  quod  Willelmus  Edwards  In.- monger, 
forftallavit  Sc  ingrolfavit  magnam  quantitatem  Grani, 
Anglicea  great  quantetye  of  Come,  in  Maltinge  .  quod 
quidem  Granum  perveniflet  ad  Mercatum  Civitatis 
Ceftrie,  ft  idem  Willelmus  Edwards  idem  non  forllalla- 
vi't  &  ingrolfavit.  229. 

132.  Billa  pro  Willelmo  Edwards  Iremonger,  ver- 
fus  Dnm.  Regem  in  Traverf.  fuper  Indietamentum. 

133.  Original  Warrant  of  John  Alderfey  Maior  of 

Chefter,  given  6  January  160;.  to  Jelferay  Cooke  Wa- 
ter-bayliffe,  for  the  Apprehetifion  of  the  Maifters  or 
Owners  of  a  Sliippc  rydingc  at  Buricne-hcad  in  Wirr- 
all.  >  232. 

134.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Accompt  of  the  Re¬ 

ceipts  &  Dilburfeinents  of  the  Legacies  bequeathed  to 
the  City  of  Chefter,  Sec.  by  Mr.  John  Vernon  Merchant- 
Taylor  of  London.  233. 

13;.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Draught  of  an  Acquit¬ 
tance,  upon  Receipt  of  the  faid  Legacies.  234. 

136.  Finalis  Concordia  fatta  in  Curia  Cuftodum  Li- 

bertatum  Anglic  authoritate  Parliament!  Portmot.  Civita¬ 
tis  Ceftrie,  12  dieAugulli  A.  D.  1655,  inter  Robertum 
Whitbie  Armigerum  querentem,  Sc  Johannem  Hard¬ 
ware  Armigerum  dcforcientetn  ;  de  4  Meffuagijs,  &c. 
pro  quibus  idem  Robcrtus  dedit  £ 220.  235. 

137.  William  Ball’s  F’ropofitions ;  or  Propofals  for 

borrowing  .Rico,  or  120.  236. 

135.  Mr.  Recorder  W'hitbies  Mate  of  Mr.  Ball’s  Evi¬ 
dences  produced  upon  that  Occafion.  237. 

139.  Finalis  Concordia  fact.  in  Curia  Portmoti  Civi- 

talis  Ceftrie,  20  die  Marcij,  anno  6  R.  Jacobi  1.  inter 
Ricardian  Cnlvcley  Generofum,  querentem  ;  et  W illel- 
mum  Lyniallj  Tanncre  Sc  K;.  therm  am  U.voem  ejus,  de- 
forciemes  :  de  quatuor  Mefuagijs,  Sc c.  (Here  the  Sum 
given  is  omitted.)  239. 

140.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  Magiftrates  of 

Chefter,  to  , the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  dated  17 
March,  1594.  240. 

This  is  an  Anfwer  to  one  from  their  Lordfhips, 
whereby  they  were  required  to  make  an  Eftate  to  the 
Oueen  of  the  upper  part  of  their  Shambles  or  Market- 
houfe,  and  to  fend  up  accordingly  a  Deed  fuflicient  for 
that  purpofe.  They  anfwer,  that  her  Majefty  gave  them 
the  old  Shire-hall,  which  in  carrying  away,  letting  up 
again.  Sc  keeping  in  repair  had  colt  them  above  ico 
pounds.  That  the  upper  part  thereof  is  referved  as  a 
Garner  for  her  Majefties  ufe,  &  always  ftiall  be  fo  ;  and 
that  it  is  now  about  being  ufed  in  her  Service  :  aiid  there- 
6  E  fore, 


M 


47+ 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  2093,2094. 

fore,  they  defire  to  be  excufed  from  making  or  fending 
up  any  fuch  Deed. 

141'.  A  Lift  of  Leafeff  &  Fee-Farmer,  made  by  the 
City,  to  divers  perfons.  dat.  2  January,  1.573, 

243-  b- 

143.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Buckliurft,  to  Mr.  Bauand  IVIaior  of  Chelter.  dat.  13 
OCtob.  1601.  3^6. 

Herein,  His  Lordfhip  places  much  Confidence  in  Mr. 
Bavand,  having  had  Expcience  of  his  Abilities  before  j 
defires  him  to  impart  this  Letter  to  his  Succefibr, 
whom  his  Lordfhip  requires  to  ufe  his  Aififtance,  in  pro¬ 
viding  for  the  future  f  ranfportation  of  Men,  Victualls, 
Ammunition,  Stc.  into  Ireland  for  the  Queenes  Service 
there :  with  deliberation  about  the  Oates  &:  Iron  defircd 
by  Sir  Henry  Dockwra. 

1 43 •  Original  Certificate  of  R’icc  Prickard  Maior  of 
Tenby,  dated  28  January  1632.  248. 

Setting  forth,  that  William  Milborne  of  Chelter, 
being  by  reafon  ot  contrarie  Windes  &  fowle  Weather, 
forced  into  the  Bay  ot  Tenbie,  was  feen  by  fome  Ten- 
bte  men  then  in  a  Shalloppe,  to  be  in  diftrcfle  &  greate 
danger  :  by  whom  (upon  an  agreement  for  5  Pounds)  he 
was  brought  into  the  Key  of  Tenbie,  the  22  of  Decent 
berpaft.  1  hat  his  Veflell  was  a  French  Barque  from 
Burdeux,  laden  with  French  Wynes ;  but  being  con- 
1  framed  to  flay  there  by  contrarie  Windes  :  for  fatisfying 
the  faid  Shaloppes  Men,  and  for  the  fupplyinge  of  his 
other  necelfarie  wants,  was  driven  to  I'  ll  Half  a 
Tunne  of  White  Wyne,  being  Winde-bound  in  the  faid 
Key, 

.  Original  Petition,  of  Hugh  Dod,  an  old  Writer 
m  the  Court  of  Pentice  ;  to  Thomas  Lord  Viicount 
Savage.  Q 

.  Deli  ring  that  the  Book  he  had  drawn  up,  with  rela- 
tion  to  all  the  antiem  &  modern  Fees  demandable  in 
that  Court,  might  be  perufed  by  his  Lordfhip,  and 
Drought  into  Ufe.  And  further,  that  now  (in  the  Win¬ 
ter  of  his  Age)  he  might  be  admitted  into  fome  fetled 
/"»!re  °r™^i:nnent  111  ^lc  kid  Court,  namelie  to  the 
Oftice  of  Philozcr. 

1 45-  Nomina  omnium  qnr  ad  Franchefias  et  Liber¬ 
ia  Civitatis  Ceftne  admiili  et  jurati  fuerunt,  tempore 
rlennci  Hardware  Maioris  Civitatis  predi&e,  a  die  Ve- 
nens  proxime  poft  Feftum  Dionifij.  Martin's,  anno 
prime  Dne.  Regine  Elizabethe,  pro  vno  anno  integro 

p  ,4®-  2ri,Ri'lal  I-et,er  ’William  Ring,  to  (he 'third 
Randle  Holme,  dated,  39  December  j66S.  tloofc.) 

lliis  Ring,  or  King  (I  know  not  which)  feems+to 
f",1*":"1  ;°,thc  La»>  mil  to  be  willing  to  affiil 
honed  Randle  (who  was  angry  at  his  being  refufed  a 
Deputation  by  Norroy)  when  there  fltould  be  Occafion. 
2C9+. 

An  Heraldiol  Book  in  folio,  on  the  out-fide  (by  the 
.  Old  Randle  Holme)  entitled  “  Pedegrees.’’  In  the 
I  ricking  , ,  v.  nting  hereof,  the  Hands  of  fcveral  dif- 
. rrent  Perfons  do  appear.  Indeed,  it  feems  to  confill 

to AhA™ .  °f  '“k  ,PaPCTS  &  Fragments  putt  up 
to  Ihei  mthont  obfervmg  any  Order.  They  are  ? 

made  A  II  “s'™  °f  Mr'  Jofm  Lee-Wood, 

”„  A'  D-  i6,9-  -■  4-  6.  8.  to.  re.  ,4.  16.  l8,  2o; 

lyith  this,  difperfed  up  &  down,  I  find, 
e,  Defcent  ot  Hhakerley  alias  TildeOey  ;  with  the 
Mantes  o*  thofe  Families  whole  Amies  they  Q„ar. 

3.  Pedegrtemf  John  Lewys  ofGwerfyfc,  colled 
by  the  lecoiid  Randle  Holme,  A.  D.  ibij  r 

4-  Annas  Quartered  by  William  IJnyd,  fourth  fen  ro 
Jeuan i  IJoye  »  ale  ;  and  by  his  Wife  :  nicked  by  the 

rccond  Randle  Holme.  A.  D.  1649. 


Num.  2O94. 

J.  Pedegree  of  Lloyd  of  Yale,  made  at  the  death 
Of  yuan  Lloyd,  A.  D.  1637.  by  the  faid  Randle 
Holme.  ^  ^ 

6.  Pedegree  of  Edward  Lloyd,  who  died  A.  D.  1640. 

by  the  fame  Randle  Holme.  5.  g. 

7.  Pedegree  of  John  Gryffith  of  Lleyn  :  made  by  the 

lime,  A  D.  ,641.  8.  A.  b. 

.  eSrce  of  Robert  Davies  of  Gofana.  9.  A. 

This  is  followed  by  hafty  Tricks  of  the  Armes  & 
Ouarterings  of  Davies. 

9-  Pedegree  of  John  Wyn  a  Lawyer,  A.  D. 
l6-58*  .  „  11.  A.  b. 

i  n:s  Man  at  his  Wives  Funeral,  altered  his  Coat 
from  Maddoc  Ddw,  to  that  of  Edwyn. 

10.  Defcent  &  Armes  of  Trevor  ;  by  the  fecond 

Randle  Holme.  11.  A. 

11.  Pedegree  of  Robert  Wyn  of  Diffyn:  by  the 

fame-  12.  b. 

12.  Pedegree  of  Lumlcy  Williams  of  Cogh- Wil¬ 
liam.  ^ 

'3-  Pedegree  of  Sir  Gryffith  Williams,  Baronet, 
by  the  fame  Randle  Holme,  A.  D.  1658.  1-.  B. 

14-  The  Atchievenvcnt  of  the  Right  HonUe  the’ Lord 
Vifcoum  Bulkeley.  I5.  a. 

lhat  is,  the  Blazon  thereof  with  Gems  ;  he  being 
a  Nobleman.  Underneath,  are  two  waxen  Impreflions 
of  his  Seal  at  Armes,  with  his  Motto  about  them,  fome- 
what  like  a  Garter. 

'5*  Original  Letter  of  Owen  Smyth,  to  the  fecond 
Ran.  Holme,  dated,  27  Junij,  1652.  17.  a. 

Hits  was  upon  theDeceafe  of  Mr.  Juftice  Pry  therch, 
and  Ordering  fome  Efcocheons  for  the  Funerall  ;  and* 
v  uhall  giving  what  Light  he  could  into  the  Defcent : 
which  Mr.  Holme  rectified  in  fome  places. 

16.  I  edegree&  Armes  (with  above  140  Ouarterings) 

of  Henry  Grey  Earl  of  Stamford.  ~  1  9.  B. 

17.  Mr.  Wynne  of  Voelas  his  Atchievement  dif- 

plaied,  in  Blafon.  2Q 

i  S.  1  he  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Draught  of  a  Let¬ 
ter  to  Sir  George  Boothe  Bar1  dat.  3  Novr  1656.  20.  A. 

Sir  George  was  defirous  of  having  the  Hiftory  of 
hts  Jaimiy  drawn  up  from  antient  Evidences  &  othcr 
Muniments,  in  the  fame  manner  as  divers  noble  Ferfons 
have  caufed  theirs  to  be  done.  In  Order  to  this  he 
caufed  Mr.  Holme  to  make  what  Searches  he  could,  and 
to  collect  together  all  the  proper  materials  which  oc¬ 
curred.  Mr.  Holme  averrs,  that  by  the  great  Pains  he 
had  taken  in  this  tedious  bufmefs,  for  two  Years  together 
he  can  prove  Sir  George  to  be  defended  from  aboue  700 
great,  noble  &  auntient  Famelys,  in  England,  Scot¬ 
land,  Irland,  Spayne,  France,  &  other  places’  But, 
having  no  Learning,  he  was  not  able  to  digeft  his  Notes’ 
mto  proper  &  regular  Method  &  Style  ;  and  was  there! 
fore,  much  mere  bent  upon  receiving  his  Monev,  &. 
being  dilcharged. 

19.  Armes  Quartered  by  Sir  George  Booth:  many 

of  which  are  impugned  by  Mr.  Holme.  20.  3/ 

20.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  John  Salufbury,  to  the 

third  Randle  Holme  ;  dated  19  Febr.  167L  22.  A. 

.  Befpeaking  Efcocheons,  &c.  upon  tfie  Deceafe  of 
Sir  John  Wynnes  Lady.  As  to  the  Attchievement  to  be 
hung  outwardly  ;  the  Armes  &  Ouarterings  are  blafoned 
according  to  a  Chiinney-piece  in  the  Houfe  ;  which  I\Ir! 

Ho  me  was  punctually  to  follow. 

21.  Pedegree  of  Henry  de  Vere  Earl  of  Oxford  ;  & 

or  Sir  Horatio  Lord  Vere  of  Tilburv  ;  by  the  fecond 
Ran.  Holme.  *  23.  A. 

22.  Pedegree  of  William  Har.aier  of  Fenns,  Elquire  • 

made  A.  D.  1623.  24.  26.  2S.  3C/ 

23.  Intermixed  with  this,  I  find, 

24-  The  Names  of  many  Families  whole  Armes  mitrht 
be  Quartered  by  Vere.  '  24. 

25.  Aimes,  in  Blafon,  of  about  80  Families,  Quar¬ 
tered  1  y  sir  Horatio  Vere  Lord  Tilbury.  24.  A.  b. 

7  26.  Names 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


475 


Num.  2094. 

26.  Names  of  Families  whofe  Armes  are,  oi'  might 
be,  Quartered  by  Stanhope  Lari  of  Chefterfield.  24.  C. 

27.  Pedegree  of  Charles  Stanhope  Lord  Harrington  ; 

fett  down  A.  D.  1657.  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme.  25.  A. 

28.  Stanhope  Lord  Harrington  his  Quarterings,  by 

the  fame.  2 5.  B. 

29.  Armes  made,  by  the  London-Heralds,  for  the 

Lady  '  holmondeley,  who  was  Daughter  to  Stanhope 
Lord  of  Harrington  ;  and  impugned  by  the  fame  Mr. 
Holme.  2  3.  C. 

30.  Defcent  of  Dauenport  ofBlackhurft  &Ofwaldeftre, 
deduced  by  Mr.  Holme  from  many  heireffcs.  26.  A.  b. 

31.  Pedegree  St  Armes,  with  Quarterings,  of  the  Fa¬ 
mily  abovementioned  ;  by  the  fame.  26.  A.  2. 

32.  Pedegree  of  Egerion  of  E.  Wrinhill  &  Betley. 

26.  B. 

33.  Pedegree  of  Crew  by  the  third  Randle  Holme. 

27. 

34.  Defcent  of  Eva  Rally,  Wife  to  Edmund  Cl ippef- 

by  :  by  the  fame.  27.  b. 

35.  Deicent  of  Letice,  Wife  to  William  Clippefby  : 

by  the  fame.  it  id. 

36.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Alton,  to  the  fe¬ 

cond  Randle  Holme  ;  ah  ut  his  own  and  his  Ladies  Pe- 
degrees,  dated,  the  14  of  May  1639.  29.  A. 

37.  Some  old  Dd cents  or  Matches  of  Mainwaring. 

t'by  the  fame  Mr.  Holme.)  29.  C. 

38.  The  feucral  ways  that  the  Name  of  Mainwar- 

ring  is  found  to  be  written,  in  old  Evidences  ;  by  the 
fame.  29.  B. 

39.  Extract  from  the  Pedegree  of  Everard  Mainwar- 

ring  a  Doctor  of  Phyfic  in  Ireland  ;  made  by  the  fame. 
A.  D.  1634.  29.  A. 

40.  Pedegree  of  Edward  Leeche  Efq;  with  the  Armes; 

made  about  A.  D.  1628.  32.  34.  36.  &  38. 

Intermixed  with  this,  I  find, 

41.  Pedegree  of  Sir  Thomas  Midleton  of  Chirke ; 

A.  D.  1 667.  32.  A.  b. 

42.  Another,  with  Armes  haftily  tricked.  32.  B. 

43.  Pedegree  &  Armes  of  Sir  Roger  Moltyn  ;  by  the 

fecond  Randle  Holme.  34.  B. 

44.  Armes  of  Trevor  ;  with  one  Branch  of  the  De¬ 
fcent  ;  by  the  fame.  35.  A. 

45.  Sir  Roger  Mollyn  of  Mollyn’s  Quarterings  ;  bv 

the  fame.  35. A.  b. 

46.  I  art  of  an  Original  Letter  of  one  Tr  el  well,  de¬ 
firing  that  enquiry  might  be  made  of  the  Earl  of  Derby 
touching  the  Defcent  of  Walter  Stanley,  who  was  laid 
to  have  fled  away,  abought  kylinge  of  a  man.  3  .  A. 

47.  Defcent  of  Jane  Dutton,  Wife  to  William  Brere- 
ton  of  Afhley  ;  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme.  37.  A.  b. 

48.  Defcent  &  Armes  of  John  I  egh  Efq;  Sheriffe  of 

Chelhire,  A.  D.  1657  ;  by  the  fame.  37.  B. 

49.  Another  Pedegree  ot  Legh,  with  Armes  ;  by  the 

fame.  37.  C. 

50.  Armes  of  Leigh  of  High-Leigh,  &c.  in  Trick. 

37.  C.  b. 

51.  Order  oftheProceflion  at  the  Funeral  of  Sir  Peter 

Leigh,  from  Lyme  to  Wynwick :  Jett  down  by  the  fe¬ 
cond  Randle  Holme.  ibid. 

52.  Pedegree  of  Thomas  Lord  Fairfax  of  Denton, 

Baron  of  Camairon,  A.  D.  1657.  38.  A. 

53.  Armes  Quarter’d  by  him.  39.  A. 

54.  Armes  of  Savage  (as  it  feemeth)  with  Quarterings, 

&  four  Crefts  ;  in  Colors.  39.  B.  b. 

55.  Pedegree  of  Daniel  of  Tabley.  40.  42.  &  44. 

Intermixed  with  this,  I  find, 

156.  Armes  remaining  in  the  Glafle- W indowes  of  the 
hurch  of  I  hornton.  40;  B. 

57.  Some  Defcents  of  Mainwaring.  ibid. 

58.  Some  Delcents  of  Bollock.  40.  B.  b. 

59.  Pedegree  of  Laurence  Hatton,  Lord  of  Hatton. 


Nuill. 


D94* 


fhefe  Hattons  redding  at  the  Mannor  houfe  of  ITaN 
Gy  fly-birches,  are  thence  called  Hattons  of 
Ivilhly-birches,  &c. 

60.  Short  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Tervirr. 

61.  Defcent  of  Beefton.  42.  A.  and^  AL 

62.  Some  Defcents  of  Mainwaring  &  Bollock. 

,  _  42.  A.  b. 

63.  Defcent  of  Bollock,  &  of  Dutton ;  by  the  third 

Randle  Holme.  42>  ^3.  b> 

64.  Ail  Savage  of  Leighton  &  Beefton,  his  Ouar- 
terings  ;  whofe  Heire  Generali  married  Sir  Thomas 
Moftyn  of  Moftyn,  Baronctt :  by  the  fame.  42.  JE.  (and 

_  _  _  '42.  /B.  b.) 

65.  Defcent  of  Savage  of  Leighton  &  Beefton ;  by 

the  lame.  ^  j£ 

66.  A  Pedegree  gmhered  for  Janies  Ma.bury  if 
Marbury  in  (.  am.  Ceftrie,  Arm.  anno  0  KJw.  v[.  42.  B. 

67.  The  Pedegree  of  Kaffe  Diitton  Efquier,  Lord  of 

Hattone.  40  B  b 

68  Notes  relating  to  divers  of  the  prime  Chefhire- 
Famihes.  42.  c  b> 

09.  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Lacy  Earl  of  Lin¬ 
coln  ;  &  of  Llewellyn  Prince  of  Wales.  4a.  A. 

70.  Defcent  of  the  noble  Family  of  Holland.  44.  A  b; 

71.  Pedegree  of  Gamull  ;  laboured  from,  &  here 
juftilled  by  proper  Evidences.  46.  48.  co.  C2.  &  cj. 

Here  I  find  intermixed, 

72.  Short  Notes  taken  in  the  Churches  of  St.  Bride  in 
Chefter  ;  and  in  the  Church  of  Manchefter.  46.  A. 

73.  Defcent  of  Eiton,  Barrow,  &  Audeley.  ibid. 

,  74.  Defendants  from  Davyd  Clarke,  alias  Davyd 
Malo-palfu,  Barone  ibidem.  46.  A.  b. 

75.  Pedegree  of  Legh  of  Addington,  by  Sam’pfoii 

Erdefwycke.  56.  B. 

76.  Deicent  of  Legh  of  the  Rvdge.  46.  B.  b. 

77.  Defcent  of  Davenport  of  Davenport.  48.  A.  b. 

78.  Defcent  of  Smyth  of  Cbmerby  in  Com.  Lancaflr.- 

»  48.  A.  b. 

,  79.  Defent  of  Hull  Lord  of  Boutanfdale  in  Cora. 

.  _  ibid. 

80.  Inquifinon*  (touching  divers  Chelhire  Families) 

in  Mr.  Roberte  Vaudryes  Booke.  4S.  33. 

81.  Pedegree  ot  Crew,  by  Jacob  Chaloncr  ;  with 
fome  Additions,  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme.  48.  B. 

b.  &  48.  C.  * 

Here  are  Extra fts  from  fundry  old  Evidences. 

82.  Lift  of  the  Mourners  at  the  Funerall  of  Arthur 
Bagnall  of  Place-nevydd  Efq;  by  the  fame  Mr.  Holme. 

.  .  48.  E.  b. 

1  his  is  followed  by  the  Order  of  the  fame  Funerall 
from  the  Place-ncwedd,  ouer  the  Water,  to  Bano-or- 
C.hurch  :  by  the  fame. 

83.  Pedegree  of  Radford  of  Chefter  ;  by  the  third 

Randle  Holme.  (loofe)  90.  B. 

84.  Defcent  of  Brercwood  (who  married  Sidney  one 
of  the  Daughters  &  Coheirs  of  Sir  Fiancis  Gamull.'  33. 

85.  Pedegree  of Norres  of  Speke.  r6.' 

On  the  back  of  this  is  the  Pedegree  of  Newton, 

86.  Genealogia  fiue  Profapia  honoratiflimi  Domini 
Dili.  Thoma;  Gerardi  Equitis  Aurati,  ac  Nobiliflimi  de 
Bromleygh  in  Comitatu  Staffordienfi,  Baronis.  62. 

Here  are  the  Armes  &  Quarterings  ;  with  fome 
Additions  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme. 

87.  Ampliflima  Boftocorum  Familiain  varijs  Stemma- 
tibus  per  Agnationes,  longe  latter ;  propagata,  Armifq; 
Gennlitijs  diftincta,  ac  feparata* 

88.  Pedegree  of  Alderl'ey  of  Chefter,  by  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme. 

89.  Pedegree  of  divers  Families  cf  Broke  ;  done  by 

one  Iiamlett  Sankye.  ^g/ 

1  his  Pe  degree  is  branded  in  very  many  places  by  the 
fecond  Fan  die  Holme  ;  who  at  the  beginning  (fol  97.) 
hath  v.  ritten,  that  it  is  1:10ft  bale  Sc  laii’c  in  all  the  Lvnesj 

ar.d 


k 


476 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2094,  2095. 


and,  toward  the  end  ffol.  1 16.)  allures  that  it  is  the  fal- 
ceft  Pedegrey  that  euer  was  invented. 

go.  Achievement  of  fome  Family  who  bare  Agent, 
a  Crofs  engiayled  Sable,  for  their  Armes.  In  colors. 

1 20. 

g  1.  Armes  8c  Ouarterings,  in  Blafon,  of  Mr.  John 
Jones  ofEdol.  121. 

92.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table  of 
the  Pedegrees  contained  in  this  Book.  122. 

2095. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifling  of  many  Papers,  8c  fome 
Parchment,  bound  up  together,  in  no  order  ;  and, 
on  the  back,  entituled  “  Chelhire-Notes  &  Heeds,”  by 
its  quondam  Mailer  the  third  Randle  Holme.  In 
looking  through  it,  I  find. 

1.  His  Account  of  the  Things  of  moll  Note  ;  at  the 
beginning,  as  ufual. 

2.  Particular  of  the  Lands  belonging  to  the  Deane  8c 
Chapter  of  Chcfler,  in  Saugh.dle  8t  Shotwick.  1. 

3.  Original  Bond  or  Bill  of  Thomas  Palyn  Vintner, 

to  Rychard  Bavand  Alderman  of  Cheller,  for  1 2  Pounds, 
dat.  1 2  May  A.  I).  1 597.  3. 

4.  A  Note  of  (Mr.  Cotgrave’s)  Lecfes  in  beinge. 

Anno  1597.  4. 

5.  Extract  from  the  Court-book  of  the  Hundred  of 
Braxton,  by  Richard  Holland  the  Steward  there,  17 
fanuarij  no  i(  R.  IT.-,  t  ii :hing  a  D  t  til  281 .  8d. 
due  from  Katherine  Reade,  to  Margaret  Almnbye.  5. 

6.  Excepd  ms  10  the  New  Commiffion  <  f  Grace, 

ive  lilies,  tt mp.  R.  Caroli  1.  6. 

7.  Nomina  Papalium  Rccufantium  :  or  an  authentic 

Conic  ol  tl.:  :-  PrcEm  inerts  of  Popilh  Recufants  dwelling 
\vu! tin  the  Hundred  or  Broxton  in  Chelhire,  for  many 
Years  duiing  the  Reign  ofK.  James  1.  8. 

8.  Original  Warrant  of  Sir  Thomas  Delves  SheritTe 
of  Chelhire,  dated  4  February  1636-  to  the  Cenflables 
of  Bache  in  the  Hundred  of  Broxton  :  for  levying 
£1.  2.  5  j  within  their  Divifion,  toward  the  Ship-money. 

S.  A. 

9.  Original  Articles  of  Agreement  made  8c  concluded 
vpon  between  Richard  Kellie  of  London,  Gent,  and 
William  Felles  of  Arrowe,  Yoman  ;  10  May  1609.  9. 

For  a  I.cafe  of  the  Manor-houfe  8c  Parke,  Gc.  of 
Bidflone  in  AVirral,  which  Kelly  htld  of  the  Earl  of 
Derby;  for  which,  Felles  was  to  pay  Kelly  140I.  per 
annum ;  ai  nt  to  tl  . 

Felles  was  bound  in  a  Bond  of  ioool.  for  performance 
of  the  Covenants.  Flere  are  alfo  two  original  Infi.ru- 
ments  of  the  fame  Mr.  Kelley  ;  by  the  former,  bearing 
date  12  July  1610.  he  appoints  Thomas  Gatnull  Efq; 
Recorder  of  Cheller  to  receive  his  Rent.  And  hy  the 
other,  upon  Mr.  Recorders  deceafe,  he  appoints  William 
Gamull  Alderman  of  Cheller,  to  do  the  fame. 

1  o.  Papers  relati  i-exati  us  ■  Shire  of  the 

Leafe  of  Bidllone  abovementioned,  which  William 
Earle  of  Derby,  &  Margaret  the  old  Counteffe  his  Mo¬ 
ther,  had  granted  to  Lulher.  But  Sir  John  Egerton 

• 

. 

having  promifed  to  procure  Lumber's  Leafe,  which  he 
could  never  effeft.  j  - . 

The  Leafe  which  Sir  John  procured,  was  figned  & 
fealed,  but  not  deliver’d,  being  by  the  Earle  committed 
to  the  Care  of  Mr.  Ireland  his  Servant,  untill  Lufher’s 
Leafe  fliould  be  produced,  and  this  of  Sir  John’s  amended 
in  certain  material  Points.  But  Sir  John  fucing  Ireland 
for  the  fame,  gott  it  out '  of  his  Hands ;  and  Rood  all 
tryds  at  I.aw  (again!!  Chriltofer  fhemikhorpe,  to  whom 
Lulher lett  it;  again!!  his  Widow  8c  Executrix  after  his 
deceafe ;  &  againll  Anthony  Randle  her  Ihcond  Huf- 
band,  for  full  eleven  years  together,  and  to  the  impo- 
verilhment  of  the  PlaintilFes.  And  when,  at  laft,  after 
all  his  Arts  ufed  for  Delaies,  lie  could  hold  it  no  longer : 


Num.  2095. 

he  leafed  out  the  fame  to  the  Earles  of  Oxford  8c  Salif- 
bury,  who  feetn  to  have  made  no  great  matter  of  it, 
fince  it  was  in  Kellies  hands  fo  foon  as  A.  D.  1609.  It 
feems,  that  Sir  John  had  attempted  to  invalidate  Lulher’s 
Leafe,  as  not  good,  for  fome  reafons  ;  the  Plaintiffes 
Counfel  therefore  obferved,  among  other  particulars, 
that  the  Leafe  it  felf,  was  under  the  Countefle  &  Earles 
Hands  8c  Seales  of  Armes :  which  weie  enoughe  without 
Witnefies.  For  euery  Earle  is  a  Prince,  and  his  Deed  a 
Patent ;  Telle  meipfo  might  fuffize. 

1 1 .  Draught  of  a  Petition  to  K.  Charles  1 .  from  the 

Gentry,  Miniffcers,  8c  Free- holders  of  the  Countie-Pa¬ 
latine  of  Chefler,  and  of  the  Inquelb  ferueing  at  the  Af- 
fizes  for  the  faid  C.ountie.  19. 

This  canting  Petition  is  to  perfuade  his  Majefly  to 
lay  afide  his  intended  dangerous  Voiage  to  Ireland,  and 
to  take  a  Journey  rather  to  White-hall,  and  to  confule' 
with  his  Great  Council :  and,  w  ith  David,  to  anfvver 
the  Petitioners,  ‘  what  feemeth  you  belt,  that  will  I  doe/ 

12.  Litters  Patenles  Regis  Ed wardi  vi.  quibus  con- 

cedit  Roberto  Tatton  omnia  Terras  et  Tenementa  que 
fuerunt  Guidonis  de  Provincia  in  Parva  Salghall,  ad  ter- 
minum  21  annorum  ;  reddendo  inde  annuatim  60  folidos. 
Telle,  &c.  Richardo  Sakevile  Milite,  1  die  Junij,  anno 
regni  6to.  2i.b. 

13.  Chardges  difburfed  8c  lay  de  forth  for  the  Ward- 

Ihippe  of  Roger  Hurlton.  23. 

1 4.  Copie  of  a  Vote  of  the  Commons  Houfe  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  dated  30  dieMarcii  1640.  25. 

Hereby  they  allowed  to  each  other,  to  be  paid  by 
the  Countrey,  for  their  Attendance  in  Parliament,  the 
following  Rate,  viz.  to  every  Knight  of  the  Sheire,  1  3 
Shillings  8c  4  pence  per  diem  :  to  every  Citizen  10  Shil¬ 
lings  per  diem ;  and  to  every  BurgclTe  6  Shillings  8 
pence  per  diem.  25. 

1 5.  Rental  of  the  Lands  given  for  the  maintenance 
of  a  Grammar-Schoole  at  Macclesfielde  in  Chelhire,. 

.  27.  b. 

Thefe  Lands  were  parccll  of  the  PoiTefiion  of  St. 
John  Baptills  College  and  of  the  Petty  Canons  Chantry 
of  Chefier. 

16.  Inltru Aliens  by  Richard  Williams,  concerning  the 

Corne  8c  Cattell  of  Mr.  Cotgrage  deeealed,  at  Hargrave, 
8cc.  29. 

17.  A  Remembrance  of  feuerall  Somes  of  Money, 

payd  to  feuerall  Perlbns  as  is  alledged,  by  Mr.  Randle 
Cotgrave  and  Mr.  John  Mirgell,  lor  the  Debt  of  Mr. 
William  Cotgreve.  30. 

18.  Authentic  Copie  of  fome  proceedings  at  the 

Court  of  the  Maner  ofFrodlham,  held  the  17  Aprill, 
anno  20  Eliz.  before  Robeit  Whitby  Steward  there: 
being  Suits,  one  a  Trefpafs  on  the  Cafe ;  the  other  an 
Action  of  Debt.  3 1 . 

19.  An  Execution  awarded  by  the  Steward  of  the 

Court  of  Dunham  on  the  Hill  in  Chelhire  ;  21  081.  ann. 
15  Eliz.  33. 

20.  Finalis  Concordia  fafta  apud  Celtriam,  14  die 

Aprilis,  anno  1  o  Caroii  1 .  iyter  Robertum  Tatton  Arm.  i 
Sc  Wilelmum  Nicholls  Clericum  querentes  ;  et  Jacobum 
Mafiie  Armigerum,  deforcientem  :  de  Manerio  de  Sale, 
et  alijs  Terris  &  Tenement's  in  Northenden,  Rungey, 
Godley,  Newton,  Matley  &  Mottram :  pro  qu;l  que¬ 
rentes  dederunt  prefato  Jacobo  quingentas  Libras  Ar-  3 
genti.  33.  | 

21.  Nomina  Juratorum  inter  Dnam  Reginatn  que- i 

rentem ;  et  Johannem  Smith  Defendentcm,  in  quadam  1 
Tranfgreffione.  34. 

This  is  faid  to  have  been  about  Kinges  Wood,  or  ' 
little  Salghall. 

22.  Finalis  Concordia,  fa£la  29  die  Aprilis,  anno  ao 

Jacobi  1.  inter  Ricardum  Grolvenor  Milirem  querentem  ’ 
et  Georgium  BoRocke  Armigerum,  deforcientem ;  de 
tribus  Mefuagijs,  8cc.  in  Churton,  Aldforde,  6 c  Far-  I 

nedon  :  pro  qua  idem  Ricardus  dedit  40  Libras.  35.  | 

2  23.  Part 


\G|, 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


477 


Num.  2095. 

23.  Part  of  the  original  Declaration  of  Thomas 

Bancke,  againft  William . circa  ann.  37  Eliz.  36. 

24.  Copies  oi  the  Writt  and  Fine  concerning  8  Acres 
of  Failure,  &  Common  of  Pafture  in  Nortone  in  Com. 
Salopie,  which  Richard  Sutton  Efq;  fold  to  William 
Grofvenor  Efq;  for  41  pounds,  anno  39  Eliz.  40. 

25.  Draught  of  an  Indenture,  whereby  Sir  Richard 
Grofvenor  Et.  and  Baronet,  in  confideration  of  3000I. 
fold  to  Sir  Richard  Brooke  Knight,  Thomas  Marbury  & 
Hugh  Wilbram  Efqrs.  &  William  Barneflon  Gent,  the 
Mannor  of  Tulfingham  &  Towne  or  Lordlhip  thereof.  44. 

26.  LitetEe  Patentes  Elizabeths  Regins,  quibus  con- 

ceflit  Hugoni  Hurlefton  Generofi,  Cuftodiam  et  Mari- 
tagium  Johannis  Cotgreve  filij  &  herfedis  Willelmi 
Cotgreve  Generofi,  cum  certis  Terris  &  Tenementis  in 
Foul  e-Stapleforde,  &  in  Civitate  Celtris.  Telle,  &c. 
20  die  Novembris,  anno  Regni  38.  52.  b. 

27.  Draught  of  the  Declaration  made  by  Peter  Da- 

niell  of  Tabley  Efq;  24  December  1638.  that  Sir  Rich¬ 
ard  Giofvenor  Kt.  &  Baronet  Ihould  receyve  icoo 
pounds  out  of  the  1500I.  referved  to  be  at  Mr  Daniels 
difpofal,  by  the  Indenture  made  vppon  the  Mariadge  of 
his  fonne.  53. 

Herein  it  is  fpecified,  that  the  faid  Richard  Grof¬ 
venor,  at  the  fpeciall  Inflance  &  Requell  of  the  faid  Mr. 
Daniel!,  andhis  fuerty,  and  forthe  proper  Debts  of  the  faid 
Peter  Daniel,  became  ingaged  to  divers,  &  fundry  perfons, 
Creditors  of  the  faid  Peter  Daniel,  for  Payment  of  feuerall 
great  Somes  of  Money,  amounting  to  many  thowfand 
pounds,  at  certayne  Dayes  &Tymes  now  long  fynce  part  by 
reafon  of  which  faid  Debts  &  ingagements,  and  tedious  & 
tveaiifome  Imprifonment  for  the  fame,  for  many  Yeares  to¬ 
gether,  the  faid  Sir  Richard  Grofvenor  hath  beene  greate- 
ly  damnified  in  his  Eftate:  and  for  parte  of  the  faid  Debts, 
hath  out  of  his  owne  proper  meanes,  given  fatisfa&ion  by 
payment  of  great  Somes  of  Money  to  divers  of  the  faid 
Creditors  ;  and  for  fome  other  parte  of  the  faid  Debts, 
the  faid  Sir  Richard  doth  lye  in  Execution,  in  the  Prifon 
of  the  Fleete.  Y et  this  Sum  of  a  thoufand  Pounds,  was 
to  be  paid  but  by  one  hundred  Pounds  per  Annum  ;  and 
the  payment  to  commence  after  Mr.  Daniels  deceafe. 

28.  Interrogatories  to  be  miniftered  to  diuers  Wit- 
1  nefl'es  produced  on  the  partie  &  behalfe  of  Richard  C.o- 

ventrie  Deffendante ;  againft.  Sir  Charles  Mordant  Knight, 
Complaynant.  65. 

Thefe  were  upon  occafion  of  a  Suit  arifen  between 
them  for  a  Mefuage  or  Tenement,  and  the  Lands  there¬ 
unto  belonginge,  in  Molington-Torrald  in  the  County 
of  Chefter. 

29.  Confiderations  movinge  that  the  Queenes  Ma- 
jefties  Tenants  of  the  Townefhippe  ofCrabball.  beinge 
three  in  number,  and  of  the  auncient  yearely  Rent  of 
fome  Pounds  ;  Ihould  have  their  parts  &  portions  of  all 
fuche  Comen  rateably,  as  others  Tennaunts  of  Greate 
Saughall  &  little  Saughall  have,  of  &  in  all  and  finguler 

’  thofe  Waft  Groundes  never  intended  to  be  inch  fed, 
lyinge  &  joyninge  to  the  faid  Townes  feuerally.  78.  A. 

30.  Depofitions  ofWittnelfes  taken  in  the  Princes 
I  Court  of  Exchequer  of  Chefter,  the  10th  of  Aprill  1620. 

I  vppon  the  parte  &  behalfe  of  Richard  Coventrye  Gent. 

Defendant  ;  againfte  Sir  Charles  Mordant  Knight  Com- 
|  playnant.  _  79- 

Thefe  were  upon  the  Interrogatories  above-men¬ 
tioned  at  No.  28. 

31.  Draught  of  an  Indenture  made  the  2  of  February 
1621.  whereby  George  Boftocke  Efq;  covenants  to  fave 
harmelefs  Sir  Richard  Grofvenor  Knight,  who  was 
bound  for  him  in  a  bond  of  1000I,  (for  payment  of 
500I.)  to  John  Bridgeman,  then  Lord  Bilhop  ofCheftejr. 

1 1 7. 

32.  The  Arguments  of  the  Judges  of  the  King’s 

Bench  (in  forry  Law-French)  delivered  in  Court,  in 
Eafter-Terme  anno  16  Jac.  1.  in  the  Cafe  of  Dewell 
againft  Saunders.  it 8, 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2095. 

The  Cafe  was  this  (as  it  is  fett  down  in  the  Law* 
French)  the  Earl  of  Northumberland  is  feifed  of  the 
Mannour  of  Ifleworth  Syon  in  Com.  Midd.  and  therein 
hath  a  Leete,  &  hath  ufed  from  times  whereof  ....  to 
punilh  Nufances  by  Paynes  &  Amerciaments.  That 
within  the  Precinct  of  this  Leete,  Dewell  had  eredled  a 
Pigeon-houfe  ;  and  that  for  thisNufance,  he  was  amerced 
at  40  Shillings,  and  afferred  (of  taxed)  at  40  Shillings. 
And  fince,  a  Payrte  was  putt  upon  him,  to  fhutt  up  his 
Pidgeons,  fo  that  they  Ihould  do  no  Damage  by  con- 
fuming  the  Corne  of  the  Inhabitants.  And  this  was  10 
Pounds,  and  afferred  at  10  Pounds.  He  did  not  fhutt 
up  his  Pigeons,  and  Saunders,  as  Baylie  to  the  faid  Earle 
diftraynes  for  this  Payne  &  Amerciament,  amounting  in 
all  to  12  Pounds,  and  therein  is  juftified  ;  and  upon  this 
the  Plaintiffe  demurres.  (The  Court  gave  the  Caufe  to 
thfe  Plaintiffe) 

33.  Copie  of  a  Letter  of  Attorney,  whereby  John 
Glynne  &  Laurence  Dycus  his  Guardian,  authorife  Tho¬ 
mas  Sutton  of  Chefter,  to  receive  the  Rent  of  aTaverne 
there,  for  Five  Years  &  an  half;  in  confideration  of  a 
Debt  &  Charges  which  lie  had  recovered  of  them  in 
the  Court  of  Exchequer  at  Chefter.  dat.  20  Aug.  1611. 

1 22. 

34.  Original  Letter  of  Tho.  Steele  &  John  Maddockes, 
to  fome  perfonof  qualitie  (Sir  Rich.  Grofvenor.  vid.  fol. 

1 25.  b  )  about  hisSealing  a  Leafe  for  Edward  Humpfton. 
dat.  15  Febr.  1628.  123. 

35.  Original  Indenture,  made  the  26  of  May  1635. 

1 24.  b. 

Hereby  Thomas  Booth  of  Aldford  Yeoman,  covenants 
with  Thomas  Booth  of  Ecclefton  Yeoman,  to  fave  him 
harmlefs. 

36.  Copie  of  Anne  Hardware^  Deed  of  Feofment 
made  to  Robert  Ince  of  Chefter,  of  a  certain  Mefuage 
in  Norley  ;  with  the  Bond  for  performance  of  Covenants, 
dat.  A.  D.  1612. 

37.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Dod  to  Sir  Richard 

Grofvenor.  dated  1 1  Julie  1630.  126. 

Upon  occafion  of  his  Son’s  death,  and  that  of  ano¬ 
ther  fon  who  died  in  Januarie  before,  whereby  two  younge 
lives  were  determined  for  Sir  Richard,  within  the  fpace 
of  fix  months.  Mr.  Dod  hereupon  defires,  that  Sir 
Richard  would  pleafe  to  leafe  vnto  them  Stockton- 
Far  me  againe,  vpon  fuch  a  Fine,  as  fhall  be  valuable  & 
proportionable. 

38.  An  original  Indenture,  whereby  John  Frodfham 
Efquier,  lefts  to  Humfrey  M.’nwaringe  Gent,  a  clofe 
within  the  Townelhip  of  Elton,  for  one  year,  at  the 
Rent  of  one  Pepper-corne.  (This  is  torn.)  127.  b. 

39.  Another  original  Letter  of  Mr.  Dod  to  Sir  Richard 
Grofvenor,  defiring  him  to  name  what  fine  he  would 
have  for  a  Leafe  of  Stockton-far  me  ;  and  to  conferre 
with  him  upon  that  fubject.  dat.  23  Auguft  1630.  129. 

40.  An  original  Inllrumcnt,  whereby  Edwarde  Bre¬ 

retone  of  Whiclefwicke  in  Com.  Lancaft.  Gent,  in  con¬ 
fideration  of  the  fomme  of  £43  6.  8.  releafed  to  his 

brother  Wyllam  Breretone  of  Handforthe  in  Com.  Ceftr. 
Efquyer,  all  his  right  to  any  part  of  the  perfonal  Eftates 
of  Bryan  Brereton  Knighte  his  father,  or  of  Randalphe 
Breretone  Efquyer,  his  brother,  deceafed.  dated  the  8  of 
Januarye,  anno  26  Elizabethaj.  1 30.  b. 

41.  Notes  touching  Moneys  paid  by  Mr.  Thomas 

Stanley  fon  &  heir  of  Sir  Thomas  Stanley  of  Alderlty,  to¬ 
wards  his  filters  portions.  (A.  D.  1612.)  133. 

42.  Accompts  of  Moneys  received  &  paid,  to  the 

fame  Ufe.  135. 

43.  Dame  Elizabeth  Stanleys  Account  of  all  fuch  mo¬ 

ney  as  Ihe  had  x'eceyved  from  Sir  Peter  Warburton  her 
father,  and  alfo  of  her  fonne  Mr.  Thomas  Stanley,  to  be 
imployed  and  putt  forthe,  for  the  vfe  of  her  Daughters. 
A.  D.  1621.  *3?* 

44.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Council ;  dated  the  laft  of  February,  1634.  and  dire  (led 

6  F 


47s 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  2095. 

to  the  High  Sheriffe  and  Juftices  of  Peace  of  the  County  of 
Chefter.  and  more  efpecially  to  the  Juftices  of  Peace  that 
are,  or  flial  be  nearer  of  Refidence  to  Blacon  in  the  faid 
County.  142. 

On  the  behalfe  of  Sir  Ranulph  Crewe ;  and  re¬ 
quiring  them  to  take  effe&uall  Order  that  neither  Wil¬ 
liam  Norris  Efq;  (a  Perfon  not  conformeable  to  ordinary 
Juflice)  nor  any  other  Perfon  deriving  any  Title  to  the 
Mannour  of  Blacon,  doe  caufe  to  be  felled  or  carried 
away,  any  Tymber  or  Wood,  growing  vpon  any  part  of 
the  faid  Manour,  till  it  may  appeare,  in  fome  Court  of 
Juflice  that  they  haue  Right  foe  to  doe.  And,  in  cafe  of 
diflurbance,  or  contradiction  to  this  Order,  to  bind  oucr 
every  Perfon  offending,  to  appeare  3c  anfwere  their  con¬ 
tempt  at  the  board. 

45.  Original  Indenture  made  the  5th  of  April  1624. 

whereby  Katheryn  Dowfon  Widowe  lett  to  John  Bennett 
Mercer,  a  Meffuage  in  Chefter,  for  eight  Years,  for  the 
yearly  Rent  of  feaven  Pounds.  143.  b. 

46.  A  Precept  for  the  Livery  of  Lands  in  Litil-Neflon 

cum  Hargrave  to  Roger  Bothe  fon  &  heir  to  Robert 
Bothe,  who  held  the  fame  (being  the  Inheritance  of  Ka¬ 
therine  his  Wife)  by  the  Law  of  England,  duringe  his 
life.  Tefle,  &c.  apud  Ceftriam,  23  die  Septembris,  anno 
7  Regis  Edwardi  vi.  144.  b. 

47.  Copie  of  the  Warant  iffued  by  Sir  Thomas  Delves 

Sheriffe  of  Chefhire,  to  the  Con  {table  of  Dunham,  for 
levying  £6.  16.  o.  within  his  Divifion,  toward  the 

Ship  money ;  with  directions  for  payment  of  the  fame, 
dat.  1 6  February  1636.  145.  b. 

48.  Draught  of  an  Indenture  made  the  1 1  of  No¬ 

vember,  anno  23  R.Henrici  vn.  whereby  John  Darffe 
was  putt  Apprentice  to  William  Parke  a  Matter  of  Mufic 
for  fix  yeares,  by  John  Abbot  of  Ruffyn  in  the  Yle  of 
Man  ;  who  was  alfo  to  allow  13  Shillings  &  4  pence 
yearly  toward  his  maintenance,  and  was  bound  (with 
others,  in  the  Sum  of  20I.  for  his  faithful  Service,  during 
that  Time.  146.  b. 

49.  Original  Indenture,  now  damaged,  made  the  2 5 
of  April  1618.  whereby  James  Cauveley  (in  confideration 
of  five  Pounds)  dimifed  to  William  Glegge  Gent,  cer¬ 
tain  Lands  in  Aldfoorde,  forone  Yeare  ;  Rent-free.  148. 

50.  A  Licence  (or  rather  a  Draught  of  one)  granted 
by  William  Troutbeke  Chamberlayne  of  Chefter,  Wil¬ 
liam  Stanley  Knight,  John  Hatton  the  Maior,  and  the 
Sheriffes  of  Chefter,  to  William  Talbot  ;  againft  whom 
Dauvd  ap  Llewellyn,  Thomas  Laurence,  &  Rees  ap  Gruf- 
fylh  had  recovered  63  Shillings  &  4  Pence  in  the  Court 
of  Appentice  of  Chefter  ;  for  payment  whereof,  the  faid 
William  was  caft  into  the  Prifon  of  the  Northgate.  dat. 

23  Sept,  anno  3  R.  Henrici  vi.  145. 

51.  A  Bond  of  John  Delves  ofDudington  Efq;  made 
to  Thomas  Stanley  of  Wever  Efq;  in  the  Sum  of  one 
thoufand  Pounds,  dat.  6  June  anno  6  Regine  Elizabethe. 

150.  b. 

This  is  for  fecuring  Lands  in  Hatherton,  &c.  as  a 
Joy  mure  upon  a  mariage  to  be  folemnifed  between  one 
of  the  Ions  of  Delves,  with  one  of  Stanleys  daughters. 

5'.  C.opie  of  a  Schedule  indented,  and  annexed  to  a 
Deed  of  Feoffment,  whereby  Edwarde  Earle  of  Derby 
veiled  his  whole  Eftate  in  Truftees,  to  the  ufe  of  himfelf, 
and  his  family.  They  were,  George  Earle  of  S’nrewfbury, 

J  homas  Earle  of  Suffex,  Ilenry  Lord  Morley,  Sir  John 
Arrundell  Knyght.  Sir  Richard  Sherburne  Knight, 

'l  homes  Ilaughe  Efquire,  Edward  Tyldefley  Efq;  James 
Kemie.'.e,  Henry  Conney,  &  Hugh  Mafon.  131.  b. 

53-  Declaratio  pro  Roberto  Eaton  querente,  verfus 
I  homani  Gamond  defendentem,  in  Placito  Tranfgref- 
fionis  fuper  Cafum,  ad  dampnum  o£to  Solidorum.  1 54.  b. 

This,  and  feveral  of  the  following  Leaves  are  putt 
up- fide  down.  r 

54.  Pro  Thoma  Gamond  Defen dente,  verfus  Ro- 
bertum  Eaton  Querentem  j  in  Arreftatione  Judicij. 

I55* 


Num.  2095. 

This  is  of  the  hand  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby. 

55.  Pro  Thoma  Gamond  Defendente  verfus  Robertum 

Eaton  Querentem  ;  in  Placito  Tranfgreflionis  luper  Ca- 
^um-  156.  b. 

Hereunto  Mr.  Recorder  putt  his  Name. 

56.  Notes  fhewing  feveial  Tenures  in  Fikedene,  (novf 

Figden)  from  the  time  of  K.  Richard  11.  to  that  of  Qu. 
Elizabeth.  157-&i57- A. " 

57.  Part  of  an  original  Letter  from  one  who  feemes  to 

have  been  a  Chefhire  Gentleman,  and  a  Servant  about 
the  Prince  of  Wales.  I57-  A.  b. 

58.  Bill  of  Charges  for  a  Fine  &  Recovery  of  fome  of 

Lands  in  Figden.  1 58.  b. 

59.  The  Cafe  about  Gilbert  Lord  Gerard’s  IntavlinV 

his  Eftate.  160.  b. 

This  is  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  hand-writing,  and 
fhews  his  Opinion. 

60. _  Draught  of  an  Alignment  of  a  Leafe  of  a  Mef¬ 
fuage  in  Chefter,  with  fome  houfehold  Goods  thereunto 
belonging,  by  Chriflofer  Iiaffelwall  of  Aldford  to  James 
Broiler  of  Chefter  :  referving  the  Rent  to  William  Rat- 
cliffe,  the  Landlord,  (dat.  the  .  .  .  of  December,  1601.) 

61.  Memorandum  of  the  Deedes  &  Wrytinges  earn 

celled  by  Edmond  Hopwood  Efquier.  John  Manley  Gent. 
&  Henry  Manley  his  fonne,  1  3  die  Novembris  anno  24 
R.  Elizabethe  before  Sir  Gilbert  Gerarde  Kt.  Matter 
of  the  Rolles,  &  Thomas  Egerton  Efq;  Solicitour  Gene- 
ral  (both  whofe  hands  are  to  this  Paper)  for  that  the 
fame  appeared  to  be  fufpicious,  &  indiredly  conlry  ved  to 
gyve  Credit  vnto  a  pretended  Leafe  in  Reuerfion  of  the 
Manour  of  Pultone  &  certen  other  Landes,  which  was 
fuppofed  to  haue  beene  made  by  the  Indenture  of  Tho¬ 
mas  Whitney  late  Abbott  of  Delacreffe,  for  Termeof  61 
Yeres ;  and  to  begyne  after  the  ende  of  a  former  Leafe 
thereof  made.  Which  Leafe  in  Reverfion  fetning  to 
haue  bene  forged  &  counterfetted,  was  heretofore  can¬ 
celled  &  defaced,  by  the  Order  &  Awarde  of  Sr  Thomas 
Bromley  Kt.  Lord  Chauncellour  of  England,  then  Soli- 
cytour-General,  and  the  faid  Sir  Gilberte  Gerrarde  Kt. 
then  Atturney-Generall,  &c.  x  * 

62.  Depofition  of  John  Whitney  late  Chamberleyne  to 

the  laft  Abbott  of  Deulacreffe,  taken  8  January,  anno 
7mo.  Elizabethan  Reginas.  I-r]> 

Hereby  it  appeared,  that  4  or  5  days  after  the  Sup- 
prefiion  of  that  Abbey,  feveral  Blankshaving  the  Covent- 
Seal  le  thereat,  were  feen  by  the  Deponent,  the  Abbat  & 
others  being  privy.  Upon  thefe  Blanks  William  Dam- 
port  the  Abbots  Scribe  wrote  Leafes,  with  Ante-dates  j 
and  among  the  reft,  one  was  the  Leafe  of  Reverfion  of 
the  Mannour  of  Poultone  aforefaid. 

63.  Authentic  Copie  of  the  Decree  made  in  the  Court 

of  Exchequer  at  Weftminfter,  againft  Mr.  John  Manley, 
who  was  the  perfon  that  plaied  the  vile  Game  with  for¬ 
ged  Writings ;  and  had  fui  reptitioufly  gotten  an  Exem¬ 
plification  from  the  Court  of  Exchequer  of  the  pretended 
Original  Deed  abovementioned,  which  had  been  deli- 
vered-up  &  cancelled.  , 

This  Decree  (made  Term.  Mich,  anno  24  Eliz) 
after  a  long  Detail  of  the  undue  Praftifes  of  the  Manleys, 
againft  the  Grofvenors  who  held  Pulton  ;  orders  that 
the  faid  Exemplification  of  the  faid  fuppofed  Leafe  in  Re¬ 
verfion,  being  fo  cancelled  as  is  aforefaid,  flial  be  filed  Sc 
remayne  in  this  Courte,  as  a  thing  vtterly  dampned,  ad- 
nihilate,  &  made  voide,  amongeft  other  fuche  Writtings 
as  have  heretofore,  in  this  Courte,  bene  adjudged  to  be 
cancelled,  dampned,  &  defaced.  And  that  a  Vacate  be 
made  of  the  Roll  of  the  Entree  of  the  faid  Exemplifica¬ 
tion  :  and  that  hereafter  no  manner  of  Exemplification, 
Copy  or  Mynute  thereof  be  made  or  written  by  any  Per¬ 
fon,  as  of  a  Recorde  of  this  Courte. 

64.  Copie  of  an  Indenture  Tripartite,  made  the  20th 
of  July  1507.  belweene  William  Smythe  Bislhop  ofLin- 
colne  &  the  Deane  &  Chapter  of  Lincolne,  oFth’one 

partie ; 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


Num.  2095. 

■partFe  :  John  the  Prior  &  the  Covent  of  Laund'e  in  the 
Countie  of  Leyceftre,  of  the  Secund  partie  :  and 
the  Maior  &  Citizens  of  Chefter,  of  the  thridd  partie. 

192. 

Setting  forth,  that  forafmuch  as  the  faid  Prior  & 
Covent  had  received  of  the  faid  Bifhop  a  Guift  of  £300. 
towards  their  great  Charges  in  procuring  the  Appropria¬ 
tion  of  the  Parochial  Church  of  Roifthorne  in  the  Countie 
oi  Chefter,  to  their  Monaftery  :  they  agreed  to  pay  an 
Annual  Rent  of  Ten  Pounds,  for  ever,  to  the  faid  Maior 
and  Citizens,  who  would  give  the  fame  to  a  fufficyentt 
&  h  on  eft  Preeft,  being  a  Mafter  or  Bacheler  of  Arte,  or 
a  Mafter  of  Grammer  at  the  left,  teching  G rammer  free- 
Iye,  in  a  Free  Schoole  at  Farneworthe  in  the  Countie  of 
Lancafter,  for  euer. 

65.  Complaint  of  Richarde  Gravenour  Efquier,  to 

William  Lorde  Burghley  Lorde  Highe  Treafourer  of 
England,  Sir  Walter  Mildmaye  Kt.  Chauncellour  of  th’ 
Exchequer,  Sir  Roger  Manwoode  Kt.  I.orde  Cheif  Ba¬ 
rone  of  th’Exchequer,  and  others  the  Barons  &  Court  of 
Exchequer.  j^. 

This  is  upon  the  occafion  of  the  Forgery  above- 
mentioned,  and  the  unjuft  pra&ifes  of  the  Manley’s  and 
their  Confederates,  upon  it. 

66.  Proofs  that  the  Commvne  Woods  called  Kings 

Woode,  in  Lityll  Salghall,  is  parcell  of  Sir  Gye  Prouys 
(Guido  de  Provincia’s)  Lands.  217.  b. 

67.  Original  Covenant,  made  16  February  1597. 
whereby  Thomas  Ireland  of  Grayes  I  nne  Efquyre  (in 
confideration  of  the  Loane  of  iool.  for  one  year)  did 
oblige  himfelf  to  procure  Wylliam  Earle  of  Darbye  to 
fell  Sawkhan-Marfye  alias  Sawkham  (Saugham)  Carre, 
to  George  Ledfam  Gent,  at  the  rate  of  fortye  Yeares 
purchafe,  according  to  the  auncycnt  &  accuftomed  Rent 
heretofore  payde  to  the  fayd  Earle  and  his  Auncetors. 

218. 

68.  Petition  of  James  Lord  Strange  to  K.  Charles  i. 

depending  the  Suit  in  the  Court  of  Wards,  between  the 
Earl  of  Derby  &  himfelf  on  the  one  fide,  &  the  Lady 
Stanley  &  her  Sonne  on  the  other.  220. 

Hereunto  is  added  the  Order  made  by  his  Majefty 
15  December  1634.  granting  the  Praier  made  by  the 
Petitioner. 

69.  Opinion  of  fome  Welfti  Counfellor,  concerning 
the  Method  to  be  purfued  by  Elizabeth  Dien,  in  her 
Claim  of  Lands  againft  Nicholas  Pennaunt,  et  al.  221. 

70.  Placitum  Antonij  Hytchyne  verfus  Johannem 

Tylftone,  fuper  ejectione  Firms:  fua;  in  Tatton-halle  : 
ad  damnum  Decern  Librarum,  &c.  Confideratum  eft 
per  Curiam,  quod  predidbus  Antonius  recuperit  Dampna 
fua,  ad  unum  Denarium  ;  et  cuftagia  fua,  ad  unum  De- 
narium.  2  Sept,  anno  20  Eliz.  n22. 

7 1.  An  Original  Receipt,  for  Rent  paid  by  John  Poole 

Efquioor,  for  the  Farme  of  Stanlow,  to  the  Ufe  of 
George  Cotton  Efquiour,  8  Novr.  1585.  224. 

72.  Another  like  Receipt,  for  the  fame  Farme  or 

Grange  of  Stanlowe,  dat.  28  Febr.  1591.  2:4.  A. 

73.  Valuation  of  certain  forts  of  Lands,  by  the  Acre  • 

and  of  feveral  forts  of  Trees.  225. 

74.  Thomas  Gafcoigne’s  Receipt  made  to-  Mr.  John 

Poole  for  1 10I.  being  in  part  of  a  greater  Sum  due  to 
Sir  Chriftofer  Hatton  Kt.  Lord  Chauncellour,  dat.  4  Sent 
’538.  • 

75.  Original  Receipt  of  William  Coton  of  Coton,  for 

15  Shillings  paid  by  John  Monfhowe  of  Monfhowe  Ef¬ 
quier,  to  the  Vfe  of  Sir  Rowland  Hille  Knyghte,  for  the 
Relefe  of  1  homas  Pole  Efquier,  for  certen  Lands  lyenge 
within  the  Lordfliipe  of  Stoke  vppon  Tierne,  dat.  1  o  Febr. 
anno  1  R.Edwardivi.  2ij. 

76.  Edward  Dodge’s  Receipt  for  200I.  paid  by  Mr. 
John  Poole  the  younger,  in  parte  of  th’ Arrearages  of 
his  Accompte,  due  to  the  Lord  Chancellor  Hatton,  dat. 

12  Maij,  anno  30  Eliz.  228. ' 

77.  Notes  relating  to  Mr,  Poole’s  Lands  in  Buerton, 


Num.  2095. 

Capenhurft,  Beifton,  Stanlow-grange,  Whitney-banks 
and  Oldfield.  229.’ 

78.  Draught  of  an  Indenture  made  22  ofNouembre 

anno  38  R.  Henrici  vhi.  whereby  '1  homas  Pole  of 
Nether-Pole  Efquyer,  covenanted  with  Sir  Edward  Fyt- 
tone  Knyght,  that  Jchn  Pole  his  Sonne  &  Heyre  appa- 
rant,  fhould  cfpoufe  &  take  to  Wyf  Sufanne  daughter  of 
the  faid  Sir  Edward  ;  upon  which,  a  joynture  of  the 
clear  yearly  Value  of  £  1 0.  was  to  be  fettled  upon  the  faid 
Sufanne  ;  befides  other  Matters  agreed  upon  for  her  ad¬ 
vantage.  Sir  Edward  covenanting  to  pay  to  Mr.  Poole 
£246.  1.  4.  as  her  Marriage-Portion.  230. 

79.  'Original  Letter  of  Mr.  John  Poole,  to  Mr.  Aider- 

man  Gamull ;  dat.  18  February  1608.  233. 

Difcharging  him  from  falling  any  more  Timber- 
Trees,  within  his  Lordfhippe  of  Buerton. 

80.  Copies  of  the  Deeds  of  Feoffment,  whereby  Hugo 

de  Calveley  Arm.  pafled  away  his  Maner  &  Lordfhip  of 
the  Lee  to  Richard  ie  Mafly,  &  Henry  de  Daucnport  : 
16  Febr.  anno  2  R.  Hem  id  v.  234. 

Laftly  follow  in  loofe  Papers. 

81.  Copie  of  a  Letter  written  at  Knottesford  the  6th 
of  September  1642,  (the  Writers  name  not  fubferibed) 
to  fome  of  the  difeontented  Chefliire-Gentry  ;  who,  un¬ 
der  Color  of  preferving  the  public  Peace,  declared  them- 
lelves  to  bee  moft  readie  to  ioyne  togeather  to  fupprefTe 
all  within  the  County,  that  fhall  goe  about  or  endeavour 
to  difarme,  pillage,  or  otherwife  terrifie  the  Countrey  - 
or  to  make  Divifion  betwixt  his  Sacred  Majeftie  &  his 
highe  &  great  Court  of  Parliament  ;  i.  e.  that  fhould  be 
for  the  King. 

82.  Form  of  the  Aflbciation  entred  into  by  the  laid 
mutinous  Gentlemen  (who  had  already  taken  the  Protef- 
tationto  be  aiding  to  King  &  Parliament  (i.  e.  to  rebell) 
and  confequently,  were  well  affeded  to  the  Peace  & 
Quiet  of  the  Kingdome  ;  upon  their  fearefull  Apprehen- 
fions  from  thefeueral  Meetings  of  the  Commiffioners  of 
Array  in  that,  &  other  Counties.  Giving  Faith  & 
A  flu  ranee  to  each  other  (for  the  Defence  of  themfelues 
their  Friends,  &  Countrey)  that  if  any  Attempt  fhould 
bee  made  for  plundering  their  Houfes,  or  difarming; 
their  Perfons  ;  they  would,  vpon  Notice  given,  bee  rea¬ 
die,  with  all  their  Strength  &  Force,  to  aflift  &  defend 
from  Violence,  all  fuch  as  fhould  bee  Jo  attempted  againft. 

83.  Copie  of  the  Letter  from  James  Stanley  "then 
Lord  Strange,  &  foon  after  (upon  his  Fathers  deceafe) 
Earl  or  Derby;  dated,  6  September  1642  ;  &  directed 
to  Mr.  Richard  Brerelon,  &  Mr.  Hughe  Wilbraham. 

Upon  Occafion  of  the  Apprehenfion  of  manyfas 
if  the  Commiffioners  of  Array  intended  to  Plunder  their 
Houfes.  Declaring  that  he  would  fend  to  the  faid  Com¬ 
miffioners  to  beware  thereof ;  and  that  if  they  fhould  doe 
contraric  to  his  Requeft  ;  he  would  take  part  with  other'1 
againft  them. 

84.  An  Eccho  in  the  Cole-pits  at  New-Caftle  227  1 
Occafioned  by  the  Behaviour  of  the  Scotts,  upon 

their  taking  of  that  Town.  1 

8j.  The  Heades  of  a  Petition  of  the  Cittizens  of  Lon¬ 
don,  read  m  the  Commons  Houfe  in  Parliament  Aprill 
!1:  mr  the  Afternoone,  &  Aprill  zz  in  the  Forenoone : 
and  after,  tranftmtted  to  the  Lords.  a„  b’ 

86.  Verfes  on  thefeLetnmas,  MorsStipendiumPeecatf; 
S^Donum  Dei  eft  Vita  sterna  :  by  John  Wright  Payn- 

87.  A  Panegyncke  (i.  e.  a  Cavalier  Lampoon3)  faith- 

fully  reptefentmge  the  Proceedings  of  the  Twoe  Houfes 
at  V)  eitni, nicer,  face  the  beginninge  of  their  Seffions  to 
this  prefent ;  and  what  is  further  to  be  by  them  ex. 
pcaed-  240. 

88.  A  Poem  made  by  Mr.  William  Ravenfcroft’e 
during  hisSicknefs  ;  refigning  himfelf  up  to  God.  241.  * 

89.  A  moll  learned  &  eloquent  Speech,  fpoken  or 

deliuered 


t 


I-; 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


4?o 


Num.  2095,  2096. 

deliuered  in  the  Howfe  of  Commons  at  Wedminder,  by 
the  moft  learned  Lawyer  Miles  Corbett,  Efq;  Recorder 
of  Great  Yarmoth,  Sc  Burgeffe  of  the  fame,  23  of  July 
1646.  243. 

This  Cavalier-TraCI  feems  to  have  been  father’d 
upon  him.  It  is  of  the  Hand-Writing  of  the  fecond  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme ;  and,  being  in  Vogue,  is  much  worn ;  as 
well  as  Moufe-eaten. 

2096. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  divers  loofe  TraCts  &  Pa¬ 
pers  Heraldical,  bound  together  by  the  third  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme,  and,  on  the  Out-fide,  by  him  thus  entitu- 
led,  “  Pedegrees  of  the  Nobility,  &  of  others.’*  Of 
which  I  lhall  give  the  following  more  particular  Ac¬ 
count. 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table 
referring  to  the  Pedegrees  herein  contained.  At  the 
beginning. 

2.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table 
pointing  to  the  Coates,  Crefts,  Sc  Quarterings  in  this 
Book:  made  A.  D.  1632. 

3.  Pedegrees  of  fome  Noble  Englilh  Families,  viz*. 
Devereux,  Fitz-Alan,  Bourghchier,  &c.  by  his  Son. 

5.  b.  21.  b.  27.  33.  b. 

4.  Defcent  of  the  Afmonean  Family,  or  of  the  Mac¬ 
cabees,  gathered  from  Jofephus,  by  the  fame.  20.  A. 

5.  Pedegree  of  Nevil,  copied  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme  out  of  an  ould  Roule  in  Parchment,  in  cullers, 
belonging  to  Sir  John  Danvers  Kt.  being  the  Pedegree  of 
the  late  Joh  ;  Neuel  Lord  Latimer  of  Snape.  26.  b. 

6.  Pedegr  °s  of  Brittifh  &  Englilh  Kings,  by  the  fe¬ 
cond  Randle  Holme.  27.  b. 

7.  Pedegrees  of  many  Noble  Englilh  Families ;  fett 

down  by  Jacob  Chaloner,  aslgueffe.  34.  89. 

Thefe  have  had  the  benefit  of  fome  Additions 
&  Corrections  by  the  fecond  &  third  Randle  Holme, 
Sc  others. 

8.  Original  Letter  of  the  fecond  Randle  Holme, 
to  Mr.  Arthur  Kinalfon  ;  about  Heraldical  matters. 

79.  A. 

9.  Defcent  of  the  Royal  Family  of  England  from  K. 

Edward  in.  made  in  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and 
written  in  Court-Hand.  88.  A. 

jc.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Coppeyof  a  peece 

of  a  Pedegree  made  A.  D . for  Robert  Sidney 

afterwards  Earle  of  Leiceder.  89. 

1 1.  His  Cataloge  of  the  Knights  of  the  Round  Table, 

in  the  tyme  of  Kinge  Arthur.  91. 

Honed  Randle  intimates  that  he  took  this  worthy 
Catalogue  from  the  Hidory  of  Prince  Arthur,  tranflated 
by  Sir  Thomas  Maleor,  Sc  printed  by  William  Caxton 
(a  book  now  rarely  feen)  with  fome  help  from  Hardings 
Chronicle. 

12.  Pedegree  of  Stafford  ;  copied  by  the  third  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme,  out  of  the  Pedegree  of  Sir  Edward  Bagot 
ofBlithfeild  in  Com.  Staff'.  Baronet,  A.  D.  1670.  150. 

13.  Pedegrees  of  Englifh,  Wellh,  &  other  Princes 
5:  Great  Nobility,  with  mod  of  the  Armes  in  Colors  : 
fett  down  (as  I  geffe  by  the  Hand )  by  Thomas  Chaloner 
of  Cheder. 

14.  Defcent  of  the  Kings  of  Cadile  &  Leon,  drawn 

by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  out  of  an  ould  Note  of  Doc¬ 
tor  Jofeph  Texaris.  168. 

15.  A  large  Pedegree,  gathered  from  the  Lynes  de- 

sended  from  the  Woodviles  of  Grafton  in  Com.  North¬ 
ampton,  for  Thomas  Vifcount  Sauage,  by  Mr.  Thomas 
Chaloner.  Wherein  are  the  Defcendinge  I.ynes  of  the 
mod  of  the  Englilh  Nobility,  &c.  as  alfo  of  Forrane 
Nations.  168.  A. 

1 6.  Part  of  a  Defcent  of  Bruges  Lord  Chandois  ;  by 

the  third  Randle  Holme.  ,  gg 

17.  Defcents  of  divers  French  Princes  &  Nobles  ;  by 
a  French  Hand. 


Num.  2096 — 2099. 

18.  ImperfeCt  d able  of  the  feveral  Families  mentioned 
in  this  Book.  At  the  end. 

2°97- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  done  by  divers  Hands,  and 
on  the  outfide  entitled,  «  Coats  &  Creds,  See.” 

It  contains, 

1.  Armes  of  the  feverall  Lord-Mayors  of  London, 

from  ann.  11  Hen.  vii.  to  ann.  11.  R.  Caroli  1.  inclu- 
.five  :  hadily -tricked  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  from 
Stow’sSurvey.  fvid.  infra  §  9.)  2.  b. 

2.  Armes  of  feverall  Families  \vhofe  Names  found  like 
one  another ;  hadily  putt  down  in  Blafon,  or  hadily 
tricked,  by  the  fame. 

3.  Copie  of  a  Warant  or  Requed  to  Henry  Birkhen* 

ed  Efq;  Prothonotarie,  Sc  Jonathan  Bruen  Efq;  Baron 
of  the  Exchequer  of  Cheder,  defiring  them  to  differ  the 
fame  Mr.  Holme  to  perufe  the  antient  Recordes  in  their 
Cudodies.  4.  A.  b. 

4.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  feveral  Families  of  the  fame, 
or  of  near-founding  Names;  by  the  third  Randle  Holme. 

5.  Armes,  in  Colors,  of  the  Peers  affembled  at  the 

Parliament  atLincolne,  anno  28  Edw.  1.  by  Mr.  Thomas 
Chaloner;  as  it  feemeth.  g. 

6.  A  final  1  &  imperfeCl  Alphabet  of  Armes,  in  Colors ; 

by  the  fame.  gm 

7.  A  Collection  of  the  Armes  belonging  to  different 

Families  of  the  lame  Name  ;  or  ot  near-founding  Names: 
painted  by  the  fame  Hand.  9.  a. 

Both  thefe  IraCts  are  much  enlarged  by  the  fecond 
&  third  Randle  Holme:  but  without  Colors,  &  not  .  1  • 
ways  in  the  proper  Place;  but  where  they  found,  or  made 
Room.  Sc  vid.  fol.  77.  A.  80.  A.  b. 

8.  Armes,  as  they  feem,  of  thofe  who  were  in  the 
Commiffion  of  the  Peace,  in  the  County  of  Glouceder, 
A.  D.  1623.  painted  by  the  faid  Mr.  Chaloner.  76. 

9.  The  Armes  of  the  Maiors  of  London  (from  ann.  t 

Ricardi  1.  to  ann.  10  R.  Hen.  vn.)  hadily  tricked  by  the 
fecond  Randle  Holme,  fvid.  fupra§  1.)  78.  b. 

In  this  TraCt,  I  findinferted, 
xo.  The  Armes  borne  by  different  Families  of  the 
Name  of  Foder  ;  rudely  painted.  80.  A.  b. 

11.  Armes  borne  by  Families  of  the  fame,  or  of  near¬ 
founding  Names;  partly  tricked,  partly  in  Blafon.  82. 

12.  Armes,  mixed,  of  feveral  Englilh  Families ;  in 

Blafon,  by  the  third  Randle  Holme.  86. 

13.  Alphabetical  Table  pointing  to  the  feveral  Armes 
entred  into  this  Book.  At  the  end. 

2098. 

A  thin  Look  in  folio,  written  upon  Parchment ;  wherein 
I  find, 

1.  Ft  aginentary  Notes  relating  to  a  Mize  laid  upon 

the  Lands  holden  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  in  Denbiglhire, 
as  it  feemes.  j. 

2.  1  he  Original  Mize-book  of  the  Affeffment  laid  upon 

Chelhire,  about  ann.  10R.  Henrici  vni.  3. 

ihis  is  written  by  the  fame  Hand  as  the  former; 
and  may  be  imperfeCl  at  the  end. 

2099. 

A  Book  in  folio,  for  the  mod  part  written  by  the  hand 
of  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  &  by  his  Son,  on  the 
out-fide  thus  entitled,  “  Deeds  &  other  Writings  of 
feuerall  Familys  in  Chelhire,  &c.”  In  the  Defcription 
whereof,  I  lhall  proceed  in  the  fame  manner  as  I  have 
before  ufed  with  Books  of  this  fort.  It  contains  there¬ 
fore, 

1.  Copies  of,  and  Extracts  from  Records  preferved 
in  the  Protho-notaries  Office  in  Cheder,  relating  to  the 
Familyof  Alderley(antiently  written  Aldredes-lega.)  248. 

Among  thefe,  many  do  likewife  relate  to  the  Familv 
of  ACton,  &c. 

*  8  2,  Copies 


bibliotheca;  Harleiarias* 


481 


Num.  2099. 

2.  Copies  (or  Abftratts,  at  the  leaft)  of  Deeds  in  the 

hands  of  Francis  Afton  of  Alderley;  copied  by  me  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme,  A.  D.  1640.  .  260. 

Mr.  Holme,  generally  here,  &  elfewhcre,  gives  hafty 
Tricks  of  the  Seals,  according  as  they  occurred. 

3.  A  large  Deed  wherein  divers  others  are  recited,  & 

corroborated  by  the  Teftimony  of  a  Publick  Notary,  A  D. 
.1412.  and  the  Teftimonies  and  Seals  of  many  Chefhirc- 
Gentlemen,  concerning  Lands  &  Tenements  recovered 
by  Thomas  le  Grofvenor  Knight,  from  Ranulph  le 
Mainwaringe,  &c.  with  a  remarkable  Relation  of 
the  folemn  manner  ufed  by  Sir  Thomas,  in  prefence 
of  the  ethers,  of  Swearing  to  the  truth,  genuinefs, 
&  authenticity  of  the  faid  Deeds,  at  the  Altar  in  Mac¬ 
clesfield- Church,  over  the  Holy  Eucharift,  which  he  alfo 
received.  2 ^4-  k. 

This  Deed  was  in  Cuftody  of  Mr.  Dutton  of  Hatton, 
A.  D.  1649.  and  then  copied  by  the  fccond  Randle 
Holme. 

4.  Coppys,  or  Abdrafts  of  Deeds,  in  the  pcfkllion 

of  Mr.  Ravenfcroft  of  Bretton;  taken  by  Randle  Holme 
junior,  A.  D.  1645.  2&7- 

Among  others,  I  find, 

5.  An  Inftrument,  whereby  William  Venables  Baron 

of  Kinderton,  with  the  Reft:  of  the  Burgeffes  of  Middcl- 
wych,  made  George,  Wiiliam,  Humphrey,  8c  Lawrancc, 
the  Sons  of  Rafe  Ravenfcroft,  and  their  Children  law¬ 
fully  begotten,  free  Burgeffes  of  the  faid  Borough,  dat. 
12  July,  1485-  37  '• 

6.  Cheif  Rents  receiued  by  Thomas  &  Robert  Rauenf- 

croft,  out  of  the  Citty  of  Chefter,  A.  D.  163c.  284. 

7.  Leafe  of  the  Tythes  of  Wybanbury,  made  ir.  May 

1 61 7.  by  Sir  Thomas  Smyth  of  Hatheiton  Kt.  and  Dame 
Anne  Smythe  Widow,  his  Grandmother.  3 1  2. 

8.  Privy  Seal  of  K  James  1.  to  Thomas  Ravenfcroft 

of  Bretton  Efq;  for  the  Loane  of  £20.  daled  the  i'econd 
of  March,  1625.  ibid. 

9.  Carta  qua  Robertus  Senefcallus  de  Monte-alto,  con- 

cedit  Monachis  de  Bafing-werke,  in  perpetuam  Eletno- 
linam,  Pafturam  per  totam  Salteneiam  ;  et  totam  Com- 
munem  Pafturam  de  Hawrdin  ;  et  ut  habeant  ibi  I'alca- 
turam  Scirpi  ad  cooperturam,  quantum  needle  habuerint 
ad  cooperiundum  domos  fuas  deLith.  et  Communitatem 
nemoris  fui  de  Swerwde,  ut  habeant  ibi  de  mortuo  Bofco, 
quantum  neceffe  habuerint  ad  Ignium  nutrimenta  ;  et  de 
Viridi,  quantum  neceffe  habuerint,  ad  Edificia,  et  ad 
omnia  cetera  neceffaria.  3 1 7* 

10.  Extracts  made  by  Randle  Holme,  from  many  old 

Deeds  in  his  own  poffeflion.  319. 

Among  them,  1  find  mention  of 

11.  A  Mandate  from  Prince  Arthur,  to  the  Mayor 
of  Chefter,  & c.  for  Hopping  all  Strangers,  &  other  Paf- 
fengers  not  known  to  them,  who  were  goeing  for  Ireland; 
and  to  keepe  them  in  Cuftody,  without  Bade,  till  further 
Order,  dated  at  Chefter,  21  Novembr.  anno  7  Hen.  vii. 

.  .  328- 

12.  A  Writt  to  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  requiring  him 
with  all  the  Juftices  of  the  Shire,  to  affemble  together, 
&  eftablifti  a  Watch  throughout  the  Shire,  as  well  within 
Liberties,  as  without:  and  to  fecure  all  Vagabonds,  and 
Unthrifts,  &c.  dat.  9  Dec'  anno  27  Hen.  vm.  ibid. 

13.  Petition  of  Dauid  Molynton  to  John  Hope  Maior 

of  Chefter,  againft  Richard  Walker  his  Apprentice  : 
{hewing  that  he  had  played  at  Dice  for  dry  Money,  con¬ 
trary  to  his  Command  ;  for  which  he  did  bete  him  & 
chaftice  him.  For  which  the  Sheriffes  of  the  Citty  do 
trouble  him,  contrary  to  Law  &  Relon :  being  there 
is  no  Law  to  punifh  any  Man  for  bating  of  Ins  Wife  or 
Prentice,  Sic.  Therefore  defires  that  he  may  not  be 
any  long’er  vexed  ;  but  that  he  may  chaftice  his  Appren¬ 
tice  for  Mif-gouernance,  &c.  ibid. 

I  find  that  John  Hope  was  Mayor  of  Chefter  many 
times;  viz.  anno  ultimo  R.Henrici  v.  &  annis  i,  4.  5. 
&  6.  Regis  Henrici  vi. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  20991 


Then  follow, 

14.  Extracts  lrom  other  Deeds,  whofe  owners  are 

hot  fpecified.  _  7  2 9* 

Moft  of  thefe  relate  to  Lands  lying  within  the  Lord- 
fliip  of  Hawardyn,  or  places  not  far  diftant ;  to  the  Hof- 
pital  of  St.  John  Baptiltin  Chefter,  &c.  In  this  Trail  I 
likeaife  find, 

15.  A  Deed  whereby  the  falfe  Claim  of  one  Thomas 
Jcpfon,  who  called  liimftlf  Thomas  Swetenham,  was 
made  manifeft,  before  George  Lord  Strange.  &  ethers 
cf  the  beft  Gentry,  dat.  15  November,  anno  12  Hen.vii. 

355- 

1 6.  De  duobus  Mcffuagijs  &  diverfis  parcellis  Terre 
in  Gorllilowe  in  Kynartone,  et  in  Kynarton,  que  nuper 
fuerunt  Ilicardi  de  Gi  rftilow  de  Gorllilowe  ;  et  nunc  in 
tnanibus  Hugonis  lc  Maynwaiinge.  anno  4  Hen.  vi.  402. 

This  was  copied  by  Mr.  Holme,  A.  D.  1648; 
from  a  Parchment  Rcule  in  cuftody  of  Capt.  Geo.  Di¬ 
mock  of  Chefter. 

1 7.  His  Extiacls  from  Deeds  in  the  cuftody  of  Mr. 

Rauen  ofEUvvorth,  A.  I).  1651.  4°3‘ 

18.  Copies  of  four  Deeds  remaining  with  Mr.  George 

Lightfoot  of  Chefter.  4X7* 

Thefe  Tranfcripts  are  faid  to  be  mifplaced,  being 

putt  after  pag.  378. 

1 9.  Copies  of  the  Foundation  of  the  Free-Grammar- 

Schole  at  North-wich  (or  at  Witton  near  North-wich)  by 
Sir  John  Deane  Prieft,  Prebendary  in  Lincolne,  &  Par- 
fon  of  Great  St  Bartholomew’snear  Smithfeild  in  London. 
A.  D.  1558.  421. 

2  '.  Copie  of  the  Statutes  of  the  faid  Schole ;  made  by 
the  Founder.  _  423* 

Here,  he  wills  that  vpon  Thurfdaies  &  Saturdaies  in 
the  afternoon,  &  vpon  Holydayes,  the  Scholars  do  refrefh 
thcmfelues  :  and  that  a  Wecke  before  C  riftmafs  &  hal¬ 
ter  (according  to  the  old  Cultotue)  they  ban  e  and  keeper 
forth  of  the  Schoole  the  Schoole-mailer,  in  fuch  fort  as 
others  Schollers  doe  in  great  Schoolcs.  And  that  as  well 
in  the  Vacations,  as  the  other  dayes  aforefaid,  they  ufe 
their  Bowes  &  Arrowes  onely,  and  efehewe  all  Bow- 
leinge,  Cardinge,  Dyceinge,  Quiteinge,  and  all  other 
vnlawfull  Games. 

21.  Literte  Patentes  Regis  Jacobi  1.  quibus  evexit 
Ranulphum  Mac-Donell  tvlilitem,  Vice-Comitem  de 
Dunluce,  ad  gradum  Dignitatemq;  Comitis  de  Antrim, 
in  Regno  Hibernia:.  Tefte,  &c.  apud  Weftmonafterium, 
12  die  Decembris  anno  Regni  18.  428. 

£2.  The  lecond  Randle  Holmes  Extra&s  from  certain 
Deeds  in  his  own  cuftody.  429. 

Here  I  find, 

23.  Privy  Seale  of  K.  Edward  .  .  for  attaching 

&  imprifonmg  Roger  Dutton  Efq;  who  being  of  a  rebel¬ 
lious  minde,  for  his  Safegard  continueth  in  Santuaries  8c 
priuileged  Places  ;  aflirmeing  that  he  hath  his  Pardoii 
vnder  the  Great  Stale.  43°* 

24.  Extrafts  from  two  Deeds  in  Cuftody  of  Edmund 

Joydrell  of  Yerdfiey  F.fq;  A.D.  1686.  431. 

To  one  of  thefe,  is  an  hafty  Trick  of  the  Seal  ufed 
by  the  Black  Prince,  A.  D.  1355.  as  Earl  of  Chefter. 

2 5.  Aflignment  of  a  Leafe  of  ilemftowe-Farme,  alias 

Holtne-Houl'e  ;  made  by  William  Gamull  Alderman  of 
Chefter,  to  John  Cotgreave  Yeoman,  dal.  9  February 
1640.  432- 

26.  Litters:  Patentes  Regis  Caroli  1.  quibus  erexit 

Evanum  Llovd  de  Yale  inComitatu  Denbigh  Armigerum, 
in  Dignitatem  Baronctti ;  Anglicc,  of  a  Ba'onett.  Tefte, 
&c.  apudOxon.  2  die  Maij,  anno  Regni  20,  433. 

27.  Litterte  Confratermtalis  concetla  Willelmo  Qwy- 

tlierft  (nunc  Withers?)  et  Johanne  Conforti  ejus,  per 
Fratrem  Richardum  Priorem  Domus  Carmelitaruin  in 
Civitate  Ceftrenfi,  A.  D.  1643.  439- 

28.  Abftra&s  0/  Eight  Deeds  in  Cuftody  of  Major 

Thomas  Saliibury  of  I.ttlbrock  ;  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme,  in  October  1654.  44°* 

6  G  Here 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


482 


Num.  2099. 

Here  I  obferve, 

29.  Litterje  Patenfes  Regis  Edwardi  1.  quibvis  conce- 

dit  quod  Villa  de  Flint  fit  liber  Burgus  ;  et  Homines 
ejufdem  Ville,  liberi  fint  Bnrgenfes,  8cc.  dat.  per  ma- 
nuin  fiiam  apud  Flint,  8  die  Septembris,  anno  Regni 
fui,  12.  440. 

30.  Abftra<5t  of  a  Charter  from  Edward  the  Black 
Prince  to  theTowneof  Flynt ;  confirming  former  Char¬ 
ters,  Ac.  dat.  apud  Ceflriam,  fub  Sigillo  Scaccarij  fui 
ibidem,  20  die  Septembris,  anno  34  R.  Edwardi  in. 

442. 

31.  Abftraft  of  a  like  Charter  from  King  Richard  n. 

to  (he  fame  Town,  dat.  per  manuin  foam  apud  Weftmo- 
nafcerium.  29  d.e  Novembris,  anno  Regni  17.  444. 

32.  Litterar  Patentes  Henrici  Principis  Wallie,  Co- 

mitis  Ceftrire,  8cc.  ac  Locum-'cnentis  metuendiftimi  Uni. 
fui  Regis  et  Patris  in  partibus  Suth-Wallie  &  North- 
Wallie  ;  quibus  pro  quibufdam  Finibus  fibi  per  Tcnentes 
fuos  de  Conimoto  de  Co'.finill  infra  Comitatum  de  le 
biynt  nuper  Rcbelle-,  ad  opus  Regis  folutis  :  Recepit 
1  refatos  Eenentes  ad  Graciam  Regis  et  fui  ipfius,  et  eis 
perdonat,  &c.  dat.  apud  London,  primo  die  Aprilis, 
anno  i  2  regni  R.  Flenrici  iv.  445. 

33.  Cana,  qua  lhomas  Rempfton  Miles,  Conftabu- 
h.rtus  Caltri  de  1'lym,  ac  Vice-Comes  (Under-Sheriffe) 
et  Raglotus  (Il.’gh-Conftable)  Comitatus  de  Flynt,  con- 
ftituit  Johannem  llckcs  Locum-tenentem  fuumin  Officijs 
predidis  :  percipietido  annuatim  decern  Marcas  :  ita 
quod  idem  Jolumnes,  de  exitibus  de  eildem  Officijs  pro- 
venientibus,  Dne.  Katherine  Regine  Anglie  fpedantibus, 
ad  Scaccarium  ejufdem  Regine  apud  Flynt,  fideliter  ref- 
pondeat.  dat.  2  die  Odobris,  anno  1 2  Regis  Henrici  vi. 

446. 

Then  follow, 

34.  A  Rentall  of  all  Tenements,  Rents,  Cheif-Rents, 

Rent-Hennes,  Rent-Capons,  Pannage-Rents,  Herriotts, 
Boones,  &  Service,  due  vnto  James  Poole  Efq;  within 
the  County  of  Chefter,  taken  A.  D.  1642.  448. 

351  -A  Copie  of  the  laft  Will  &  Teflament  of  Thomas 
Alcocke,  Cittizen  &  Flaberdafher  of  London :  dated,  the 
Tenth  of  January  1652.  431. 

36.  Abflrads  of  Deeds  found  among  the  Sequeftrators; 

and  afterward,  reftored  to  the  Owners.  454. 

Here  I  find, 

37.  A  Coppy  of  the  lafl  Will  &  Teflament  of  Thomas 
Goofe  of  Chelter  Draper :  made  26  of  December,  1619. 
of  the  Probate  thereof ;  and  of  an  Order  made  by  the 
Court  of  Exchequer,  about  the  Execution  of  it.  457. 

•  '  ■■  ■  ;  -  Deed  given  (or  reftored)  to  Mr. 

I  teron  1  655.  46o. 

Deeds  given  (  r  reftored)  to  Mr. 

460. 

40.  Copus,  cr  Abitracts  of  Four  Deeds  given  to  Mr. 
William  Brock.  481. 

.1.  Copie  of  another,  given  Mr.  Thropp.  484. 

'•  Copi  her  remaining  with  the  Lord  Chol- 

roundeky  A.  D.  1  Of 6.  486. 

4-3.  Abili  ads  of  old  Deeds  in  the  pofleffion  of  Mr. 

4S7- 

44.  Conics  vf  3  Deeds  relating  to  the  Eftate  of  War- 

460.  &c.)  491. 

45.  Rental  of  the  Eftate  of  Warburton  of  Arley  ; 

temp.  R.  Jacobi /.  495. 

46.  Ab ft  reels  of  two  Deeds  1  elating  to  the  Wardfhip 

of  Peter  Warburton  Efq;  and  the  Divifion  of  his  Eftate 
after  his  deceal'e.  49g_ 

A.  '  I --  fan  Indenture,  made  23  March,  anno  8 
Caroli  1.  whereby  Sir  George  Boothe  of  Dunham-Maffey 
Knight  re  Baronet,  &  William  his  Son  8c  Heire,  in  con- 
fideration  of  20  Shillings,  fold  unto  William  Roecrofte 
A  Hugh  Wardle,  a  Mefuagc  in  Afhton  vnder  Lyme  in 
Lancaftr.  500. 

48.  An  Indenture  made  1  Martij  anno  4  Elizabeths 
Regime,  whereby  William  Earl  of  Pembroke,  for  120 
14 


Num.  2cgg. 

Pounds,  kid  a  Capital  Meftur.ge,  with  certain  Lands 
formerly  held  by  C\e  Province  in  Little  Saghall  alas 
Slebghall  in  Coni'.  Cellr.  502. 

49-  Releafe  of  Edward  Brerston  of  Whiclefwicke  in 
Com.  Lancaftr.  Gent,  (in  confideration  of  ^43.  6.  8. 
paid)  by  \\  illiam  Brei  eton  ofHandforthe  in  Com.  Ceftr. 
Efq;  of  his  Right  to  any  part  of  the  perfonal  Eftate  of  Sir 
Vrian  Brereton,  hi*  father,  or  of  Randulphe  his  bro- 
j  ther,  both  deceafed.  dat.  8  januarv,  anno  26  Elizabeths 
Regina:.  ~  '  503. 

50.  Mr.  Robert  Tatton’s  Pn  iof that  the  Wood  called 

Kings-wocd.  is  parcel  of  the  Lands  of  Gve  Province,  in 
Little  Salghall.  ^  304. 

Ihis  is  f  ollowed  by  Copies  of  divers  other  Writings, 
relating  to  the  laid  Wood. 

5 1 .  Confiderations  move'nge  the  Queenes  Tenants  of 

C.rabball,  beinge  three  in  Number,  8c  of  the  antient 
yearelv  Rent  of  40  pounds  ;  rateably,  as  other  Tenants 
o!  Great  Saghall  Sc  Little  Saghall,  to  haue  their  parte  8c 
portion  of  Common  £c  other  Waft  Ground,  now  in¬ 
tended  to  be  inclofed,  lyinge  to  the  faid  Townes  feue- 
ral,y-  _  509. 

52.  Rental  of  Tatton’s  Lands  in  Salghall,  as  it 
feeines  ;  with  fome  other  Writings  relating  to  that  place. 

510. 

53.  Abflrafts  of  Deeds  given  to  Sir  William  Brere¬ 
ton,  A.  D.  :656.  3,  A, 

54.  Ab fl rafts  of  5  Deeds ,  (relating  to  Salghall^)"  in. 
the  hands  of  James  Doe  of  Salghall,  A.  D.  1 656.  51 6. 

,  55-  Original  Letter  of  Ifaac  Antrobus  &  Richard 
lovverfon,  to  John  Bridgeinan  Bifhop  of  Chefter  4  dated 
14  December  1629.  concerning  new  Truftees  to  the 
Schoole  of  St.  Bees  in  Cumberland  ;  with  regard  to 
which  they  defire  that  the  Provoft  and  Fellows  of  Queens 
College  in  Oxford  might  be  confulted.  3 1 8. 

They  fay  that  they  perceive  his  Lordfhip  (vpon  lb  me 
privat  mans  Information)  had  appointed  three  Iiulband- 
men  to  be  Governors  (or  Truftees )  of  the  faid  Schole : 
one  of  whome  was  a  fervile  Fellowe,  and  a  Sheriffs 
Baliffe. 

56.  A  Fragment  written  by  an  older  Hand ;  contain¬ 
ing  undigefted  Collections  8c  obfervations,  relatino-  to 
our  anti,  nt  Earls  of  Chefter,  and  other  Nobles.  522. 

57.  A  Note  of  the  Lands  belonging  to  the  Free- 

Schole  of  Macclesfeld.  532. 

58.  Sir  Peter  Leiccfter’s  opinion  (delivered  in  his 

Book.  fol.  37.  a.)  concerning  Amieia,  daughter  of 
Hugh  de  Cyvelioc.  533,  , 

Namely,  that  Ihe  being  illegitimate,  could  not  be 

a  Coheir  :  and  confequently,  that  Sir  Randle  Mainwa- 
ringe  (Sir  Peters  own  Grandfather  by  the  Mothers  fide) 
had  no  right  to  qua:  ter  the  Armes  of  the  old  Earls  of 
Chefter,  although  this  Amieia  was  married  to  his  An- 
ceftor,  and  Sir  Randle  defcended  from  her. 

59.  Anfwer  of  Sir  Thomas  Maimvaring  to  Sir  Peter 

Leicefter.  ibid. 

Here  Sir  Thomas  is  pretty  warm  ;  and  proves  that 
fince  what  Hugh  Kevelioc  gave  with  this  Amieia  to  Ra- 
nulph  Mainwaringe,  was  giuen  in  freemarriage  (in  li- 
bero  Maritagio)  it  certainly  proves  that  Amieia  was  law- 
full  :  becaule  a  Baftard  is  not  capable  to  receive  any  thing 
that  way:  with  oilier  Arguments :  moll  of  which  are 
as  ftrong  for  Geva  the  l)  tughter  of  Hugh  Lupus :  whom 
Sir  Thomas  owns  to  be  illegitimately  begotten,  &  whofe 
Caufe  Sir  Simond  Devves  defends. vid  (38.  C.  8.  fol.  30.) 

60.  Indec  Virorum  :  or  an  Alphabetical  Table  re- 

ferring  to  the  leveral  Perfons  Names  mentioned  in  this 
Book.  537* 

61.  Index  Locorum  :  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  the 

Names  of  Places.  53 1 . 

62.  A  Draught  of  a  long  Building,  defigned  for  a 
Mint  :  perhaps  in  the  Cattle  at  Chefter.  Loofe  at  the 
end. 

63.  A  Writt  of  K.  James  1.  bearing  Tefte  15  Septem¬ 

ber, 


Bibliothecse  HnrleianaS. 


'JuiTi.  2099,  2IOO. 

bcr,  anno  Regnl  iq  ;  about  the  partition  of  ah  Eftate  in 
Little  Mancoit,  within  the  County  of  Flint  ;  with  the 
Inquifition  taken  thereupon.  561. 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  on  the  outfide,  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme,  thus  entituled,  “  Pedegrees  of  feueral 
I'amilyes,  with  the  Quartered  Coates.”  It  is  rather  a 
Khapfody  of  Heraldical  matters,  mangled  &  in  bad 
condition,  for  the  greateft  part,  done  by  feveral 
perfons ;  and  of  which  1  think  no  more  need  be  faid 
than  this  that  follows, 

1.  Pedegree  ot  the  Royal  Family  of  England,  deduced 
from  Adam  to  K.  James  1.  by  fome  Wellhman  perhaps. 

.  .  i.b. 

Intermixed  with  this,  I  find, 

2.  The  Pedegree  &  Aimes,  with  Quarterings  of 
Langford,  as  I  take  it ;  by  the  fccoiid  Randle  Holme. 

6.  A. 

3.  Divers  Wdfii  Pedegrees,  felt  down  by  the  fame, 

and  elfewhere  in  this  book.  7. 

4.  Quarterings  &  Crofts  of  Salulbury  ;  as  painted  on 

the  Wanfcot  in  the  perlar,  at  Mr.  Saliibury’s  of  Ruge  in 
Comitatu  Merioneth.  7_ 

5.  Pedegre.s  of  Eyton.  (vid.  Armes  of  Eaton  of 

Eaton,  v.’in  142  Quartcmigs,  faid  to  be  too  few  by  20. 
fob  12.  C.)  8.  A. 

6.  Pedegree  ofEdwyn.  IO-  y,\- 

7.  Pedegree  of  Coll.  Robert  Soutly,  who  died  5  Sept. 

lC53-  .  13.  a. 

8.  Defcent  of  Heaton  of  Heaton  in  Llevennv.  1  3.  b. 

9.  Pedegree  of  John  Broughton,  made  by  the  focond 

Randle  Holme,  A.  I).  1651.  '  ,  ? 

10.  Pedegree  ol  Mr.  Hugh  Nanny  of  Merlonei’li 

Shire  made  by  the  fame.  j  - 

11.  Armes  Quarterage  by  Gerard;  colledcd  for 
the  Lord  Gerard’s  filler  by  the  fame.  A.  D.  1636.  1 9.  A. 

Then  follows, 

1  2.  The  Gcnealogie  or  Pedegree  of  the  honorable 
Charles  Worlley,  Major-Generall,  &c.  to  Oliver  Crom- 
rrcll ;  collefted,  as  well  out  of  the  auntient  family  of 
the  Worfleys  ol  Worlley.  in  the  County  Palatine  of 

I.ancafler,  as  out  of  other  authentic  Records  &  Collec¬ 
tions  of  diuers  Pedegrees  of  noble  &  worlhipfull  Howfes 
m  feueral  Cpuntyes ;  and  contynued  :  by  the  fame 
Randle  Holme,  (with  this  I  find.)  ,2 

1  3.  Pedegree  &c.  of  Legh  ofEaft-hall.  32.  b.' 
14.  Pedegree  &  Quarterings  of  Rowland  Hill  of 
Soul  ton  Efq;  &  of  Rowland  Hill  of  Hawke  (tone  Gent 
tranfenbed  or  col.'eclcd  by  John  Salulbury  de  Gebylteck 
A.  D.  1667.  for  Mi.  Holme,  loofe.  35- A. 

Mr.  Salulbury  fays  that  he  tranferibed  this  Defcent 
out  ox  the  Bookes  ol  Owen  Salulbury  of  Rug  Efq-  R0 
bert  Davyes  of  Gwyfaney  F.fq;  i  eter  Ellis  of  Wrexam 
Arthur  Kynafion  ol  Sant  Gent.  &  George  Owen  Har- 
nes  booke  ol  the  Gcnealogie  of  K.  James  in  Print,  a0 
1604.  and  out  ol  the  Books  and  Collodions  of  the  an- 
cient  Wellh  Bards. 

'5-  PedegtecS;  Quarterings  of  Mr.  John  Lee  of  Lee; 

by  the  faid  Randle  Holiue. 

Worfleys  Pedegree  L  followed  by 
rC  The  Pedegree  of  Herbert,  Wynne,  &  Vans  ban  of 
Lloddyard  :  by  another  hand.  6  ^ 

.  7.  Pedcr  rcc  of  Piers  Davies  of  Cheder  Linen-draL ; 
rruely  colluded,  gathered  &  feu  downs  according  to  thl 
a  undent  Records  ot  Wales,  and  the  bookes  of  the  bell 

.  L  leans  very  'hard' that  fo  many  Crowns,  Coronets, 
royal  be  noble  Lames  as  adorn  this  true  Pedegree  ffor- 
footli .)  at  the  beginning,  fhould  dwindle  into  a  Linen- 
Draper  m  the  end. 


Num.  2ioo,  2iot. 

18.  Pedegree  of  James  Phillips  of  London,  with  the 

Armes.  gg. 

This  is  of  the  fame  honeft  Randle’s  drawing  up, 
and  is  thus  lubferibed  by  him,  “  This  Pedegreywas  col¬ 
lected  out  of  auntient  Records  &  warrantable  Authores 
by  Randle  Holme  of  the  City  -of  Chelter  Efquire,  De¬ 
puty  to  the  Office  of  Armes,  anno  1633.  June  28.” 

19.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Alphabetical  Table  of 
the  Pedegrees  extant  in  this  book  :  at  the  end; 

2101. 

A  book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  fingle  Papers,  with 
fome  Parchments  and  particular  Tracts,  bound  up 
together  by  the  third  Randle  Holme  ;  and,  by  him 
(on  the  cutfide)  thus  entituled,  “  Deeds  of  Abbey’s 
84  Priory’s,”  &:c.  of  which  I  ffiall  give  the  following 
brief  Account. 

1.  The  faid  Mr.  Holmes  Lift  of  the  Things  of  mod 
note  in  this  book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Anfwer  ol  William  Bonnet  &  Sibill  his  Wife, 

to  the  Complaint  of  Sir  William  Bfereton  Baronet,  in  a 
Plea  of  Trefpafs.  j 

The  occafion  of  the  Suit  was  this ;  Sir  William 
being  no  Free-man  cf  Chefter  fends  two  Sacks  of  Oats  to- 
leil  in  the  Corn-market  there;  from  which  Bonnet  &  his 
Wife  (being  the  City-Officer)  took  two  Quarts,  as  a 
Toll.  ^ 

3.  Sir  William  Brereton’s  reply  :  fhewing  that  thofe 

Oats  grew  in  a  certain  clofe  called  Lc  [eoffreys  Halke 
which  formerly  belonged  to  the  Nuns  of  Chefter  ;  and 
being,  in  their  time.  Toll-free  throughout  England,  was 
not  then  liable  to  any  Toll  at  all.  164. 

Thefe  two  Pleadings  are  loofe. 

4.  A  date  of  the  Revenue  of  St.  John’s  Hofpital  in 

Chefter  ;  and,  in  part,  how  to  be  applied  170. 

5.  Letter  of  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter  to  Robert 
Johnes,  Mafter  ot  the  laid  Hofpital ;  requiring  that  he 
fhould  fuftain  13  poor  Men  there,  all  of  their  Commu¬ 
nity  ;  without  admitting  of  any  Strangers.  ibid. 

6.  Mr.  Johnes’s  Anfwer  :  fhewing  that  the  Hofpital 

was  not  able  to  maintain  13  poor  men  ;  but  if  it  was  fo, 
that  the  Inhabitants  of  Chefter  had  a  right  to  a  preference 
there  ;  it  fhould  be  fo  for  the  future.  170.  b. 

7.  Notes  touching  Lands,  See.  parcels  of  the  Pof- 
feffions  of  feveral  Monafteries,  granted  to  Sir  Chrifto- 
pher  Hatton  Knight,  anno  28  R.  Elizabeths.  171. 

S.  Note  about  the  Grant  of  the  old  Shire  Hall  in 
Chefter,  to  George  Ireland  ;  25  May,  anno  23  R  Eli¬ 
zabethan  ibid.' 

9.  Part  of  the  Grant  of  the  Rectory  &  Church  of  St. 

John  Baptift  in  Chefter,  to  Alexander  King,  for  21 
years  ;  he  paying  the  annual  Rent  of  53s.  4d.  and 
allowing  jT :  3.  6.  8.  annually  to  the  Vicar.  1 71.  b„ 

10.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbie’ 3  Draught  of  a  Petition  to 
K.  Charles  1.  for  Mr.  Thomas  Powel,  who  had  a  right 
to  a  Ferry  over  the  River  Merfey,  from  the  Priory  of 
Birkenhead  to  the  Town  of  Liverpool ;  wherein  he  was 
interrupted  by  Ed  ward  Nicholfon  &  William  fematte.  172 

11.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbie’s  Draught  of  a  Certificate 

to  the  King,  concerning  the  faid  Ferry.  ,  7- 

12.  Original  Letter  from  Mr.  John  Ratclyffo  Maior  of 
Chefter,  to  Sir  William  Brereton  Baronet,  dated  the 
28th  of  Odober  1628. 

This  is  about  a  Suit  which  Sir  William  had  com  • 
menced  againft  the  City  (contrary  to  his  promife)  in  the 
Court  of  Wards  ;  upon  their  diftraining  for  Murage  at 
the  Nunnery  in  Chefter.  °  3 

it.  Mr.  RprnrrW  \ai hltKia*  - r  .L.  t.  f- 

—  - ...  ....... o  v... a.  1C1&,  oc  ixoyai  ratents, 

touching  the  foundation  &  Privileges  of  St.  Maries  Nun¬ 
nery  m  Chefter.  ^  117.  180.  1S8.  193. 

15-  ^hat  the  Kings  of  England,  after  the  Conqueft, 
eiercifed  no  Dominion  within  the  County-Palatine  of 

Chefter, 


484 


Catalogus 


Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2101. 

Chefter  untill  the  Death  of  Johannes  de  Scotia,  the  Fad 
of  the  old  Earls.  J79 

This  was  taken  out  of  an  ould  Vellom-booke  of  John 
Goulborne  of  Goulborne,  A.  D.  1610.  and  tranfcribed 
by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme. 

1 0.  The  Gabull-Rents  which  the  Sheriff's  be  charged 
with  ;  vewed  &  fet  forth  in  the  firil  Maioralty  of  Henry 
Gee,  A.  D.  1533.  186. 

17.  Copy  of  a  Leafe,  whereby  Margery  Pafmyche 

Priorcfs  of  the  Nuns  of  Chefter,  dimifed  to  Thomas 
Croghton,  one  Mefuage  in  Chefter,  for  70  years  ;  at  the 
annual  Rent  of  20  Shillings,  dat.  10  December  anno  16 
Regis  Henrici  viix.  192. 

18.  Extrad  from  a  Deed  of  Sale  of  an  houfe  in 

Bridgeftreet,  formerly  belonging  to  the  Nuns  of  Chefter, 
by  John  Poole  Sc  his  Sons,  to  iv.r.  Edmund  Gamull  : 
26  May,  anno  33  Elizabethte  Reginte.  196. 

tg.  Abftiad  of  a  Deed,  whereby  Agnes  de  Dutton 
Priorefs  of  the  Nuns  of  Chefter,  lett  to  perpetual  Fee- 
Firme  a  Place  of  Land  in  Bridgeftreet.  dat.  in  vigilia  S. 
Cedde,  anno  48  R.  Edwardi  111.  196.  b. 

ao.  Mr.  William  Noyes  Opinion,  that  Sir  William 
Brereton’s  holding  the  Scire  of  the  Nunnery  of  Chefter, 
did  not  difeharge  him  of  Murage,  when  levied  by  the 
City.  198. 

21.  Writt  ofK.  Charles  1.  to  the  Maior  &  Citizens  of 

Chefter,  commanding  them  not  to  vex  or  moleft  the  Hof- 
pital  of  St.  Giles  without  the  Eaft  Barres  of  their  faid 
City,  upon  the  account  of  Murage,  Pannage,  or  Pontage. 
Tefte,  See.  9  Septembris,  anno  Regni  5.  200. 

22.  Confinnatio  Gregorij  Papa:  ix.  facta  Monachis 

Cellrenfibns,  fuper  Appropriatione  Ecclefiaruin  de  Preft- 
bury,  de  Bruera,  deNeflon,  deEaftham,  deBunnbrough 
8e  de  Kirkby.  202. 

23.  De  Donatione  Ecclefiarum  de  Bruera  8c  de  Pul- 

ford,  Monafterio  S.  Werburgte.  203. 

24.  Deeds  relating  to  the  Suit  between  the  Abbat  of 

Dieulacres  Sc  William  de  Ipftanes,  upon  the  claim  made 
by  the  faid  Abbat  of  Right  of  Common  in  the  Pafture  of 
Ipftanes.  temp.  R.  Henrici  hi.  204. 

2.-.  Writt  of  Prince  Edward  as  Earl  of  Chefter,  com¬ 
manding  the  Maior  8c  Shireves  there  to  apprehend  8c 
committ  to  Gaol,  Ralf  Etone,  for  his  bad  abearing 
toward  Mailer  William  Thomas  Clerc  8c  Warden  of  St. 
John  Baptifts  Hofpital  in  Chefter.  Tefte,  8tc.  j  8  Julij, 
anno  17  R.  Edwardi  v.  205.  b. 

26.  Notes  relating  to  certain  Religious  IJoufcs,  taken 
fromfome  of  Mr.  Roger  Dodlworth’s  Writings.  205.  c. 

27.  Notes  touching  certain  Privileges  granted  to  the 

Priory  of  Byrkenhed.  208. 

28.  A  blank  Letter  of  Confraternity,  under  the  Hand 

8c  Seal  of  Antonius  a  Mutina  General  of  the  Capuchines. 
printed.  210. 

29.  Copie  of  the  Letters  Patents  of  K.  Henry  vm. 

whereby  he  diflblvedthe  Priory  of  Canons  of  the  Order 
of  St.  Vidor,  obferving  the  Rule  of  St.  Auguftin,  l'citu- 
ate  near  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Dublin  ;  and  refound¬ 
ed  the  Prior  and  Canons  thereof  into  the  Dean  8c  Chap¬ 
ter  of  the  faid  Cathedral.  Tefte,  See.  10  die  Maij,  anno 
Regni  .13.  an. 

30.  The  feuerall  Debts  of  fuch  Tenants  as  pay  Rents 

vnto  the  Deane  of  Chrift-Church,  in  Dublin  ;  and  which 
are  due  vnto  the  Honorable  Sir  George  Radcliffe  Kt.  by 
vertue  of  a  Sequeftration  of  the  faid  Deanrie,  from  the 
right  Honorable  the  Lord-Depude  8c  Councell.  213. 

This  is  figned  by  Henry,  Bilhop  of  Elphin  :  and 

feems  to  be  wholly  of  his  Hand-writing. 

31.  A  Leafe  of  the  Tithe-Come  of  Berneton,  made 

1 2  June  anno  3  Edwardi  vt.  to  John-Bafnett  by  Peter 
Shakerley  Efquier,  for  36  years  ;  at  the  annual  Rent  of 
^2:6:8.  2 1 8. 

It  feems  that  the  Deane  Sc  Chapter  of  the  Cathedrall 
Churche  of  Grille  in  Oxford  had  left  to  the  faid  Peter 
and  one  Bryan  Trauers  the  Redorie  8c  Perfonage  of 


Num.  2101. 

Budworthe,  with  the  Chappell  of  Witton  &  Pever, 
for  40  years  (to  commence  alter  the  Expiration  of  the 
faid  Leafe  which  the  Dean,  See.  had  granted  to  oneGeorge 
Cotton  Efqr  ;  at  the  annual  Rent  of  £82  :  2  :  8. 

32.  Apographum  Record i ;  viz.  Cartse,  qua  Johan¬ 

nes  Rex  eonfirmavit  Abbatie  S.  Marie  de  Magio  in  Hi¬ 
bernia,  omnes  Terras  et  Tenementa,  quede  dono  Ante- 
cefl'orum  fuorum,  vel  illorum  qui  poll  Adventum  ipfius 
in  Hibernian)  illis  benelccerant :  tain  de  dono  Regun) 
vel  Princi;  uam  Francorum,  unde 

Munimcnium  vel  Warnntum  habeant.  dat.  1  die  No- 
Vembris,  anno  Regni,  2.  27,0. 

33.  Rentale  ccrt.  parcell.  Terrarum  8c  Poflcflionum 

nuper  Hofpitalis  S.  Johannis  Baptiile  extra  Novam  Por- 
tam  Civil  at  is  Dublin,  ccnfcdum,  A.  D.  1583.  225. 

This  is  written  upon  Parchment  8c  is  authentic.  At 
the  bot  1,  is  a  M  rrant  i  ned  by  the  then  Lords  Juf- 
tices  in  the  behalfe  ot  Thomas  Coppinger  of  Youghally 
to  whom  Q.  Elizabeth,  (in  conlideration  of  his  greate 
I.ofies)  was  willing  to  grant  an  Eftate  of  Fee-farme  in  fo 
much  of  her  Lands  in  Ireland,  as  v'ould  amount  to  the 
annual  Rent  oi£  1 4  12:0. 

34.  Carta,  qua  Robertus  de  Ferrarijs  Comes  de  Not- 
inghani  concedit  Ecclefiam  S.  Maria:  et  S.  Hardulfi  de 

lefias  S.  Ofwaldi  de  Noftla.  227. 

35.  Confinnatio  Cartce  piaxlida:,  per  Hugonem  de 

Feirarijs  Roberti  filium.  ibid. 

36.  Carta  Helberti  de  Laceio  qua  confirmat  Funda- 

tionem  cum  Dotatioiie  Canonicorum  S.  dementis  in 
Caftro  de  Pome  frado.  228. 

37.  Abftrad  of  a  Charter,  w  hereby  Robert  de-Lacy 

gave  the  Tovvne  of  Nether-Sutton,  to  Gilbert  rhe  Her- 
mite  of  St.  James  of  Notall,  and  to  his  ten  Brethren  there 
ferueing  God,  228.  b. 

38.  The  Confirmation  of  Robert  de  Lacy,  of  Ber- 

noldefwick,  8c  many  other  things  to  the  Monaftery  of 
Kirkftall.  ibid. 

This  Deed  wras  in  the  keepeing  of  Richard  Hartley 
of Bemoldfwick- Coates,  A.  D.  1655. 

39.  Abftrad  of  a  Charter,  whereby  Robert  Lacy  of 

Pomfret,  gave  Lands  in  Killing-hall  to  the  Abbey  of  Kirk- 
ftaft.  "  229. 

This  was  taken  from  Ralf  Broke’s  Difcovery. 

40.  An  Agreement  between  John  Lacy  Conftable  of 
Chefter  Sc  the  Deane  of  St.  Peters  of  Yorke  ;  for  Com¬ 
mon  of  Pafture  in  Brotherton.  dat.  9  Julij,  A.  D.  1 339. 

23°- 

Th.s  was  m  a  Coucher-booke  of  Edmund  Bunny’s 
of  Newland  near  Wakefelld,  Efqj 

Then  follow', 

41.  Abftrads  or  Copies  of  divers  Original  Charters 
made  by  the  Lacies,  8c  others  touching  the  Churches  of 
Whalley,  Edesford,  St  Johnof  Jerufalem,  St.  JohnofPon- 
tefrad,  Noftell,  Kirkftall,  8cc.  taken  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme,  who  alfo  wrote  thofe  above  rehearfed.  230.  b. 

4?.  Collediones  quaedam  ex  Regiftris  Teftainentorum 
in  Ollicio  Regiftrarij  Curiie  PrEerogativae,  Londini,  238. 

Thefe  feem  to  have  been  taken  from  fome  of  Mr. 
Roger  Dodfworth’s  Collcdions. 

43.  Abftrads  of  feveral  old  Deeds,  owned  to  have 

been  taken  from  Mr.  Dodfivorth’s  Book.  240. 

Thefe  relate  to  divers  noble  8c  antient  Families  ; 
as  alfo  to  the  Churches  or  Monafteries  of  Quarrera,  St. 
John  of  Bedford,  Sibetune,  Alba  landa,  8cc. 

44.  Ex  Regiftro  Prioratus  de  Blithe  in  Com.  Noting- 

ham.  245. 

45.  Ex  Cards  Roberti  Lifie  de  Gosford  &  Felton  in 

Com.  Northumbr.  A.  D.  1586.  ibid. 

46.  Ex  Cards  antiquis  Richardi  Malyuerer  ue  Allerton 

in  Com.  Ebor.  Militis,  A.  D.  1584.  249. 

Amongft  other  Religious  Houfes,  thefe  principally 
concern  thatof  Motesfont  in  Hampfhire:  and  theExtrads 
from  Mr.  Dodfworth’s  Collcdions  feem  not  10  end,  before. 

265.  b. 

7  Then 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae- 


Num.  2101,  2102. 

Then  follow,  in  the  Rere. 

47.  Index  Virorum.  268. 

48.  Index  Locorum.  At  the  end. 

2102. 

A  Book  in  foiio  confifting  of  a  parcel  of  fingle  &  inde¬ 
pendant  papers,  bound  up  together  by  the  third  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme,  and  by  him  entitled  on  the  back,  or  out- 
fide,  “Bills  &  Bonds  fued  in  the  Courts  within  Chefter ; 
with  other  Writtings.”  In  defcribing  of  which,  I  ftiall 
take  this  fhort  Courfe  :  as  particularly  obferving  in  the 
whole  Colleftion,  only 

1.  The  faid  Mr.  Holmes  account  of  the  Things  of 
moll  Note  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Collection  of  Bills  8c  Bonds  above-mentioned; 
which  containing  moftly  TranfaCtions  of  private  Families, 
I  might  pafs  over  in  the  General  ;  I  (hall  neverthelefs 
take  notice  of 

3.  The  Bond  of  Robert  Prichard  Prebendary  of  Wor- 

cefter,  of  £40.  made  to  the  Deane  &  Chapter  of  Chelter, 
the  6th  of  October  1625.  431. 

This  was  in  the  behalf  of  Thomas  ap  William  Tho¬ 
mas  his  Nephew,  who  had  a  Grant  of  an  Almes-mans 
Place  in  the  Cathedral  of  Chefter,  into  which  one  Raphe 
Holland  had  gotten  by  virtue  of  a  former  Grant.  It  was 
therefore  agreed,  that  Holland  fliould  keep  the  Place,  8c 
the  other  be  allowed  an  annual  Penfion  of  5  Marks,  unt  ill 
a  Vacancy  fliould  happen. 

4.  Abell  Brearley’s  Bond  of  £  1 00.  to  John  Bridgeman 

Bifhop  of  Chefter,  dated  19  June  1629.  433. 

This  was  for  the  Sollemnization  of  a  Marriage  be¬ 
tween  James  Meale  &  Elizabeth  Holland,  in  the  face  of 
the  Church  of  Rachdele,  or  Millrowe-Chapell.  Divers 
other  Bonds  of  this  kind  I  pafs  over. 

5.  The  Bond  of  Phillip  0  Reilly  of  Cluneany  in  the 

County  of  Cavan  Efq;  &  Kathrin  Rely  alias  mac  Muhon 
Widow,  to  Rannald  Earl  of  Antrim,  for  payment  of  /,6o. 
dat.  23  July  1634.  43.S. 

Hereunto  the  Gentlewoman  putt  down  part  of  her 
Name  [catrina  Ma~|  in  handfome  Irilh,  Characters. 

6.  Petition  of  John  Waddinge  Clerke,  to  the  Howfe 
of  Commons  in  Ireland,  againft  John  Kinge  Clerke,  a 
Member  of  the  Convocation  :  about  A.  D.  1640.  47 1. 

7.  Receipt  for  £300 :  16:8:  paid  by  the  Maior  & 
Citizens  of  Chefter,  to  certain  Merchants  of  Galway  in 
Ireland,  for  2  8  Tonns  8c  one  Hogfliead  of  Sack  8c  Hul- 
locke,  and  5  Hogfheads  of  Aqua  Vitae,  1 5  May  1582. 

478. 

8.  A  Coppy  of  that  Draught  of  a  factious  Petition  to 

theHoufeof  Commons,  which  was  delivered  to  me  March 
18  .  .  .  .  by  my  Brother  Hue  Wilbraham,  from  divers 
great  Ones.  544. 

It  is  in  the  Name  of  Knights  8c  Gent,  of  the  County- 
Palatine  of  Chefter ;  and  acknowledges  the  great  bene¬ 
fits  flowing  from  that  Houfe,  &  defiling  the  Continuance 
thereof,  with  their  lpeedie  calling  a  Synod  ;  the  Chang¬ 
ing  their  Countie-Court-Daie,  for  the  belter  Oblervance 
of  the  Lords  day  ;  the  ereCting  a  Fort  alt  Ik-lbree  ;  the 
providing  Money  8c  Ammunition  at  Chcflcr,  befoie  any 
Souldiers  be  lent  into  their  Countrey  to  be  billeted  ;  the 
inabling  the  Juftices  for  puniftiment  of  inlolent  8c  dilor- 
derly  Souldiers,  and  authorifing  the  Juftices  8c  fuch  of 
Quality  as  they  fliould  call  to  them,  for  Afl'efling  fitt  8c 
moderate  Rates  for  Provifion  of  Horfe  8c  Foot  ;  the 
taking  away  the  Votes  of  Popifti  Lords  in  Parliament ; 
and  the  fullering  noe  Recufant  to  beare  Office  in  the 
Common  wealth. 

9.  An  Agreement  between  Thomas  Lawton  Efquior 

Recorder  of  Chefter,  8c  Mr.  Robert  Whitbie  Clerke  of 
the  l’entice  there,  about  certain  Fees  claimed  by  each  of 
them,  as  incident  to  his  Office,  dat.  the  27th  of  Novem¬ 
ber,  anno  2  R.  Jacobi  1.  553. 

10.  Bond  of  Thomas  I.eycefter  of  Toft  Yomon  in 
£ 200.  made  to  Sir  Richard  Wilbraham  Sheriffe  of  Che- 

Cat.  Haul,  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2102,  2103. 

fhire,  for  the  fafe  keeping  of  the  Cattle  of  Raff  Lcycef- 
ter  of  Tofte  Efquiour,  feized  (upon  his  Outlawry  in  a 
Plea  of  Debt)  to  his  Majefties  ufe.  dat.  4  November, 
1616.  556. 

1 1 .  A  Certificate,  figned  by  many  Perfons,  letting 
forth,  that  Elizabeth  wiffe  of  Thomas  Ormifliawe  of 
Skclmerfdale  in  Lancafhire,  Hufbandman,  was  reputed 
to  be  a  verie  vifious,  incontinent,  8c  lewd  Woman  ;  a 
beginner  8c  railer  of  Strife  8c  Diffenfion,  between  many 
Hulbands  Sc  their  Wives;  8c  the  caufe  of  the  Decay  8c 
Ruin  of  many  Families,  by  inveigling  People  to  fpend 
their  Subftance  upon  her.  dat.  1  1  Julie  1632.  566. 

1 7.  Obfervations  touching  the  Eftate  of  Thomas  Man- 
waring  Elq;  as  they  occurred  upon  perufal  of  the  Inden¬ 
ture  of  Covenant  of  his  Mariage,  dated  13  June  1641. 

r-  .  571- 

13.  Fragmentary  Copies  of  fome  old  Deeds  8c  Inftru- 
menls  relating  to  Lands.  375.  596.  611.  617.  641. 

646.  .649. 

14.  Part  of  an  Entrance-book  of  Recognizances  & 

other  matters  of  Court  Bufinefs  in  Chefter,  regiftred 
or  noted  down  as  they  happened,  tempore  R.  Eliza¬ 
beths.  180. 

15.  Certificate  of  William  Maffy  Mayor  of  Chefter, 
touching  the  lawful  Mariage  of  Thomas  Pilkinton  with 
Jane  his  wife,  and  of  the  Legitimacy  of  Robert  their 
fon.  dat.  27  November,  anno  33  Elizabethan.  605, 

16.  Part  of  the  Draught  of  an  Agreement,  made  17  th 
of  October,  anno  10  R.  Elizabethan;  between  Edward 
Madock  of  Horfeley  in  Com.  Flint.  Gent.  8c  Thomas 
Darwall  of  Milton-Grene  in  Com.  Ceftr.  Yoman.  634. 

This  was  for  a  Marriage  to  be  folemnized  between 
John  ap  Edward  Madoc  Sonne  8c  Heire  of  the  faid  Ed¬ 
ward,  and  Elez  Darwall  Suiter  cf  the  faid  Thomas. 

17.  An  Indenture  made  19  Odtcber  1615.  between 

the  old  Sheriffes  &  the  new  Sheriffes  of  the  Citty  of 
Chefter  :  wiuieffmg  that  the  faid  late  Sheriffes  had 
then  delivered  up  the  Gaole  of  the  Northgate,  Sc  the 
Cullouie  thereof,  8c  all  the  Prifoners  therein,  vnto  the 
laid  newe  Sheriffes;  together  with  the  Names  of  the 
faid  Prifoners,  and  the  feverall  Caufes  of  their  Imprifon- 
ment.  645. 

1 8.  Draught  of  an  Obligation  binding  Alderman  Ran¬ 

dal  Mayn taring  to  pay  to  the  Dean  8c  Chapter  of  Chef¬ 
ter  halt  the  Rent  of  their  Tythe-Barne,  8c  Tythe-Corne; 
with  other  Covenants.  648.  b. 

1  he  Number  of  Papers  in  this  Volume  is  great,  yet 
I  take  their  Importance  not  to  be  confiderable  :  however, 
many  original  Hands  may  be,  from  hence,  obferved. 

2  1 0  3 . 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  a  parcel  of  fingle  Tracts 
8c  loofc  Papei  s,  bound  up  together  by  the  third  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme  ;  and,  by  him,  on  the  out-lide,  thus  enti- 
tuled,  “Church-matters  ;  as  Tythes,  Mortuarys,  with 
l'everal  Things  concerninge  many  Churches,  8c  Parifh 
Bufmefl’e  Among  which,  I  obferve 

1 .  The  faid  Randle  Holme's  Catalogue  of  the  Things 

of  molt  Note  in  this  Book,  iaken  A.  D.  1669.  At  the 
begining.  • 

2.  Order  of  the  Lord  Treafurer  Burghejey,  the  Earle 

ofLeycefter,  See.  authorifed  by  her  Majefty  to  heare  8c 
determine  all  Caufes  8c  Gontroverfies  growing  vpon  the 
Validity  &  Invalidity  of  the  Dotation  8c  grant  made  by  K. 
Henry  vm.  to  the  Deane  8c  Chapter  of  Chefter,  7 
Aprilis,  anno  21  R .  Elizabeths.  1. 

3.  Complaint  of  the  Maior  8c  Cittizens  of  Chefter, 

againft  the  Mifdemeanors  committed  by  the  Dean  of 
Chefter  &  his  Servants  ;  and  efpecially  upon  occaflon  of 
certain  Expreffions  ufed  by  Mr.  Deane,  in  a  Sermon 
preached  in  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Chefter.  5. 

This  Deane  of  Chefter,  perhaps,  was  Mr.  Thomas 
Mallorie. 

4.  Other  Notes  taken  from  the  fame  Sermon,  which 

6 II  Mr. 


* 


486 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2103. 

Mr.  Deane  preached  the  Sunday  before  the  Election  of 
(Mr.  William  Alderfey)  the  newMaior  A.  D.  1612.  6. 

5.  Notes  taken  from  the  Sermon  preached  by  the 

Lord  Bifhop  of  Chefter  (Dr.  George  Lloyd)  the  Sunday 
after  the  Elettion  aforefaid.  6.  b. 

6.  Letter  of  the  Maior  (Mr.  Alderfey)  and  of  the 

principal  Cittizens  of  Chelter,  perhaps  to  William  Stan¬ 
ley  then  Earle  of  Derby  ;  principally  againft  Mr.  Deane  ; 
&  defiling  that  both  he  8c  Mr.  Robert  Whitbie  (the  late 
Maior)  might  be  called  to  appeare  before  him,  and  the 
Caufe  examined  ;  and  if  it  fhould  appeare  that  Mr. 
Whitbie  had  demeaned  himfelfe  in  his  Government  as  a 
good  8c  carcfull  Magiftrate  ought  to  have  done  ;  that 
both  he  &  the  Cittie  might  be  cleared  8c  acquited  of  the 
vile,  flanderoufe,  &  vntrue  Afperfions  laid  vpom  him 
8c  their  Government  ;  and  fome  Courfe  taken  for  his 
clearingein  his  Reputation  8c  Credit,  See.  9. 

7.  Mr.  Whitbies  Obfervations  made  upon  the  fame 

Bilhop  of  Chefter’s  Sermon  preached  at  the  Funeral  of 
Mr.  Thomas  Gamul  late  Recorder  of  Chelter,  and  after 
the  Election  ofhis  Son  Mr.  Edward  Whitbie,  to  be  Re¬ 
corder  in  his  Place,  whom  his  Lordfhip  oppofmg,  in  the 
behalf  of  another,  did  thereby  give  Occafion  to  thefe 
Broils.  1  o. 

8.  The  Cafe  between  Sr.  Hugh  Beeflon  Knight  Plain- 

tiffe,  &  Peeter  Daniel!,  Efq;  Defendant.  11. 

About  Abbots-Cotton,  which  John  Bird  Bifhop  of 
Chefter  lett  for  89  years  ;  and  fo  was  lett  from  one  to 
another,  till  the  Church  received  little  benefit  from  it. 

9.  Original  Receipt  of  John  Bridgeman  Bifhop  of 

Chelter,  for  13s.  4d.  paid  by  the  Incumbent  of  the 
Rectory  of  St.  Peter,  for  his  Tenths  due  to  the  Kings 
Majeftie.  dat.  1 7  January  1625.  14.  b. 

10.  The  State  of  the  Cafe,  deliuered  to  the  Lord  Sa- 

uage  concerning  the  Difference  twixt  the  Churche  8c 
Cittie  of  Chefter.  1 5. 

This  is  of  the  very  bad  Hand  of  Mr.  Recorder 

Whitbj . 

11.  Copie  of  a  Precept  from  the  Lord  Bufhoppe  8c 

others  to  the  Sheriffe  of  the  County  of  Chefter  ;  for  a 
Jury  of  24,  to  inquire  about  Pious  Ufes.  dat.  21  July 
1630.  1 7. 

12.  Original  Bill  of  the  Dean  8c  Chapter  of  Chefter, 

dated  16  February  1624.  19. 

It  feems  that  one  Henrie  Wilkinfon  pretended  to 
hold  the  Tythes  ofShotwicke  by  a  Leafefrom  them,  the 
date  whereof  they  knew  not ;  nor  whether  it  was  ex¬ 
pired,  or  noe  ;  as  having  neither  Counterparte  nor  Re- 
corde  thereof ;  ar.d  being  hopeleffe  to  come  to  the  cer 
taine  knowledge  of  his  Eftate  therein  without  Suit  of 
La  we  :  they  therefore  lett  the  laid  Tythes  to  Henrie 
Iiarpur  Gent,  at  the  annual  Rent  of  £8.  10.  o.  agreeing, 
that  the  faid  Rent  fhallbe  returned  back  upon  each  Pay¬ 
ment,  untill  l'ueh  time  as  Mr.  IJarpur  fhould  have  re¬ 
covered  the  faid  Tythes  from  that  Wilkinfon. 

113.  Arguments  to  prove  the  Farme  of  Churchenheath 
to  be  within  the  M armor  of  Salghton  ;  and  fo,  to  be¬ 
long  to  Hugh  Calveley  Elq;  Lord  of  that  Mannor.  21. 

14.  Arguments  to  prove  i  to  be  in  the  Church.  22. 
Here,  by  the  Church,  is  meant  the  Collegiate 
Church  of  Chelter  ;  8c  in  the  Portion  of  the  Dean  & 
j  Chapter. 

15.  A  Blank  Warrant  from  John  Bridgeman  Bifhop 
of  Chefter  &  other  Ecclefialtical  Commiflloners,  for 
apprehending  feveral  Perfons  within  the  Province  of 
York,  and  bringing  them  to  anlwer  to  fuch  matters  of 
Ecclefiailical  Cognizance  as  fhould  be  objected  againfl 
them.  23. 

This  is  not  dated,  but  has  the  Kings  Signet  pre¬ 
fixed. 

1 6.  Copie  of  an  Agreement  betwen  the  Abbat  &  Con¬ 
vent  of  Chefter,  &  the  Maior  8c  fome  of  the  Cittizens 
there,  for  the  Reparation  of  St.  Ofwaldes  Church,  dat. 
A.  D.  14-F8.  24. 


Nam.  2103. 

1 7.  Original  Receipt  of  Rowland  Thicknes  Vicar  of 

St.  Ofwalds,  for  3  Pounds  paid  by  William  Higginfon, 
for  his  reading  Morning  Prayers  during  one  Yeare.  dat. 
29  April  1622.  25. 

18.  Obfervations  made  on  the  antient  State  of  the 

Revenue  given  to  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Chefter  by 
K.  Henry  the  Eighth,  of  which  here  is  an  Account  ; 
and  of  the  Improvement  of  the  fame  made  by  order  of 
Q.  Elizabeth’s  Commiflioners  ;  with  an  Account  of  what 
further  accrued  to  the  Dean  8c  Chapter  beyond  their  Al¬ 
lowance  ;  and  of  many  Abufes  committed  by  them,  in 
fundry  kinds.  27. 

19.  Original  Order  of  John  Bridgeman  Bifhop  of 

Chefter,  10  the  Church-wardens  of  .  ...  for 

repairing  the  Church,  8c  Uniformitie  in  the  Seats  there; 
and  for  removing  the  Comon  Table  long-waies  to  the 
Eaft  Wall  of  the  Chancel!,  See.  dat.  4  September  1634. 

29- 

io.  The  Effect  of  a  Speech  made  by  Mr.  Mallory 
Deane  of  Chefter,  at  a  Meeting  of  the  Parifhoners  of  St. 
Ofwald’s  ;  15  of  January  1628.  31. 

2 1 .  The  Cafe  Rated  as  to  fome  Difputes  arifing  be¬ 

tween  Bridgeman  Bifhop  of  Chefter,  8c  the  Maior  Sc 
Corporation  there  :  with  the  Opinion  of  Mr.  John  Sel- 
don  thereupon,  written  with  his  own  Eland.  32.’ 

It  feems  that  the  Bifhop  being  out  of  humour  with 
the  Citty  ;  was  refolved  to  inoleft  the  Cittizens,  Sc  putt 
them  to  all  the  Inconvenience  he  could  ;  by  altering  the 
accuftomed  Times  8c  Places  appointed  for  Prayers  and 
Sermons  :  inhibiting  Sermons,  and  other  Irregularities, 
which  would  bring  a  general  Odium  upon  him,  8c  yield 
him  no  benefit. 

2 2.  Lift  of  thofe  Perfons  Names  to  whom  divers  Seats 

in  St.  Ofwalds  Church  were  appointed  by  the  Commiflion¬ 
ers.  34.  b. 

23.  Copie  of  the  Order  blued  by  Dr.  "William  EafdaM 

the  Arch-bifhop  of  Yorks  Vicar  Generali,  to  Mr.  Tho¬ 
mas  Mallory  Deane  of  Chefter  8c  others,  authorifmg 
them  to  allott  convenient  Seats  in  St.  Ofwalds  Church, 
to  feveral  of  the  Inhabitants  of  that  Parifh.  Given,  4 
February  1633.  35. 

24.  The  Anfweare  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  (after 
K.  Charles  1)  to  the  Letter  fent  him  by  Pope  Gregory  xv. 

37- 

Upon  his  Intention  to  marry  the  Princefle  of  Spain. 

25.  Original  Award  of  Richard  Vaughan  Bifhop  of 

Chefter,  upon  the  Difpute  arifing  betwen  Mr.  Rychard 
Bavand  Mayor  of  Chefter,  Sc  Wylliam  Mannyng;  about 
the  Seat  belonging  to  Mannyng  in  St.  Ofwald’s  Church, 
dated  15  Auguft  1601.  38. 

2(5.  A  Copie  of  an  Agreement  betweene  the  Maior 
8c  Aldermen  of  the  Citty  of  Chefter,  &  the  Church¬ 
wardens  of  St.  Ofwalds  in  the  fame  City,  dated  1 3  Fe¬ 
bruary  1 633.  40. 

This  was  for  defraying  the  Charge  of  building  a 
Seate  in  the  parochial  Church  of  St.  Werburg,  for  the 
Maiors  Wife,  Juftice  of  Peace  8c  Aldermens  Wives,  8c 
the  annual  Rent  thereof. 

27.  Some  Papers  written  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby, 

relating  to  the  Difputes  between  the  Bifhop  8c  the  Corpo¬ 
ration  of  Chefter  (abovementioned  at  No.  21.)  and  con¬ 
taining  Objections  againft  him.  42. 

28.  Draught  of  a  Letter  to  the  Bifhop,  by  the  fame 

Recorder  ;  to  be  fent  as  from  Mr.  Maior.  44. 

29.  A  Note  of  thofe  Greevances  that  the  Parifhioners 

of  St.  Warburgs  doe  complaine  of,  from  the  now 
Vicar  of  the  fame  Place.  4b. 

30.  A  Schedule  of  fuch  Arrearages  as  are  demanded 
by  the  Deane  Sc  Chapter  of  Mr.  Richard  Dutton,  their 
Bailiffe,  for  their  Lands  in  8c  about  Chefter.  48. 

31.  Rentale  omnium  ct  Singulorura  Mefuagiorum, 

Terrarum,  See.  Monafterio  Sta:.  Werburgze  pertinentium, 
infra  Civitatem  Ceftrite,  et  fuburbia  ejufdem  ;  faftum 
per  Otuelum  Worfeley  Ballivum  ibidem,  anno  30  reg- 
ni  R.  Henrici  vin.  5°- 

32.  Tranfla^ 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


487 


Num.  2103. 

32.  Tranflation  of  a  Writt  or  Mandate  of  K.  James  1. 
directed  to  Chriftopher  Minfliull,  &c.  commanding  them 
to  fulfill  a  Decree  made  in  Chancery  for  the  eftabliftnng 
a  Free-Schole  at  Minihull  in  Chelhire.  the  payment  of 
Legacies  bequeathed  to  the  Poore  of  the  Wrenburie,  & 
Aldlam,  in  the  faid  County  ;  &  for  the  maintainance  of 
a  Scholemafter  at  Marbuiie,  within  the  faid  County; 
This  bears  Teffe,  4  Julie,  anno  regni  xS.  52. 

i-.  Exceptions  to  the  Account  of  the  Exchequer 
holden  at  Chefter  :  4  July  1637.  _  54- 

This  relates  to  the  Tithes  of  Sandwich,  k  to 
fome  litigious  &  rapacious  Fermar,  who  then  held  thfem. 

34.  Original  or  Authentic  Order  of  the  Court  of  Ex- 
thequer  of  Chefter,  dated.  29  September  1631.  56. 

Hereby  the  Small  Tythes  of  theLordlhip  or  Village 
of  Eaguley,  were  awarded  to  Dr  William  Fofter,  claim¬ 
ing  in  Right  of  his  Church  of  North-Erden  ;  but  the 
poffeffion  of  the  Great  Tithes  of  the  faid  Lordlbip,  were 
left  to  a  Trial  at  the  Common  Law,  between  the  faid 
Dr.  Fofter  &  Sir  George  Booth,  who  claimed  the  fame, 
in  Right  of  the  Rectorye  or  Viccarage  of  Bodon. 

35*  Original  Certificate  of  Dr.  Geor.  Snell  Rectoutof 
Waverton,  k  of  the  Churchwardens  there,  (hewing 
that  John  Tilfton  of  Huxley  Efcuyer  had  built  a  decent 
Chaplett  or  Oratorie  on  the  North  fide  of  his  Church,  & 
defiring  that  the  fame  Chaplet  might  be  confirmed  to  Mr. 
Tilfton  k  his  heirs  of  his  Capital  Houfe  in  Huxeley. 
dat.  28  July  1640.  58. 

To  this,  Bridgeman  Bifliop  of  Chefter  hath  added 
his  Order  that  an  Ait  fliould  be  fped  for  the  vfe  of  that 
place,  to  Mr.  ^ilfon,  &c.  to  bury,  kneel,  fitt,  &  Hand  in, 
during  divine  Service  in  the  faid  Church. 

36.  Draught  of  an  Ait  abovementioned.  dat.  29  Au- 

gufti,  164c.  60. 

37.  An  lnftrument  attefted  by  a  public  Notary,  de¬ 

claring,  how  and  upon  what  motives,  the  faid  Bifliop 
gave  Licence  to  Mr.  Tilfton  to  build  the  faid  Chapell. 
dat.  7  Auguft  1635.  61. 

38.  A  true  Report  of  the  good  k  juft  Tytle  of  Rich¬ 

ard  Vaudray  to  the  Goods  k  Chattels  of  Robert  Vau- 
dray  his  father  ;  efpecially  to  the  Vicarages  k  Tythes  of 
Bowdon  k  Saughton.  6  2 . 

39.  Order  of  the  Bifliop  of  Chefter,  &c.  touching  the 

Difpofition  of  iool.  which  Mr.  Man  late  Citizen  of 
London  left  to  be  freely  lent  to  the  Artificers  k  Handy- 
crafts-men  of  the  Towne  of  Nether  Knotsford.  dat.  24 
July  1628.  63. 

40.  Claufe  of  Humphrey  Baylies  laft  Will,  whereby 

he  bequeathed  the  profits  accruing  by  the  remainder  of  a 
Leafe  in  his  hands,  to  the  poore  &  nedye  People  dwelling 
in  the  Townes  of  Over  Knutesford,  Ovlerton,  Chelford, 
Aftle,  Sc'^Jithington.  Which  Will  was  made  24  Sep¬ 
tember  1616.  64. 

41.  A  Memorandum,  how  Peter  Minfliull  promifed 

the  Bifliop  of  Chefter,  to  lecure  the  payment  of  the  mo¬ 
neys  bequeathed  to  the  Towne  of  Minfliull,  by  Chrif- 
tofer  Minfliull  Clerke  deceafed.  20  Auguft,  1630.  (vid. 
fupra§32.)  _  65. 

42.  A  Memorandum  to  the  Commiflioners  of  Cha¬ 

ritable  Ufes,  how  Mr.  Chriftopher  Minfliull’s  I.egacie 
had  been  detained  for  about  ten  years  together  by  Peter 
Minfliull  Efq;  66. 

43.  The  Claufe  of  Mr.  Minftiulls  Will  (made  8 
Auguft  16x4)  relating  to  the  abovementioned  bequeft. 

66.  b. 

44.  A  Letter,  in  the  rough  Draught  relating  to 

Mr.  Chriftopher  Minihull’s  founding  a  Free-Schoole  at 
Minfliull.  dated  at  Chefter,  8  October,  1630.  67. 

45.  Abufes  committed  by  (Thomas  Mallorie)  the 
Deane  &  Chapter  of  Chefter,  in  the  Cathedral  Church. 

68. 

Thefe  are  mentioned  before  in  the  book,  at  fob  27. 

46.  The  Duties  of  the  Sexton  k  Sub-Sextons,  to  be 

hereafter  obferved.  69. 


Num.  2103. 


This  Paper  is  fubferibed  by  the  faid  Mr.  Mallory 
Deaii  of  Chefter,  the  Sub-Dean,  and  two  of  the  Pre¬ 
bendaries. 

47-  A  Note  of  thofe  things  that  T  founde  in  the  Vef- 
trie,  when  I  was  admitted  chefe  Sexton  of  this  Cathedrall 
of  Cheller,  13  December  1628.  ibid. 

48.  A  true  Note  of  the  Goods  in  particular  belonge- 

inge  to  the  Cathedrall  of  Chefter.  70. 

This  is  fubferibed  by  Dauid  Burches  cheife  Sexton. 

49.  The  Prefcntment  of  the  Mmlfter  and  Church¬ 
wardens  of  Tilfton,  in  Cheftiire.  71. 

This  is  chiefly  againft  Mr.  Edward  Wright  of 
Stretton,  by  reafon  of  whofe  wilfulnefs,  the  Parochial 
Church  Was  going  io  ruin. 

50.  Copie  of  a  Leafe,  made  24  June  1622.  whereby 

Thomas  Coller  Parfon  of  the  one  Moytie  of  Rectory  of 
Malpas,  alias  the  lower  Parfonadge  of  Malpas  r  lett  his 
Tithes  to  Thomas  Roycrofce  Parfon  of  Coddington,  at 
the  annual  Rent  of  3  Pounds.  73. 

51.  Certain  Claules  of  the  Will  of  Mr.  Thomas  Gan- 

die,  whereby  he  bequeathed  towards  the  mnyntayninge 
of  a  Preachinge  Minilter  at  Church-Hulme,  tenn  Pounds 
to  be  putt  forth.  And  towards"  the  relievinge  of  the 
Poore  within  the  C.hnpelry  of  Church  Holme,  tenn  J 
Pounds,  to  be  putt  forth,  as  aforefaid.  75. 

This  WiJ  was  proved  15  Auguft  1626.  k  thefe 
Claufes  are  attefted  by  a  public  Notary. 

52.  Original  Precept  of  Bridgeman  Bifliop  of  Chefter 

k  other  Commiflioners  ad  pios  ufus,  to  S'  Edward  Stan¬ 
ley  Bart.  Sherift'e  of  Chelhire  for  lumnioning  a  Jury  to 
appear  at  Gropinall-Church.  77. 

This  was  executed,  although  the  Date  is  omitted  ; 
k  the  panell  is  annexed. 

53.  Another,  to  Raph  Johnfon,  &c.  to  appear  at  thd 

fame  place,  k  to  anfweare  to  fuch  things  as  liiould  be  de¬ 
manded  of  them.  dat.  26  June,  1628.  8i. 

54.  Copie  of  the  Decree  made  at  the  metropolitical 
Vifitation  of  Chefter,  27  Augufti  1633,  for  taking  away 
the  Rulhes  k  other  Filthinefs  in  St.  Ofwalds  Church  ; 
making  the  Seats  there  uniforine ;  removing  the  Coin.  | 
munion-Table  to  the  Eaft  Wall  of  the  Quire,  kc.  83. 

This  is  alfo  attefted  under  the  hand  of  a  public 
Notary. 

55.  Articles  obje&ed  againft  William  Hindle  k 

Richard  Mercer  of  Harwood,  before  John  Bridgeman 
Bifliop  of  Chefter  and  others  his  Majefties  highe  Com¬ 
miflioners  for  Caufes  Ecclefiaftical,  within  the  Dioces  of 
Chefter.  85. 

For  favoring  Mr.  Richard  Hargreaves  Curatt  of 
Harwood,  &  abetting  him,  whom  they  knew  to  be  ex¬ 
communicated  for  clandeftine  Marriages,  Drunkennefs,  8c 
Ale-houle  haunting.  85. 

56.  A  General  Releafe  made  by  Anthony  Davenport 

of  Knowefley  in  Com.  Lancaftr.  Gent,  to  John  Hough  of 
Brinfton  in  Wirhall  in  Com.  Ceftr.  Gent.  27  Febr  anno 
1  o  Elizabethae  Regime.  87. 

57.  A  Note  of  the  Tythc  of  Ecclefton,  dcliuered  by  1 

Mr.  Clarke  to  Mr.  Bifphatn,  anno  1635.  89. 

5S.  The  EtfeQ:  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Speech, 
at  a  Meetinge  of  the  Juftices  in  St.  Werburghs  Churchc. 

91* 

This  is  of  his  own  hand  writing. 

59.  His  Anotations  about  the  Difference  between  the 
Citty  of  Chefter  &  the  Bufliopp,  about  Sermons  at  the 
Great  Church,  &  at  St.  Peter*.  93. 

6c.  Queries  arifing  from  the  fiift  Donation  of  the  Ca¬ 
thedrall  Church  of  Chefter,  by  King  Henry  vni.  where 
the  word  Ceftrienfis  was  .left  out.  95. 

6 1 .  Copie  of  the  Surrendour  made  to  Queen  Elizabeth, 

by  the  Deane  &  Chapter  of  Chefter,  of  all  their  Lands 
and  Rents,  parcell  of  the  pofleflions  of  the  late  diflalved 
Monaftery  of  St.  Werbugh.  97. 

62.  A  breefe  Note  of  the  State  of  the  Caufe  betwixt 
the  Bifhops  of  Chefter  k  of  Coventre  &  Litchfild 

2  about 


458 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2103. 

about  the  Jurifdiction  of  St.  Johns  Church  in  Chef- 

ter-  .  99- 

63.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Richard  Dutton  of  Ghef- 
ter,  to  John  Egerton  the  firft  Earl  of  Bridgewater  ; 
dated  the  21  Match,  1627.  defiring  to  be  his  Lordfhips 
Deputv-Stevvarde.  to  the  Dean  &  Chapter,  whofe 
good  will  in  that  matter,  he  already  had  gained.  100. 

64.  Charta  Dotations  Decani  &  Capituli  Ceftrenfis ; 

5to  Augufti,  anno  33  Hen.  vm.  102. 

’i  his  is  faid  to  have  been  made  voyd  by  Robert 
Dudley  Earl  ofLeyccftcr. 

63.  Charta  Dotationis  Decani  8c  Capituli  Ceftr.  anno 
22  E!iz.  i06. 

"With  Recyta!  of  what  is  graunted  to  the  Fee- 
Farmers. 

6‘).  Copie  of  an  Indenture,  made  the  14  ofDecember, 
anno  36  R.  Henr.  vm.  whereby  Henry  Man  Deane,  & 
the  Chapter  of  Chefter  dimifed  unto  John  Calvely  Gen 
tie  man  the  Mannour  of  Saughton,  with  certain  Lands, 
Lithe- Come,  &c.  for  21  yeares,  (to  commence  at  the 
Expiration  of  a  certain  Terme)  for  the  annual  Rent  of 
X1 1  10  VO..  1IO> 

&7 '  Quellions  ariling  from  a  Graunt  of  an  old  Meafe, 
which  was  made  by  the  Deane  k  Chapter  of  Chefter ; 
whereof  they  had  only  a  Rent  puffed  unto  them,  and  not 
the  thing  it  felfe.  1I-+i 

68.  Copie  of  the  Lcafe  made  by  Will.  Cliffe  Deane, 

&  the  Chapter  of  Chefter,  to  Sir  Richard  Cotton,  of  al- 
moft  all  their  Lands,  to  be  held  in  Fee-ferme,  for  the  an¬ 
nual  Rent  of £603  18  ic.  116. 

69.  Queftions  arifing  from  the  Cafe  of  the  Prior  & 
Convent  of  Chrift-Church’s  being  tranflated  into  a 
Deane,  8c  Chapter  ;  with  the  Anfwers  thereunto.  120. 

70.  Original  Petition  of  James  Ball  to  the  Deane  8c 

Chapter  of  Chefter ;  praying  to  be  allowed  for  above 
nine  Weeks  Lodging  &  Diet,  which  one  Thom.  Dawes 
whom  they  employed  in  mending  the  Pipes  of  their  Or¬ 
gan,  had  had  in  his  houfe.  I2l. 

Mallory  the  Dean,  8c  Ley  the  Sub-dean,  allowed  the 
poor  man  but  20  Shillings. 

7 1’  Copie  eft  the  furrender  of  Lands  belonging  to  the 
late  Abbey  of  St.  Werburghe,  in  the  City  of  Chefter, 
to  the  QuetnesMajcftie,  by  the  Gentlemen  Fee-Farmours. 
dat.  ultimo  die  Septembris,  anno  2  1  R.  Elizabeths.  1  23. 

7'-  A  Coppye  of  a  Sopllye  keflone  (Supplication)  to 
the  Queues  Maigeftye,  anno  1577.  1  2 5. 

lies  v. as  ligiicd  by  the  Gentlemen  Fee-Fermars 
aforefaid,  and  is  for  having  their  Eftates  &  Interefts  in 
the  Lands  of  the  Church  of  Chefter  confirmed  ;  in  the 
Cafe  the  Letters  Patent  of  K.  Henry  vm.  whereby  he 
founded  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Chefter,  Ihould  be 
deemed  imperfefl:  or  defective. 

73.  Short  Notes  or  Extracts  from  the  faid  Patent,  &c. 

touching  the  foundation  of  the  Bilhoprick,  Deanary  and 
Chapter  of  Chefter.  j  26. 

74.  Original  Inftruinent,  whereby  Mr.  William  Stan¬ 

ley  of  Hooton  granted  to  Mr.  Peter  Bennett  of  Chefter, 
the  next  Abvowfon  of  his  Vicaridge  of  Eaft-ham.  dat. 
S  March,  1635.  ^7. 

75-  Draught  ol  an  order  made  by  Bridgeman  Bifliop 
of  Chefter.  &c.  Commiftioners  ad  pios  ulus;  about  the 
!.  pp  oc  Croppings  of  1  rees  u  Under-woods  growing 
'up.  the  Grounds  belonging  to  Appleton-houfe :  a 
moiety  whereof  did  belong  to  the  Poor  of  Grappenhall. 
dat.  4  Junij  1631.  I2g_ 

7C._Origir.al  Certificate,  of  Thomas  Woodcocke  to 
:  le  ■  ■  ;  that  he  had  received  &  putt 

out  to  mtereil  Ten  Pounds,  bequeathed  by  William 
Woodcocke  oi  London  Grocer,  to  the  Poore  ofChurch- 
llulme.  dat.  26  March  1640.  I2 

77.  Another  Certificate  in  the  fame  words  (excepting 
IL.fe  for  William)  8c  liand,  &  of  the  fame  date;  but 
having  at  the  bottom  the  name  of  Law  :  Wynyngton 


Num,  2103. 

78.  Another  by  the  fame ;  owning  his  Receipt  of 

Twenty  Pownds  bequeathed  by  Thomas  Wynington  of 
the  Ermitage  Efq;  towards  the  maintenance  of 
the  Minifter  of  the  Chapell  of  Church-Hulme,  26  March, 
1640.  131. 

79.  Prefentment,  to  the  faid  Commiftioners,  of  Mr. 
Richard  Vaudrey  of  the  Banck  in  Com.  Ceftr.  for  de- 
nieinge  to  pay  four  Pounds  per  annum,  bequealhed 
by  his  Grandfather,  to  the  Scoole-Mafter  of  Bowden. 

132. 

80.  Original  Precept  of  the  faid  Commiftioners  to 

the  Sheriffe  of  Cheftiire,  for  fummoning  a  Jury  to  make 
true  Prefentment  of  all  fuch  things  as  {hall  be  given  them 
in  Charge.  Given,  21  July  1630.  133: 

8 1 .  Memorandum,  for  calling  upon  the  Churchwar¬ 

dens  of  Farnedon,  Pulford  &  Holt,  to  account  for  the 
Legacies  left  by  Robert  Woodward  to  the  Poore  of  their 
feverall  Parifhes.  1  -4. 

82.  Another,  concerning  Tenne  Pounds,  given  by 

Roger  Oulton  Citizen  of  London,  vnto  the  Poore  of  the 
Parifti  of  Wettenhall.  ibid. 

83.  How  Sir  Hugh  Beefton  of  Beefton-Caftle  left  200 

pounds  to  the  vfe  of  the  Poore  of  Bunbiirie-Parilh  and 
how  his  Will  was  defeated  by  the  art  of  Thomas  Savage 
Efq;  .  134.  b. 

84.  The  Crye  (or  Petition)  of  the  Poore  in  the  Pa- 

riflie  of  Bunbury,  againft  Mr.  Savage,  to  the  laid  Bifliop 
of  Chefter.  13^,  1j(j. 

85.  Lift  of  the  Debts  owinge  to  Sir  John  Dye  Gierke, 

&  Parfon  of  Tilfton  ;  7  May  1 57  4.  >37  - 

86.  A.  Cataloge  of  all  the  Parfons  of  the  Rectory  or 

Parfonage  of  Tilfton  in  the  Countie  of  Chefter,  fynce  the 
3  Idus  Februar.  A.D.  1300.  137.  b. 

87.  Statutes  of  the  Calhedrall  Church  of  Chrift  k  of 

the  bleffed  Virgin  Mary  of  C  hefter  ;  fett  forth  by  K. 
Henry  vm.  j  38. 

88.  Fragment  of  the  faid  Statutes,  in  Latin.  150. 

89.  A  Coppie  of  the  Orders  &  Articles  fett  downe  by 

the  Lord  Treafurer  Burghley,  and  other  Commiftioners, 
concerninge  the  Feofarmours  &  Leffees  of  the  Lands  of 
the  Deane  &  Chapter  of  Chefter.  dat.  7  die  Aprilis,  anno 
2 1  Elizabethe  Regine.  j  ^ 

90.  Notes  of  many  long  Leafes  granted  by  the  Abbot 
8c  Convent  of  Chefter,  8c  by  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of 
Chefter  of  certain  of  their  Lands  &  Tenements  there. 

158. 

91.  The  Cafe  in  the  Suit  between  Dutton  &  Rat- 

cliffe,  in  the  Exchequer  at  Chefter,  23  May  A.  D. 
1616.  1 60.  • 

This  was  upon  the  Defendants  refufal  to  grind  at 
the  Plaintiffes  Milles;  which  he  claimed  as  Tenant  of  cer¬ 
tain  Meffuages  Lands  k  Tenements  in  Chefter,  formerly 
belonging  to  the  Abbey,  8c  knowne  by  the  Name  of  the  « 
Bayliwicke  of  Chefter  6c  Upton  ;  with  the  fubjoined  opi¬ 
nions  of  learned  Council  thereupon. 

92.  Order  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer  of  Chefter,  re¬ 

ferring  the  faid  Suit  to  a  trial  at  the  Common  Law  • 
wherein  it  would  be  fo  order’d,  that  Ratcliffe  Ihould  be 
Plaintiffe  8c  Dutton  Defendant ;  contrary  to  the  Opi¬ 
nions  of  Sir  Henry  Hobart,  &  the  other  learned  Gentle¬ 
men  abovementioned.  dat.  2  July  1616.  162. 

93.  Abftradt  of  the  Leafe  of  a  Tenement  in  Church-  I 
heath,  by  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Chefter,  to  Calveley.  I  ' 

164.  167.  b.  i 

94.  Notes  {hewing  how  Church-heath  was  antfently  •  1 

held.  ...  166.  II 

95.  Charta  Willelmi  Epifcopi  Coventrenfis  de  Ap- 

propriatione  Vicaria;  Altaris  S.  Ofwaldi,  et  Capellarum  jj 
de  Bruera  &  Wyrvin,  in  proprios  ufus  Monachorum 
Ceflrite.  168. 

96.  Ordinatio  Simonis  de  Balidon  fuper  Vicaria  S. 

Ofwaldi  Ceftriee.  ibid. 

97.  Notula  de  firmatione  Manerij  de  Salghton.  169.  )) 

98.  Libellus  ex  parte  venerabilis  viri  Orlandi  Bridg- 

4  man, 


Bibliothecae  Marleianse. 


4^9 


Nihli.  2103. 

man,  contra  Richardum  Broiler,  dat.  20  0<£t.  1636. 

170. 

This  was  about  the  Tytlies  of  the  Re&ory  of 
Plemftall. 

99.  The  Cafe  of  Mr.  Burges  Schole-mafter  of  Wal¬ 
den.  J72, 

He  (hews  how  he  was  profccuted  by  Dr.  Gray  the 
Vicar  there,  who  endeavour’d  to  get  the  Schole  to  him- 
fclf,  by  profecuting  Burges  for  negle&ing  hisbufmefs. 

100.  The  Generali  Sc  joynt  Petition  of  the  Gentle¬ 

men  &  all  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Chappelree  of  Farn- 
worth,  to  the  Mayor  &  Aldermen  of  Chefter.  4  July 
163I.  *74- 

This  is  for  new  Schole-mafters,  inftead  of  old  Mr. 
Hawarden,  who  was  infufiicient,  &  young  Williams,  who 
was  idle  &  neglectful. 

101.  The  Cafe  of  John  Flail  Churchwarden  of  St. 

Ofwald’s  Parilh  in  Chefter,  who  about  A.D.  1625.  put 
in  execution  the  Bilhops  Commiilion  for  taking  down 
the  Pulpit  in  St.  Ofwald’s  Church,  &  fetting  it  up  in  ano¬ 
ther  part  of  the  fame  Church,  and  removing  all  the  Seats 
therein ;  with  the  Queftions  arifing  therefrom ;  efpeci- 
ally  touching  parochial  Cuftoms.  176. 

Much  has  before  occurred  about  this  troublefome 
Affair ;  whereby  it  feemeth  that  the  faid  Commiflion 
was  granted  only  out  of  pure  fpight  to  the  Magiilrates 
Sc-  other  Citizens  of  Chefter. 

102.  Articles,  with  their  Anfwears,  in  a  Suit  between 

Mr.  Wilfon  Rector  of  Trinity-Parilh  in  Chefter,  again!! 
Plumloc  &  Bellen,  about  ten  Shillings  demanded  by  the 
Plaintiffe,  for  preaching  Plumloes  Wifes  Funeral-Ser¬ 
mon.  182. 

103.  Draught  of  an  order  made  by  the  Parifliioners 
of  St.  Ofwalds  in  Chefter,  for  profecuting  Mr.  William 
Cafe  Vicar  ot  the  fame  ;  he  having  demanded  and  taken 

,  ten  Shillings  as  a  Mortuary,  &  being  grown  otherwife 
'very  troublefome.  dat.  1 1  March  1629.  185. 

104.  Prototypon  Confirmationis  Scamnorum  &  Sedi- 
lium  in  Navi  Cape! la:  de  Blakeley,  in  parochia  de  Man- 
chefter,  per  Johannem  Bridgman  Epifcopum  Ceftrenfem. 

186.  et  200. 

105.  Inftrumentum  ejufdem  Epifcopi  concedentis  duo 

Scamna  feu  Sedilia  fuperiora  in  Ecdefia  parochiali  S. 
Trinitatis  Ceftr.  cuidem  Johanni  Alderfey  Generolo. 
dat.  16  die  Febr.  A.D.  1637.  188. 

xo6.  The  Names  of  fuch  as  have  Seats  in  Atton- 
Church,  confirmed.  A.D.  1636.  190. 

107.  Acquittance  of  William  Leghe  Schoole-mafter 
of  Macclesfelde,  for  Rent  received  from  Mr.  Bavand  of 
Chefter,  tenant  to  the  faid  Schole.  26  Jijn.  1594.  1 92. 

&  195.  196.  197. 

ic8.  Another  of  the  fame,  for  Rent  paid  by  Ales  Ni- 
colfon  of  Chefter,  15  Novr.  ij 593.  193. 

109.  Another  Receipt  for  Rent  paid  by  Richard  Bird 

to  John  I.eeahe  Collector  to  St.  Annes  in  Chefter.  dat. 
14  Auguft,  1596.  ...  *94- 

1 10.  Prototypon  Confirmationis  trium  fedilium  in  ec- 
clefia  de  Acton,  Roberto  Domino  Vice-comiti  Cholmon- 
deley  de  Kelles  infra  Regnum  Hibernia:,  per  Johannem 
Bridgeman  Epifcopum  Ceftrenfem,  11  Sept.  A.  D.  1636. 

198.  227. 

ui.  An  Order  for  flagging,  repairing,  &  making 
the  Seats  uniforme  in  the  Church  of  Great  Budworth, 
made  in  the  Bifliop’s  triennial  Vifitation,  24  June  1634. 

*99- 

1 12.  Part  of  an  Order  of  the  Commifiioners  for  dif- 
poling  of  Scats  in  St.  Ofwald’s  Church,  5  Auguft  1625. 

201. 

1 13.  Objections,  Sc  Grievances  arifing  from  Removing 

the  Seats  in  St.  Ol'wald’s  Church.  202. 

114.  Original  Letter  of  John  Grantham,  to  his 
Lady  the  Lady  Manwaring  of  Peever,  17  Auguft  1603. 

204. 

This  is  about  the  Great  Tythes  of  Alheton  upon 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2103. 

Merfey-Banke,  8c  fhews  at  what  Rate  they  were  then, 
paid. 

1 1 5.  An  Order  for  the  Appearance  of  the  Rector  & 

Churchwardens  of  Awforth,  before  the  Bifhop  of  Chefter, 
to  anfwer  about  the  imbezelment  of  a  Gift  of  40  Pounds 
bequeathed  to  the  Poor  of  that  Place  by  Mrs.  Alice  Den- 
nys  of  Wotfon-Under-Wood  in  Com.  Buck.  Widow,  dat. 
iSAug.  1630.  205. 

1 1 6.  A  Note  of  Covenants  to  be  performed  for  Plem- 

ftow-Farme  in  the  Countie  of  Chefter.  206. 

This  was  upon  making  a  Leafe  of  the  Premiffes  for 
2 1  years;  and  here  the  old  hard  Covenants  are  continued* 

117.  Greevances  prefented  to  the  High  Court  of  Par¬ 

liament,  by  many  of  the  Citizens,  &  Inhabitants  of  the 
City  of  Chefter,  againft  the  Diocefan  of  the  See  of  CheL 
ter.  207.  b. 

This  Draught  is  imperfect ;  and  the  Complainants 
Puritans. 

1 18.  InftruClions  for  the  Delivery  Sc  taking  ofPof- 
feflion  &  Liuery  &  Seyfon  of  the  Fiue  Portions  of  Tithes 
of  the  Prebend  of  Vaynol  in  the  Cathedrall  Church  of 


St.  Afaph.  208. 

Thefe  were  executed  for  Dr . Lloyd,  2 1 

Aug.  1599. 


119.  Acquittances  made  to  Thomas  Glover  Parfon 
of  Weft- Kirby  aliits  Kirkby,  upon  Account  of  Moneys 
paid  by  him  as  an  Annuity  of  18  pounds  per  ann.  to 
Thomas  Billings  late  Parfon  of  the  fame  Place  :  A.  I). 
1632.  210. 

1 2C.  A  Declaration  appointed  by  his  Majefties  High 
Commiflioners  for  Caufes  Ecclefiafticsd  within  the  Pro¬ 
vince  of  Yorke  to  be  pronounced  by  Nicholas  Set- 
chell  in  the  Church  of  Weft-kirkby  in  Com.  Ceftr.  2  1 

Upon  Palme  Sunday  1631.  in  verie  irreverent  6c 
offenfive  manner,  he  took  a  Child  which  then  was  to 
be  chriftened,  from  one  of  the  God-mothers,  or  Midwife 
&  chriftened  the  fame ;  when  as  Mr.  Glover  the  Parfon 
there  had  proceeded  in  the  publique  Prayers  of  the 
Church  for  Baptifme,  to  the  nameing  of  the  Child.  He 
kept  an  Ale-houfe  within  the  Parfonage-houfe  there,  and 
fold  Ale  therein :  and  had  beene  divers  times  in  beaftlv 
manner  overtaken  with  drinke.  He  feems  to  have  been 
Mr.  Billings  Curate  there. 

1 2 1.  The  Cafe  about  the  payment  of  Tythes  for  the 

Mannour  of  Grafton  in  the  Parilhe  of  Dale  with  certain 
Queftions  arifing  therefrom,  and  Sir  Humphrey  Daven¬ 
ports  Anfwers  to  them,  fett  down  the  29th  ofNovember, 
1623.  217. 

122.  A  Note  of  Dr.  Robert  Kings  demand  of  Tythe 

for  Grafton.  220. 

123.  Original  I.etter  of  Dr.  Robert  Kinge,  to  Sir 
Richard  Grofvenour  Kt.  &  Baronet;  3  Sept.  1623. 

221. 

Defiring  Sir  Richard  to  lctt  him  know  why  he  de¬ 
tains  the  Tythes  of  Grafton  from  him.  In  this  Letter,  the 
Doctor  Ihews  himfelf  to  have  been  a  man  of  good  Senfe, 
Learning,  Integrity,  Sc  Courage. 

124.  Receipts  for  moneys  paid  to  Mr.  Ro.  Gittins. 

for  part  of  the  Tythes  of  Grafton,  A.  D.  1623.  223. 

125.  How  part  of  the  Tythes  of  Grafton  are  payable 

to  the  Parlbns  of  Malpafs  &  Tilfton.  226. 

126.  Draught  of  an  Ad  concerninge  the  takine  of 

Mortuaries.  229. 

127.  Confirmatio  diftributionis  novorum  Sedilium 
in  Ecclefia  de  Acton,  per  Johannem  Bridgeman  Epifco- 
putn  Ceftrenfem :  dat.  14  die  Septembris  A.D.  1636. 

237. 

228.  Coppie  of  an  Ordinance  or  A£t  of  State 
made  by  the  Lord  Deputie  of  Ireland  &  the  Privy 
Counfell  there,  reftraining  all  Arch-bifhops,  Bifhops, 
Deanes,  Deanes  Sc  Chapters,  Mafters  or  chief  Gover¬ 
nors  of  anie  Colledge  or  Hofpital  from  making  anie  Leale 
or  Graunt  of  any  of  theire  Lands,  Hereditaments,  or  Pof- 
feffions  belonging  to  their  Arch-bifhopricks,  See.  for 
6  I  anie 


49° 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2103,  2104. 


anie  longer  Tearme  or  Tyme  then  2 1  yeares.  Given  at 
the  Caftle  of  Dublin,  the  17  th  of  March  1610. 

2IO4. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  loofe  &  fingle  papers 
<k  Tradts,  partly  Originals  Sc  partly  Copies,  now  bound 
up  together  by  the  third  Randle  Holme  ;  who,  upon 
the  out-fide  of  the  lame,  hath  given  them  the  following 
'litle,  viz.  tc  Notes,  Charters,  Sc  other  things  con- 
ferning  the  Companys  u  ilhin  the  City  of  Chefter.”  In 
accounting  for  thele  feverally,  I(hall  purlue  the  ufual 
method.  Thus.  I  find  herein, 

1 .  The  laid  Mr.  Holmes  Lilt  of  the  things  of  molt 
note  in  this  book  :  at  the  beginning. 

2.  Atrelted  Copie  of  an  Acquittance  given  by  Sir 

Richard  Calveley  Kr.  to  William  Camuil  &  others,  upon 
their  payment  of  f  1 62  10  00.  for  one  Quarters  Rent  of 
vhe  Import  of  French  \\  ines  in  the  Port  of  Chelter. 
dat.  10  October  1625.  261. 

3.  Other  Acquittances  for  moneys  paid  by  the  faid 

Mr.  Gamull,  upon  the  lame  account.  263. 

4-  Certificate  of  Sir  John  Savage  Maior  of  Chelter, 
touchii  fCa  tr;  nfported,  (in  pur- 

fuence  of  the  Royal  Grant)  that  year,  by  the  Merchants 
of  Chelter.  dat.  3  February  1607.  267. 

The  number  ol  Skinnes  mentii  ned  here,  is  1050  defen. 
5.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  notes  fett  down  by  him 
when  he  was  Member  ofParliamer.t  for  Chelter;  viz. 
A.  D.  1625.  wish  fome  others  of  his  Memorandums 
fcribbled  by  himfelf.  269. 

6.  Draught  of  an  .  Offer  made  by  Mr.Wiliiam  Gamull  & 
others  the  Sub-Termors  of  the  Imports  upon  French 
Wines  within  the  Port  of  Chelter,  to  the  Company  of 
Merchants  there ;  for  their  joining  together,  and  propor- 
t  ion  ably  (haring  in  the  gain  or  lols  accruing  by  their  Pa¬ 
tent.  dat.  loAprill  1611.  "  283. 

t  7-  Draught  of  a  Petition  from  the  faid  Company  of 
Merchants  Adventurers,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Council.  285. 

Phis  is  againrt  Will  Edvards  an  Ironmonger,  who 
having  got  into  their  Company,  procured  an  order  from 
their  Lot  dihips,  that  he  Ihoulil  be  allowed  a  proportion 
of  his  own  Goods  in  any  bottoms  they  Ihould  fend  out, 
or  receive  in.  Hereupon,  they  pray  their  Good  Honors 
to  continue  them  in  their  Liberty  of  chufing  their  own 
partners;  an  !  that  Edwards  might  not  alone  be  freed 
hem  the  Orders  of  their  Company. 

a.  Charges  dilburled  by  Mr.  William  Gamull,  &c.  in 
obtayneing  the  Grant  of  the  Ympofl  abovementioned. 

?  86. 

9.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Draught  of  the  Maior  & 
Citizens  of  Chefters  Petition  to  the  Kino-.  288. 

Praying  that  rhtir  Port  may  not^be  included  in 
Mr.  Maxwells  Patent  for  tranfportation  of  Calve-lkins ; 

&  that  their  prefent  Grant  might  be  renewed  for  21 
years  more. 

to.  Original  Petition  of  the  Maior  &  Citizens  of 
Chelter,  to  the  Lord  Chauncellor  Ellefmere,  19  Jun. 
*6f3-  290. 

To  make  rtay  of  Mr.  Maxwell's  Grant  for  tranf. 
portation  of  Calve-fkins ;  and  that  their  Port  might  be 
absolutely  excepted  out  of  the  fame;  and  that  a  Grant 
thereof  might  be  made  unto  them. 

1 1.  'J 1  ranflation  of  a  Letter  from  the  King  of  Morocco 
to  the  King  of  England. 

I  Ins  was  to  K.  Charles  1.  acquainting  him  with  a 
Viftory  gained  over  the  Rovers  of  Salley  ;  &  defiling 
his  Aid  by  Sea  againrt  thole  of  Tunis,  Alger,  and  other 
places. 

12.  Copie  of  the  Indictment  of  Mr.  William  Single- 

ton  Curtomer  of  Chefter,  for  Corruption,  in  taking 
24  Pounds  of  Mr.  Charles  Leech,  whom  he  pretended 
to  make  Curtomer  at  Liverpoole,  ult.  Fcbr.  anno  8 
Caroli  i.  294. 


Nitm.  21O4. 

1 -•  Draught  of  a  Petition  to  Charles  Howard  Earle  of 
Notingham  &  Lord  High  Admirall  of  England,  from  Mr. 
VN  illiam  Gamull  A  others,  anciently  licenled  to  fell 
Wynes  in  Chefter,  complaining  of  one  Edward  Button 
a  Victualler,  who  retailed  Wines  there,  to  their  prejudice. 

296.  b.  vid.  311. 

1 4-  Form  of  a  Certificate  from  the  Juftices  of  the 
Peace  at  their  Quarter  Scflions  A.  D.  1626.  to  the  Lord 
Keeper  Coventry ;  in  behalf  of  one  ruined  by  Pirates. 

298. 

15.  State  of  the  Cafe  with  the  Merchants  of  Chelter, 

who  petitioned  Queen  Elizabeth  for  twelve  years  longer 
time,  to  tranfport  the  1 0000  Dicker  of  Calve-fkins  ;  ac¬ 
cording  to  her  Majefties  Grant.  599. 

16.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Notes  relating  to  the  Li- 

cenfe  granted  by  Queen  Elizabeth  to  the  Merchants  of 
Chelter,  for  tranfporting  of  Calve-fkins.  ->0I. 

17.  Copy  of  a  Letter  from  George  Villiers  then  fas' I 
remember)  Marquis  of  Buckingham,  &  Lord  High  Ad¬ 
miral  of  England,  to  the  Lord  ....  as  Vice-Admiral 
of  .....  .  defiring  him  to  make  ftreight  &  diligent 
fearcli  for  the  finding  out  A  apprehending  of  Sir  Giles 
Mompefione  Kt.  who  had  made  an  Lfcape  from  the  Ser¬ 
geant  at  Armes  attendant  on  the  Lower  Houfe  of  Par¬ 
liament,  to  whome  he  was  committed,  dat. 3 March  162.0. 

303. 

18.  An  Order  fett  downe  by  the  Lords  of  Her  Maicf- 
ties  Privy  Councill;  in  the  matter  of  Controverfy  be- 
tweene  the  Maior  &  Citizens  of  Chefler  &  William 
Maffy  &  others  termed  Mere  Merchants  ;  9  July  1589. 

19.  pepofi'ions  taken  before  the  Maior  of  Chefter, 

8  March  •<  :6,  concerning  a  Ship  which  failed  from 
Bourdeaux  to  Beaumaris.  ^06. 

so.  A  Coppie  of  divers  Statutes  concerning  Cultom- 
bufinefs. 

2t.  The  Original  Declaration  of  Mr.  William  Gamull 
&  his  Affociates,  importing  their  vvillingnefs  lliil  to  ad- 
mitt  any  of  the  Chefter-Merehants  to  a  Share  of  the 
Grant  they  had  obtained  of  James  Maxwell  &  Abraham 
Dawes  Efq;  for  tranfportation  of  Calve-fkins,  they  pay¬ 
ing  a  proportionable  Charge  with  others  ;  after  that 
tins  Privilege  had  been  utterly  refufed  by  William  Ed¬ 
wards  A-  others,  dat.  27  Januarye  1629.  °io. 

22.  Ihe  Sate  of  ihe  Caufe  concerning  the  Im¬ 
port  of  French  Wynes,  laid  on  the  Merchants  of  Chefttr.. 

23.  Draught  of  a  Petition  from  the  Merchant 
Adventurers  of  C.herter,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privv 
Council. 

Shewing,  how  Sir  Robert  Carre  a  Gentleman  of  the 
Kmgs  Privy  Chamber  (afterwards  Karl  of  Somerfet) 
had  hind  red  them  lor  getting  their  Licence  for  Tranf 
portation  of  Calve-lkins  to  be  renewed;  and  oblieed 
them  to  compound  with  him,  at  a  great  Sum  ftMit 
And  they  pray  that  the  hundred  Dicker  which  they  h  id 
gotten  ready  might  proceed,  notwithilanding  the  Stoo 
put  upon  them  by  tileLord  Treafurers  Order  f 

a  4-  Altefted  Copie  of  the  Order  &  Agreement  made  at 
a  meeting  of  the  Merchants  of  Chelter,  ,n  January 
i6:J  ;  m  order  to  the  obtaining  a  new  Licence  for 
1  ranfportation  of  Calve-lkinncs.  l 

.  of  tf\e  Charges  in  the  Exchequer  at  London, 

m  the  Defence  of  a  Stitt  of  Prize- Wynes,  between  Tho! 
mas  Smgleton  D.  D.  playntiffe  ;  &  Willliam  Gamull  & 
William  Alderfey,  delendants,  ann.  12.  13.  R.  Jacobi  1 

2 6.  Attefted  Copie  of  the  Letters  Patent  granted  °bv 
K.  James  1.  to  the  Merchant  Adventureis  of  Chefter  • 
giving  them  Licence  to  traniport  Tenne  Thowfand  Die! 
kers  of  Calve-fkins,  within  twelve  Years.  Which  Patent 
bears  Tefte,  the  g  of  March,  anno  Regni  Anglic,  &c.  o. 

27.  Petition  of  Thomas  Poolle  of  Chefter  Paim a'k 

Barbar. 


Nam.  2104: 

Barbar,  to  Sir  John  Savage  fit.  Maior*  of  Chefter,  &  his 
Brethren  ;  exhibited  A.  L>.  1570.  338. 

Complaining  of  the  vexatious  &  malicious  be¬ 
haviour,  of  fome  others  of  the  fame  Occupation  towards 
him. 

•28.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Notes,  concerning  the 
Cuftomes  of  fundry  Companies  in  Chefter  ;  applicable 
to  Birchleys  Cafe.  340. 

29.  His  Brief  which  he  ufed  in  that  Caufe.  342. 

30.  His  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  Mayor  &  Al¬ 
dermen  of  Cheiter,  to  the  Princes  Counfell,  concerning 
the  Writt  of  Reftoration  brought  by  Birchley.  344. 

31.  Copie  of  a  Letter  fent  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby, 

&c.  to  the  Judges  who  tried  Buchleys  Caufes  at  the 
Aflizes  ;  fhewing  that  the  Magiilr.ites  of  Chefter  had 
ftayed  the  Writt  for  his  Reftoration  ;  becaufe  the  faid 
Byrchfey  being  firft  an  Imbroderer,  could  not  (contrary 
to  the  Cuftome  of  the  City)  vie  the  Trade  of  a  1  Haber- 
daiherof  fmall  Wares.  346.  vid.  infra.  356. 

32.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Peter  Drink-water,  to 

Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  about  this  Bufinefs  concerning 
Birchley  ;  and  defiling  him  to  move  the  Judges  in  fuch 
manner,  as  that  their  Order  might  be  for  readmitting 
Birchley  only  to  the  Freedom  of  the  City  in  General :  & 
to  leave  him  to  get  into  any  Company  there,  as  he  fhould 
be  able.  ^,48. 

33.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Draught  of  a  Letter  from 

the  Maior  &  Cittizens  of  Chefter,  to  the  Lords  of  the 
Kings  Privy  Councill,  concerning  Byrchley.  350. 

34.  Ilis  Draught  of  an  Order  of  the  Aflembly  of 

Chefter-Magiftrates,  for  rellraining  Thomas  Byrchley 
from  ufing  or  exercifmg  any  trade  or  Occupation,  within 
that  City.  ^22. 

35.  His  Draught  of  an  Order  cf  the  AfTembly,  for 

the  Reftoration  of  '1  ho.  Byrchley  to  the  Freedome  of 
that  City.  .  ?  54. 

36.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  James  Whitlocke  & 

Sir  Marmaduke  Lloyde  (being  the  Judges  abo.vemen- 
tioned  atN°.  31.)  to  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby  ;  declaring 
their  meaning  to  ’e  that  Byrchley  fh'Hild  be  reftored  to 
the  Freedome  of  the  City  only  ;  and  that  his  Doores& 
Windows  might  be  opened;  bu  that  if  th-  n  he  dr  uid 
Ufe  any  other  Trade  then  what  he  might  doe,  by  the 
Cuftome  of  Chefter,  they  might  lake  their  Courfeagainft 
him,  in  a  lawfu  l  manner,  dated  from  Lsdlowe-Cuftle, 
24  Januarie  622.  338. 

37  Copie  of  Mr.  Hugh  Davenport’s  Letter  to  Mr. 
Dod  of  F.oge,  dat.  1 9  Febr.  1614.  s6o: 

About  expediting  the  Exemplification  of  an  Order 
out  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer,  fealed  with  the  Seal  of 
th°  County-Palatine  of  Chefter;  in  behalf  of  the  Company 
of  Ironmongers  in  Chefter. 

38.  Copie  of  Mr. Edward  Dod’s  Anfwer  toMr.  Daven¬ 
ports  Letter,  dat.  19  February  1614.  362. 

Declaring  that  he  could  not  aflent  to  any  fuch  Ex¬ 
emplification  as  was  delired  without  the  Earl  of  Derbie 
the  Chamberlayne’s  Order  ;  nor  did  he  ever  knowe  any 
meane  Order  !  the  Suite  dependinge)  to  be  exemplified  ; 
it  being  in  his  Opinion  a  thing  moll  unfitting. 

3 9.  Order  of  the  Aflembly  of  Magiftrates  holden  in 

the  Inner  Pentice  of  Chefter,  3  July  anno  to  R.  Jacobi  1. 
for  dis-franchifmg  Thomas  Byrchley  Vphoulfter,  for 
intruding  himfelfe  into  the  Companies  of  Mercers  & 
Ironmongers.  364. 

40.  Petition  of  Thomas  Berchleyto  the  Aldermen  & 

Stewards  of  the  Company  of  Paynters,  Glaziers,  Ym- 
broderers.  &  Stationers  of  Chefter.  Praying  to  be  ad¬ 
mitted  into  their  Company,  he  purpofing  to  take  to 
wife  Anne  Dewfbury  Widow,  whole  hufband  had  been 
free  of  the  fame.  366. 

41.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Notes  &  Collections 

from  the  Statutes,  &c.  concerninge  H  ftydays,  Fifhe 
dayes,  &  killinge  &  eatinge  of  Fleihe  in  Lent,  or  vpon 
Filh-dayes.  368. 


The  fecond  Randle  Holme  hath  obferved  that 
this  little  Tract  is  ufefull  for  the  Citty,  ik  Company  of 
Fiilimongets. 

42.  His  Notes  &  Obfervations  concerning  the  Duke 

of  Lenox’s  Patent  for  the  Subfedie  &  Aulnage  of 
Clothes ;  and  about  Novel  Draperies.  373. 

43.  Propofal  of  George  We.l ridge  about  retailing 
Hu  1  wife’s  cloth,  lo  called,  &  ICnitt  Hole,  in  Cheftef. 

3S0. 

44.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Notes  in  the  Caufe  of 
Mr.  Wolridge  againft  'i  ho.  Ankers  &  Anne  Houghe. 

381. 

45.  A  Bill  whereby  George  Wolridge  Sc  Thomas 

Walker  Deputy  Aulnagers  to  Francis  Duchefs  Dowager 
of  Richmond  &  Lenox,  craved  the  ayde  A  afliftanceof  the 
Magiftrates  of  Chefter,  in  the  Execution  of  their  Offices, 
dated,  14  Augult  1626.  383- 

46.  Depofitions  of  many  Bakers  of  Chefter,  taken 

28  April  1643,  againft  Mr.  Edward  Ruflell  ;  who  drew 
them  in,  upon  ftiong  Promiles  of  quick  Payment,  to  bake 
much  Bread  Sc  Bilcuit  for  the  Kings  Store-houfe  there; 
but  payed  them  not.  384 i 

47.  Petition  of  the  Company  of  Bakers,  to  Prince 

Maurice,  againft  the  faid  Mr.  RufTell,  who  had  refigned 
his  Gommiffary-fhip,  &  left  them  in  the  lurch  ;  even 
denying  to  pay  hem,  although  he  had  fufficiem  Effefts 
of  the  Kings  in  his  Hands.  388. 

Underneath  is  a  Copie  of  an  Order  from  the  Prince 
to  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  Sc  to  Sir  Francis  Gamu1  Gover¬ 
nor  of  that  Citie,  to  call  the  faid  Ruflell  before  them,, 
Sc  to  take  in  his  Accompts,  &c  dat.  1 1  March  1644. 

48.  Draught  of  the  Anlwarc  of  Edward  Ruflell  late 
Generali  Commiflary  of  his  M.Jellies  Army,  to  the 
Bakers  Petition,  preferr'd  to  Prince  Maurice  his  Highnes. 

390. 

49.  Draught  of  a  Petition  from  Edward  Ruflell,  to 

John  Lord  Byron,  Baron  of  Ratchdale,  Commander  in 
Chief  of  his  Majefties  Army,  &  Governour  of  this  Citty 
of  Chefter.  391. 

In  both  thefe,  Mr.  Ruflell  alferts  his  Innocence  ; 
defiring  that  his  Cafe  might  be  enquired  into,  that  his 
Reputation  might  not  be  unjuftly  prejudiced  ;  and  others 
of  the  Kings  Officers  difeouraged. 

50.  Original  Bond  of  Richard  Ell.’fton,  and  of  his 

Surety  Sir  Thomas  Baugh,  of  £  too.  to  the  Stewards  of 
the  heft-makers  Company  in  Chefter,  dated  the  6  of 
November  16-2.  392. 

Hereby  Ellifton  was  obliged  (during  the  Tyme  he 
fhould  be  difabled,  for  not  ferving7  years  to  that  Trade) 
to  abftain  from  exercifing  the  faid  Cralte,  or  fett  anie 
Perlon  on  Worke,  or  take  anie  Apprentice. 

51.  Original  Petition  of  the  Aldermen,  Stewards,  & 

Company  of  l'eli-Makers  in  Chefter,  to  Sir  Thomas 
Ireland,  Vice-Chamberlayne  of  the  Countie-Palatine  : 
fhewing,  that  a  young  Apprentice  paffing"  by  an  ancient 
Mafter  of  the  Companie,  did  not  move  hisEIattor  Cap  ; 
which  Abfurdity  the  other  c.orredled,  by  giving  him  a 
Box  on  the  Ear.  That  thereupon,  Mr.  Harpur  an  At¬ 
torney  (againft  the  Confent  of  the  Bovs  Mafter)  caufed 
the  ftriker  to  be  bound  to  the  Peace  with  four  Suretyes, 
to  anfwer  the  lame  at  the  next  Allifes  :  which  proceed¬ 
ing  would  caufe  great  confufion  in  the  Citty,  &  make 
their  Apprentices  little  to  regard  them.  395.  b. 

This  was  referr.  d  to  the  Determination  -of  Mr. 
Recorder,  the  19  July  1622  :  as  beinge  a  Cittie-Matter, 
and  fitter  for  Reformation  there. 

52.  A  Draught  of  a  Letter  for  the  Felt-makers 
movinge  for  Moneys  tobeimploy’d  in  their  Trade.  396. 

53.  Depofition  of  John  Poole,  taken  by  Mr.  Recor¬ 
der  Whitby,  touching  the  occafion  of  his  ftriking  Brad« 
bourne  the  young  fawey  Apprentice  abovementioned. 

397- 

54.  A  Copie  of  the  aforefaid  Depofition,  dated  the  13 
September  1622.  with  Mr.  Recorders  Account  (dated 

to  1-7  Sept. 


Ml' 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS 


49  z 


Num.  2104. 

17  Sept.  1622)  of  his  hearing  both  parties  &  reconciling 
them  ;  Poole  paying  his  own  Charges.  399. 

55.  Bradbourne’s  Examination,  (taken  for  the  mod 
part)  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  16  September  1622. 

400 ; 

Here  Bradboume  gives  a  good  account  of  himfelf, 
and  Poole  appears  to  have  been  too  peevilh. 

56.  Original  Warrant  of  Robert  Sprofton  Maior  of 

Cheder,  to  the  Condables  of  St.  John’s  Ward,  1  March 
1638.  _  4°2- 

This  was  for  bringing  before  them  all  In-houlders, 
Cookes,  Tauerners,  Butchers,  Ale-houfe-keepers,  Tip- 
lers,  &  other  Vi&uallers,  within  that  Ward,  to  enter 
into  Recognizance,  for  the  performance  of  his  Majefties 
Proclamation  for  the  pun&ual  Obfervation  of  Lent,  & 
other  Fading  Days. 

57.  Complaint  of  the  Inholders  8c  Coocks  of  Cheder 

to  the  Maior  &  the  other  Magidrates  there,  temp.  R. 
Eliz.  403. 

Thefe  Men  were  Brewers  8c  Retailers  of  Beer  & 
Ale,  &  prayed,  that  their  Fines  might  be  mitigated  for 
their  not  felling  their  bed  Drink  at  an  Halt  Penny  a 
Quart  ;  which  they  could  not  afford  to  do,  by  reafon  of 
the  Dearnefs  of  Malt. 

58.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council,  to  the  Maior,  See.  of  Cheder.  dat.  3  February 
1636.  4C5. 

Declaring  his  Majedies  Pleafure  for  reducing  the 
Number  of  Maulders  in  every  County,  &  incorporating 
the  mod  able  of  them  :  and  requiring  them  to  certifie 
to  their  Board,  the  Names  of  fuch,  within  their  Citty 
&  Liberties,  as  arc  delirous  to  bee  conformable,  &  to 
Live  vnder  Gouernmei’t.  405. 

59.  Articles  to  bee  propounded  to  Malders  in  the 

County  Pallantyne  of  Cheder.  407. 

Thefe  Articles  were  fent  by  the  Lords,  with  their 
feveral  Letters  to  each  County. 

60.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  William  Edwards  Maior 

of  Cheder,  to  Sir  William  Beecher  Kt.  &  Captain  James 
Duppa  (who,  perhaps,  were  Clerks  of  the  Pi  ivy  Council) 
dat . 409.  (vid.  417.  &  419.) 

Declaring  what  had  been  done  in  Cheder,  purfuant 
to  the  Lords  Letter  ;  and  that  the  Brewers  there  being 
already  incorporated  by  his  Majeily,  they  conceived 
themfelves  not  to  be  meant  therein. 

61.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  William  Beecher,  Jo. 
Here,  &  James  Duppa,  Commidioners  for  compounding 
with  meet  Perfons,  to  ufe  feuerallye  the  Trades  of  Com¬ 
mon  Maulders  8c  Brewers  in  iitt  Places  of  the  Reahne, 
to  the  Maiorof  Cheder,  &c.  dat.  24  Febr.  1636.  41 1. 

Defiring  them  to  recommend  fuch  honed  &  able 
Perfons  of  Maulders  &  Brewers,  as  had  no  other  Trade. 

62.  Draught  of  the  Certificate  from  the  Maior  k  Al¬ 

dermen  of  Cheder,  to  William  Earle  ofDerbie,  about 
the  Brewers,  who  had,  without  the  Knowledge  of  the 
Corporation,  procured  to  themfelves  a  Charter  of  In¬ 
corporation,  with  a  Claul'e  of  Redraint,  that  none  but  of 
that  Companie  (hould  brew  Beere  or  Ale  to  fell  there ; 
which,  if  obferved,  would  ruin  molt  of  their  Inholders 
Sc  Alehoufe-keepers,  who  had  ufed  Brewing,  time  out 
of  mind.  413. 

63.  Copie  of  the  Certificate  of  the  Beere-Brewers  to 

the  Kings  Majedie,  4  September  1629.  415. 

This  is  in  the  Name  of  the  Maior  k  Citizens  of 
Cheder,  who  knew  nothing  of  the  matter  ;  and  is  that 
complained  of  as  clandedine  and  untrue,  in  the  Article 
lad  above  written. 

64.  Petition  of  the  Companie  of  Beere-brewers  of 

Cheder,  to  the  Maior,  Aldermen,  k  Common  Council 
there.  421. 

Praying  to  be  incorporated,  under  the  common 
Seale  of  the  City  :  which  was  done  accordingly. 

65.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Thomas  Bauand  to  Mr. 

Recorder  Whitby  ;  dated  21  December  1634.  423. 


Num.  2  1 04* 

Partly  about  his  own  private  A  flail's ;  and  partly 
about  thofe  of  the  City  of  Cheder  ;  he  being  a  Lawyer 
employ’d  in  the  Affair  about  the  Beer-brewers  Patent, 
and  other  City-matters.  He  likewife  takes  notice  of  the 
method  ufed  in  London  For  aflefiing  the  Ship-money  ;  & 
wiflies  the  fame  were  putt  in  pra&il'e  in  Cheder. 

66.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Councill,  to  the  Earle  of  Derbie,  &  Judges  of  Aflize  at  ■ 
Cheder:  dat.  the  lad  of  January  1635.  425. 

Upon  the  Brewers  Information  againd  300  Inkeep¬ 
ers  &  Viftuailers  who  brewed  Beer  &  Ale  to  fell.  Re-* 
quiring  to  take  into  their  ferious  Confideration,  the  Ads 
of  Common  Council  at  Cheder,  the  Letters  Patents  pro¬ 
cured  by  the  Brewers,  and  the  Allegations  of  the  faid 
Brewers  and  of  the  City  ;  and  alfo  to  hear  what  further 
could  be  materially  urged  by  either  Partie  ;  and  to  certifie 
the  Refult  of  all  to  their  Board. 

67.  Part  of  Mr.  Carickes  Letter  to  Mr.  Worfley  ; 
(Walley  ?)  dated  from  Ludlow,  5  March  1635.  427. 

1  his  is  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  dif-agreable  Hand; 
and  relates  (as  do  feveral  of  the  following  Papers)  to  the 
Affair  then  litigated  between  the  Cheder-Brewers,  on  the 
one  fide,  <k  the  Inholders  &  Viduallers  on  the  other. 

68.  Allegations  againd  the  Patent,  obtained  by  the  faid 

Brewers  :  by  the  fame  Hand.  ibid. 

69.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Notes,  or  Breif,  relating 
to  the  Caufe  in  Suit  between  the  faid  Cheder  Brewers, 
and  the  Inkeepers,  Victuallers,  k  Ale-houfe-keepers.’ 

429, 

70.  Copie  of  the  Charter  of  Incorporations  granted 
to  the  Company  of  Bere-brewers,  in  this  Citty  of  Cheder, 
by  Phillip  Phillip,  then  Maior,  kc.  dat.  9  March  1606.’ 


43V 

71.  The  Bakers  Oath.  435,  b. 

72.  The  Butchers  Oath.  ibid* 

73.  Copie  of  an  Order  of  Affembly  in  Cheder, 
made  the  12th  of  Ottober.  anno  6  R.  Edwardi  vi.  436. 

By  this,  the  Cheder-Brewers  were  obliged  to  fell 
their  bed  Beere  at  the  rate  of  4  Shillings  the  Barrel, 
holding  36  Gallons. 

74.  Certificate  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy-Council, 

from  the  Earl  of  Derby  Sc  the  Judices  of  Alfize,  dated  at 
Cheder,  the  1 8th  of  Aprill  1636.  438. 

This  is  in  purfuance  of  that  mentioned  above,  at 
No.  66.  and  certifieth  that  they  conceived  it  fitt  that  a 
great  Number  of  Inns  fhould  be  allowed  there,  the  Keep¬ 
ers  whereof  might  haue  Libertie  to  brewe  Beere  A-  Ale 
for  their  Gueds.  And  that  the  red  of  the  Inns  8c  Ale- 
houfes  fhould  not  brew,  but  take  their  Drink  of  the 
Brewers. 

75.  Copie  of  an  Order  made  by  the  Lords  of  the  Privv 

Council;  dated  5  Augud  1635.  44Q. 

This  is  in  behalf  of  the  Brewers  ;  and  directing  the 
Chamberlayne  of  Cheder  to  chadife,  by  Imprifonment 
or  otherwife,  thofe  who  fhould  prefume  to  contravene 
the  Patent  oflncorporation,  which  the  fame  Brewers  had 
lately  obtained. 

76.  A  Brief  in  the  Suit  between  the  Brewers  of  Chef- 
ter  ;  &  the  Maior  &  Sword-bearer  ;  Febr.  1634.  442. 

It  feems  that  the  Defendants  caufed  the  Brewers  to 
pay  fundry  Sums  of  Money  in  the  Name  of  Coldifh  f  or 
Marygallon  ?  out  of  every  brewing ;  and  what  other 
Sum  they  pleafed  for  driving  Carres  through  Streets, 
loaden  with  Beer. 

77.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Earl  of  Derby  Cham¬ 
berlayne  of  Cheder  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council. 


444. 

Shewing  that  the  Brewers  had  obtained  their  Incor¬ 
poration-Patent  vpon  vntrue  Grounds  ;  and  without  the 
Knowledge  or  Privitie  of  the  Maior  or  his  Brethren. 
And  that  it  was  conceived  to  tend  much  to  the  prejudice 
of  the  Cittie,  efpeciallie  to  the  poorer  forte,  which  are 
not  able  to  fubfide,  nor  to  maintayne  their  Families  if 
they  be  redraynedfrom  brewinge. 

«2  78.  Sub- 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


493 


Num.  2104. 

78.  Subfcription  of  Monye  graunted  by  the  Companye 

of  the  Yron-monggers;  to  be  payd  by  them  week  lye  ; 
towards  the  makinge  vp  agayne  of  the  Haven  :  the  thred 
daye  of  Aprell  A.  D  1571-  44^- 

79.  Petycion  of  the  Companye  of  Mercers  &  Iremong- 

ers,  to  Sir  Randle  Mainwaringe  Kt.  Maior  of  Chefter, 
See.  447- 

This  is  for  disfranchifing  of  Thomas  Birchley, 
who  had  intruded  himfelfe  into  their  Trade,  and  refufed 
to  be  ordered. 

co.  Another  Petition  of  the  fame  Company,  to  the 
fame  Maior,  &  to  all  the  Corporation  of  Chefter.  448. 

Agailt  the  fame  Thomas  Birchley  the  Embroiderer  ; 
praying  that  be  might  be  re  drained  from  following  their 
Trades,  and  be  obliged  to  keep  to  his  own. 

81.  Notes  touching  Orders  made  about  Retaylers, 

within  this  Cittie  of  Chefter.  450. 

1  hole  are  for  the  mod  part  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whit- 
bies  Eland. 

82.  Original  Letter  of  the  Mercers  &  Ironmongers 
to  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby  &  John  Ratcliffe  Efqrs. 
Members  of  Parliament  for  Chefter  :  dated  28  May  1 63  . 

452- 

Defiling  them  to  put  their  Hands  to  a  Letter  which 
the  Mayor  &  Aldermen  of  t.  hefter  had  written  to  the 
Princes  Council  about  Berchley  ;  and  likewife,  to  get 
Sir  Thomas  Savages  hand  to  ii,  if  in  London.  L  ke- 
wife  defil  ing  them  to  ule  Expediti*  n  in  getting  a  Letter 
to  the  Ju dices,  in  the  Citties  behalfe. 

87.  A  Noet  ofhowe  many  thear  be  of  the  Companie 
of  the  Iremnongers  &  Mercers  ;  with  the  Number  of 
thear  houfhoulds.  454. 

84.  Littera;  Patentes  Elizabeths  Reginze,  quibus 

confirmat  Libertines  ac  Privilegia  Fraternitati  Cifforum 
Cedriai  antiquitus  concelfas.  Telle,  &c.  5  die  Marcij, 
anno  Regni  5.  456. 

85.  Copie  of  an  Order  of  Affembly  at  Chefter,  dated 

1  Februarij  anno  0  R.  Carcli  1.  458. 

Hereby,  Liberty  was  granted  to  the  Companie  of 
Taylers,  to  builde  vppon  the  voide  peece  of  Ground, 
whei  e  their  CarrLge-houfe  formerlie  ftoode. 

86.  Copie  of  the  Writt  ofK.  James  1.  bearing  Tefte  22 
Maii,  annoq;  regni  Anglie,  22.  upon  a  Writt  of  Error 
obtained  by  Henry  Hughes,  in  his  Suit  with  the  Alder¬ 
men  &  Stewards  of  the  Company  of  Taylors  of  Chefter. 

460. 

Unto  this  Writt,  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby  hath  putt 
fome  of  his  Remarks. 

87.  Errors  obje&ed  by  the  faid  Elughes,  to  the  faid 

Aldermen  &  Stewards  ;  with  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies 
Notes.  462. 

88.  Certificate  of  divers  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Frod- 

fham,  to  Thomas  Lord  Vifcount  Savage,  Chancellor  & 
Councelor  to  the  Queenes  Majefty,  in  behalf  of  William 
Smith  of  Frodfham,  who  was  almoft  ruined  by  the  Shoe¬ 
makers  of  Chefter,  for  prefuming  to  ufe  their  Occupa¬ 
tion  ;  not  having  ferved  an  Apprentice-fhip  to  it,  as  they 
alledged.  4^4- 

89.  The  Names  of  the  Mailers  of  the  Sho-makers 

within  Chefter,  A.D.  1570.  466. 

90.  Mr.  William  Gregories  Accompts  of  Moneys  dif- 

burfed  by  him  for  fome  Company.  467. 

This  was  confider’d  &  taxed  in  many  of  the  par¬ 
ticulars. 

9 1 .  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Lord  Vifcount  Savage, 

to  Mr.  Recorder  of  Chefter,  22  Sept.  1633.  469. 

In  behalf  of  the  Shoe-maker  of  Frodfham,  above- 

mentioned  at  No.  88. 

92.  Coppie  of  Articles  exhibited  to  Mr.  Maior  &  the 

Aldermen  of  Chefter,  by  the  Companie  of  Shoe-makers, 
againll  Mr.  Gregorie,  Mothers.  471. 

93.  Billa  pro  Aldermannis  &  Senefchallis  Art.  del 
Smithes,  Cullers,  Pewterers,  Card-makers  &  Plummers 
in  Civitate  Geftrie  ;  qui  tarn  pro  feipfis  quam  pro  Con- 

Cat.  Harl.  Vox..  II. 


Num.  2104, 2105. 

fratribus  fuis,  in  hac  parte,  fequuntur  Querel.  verfus 
Johannem  Sefton  Defendentem,  in  placito  Tranfgreffionis 
fuper  Cafum,  ad  damnum  decern  Librarum,  A.  D.  1602. 

4-3- 

94.  Billa  altera,  pro  eudem  verfus  Henricum  Trafford 

Defendentem,  in  placito  Tranfgreffionis  fuper  Cafum, 
ad  damnum  20  Librarum,  A.  D.  1617.  474. 

95.  Petitio  eorunclem  pro  Judicio  contra  Henricum 
Trafford,  A.D.  1617. 

96.  Narrntio  pro  Aldermannis  &  Senefcallis  Artium 

de  Smithes  &  Pewterers  in  Civitate  Ceftrie,  verfus  Hum- 
fridum  Williams,  in  placito  Tranfgreffionis  fuper  Cafum, 
ad  damnum  quinque  Librarum,  A.  D.  1586.  476. 

97.  Alia eorundem,  verfus  Matheum  Evans,  &c.  ut 

fupra,  A.  D.  1583.  477. 

98.  Alia  eorunclem,  verfus  Robertum  Hawnfe,  alias 

Holbrucke,  &c.  ut  fupra,  A.D.  1568  478. 

99.  Alia  eorundem,  verfus  Thomam  Fletcher,  in  pla¬ 
cito  Tranfgreffionis  fdper  Cafum,  A.D.  1591.  479. 

100.  Lift,  asitfeems,  of  the  feveral  Fraternities  or 
Gilds  in  Chefter,  before  the  Reformation.  480.  loofe. 

1  ox.  Th’Enfware  of  Thomas  Smyth  Maior  of  the 
Citie  of  Clieftre,  to  the  complaynt  of  Henry  Hardware. 

48 1 .  loofe. 

About  a  Drapers  Shop  &  Ware-houfe  ;  the  Title  to 
which  was  ccntefted. 

102.  Attefted  Order  of  the  Exchequer-Court  of 

Chefter;  holden  the  15  of  September  1^09.  482. 

This  is  againft  Hurlefton  &  Younge  ;  who  being 
not  Citizens  of  Chefter,  had  privatly  fold  Mault  (out  of 
the  Market)  at  their  own  Houfes,  and  were  thereof  con¬ 
victed  at  the  Quarter-Seflions,  Se  fined  for  the  fame. 

103.  A  printed  Bill,  in  Order  to  the  obtaining  an  A£t 

or  Ordinance  to  reftrayne  making  of  Mault  in  the  Sum¬ 
mer-time.  484. 

104.  Notes  concerning  Ale-houfes,  collected  by  Mr. 

Recorder  Whitby,  from  the  Statutes,  &c.  485. 

2105. 

Another  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  many  original  & 
other  loofe  Papers  &  Trafts  bound  up  together  by  the 
third  Randle  Holme  ;  who  upon  the  out-fide,  hath 
beftowed  this  general  Title  upon  the  whole,  “Seuerall 
things  concerninge  the  Citty  of  Chefter.”  In  deferibing 
of  which,  I  fhall  follow  my  ufual  method. 

1.  In  the  firft  plaee  then,  I  find  therein,  the  faid  Mr. 
Holme’s  Account  of  the  Things  of  moll:  Note  in*  this 
Booke,  taken  A.  D.  1669.  At  the  beginning.  Then 
follows, 

2.  Part  of  an  old  Regifter  of  the  Mayors  or  Sheriffes 
Court  in  Chefter,  beginning  about  anno  21  R.  Henrici 
vn.  and  herein  I  obferve, 

2.  A  Panel  of  the  Names  of  fome  Jury.  260.  b. 

3.  Names  of  Chefter-Conftables,  in  feveral  Wards. 

261. 

4.  Nomina  Piftorum  Civitatis  Ceftrie.  261.  b. 

5.  Nomina  Camificum  (i.  e.  of  the  Butchers)  ibid. 

6.  Entrances  of  divers  Perfons  who  were  admitted 
to  the  Freedome  of  that  City,  anno  21  R.  Henrici  vi. 

262.  b. 

7.  Entrances  of  the  Pleas  tried  in  the  Portmote  Court 

there,  held  before  Thomas  Thornton  Maior  the  fame 
year.  265.  272.  273.  b. 

8.  An  Order  made  by  the  fame  Maior  &  his  Brethren, 

touching  the  Enfranchifement  of  all  Traders  who  had 
faithfully  ferved  their  Apprentice-lhips  ;  &  for  keeping 
out  all  Strangers.  270. 

g:  Entrance  of  an  Agreement,  made  before  the  faid 
Maior,  See.  betwixt  John  Rathebone,  &  Margerie  the 
Wife  of  William  Humfrey,  about  the  poffelfion  of  an 
houfe.  270.  b. 

10.  Entrances  of  Pleas  tried  in  the  faidPortmote-Court, 

anno  22  R.  Henrici  vn.  271. 

1 1.  Orders  Se  Regulations  made  by  the  Maior  &  his 

6  K  Brethren, 


494 


Catalogus 


Libromm  MSS. 


Num.  2105. 

Brethren,  for  keeping  the  Ailize  of  Bread  ;  &  about  the 
Sale  of  the  fame  ;  anno  21  R.  Henricivii.  271.  b.  et 

37s- b* 

12.  Placita  Coronmot  Civitatis  Ceftr.  tent,  coram 

Thoma  Thornton'  Maiore,  anno  21  &  22  R.  Heniici 
mi.  275.  b. 

13.  Entrances  of  Caufes  heard  at  the  Seffions  of  the 

Peace,  held  before  Thomas  Grene,  Maior  of  Chefter,  & 
his  brethren,  anno  8  R  Elizabethe.  279. 

14.  Placita  Curie  Portmot.  tenta  coram  Thoma  Grene 
Maiore  ;  anno  8  R.  Elizabethe.  293.  b.  &  vid.  304. 

1 5.  Nomina  Officiarorutn  <k  Miniftrorum  Dne.  Regine 

In  Comitatu  Civitatis  Ceftrie,  tempore  Thome  Grene 
Maioris,  et  anno  7  R.  Elizabethe.  299. 

Hu’s  takes  in  likewife  the  Names  of  the  Butchers, 
Bakers  &  Conftables. 

16.  Entrances  of  matters  tranfa&ed  at  the  Seffions 
of  the  Peace,  held  before  Sir  William  Snead  Maior  of 
Chefter,  and  his  brethren,  aim.  9  R.  Elizabethe.  306. 

17.  Ofiiciarij  &  Mmiftri  Dne.  Regine  in  Com.  Civi¬ 

tatis  Ceftrie,  tempore  Willelmi  Sneade  militis  Maioris 
ibidem,  anno  8  R. Elizabethe.  312. 

1  his  is  like  that  above-mentioned  at  No.  15. 

18.  Hie  Names  of  all  the  Poore  People  apoynted 
to  lyve  by  Aimes  within  this  (  itie,  in  (euerall  Wards ; 
in  the  tymeof  the  Mayraltie  of  Henry  Hardware.  315. 

19.  Memorandum,  touching  an  Award  made  by  the 
Sheriffes  of  Chefter,  as  to  two  Actions  brought  by  Thom. 
Burges  Eailiour,  -againll  others  ;  which  were  com¬ 
pounded  for  /  15.  14.  8.  brought  into  the  Pendeis,  be¬ 
fore  Henry  Hardware  then  Maior,  &  his  brethren, 
25  of  Septembre,  anno  fecundo  Elizabethe  Regine. 

3 1 6.b. 

20.  An  order  made  1 1  July  1506.  by  Thomas  Grene 

Maior,  &c.  upon  the  Variaunce  depending  betweene 
William  Williamz  Efquier  &  Morrys  Willyamz  Alder¬ 
man  for  the  Teyth  pertaining  to  St.  John  in  Chefter ; 
which  were  to  be  gathered  &  kept  in  the  Teyth-Barne, 
until  the  Law  fhould  determine  which  of  them  had  mofl 
Right  to  the  fame.  217. 

21.  Placita  Curie  Portmot.  Civitatis  Ceftrie  tente  co- 

)ain  Ihoma  Grene  Maiore,  13  die  Julij,  anno  8  Reg. 
Elizabethan  3 1 7- 

22.  Nomina  Officiariorum  &  Miniftrorum  Dne.  Re¬ 

gine,  in  Comitatu  Civitatis  Ceftrie,  anno  4to.  Elizabethe 
Regine.  (imperfect.)  3x8. 

23.  Orders  made  by  Mr.  Mair,  by  th’Aduife  of  the 

Aldermen  &  Common  Counfell,  for  byenge  Corne  & 
Grame  in  the  Market! ;  as  alfo  for  felling  of  Beare  & 
Ale,  &  Tallow- Candles,  &  Vichialls.  320. 

24.  A  Warrant  or  Proclamation  of  Mr.  Maior  &  his 
brethren,  licenfing  all  Houfe-holders  to  bake  their  own 
biead  ;  &  alfo  the  Countrey- Bakers  to  bring  in  their 
biead  to  Chefter-Market ;  upon  the  Combination  of 
the  Bakers  not  to  bake  any  bread  at  all,  rather  than 
keep  to  the  reafonable  Aflife  appointed  by  Mr.  Maior. 

25-  411  tu-dcr  of  Mr. Maior,  forbidding  the  Breake¬ 
rs  wvch  th>  wurfliipfull  of  that  City  had  caufed  to  be 
made  m  therHoufes,  vpon  Chriftemafs  daie  in  the  mor¬ 
ning,  before  devine  Service  ended  :  by  reafon  whereof 
many  difordered  perfons  haue  rather  ufed  themfelues 
all  the  daie  after  idely,  in  Vice  &  Wantones,  then  yeuon 
tnemielis  h  ly  to  Contemplacion  &  Praier.  And  alf  , 
that  no  miner  perfon  do  go  abrade  a  mumminge  in  any 
place  within  the  fame  Citie,  their  Faces  being°  couered 
or  difguifed  :  or  plaie  at  any  vnlawful  Games.  o22 

26.  Diftribudon  of  the  Chefter-Poor  (with  their  names) 

according  as  the  Aimes  were  appointed  for  them  in  the 
feverall  Wardes  of  Chefter.  2' 

27.  Accompt  of  fome  family-difburfements,  about 

A-D-  i537-  .  .  324- b.  et33i. 

28.  Narration  of  the  Proceedings  on  both  fides,  upon 
the  Chefter-bakers  refuftng  to  comply  with  the  Affile  of 


Num.  210^. 

Bread  appeared  by  Mr.  John  Webfter  then  Maior,  via. 
14  November  1557.  with  Copies  of  the  faid  Bakers  bill  of 
Complaint  to  the  Council  of  the  Marches  of  Wales  ;  Mr. 
Maior  s  Aniwer  to  the  fame,  &c.  0 2g 

29.  Orders  made  by  the  fame  Maior,  A.D.  1  c57.  about 
Moneys  to  be  collected  for  the  better  fetting  forwards  of 
t  .  vvoorke  of  the  Haven.  About  the  admiffion  of  For- 
reigners  into  the  Freedome  of  the  City.  For  the  fale  of 
Make  111  the  open  Market.  And  how  the  Joyners  or 
Carvers  fhould  buy  &  fell  their  Tymber,  Bords,  Sparres, 

30.  The  Book  of  Affeffment  toward  the  Relief 
of  the  Chefter-Poor,  made  A.D.  i574,  by  Richard 
JAitron  Ffq;  then  Maior,  &  his  brethren,  Juftices  of  the 
Peace. 

31.  Short  Annals  of  Chefter,  imperfeft  at  the  begin- 

nmg;  whofe  chief  Scope  was  to  give  a  Succeffion  or 
Series  of  the  feveral  Maiors  of  Chefter.  343. 

1  his  Traci  now  begins  with  Alexander  Hurrell,  who 
was  Maior  A.D.  1348.  and  is  continued  down  to  Wil¬ 
liam  Bird  who  was  ele&ed  A.  D.  1 5S0. 

_  3  2y  Entrances  of  Pleadings  in  the  Courts  ofPortmote, 
A’c.  i  homas  Grene  being  Maior,  annis  7  &  8  Regine 
Elizabethe.  ° 

33-  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Lord  Vifcount  sL 
uage,  to  William  Gamull  Maior  of  Chefter,  7  Febr 

l62°*  363-’ 

Upon  occafion  of  the  Suit  depending,  upon  the 

two  Whitbies  being  turned  out  of  the  Office  of  Clerk 
of  the  Peutice  :  in  which  Caufe,  his  Lordffiip  was  not 
their  Friend. 

34.  Another,  from  the  fame  noble  Lord,  to  the  fame  ■ 

dat.  9  February  1620.  36c/ 

Shewing^  that  the  faid  Caufe  was  determined  in 
favor  of  the  City  ;  &  confequently,,  that  Mr.  Brerewood 
would  nor  keep  his  Place.  That  Mr.  Whitby  &  Sir 
Randle  Mamvaringe  were  both  angry  ;  although  if  they 
would  but  think  of  a  Starr-chamber  Suite,  they  might 
thank  God  on  their  Knees,  they  were  fo  well  rid  of  it. 

35.  Copie  of  Sir  John  Bridgeman  &  Sir  Marma- 
duke  Lloyd’s  Letter  to  the  fame  Lord  Vifa-  Savage. 

367. 

Upon  Mr.  Brerewood’s  being  fequeftred  from  his  Office 
of  Towne-Clerke,  or  Clerke  of  the  Pentice,  for  fome 
Negligence  or  Remiffenes  in  his  faid  Office ;  and  de- 
firing,  that  if  he  had  given  any  Offence  to  his  Lordffiip, 
by  any  intemperate  carriage,  or  any  other  meanes 
vppon  his  humble  Submiffion,  his  Lordlhip  would 
be  a  meanes  to  the  Cittie  to  reftore  him  ;  for  the  Rea- 
fons  they  give. 

36.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  notes,  upon  certain  irre¬ 
gular  proceedings  of  fome  of  the  Chefter  Serjeants  at 
Mace  ;  who  arrefted  divers,  &  carried  them  to  their  own 
Iloufes,  &  not  to  Prifon. 

37.  Original  Opinion  of  Sir  Edward  Littleton  Recorder 

of  l.ondon,  upon  the  Cale  putt  to  him  ;  how  certain 
Common  Cheaters  &  Cofiners  fhould  be  tried,  who  plead 
not  Guilty  ;  but  will  not  putt  themfelves  vpon  the  Coun- 
trey.  37,. 

38.  Original  opinion  (as  it  feems)  of  Mr.  Juftice  Jones, 

upon  the  lame  Cafe.  373. 

39.  Original  Note  under  the  hands  of  Robert  Brocke 
Maior  of  Chefter,  &  his  brethren  Juftices  of  the  Peace, 
dated  24  of  February  1588;  who  imprifoned  &  fined 
Roger  Hanmer,  &  others,  for  making  a  forcible  Entry.  j 

375 . 

40.  The  Cafe  of  Ellice  Johnes  Citizen  of  Chefter, 
who  was  arrefted  in  his  own  houfe,  for  Debt,  by  virtue 
of  a  Warrant  from  Sir  James  Croft,  directed  to  the 
Knight- Mar fhall,  &  to  his  Depude  &  Depudes.  376. 

41.  Copie  of  the  faid  Warant,  dated  from  the  Court 
at  Weftminfter,  the  18  of  December  1581,  fubferibed  by 
many  of  the  Aldermen,  &  other  principal  Citizens  of 
Chefter,  as  a  true  Copie. 

42.  Rela- 


Bibliothecae  Ilarleianae. 


495 


Num.  2105. 

42.  Relation  of  the  Proceedings  of  Mr.  Richard  Ba- 

Vand  then  Maior,  upon  the  laid  Arred ;  who  finding  the 
faid  Warant  to  be  infufficient,  the  Arred  unlawful),  & 
the  manner  of  the  fame  not  to  be  lett  pafle  without  Pu- 
nifhment;  in  the  prefence,  &  by  confent  of  thofe 
who  fubfcribed  the  Copie  of  the  faid  Warant,  committed 
William  Harbard  who  made  the  Arrell,  to  the  North- 
gate  Prifon.  377-b. 

43.  Draught  of  a  Bill  of  Complaint  from  the  Maior  & 

Citizens  of  C heller,  to  William  Earl  of  Derby  Cham- 
berleyne  of  the  County  Palatine,  againd  William  Hodges 
of  London  Merchaunt ;  who  importing  divers  Wares 
there,  agreed  to  pay  them  £3  5  6.  for  the  Cullomes 
thereof ;  but  having  fold  the  fame  there,  would  not  ful¬ 
fil  that  his  Agreement.  (Herein,  many  of  their  particular 
Cullomes,  as  Tonnage,  Poundage,  Murage,  &c.  are  fpe- 
cially  fet  forth)  379. 

44.  Copie  of  the  Letter  of  K.  James  1 .  to  the  Corpo- 

fation  of  Shrewlbury,  recommending  to  their  choice  for 
the  Reverfion  of  the  Ollice  of  their  Towne-Clerke  Tho¬ 
mas  Vnton ;  who  had  bene  for  clivers  Yeares  at  the  Vni- 
verfity,  where  he  had  taken  Degrees  of  Scholes  ;  and 
Iikewife  at  Innes  of  Courte  ;  and  did  then  attend  about 
one  of  his  right  trufly  &  wel-beloved  Counfay  lours. 
Given . A.  D.  1604.  384. 

45.  Copie  of  the  humble  Anfwerc  of  the  Bayliffes  & 

Burgefles  of  the  Towne  of  Shrewlbury,  by  way  of  Peti¬ 
tion  to  his  Majellies  Letter,  for  th'eleclinge  of  Thomas 
Unton  vnto  the  Office  of  Towne-Clerke  there,  after  the 
death  of  Adam  Mitton,  who  then  held  the  fame. 
(Giving  their  Reafons  why  they  could  not  make  fuch 
Elettion.)  384.  b. 

46.  Letter  from  the  Lords,  &c.  of  the  Privy-Council, 

fo  the  Earl  of  Derby,  the  Bilhop  of  Chefter,  the  two  Juf- 
tices  of  Aflize  there,  &  to  the  Dean  of  Cheller,  dated, 
1  ith  of  Augull  1627.  .  385. 

Referring  to  them,  the  hearing  of  the  Caufe  of  Ro¬ 
bert  Brerewood  Efq;  Towne-Clerke  of  Cheller,  who  was 
accufed  by  the  Maior  &  Citizens  there,  of  Mifdemenor  & 
vndue  Carriage  in  that  Oilice  :  concerning  the  maner  of 
the  faid  Brerewood’s  Sequedration,  the  Caufes  for  which 
he  was  feqnefrel,  and  his  mifearriage  fince  :  &  to  re- 
tourne  the  Examinations  of  the  WitnelTes  on  both  fides 
to  the  board,  with  their  opinions  of  the  whole. 

47.  A  Minute  of  the  Common  Council,  held  the  1 5  of 

March  1580,  about  certain  Plates  being  redeemed  from 
the  City,  by  Helyn  and  Rathburne.  387. 

48.  Draught  of  an  Acquittance  from  the  Corporation 

of  Cheller,  owning  thereby  the  Receipt  of  a  Silver  Cup 
and  Cover,  gilt,  weighing  80  Unces  &  vpward,  with  the 
Cafe  therevnto  belonging,  bequeathed  vnto  them  by  Ro¬ 
bert  Gilley  th’elder,  late  Citizen  &  Haberdalher  of  Lon¬ 
don,  to  be  vfed  in  Remembrance  of  him  in  the  Howfe 
comonly  called  the  Pendhows  of  the  faid  City.  dat.  the  4 
of  June,  anno  38  Elizabethe  Regine.  389. 

49.  Mr.  Robert  Brerewood’s  Opinion,  that  the  Inroll- 

ment  of  a  Statute-Merchant  (wherein  the  Clerk  had  erro- 
neoully  entred  50I.  indead  0F40I.  might  be  amended,  & 
made  agreeable  to  the  Statute  itfelf.  390. 

50.  Three  Draughts  of  a  Letter  from  many  of  the  Al¬ 

dermen  &  Common  Council  of  Cheller,  to  the  Lord 
Keeper,  amended,  A  fent  away  from  Cheller,  the  8th  of 
February  160!.  392. 

This  is  in  arraigning  the  Proceedings  of  Mr.  John 
Radclille  the  then  Maior,  who  made  Mr.  Robert  Whit¬ 
by  Clerk  of  the  Pentice,  againlt  their  Confent.  (vid. 
infra  No.  98.) 

5  x .  Indructions  in  my  Cafe,  .when  the  fame  is  to  be 
determined  in  the  Afiemblic  at  Cheller.  400. 

This  feemsto  relate  either  to  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby, 
or  to  his  Predeceffor  Mr.  Thomas  Gamull ;  who  fell  into 
the  Difpleafure  of  fome  humorous  Maior,  that  alleaged 
he  did  not  rile  up  to  do  him  Reverence,  once  when  he 
came  into  the  Church  ;  nor  was,  at  another  time,  *  pre- 


Num.  2105, 

fent  at  the  bynding  of  the  Ale-howfes and  therefore 
ought  to  be  putt  out  of  his  Place.  Mr.  Recorder  has 
drawn  up  this  Paper  very  artfully  ;  and  has  lhewn  that 
he  would  not  be  ihruft  from  his  Office,  upon  every  vain 
fancy  of  a  Maior  brim  full  of  pride  &  ill  nature. 

52.  Draught  of  the  bill  of  Complaint  exhibited  to 
William  Earle  of  Derby  &  James  Lord  Strange,  Cham- 
berlen  of  Cheller,  by  the  Maior  &  Citizens  of  the  Citty 
of  Cheller,  againll  Euan  Jones  &  Richard  Warmilham. 

402. 

It  feems  that  when  the  Accompt  of  William  Filher 
late  one  of  the  Sheriffes  of  Cheller,  was  audited,  he  was 
found  Debtor  to  the  City  in  the  Sum  of  £44  which 
Sum  he  promifed  to  pay,  but  died  before  he  did  fo  j 
leaving  Jane  his  Wife  his  Executrix.  The  Widow  like- 
wife  promifes  to  pay,  but  obtains  a  Term  of  Forbearance 
and  deceafes,  leaving  the  Defendants  her  Executors. 
They,  at  firlt,  faithfully  promife  to  pay  ;  but  perceiving 
that  the  Citty  had  not  fuch  precife  proof  of  the  pa;ti- 
culars  of  the  faid  Accompt,  &  other  Circumllances 
which  would  be  necefihry  to  convicl  them  at  the  Com¬ 
mon  Law,  fly  off,  and  oblige  the  City  to  have  recourfe 
to  Equity. 

53.  Draught  of  a  bill  of  Complaint  to  the  fame  Cham- 

berlayne  of  Cheller  (figned  by  Robert  Brerewood  Efqj 
who  afterwards  fucceeded  Mr.  W  hitby  in  the  Recorder- 
fhip  of  Cheller  ;  was  knighted,  &  made  a  Serjeant  at 
Law)  made  for  Jane  Penny,  who  claimed  an  Houfe  in 
Chelter,  as  heireiTe  to  her  brother  Jerome  ;  which  he  en¬ 
joyed  as  heir  to  his  brother  RaulFe,  the  elded  Son  of  their 
Father  William,  who  entred  into  it,  upon  the  deceafe  of 
his  father,  long  before.  The  Bill  is  againll  Thomas  Ea¬ 
ton  &  one  Wellh  ;  who  having  gotten  the  Writings  into 
their  hands,  entred  into  the  Premiffes,  pretending  to  have 
bought  the  fame  of  the  Complainants  Fathers  fiders. 
This  was  A.  D.  1634.  405. 

54.  The  Demurrer,  Anfwere,  &  Aide-praier  of  Tho¬ 

mas  Eaton  Defendant,  to  the  Bill  of  Complaint  of  Jane 
Penny  Spinder:  Sworn  to,  23  Febr.  1634.  407. 

This  is  figned  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby ;  and  al- 
leages  matters  dire&Iy  contrary  to  the  former  Bill. 

55.  Original  Submiffion  of  William  Telh,  an  Officer 
in  the  Court  ofYorke,  who  had  reviled  Mr.  Maior  of 
Cheder,  Mr.  Recorder,  &c.  and  was  therefore  com¬ 
mitted  toWard,  A.  D.  1637.  (vid.  infra  N#.  86.)  41  r. 

He  alleages,  that  coming  (drunk)  from  fome  Com¬ 
pany  along  the  Rowe,  fome  of  the  Shuemakes  &  Card- 
makers  abueffing  him,  rought  fuche  a  ConfulTyon  or 
Didcmperature  in  his  Brayne,  that  they  made  him  halfe 
mad  (yet  more  drunk)  in  foe  muche  that  he  was  not 
his  owne  man. 

56.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Draught  of  a  Petition,  to 
the  Marquis  of  Buckingham,  in  the  name  of  his  Father 
Robert  &  Brother  Thomas,  Clerkes  of  the  Pentice,  who 
were  accufed  of  fome  Crimes  &  Miidemeanors  committed 
in  that  Office ;  for  which,  they  were  afterward  putt  out. 

.  4‘3- 

Herein  it  is  prayed  that  they  might  have  an  indift'er- 
ent  Trial  ;  that  they  might  have  the  Liberty  of  bringing 
in  their  WitnelTes  ;  &  that  their  Accufers  might  not  be 
their  Judges.  Indeed,  I  find  elfewhere,  that  their  Pride, 
as  well  as  their  Extortion,  brought  a  general  Odium 
upon  them. 

57.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Draught  of  another  Peti¬ 
tion,  to  Prince  Charles,  as  Earle  of  Cheder,  in  the  Names 
of  his  faid  Father  &  Brother.  Praying,  that  no  Com- 
miffion  or  Warrant  out  of  his  Highneffe  Court  of  Ex¬ 
chequer  may  be  awarded  againd  them  ;  or  if  that  anie 
bealreadieifiued,  aSuperfedeas  may  be  thereunto  granted, 
&  that  the  Petitioners  might  quietlie  enjoie  their  Office, 
vntill  a  legall  &  due  Examination,  &  Tryall. 

58.  A  rough  Draught  of  the  lad  Petition,  corrected 

by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby.  416. 

59.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  fird  part  of  a  Petitiorij 

in 


49<5 


Catalogus  Libroruni  MSSi 


Num.  2105. 

in  the  Names  of  his  faid  Father  &  Brother,  to  K.  James  1. 

418. 

60.  Another  Draught  of  the  fame  Petition,  amended 
by  Mr.  Recorder,  &c.  420.  et  430. 

Praying  that  hisHighnes  Attornie  &  Sollicitor  may 
direct  an  indifferent  Courfe  for  triall  of  their  pretended 
MifJemenors  in  any  his  ordinarye  Courts  of  Juftice, 
where  none  cf  the  Parties  are  Judges.  And  that  in  the 
meane  time,  they  may  enjoye  their  Office  without  dif- 
turbance. 

6  .  An  Original  Deed  of  Gift,  whereby  Mawde  Ba- 
nyfter  Spinfter  abfolutely  gives,  without  poflibility  of 
Redemption,  to  Jane  Cotgraveher  Aunte,  and  to  Alyce 
Wyrthen  her  Sifter,  her  ownely  &  efpeciall  frends,  who 
do  care  for  her  wcll-doinge  :  all  her  Money,  Goods, 
Cattails,  Jewells,  Ymplements,  and  other  t!  ings  what- 
foever.  bequeathed  to  her  by  her  Father:  and  putts  them 
into  acluall  pollllfion  of  the  fame,  by  the  Delyucry  of 
one  Shillinge  of  Syluer.  And  all  this,  without  any  Pro- 
vifo  f  >r  her  maintenance,  dat.  the  26  of  June,  1 58  3.422. 

The  main  Motive  to  this  extraordinary  Gift  is  thus 
exprefled,  For  “  that  I  feele  my  fellf  fomewhat  weake  of 
my  Seril’cs,  &  therfore  not  fytt  to  marry,  or  otherwife 
to  rule  &  governc  my  fclf,  and  fuch  pori ion  of  Goods 

as  my  faide  late  Father  hath  bequeathed - to  me.  And 

rather  to  them,  then  to  eny  others,  whoe  may  or  fhall 
hereafter  entife,  or  perl'wade  me  to  eny  Enconvenyence, 
ether  of  my  felf,  or  my  laide  goods.” 

Annexed  to  this,  remains, 

62.  I  he  Original  Letter  of  Adminiftration,  of  all  & 
fingular  the  1.. id  Goods,  granted  by  Dodlor  David  Yale 
the  Biiliop  of  Chaffer’s  Vicar-Generall  to  William  Cot- 
grave,  to  the  intent  that  they  ihould  be  equally  divided 
between  Ellen  the  Daughter  of  him  &  Jane  his  Wife 
:  :  and  the  fai  1  Ah 

after  the  Deceafe  of  the  laid  Mawde,  the  17th  of  Sep¬ 
tember  1589.  421. 

This  isfubferibed  by  Randle  Cotgrave,  as  Regifter 
of  the  Bifhops  Court,  and  the  whole  feems  to  have  been 
of  his  Writing.  1  his  Randle  I  take  to  be  Author  of  the 
French  &  Englilh  Dictionary  ;  a  book  efpecially  ufeful 
to  him  who  is  defirous  of  underftandiug  the  old  French. 

6  ’.  Another  Draught  of  the  Petition  above-mentioned 
at  N°  60.  and  Iikewife  amended  by  Mr.  Recorder  Whit- 

by-  .  414. 

1  h;s  has  an  Anfwerj  dated  from  the  Court  at  1  heo- 
balds,  4  Junij  1618.  importing,  that  if  they  found  them- 
klves  aggrieved,  they  might  ieeke  their  Remedye  by 
Courfe  of  Law  in  any  Judiciall  Court. 

64.  Copie  of  the  Sentence  promulgated  by  William 
Awbiev  ix  William  C.lerck  ll.  dd.  Judges  (Auditors) 
in  the  Arch-bilhop  of  Canterburies  Court  of  Audience 
againft  Robert  Yardeley  the  furviving  Executor  of  Eli¬ 
zas  Broughton  for  detaining  from  Francis  Broughton  the 
Legacy  bequeathed  to  him  by  the  dcceafed.  dat.  20  Nov. 
I578-  ,  .  .  426. 

In  tilde  Papers  is  a  Schedule  of  the  Goods  fo  be¬ 
queathed  to  Mr.  Broughton,  with  their  Valuations. 

6  k  The  abovemen  boned  Whitbies  firft  Petition  to 
the  King,  upon  their  being  turn’d  out  from  the  Clerkfhip 
of  the  Pentice  ;  praying  his  Majefties  gracious  Letters 
for  their  re-eftablifhment :  whch,  it  feemes,  was  granted 
in  part.  432. 

This  Draught  was  alfo  amended  by  Mr.  Recorder 
Whitby. 

66.  A  former  rough  Draught  of  the  laft  mentioned 

Petition  ;  amended  likewife  by  Mr.  Recorder.  414. 

67.  Minute  of  the  Affemblyof  Chefter  ;  lhewing,  that 

when  they  made  Mr.  Brerewood  Clerke  of  the  Pentice, 
they  meant  not  to  prejudice  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby  ;  or 
to  take  away  any  of  the  Rights  &  Fees  belonging  to  his 
PIacc- ,  .  436. 

This  was  upon  Complaint  that  he  had  received  no 
Fees  o  - Profits  (but  only  the  Citie-Fee)  fince  Mr.  Brere¬ 
wood  come  into  his  Place. 


Num  2105. 

68.  Copie  of  an  Order  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Council  ;  dated  the  21  of  November  1627.  43S.  444. 

Upon  hearinge  the  Caufe  concerninge  the  Sequef- 
tralion  of  Mr.  Brerewood  from  his  Place ;  that  the  Heads 
of  his  Charge  be  deliuered  unto  him,  and  that  there  be 
another  Hearing,  upon  the  matters  laid  againft  him. 

69.  Narration  of  the  feu!, x  treacherous  Praclices  of 

theabovementioned  Francis  Broughton,  &  Robert  Yard- 
lev,  againft  Elinor  the  Relict  &  Executrix  of  Edward 
Broughton,  the  elder  Brother  &  one  of  the  Executors  of 
Ellis  Broughton.  439. 

This  is  imperfeft,  but  opens  a  Scene  of  great  Villany. 

70.  Copie  of  another  Order  of  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 

Council  ;  dated  the  5th  of  December  627.  442. 

Biaming  the  Proceeding  of  Mr.  Brerewood  in  gettino- 
of  Hand*  to  a  Paper  drawn  up  againft  the  Affemblies 
Order  for  fequeftring  his  Place,  &  Mr.  Gamull  for  put¬ 
ting  his  Hand  to  the  lame.  Both  whom  having  fubmitted 
themfclves  to  be  order’d  by  the  Lord  Savage  (who  hath 
the  place  of  an  Alderman  in  Chefter)  his  Lordfhip  was 
to  take  Cognizance  of  the  w'hole  matter,  A  direct  what 
is  fitt  to  be  done  ;  efpecially  with  regard  to  one  Tarle- 
ton,  who  had  caft  fcandalous  Afperfions  vpon  Mr.  Re¬ 
corder  Whitbie,  &  others  who  had  menaced  him  with 
the  lofs  of  his  Place  :  and  to  report  his  w  hole  Proceedings 
to  the  Burd. 

7 1 .  Copie  of  Mr.  Brerewood’s  Surrender  of  his  Office 
of  Clerk  of  the  Pentice,  into  the  hands  of  the  Maior  Sc 
Cittizens  of  Chefter.  dated,  the  9th  of  December,  1627. 

His  Pretence  for  refigning  is  thus  :  “  Finding  my 
felfe  by  reafon  of  my  oilier  imployments  not  able  to 
attend  my  faid  Office  in  my  mvnc  perfon,  and  withall 
finding  by  experience  the  great  inconvenience  that  hath 
redounded  vnto  me  by  my  truil  heretofore  lvpofed  ia 
my  fervants  for  the  execution  of  the  laid  place.” 

72.  (Tmperfeft)  Agreement  between  the  Guardians  of 

Rauff  Radford  &  Alderman  William  Alderfey  touching 
their  refpeclive  Rights  to  the  poffeflion  ofBoughton- 
Chappeli  with  its  appurtenances,  dated  the  25th  of  Au- 
guft,  anno  1 1  Elizabethe  Regine.  446. 

Hereby,  they  were  to  putt  their  Writings  into  the 
hands  of  Edward  Hulfall  Efq;  lerned  in  the  Lawes  :  and 
after  lie  had  confidered  the  fame,  to  (land  by  what  he 
fhould  award  between  them. 

73.  The  Charge  againft  Mr.  Robert  Brerewood  ;  de¬ 

liuered  to  the  Comniiffioners  the  15th  of  December, 
A.  D.  1627.  laying  open  his  Mifdemeanors  before  his 
Sequeftration,  &  fince.  447. 

This  is,  indeed,  very  great  &  heavy  ;  and  fuffici- 
ently  fhews  him  to  have  been  a  very  wicked  officer. 

74.  Declaration  of  Margaret  Alderfey  Executrix  of 

Joan  Alderfey,  againft  Hugh  Dutton  Gent,  who  having 
borrowed  Ten  Pounds  of  the  faid  Joan,  in  the  3d  Year 
of  Q.  Mary,  refufed  to  pay  the  fame.  449. 

75.  Declaration  of  Ranulph  Maynwaringe  Efq;  &c. 

Executors  of  Peter  Leicefter  of  Tabley,  Elq;  againft 
Laurence  Leicefter  Gent.  Adminiftrator  to  William  Lei- 
cefter  of  Toft,  Efq;  in  an  Aftion  of  Debt,  to  Two.Thou- 
fand  Pounds  (temp.  Elizabethe  Regine)  450. 

76.  Petition  of  the  City  of  Chefter  to  the  Lords  of 

the  Privy  Councill  ;  21  Auguft  1627.  45 1. 

Deiiring  that  their  Caufe  might  be  heard  before 
their  Lordffiips,  &  not  by  Comniiffioners  :  and  that  be¬ 
fore  the  Election  of  a  new  Maior  :  becaufe  B;\  re  vood 
&  Alderman  William  Gamull  had  given  out,  that  if  they 
could  paffe  over  this  Yeare,  they  would  choofe  fuch  a 
Maior,  as  Ihould  reftore  Brerewood,  difplace  the  Recor¬ 
der,  queftion  the  now  Maior  &  others  for  fequeftring 
Brerewood,  &  complaining  to  their  Honors,  &c. 

77.  Certificate  of  the  laid  Maior  (Nicholas  Ince)  Sc 
Magiftrates  of  Chefter,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Coun¬ 
cil,  touching  the  infolent  &:  tumultuous  Behavior  of 
FoulkaSalufbury  (whom  their  Lordffiips  had  fent  for  up, 
by  a  Pourfuivant,  for  former  like  Behavior)  of  Alderman 

14  William 


Bibliothecae  Harleiattae* 


497 


Num.  2  I O  . 

William  Gamull,  &  others,  at  an  AfTembly  in  behalfe  of 
Brerewood  before  mentioned.  And  praying  that  fume 
Courfe  might  be  taken,  to  prevent  the  Diforders  they 
fufpe&ed  fuch  Carriage  might  produce.  _  453* 

78.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Ir.ce  Maior  of  Chef- 

ter,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  ;  14  Auguft 
1627.  4'5- 

Certifying,  that  he  had  bound  over  Mr.  Brerewood 
to  appear  before  them;  and  had  fent  Mr.  Recorder 
Whitby  &  Alderman  Drinkwater  authorized &inftna£led 
to  attend  them,  to  give  Information,  &  to  make  Proofe 
as  well  of  his  mifcarriage  in  his  Office,  before  the  Se- 
que fixation,  as  of  his  vndue  praftifes  fmce.  Complaining 
likewife  of  Alderman  William  Gamull  &  others,  who 
fpake  injurioufly  of  him,  for  drawing  this  Bufmeis  con¬ 
cerning  Mr.  Breiewood  out  of  the  Citty. 

79.  Copie  of  a  Petition  from  the  Maior,  Aldermen,  he. 
of  Chefter,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council.  457- 

Shewing,  that  when  Brerewood  was  fequeftred, 
the  Lord  Vifcount  Savage  was  prefent,  as  Alderman  of 
that  City.  That  Brerewood  &  his  Friends  had  laboured, 
indyreftly,  to  procure  Voyces  Sc  Hands  for  his  reftitu- 
tion ;  to  fett  deviffon  in  the  laid  Citty,  and  to  workc 
his  reftitution  by  ftronge  hand.  Praying  therefore  that 
their  Lordfhips  would  take  fuch  a  Courfe,  that  the  Office 
of  the  Pentice  or  Towne-Clerke,  might  be  reditkd  ; 
the  Juftice  of  the  Courts  prefer ved ;  &  Peace  in  that 
auncyent  Citty  fettled.  _ 

80.  Narratio  pro  Roberto  Conway  Sc  Criftofero  Conway 
Adminiftratoribus  Bonorum  Sc  Catallorum  que  fuerunt 
Willelmi  Mutton  nuper  defuncti,  querentibus  :  verlus 
Willelmum  Walle  Aldermannum  Defendentern,  in  pla- 
cito  Debiti,  Librarum  28,  et  Denarioi  urn  odo.  458. 

81.  Narratio  pro  Margareta  Hewer  Adminiftratrice 

Bonorum  &  Catallorum  que  fuerunt  Johannis  Hewer 
defundi,  Oueremis  :  verfus  Johanncm  De  le  hay,  in  Pla- 
cito  Debiti  £4:9:8.  459- 

82.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  abovementioned  Maior 

of  Chefter  Sc  his  Brethren,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Council,  14  March  1626.  _  46'- 

Upon  their  fequdl ring  Brerewood,  in  the  prefence 
of  the  Lord  Savage  ;  advertifmg  that  thefaid  Brerewood, 
pradifinge  to  come  again  to  his  Mace  by  indued  means, 
and  by  a  ftronge  hand,  hath  not  only  threatened  the 
Maior  &  others  that  informed,  or  voyced  againft  him  ; 
but  hath  caft  Afpertions  vpon  th’Afl'embly,  taxed  their 
proceedings  &  Judgement, ;  &  being  confcdcrare  with 
fome  others,  doth  labour  &  vfe  indyred  meanes  for  pack- 
inge  Sc  procuringe  of  Hands  to  a  Wrytinge  or  t  ertilicate 
of  his  S:  their  drawinge  &  contrivinge,  thereby  to  vvorke 
his  Rcftytuiion  ;  without  cleering  himfelfe  of  the  Crymes 
&  Mifdemeanors,  wherewith  hee  hands  charged. 

83.  Copie  of  part  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Andrew 
Gamull  of  Chefter,  to  hi,  brother  Mr.  Thomas  G;  mull 
of  London;  dat.  17  July  1623.  complaining  much  of 
Mr.  Edwards  of  Chcfter,  heretofore  mentioned  in  this 

Catalogue.  ,  '  4^3- 

84.  Mr.  Recorder  Whitbies  Draught  of  a  Letter  10 

the  then  Maior  of  Chefter  ;  about  Mr.  Brerewoods  de¬ 
taining  his  Fees.  4g4- 

85.  Narratio  Willelmi  Boothe,  Szc.  Executorum  icl- 

tamenti  Johannis  Boothe  Armigeri,  Querentium  :  verfus 
Nicholaum  Jeynfon,  alias  Thomafon,  alias  Thompfon, 
Yoman,  in  piacito  Computi.  Viz.  quod  reddat  eis  ra- 
cionabilem  Computum  fuum  de  tempore  quo  fuit  Ballivus 
ipfius  Johannis  dum  visit,  et  Receptor  Denariorum  ejuf- 
dem  Johannis,  &c.  ad  damnum  Mille  Librarum.  (This 
is  figned  by  Worfeley.)  __  *65- 

86.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Edwards  Maior  of 

Chefter  Sc  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  to  Dr.  Will.  Eafdall 
Chancellor  of  York,  &Dr.  Hen.  Wickham  Arch-deacon 
of  York  ;  21  Sept,  anno  13  R.  Carol..  _  468. 

Acquainting  them  with  their  proceeding  with  leih 
(a  Meffenger  of  the  High  Commiflion-Court  at  Yorke) 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2105. 

before  mentioned,  viz.  at  N°.  53.  who  being  got  wick" 
edly  drunk,  reviled  them  openly,  fwore  &  Llaiphemed 
horridly,  &  refilled  the  C.onftables  &  Gaoler  :  but  being 
cooler  the  next  day,  fubmnted  himlelf;  paid  for  his 
drunkenefs  &  fwearing,  and  was  bound  to  the  good  be¬ 
haviour  for  one  Pomfret  his  companion,  as  Pomfret  was 
for  him. 

87.  Original  Anfwer  of  Mr.  Chancellor  &  Mr.  Arch¬ 

deacon  of  Yorke,  to  Mr.  Maior  &  the  Recorder  of  Chef¬ 
ter  :  dat.  25  September  1637.  47°- 

Acquiefcing  in  what  they  had  done  toTefh  &  Pom¬ 
fret  ;  but  advifing,  that  fince’twas  not  almoft  poffible 
that  the  Purfevant  beinge  conftreyned  to  imployefo  many 
inferior  Minifters  as  he  does,  but  that  he  ffiould  fome* 
times  happen  vpon  difordered  Perfons :  it  would  bee 
convenient,  that  when  they  fhould  be  found  faulty, 
matters  may  bee  fo  carryed,  that  the  prefent  Seruice  of 
his  Majefty  bee  not  hindred  ;  efpeciaily  when  the  Bu- 
fineis  fh  11  bee  of  more  then  ordinary  confequence,  as 
thers  was. 

88.  Original  Letter  of  Adnjiniftraiion,  granted  by 
Dr.  David  Yale  Official  of  Chefter,  to  Anne  the  Relifit 
of  John  Williams,  who  died  inteftate.  dat.  5  April  1605. 

4  71- 

89.  Report  of  a  Trial  in  theFentice-Courtof  Chefter 

14  Sept,  anno  29  R.  Lliz.  between  Will.  Bebinton  Gent. 
Adminiftrator  to  John  Alderfey  late  of  Spurftow  Gent, 
and  John  Cotton  of  Cotton  Efq.  472. 

90.  Order  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer  of  Chefter, 

made  1  Ocfob  1634.  in  the  Suit  between  the  City  of 
Chefter  Plaint.  Sc  Alderman  William  Gamull,  See.  De¬ 
fendants.  474- 

This  was  for  Recovery  of  the  remaining  part  of  ioo 
Markes,  which  the  City  had  lent  to  Rich.  Tayliour  the 
late  keeper  of  the  Houfe  of  Corre&ion  there. 

91  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Juftice  Warburton  to 
Mr.  Will.  Gamull  Maior  of  Chefter  ;  13  Febr.  1620. 

476. 

That  he  had,  indeed,  intention  of  purchafing  lome 
of  Mr.  Bollock's  Lands  in  Aldfted  ;  but  that  fmce  he 
h  *d  lent  Mr.  Bollock  Money  to  fupply  his  Occafions 
with  ail,  he  had  off  red  the  fame  tor  another.  ’I 'hat  the 
Lurd  Cheife  Juftice  &  himfelf  had  ended  the  great  Buli- 
n.l's  between  Mr.  Robert  Whitby,  and  the  late  Maior, 
See.  and  now  they  trull  their  will  be  loving  &  neigh¬ 
bourly  Agreement  betwen  all  Citiz  ns. 

92.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lord  Chancellor  Ellef- 
mueto  Mr.  Pceter  Sharpe,  Bachellor  in  Dyvinuie.  dated 

477- 

Commending  Mr.  Robert  Whitby  then  Maior 
of  Chefter,  for  refigning  up  the  Office  (as  I  take 
it)  of  Steward  of  the  Dean  Sc  Chapters  Lands  ;  fmce 
he  could  not  houlde  it  without  fufpicionon  both  Sydes  : 
and  wilhing  that  the  Deane,  &c.  would  make  choyce  of 
fome  well-qualified  perl'on  to  fucoeed  him. 

93.  Declaration  of  Peter  RofengravePlaintiffe,  againft 

Maud  Cotgreve  adminiftratrix  to  James  Cotgreve  of 
Iiargreve,  in  an  Adtion  of  4  Pounds.  478. 

94.  The  Accomptes  of  Hugh  Dodof  Chefter  Yeoman, 

by  him  made&  deliuered  vnto  Nicholas  Ince  Alderman, 
in  July  1629.  in  refpefte  the  faid  Dod  was  admitted  by 
the  faid  Nicholas  Ince,  in  the  tyme  of  his  Maiorallity,  to 
write  in  the  Office  of  Pentice,  during  the  Sequeftration 
thereof,  in  the  fame  yeare  ;.by  Order  of  Affcmbly,  20 
Febr.  1626.  479- 

95.  Narratio  Willelmi  Norres  Militis  Executoris  Tef- 
tamenti  Henrici  Albroke,  etMargerie  Albroke  Coexe- 
cutricisejuldem  ;  C)uerentium,  de  Roberto  Bower,  de 
piacito  quod  reddat  eis  30  Solidos  quos  eis  injufte  detinet. 

484. 

96.  Narratio  pro  Margareta  Rattcliffe  Adminiftratice 

Jane  Rattcliffe  nuper  Matris  fue,  Querente  verfus  Johan- 
nem  Meoles  Gen.  Defendentern,  in  PlacitoTranfgreffionis 
fuperCafura,  ad  damnum  200  Librarum.  485^ 

6  L  97-  Narratio 


Catalogus  Libroruni  MSS. 


Num.  2105. 

97.  Narratio  pro  Elizabeths  Yerworth  et  Johanne 
Yenvorth  Executoribus  Teftamenti  Johannis  Yerworth 
Armigeri ;  verlus  Margeriam  Thornton  Executricem 
Teftamenti  Radulli  Thornton,  in  placito  Debeti^'3.  12. 

486. 

98.  Original  Letter  of  many  of  the  Aldermen  &  Citi¬ 

zens  of  Chefter,  to  the  then  Lord  Keeper  Sir  Thomas 
Egerton  :  6th  of  February,  1601.  488. 

Againft  Mr.  Radclifle  their  Maior,  who  made  Mr. 
Robert  Whitby  Clerk  of  the  Pentice,  without  their 
confent.  This  is  that  Letter,  alluded  to  above,  at  §  50. 

99.  Examination  of  Anne  Hough,  taken  before  the 

Maior  &c.  of  Chefter,  15  Augufl,  1637.  490. 

About  contemptuous  Words  fpoken  by  one  War¬ 
rington  a  Brewer,  againft  Alderman  Francis  Gamull. 

1  op.  Original  Letter  of  Adminiftration,  granted  by 
Mr.  brands  Magfon  Deputy  of  Dr.  Edmund  Mainwaringe 
Commillary  of  Richmund,  to  John  the  Father  Richard 
Lewteth  dat.  23  November  1632.  491. 

This  isalfo  figned  by  the  Writer  thereof  JohnDic- 
konfon  ;  who  appears  to  have  been  but  a  very  icnorant 
Notary-Publick. 

ici.  A  Note  touching  difrefpedful  Words  fpoken  by 
George  Warrington  abovementioned,  to  April  162  c.  of 
the  then  Maior  of  Chefter.  493. 

102.  Note  of  foine  of  that  Cities  Deeds  &  Charters 
deliver’d  22  April  1634.  to  Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  to  be 
confidered. 

103.  A  Note  of  fome  others,  delivered  to  Mr.  Recor¬ 
der  &  Mr.  Brerewood  to  perufe.  496. 

104.  Minute  of  an  Afiembly  holden  the  30th  of  April 

1581.  for  eleding  a  new  Yoman  of  the  Pentice  :  and 
touching  their  conftant  Attendance.  497. 

105.  Original  Certificate  of  many  Citizens  of  Chefter, 
touching  the  good  behaviour  of  William  Tayl  or  who 
was  then  in  Election  for  an  Officers  place  to  the  King’s 
Sheriff  within  the  fame  Cittie,  14  Marche  1614.  499. 

Upon  this  Certificate  he  was  admitted,  &  fworne, 
the  fame  day. 

106.  C.opie  of  a  Letter  from  K.  James  1.  given  the  22 

daie  of  November,  anno  regni  3.  to  the  Corporation  of 
the  Citie  of  Chefter  :  recommending  to  them  for  their 
Recorder  Hugh  Mainwaringe  of  Grayes  Inne,  an  Utter 
Barrefter  of  good  ftandinge.  30  1 . 

107.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Robert  Cecil  Earl  ©f 
Salifbury  to  the  faid  Corporation,  dat.  2  Febr.  1605. 

•  •  503. 

Acquainting  them,  that  his  Majeftie  having  receaved 
their  humble  Petition,  imploring  his  Pardon,  &  leave 
to  proceed  to  the  Eledon  of  a  new  Recorder,  according 
to  the  Lymitts  preferibed  vnto  them  by  their  Charter : 
which  is  to  eled  fome  fufficient  man  of  their  own  Cor¬ 
poration,  which  Mr.  Maynwaring  is  not  :  is  gracioully 
pleafed  to  forbeare  to  preffe  them  any  further  in  this 
Suyte  ;  and  the  rather,  in  rhat  they  have  fo  dewtifully 
&:  dilcreetly  behaved themfelves  towardshim,  in  delivering 
iheir  excul’e.  ° 

In  this  Affair,  the  City  of  Chefter  feems  to  have 
followed  the  Precedent  fett  them  by  the  Town  of  Shrewf- 
bury  (vid.  fupra,  N°  45.) 

1 08.  A  fairer  Copie  of  the  preceding  Letter.  505. 

109.  Attefted  Copie  of  a  Minute  of  the  Affembly 

holden  the  2 1  of  May  anno  primo  Caroli  Regis,  touching 
the  repay  re  of  the  City-Walls,  and  levying  the  Rate  of 
the  Aflcilnient,  by  way  of  Diftreffe,  upon  any  Inhabitant 
that  ftiould  refufe  to  pay  the  fame.  rQy , 

f  was  ffiewed  to  the  Witncffes  for  the  Sheriffes 

01  Chefter,  16  January  1627,  upon  occafion  of  the  Suit 
between  the  Sheriffes,  and  Sir  Walter  Pye  Mailer  of  the 
Court  of  Wards  ;  in  behalf  of  Sir  William  Brereton 

iio.  Draught  of  a  Letter,  by  Mr.  Robert  Brerewood 
Clerk  of  the  Pentice,  to  Mr.  Brereton  a  Juftice  of  the 
Peace,  or  to  the  Juftices  of  Peace  of  the  whole  County- 
Palatine.  dated  .  .  .  .  .  October  1621.  509. 


Num.  2105. 

Charging  him  or  them  with  infringeing  the  Privil- 
ges  of  the  City,  by  executing  the  Office  of  Juftice  of  the 
Peace  in  the  Parfonage-houfe  of  St.  Maryes  in  Chefter, 
out  of  an  erroneous  Conceat  that  the  fayd  Houfe  is  not 
within  the  I.ibertyes  of  the  fayd  Cittie  ;  by  conftitutinge 
&  authorizinge  of  a  Cunftable  within  the  Liber  tyes  of  the 
Cittye,  and  indeed,  over  fome  parte  of  the  Countye  of 
the  laid  Cittye,  where  there  was  never  any  before,  but  as 
appointed  by  the  Cittye  ;  &  by  claiming  a  quantity  of 
Ground  as  belonging  to  the  County-Palatine  which  was 
really  part  of  the  County  of  the  City  of  Chefter. 

hi.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Dutton  Maior  of  Chefter, 
&  of  divers  of  the  Aldermen  his  Brethren,  to  Mr.  Re¬ 
corder  Whitby,  upon  occafion  of  the  Writt  ad  audiend. 
Judic.  iffued  out  of  the  Courte  of  Wards,  att  the  Suite  of 
Sr.  William  Brereton.  &ferved  vppon  the  twoe  Confta- 
bles  that  made  diftreffe  vppon  his  Goods,  for  not  paying 
toward  their  late  Affeffment  for  Murage.  5 1 1. 

Here  they  defire  him  to  make  up  the  matter  with 
Sir  William  ;  but  if  that  could  not  be  effected,  to  fpare 
no  Cofts  in  defending  the  City  ;  and  what  ftiould  be  dif- 
burfed,  would  be  repaied.  This  feems  to  have  been 
about  the  beginning  of  the  year.  1628. 

1 12.  Original  Opinion  of  Sir  Heneage  Finch  Recor¬ 

der  of  London,  that  all  Inhabitants  Refiants  in  London 
are  liable  to  the  publick  Charges  ;  and  might  be  dif- 
trained  upon  in  purluance  of  the  A£ts  of  Common  Coun¬ 
cil.  Alfo  that  Subfidies  are  affeffed  and  levyed  in  all 
Places  within  the  City  of  London,  notwithftanding  any 
Privilege  or  Exempcion  from  the  Jurifdiftion  of  the  City. 
23  Febr.  1629.  513. 

1 13.  Prefentment  of  the  Jury  of  Chefter,  as  to  the 

Mifdeameanors  of  many  Perfons.  3 1 4. 

1 14.  Original  Petition  of  the  Company  of  Clo¬ 
thiers  of  Chefter,  to  Sir  Thomas  Smith  then  Maior,  &c. 

5l6- 

This  was  againft  the  Company  of  Shar-men  & 
Cloth-workers  who  had  lately  raifed  their  Prizes  for 
working  and  dreffing  of  theirClothes. 

1 1 5.  Petition  of  Hughe  Dod  to  the  Affembly  of 

Chefter;  preferred  in  October,  1624.  3x8. 

Praying,  that  he  might  have  the  prefent  Vfe  of  the 
Office  of  a  Philozer  ;  or  the  Clerk-flxip  of  the  Pentice, 
in  Reverfion  ;  or  of  Attorney  of  Record,  in  Reverlion  -r 
at  the  ufual  Rents. 

1 1 6.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Thomas  Gamull 

Recorder  of  Chefter,  to  William  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby  : 
dated  the  28th  of  Auguft,  1610.  318.  b. 

Recommending  this  Hugh  Dod  to  his  Lordlhip’s 
favor,  fo  as  that  he  might  have  the  place  of  an  Attorney, 
after  the  Death  of  any  of  the  four  Serjeants  of  Chefter  ; 
whoe  have  byn  vfually  appoynted  by  fuche  to  whom 
theCuftody  of  the  foure  Gates  of  that  City  by  Inheri¬ 
tance  did  belong  ;  whereof  his  Lordfhip  was  one.  Yet, 
although  that  noble  Lord  did  allow  of  this  Nomination : 
poor  Hugh  was  putt  by  when  the  next  Ele&ion  came  on, 

1 1 7.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  K.  James  1.  to  the  Affem¬ 
bly  of  Chefter  :  given  the  22  of  July,  anno  regni  14, 

519. 

Recommending  this  Hugh  Dod  vnto  them,  for  his 
Admittance  into  fuche  Place  of  Preferment,  in  his  Courts 
there,  as  to  them  ftiould  be  thought  good :  the  faid 
Hugh  having,  of  late,  done  vnto  him  acceptable  Service 
in  Writeing  fondry  Inftru&ions,  for  the  ayde  of  his 
dearefte  Daughter  the  Lady  Elizabeth. 

Neither  had  this  Letter  any  good  effeft,  when  it  was 
produced. 

1 1 8.  Ameries  Cafe  ;  concerning  l’Amcndement  d’une 

Common  Recoverie,  13  Auguft  1613  :  fett  down  by 
Mr.  Recorder  Whitby.  320. 

1 1  9.  A  Copie  of  the  Writt  of  Corpus  cum  Caufa  j 
for  bringing  Will.  Sprofton  out  of  the  Prifon  of  the 
Northgate  before  the  Judges  of  Affize  at  Chefter  :  bear¬ 
ing  Tefte  18  O&obr.  anno.  4  R.  Caroli  1.  322. 

*8  120.  Copie 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


499 


Num.  2105. 

120.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy 
Council,  to  the  Maior  &  Aldermen  of  Chefter:  dated 
from  the  Court  at  Oallands,  the  12  of  September,  1636. 

524. 

Written  upon  occafion  of  the  fpreading  of  the 
Plague ;  &  directing  them  (in  his  Majefties  name)  to  put- 
°Jf  their  next  Michael-mafs-Fayre,  giving  publicque  & 
tymely  notice  thereof.  And  to  caufe  all  fuch  Londoners 
He  others  coming  from  infefted  Places,  &  vending  their 
Wares  in  the  Villages  within  5  miles  round  about  Chefter, 
to  he  fhutt  up  (at  their  owne  Charges)  in  the  howfes  where 
in  they  fhould  abide ;  and  alfoe,  the  Howfes  where  fuch 
their  W areslhould  remayne,  as  if  they  were  Places  infected. 

1 2 1 .  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  Maior  &  Alderman  of 

Chefter,  to  Sir  Edward  Broughton  of  Ifcoyed  Knight : 
dated  the  4th  of  March,  1636.  526. 

In  anfwer  to  an  unkind  Letter  they  received  from 
him,  who  claymed  an  Intereft  in  the  Lands  left  by  Mr. 
Alderman  Valentine  Broughton,  the  Nomination  of  Te¬ 
nants,  kc.  and  threatened  them  with  Lawfuits,  if  they 
did  not  comply  with  him. 

122.  Original  Letter  of  the  Maior,  &c.  of  Chefter,  to 

the  Earl  of  Northampton,  Lord  Prefident  of  Wales, 
dated  the  21ft  of  December,  1620.  328. 

Shewing  their  willingnefs  to  have  forwarded  the 
Election  of  Sir  Henry  Carye,  for  their  Burgefle  (although 
they  feared  much  oppofition  in  the  Commynaltie,  by  rea- 
fon  he  was  not  infranchifed)  but  having  receyued  cer- 
teine  Intelligence,  that  Sir  Henry  was  already  defied  a 
Knight  for  Harfordihire,  they  found  themfelves  to  be  un¬ 
worthy  of  him,  _  (etvid.  535.) 

123.  Attefted  Copie  of  the  Lift  of  thofe  who  voted  at 
the  Afl'embly  holden  the  5th  of  October  1629,  when  the 
gueftion  was  putt,  whether  Mr.  Robert  Brerewood  ftiould 
be  of  the  Citties  Counfell  to  affift  Mr.  Grene,  Yea  or 

529.  b. 

Ihen  31  voted ior  him,  &  32  againft  him. 

124.  Original  Letter  of  William  Earl  of  Northamp¬ 

ton,  to  the  Maior  Sc  Aldermen  of  Chefter ;  dated  from 
Ludlowe-Caftle,  the  27  of  December  1620.  531. 

Recommending  Sir  Henrie  Carewe  Comptroller  of 
his  Majefties  Houfehold  to  be  one  of  their  Burgefles  ; 
upon  the  earneft  Entreaty  of  the  Prince  his  Counfell, 
brought  to  him  in  his  Highnes  name. 

125.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  William  Gamull 
Maior  of  Chefter,  &c.  to  the  Princes  Council,  A.  D. 
1620,  (hewing  how  ready  they  were  to  eled  Sir  Tho¬ 
mas  Edmunds  for  one  of  their  Burgefles  in  Parlia¬ 
ment  ;  but  that  Mr.  Recorder  who  fecmed  to  comply 
therewith,  &  did  give  Sir  Thomas  his  Vote,  by  bringing 
a  multitude  of  the  bafer  people  from  the  fuburbs,  fuch 
as  Laborers  &  hyred  Workmen,  common  Beggars, 
Apprentices,  &  Forreigners,  who  had  no  Votes,  and 
others  his  Tennants  &  Servants  ;  Sc  by  prefling  the  Sta¬ 
tute  of  1  Hen.  v.  for  the  electing  of  Citizens  infranchifed 
&  refiant,  difabled  Sir  Thomas,  k  caufed  himfelf  to  be 
eledted,  together  with  Mr.  Ratcliffe  his  adherente,  a  man 
never  employed  in  any  publique  Allaire  but  euer  noted 
for  a  countenancer  of  Factions,  and  who  had  ben  con- 
vented  before  the  ordynary  for  his  Non-Conformity.  533. 

126.  Draught  of  another  Letter  from  the  Maior  k  Al¬ 

dermen  of  Chefter,  perhaps  to  the  Earl  of  Northampton  : 
noted  to  have  been  written  A.D.  162c.  33 

Shewing  their  willingnefs  to  eledt  (Sir  Henry 
Carewe)  the  perfon  recommended  by  the  Princes  C  oun- 
cil  ;  yet  finding  him  to  be  vncapable,  in  regard  of  the 
Lawes  &  Statutes  of  the  Kingdome,  the  Tenor  of  the 
Writte  of. Election,  and  the  vfage  of  that  Cittye ;  they 
advertife  him  thereof,  that  in  cafe  of  a  difappointment,  his 
Highneffe  might  not  efteeme  them  either  negledtfull,  or 
vnwillinge  to  performe  his  pleafure. 

lzy.  Original  Letter  from  Sir  Randle  Mainwaring  to 
Mr.  Gamull  Maior  of  Chefter,  23  Jan.  1620.  539. 

Letting  him  know,  that  notwithftanding  the  late 


Num.  2105,  2106. 

Eleclion  (if  the  time  had  not  been  overflipped)  new 
Wntts  might  have  been  procured,  according  to  the  Opi¬ 
nions  of  Sir  Robert  Heath  the  Kings  Sollicitor,  Sir  Fran¬ 
cis  Moore  the  moft  antient  Star-chamber-man,  Sir  Tho¬ 
mas  Hughes  a  very  antient  Council,  &  Sir  Thomas  Co¬ 
ventry  the  Kings  Attorney.  But  now  defiring  a  Cer¬ 
tificate  from  him  &  his  brethren,  as  to  the  number  of 
voyces  giuen  for  Sir  Thomas  Edmonds,  or  to  Mr.  Sauage 
or  Mr.Recorder,  or  Mr.Ratcliffe,  feverally,  whereby  both 
the  number  &  quality  of  them  fo  giuen,  might  haue 
beene  feen  exactly. 

Here  is  a  Poftcript  written  by  the  Lord  Sauage, 
way  of  Complement  to  Mrs.  Maiorefle. 

128.  Original  Letter  from  Thomas  Lord  Vifcount 

Sauage  to  the  fame.  dat.  22  Nov.  1620.  541. 

Recommending  his  brother  John  Sauage,  &  Sir  John 
Bingley  for  Burgefles  to  the  City,  at  the  enfuing  Par- 
lement. 

1 29.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  the  City  of  Chefter,  to 
Richard  Neyle  Arch  Bp.  of  York,  31  Aug.  1633.  543. 

In  behalf  of  Mr.  Ley  a  Prebendary  there,  who  ha¬ 
ving  a  Benefice  near  the  City,  did  preach  a  Weekly  Lec¬ 
ture  in  Chefter,  but  was  filenced  by  his  Graces  Vifitors. 

543. 

130.  Original  Letter  of  Edward  Lord  Vifcount'Con- 
way  &  others  of  his  Majefties  Council  for  Irilh  Affairs, 
dated  7  April,  1625. 

Defiring  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter  to  fend  up  fpee- 
dily  a  true  &  perfect  Certificate  of  the  names  of  all  thofe 
who  were  caff  away,  by  the  violence  of  the  late  great  tem- 
peft,  in  their  paflage  towards  Ireland  ;  and  of  whofe  Com- 
panyes  they  were  :  that  ordre  might  be  giuen  for  leuying 
other  men  to  fupply  that  lode. 

1 31.  Draught  of  an  Aft  of  the  Privy  Council  in  Ire¬ 

land  ;  upon  great  Complaints  made  to  the  Lord  Deputy 
againft  the  vnreafonable  &  exorbitant  By-Lawes  ufed 
there  in  feverall  Citties  &  other  Corporat  Townes  :  and 
for  requiring  true  &  perfed  doequetts  of  the  fame  to  be 
brought  in  from  all  the  Corporate  Townes,  See.  in  the 
Kingdome,'  that  they  might  be  confidered.  546. 

132.  An  original  (but  ill-worded)  Letter  from  Mr. 

Mathew  Whitehead  to  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  dated  from 
London,  18  of  Januaiy  1624.  34^. 

About  the  rent  of  an  houfe  of  his,  which  the  City 
claimed  to  be  theirs. 

J33-  Apographum  Carta;,  qua  Petrus  Dutton  Major, 
&  Cives  Ceitrenles  conceflerunt  Georgio  Harebrowne 
Erudito  in  Lege.Anglie,  annualem  Redditum  40  foli- 
dorum,  pro  termino  Vite  fue  percipiendem  :  dat.  x 8  die 
Augufti,  anno  5  Regis  Henrici  vin.  549-b. 

13 4-  Original  Prefentment  of  Rich.  Greaves,  for  en- 
croching  upon  the  Efcheat-Lands  of  the  City  :  A.  D. 
1593-  550.  b. 

2  106. 

An  Ileraldical  Book  in  folio,  written  by  divers  hands  •  as 
by  thofe  of  Mr.  Thomas  Chaloner,  the  firft  Randle 
Holme,  kc.  which  although  it  be  marked  all  along  as 
entred  into  fome  other  book  or  books,  yet  it  remains 
legible,  and  is  an  Armes-book  that  may  be  of  good  ufe. 
I  find  in  it, 

1 .  A  Sort  of  Ordinary  of  Armes  in  Blafon  ;  whofe 

contriver  leans  to  have  alfeded  concifenefs  a  little  too 

much-  1 .  et  1 13.  et  207. 

2.  Copies  of  the  old  Defcents  of  Wermincham,  with 

their  Armes  tricked.  yg 

3.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  feveral  Families  in  Dublin. 

80. 

4.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames ;  but  without 

the  references.  gt> 

5.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  many  of  our  antient  Nobility. 

103. 

6.  Another  Alphabetical  Table  of  Surnames  :  like  the 

former.  ^ 

7.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  many  antient  Families,  putt 

down 


5°o 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2106,  2107. 


down  promifcuoufiy.  171.  et  20S.  et  237.  230.  269* 
285.  307. 

8.  Armes,  in  French  Blafon,  of  the  Englilh  King,  No¬ 
bility,  &  Gentry  ;  thought  to  be  taken  from  fome  Book 
or  Roll  made  in  the  time  of  K.  Edward  tv.  189. 

g.  Extracts  from  fome  old  Deeds  relating  to  the  Fa¬ 
mily  of  Newton.  206. 

10.  Armes  of  old  Englilh  Gentry,  in  French  Blafon. 

221.  24 7-  253. 

ix.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  Stafford  (hire  Gentry.  264. 

1  2.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  the  piincipalle  Companies 
of  Loudon  ;  and  of  the  Univerfitie  of  Cambridge.  268. 

13.  ’Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  antient  Chefliire-Families  ; 

dated  A.  D.  1589  _  273. 

14.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  divers  of  our  antient  Nobi¬ 
lity.  278. 

15.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  many  Kings  8c  Princes, 

moflly  F  jreign ;  fome  real,  others  fictitious.  281. 

16.  Armes  of  the  Eng lifli  Nobility  j  feeming  to  have 

been  t  tki  n  from  Cookes  Baronage.  -o'- 

This  Tract  comes  down  no  lower  than  K.  Richard  hi. 

306. 

17.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  the  old  Earles  ol  Chelter. 

3*3- 

.  j  3.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  Names,  8c  Surnames, 
directing  to  the  feveral  Armes,  8c  Crefts  entred  into  this 
Book.  3 1 5- 

19.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Explication  ot  the 
method  ufed  in  the  abovement toned  ordinary.  At  the 
end. 


2107. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  loofe  Papers  bound 
up  together  by  the  third  Randle  Holme  ;  and  by  him 
cm  the  imtfide.  thus  entituled  “  The  names  of  all  the 
Inhabitants  within  the  County  of  Chelter.”  In  deferib- 
irg  which,  I  lhail  proceed  in  the  ufaal  method;  begin¬ 
ning  with, 

1.  A  fable  !i  reeling  to  the  feveral  Town  fhips,  to 
which  tli’  •  f  'llowing  papers  do  belong  ;  made  by  the  fame 
1 :  andle  IT  .line.  In  the  firft  w  ritren  leaf. 

2.  A  Remonftrancc  or  . /cclaration  of  Us,  the  Inhabit 

tants  of  1  tie  Cour.tie  Pal  one  of  Chelter,  whole  names 
are  fubferibed  ;  ar.J  c  f  m: \y  nv  re.  1 90. 

This  is  for  tht  Inhabitants  of  Bxmbprt,  whole  fub- 
feri  ers  were  169  in  number.  The  Remonltrance  (which 
is  the  lame  in  all  places)  was  made  A.  D-  1641.  under 
pretence  of  mail  ling  hi  >  Mi ties  roy  il  &  facred  Per- 
lun  &  Prerogative ;  and  the  juft  Privileges  of  Parliament. 

3.  Another  from  fome  Hamlett,  whole  name  doth  not 

appear;  and  its  fubferibers  are  but  50.  192. 

’  4.  Another  of  thefe,  fubferibed  by  many  of  the  prin¬ 
cipal  Gentry  (A.D.  1642)  being  48  in  number.  194. 

5.  Another  from  fome  other  Place,  whofe  Subfcribers 

were  in  number  133.  <  196. 

6.  Another  from  Torpor  ley  ;  whofe  Subfcribers  were 


>°5- 


7.  Another,  from  fome  other  Place  ;  whofe  Subfcri- 

'bers  were  51.  200. 

8.  Ar  c.  1  her  from  Budworth  parva ;  whofe  Subfcribers 

were  35  in  number.  202. 

9.  Another,  from  fome  other  Place ;  whofe  Subfcribers 

were  about  a&zn  •  204. 

10.  Another,  from  Stockport;  whofe  Subfcribers 

were  350.  2c6. 

1  ! .  Another,  from  Chriflleton ;  whofe  Subfcribers 
were  66.  210.  b. 

12.  Another,  fromBodon;  whofe  Subfcribers  were 

74.  2 1 2.  b. 

13.  Another,  from  Baddeley;  whofe  Subfcribeia 

were  51.  214. 

Among  thefe,  are  the  names  of  the  Juftices  of  the 

Peace,  &  ot  the  Jury,  at  the  Quarter-Seflions. 

14.  Another,  It  ora  another  place ;  whofe  Subfcrit  ers 

were  40.  2x5. 


Num.  2107. 


5.  Another,  from  North-wich ;  the  Subfcribers  being 


7  2.  t  / 

1 6.  Another,  faid.to  be  from  the  fame  place;  fubferibed 

by  65.  219. 

1 7.  Another,  from  Davenham ;  whofe  Subfcribers 


18.  Another,  from  Peever;  whofe  Subfcribers  were  95. 


1 9.  Another,  from  Siddington  ;  whofe  Subfcribers 


were  90.  224.. 

20.  Another  from  fome  other  place;  whofe  Subferi- 

226. 


bers  were  48 

21.  Another  from  Ringey;  whofe  Subfcribers  were 

114.  .  227.  b. 

22.  Another,  from  Barrow  ;  whofe  Subfcribers  were 

93.  229. 

23.  Another,  from  Budworth  ;  whofe  Subfcribers 

were  69.  231.  b. 

24.  Another,  from  Turvyn  ;  whofe  Subfcribers  were 

136.  233. 

25.  Another,  from  Poole,  Namptwiche,  8c  other 

parts  ;  where  64  fubferibed.  235. 

26.  Another,  from  fome  other  place;  where  32  fub¬ 
feribed.  236. 

27.  Another, fromWib unbury;  where  267  fubferibed. 

238. 

28.  Another,  from  Wood-church ;  fubferibed  by  93  ^ 

lioufe-holders.  240. 

29.  Another,  from  Adon,  Edleflon,  See.  fubferibed 

by  33.  241. 

3c.  Another,  from  Barthomley  &  Ardren-Parilhes ; 
fubferibed  by  605.  243. 

3 1 .  Another,  from  Crew,  Haflir.gton,  8c  Bcxton  ; 

fubferibed  by  14 1.  245* 

32  Another,  from  Burland,  &c.  fubferibed  by  46. 

.  24 7- 

33.  Another,  from  fome  other  place  ;  fubferibed  by 

90.  249. 

34.  Another,  from  Sandbach  ;  fubferibed  by  193. 

25»- 

35.  Another,  from  Weverham  ;  fubferibed  by  281. 

.  253- 

36.  Another,  from  fome  other  place  ;  fubferibed  by 

104.  .  255- 

37.  Another,  from  another  ;  fubferibed  by  31.  257. 

38.  Another,  from  another  Place ;  fubferibed  by  66. 

259- 

39.  Another,  from  Carrington  ;  fubferibed  by  70. 

'261. 

40.  Another,  from  another  place  ;  fubferibed  by  38. 

263. 

41.  Another,  from  Seven  Oakes  ;  fubferibed  by  32. 

265. 

42.  Another,  from  Withington  ;  fubferibed  by  47. 

267. 

43.  Another  from  Alderley  ;  fubferibed  by  67.  269. 

44.  Another,  from  .  .  .  .  ;  fubicribed  by  12.271. 

45.  Another,  from  Davenport ;  lubferibed  by  70. 

273.  1 

46.  Another,  from  Norton  ;  fubferibed  by  43 1  •  275.  ; 

47.  Another,  from  Alderley  ;  fubferibed  by  14c. 

279.  j 

48.  Another,  from . fubferibed  by  44.  281. 

49.  Another,  from . fubferibed  by  106. 


283. 


co.  Another,  from  another  place;  fubferibed  by  37.  I 

285. 

c ! .  Another,  from  another  place ;  fubferibed  by  2 1 .  I 

287. 

52.  Another,  from  C.helford  ;  fubferibed  by  57.  289. 

53.  Another,  from  fo.i.e  other  place  ;  fubferibed  by  | 


54.  Another,  from  Macclesfield  ;  fuYcribe  I  by  202,  I 
Augult  1.  A.  D.  1642.  293. 

55.  Ano-  I 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


Soi 


Num.  2x07. 

55.  Another,  from  fome  other  place  ;  fubferibed  by 

31-  .  29 5- 

56.  Another,  from  fome  other  place  ;  fubferibed  by 

5 2.  298. 

57.  Another,  from  Sandbach  ;  fubferibed  by  31.  299. 

58.  Another,  from  Over  ;  fubferibed  by  119.  301. 

59.  Another,  from  Wineflowe  ;  fubferibed  by  59. 

3  °3- 

60.  Another,  from  fome  other  place  ;  fubferibed  by 

two.  305. 

61.  Another,  from  Middel-wich  ;  fubferibed  by  hi. 

3 °7-  b- 

6 2.  Another,  from  Lyme-Parifh  ;  fubferibed  by  160. 

.  3°9- 

63.  Another  from  Roufthorne-Parifh  ;  fubferibed  by 

109.  3n* 

64.  Another,  from  Chefter-Caftle,  &  the  Glovers- 

ftone;  fubferibed  by  50.  313. 

.65.  Another,  from  Boughton  ;  fubferibed  by  53. 

.  3*5- 

66.  Another,  from  another  place  j  fubferibed  by 
no.  318. 

I  67.  Another,  from  Pulford  ;  fubferibed  by  55.  32 1. 

68.  Another,  from  Ecclefton  ;  fubferibed  by  70. 

323* 

I  69.  Another,  from  Thornton,  fubferibed  by  95.  325. 

70.  Another,  from  Stanney  ;  fubferibed  by  23.  327. 

71.  Another,  from  Plemftall ;  fubferibed  by  50.  329. 

72.  Another,  from  Knuttesford  in  the  Pariffi  of 

Rofthorne  ;  fubferibed  by  108.  331. 

73.  Another,  from  Over  ;  fubferibed  by  3 1.  333. 

74.  Another,  from  Mobberley  ;  fubferibed  by  95. 

335- 

75.  Another,  from  Shotwick  ;  fubferibed  by  34.  337. 

76.  Another,  from  fome  other  place  ;  fubferibed  by 

85-  .  339- 

77.  Another,  from  Cholmondefton  ;  fubferibed  by 

40.  340. 

78.  Another,  from  the  Pariflies  of  Weft  Kirkeby, 

Bidfton,  &  Nefton,  fubferibed  by  246.  341. 

79.  Another,  from  Wibunbury  ,  fubferibed  by  35. 

342. 

80.  Another,  from  fome  other  place  ;  fubferibed  by 

68.  .  343. 

8 1 .  Another,  from  fome  other  place  ;  fubferibed  by 

54-  .  344- 

82.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Names  of  the  Subfcribers  to 

the  faid  Declaration,  in  the  Parilh  of  Warmincham. 
Their  Number  is  faid  to  have  been  122.  345. 

83.  Another  like  Declaration  from  Bovvdon  :  l'ub- 

feribed  by  49.  346. 

84.  Another,  from  the  Townftiippe  of  Bollington, 

within  Bowdon-Parilh  ;  fubferibed  by  31.  347. 

85.  Lift  of  the  Subfcribers  at  Bagguley,  in  Bowdon- 

Parilh;  57  in  Number.  348. 

All  thefe  Subfcriptions  abovementioned  do  not  in¬ 
clude  near  the  Number  of  the  then  fubftantial  Inhabi¬ 
tants  of  the  County-Palatine  of  Chefter.  And  I  find 

that  thofe  who  by  fubferibing  declared  themfelves  to  be 
for  both  the  King  &  the  Parliament,  in  this  County,  were 
more  than  8400  :  as  vid.  fol.  317.  b. 

Then  follow, 

86.  A  Copie  of  the  Petition  of  the  Prifoners  in  the 

I'leete,  to  the  Lords  &  others  his  Majefties  Commiffion- 
ers  for  examining  of  Greivanccs.  349. 

Complaining,  that  the  ufe  of  the  Fleet  yard  was 
lately  taken  from  them  ;  and  praying  that  they  would 
direct  M\  Warden  to  graunt  the  Liberty  of  the  Rule  & 
Houfe,  to  all  fuch  as  have,  or  lhall  give  in  Security  for 
their  true  Imprifonment.  A.  D.  1635. 

87.  A  Draught  of  another  Petition,  to  the  fame  pur- 

pofe  ;  but  longer.  350.  b. 


Num.  2108 —  21 IC. 


2108. 

A  Book  in  finall  folio,  written  by  the  third  Randle 
Holme,  &c.  and  containing, 

A  good  Alphabet  of  Armes,  in  Blafon. 

2  IO9. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  finall  folio  ;  written  by  feverat 
hands  ;  wherein  I  find, 

1  •  Jacob  Chaloner’s  Copie  of  the  Vifitation-book  of 
Bed  ford  Hi  ire,  as  the  fame  was  taken  by  the  Officers  of 
Armes,  A.  D.  1582. or  1583.  1. 

This  Copie  is  enriched  with  many  Continuations 
and  Additions. 

2.  Defcents  &  Matches  of  many  of  the  Irifti  &  Englilh 

Nobility,  Se  Gentry  ;  fett  down  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme.  Cg. 

3.  Like  Defcents,  fett  down  by  the  faid  Chaloner  Sc 
Holme  ;  (to  be  read  from  the  other  end  of  the  Book)  1. 

4.  Their  Alphabetical  Table  of  Sur-names  mentioned 

in  the  Book  hitherto.  Toward  the  end.  115.I1. 

5.  Lift  of  the  Sheriffes  of  Bedfordfhire,  from  the  firfl 

of  K.  Henry  11  ;  to  ann.  17  Jacobi  1.  ii2.b. 

6.  The  names  of  the  Families  owning  the  Cotes,  Crefts 
Se  Quarterings  tricked  in  both  ends  of  this  Book  :  fett 
down  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  A.  D.  1632.  123. 

2  I  IO. 

Codex  mcmbranaceus  in  fol.  min.  fcilicet  Regeftum  Car- 

tarum  Prioratus  de  Cartel- Acre  in  Comitatu  ...  in 

quo  continentur, 

1.  Nomina  Oppidorum  et  Villarum,  nee  non  Tituli 
nonnullarum  e  Cartis,  hoc  in  Codice  deferiptarum  : 
manu  Ranulfi  Holme  tertij. 

2.  Carte  Comitum  et  Comitiflarum  Warenne,  Fun- 

datorum  hujufee  Domus  Monachorum  Ordinis  Clunia- 
cenfis.  1.  13.  b. 

3.  Carte  Baronum,  Militum,  et  aliorum  Benefactorum 

noltorum.  7.  b. 

4.  Cartas  de  Terris,  See.  in  Villa  de  Maffingeham.  15. 

5.  Placitum  Affife  apud  Lennam,  contra  Galfridum 

de  Congham.  18.  b. 

6.  Cartas  da  Terris  in  Dunham,  Suth-Acra,  et  Rich- 

efnefe.  19. 

7.  De  Ecclefijs  de  Kemeftun,  Dunham,  Eft-Lechef- 

ham,  Wefehamtorp,  et  decimis  earundem :  et  With- 
resfeld,  et  Winbotelham  ;  et  duabus  Terris  i4SoIido- 
rum  in  Wefeham  ;  et  Terra  de  Congham,  et  Snetefham  ; 
etSparte.  20.  et28.b. 

8.  Carta:  de  Terris  in  Suthacra.  21. 

9.  Carta:.  de  Terris  in  Pagrava.  22.  b.  et  23.  b. 

10.  Carta:  de  Terris  in  Neutuna.  23.  b. 

1  r .  Carta;  de  Terris  in  Rucham.  24. 

12.  Carta:  de  Terris  in  Kemeftun.  27. 

(Hie  colligi  poteft,  Clericos  port  conquEeftum  An¬ 
glia;  fuifle  uxoratos)  et  vid.  30.  b.  et6o.  65.  68.  b. 

76.  b.  90. 

13.  Carta:  de  Terris  in  Leceffiam.  ibid. 

14.  Carta;  de  Terris  in  Wefeham.  29. 

15.  Carta:  de  Terris  in  Geituna;  et  Welles.  3r. 

16.  Carta:  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Congham,  Sc  Ridune. 

32.  b. 

17.  Cartse  de  Terris,  See.  in  Snetefham.  37. 

18.  Carta:  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Rudham.  33>  b- 

19.  Carla;  de  Terris,  See.  in  Herpele.  3  c. 

20.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Sidelterne.  (vel  Siefterne) 

35.  b.  (etSiJiefterne.) 

21.  Carta  de  Terris,  8cc.  in  North-birlingham.  ibid. 

22.  Carta  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Enhale.  Sidelterne,  North- 

wolde,  Houtuna,  Rochelund  &  Crec.  36. 

23.  Carta  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Caftel-acra.  .  36. 

24.  Carta;  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Taterfete  &  in  Senge- 

ham.  26.  b.  37. 

25.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Eft-barfham,  et  Depe- 

dena.  37. 

6  M  6.  Carta 


Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


50i 


Catalogus  Libroruin  MSS. 


Num.  2 no. 

2.6.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Eft-barfham,  Kerdeftun, 
e*  JjyrrelJroJpe.  38. 

27.  Carta;  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Weft-barlham.  38.  b. 

28.  Carta;  de  Terris,  8cc.  in  North-barfam,  Trekef- 

tuna,  et  Bodeham.  39. 

29.  Carta  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Refham.  40* 

30.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Creke.  40.  b. 

31.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Brunham-torpa.  44. 

32.  Carts  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Burneham.  45.  b. 

33.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Bcremere.  46. 

34.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Baggetorp,  Felduna, 
Alreford,  Hotringeheia,  et  Wiltuna,  (et  in  Feltevvella) 

49. 

35.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Facheam.  50. 

36.  Carta;  de  Terris,  kc.  in  Frenge,  et  Dokingei 

50.  b. 

37.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Holkam,  Claia,  Sceng- 

ham,  &c.  51. 

3S.  Carta;  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Holt,  Claia,  Brichelef- 
wrde,  et  Emllede.  51.  b. 

39.  Carta;  de  Decimis,  &c.  in  Greffeham  et  Hecham. 

S3- 

40.  Carta;  de  Terris,  in».Fulmodeftuna,  et  Croke- 

ftuna.  53.  b. 

41.  Carta;  de  Decimis,  Sec.  in  Gatele.  54. 

42.  Cartae  de  Celia  de  Reinham.  54.  b. 

43.  Carts  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Heleghetona.  55.  b. 

44.  Carta;  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Wichingefete.  5 6. 

45.  Carta;  de  ReddiiibusSc  Decimis,  in  Ridburch,  et 

Hilling etuna.  56.  b. 

46.  Carta;  de  Terris  et  Decimis  in  Binetre,  Nortune, 

et  Bunewella.  57* 

47.  Carta;  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Wordinge.  57.  b. 

4S.  Carta;  de  Terris  et  Redditibus,  kc.  in  Billinge- 

forda,  etHafpehale.  58.  b. 

49.  Carta;  de  Terris  in  Reimereftuna,  Wiclefwde,  k 

Nonviz.  59. 

50.  Carton  de  Terns,  &c.  in  Gememua  (nunc  Yar¬ 
mouth)  Wallmgeham,  &  Fildedallinges.  59.  b. 

51.  Carta;  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Wichingham,  Brantef- 

tuna,  Saham,  Wicluna,  Wikemere,  Wltertuna,  Plum- 
ftede,  Iliteringeham,  Paftun,  Sc  Berningeham.  60. 

52.  C.artoe  de  Ecclefia,  Sec.  in  Ilaringcbi,  Walefliam, 

ct  Witewelle.  60.  b. 

53.  Carta;  de  Decimis,  kc.  in  Herfham,  et  Baldrefeia. 

61. 

54.  Carts  de  Terris  in  Baketuna  ;  et  de  Celia  de 

Bromhalm.  61.  b. 

55.  Carta;  de  Celia  de  Mendham,  et  pertinentijs. 

62.  b. 

56.  Carta  de  Decimis  in  Stanham.  63. 

57.  Carton  de  Decimis,  Sec.  in  Wecheftiam,  Malfamebi 

Bedala,  Fri.-bi,  Culuertebi,  Scortona,  Echefco  et  Bri- 
e  a.  63.  b. 

5S.  Carta;  plurims  donntorum  F.cclefiarum  de  Sut- 
tune  Sc  Luttona  ;  et  Terrarum  Se  Reddituum  de  Suttuna. 

64- 

Here  Willelmus  filius  Ernifij,  with  his  Wifes  con- 
fent,  gives  3  Acres  of  Land  in  Sutton,  for  building  a 
new  Parochial  Church  there;  ordering  the  formerwooden 
Church  to  be  pulled  down  ;  the  Bodies  there  buried,  to 
be  re-buried  in  the  new  C.hurch-yard ;  and  the  old 
Church-yard  to  be  abolifhed.  64.  b. 

59.  Cartae  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Thid.  70. 

60.  Carta:  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Flet.  ibid,  et  vid.  73.  b. 

6t.  Carta:  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Weft-Waltona.  72. 

62.  Carta:  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Upwelle.  72.  b. 

63.  Carton  de  Terris,  See.  in  Enemeth  &  Haleghe, 

73.  b. 

64.  Carta;  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Leona;  74. 

Cj.  Carta;  de  Ten  is,  kc.  in  Aganalofa,  et  Mentlinghe. 

75- 

6.6,  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  de  Wigehale,  et  Nereford. 

76.  «  8 5.  &  86. 


Num.  2110,  2  1 1  r . 

67.  Carta;  de  Molendino,  Sec.  in  Fincham.  79.  et  82.  b. 

68.  Carts  de  Redditu,  kc.  in  Marham.  79.  b. 

69.  Carts  de  Turbaria,  Decimis,  kc.  in  Nereburch, 

Waltuna,  &  Weft-winez.  80..  b. 

70.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Watlingetuna,  Dierhani, 

Se  Wrettona.  81. 

71.  Carta;  de  Ecclefia,  &  Terris,  Sec.  in  Weflbriga, 

Suldeham,  Hadduna,  et  Baufeia.  81.  b. 

72.  Carta  de  Decimis  de  Wiraham.  82. 

73.  Carts  de  Terris,  kc.  in  Clenche-Warctuna.  83. 

74.  Cartze  de  Molendino,  kc.  in  Peteneia.  85. 

75.  Cartze  de  Molendino,  k  Decimis,  kc.  in  Nereford. 

85.  b. 

76.  Cartze  de  Pifcatura  in  Helegeia  ;  deq;  Decimis 

de  Sudmere,  &  Wiftuna.  86.  b. 

77.  Cartze  de  Decimis,  kc  in  Melwede.  87. 

78.  Cartze  de  Terris,  kc.  in  Feltewelle.  87.  b. 

79.  Carta:  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Heringelhae.  88. 

80.  Carta;  de  Terris,  kc.  in  Dichwde,  Sec.  88.  b. 

81.  Cartze  de  Terris,  Sec.  in  Heringelhae,  Fraufham. 

91.  b.  et  vid.  96.  b. 

8*.  Compofitio  fuper  Ecclefia  de  Suttone,  et  Capella 
de  Luttone.  dat.  12  Novembris  141 1.  94. 

83.  Copra  Carte  Alexandri  Harfye  Militis,  de  Saml- 

pyttys,  et  una  pecia  Prati.  94.  b. 

84.  Carta  Ricardi  de  S.  Claro,  &c.  de  Ecclefia  de 

Weft-Lexham.  95. 

85.  Placitum  inter  Simonem  Priorem  de  Caftel-Acie, 
k  Johannem  Bofoun,  kc.  fuper  quodam  Tenemento  in 
Wendlyng,  anno  4  Regis  Henrici  iv.  95  b.  et  vid.  96. 

et  96  b. 

86.  Cartze  de  Terris-,  See.  in  Kirtlinge.  96. 

87.  Carta;  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Wenlinge.  96.  b. 

88.  Cartse  de  Terris,  kc.  in  Swafham,  et  Stowe. 

97.  b. 

89.  Cartze  de  Redditu  in  Bradeham.  98.  b„ 

90.  Cartze  de  Terris,  &c.  in  Neketuna.  99. 

91.  Cartoe  de  Decimis,  Sc  Terris,  &c.  in  Rochelund, 

Sip^edeham,  et  Lirlinge.  99.  b. 

92.  Cartze  de  Terris,  kc.  in  Ho.  100. 

93.  Carts  de  Redditibus  Terrarum  in  Tudeham.  1 00. 

94.  Cartze  de  Decimis  et  Terris,  in  Taverham,  Drai- 

tuna,  et  Ykebure.  101. 

95.  Carts  de  redditu  in  Colvefluna.  101.  b. 

96.  Carts  de  Ecclefia,  et  Terris  in  Haveihille.  102. 

97.  Carts  de  Terris,  Sic.  in  Werchesforda,  Sturemera, 

et  Bumftede.  103. 

98.  Carts  de  Ecclefia,  See.  de  Roinges.  105-. 

59.  Carts  de  Redditu  de  Sandto  Edmundo.  105.  b. 

100.  Carts  de  Terris  in  Afchele.  ibid. 

10 1.  Carte  Regum  Anglie  ;  pro  Monafterio  de  Acra. 

ic.6.  etvid.  110.  b. 

>  02.  Cyrographa  Curiarum  Regiarum,  ad  Terras,  See. 
ejufdem  Monafterij  fpe&antia.  108. 

103.  Carte  Archiepilcoporum  Cantuarienfium,  quas 

apud  nos  habemus.  113* 

104.  Carte  Epifcoporum  Eundonienfium.  114. 

105.  Carts  Epifcoporum  Elienfium.  1 1 5. 

106.  Memoranda  de  diverfis  Denariorum  Summis 

Acrenfi  Monafterio  debitis.  115.  b.  et  114-b.  . 

107.  Carte  Epifcoporum  Lincollienlium,  et  Capituli 

Lincolnienfis.  1 1 6. 

108.  Carte  Epifcoporum  Nonricenfium.  1 1 7.  b. 

Sequitur, 

109.  Farrago  diverfi  generis  Inftrumentorum  (ubi, 

inter  alia,  plurims  Compofitiones  Decimarum,  Sec.  nullo 
ordine  fervato  deferiptorum.  _  130.  137- 

110.  Nomina  Priorum  hujufee  Monafterij  de  Caftel- 

Acra.  136.  b. 

21  I  I- 

A  book  in  folio,  written  (for  the  mod  part)  by  the  fe- 

cond  Randle  Holme  ;  and  by  the  third,  thus  entituled, 

on  the  outfide,  “  Annuals ;  (i.  e.  Annalls)  or  an  Ab- 
4  *  draft 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


S°3 


Num.  2iii,  2 1 1 2. 

ftra&  of  moll  remarkable  Actions  &  Paffages  which 
hath  happned  in  Brittaine :  out  of  feueral  Englifh 
Chronicles.”  This  comes  down  to  about  A.  D.  1589. 
and  is  mainly  adapted  to  Chelhire  8c  Chefler,  and 
the  recorded  A&ions  of  their  Natives  or  Inhabitants  : 
which  prcmifed,  1  fliall  fay  no  more,  than  that  I  find 
in  and  about  it, 

2.  The  lalt  Randle  Holmes  Table  of  the  things  of  molt 
note  in  this  booke.  At  the  beginning. 

3.  Defcriplion  of  the  Forme  of  a  Roman  Monu- 

mente,  lately  found  by  Mr.  Thomas  Crewe  Gent.  21.  1 

This  monument  was  an  entire  Stove,  found  in  Mr. 
Crues  Ground,  in  the  Reign  of  K.  Charles  1.  as  I  gefs  : 
which  he  fuffer’d  to  be  defaced.  Part  of  this  Account  is 
written  by  his  own  hand. 

4.  The  Apoftles  Creed  &  Lords  Prayer  in  old  Englifh 
as  they  were  join’d  to  an  Epiltle  of  Pope  Adrian  iv.  temp. 
Regis  Henrici  n.  (Thefe  are  printed  in  Bifhop  Wilkins’s 
Real  Character,  if  not  in  Caindens  Remains)  62. 

5.  Relation  of  a  wonderful  Appearance,  which  had 

happened,  at  fundry  times,  in  the  meare  called  Bagmeare 
near  Brereton  in  Chefhire.  138. 

Where  certain  Stocks  or  Logs  of  Wood,  of  a  great 
bulk,  would  come  up  fuddenly  above  the  Water,  and  ap- 
peare  in  view  many  dayes  together,  remaining  immove¬ 
able  •,  and  would  as  fuddenly  link  again,  nolwithftanding 
all  contrivances  to  chain  them  together,  &c. 

6.  His  Majeflies  Speech  to  the  Affembly  of  the  Peeres 

at  Yorke  ;  24  Sept.  1640.  161. 

7.  The  Lord  Keeper  Finch’s  Letter  to  Mr.  Willis, 

Clerke  of  the  Crowne,  24  Sept.  1 640.  1 6 1 .  b. 

To  prepare  Writts  for  fummoning  the  Parliament 
to  meet. 

8.  The  Scots  Covenanters  Letter  to  the  Secretary  of 

Scotland:  dated  at  New-cadle,  23  Sept.  1640.  with 
their  Petition  to  the  King.  ibid. 

9.  Lift  of  the  Englifh  Lords,  8c  Scotch  Commiffioners, 

appointed  to  treat  at  Rippon,  the  firft  of  October,  1640. 
with  minutes  of  fotne  of  their  Proceedings.  163. 

10.  His  Majefties  Speech  in  the  Parliament-Chamber, 

the  3  of  November,  1640.  166. 

1;.  The  Kings  Speech  in  the  Parliament-Chamber, 

5  to  Novembris,  1640.  167. 

12.  Minutes  of  the  Commons  Houfe  of  Parliament, 

refolved  upon  15’  Decembris,  1640.  168. 

1  hefe  were  againlt  the  Clergy. 

13.  Other  Refolves  of  the  fame  Houfe  again  ft  the 

Hierarchy  of  the  Church  of  England  ;  with  further  rela¬ 
tions  of  their  Proceedings ;  fent,  by  way  of  Letter  by  one 
George  Browne  to  his  brother.  170. 

14.  An  Index  of  the  remanent  Heads  conteyned  in  the 

eighth  demand  for  eftablifiiing  of  a  firme  and  durable 
Peace  between  England  and  Scotland.  171. 

2  112. 

A  book  in  folio,  confifting  of  Tra&s  written  by  fundry 
perfons  ;  and  by  the  third  Randle  Holme  on  the  out- 
fide  thus  entituled,  “  Deeds  &  Evidences  of  feueral 
Familys  in  Lancalhire:”  but  I  fliall  account  for  it  more 
particularly,  as  finding  therein, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Catalogue  of  the  things 
of  mod  note,  in  this  book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Taxatio  fecundi  Subfidij  concefli  pro  1'emporali- 
"bus  in  Parliament  tento  anno  35  R.Eliz.  coram  Ri- 
chardo  Molyneux  milite,  Petro  Leyghe,  et  Thoma  Hol- 
crofte  Armigeris,  Commiflionarijs  pro  LIundredo  de 
Weft-Derby  in  Comitatu  Lancaftrie. 

3.  The  Taxatione  of  the  firfte  Parte  of  the  third  fub- 
fedye  granted  to  our  late  Sovcraigne  the  Quc-encs  Majefty 
Sc  her  Succefl'ors,  in  the  43  yeare  of  her  Reygne  ;  affeffed 
by  Ranulphe  Barton,  Edward  Staundifhe,  &  Raphe  Afhe- 
tone  Efquvors,  Commiflioners  for  theHvndreth  ofWeft- 
Derbye  in  the  Cowmye  of  Lancafter,  the  1 6th  of  Maie, 
anno  1  Citroli  1. 


Num.  2112. 

3.  A  true  &  perfe&e  bopke  of  all  Rates  8c  Taxations 
concerninge  the  Counrie  of  Lancafter  :  verie  neceffary  Sc 
profitable  for  all  Gentlemen  of  Accompte  within  the  laid 
Countie;  and  maie  fetue  fora  perpetuall  Prefidente  to 
them  8c  theirs,  for  the  true  rating  8c  affeffinge  of 
the  faid  Countie  with  whatfoever  Sommes  fhall,  att  any 
tyme  bee  impofed  vpon  the  fame.  Written  A.  D.  1625. 

This  Tra&  hath  fuffer’d  Damage  by  much  Ufe,  8c 
want  of  due  care. 

4.  The  vfuall  Calendar  for  Mufters  8c  leveying  of 

Souldiers,  of  Money,  or  Men,  within  the  Countie  of  Lan¬ 
cafter.  1  • 

5.  Moneys  colle&ed  in  each  Hundred  of  Lancafhire, 

A.  D.  1639.  for  her  Majefties  ufe.  13. 

6.  Accompt  of  monies  colle&ed  by  Mr.  Robert  Moly¬ 
neux  ofMelling,  A.  D.  1639.  15. 

7.  Accompt  of  moneys  colle&ed  by  Mr.Townleye,  the 

fame  yeare.  17. 

8.  Original  Receipt  of  Sir  Bafill  Brooke  8c  Sir  Kenelme 

Digby,  for  moneys  reed  of  Robert  Molyneux  Efq;  for 
her  Majefties  ufe,  30  November.  1639.  20.  C. 

9.  Ftodarium  Ducatus  Lancaftrie,  extra&um  de  Ru- 

beo  I.ibro,  Libris  Feodorum,  et  Libro  de  racionabill 
Auxilio,  in  Scaccario  Domini  Regis  exiflentibus  ;  ncc 
non,  de  diverfis  Inquifitionibus,  Rotulis  Curie,  et  Com- 
potorum,  ac  alijs  Evidencijs,  8cc.  2 1 . 

10.  Exemplifications  oi  certain  Charters,  whereby 
K.  Hem  y  in.  granted  the  Poffeflions  of  Simon  de  Monte- 
forti  Earl  of  Leicefter  8c  of  Robert  de  Ferrarijs  Earl  cf 
Derby,  to  his  fon  Edmund  Earl  of  Lancafter.  42. 

1 1 .  Abftra&s  of  fome  few  old  Deeds.  45; 

1 2.  Extra&s  from  fome  old  Deeds  penes  Mr.  Worfley. 

46- 

13.  Inquificio  capta  6  die  Februarij,  A.  D.  1310. 
pod  mortem  Henrici  de  Lacy  nuper  Comitis  Lineolnix. 

48. 

14.  Inquificio  capta  18  die  O&obris,  anno  22  R.  Ed- 
wardi  111.  poft  mortem  Alefie  Comitiffe  Lincolnke.  56. 

15.  Exemplificatio  Inquifitionis  captte  poft  mortem 

Henrici  Ducis  Lancallrke.  57. 

1 6.  Defendants  from  Guydo  de  Manchefter.  59.  b. 

17.  Two  Charters  granted  by  K.  John  8c  K.  Henry  hi. 

to  theBurgeffes  of  Prefton.  6o.- 

1  &.  The  Charter  of  Nevv-caftell  under  Lyme,  as  granted 
by  K.  Henry  in.  8c  confirmed  by  K.  Charles  1.  ibid. 

19.  Libertates  Gilde  Mercaiorie  concede  Burgenfibus 

ville  de  Prefton  in  Amunderneffe,  per  Edwarduni  Regem 
Anglorum.  63. 

20.  Abftra&s  of  fome  old  Deeds  relating  to  the  Towne 

of  Brockhull.  65. 

2 1 .  Abftra&s  of  fome  others  relating  to  the  Town  of 

Whithull.  66. 

22.  Notes  from  4  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Serjeant.  68.  b. 

23.  Abftra&s  from  5  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Topping  of  Whithul.  69. 

24.  Abftra&s  of  two  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Longley.  69.  b. 

25.  Abftra&s  of  fome  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Ballhaw  of  Walton.  70. 

26.  Abftra&s  of  five  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Wild.  7c.  b. 

27.  Abftra&s  of  feven  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Bonk.  71. 

28.  Abftra&s  of  feveral  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family 

ofFarington.  72. 

29.  Abftra&s  from  feveral  Deeds  relating  to  the  Fa¬ 
mily  of  Blackburne.  73. 

Some  of  thefe  relate  likewife  to  the  Towne  8c  Family 
of  Kerdon.  et  vid.  96.  b. 

30.  Abftra&s  of  Deeds  relating  to  the  Towne  8c  Fa¬ 
mily  of  Chorlegh.  715. 

Molt  of  thefe  Abftra&s  are  faid  to  have  been  made 
from  the  originals  in  the  poffeflion  of  Dr.  Kuerdcn  of 
Prefton. 


31.  Ah’’ 


(  u',  tt 

Lkl;  a  it 


ft  I 


l 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2112 


31.  Abftracts  of  many  other  Deeds,  relating  to  Per- 

fons  &  Places  in  Lancalhire.  85.8c  97.  &  108. 

Here,  as  alfo  before,  I  perceive  the  Seals  are  haftily 
tricked. 

32.  Abftratts  of  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of  Af- 

huril.  '25. 

33.  Abftratts  of  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of  Blun¬ 
dell.  97.  b. 

34.  Dockets  from  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Barton.  103. 

35.  Abftratts  made  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  from 
the  Deeds  of  Richard  Bradfhaw  of  Penington  Efq;  1 06. 

8c  1 10. 

36.  His  Abftratts  from  the  Deeds  of  William  Pening¬ 
ton  of  Muncafter  Efq;  8  June  1650.  110.  b. 

37.  Abftratts  from  the  Deeds  of  John  Atherton  Efq; 

made  in  November  1651.  113. 

38.  Abftratts  from  the  Deeds  of  Robert  Hide  of  Den¬ 
ton  Efq;  taken  A.  D.  1652.  1 1 7. 

Here  is  a  Copie  of  a  long  Certificate,  made  anno 
.  .  Henrici  vi.  by  Thomas  Hide  of  Urmefton,  Thomas 

Afliton  of  Sale,  8c  Robert  Alhton  of  Urmefton,  much 
illultrating  theDefcents  of  their refpettive  Families;  which 
Certificate  was  alfo  annexed  to  the  Defcent  of  Hide  of 
Urmefton,  A.  D.  1559. 

39.  Abftratts  from  the  Deeds  of  Edward  Hide  of 

Hide,  12  April  1653.  126. 

40.  Abftracts  of  two  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of 

Bolton  ;  made  A.  D.  1658.  132. 

41.  Copies  Sc  Abftratts  of  the  old  Deeds  of  Sir  Cecil 

Trafford  ;  10  July  1652.  133. 

42.  Abft  rafts  of  Old  Deeds  penes  Thomam  Birch  Arm. 

.  .  Aug.  1652.  142.  b. 

43.  Abftratts  of  Old  Deeds  penes  Richardum  Holland 

de  Heton.  Arm.  16  Julij,  1652.  145. 

44.  Abftratts  of  Old  Deeds  penes  Joan.  Lighlboun  de 

Salford,  Arm.  27  Otti  1652.  165. 

45.  Rentale  Thome  Welt  Domini  de  Manceftre,  Filij 
Sc  Ideredis  Domini  de  la  Ware,  et  Elionorc  Confortis 
fue ;  faftum,  primo  Maij,  anno  13  Regis  Edwardi  iv. 
coram  ditto  Thoma  etalijsde  Confilio  fuo.  166.  b. 

46.  C.ollcttanea  ex  Cartis  Alexandri  Barlow  de  Bar- 

lowe,  Ann.  .  .  Apr.  1633.  172. 

47.  Abftratts  of  other  old  Deeds  relating  to  many 

Lancafhire- Perfons  Sc  Places.  176. 

48.  Index  Viroruin:  oran  Alphabetical  Table  of  thofe 
perfons  Names  who  are  mentioned  in  this  Book.  To¬ 
ward  the  end  ;  viz.  at  183. 

49.  A  like  Table  of  the  Names  of  Places.  At  the  end 

2113. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  many  Tratts 

8c  Fragment  now  bound  up  together,  and  by  the 

third  Randle  Holme  thus  entituled  on  the  back,  Coats 

8c  Pedegrees.  But  I  looking  into  the  fame,  do  find 

therein, 

1.  Pedegree  8c  Armes  of  the  Noble  Family  of  Stanley, 

&  of  feveral  of  its  Branches,  8rc.  1.  b. 

2.  Armes  of  feveral  Honorable  Perfons,  made  Baro¬ 
nets  ot  this  Realm.  2.b.  8cc.  39. 

3.  Pedegrees  8c  Armes  of  feveral  antient  8c  worfhip- 

ful  Families  of  Shropfhire,  See.  5- Sec. 

4.  Armes  of  certain  Shroplhire  8c  Chefhire  Families; 
tricked  perhaps,  by  Sir  William  Dugdale,  inter  foil.  2 6. 

Sc  27. 

5.  Names  of  the  Gentry  of  the  Wapentake  of  Ofgod- 

crolfe  in  the  Weft  Riding  of  York-lhire  as  they  were 
fummoned  to  appear  at  the  Vifitation  of  Sir  Richard  S'. 
George  Norrov,  A.  D.  1612.  2g.  A. 

6.  Names  of  fome  others  living  near  Burkefton-Alhe. 

ibid. 

7.  Dr.  Fuller’s  Epitaph  made  upon  Thomas  Johnfon, 

wh’->  was  flai.u  in  the  Defence  of  Bafing-houfe,  A.  D. 
*644.  29.  A.  b. 


Num,  2113. 

Some  Pedegrees  of  Chefhire-Families.  30.  A. 

9.  Copie  of  Dr.  Powel’s  Licence  to  John  Keene,  to 
paint  the  Kings  Armes  where  they  Ihould  be  wanting, 
in  any  Churches  within  the  Counties  of  Salop,  Lancafter, 
C.hefter,  Stafford,  8f  in  North-Wales,  he  being  deputed 
thereto  by  S.  Edward  Walker,  Garter.  31.  A.  b. 

1  o.  Armes  of  Mr.  Price  of  Walhingley  ncere  Stilton, 
in  Huntindonlhire.  36.  b. 

1 1 .  Defcent  Sc  Armes  of  Shawcrolie  of  Shawcroffe. 

37.  b. 

12.  Armes  of  divers  Derby-lhire  Baronets.  (with 

fome  of  their  Pedegrees.)  35. 

13.  An  old  Pedegree  of  Fitz-PIerbert  &  Falconer. 

63.  b. 

After  the  abovementioned  Page,  the  remaining 
leaves  take  another  Numeration,  8c  begin  with  fol.  18. 

14.  Part  of  a  VilitatFm  of  Staffordlhire,  taken  narra¬ 

tively  ;  8c  feeming  to  be  rather  older  than  that  of  Glover 
of  A.  D.  1583.  18. 

Whether  this  be  the  Original  or  not,  I  cannot 
now  determine  :  but  it  is  all  croffed  over,  as  having 
been  enter’d  into  fome  other  Book,  as  the  old  Oiiginals 
always  were. 

1 5.  Pedegree  of  Draycot  of  Draycot  ;  perhaps,  by 

the  hand  of  Sir  Henry  St.  George.  33. 

16.  Part  of  a  Vifitation  of  Derby-fhire  ;  perhaps 

that  of  Will.  Flower  Noiroy,  taken  A.  D.  1659.  34. 

This  is  likewife  done  by  way  of  Narration  ;  8c  is 
croffed  over  like  that  of  Staffordihire.  Here  are  alfo  fome 
other  Pedegrees  added  by  S'.  Henry  S'.  George,  See. 

1 7.  Armes,  in  Trick,  of  the  Staffordihire  Gentry, 

but  turned  up-fide  down.  37. 

18.  Short  Defcents  of  feveral  Families  ;  feeming  to 

be  taken  from  Inquifitions.  62.  b. 

What  follows,  I  take  to  have  been  colletted  by  an 
Antiquary  much  noted  in  his  time,  Mr.  Laurence  Bollock 
of  Chelhire ;  and  to  be,  for  the  moll  part,  of  his  own 
hand-writing. 

19.  Some  Pedegrees  of  Chelhire-Families,  and  of  the 

adjacent  Counties.  63. 

And  here,  intermingled,  I  find, 

20.  The  Epitaph  of  Sir  Nicholas  Mofeley  Kt.  a 

Woollen  Draper.  64.  b. 

21.  Anlmperfett  Note  touching  the  Obits  ofmanv  of 

the  Family  of  Booth,  See.  84. 

22.  The  Pedegree  of  Edward  Porter  of  Barton-Harti- 

lliorne,  taken  at  Bukyngham,  the  20  July  1566.  by  Mr. 
William  Hervy  afs  Clarenceulx.  '  87.  b. 

23.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Juftice  (or  Judge)  Peter 
Warburton,  about  fome  Armes  to  be  painted  for  him. 

90. 

24.  Notes  taken  in  Atherley-Church,  in  Com.  Salop, 

16  Januarij  1580.  91.  b. 

25.  Notes  taken  in  Aldelyme-Church,  in  Com.  Ceftr. 

die  &  anno  ditto.  ibid. 

26.  Notes  taken  in  Wibunbury  Church,  17  Januarij, 

1 5So*  .  ibid.’ 

27.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Aghton  in  Com. 

Ceftr.  3  Januarij  A.  D.  1580.  g2. 

28.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Barton  in  Com. 

Buckingham  1  June  1589.  93 -b. 

29.  A  Note  of  Badges  faid  to  have  been  given  by 

certain  Nobles,  8c  Corporations.  95-  b/ 

30.  Pedegree  of  Bulkeley,  colletted  by  Mr.  Roland 

Kenri.ke  of  Beawmarras.  98.  b. 

3 1 .  Note  of  a  Grant  of  Armes  faid  to  have  been  made, 

anno  34  R.  Edwardi  1.  to  Peter  Dodge  of  Stockport,  by 
Jacques  Hedingly,  ats  Guyen  Roy  d’Armes  ;  with 
a  Trick  of  his  Seal.  10 1. 

32.  Pedegree  of  Bold  of  Upton  ;  to  the  delivery  of 

two  Exemplars  whereof  upon  the  16  of  June,  1580, 
Mr.  Bollock  hath  fubferibed  his  Name,  Laurence  de 
Bollock,  at  the  bottem  of  the  Page.  103. 

33.  Armes  taken  from  the  Parler-W  ndowes  of 

9  the 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


5°5 


Num.  2113. 

the  Hall  at  Blythe-feld  in  Com.  Stafford,  A.  D.  1596. 

104.  b. 

34.  Armes  in  Blafon  of  fome  antient  Warwick Ihire- 

Families,  received  from  Nicolas  Ifler  Dutcheman  & 
Glaziar  of  Warwick,  12  March  1588.  105. 

35.  Notes  taken  in  the  Churche  of  Dunftable-Halton 
two  Miles  from  Dunltable,  14  Marche  1580.  105.  b. 

36.  Notes  taken  out  of  Mr.  Laurence  Hollinglheads 

books,  19  July  1582.  106. 

Thefe  are  of  Armes  in  Blafon,  belonging  to  divers 
antient  Families. 

37.  Armes  handing  in  the  Wyndowes  in  the 
Churche  of  North-Welde,  in  Effex  ;  20  Maie  1581. 

107. 

38.  Armes  obferved  in  the  Hall-Wyndowe,  at  Grays 

Inne  ;  1 5  Junij  1 58  1  -  107.  b. 

30.  Notes  tranferibed  in  fome  Church,  not  named. 

108.  b. 

40.  Pedegree  ofHoo.  109. 

41.  Notes  taken  in  the  Churche  of  Mount-Sorell.  113. 

42.  Notes  taken  in  the  Pariflie-Churche  of  Sutton 

in  Alheton  in  Com.  Nottingham.  _  ibid. 

43.  Notes  taken  in  the  Churche  of  Grefley,  in  Com. 

Nottingham.  ibid. 

44.  Notes  taken  in  the  Churche  of  Copenhall.  ibid. 

4-.  Notes  taken  in  the  Churche  ofPreftbury.  1 13  .  b. 

46.  Pedegree  of  Edgerton,  received  from  William 

Brereton  of  Brereton  Efq;  A.  D.  1578.  ibid. 

47.  Notes  taken  in  the  Abbe  of  Chefter  ;  in  the 

Holte-Caftell ;  at  Hackney-Machell ;  and  in  the  Church 
of  Chelfea  in  Com.  Midd.  1 14.  b. 

48.  Extracts  from  fome  old  Deeds,  chiefly  relating  to 

the  Family  of  Oldfield  of  Altringham.  115. 

49.  Defcent  of  Baldwyn  of  Southampton,  received 

from  Mr.  John  Horton,  A.  D  1 58 1.  1 1 6. 

30.  Notes  taken  in  the  Hall-Windowes,  in  the  Houfe 
of  Sir  Thomas  le  Fitz-Herbert  of  Norbury  in  Com. 
Derby.  11 7- 

51.  A  Short  Diary  of  Mr.  Laur.  Bollock’s  Journey 

towards  Chefhire,  from  7  of  October  1581.  to  the  16  of 
November  following.  1  1 7 .  b. 

52.  The  Defcent  of  Thomas  Brynley  alias  Brindefley 

ofWiftaftonin  Com.  Ceftr.  Gent,  from  Brafey  of  Wif- 
tafton  aforefayd  ;  taken  forth  of  a  Roll  of  Parchement, 
made  A.  D.  1657-  .  1  *9* 

53.  Extradts  from  Deede  relating  to  Lands  in  Leigh¬ 
ton  in  Com.  Ceftr.  1 2 1  • 

54.  Pedegree  of  Venables,  reed,  from  Mr.  Sampfon 

Erdefwike  at  Leighton,  2  1  December  1580.  122. 

55.  AHeyne  Sutton’s  Verfes  concerning  the  Armes 

borne  by  Vernon  &  Sutton.  1 22.  b. 

56.  Defcent  of  Gryffyn  :  with  a  Note  taken  from 

(Edmund  Knight  ?)  Chefter-Herald,  afferting  that  Bar¬ 
tholomew  Gryffyn  was  Lord  of  Barthon  in  the  tyme  of 
K.  William  Rufus.  ^  123.  b. 

57.  Defcent  of  the  Lord  Audeley  from  Edmund  de 

Langeley  Duke  of  York  ;  and  another  of  John  Lord 
Welles,  which  laft  (and  perhaps  the  former  alfo)  was 
received  of  Mr.  (William  Dethick)  Yorke-Harolde, 
A.  D.  1  581.  124. 

58.  Defcent  of  Foulehurft  ;  received  of  Mr.  Thomas 

Brundeley  of  Wiftanton,  20  Jan.  1  580.  1  25. 

59.  Notes  relating  to  the  Armes  &  Defcent  of  Bof- 

tock.  J  2 

60.  Pedegree  of  Salufbury.  _  128. 

61.  Pedegree  of  Nuttowe,  received  of  Mr.  Charles 
Nuttowe  of  Anpanley  in  Com.  Eflex,  18  December, 


157  9- 


129. 


62.  A  Note  touching  the  partition  of  Lands  made  by 
Indenture,  betweene  Rafe  Baron  of  Stafford  of  the  one 
parte  :  and  Sir  Edmund  Corenewall,  Elizabeth  his  Wife, 
&  Robert  Son  &  Heire  of  Robert  de  Hareley,  of  the 
other  parte  :  with  a  Pedegree  fhewing  their  Mutual  Re¬ 
lation.  I31,  b- 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 

3 


Num.  211  3 — 2i  13 

63.  Pedegree  of  Corbett ;  with  Defeents  of  Bure- 

ley,  Ilopton,  &c.  132.  et  vid.  1  31. &133.  b.  &c. 

64.  Armes,  with  Quarterings,  in  Blafon,  born  by 
Corbet,  &c.  received  of  Thomas  Powell  Efq:  4  Marche 

1 58°-  .  "  .  *33- 

65.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  as  quartered  by  Sir  Henry 

Savile.  134. 

66.  Defcent  of  Dornoch,  in  Welfh.  134.  b.  et  vid. 

!  57* 

67.  Defendants  from  Lacy  Lord  of  Ludlowe.  ibid. 

68.  Pedegree  of  the  noble  Family  of  Ho'land.  138. 

69.  Defeents  of  Vernon,  Sc  Egerton  ;  with  fome 
Notes  received  from  William  Brereton  Efq;  A.  D.  15  8. 

I39* 

70.  Defcent  of  Sir  Laurence  Smythe  lit.  with  fome 

Notes,  made  A.  I).  1580.  140.  b. 

71.  Other  Defeents  of  Families  refiding  in  different 

Counties,  mixed.  141.  b. 

Among  thefe  I  find, 

72:  Notes  relating  to  the  Armes  &  Inheritance  of  the 
Family  of  Ayfcu.  151. 

73.  Mr.  Rafe  Bollock  of  Multan’s  receipt  for  a  Salve 

to  hele  all  manner  of  new  Wounds.  x 54. 

74.  Notes  concerning  the  Defcent  of  Bollock,  received 

from  the  fame.  A.  D.  1578'.  ibid. 

75.  Notes  touching  the  Family  of  Coci,  received 
from  William  Brereton  of  Brereton  Efq;  2  Dec.  1578. 

154.  b. 

76.  Notes  taken  in  Mackelsfylde  Church,  26  Novem¬ 
ber,  1580.  .  .  155. 

77.  A  Fragment  containing  fome  mixed  Defeents,  all 

crofted  out ;  as  having,  perhaps,  been  entered  from  hence 
into  fome  other  book.  158. 

78.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Table  to  the  Church- 

notes  abovementioned  ;  and  alfo  to  the  Coats,  Crefts,  & 
Pedegrees  exhibited  throughout  the  book.  x  63.  b. 

2  L  14. 

A  thin  Heraldical  book  in  folio,  at  one  end  whereof  I 
find, 

1.  A  generall  Cathologue  of  all  the  Knights  made  by 
King  James,  gathered  into  a  perfect  Alphabett,  with  the 
place  of  their  Knighthood,  the  Yeare  of  our  Lord,  and  the 
day  of  the  Moneth ;  truly  marfhalled  in  their  Rancks, 
from  the  firft  Yere  of  his  Majefties  Raigne,  vntill  this 
prefent  .  .  .  day  of  Match,  16x6-17. 

By  turning  the  book,  &  beginning  at  the  other  end 
I  find, 

2.  Part  of  an  original  Regiftre  of  the  Officers  of 
Armes,  wherein  are  entred  their  Partitions  among  thein- 
felves  of  feverall  Sums  of  money  which  came  to  them  by¬ 
way  of  Largefs  from  Queen  Elizabeth,  upon  ufual  days  ; 
or  as  benevolence  from  noble  &  worffiipful  Perfons,  upon 
their  Attendance  at  the  Jufts  :  or  as  Fees  upon  the  Cre¬ 
ation  of  new  Knights  :  from  Twelfth  Day,  1558-9.  to 
Twelfth  Day,  1560-1.  both  included. 

Here  Mr.  Norroy,  (whom  I  take  to  have  been  Lau¬ 
rence  DaltonJ  was  accufed  of  having  the  foule  difeafe, 
and  of  communicating  the  fame  to  his  Wife ;  and  was 
therefore  excluded  fotnetimes  from  the  whole  of  his  Divi¬ 
dend,  fometimes  from  part  of  it ;  from  going  to  the 
Court ;  &  appearing  at  their  Chapters.  And  here  are 
Inftances  of  the  cutting-off  part  or  the  whole  flrares  of 
other  Officers,  as  occafions  happened. 

3.  At  fol.  8.  is  a  Copie  of  a  bill,  whereby  Raphe  Tho- 
rowton  of  Chefter  Tanner  acknowledged  himfelf  Debtor 
to  Thomas  Tomlinfon  Cowper,  in  the  fum  of  ten  Pounds, 
dat.  1  Maye,  1619. 

2  1  1  5. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  divers  hands,  both  antient  & 

modern  ;  &  confiding  of  feveralTradts  &  loofe  papers 

now  bound  up  together  ;  being,  on  the  outfide  thus 

entituled,  “  Halton-Priviledges,  &  feueral  Inquifi- 
6  N  dons 


506  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num  2115. 

tions,  with  other  Records  concerneing  Chefliire,  &c.” 

Of  which  1  fhall  proceed  to  give  the  following  brief 

Account. 

1 .  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Catalogue  of  the  things 
of  moll  note  in  this  book  at  the  beginning. 

This  is  followed  by 

2.  His  Fathers  Alphabet  of  the  names  of  Townes 
or  Lands  in  Com.  Ceflr.  &  alibi,  as  alfo  of  other  notes 
mentioned  in  this  book ;  made  in  December  1639.  And 

3.  His  Alphabet  of  fumames  for  this  booke  ;  made 
the  fame  year. 

What  is  faid  of  their  making,  is  to  be  underftood 
of  their  being  begun  ;  but  fince  that  time  they  have 
been  finilhed  by  other  hands. 

Thefe  being  difpatched,  we  come  to  the  Book  itfelf, 
the  firft  part  whereof  contains  a  large  &  numerous  Col¬ 
led. on  of  Writings  or  Precedents,  of  different  kinds, 
relating  principally  to  the  County  Palatyne  of  Chefter  ; 
the  moll  remarkable  of  which,  I  take  to  be  thefe  that 
follow. 

4.  Inquifitio  poll  mortem  Johanne  Conwey  nuper 

uxoris  Johannis  Conwey  Armigeri,  capta  anno  18  R. 
Henrict  vin.  38.  5. 

5.  A  large  Prefentment  of  the  Millers  belonging  to 

Dee-Mylnes  for  their  multifarious  Extortions,  ann.  10 
Rich.  11.  48.  b. 

6.  The  C.hartre  of  the  Nunrie  of  C-heftre,  by  Ed¬ 

ward  the  Black  Prince,  ann.  32  R.  Edwardi  in.  in  Eng- 
lilh.  32. 

7.  The  Meers  &  bounds  of  Iiull-heithe.  53. 

8.  A  Record  of  a  Fine  vfid  in  Portmot.  Cellrie,  anno 

R.  Edwardi  in.  l'eptimo.  ibid. 

9.  The  Namez  of  the  4  Brethren  which  came  with 

William  the  Conqueror,  &  were  made  Barons  in  C.he- 
fhire.  ^  ibid. 

10.  Articles  of  an  Order  takyne  at  Chefter  affore  the 
Kyngs  Commyffyoners,  in  the  6th  yere  of  King  Henry 
vin.  by  the  Maires  Dcputie  of  Chefter,  Aldermen,  & 
Commyns  of  the  fame  Citie,  by  the  Advife  of  their 
Counlelle,  for  the  Common  weale  of  the  feid  Citie,  & 
the  Contynuance  of  Peax  &  gud  Rule  wythin  the  fame. 

54- 

1 1 .  Breve  de  Quo  Waranto  Arthuri  Principis  Walliae, 

contra  Abbatem  de  Deulacres.  Telle,  &c.  12  Auguft, 
anno  14  R.  Henrici  vn.  58. 

12.  Aliud,  ejufdem  Principis,  contra  Prioriffam  Mo- 

nialium  Cellrie.  Tell.  27  Augufti,  anno  15  ejufdem 
Regis.  59. 

1 3.  Abftrad  of  a  fine  touching  certain  Lands  &  Houfes 
&c.  in  and  about  Middel-  A  yche,  fold  by  Will.  Bof- 
tock  to  the  Principal  &  Scholars  of  the  Hall  &  College  of 
Brafenofe  in  Oxford.  1  Aug.  ann.  30  R.  Henr.  via.  60. 

14.  A  Quo  Waranto  brought  againft:  the  Abbat  of 

Chefter,  anno  27  R.  Edwardi  in.  61. 

1 5.  Breve  Arthuri  Principis  Walliae,  de  Quo  Waranto 

contra  Maiorem  &  Cives  Civitatis  Cellrie.  "  Tell,  &c.  1 2 
die  Augufti  anno  1 4  R.  Henrici  vu.  71. 

16.  A  Scire  Facias  brought  for  the  King,  againft  Ri¬ 
chard  Fit z- A lan  I'.arl  of  Arundel,  for  detaining  the 
Towns  of  Llaye,  Burtone,  &  Hunkele,  with  the  moiety 
of  the  1  own  of  Trefhalen  ;  all  which  were  parcell  of  his 
Majefties  Lordlhip  of  Hopedale  :  ann.  7  R.  Richardi  11. 

74- 

17.  Nomina  Villarum  infra  Foreflam  de  Macclesfield. 

7  9. 

18.  Nomina  Villarum  infra  Forefl.  de  Mara  &  Mon- 

drem.  8o_ 

19.  Nomina\  iliarum  infra  Foreftam  deWirehalle.  81. 

20.  Account  of  twelve  Towers  &  Caftells,  built  within 

twelve  milts  round,  about  Chefter.  83. 

2 1.  ARetorne  of  aWritte  in  the  Courte  of  Dee-Mylnes. 

ibid. 

2:<  A  Quo  Waranto  brought  againft  Roger  Bp.  of 
Coventre  &  Lichfield  ;  ann.  22  R.  Edw.  111.  86. 


Num.  2115. 

This  alfo  exhibits  the  Bilhops  defence ;  but  incor¬ 
rectly  copied  ;  together  with  a  Claim  made  by  Bp.  John 
his  fucceffor. 

23.  I  epofitions  taken  at  Chefter,  conferning  a  Place 
callid  the  Kinges  Wode  ;  by  vertue  of  the  Kinges  Ma¬ 
jefties  Commiffione,  the  5th  day  of  January,  anno  R.  R. 
Edwardi  vi.  fexto. 

24.  Placita  Itineris  Forcfte  de  Wirehall  tenta  apud  Cef- 
triam  coram  Ricardo  de  Willoughby,  Ricardo  de  Stafford 
militibus,  &c.  Jufticiarijs  Diii  Edwardi  Principis  Wallie, 
ad  itinerandum  in  omnibus  .  .  .  Forefte  preditte,  affig- 
natis,  anno  31  R.  Edwardi  tertij. 

25.  When  Wyrehalle  was  difafforeflid.  100. 

26.  Refponfio  cujufdam  Johannis,  contra  quern  Breve 

de  Quo  Waranto  e  curia  emanavit.  101. 

27.  Copie  of  the  Certificate  given  at  Chefter  by  the 
Commifiioners,  to  thole  who  had  paid  their  Affeff- 
ment  of  the  fecond  Payment  of  the  fecond  Sublidie, 
given  by  Parliament  to  Qu.  Elizabeth,  anno  Regni  43. 

ibid. 

Then  follow,  among  other  matters  of  lefs  moment, 

28.  Copia  Carte  Generalis  fade  per  Dnm  Elenricum 

quondam  Ducem  Lancaftrie,  Tenentibus  fuis  de  Wid- 
neffe,  tranflata  de  Gallico,  in  Anglicum.  108. 

This,  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  had  of  Sir  Thomas 
Alton  Baronet,  A.D.  1636. 

29.  Extrad  from  an  Exemplification  of  a  Record,  co¬ 

pied  by  the  fame  Mr.  Holme,  from  one  of  Mr.  William 
Vernon’s  books :  Ihewing  the  F.ftates  held  by  divers 
Gentlemen  of  antient  C  hefhire-Families.  108. 

30.  Extenta  Caftri  de  Halton,  cum  pertinentijs,  fada 
anno  2do  Regis  Edwardi  in.  taken  from  the  Record. 

109. 

31.  The  Names  of  feveral  of  the  Kinges  Tenants  in 
his  Lordftiips  of  Over-Whitlegh  &  Coge'lhall ;  with  the 
money  they  granted  to  give  toward  the  repaire  of  the 
Church  of  Budworth,  17  Febr.  anno  30  R.  Henr.  vm. 

hi. 

Copied  by  the  fame  Mr.  Elolme,  from  Sir  Thomas 
Alton's  Roll,  A.D.  1639. 

32.  Colledions  from  the  Court-Books  &  Rolls  of 

Halton  in  Com.  Ceftr.  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  John  Wilfon, 
&c.  by  the  fame  Mr.  Holme,  A.D.  1639.  113. 

And  here  1  find, 

33.  Part  of  a  bill  of  Complaint  againft  Sir  Peires  Dut¬ 

ton  Kt.  by  William  Brereton  the  Kings  Steward  of  his 
honor  of  Halton  ;  anno  23  R.  Henrici  viii.  ibid. 

It  feems  that  one  Rich.  Penkethman  did  take  one 
Filli  Royal  called  a  Sturgeon  in  the  Lcrd/liip  of  Wefton 
within  the  Liberties  of  the  faid  Honor,  which  he  would 
have  deliver’d  up  at  Halton-Caftle,  but  that  Sir  Peires 
(emending  to  deleave  &  difinheret  the  Kinge  of  the 
fayd  Fifh,  and  alfo  of  all  other  Fifties  Royall  hereafter 
to  be  taken  in  Wefton,  (wherein  he  hath  no  med- 
linge,  nor  dowing)  in  a  riotous  manner,  took  the  fame 
away. 

34.  A  Perition  of  Sir  Piers  Dutton  to  the  Chancellor 

of  the  Duchy,  againft  Richard  Starkey,  whom  he  ac- 
cufed  of  embefiling  &  privatly  convaying  away  diuers 
Records  of  the  Court  of  Halton,  wherein  was  mentioned 
fucli  Perfons  as  held  Lands  of  the  King  by  Knights  Ser¬ 
vice,  Soccage-Tenure,  &  Coppie-hould ;  whereby  the 
Kinge  loofeih  Gard,  Marriage,  &  Releif,  &c.  of  divers  : 
but  alfo  other  Roules  containing  real  &  perfonall  Ac¬ 
tions  :  with  Starkey’s  Anfwer.  113. 

35.  Bill  of  Complaint  of  Thomas  Afton  Efq;  the 

Kings  Attorney  within  the  Fee  of  Halton,  to  William 
Fitz  Williams  Erie  of  Southampton,  &  Chancellor  of  the 
Duchy  ;  againft  Sir  Peirs  Dutton  Deputy  Steward  of 
Halton,  for  his  many  wrongs,  &  irregular  proceedings, 
(ann.  30  Henr.  viii.)  114. 

36.  Inquifitio  capta,  anno  34  R.  Henrici  viii.  poll 
mortem  Johannis  Wynington,  de  Hermitage,  Gen.  1 27. 

37.  Inquifitio  capta  anno  35  ejufdem  Regis,  poll 

mortem 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


S°7 


Num.  2115. 

mortem  Johannis  Danyel!  Senioris,  de  Darefbury, 
Arm.  127 . 

The  faid  Collections  being  turned  over,  next  oc- 
curres, 

38.  Narratio  de  Divifione  Baronise  de  Wico-Malban. 

inter  Alias  Dili  Willelmi  Malbank,  anno  16  R.  Edwardi 
primi.  135.  (et  vid.  i47.b.) 

39.  Inquifitio  capta  eodem  anno,  de  Servitijs  Dno  Regi 

debitis  in  toto  Comitatu  Ceftrie,  in  teinpoie  guerre  in 
Wallia.  136.  (et  vid.  148.  b.  et  154.) 

Sequnntur, 

40.  Abftrafta  plurimarum  Inquifitionum  port  mortem 

variorum,  captarum.  139. 

41.  A  Coppie  made  of  a  Graunt  by  K.  Edward  called 

the  ConfelTor,  &  remayning  of  Recorde  in  the  Exche¬ 
quer.  _  _  143.  b. 

This  is  that  fpurious  Charter  pretending  to  be  made 
to  Randolphe  Peperking  ;  whofe  language  does  fuffici- 
ently  dil'corer  the  cheat,  all  along. 

42.  The  Coppye  of  an  ould  Deede  founde  in  the  Re- 

gelters  Office  at  Gloucefter.  144. 

This  is  another,  pretending  to  be  a  Grant  of  K.  Wil¬ 
liam  the  Conqueror  (who  byt  the  white  wax  with  his 
tooth)  made  to  Paulyn  Roydon. 

43.  Armes  (in  blafon)  quartered  by  Brereton  of  Bur¬ 
ras  in  Com.  Denbigh ;  with  fome  fhort  notes  touching 
that  Family  made  by  Edward  Pulel'don  of  Trevalwyn. 

144.  b. 

44.  Notes  touching  the  Pofterity  of  Richard  Kingefley 

Forrefter  of  Dellamare-Foreft.  146. 

45.  Grant  of  a  Creft  to  William  Eyton  of  Whichflie 

in  Com.  Denbigh,  Efq;  &  to  his  brother  Richard  Eyton 
Efquier,  Serjeant  at  Armes,  by  Sir  Gilbert  Dethick 
Garter,  dat.  13  Augufl,  1577.  147. 

46.  A  fragment  of  the  Modus  tenendi  Parliamentum, 

in  Englifli.  , 

47.  Lift  of  the  Dukes,  Earles,  Lords,  &  Knights,  that 

were  at  the  Coronation  of  our  Soueraine  Lord  King  Ri¬ 
chard  in.  &  Queene  Anne,  the  firft  Yeare  of  his  noble 
Raigne,  the  6  day  of  July  1483.  192. 

48.  Lift  of  thole  who  were  made  Knights  of  the  Bath 

at  that  Coronation.  ibid. 

49.  The  Order  of  the  Coronation  of  K.  Richard  111. 

k  Queen  Anne,  anno  1483,  on  the  6th  day  of  July,  the 
firft  yeare  of  his  noble  Raigne  ;  and  of  the  Royall  Ser¬ 
vice  that  was  done  at  the  fayd  Coronation,  at  Weftmin- 
tter.  '  ,  52.  b. 

50.  The  Plea  upon  bringing  a  Quo  Waranto  againft 

Elena  &  Sigreda  Daughters  &  Heirelfes  to  John  the  Gao¬ 
ler  of  Macclesfeld,  for  holding  the  Gaoler-fliip  there  ; 
anno  23  R.  Edw.  in.  1 55.  b. 

5 1 .  Another,  upon  bringing  a  Quo  Waranto  againft 

the  Maior  &  Burgefies  of  Macclesfeld,  anno  24  R.  Ed¬ 
wardi  in.  1 

52.  Another,  upon  bringing  a  Quo  Waranto  againft 

the  Abbat  of  Vale-royal,  the  fame  year.  158.  b. 

53.  Clamium  Willelmi  Troutbeck  Militis  de  Liberta- 

tibus,  &c.  160.  b. 

In  this  Claim  is  the  Boundary  of  the  Forreft  De  la 
Mare. 

54.  Charter  of  the  Taylor’s  Company  of  Chefter, 

granted  by  K.  Henry  v.  anno  Regni  fexto.  163. 

55.  The  Plea  upon  bringing  a  Quo  Waranto  againft 

Robert  Grofvenour  Efq;  as  Serjeant  of  the  River  of  Dee, 
anno  15  R.  Henrici  vii.  163.6. 

Before  this,  in  the  preceding  Page,  is  a  Lift  of  many 
others,  againft  whom  Quo  Warantos  were  brought  the 
fame  year  :  many  of  whofe  Pleas  do  here  follow  :  as 

56.  That  of  the  Leather-drefiers  &  Shoe-makers  of 


Chefter.  164.  b. 

57.  That  of  John  Abbat  of  Norton.  165.6. 

58.  That  of  Richard  Prior  of  Wenlock.  167. 

59.  That  of  John  Kendall  Prior  of  S'  John  of  Jerufa- 

lem.  ,69. 


Num.  2115. 

60.  That  of  George  Grey  Earl  of  Kent,  & c.  169.  b. 

61.  That  of  Thomas  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby,  as  Maf’ 

ter- Forrefter  of  Macclesfeld,  and  Mafter-Forreller,  Sur¬ 
veyor,  &  Ranger  of  the  Foreft  of  Mara  &  Mondrem  ; 
and  as  Steward  of  Macclesfelde.  170.  b. 

62.  Another  of  the  fame,  and  of  the  Lord  George 

his  fon,  as  Juftice  of  Chefter  &  Flynt.  17Kb. 

63.  1  hat  of  John  Boucher  Lord  Fitz-Warin,  &  others, 

as  Lords  of  Namptwich.  172. 

64.  That  of  Edward  Sutton  Knight,  Lord  of  Dud  ley* 

as  Serjeant  of  Malpas-Hundred.  1 72.  b. 

65.  Thatof  Thomas  Venables  Efq;  ofKinderton.  174. 

66.  1  hat  of  Thomas  Crewe  Mafter  of  the  Hofpital 
of  S.  John  Baplift  without  the  North  Gate  of  Chefter. 

175. 

67.  That  of  the  Burgefies  in  the  Burgh  of  Frodlham. 

176.  b. 

68.  That  of  John  Stanley  Efq;  of  Audeforde.  1 77.  b. 

69.  That  of  Sir  William  Stanley  of  Hotone,  Knight.  1 

179.  b. 

70.  lhat  of  Johan  Relift  of  William  Stanley,  the  fon 

of  William  Stanley  Knight.  180. 

71.  That  of  Thomas  Huls  of  Knottesforde  Efq;  181. 

72.  That  of  Philip  Legh  of  Bothes  Efq;  182. 

73.  That  of  John  Bunbury  Efq;  182.  b. 

74.  That  of  Laurence  Dutton  Efq;  183. 

7^.  That  of  Edmund  TrafFord  K'  &  of  William  Bothe 

K™ght.  184. 

7 6.  That  of  the  Burgefies  of  Middel-wich.  185. 

77.  That  of  William  Launcelyne  of  Pultone-Launce-  ii 

tyne.  ,86. 

78.  That  of  Ralf  Davenport.  187. 

79.  rlhat  of  the  Maior  &  Burgefies  of  Macclesfelde. 

187.  b. 

80.  lhat  of  Richard  Cholmondeley  of  Cholmondeley 

Efq;  by  his  Feoffees.  188. 

8 1 .  That  of  Henry  Biram  &  Conftance  his  Wife  James 

Holt  &  Ifabella  his  Wife.  189.  b. 

82.  That  of  Peter  Hope.  190. 

83.  That  of  Edmund  TrafFord,  &  William  Bothe 

Knights.  1 9 , , 

84.  That  of  John  Hokenhull  of  Shotewike.  191.  b. 

85.  That  of  John  Glegge  of  Gaytone.  192.  b. 

86.  That  of  John  Warren  Knight.  ,94. 

87.  That  of  Thomas  Legh  of  Adlyngton,  Efq;  194.  b. 

88.  That  of  the  Hofpital  of  S'  Giles,  without  the  City  l! 

of  Chefter.  195.  b.  h 

89.  That  of  John  Donne  Knight,  Sc  of  Elizabeth  his 

Wife.  r96.  b. 

Then  follow, 

90.  The  Othe  of  the  Sheriff  of  Cheftar,  of  ould, 

3  Edw.  6.  I98. 

91.  Form  of  the  Oth  of  Supremacy,  taken  by  Thomas 

Afton.  199. 

92.  Form  of  a  Writt  to  attach  ;  from  Thomas  Afton 

Efquier  Shirefte  of  Chefhire.  200.  b. 

93.  Retorne  of  a  Dedimus  Poteftatem,  of  fwering 

the  Shireffe  of  Chelhire,  anno  3  R.  Edw.  vi.  201. 

94.  Feodaryes  of  the  Lordfiiip  of  Halton,  in  Com. 
Ceftr.  &  Lancaftr.  ann.  2  Edw.  m.  6  Turr.  Lond  202. 

95.  Defendants  from  the  Count  of  Bearne  in  Den- 

marke.  203.  b. 

96.  Infpeximus  of  Qu.  Elizabeth,  anno  regni  23. 

touching  the  Fee  of  Halton.  204. 

97.  Exemplificatio  Recordi,  de  rationabili  Auxilio 
Dominij  de  Halton.  anno  2  R.  llfenrici  iv.  204.  b. 

The  Original  of  this  was  with  Mr  Stanley  of  Alderton. 

98.  Extraft  from  a  faire  Manulcript  of  Mr  James  An- 

dertons  of  Cleriton  ;  here  inferted  becaufe  it  relateth  to 
the  Barony  of  Halton.  206.  (vid.  N°  ion) 

99.  Feodarium  Dominij  de  Halton  infra  Com.  Ceftr. 
at  Lancaftr.  pertinens  Domino  de  Halton.  207.  b. 

ico.  Claim  of  Privileges  incident  to  Halton,  while 
under  the  Earls  of  Lincolne.  209. 

io  1.  Another 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


508 


Num.  2115,  2116. 

1 01.  Another  Copie  of  the  ExtraCt  preceding  at  206. 

N°  98.  taken  A.  D.  1641.  from  a  Parchment  in  the  pof- 
feflion  of  Peter  Daniel  Efq;  and  in  fome  places  differing 
from  it.  V,2;!1', 

102.  Claim  of  Roger  Bifhop  of  Coventre  &  l.ichfeld, 

At  an  Eyre  of  the  Pored  ol  Mara  Se  Mondrem  held  at 
Che(l er  before  Richard de  Willughby,  See.  anno  31  R. 
Edwardi  hi.  21 5- 

103.  Placita  Comit.  Ceftrie  tenta  apud  Ceftriam,  co¬ 

ram  Rogero  Hillary  Jufticiario  Dili  Comitis  Ceftrie,  die 
Mnrtis  proxime  port;  Fedum  Affumptionis  B.  Marie,  anno 
R.  R.  Edwardi  m  port  Conquertum,  27.  220. 

This  gives  the  Claim  of  Henry  Duke  of  Lancafter, 
where  may  Paragraphs  were  added  to  thofe  mentioned 
above,  at  the  Numbers  98.  &  10 1. 

104.  The  Charter  of  Iv.  Edward  1.  of  the  Liberties  of 
the  (County  or)  Duchy  of  Lancafter.  (anno  regni,  24.) 

224. 

105.  The  Charter  of  K.  Henry  iv.  of  the  Liberties  of 

the  Duchy  of  Lancafter.  225  . 

1 06.  Statute  of  1  Edw.  iv.  for  the  Incorporating  of 
the  Duchy  of  Lancafter,  to  the  Crowne  of  England.  226. 

107.  Statute  of  1  Henr.  vn  giving  the  Duchy  of  Lan¬ 
cafter  to  the  King,  226.  b.. 

108.  The  Charter  of  1  Henr.  vn.  confirming  the  Li¬ 
berties  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancafter.  227. 

109.  A  Plea  held  in  the  County  of  Chefter,  anno  15 

R.  Edwardi  in.  229. 

This  relates  to  the  H->fpital  of  S'  John  without  the 
Northgate,  whofe  poor  Brethren  ought  to  be  Citizens  or 
frnnehifed  perions  of  Chefter. 

1  xo.  The  Extent  or  Survey  of  the  Mannour  of  Ter- 
vyne ;  taken  out  of  the  Booke  late  belonging  to  the 
Bifhoprick  of  Lichfeild  &  Coventry,  commonly  called 
the  Blewe-booke.  230. 

111.  Pleas  of  the  Circuit  of  the  Foreft  of  Mara  & 
Mondrem,  holden  at  Chefter  before  Richard  Willowg- 
by,  Sec.  Juftices  in  Eyre  of  Edward  Prince  of  Wales,  &c. 
anno  13  R.  Edw  in.  232. 

2Il6. 

An  Heraldical  Book,  confiding  of  feveral  Rolls  &  1  rafts 

now  bound  up  together  in  a  Imall  folio  opening  like  a 

Mufick-book.  They  are, 

1.  The  Armes  of  our  Englifh  Nobility,  temp.  R.  Eli¬ 

zabethan  ;  painted  on  a  narrow  Roll  of  Velum,  now  cutt  j 
into  the  Ihape  of  Leaves.  1  • 

2.  Another  Roll  of  Paper,  broader  than  the  former  ; 

and  like  it,  cut  into  Leaves  ;  wherein  are  the  Armes  of 
K.  Edward  the  Confeflor  ;  of  the  King  ol  England  ;  the 
old  Armes  of  France  &  Spain  ;  of  the  old  Earls  ol  Chef¬ 
ter  ;  and  of  many  antient  Chefhire -Families,  rudely 
depicted.  17* 

3.  Les  Nofmes  &  les  Armes  des  Barons  &  Chivalers 
d’Engliterre  en  le  Temps  del  Roy  Edward  le  Primier. 

23- 

Thefe  are  painted ;  and  are  followed  by  the  Names 
&  Armes  of  old  Englifh  Knights,  put  down  according 
to  the  Counties  wherein  they  refilled,  in  the  following 
Order,  viz. 


4.  Norfolke. 

30.  b 

5.  Southfolk. 

33 

6.  Cambridgefhire. 

35 

7.  Efiex. 

36 

8.  Hertford  (hire. 

37-  b 

9.  Bedford  fhire. 

38 

10.  Buckinghamfliire. 

38.  b 

1 1 .  Oxfordshire. 

39-  b 

12.  Kent. 

40 

13.  Myddlefex. 

41 

14.  Barkelhire. 

41.  b 

15.  Southfex,  &  Surrey. 

42 

16.  Wiltlhire. 

42.  b 

17.  Hampfliire. 

43 

18.  Dorcetlhire. 

43-  b 

Num.  2116,  2117. 


19.  Cornewall.  43.  b. 

20.  Somerfetlhire.  44. 

2 1 .  Devonlhire.  44.  b. 

22.  Darby  &  Nottlngham-fliires.  ibid. 

23.  Lyncolnelhire.  45.  b. 

24.  Weftmerland,  and  County  of  Lancafter.  47. 

25.  Yorkelhire.  47.  b. 

26.  Leycefter-fhire.  48.  b. 

27.  Northampton,  &  Rutland  Shires.  50. 

28.  Warwickfhire.  51. 

29.  Glocefter-lhire.  52. 

30.  HerelFoidlhire.  53.  b. 

31.  Hontintonfhire.  54. 

32. -  Worcefterlliire.  54.  b. 

33.  Shroplhire.  55. 

34.  Staffordlhire.  55.  b. 

35.  Northumberland  &  Cumberland.  56. 

3b.  Chefter-lhire.  57. 


Then  follows  another  Roll  cut  into  Leaves,  con¬ 
taining 

37.  The  Names  &  Armes  of  fome  Foreign  Kings  ;  of 

fundry  of  our  antient  Nobles  ;  and  of  many  worlhipful 
Perfons,  rudely  written  &  painted.  58. 

Among  thefe,  I  find, 

38.  Two  ftiort  Defcents  of  Stanley ;  and  a  Note  of 
Armes  found  in  Rayneforde-Chapell.A.  D.  1592.  65.  b. 

Then  come, 

39.  Armes  of  the  Yorkfhire-Gentry  j  fett  down,  in 

Trick,  by  way  of  Alphabet.  74. 

40.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table  to 
the  Armes  abovementioned.  At  the  end. 

2117. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  by  divers  wands,  but 
moftly  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  &  his  fon  ;  who, 
on  the  out-fide,  has  thus  emiiulcd  it,  “  York-fhire 
Deedes,  &c.”  which  being  fomewhat  too  general ; 
I  (hall  deferibe  it  a  little  more  particularly,  as  in  the 
following  manner, 

1 .  Index  Locorum  ;  or  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  the 
Names  of  Places  mentioned  in  this  Book.  At  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

2.  l  he  Names  of  the  Townes  of  Yorkfhire,  with  the 
feverall  Liberties  &  Weapontackcs  wherein  they  ftand. 

212. 

3.  Abbreviationes  de  Terris  in  Comitatu  Eboracenfi ; 

ex  Libro  de  Domefday  in  Scaccario.  227. 

To  this  TraCt  is  prefix’d  an  Original  Letter  of  Dr. 
Richard  Keurden (perhaps,  to  the  fecond  Randle  Holme) 
(hewing  that  he  and  Mc  T.  (whom  I  take  to  be  Mr  Towne- 
lev)  were  taking  great  pains  in  collecting  the  Pedegrees 
of  Chefhire-Families,  &c.  To  which  end  he  had  perufed 
the  Book  of  Domefday  ;  and  hoped  likewife  to  borrow 
fome  Volumes  of  Mr.  Dodfworth's  Collections  of  the 
Lord  Fairfax :  perhaps,  by  the  meane  of  Mr  Tilleyfon, 
who  is  here  mentioned. 

4.  AbftraCts  of  Nine  Deeds  relating  to  the  Priory  of 

Drax,  or  to  the  Church  of  Bingley  ;  made  from  the 
Originals  in  the  pofi'effion  of  the  third  Randle  Holme, 
by  himfelf,  A.  D.  1667.  266. 

5.  AbftraCts  of  old  Deeds  relating  to  Yorklhire,  col¬ 

lected  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  from  Mr  Roger 
Dodfworth’s  Book  marked  AA.  269. 

In  this  TraCt  I  likewife  find, 

6.  The  Names  of  fundry  Fryeryes,  Guides,  Chan- 

tryes,  in  &  adjoyning  to  the  Citty  of  Yorke,  in  former 
Ages.  _  27 4- 

7.  Nomina  quorundam  Abbatum  Monafterij  S"  Marie 

Ebor.  274-  b. 

Then  follow, 

8.  Like  Extracts  from  old  Deeds,  entred  into  Mr. 

Dodfworth’s  Book  BB.  293. 

It  feems  that  thefe  were  firft  collected  by  St.  Lo 
Kniveton  Efq;  &  then  copied  by  Richard  Gafcoigne 


Bibliothecae  HarleianaS.  509 


'Slum.  21  r 7,  2118. 

Efq;  and  do  concern  many  other  Counties  as  well  as  that 
of  Yorkfhire  ;  being  alfo  taken  from  Books,  and  other 
Records,  in  part. 

9.  ColleCtanea  ex  Libro  compofito  de  Inquifition- 

ibus  de  Officio  captis  in  Scaccario,  ex  parte  Rememora- 
toris  Regis.  _  3°9* 

10.  AbftraCts  of  Pleas,  out  of  mss.  now  in  the  hands 

of  Mr.  Roger  Dodfworth,  24  May  1632;  beingin  Paper 
in  folio,  with  this  marke  A  in  dorfo.  3  r4* 

11.  AbftraCts  of  Pleas,  taken  from  that  book  of  Mr. 

Dodfworth’s  above-mentioned  at  §  8.  320.  b. 

Among  thefe  AbftraCts  of  Picas,  feveral  might  have 
been  particularly  noted  in  this  fhort  Catalogue,  had  not 
thefe  AbftraCts  been  too  concife,  or  too  erroneoufly 
written.  However,  I  take  leave,  by  the  by,  to  juft 
mention  two  or  three  Trials  vizt. 

12.  That  held  at  the  Halymote  of  Colne,  anno  35.  R. 

Henrici  vi.  before  Richard  Nevil  Earl  of  Salifbury,  then 
Steward  of  the  Court :  where  it  was  pleaded  (upon  a 
Claim  of  an  Eftate)  how  Agnes  the  Widow  of  John  Ba- 
naftre  of  York,  dido  Johanni  virofuo  nequiter,  perverfe, 
el  non  feminti  difpofita,  fed  calide  &  fubtiliter  imaginans 
qualiter  Caufam  quomodo  a  Confortio  diCti  Johannis  fe- 
parari  poterit,  adquireret  :  ita  quod  per  legem  Ecclefiaf- 
ticam,  a  Menfa  &  Thoro  fuis  divorciari  potent :  She 
impofed  upon  John  Biffiop  of  the  Ifle,  by  procuring  him 
to  receive  &  accept  of  herfelf  aCommater,  at  his  confirm¬ 
ing  of  her  Daughter  (whereby,  fhe  contracted  another 
Relation  to  her  Hufband.)  319* 

13.  That  held  anno  34  R.  Edw.  1.  when  William  the 

Son  of  John  del  Heith  loti  his  Eftate  to  his  Unkle,  quia 
conviCtuseft  per  Affifam  iftam,  quod  predict  us  Johannes 
del  Heith  nunquam  difponfavit  predictam  Katherinam 
in  facie  Ecclefie  ;  per  quod  fequitur,  quod  prediCtus 
Willelmus  nihil  Juris  clamare  poteft  in  prediCtis  Tene- 
mentis.  Yet  a  fort  of  Marriage  had  been  celebrated  be¬ 
tween  them,  for  John  being  fick,  the  Vicar  ofPlumftede 
advifed  him,  for  his  Souls  health,  to  marry  the  faid 
Katherine  his  Concubine,  by  whom  he  had  two  Daugh¬ 
ters  :  whereupon  this  John  in  his  own  Houfe,  coram 
Vicario,  predidam  Katerinam  fporitanea  Voluntate  flia 
affidavit,  et  Annulum  digito  ipfius  Katherine  impofuit, 
et  verba  confueta  ad  Matrimonium  contrahendum,  abfqj 
Mifle  celebratione,  pronuntiavit ;  eo  quod,  propter  de- 
bilitatem,  ad  Ecclefiam  accedere  non  potuit ;  et  ipfam 
ex  tunc,  ad  totam  Vitam  ipfius  Katherine,  pro  Uxore 
tenuit  ;  et  poftea  procreavit  filium,  nomine  Willehnum, 
de  ipfa  Katherina.  339. 

The  laft  I  ffiall  now  mention.  Is 

14.  That  of  John  Devereux,  who  (anno  29  R.  Ed- 

tvardii.)  would  not  be  compelled  by  Margery  the  Daugh¬ 
ter  of  Philip  dela  Walles,  to  marry  her,  againft  his  own 
Will.  34b 

2Il8. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  by  divers 
Hands,  during  the  Reign  of  K.  Charles  1.  as  it  feems 
to  me  ;  and  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  on  the  back, 
entituled  “  Yorkfhire-Pedegrees  wherein  I  find. 

1 .  A  Collection  of  Pedegrees  of  Yorkfhire-Families, 

which  are  ranged  together  in  Alphabetical  Order,  (as  the 
Heralds  &  Armes-painters  underftand  it)  that  is  regard¬ 
ing  only  the  firft  Letter  of  their  Sur-names.  1 . 

2.  A  like  Collection  of  Pedegrees  of  good  Families 

refiding  within  the  Biffioprick  of  Durham.  35.  b. 

3.  Yorkffiire  Defcents,  Alphabetically  :  that  is,  a 

larger  and  different  Collection  from  the  former,  ranged 
in  the  like  Order.  48. 

It  may  be  obferved  that  the  faid  Randle  Holme  has 
made  divers  Additions  &  Continuations  to  each  of  thefe 
TraCts  ;  and  has  brought  down  fome  of  the  Pedegrees 
as  low  as  the  time  of  the  Reftoration,  or  lower. 


Num.  2119. 

2119 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  confiding  ofPapers  as  well  loofe*, 
as  bound  ;  written  by  many  Hands,  and  on  the  out- 
fide,  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  entituled  “  Cheffiire 
Pedegrees  &c.  which  Title,  although  it  might  give  a 
notion  of  the  fubjeCt-matter  treated  of  therein,  in  the 
general  ;  I  ffiall,  neverthelefs,  endeavour  to  deferibe 
the  fame  fome-what  more  particularly,  in  the  manner 
that  followeth.  As, 

1.  Notes  touching  the  feveral  Heraldical  Vifitations  of 

Cheffiire  ;  when  made,  &  by  whom.  1 .  b.  &  6. 

2.  Lift  of  fuch  Gentlemen  whofe  Defcents  feem  to  have 

been  regiftered  Gratis,  at  the  Vifitation  of  Shropfhire, 
A.  D.  1663.  according  to  my  new  Numeration  with 
black  Lead  ;  as  are  all  that  follow.  2. 

3.  Lift  of  fome  of  thofe  Perfons  names  who  were  con¬ 

cerned  with  the  Lord  Cobharn  againft  K,  James  1.  and 
in  the  Gun-powder-Treafon-plot.  2.b. 

4.  The  Names  of  fuch  Efquires  as  entred  their  Defcents 

&  Armes,  in  the  Vifitation  of  Shroplhire  taken  anno 
1663  (by  William’Dugdale  Norroy)  fome  of  them  having 
that  Title,  as  Juftices  of  Peace.  3. 

This  is  begun  by  Sir  William  Dugdale’s  own  hand  ; 
and  continued  by  that  of  another. 

5.  The  Names  of  fuch  Efquires  as  did  enter  their 

Names  and  Armes,  in  the  Vifitation  nf  Cheffiire  (made 
by  the  fame  Norroy,  &  by  Mr.  Elias  Affimole  Windfor- 
Herald,  his  Son  in  Law)  anno  1663  ;  fome  of  them 
having  that  Title  as  Juftices  of  Peace.  3.  b. 

This  is  written  &  continued  by  the  fame  Hands  as 
the  former. 

6.  Lift,  of  fome  Cheffiire- Gentlemens  Names ;  like 
that  above-mentioned  at  No.  2.  &  by  the  fame  Hand.  4. 

7.  Alphabetical  Table  containing  the  Sur-names 

of  thofe  Families  whofe  Pedegrees  were  deferibed  in 
certain  Rolls  belonging  to  the  third  Randle  Holme  of 
Chefter.  8. 

8.  Pedegrees  written  within  feveral  of  the  faid  Mr. 

Holmes  Books  of  Deeds.  i£. 

Then  follows 

g:  The  main  Collection  of  Chefliire-Pedegrees,  be- 
ghn  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  and  carried  on  by 
divers  others  ;  with  Continuations  to  late  Years  by  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme  the  third.  1 8. 

Among  which,  Iobferve, 

1  o.  The  Names  of  the  Manors^  Lordffiips,  Townes^ 
&  Lands,  which  Sir  Geffrey  Sonne  of  Adam  de  Dutton 
gave  away  among  his  Gentlemen,  Yeomen,  &c.  10.  b. 

This  was  on  the  back-fide  of  Duttons  Pede- 
gree,  which  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  had  of  Sir  Thomas 
Afton. 

1 1 .  A  Defcent  of  Dutton,  noted  to  be  very  falfe, 
though  it  was  confirmed  by  William  Flower  Norroy,  &c 
by  Chefter  Harauld  his  Marffiall.  20.  b. 

13.  Original  Letter  of  Henry  Travers  to  the  third 
Randle  Holme,  or  his  Son,  dated  16  November  1699. 
and  exhorting  him  to  be  juft;  to  his  youngNephew  George. 

29. 

1 1.  Copie  of  the  faid  Mr.  Holme’s  Certificate  touch¬ 
ing  *tbe  Truth  of  Alderfeys  Pedegrees  ;  11  Jan.  1699. 

29.  b. 

14.  Copie  of  the  Patent  of  Laurence  Dalton  Norroy, 
granted  to  Sir  Thomas  Venables  Knight  Baron  of  Kinder- 
ton,  whereby  the  Armes  (with  the  Augmentation  of  a 
Dragon)  and  the  Creft,  being  a  Demy-Dragon,  were 
confirmed  to  him  &  his  Family  :  £  November,  1560. 

.  ,  .  3°- 

Here  it  is  fabled,  that  “  in  the  tune  of  Thomas  Ve¬ 
nables  of  Golbome  in  the  County  of  Chefter  Gentleman, 
hitt  chancyd  a  terrible  Dragon  to  remayne  &  make  his 
abode  in  the  Lordffiippe  of  Mofton  in  the  County  of 
Chefter  >  where  he  devowred  all  fuch  perfons  as  he  layd 
hold  on.  Which  ihe  faid  Venables  hearinge  tell  of,  cun- 
fyderinge  the  pittylull  and  dayly  deilruCtion  of  the  people 
6  O  without 


Cat.  IIarl.  Vol,  II. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


510 


Num.  2i  T9. 

without  recouery  (in  following  the  example  of  the  valiint 
Romaynes,  &  other  worthy  men  ;  not  regarding  his 
own  Life,  in  comparifon  of  the  Commodity  &  Safegarde 
of  his  Countrey-men)  did  in  his  one  perfon  valiantly  & 
couragioufly  fet-on  the  faid  Dragon.  Where  firft  heffiott 
him  throw  with  an  Arrow,  and  afterward,  with  othere 
Weapons,  manfully  flew  him:  at  which  inftant tyme,  the 
faid  Dragon  was  devowringe  of  a  Child.  For  which  worthy 
Sc  valiant  Aft,  was  giuen  him  the  Lordfhip  of  Mofton,  by 
the  Aunceftors  of  the  Earle  of  Oxford,  Lord  of  the  Fee 
there.  And  alfo  euer  fince,  the  faid  Thomas  Venables  & 
his  Heires,  in  remembrance  thereof,  haue  ufed  to  beare 
as  well  in  his  Armes,  ft  in  theire  Creft,  a  Dragon.”— 
Upon  occafion  of  this  Story,  I  beg  leave  to  make 
one  Refleftion  ;  which  is,  that  fundry  Families  of  great 
Antiquity  ft  Splendor,  &  well  known  to  have  been  in 
chief  rank  in  their  feveral  Counties,  for  many  Genera¬ 
tions  ;  with  which  Glory  their  Po (ferity  might  have  been 
well  contented  :  have,  neverthelefs,  attempted  to  out- 
fliine  their  Neighbours,  by  adding  a  gliftring  ft  falle 
Light  to  their  native  Luftre,  borrowed  from  Ignorance 
ft  Import ure  ;  and  which  upon  the  firft  attentive  view  of 
any  judicious  Perfon,  not  only  difappears,  but  leaves  a 
fort  of  mifty  doubtfulnefs,  upon  what  was  before  ap- 
parent,  granted.  Sc  refoefted  :  as  in  the  Cafe  before  us 
of  Venables  ft  his  Dragon.  Which  I  fhall  endeavour  to 
match  by  another  Dragon-quelling  Story,  which  is  too 
grofs  to  need  any  Confutation.  I  find  it  in  the  ms.  No. 
2118.  at  foL.39.  and  it  is  in  the  words  following  :  “  Sir 
Jo.  Conyers  de  Stockburne  Knt.  whoe  flew-  the  monftrous 
venom’d,  &  poyfon’d  Wiverne,  Afk,  (Afp?)  or  Worme, 
which  overthrew  ft  devour’d  many  People  in  Fight.  For 
the  Scent  of  the  Poyfon  was  fo  ftrong,  that  noe  Perfon 
was  able  to  abide  it.  Yet  he  (by  the  Providence  of 
God)  overthrew  it  ;  and  lyes  buried  at  Stockburne,  be¬ 
fore  the  Conqueft.  But  before  he  did  enterprife  it 
(haueing  but  one  Child)  he  went  to  Church  in  compleate 
Armour ;  and  offer’d  up  his  Sonne  to  the  Holy  Ghoft. 
Which  Monument  is  yet  to  fee  ;  and  the  place  where  the 
Serpent  lay,  is  called  Grayftone.” — Thus,  in  the  fame  ms. 
at  fol.  34.  the  Family  of  Welby  is  faid  to  have  been  de¬ 
rived  from  “Jo:  dnsCayfton  alias  Welby,  who  took  part 
with  Iptney  Earle  de  Reilvoir  contra  Willelmum  Conq. 
anno  Domini  10 66.” — Thus  in  the  Narrative  Pedegree  of 
Hamden  of  Hamden,  (to  be  found  in  the  Vifitation- 
books  of  Buckingham  (hire)  I  find  thefe  words  at  the 
beginning,  “hit  was  foe  that  there  was  a  Commiflion  at 
Hampden,  direfted  to  Hampden  as  a  Commiflioner,  to 
helpe  to  putt  out  the  Danys”— Thus,  the  Family  of  Afli- 
burnham  derive  themfelvesfrom  one  Bertram  de  Afhburn- 
ham,  who  they  pretend  to  have  been  King  Harold’s  Ge¬ 
neral  of  the  Horfe,  againft  William  the  Conqueror  ;  and 
caufcd  a  Print,  as  ofhis  Effigies,  to  be  inferted  intoBlome’s 
Edition  of  Gwyllim’s  Difplay  of  Heraldry,  which  came 
out  A.  D.  16.  .  where  this  valiant  Bertram  is  repre- 
fcnted  in  Armor,  with  a  Scarf  upon  it,  and  a  fort  of 
Collar-Band;  all  as  ufually  worn  in  the  Reign  of  K. 
Charles  the  Firft.  I  could  mention  feveral  other  Pede- 
grees  remarkable  in  this  way,  (without  examining  into 
the  Roll  of  Battel-Abbey)  but  think  what  is  now  re¬ 
marked,  may  fuffice. 

is-  Original  Letter  of  George  Hyde  to  the  third 
Randle  Holme,  concerning  his  own  Family  &  that  of 
Venables.  g 

16.  Some  Defcents  noted  to  be  falfe,  and  to  have 
Ken  made  by  one  Sankey  a  Contriver  of  Falfe  Pedegrees- 
who,  at  length,  fled  into  Portugal.  39.  39.  b.  43.  b.  * 

17.  Confirmation  of  Amies' ft  Creft,  to  John  Hyde 

of  London  Gent,  by  Robert  Cooke  alias  Clarencieux 
dat’d  the  fecond  of  April  1571.  b 

18.  How  K.  Henry  vi.  anno  Regni  29.  by  Letters 
Patents,  releafed  the  Tax  laid  upon  the  County  of 
Chclter  by  the  Parl'ament  of  England,  upon  a  Repre- 
fentation  laid  before  him. 


19.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  John  Crewe  to  the  Son  of 

the  third  Randle  Holme,  dated,  24  July  1702.  relating 
to  the  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Crew.  70. 

20.  The  Pedegree  of  Maifterfon  collected  by  Mr. 

Will.  Vernon  ;  is  followed  by  a  long  Narrative  concern¬ 
ing  that  Family,  written  by  Law.  Mayfterfon,  A.  D. 
l6n-  T  84. b. 

21.  Sir  Henry  Gages  Account  of  the  folemn  Funeral 

of  Sir  William  Stanley  (Rebel  to  Qu.  Elizabeth)  in  our 
Ladies  Church  at  Mechlin.  ~  89.  b. 

22.  Original  Letter  of  .  .  .  Trefwell  to  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme,  24  May  1639,  concerning  one  Robert 
Stanley  who  killed  fomebody,  and  fled  ;  and  at  length, 
changing  his  Name,  lived  in  Gloucefter ;  and  of  his 
Children. 

23.  1  he  fame  Mr.  Holme’s  Copie  of  a  Letter  from 

Mr.  Wil.  Vernon,  dated  9  Jan.  1 65 1 .  to  Mr.  John  Da¬ 
niel ;  about  his  Pedegree.  104. 

24.  An  odd  Inftance  of  a  debauched  Branch  of  the 

Family  of  Calveley  ;  where  mention  is  made  of  a  Baftard 
Sonne,  whofe  Father,  Grandfather,  &  Great-Grandfa¬ 
ther  were  alfo  Baftards  j  belides  five  or  fix  more  of 
their  neareft  Relations.  (Thefe  might  be  all  living  at 
the  fame  time.)  IO 

25.  Sir  Hugh  Calveley’s  Pedegree,  as  labor’d  from 

old  Evidences  by  Mr.  Sampfon  Erdefwyke.  106. 

26.  Mr.  Thomas  Manley’s  Pedegree,  as  labor’d  by 

Randle  Holme  11.  A.  D.  1 638.  and  approved  by  Henry 
St.  George  Norroy.  j 

27.  The  Pedegree  of  Rofengrave,  as  labor’d  by  Lau¬ 

rence  Bollock,  and  allowed  by  Robert  Cooke  Claren¬ 
cieux,  22  July  1574.  j 

28.  Original  Letter  or  Certificate,  made  by  Mr.  Hugh 

Glafeour,  in  Defence  of  Mr.  Thomas  Challonour,  who 
was  accufed  by  Leeche  the  Barber  vnto  Sir  William 
Dethick  Garter,  of  altering  Mr.  Glafeours  Cote- Armor, 
ofhis  owne  Devife.  dat  2  Aprill  1595.  149.  b. 

29.  Shakerley’s  Pedegree,  as  labor’d  by  Mr.  Will. 

Vernon.  1 50.  b. 

30.  Pedegree  of  Rowley,  as  labor'd  by  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme,  A.D.  1633. 

31.  Genealogia  per-antiquse  Familke  Thovnycrofto- 
rum  de  Thorny-croft  in  Comitatu  Palatino  Ceftria:  ;  ex 
Evidentijs  ejufdem  Family,  alijfq;  Munimentis  fide- 
d  ignis,  defumpta  :  per  Gregorium  King  Rouge-dragon, 
Collegij  Armorum  Regiftrarium.  A.  D.  1688.  190.%.  * 

32.  A  Warrant  from  Henry  Lord  Mowbray  ft  Matra- 

vers,  Deputy  Earl-Marffiall  to  his  father  Thomas  Howard 
Earl  of  Arundel  &  Surrey,  licenfing  Sir  William  le  Neve 
Norroy,  to  alter  the  Creft  of  Sir  Richard  Minffiull,  from 
“  Twoe  lions  Pawes  holding  a  Crefcent,  to  the  Turkifli 
Sultan  Saladine  kneelinge  on  his  knee,  &  holdinge  a 
Crefcent.”  dated  the  4th  of  July  1642.  25. 

33.  Antiqua  Wynnyngtonorum  Familia  in  varijs 
Stemmatibus  propagata,  Armifq;  feparata,  et  in  formam 
digefta  per  Johannem  Booth  de  Twemlow,  confirmataq; 
a  Ricardo  St.  George,  Norroy  Armorum  Rege.  2 1 6.  b. 

34.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Bofier,  to  Mrs.  Ka¬ 

therine  Davenporte,  30  May  1681.  defiring  that  (he 
would  procure  of  the  third  Randle  Holme,  the  whole 
Pedegree  of  Davenport  ofDavenport,  with  all  the  matches 
&  all  the  collateral  Lines.  230. 

35.  Alphabetical  Table  directing  to  the  feveral  Pede¬ 
grees  entred  into  this  book.  237. 

36.  A  like  Table  of  the  names  of  Places.  239. 

2120. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  feveral  Trafts 
written  by  different  hands,  bound  up  together ;  where¬ 
in  I  find, 

1.  A  note  of  the  Armes  in  the  Windows  of  Lymme- 
Church.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  the  Con¬ 
tents  of  this  book.  1 . 

3,  Armes 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


Hu 


Num.  2  120,  212  1. 

3.  Armes  of  fome  Scotch  Kings  ruddy  tricked.  2. 

4.  Armes  of  many  of  the  Scots  Nobility.  3. 

5.  Armes  of  many  of  the  Irifh  Nobility.  7.  et  20. 

6.  1'he  Names  &  Armes  of  the  Gouernors,  Liefte- 

nantes,  Lord-Juftices,  &  Deputies  of  Irelande,  fxnce  the 
Conqueft  thereof  by  K.  Henry  11.  lo. 

7.  A  trwe  Coppye  of  an  auncient  Booke  of  Armes  of 

the  Irifhe  Nobility  &  Gentry  ;  collefted  by  Mr.  Thomas 
Poyninges,  and  by  him  delyueredinto  the  Office,  with  a 
Coppye  thereof  to  himfelfe  referued :  truely  examined 
&  allowed  per  R.  Glover  Somerfet-Herehaught,  &  W. 
Flower  Norrey  :  and  now  written  by  Thomas  Chaloner 
alias  Vlfler  principall  Herauld  &  Kinge  of  Armes  of  the 
Realme  of  Ireland,  at  Chefter,  A.D.  1590.  40. 

Thefe  Armes  are  moftly  in  blafon  ;  and  to  this  Col¬ 
lection  many  Additions  have  been  made,  by  the  fame  Mr. 
Chaloner,  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  &c. 

8.  How  the  Lords  fitt  in  the  Parliament-houfe  in  Ire¬ 
land.  56. 

9.  Defer iption  of  the  7  forts  of  Crowns  ufed  by  the 

Romans.  57.  b. 

10.  Matches  of  the  Kings  of  England  fince  the  Con¬ 
queft  ;  with  their  Queenes  Armes  in  blafon.  58. 

1 1 .  Armes  of  the  7  Electors  of  the  Emperor  ;  with 

thofe  of  fome  other  foreign  Nobles.  6 1 .  b.  &  76. 

12.  Armes  of  fome  foreign  Provinces,  Seignories, 

Cities,  &c.  tricked  by  the  fecond  or  third  Randle  Holme, 
from  a  painted  German  Manufcript.  72. 

13.  Alphabet  in  blafon,  of  the  Armes  of  many  Eng- 

lifli  Families.  77. 

This  is  but  a  fragment,  and  feems  to  be  written  by 
Mr.  Thomas  Chaloner :  who  hath  inferted  into  it,  an 
account  of  the  waye  from  Chefter  to  Cambridge,  at  pag. 
87.  and  at  the  end  is 

14.  Medici  Icon ;  being  Englifh  Verfes,  ad  ornatiffi- 

fnos  Viros  D.  J^iannem  James,  et  Lancelottum  Browne 
Medicos  celeberrimos.  89. 

1 5.  Armes,  in  blafon,  of  Scottifh  Nobility  &  Gentry, 

A.D.  1580.  X14. 

16.  Coats,  in  blafon,  found  in  the  Glaffe-Wyndowes 

of  the  Monaftry  of  Chefter.  130. 

17.  Armes  of  Scots  Noble  Families,  rudely  tricked. 

i3r* 

18.  Scottifh  Coats,  in  blafon  :  fet  down  promifeuoufly 

by  the  third  Randle  Holme.  1 36. 

1 9.  Armes,  in  blafon,  of  the  Scottifh  Nobility  ;  by  the 

the  fame.  143. 

20.  Armes,  in  blafon,  of  Nobility  &  Gentry  in  York- 

fliire.  148. 

21.  Lift  of  other  Yorkffiire  Families,  but  without 

.Armes.  1 70. 

22.  The  fecond  Randle  Holmes  Alphabetical  Table 

to  the  preceding  Tra&s ;  made  A.D.  1657.  176. 

It  feems,  by  the  Croffes  appearing  in  feveral  places 
of  the  book,  that  Entries  have  been  made  into  other 
books  from  hence. 

2121. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  feveral  Trafts 

now  bound  up  together,  and  written  by  different  hands. 

They  are, 

t  .  Pedegrees  of  many  Hereford-fhire-Families :  feveral 
of  which,  having  the  Letter  E  above  them,  feem  to  have 
been  from  hence  entred  into  another  book.  1 . 

2.  Pedegrees  of  fundiy  Devon-ffiire-Families.  45. 

Some  of  thefe  are  much  torn,  or  eaten  by  Mice. 

3.  Pedegrees  of  many  antient  Families  in  Gloucefter- 

fliire.  &c.  72. 

4.  Alphabet,  in  blafon,  of  Gloucefter-fhire-Families. 

1 10. 

5.  Lift  of  the  Juflices  of  the  Peace  in  the  County  of 

Salop;  A.D.  1629.  no.  b. 

6.  A  like  Lift  for  Oxfordfhire.  ibid. 

7.  Another  for  Worcefter-fhire.  in. 

8.  Another  for  Hereford-fhire.  ibid. 


Num.  2121,  2122. 


9.  Another  for  Gloucefterfhire.  nr.b. 

Thefe  two  laft  Leaves  have  been  turned  up-fide 
downe. 

1  o.  A  fort  of  Calendar  to  the  bundles  of  the  Pell- 
Office  ;  giving  the  names  of  thofe  who  ferved  our  Kings 
in  their  Wars.  187. 

1 1 .  Names  of  four  of  the  auntienteft  Squiers  of  Eng¬ 
land  ;  out  of  the  Leger  booke  of  Collingborough-Abbey. 

190. 

12.  Forme  of  the  Precept  iffued  by  Samuel  Thomfon 
Windfor-Herald,  and  Auguftin  Vincent  Rouge-croix  to 
the  Conftables  of  the  Hundreds  of  Kingefton  &  Emly- 
bridge  for  fummoning  the  Gentry  to  meet  them  at  their 
Vifitation  of  the  County  of  Surrey,  dat.  18  March  1622. 

ibid. 

13.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table  to 

the  Cotes,  Crefts  or  Quarterings  fet  forth  in  this  book  : 
made  A.  D.  1632.  191. 

14.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Defcents  in  this 

book;  per  Randle  Holme  Jun.  A.D.  1632.  194. 


A  Book  in  folio  containing  the  Succeffions  of  the  high 
Sheriffes  of  divers  Counties  from  the  Reign  of  King 
Henry  11.  to  that  of  K.  Charles  1.  in  the  order  fol¬ 
lowing. 

1.  Sheriffes  of  Bedford  &  Buckinghara-ftiires.  1. 

2.  Sheriffes  of  Buckinghamlhire,  fince  the  Divifion 
from  Bedfordlhire,  ann.  17  Eliz.  to  ann.  22  Caroli  1. 

8.  b. 

3.  Sheriffes  of  Cambridge  &  Huntingdon-fliires.  10. 

4.  Sheriffes  of  each  of  thofe  Counties  alone ;  from  the 

12,  to  the  17  Caroli  1.  16.  b. 

5.  Sheriffes  of  Cornwall,  to  the  22  of  Charles  1.  17. 

6.  The  Sheriffes  of  Cumberland,  (to  the  fame  year) 

23.  b. 

7.  Sheriffes  of  Derby  and  Nottinghamlhires.  (to  the 

10th  of  Qu.  Eliz.)  29. 

8.  Sheriffes  of  Derby-fliire  alone,  from  10  Eliz.  to  22 

Caroli  1 .  34. 

9.  Sheriffes  of  Devonfhire,  to  ann.  35  R:Caroh  1. 

35- 

10.  Sheriffes  of  Dorfet  &  Somerfet-fhires,  to  ann.  17 

Caroli  1.  42. 

(Sheriffes  of  Dorfet-lhire  alone,  to  the  year  above, 
from  7  Hen.  111.) 

11.  Sheriffes  of  Effex  &  Hertford -fhires,  to  9  Eliz. 

5°. 

12.  Sheriffes  of  Effex  alone,  from  9  Eliz.  to  22  Ca- 

rolil.  _  55.  b. 

13.  Sheriffes  of  Hertford-fhire,  from  9  Eliz.  to  20  Ca¬ 
roli  1.  58. 

14.  Sheriffes  of  Gloucefterffiire,  to  22  Caroli  1.  60. 

15.  Sheriffes  of  Hantffiire,  to  22  Caroli  1.  68. 

16.  Sheriffes  of  Hereford- ffiire,  to  22  Caroli  1.  76. 

1 7.  Sheriffes  of  Huntingdon-lhire,  from  the  12  to  17 

Caroli  1.  83.  b. 

18.  Sheriffes  of  Kent,  to  22  Caroli  1.  84. 

19.  Sheriffes  of  Lancaftffre,  from  1  Eliz.  to  17  Ja¬ 
cobi  1.  *  92. 

20.  Sheriffes  of  Leicefter-lhire  &  Warwickfhire ;  from 

1  Hen.  11.  to  9  Eliz.  94. 

21.  Sheriffes  of  Leicefter-lhire  alone,  to  22  Caroli  1. 

99.  b. 

22.  Sheriffes  of  Warwick-lhire  alone,  to  21  Caroli  1. 

100.  b. 

23.  Sheriffes  of  Lincoln-lhire,  to  22  Caroli  j.  102. 

24.  Sheriffes  of  London  &  Middlefex,  to  22  Carol i. 

108. 

25.  Sheriffes  of  Norfolk  &  Suffolk,  to  17  Eliz.  118. 

26.  Sheriffes  of  Norfolk  alone,  to  22  Caroli  1.  123.  b. 

27.  Sheriffes  of  Suffolk  alone,  to  the  fame  year.  1 24-b. 

28.  Sheriffes  of  Northampton-lhire,  to  the  fame  year. 

126. 

39.  Sheriffes 


SI* 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2122 — 2125. 

29.  Sheriffes  of  Northumberland,  from  1  Rich.  11.  to 

13  Caroli  1.  134. 

30.  Sheriffes  of  Rutlandfhire,  from  1  Rich.  11.  to  5 

Maris.  138. 

31.  Sheriffes  ofBerkfhire  &  Oxford-fhire,  from  1  Hen. 

11,  to  22  Caroli  1.  141. 

It  may  be  obferved,  that  the  places  of  the  chief 
refidence  of  many  Families  of  thefe  Sheriffes,  and  many 
of  their  Armes,  are  fett  down  in  blafon. 

Laftly  follow, 

32.  The  Names  of  all  the  Sheriffes  of  the  County  of 
Denbigh,  fithence  the  fame  became  Shire-ground,  i.  e. 
from  A.  D,  1541,  to  1682. 

2123. 

A  paper  Book  infmall  folio,  wherein  I  find  nothingbut 

1.  An  old  Law-Common  place-book,  in  Law-French. 

2.  The  Anfwer  of  .  .  .  Relitt  of  Richard  Bag- 

nall,  to  the  Exceptions  taken  againfl  her  Hufbands 
Eflate.  At  the  end. 

2124. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  incorrectly  tranfcribed  per  Jaco- 
bum  Miller,  A.  D.  1607.  being  a  Copie  of  the  Plays  or 
Interludes  which  were  wont  to  be  publicly  performed 
by  the  Citizens  of  Chefler ;  of  which  I  have  before 
made  fome  mention  in  my  Defer iption  of  the  ms. 
96.  A.  1.  where  the  Plays  are  the  fame  as  in  this  Ex¬ 
emplar  (the  Prologue  or  Banes  excepted,  which  are 
not  here)  and  therefore  need  not  be  repeated  in  this 
Catalogue  ;  there  being  likewife  a  Tabie  referring  to 
them  all  at  the  end  of  the  book. 

To  this  book  fome-body  hath  prefixed  a  fort  of  Title 
Sr  Tradition  (different  from  that  which  the  fecond  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme  added  to  the  other)  which  are  expreffed  in  thefe 
words  :  “  The  Whitfun  playes  firft  made  by  one  Don 
Randle  Heggenet  a  Monke  of  Chefler  Abbey  who  was 
thrife  at  Rome  before  he  could  obtaine  leaue  of  the  Pope 
to  haue  them  in  the  Englifh  tongue.  The  Whitfun 
playes  were  playd  openly  in  pageants  by  the  Cittizens  of 
Chefler  in  the  Whitfun  Weeke.  Nicholas  the  fift  then 
was  Pope”  (in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1447,)  “Sir  Henry 
Francis  fometyme  a  Monke  of  the  Moneflery  of  Chefler. 
obtained  of  Pope  Clemens  a  thoufanddaies  of  pardon,  and 
of  the  Bifhop  of  Chefler  40  dayes,  for  euery  perfon  that 
reforted  peaceably  to  fee  the  fame  playes ,  and  that  euery 
perfon  that  diflurbed  the  fame  to  be  accurfed  by  the 
faid  Pope,  vntill  fuch  tyme  as  they  fhould  be  abfolued 
thereof.  This  feems  to  have  been  written  Anno,  1628. 

2125. 

A  Book  in  folio  written  by  feveral  hands  (but  princi¬ 
pally  by  the  fecond  and  third  Randle  Holme)  and 
treating  almofl  wholly  about  the  City  of  Chefler  8c 
its  affairs  :  wherein,  not  to  infill  upon  every  minute 
Article,  I  find, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Catalogue  of  the 
Things  of  chiefefl  Note  in  this  Booke.  At  the  begin¬ 
ning. 

This  feems  to  have  been  taken  with  a  view  of  ufing 
the  Book  as  a  Chefler  Man,  who  was  curious  as  to  the 
Hi  (lory  &  Antiquities  thereof  :  which,  I  not  thinking  to 
be  fo  proper  to  be  followed  here,  fhall  make  only  thefe 
Obfervations,  in  turning  over  the  fame.  1 

2.  A  Lift  of  certain  learned  Men  borne  in  Chefler  • 
&  of  fome  of  our  Englifh  Hiflorians  bom  in  other  places’. 

n  T  TV’  *  l8o.  b. 

3*  B'‘eife  ot  Ae  Antiquitye  of  thefamofe  Cittye 
of  Chefler  :  with  the  Succeffion  of  Mayors  Sc  Sheriffes 
fince  Sir  Walter  Lynett  Knighte  was  firil  Mayor  •  with 
many  Additions,  and  Continuations  of  Tranfaftions  by 
the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  to  the  5  of  October  16  ci 
181.  (et  vid.  258.  Sc  268.  et  vid.  271.  &  146  i 

In  this  Treatife,  I  likewife  obferve,  J  ’ 


Num.  2125. 

4.  An  Account  of  the  old  Earles  of  Chefler.  iSj, 

(et  vid.  258.  b.) 

5.  A  Succeffion  of  the  Bilhops  of  Chefler,  down  to 

Dr.  John  Bridgman.  186;  b.  (et  vid.  263.)  . 

6.  A  Succeffion  of  the  Deanes  of  Chefler  ;  con¬ 
tinued  to  Dr.  Henry  Bridgeman,  inftalled  A.  D.  1661. 

1 89.  Sc  265. 

7.  Cuflomes  Sc  Prifes  which  ufed,  of  ould  tyme,  to 

be  taken  by  the  Keeper  of  the  Bridge-Gate  for  Goods  Sc 
Commodities  brought  into  the  City.  1 89.  b. 

S.  The  joyniuge  of  all  the  Trades  of  ould  Tyme,  as 
they  played  the  Whitfon-playes,  and  the  Partes  they 
played  on  Munday,  Tufdaye,  Sc  Wenfdaye  in  Whitfon- 
Weeke.  1901 

9.  The  Oathes  of  the  Mageflrates  Sc  Officers  in  the 

Cittye  of  Chefler  ;  taken  When  they  enter  upon  their 
Offices.  191.  et  193. 

10.  A  printed  Paper  containing  the  Othe  of  every 
Free-man  of  the  C.itieof  London,  temp.  R.  Eliz.  192. 

1 1 .  Names  of  many  of  the  Recorders  of  Chefler. 

194.  b.  et  2691 

12.  Names  of  the  Common-Council  of  the  City  of 

Chefler,  20  January  1628.  195.  b.' 

13.  Names  of  many  of  the  Maiors  &  Shirevcs  of 

Chefler  ;  and  particularly  of  thofe  whofe  time  of  ferving 
"is  incertain.  i95-b.  Sc  195.  B.  b.  et  196.  b. 

Then  follow  the  Annals  of  Chefler,  or  Succeffion 
of  the  Maiors  &  Sheriffes  abovementioned  at  No.  3.  and 
which  may  be  a  iittle  faulty,  efpeeially  at  the  beginning. 
It  is  called  Geo.  Bellen’s  Catalogue.  197. 

The  lafi  TraCl  is  fucceded  by  another  containing 
much -what  the  fame  matter  with  what  hath  been  men¬ 
tioned  before  in  feveral  Articles,  where  (to  avoid  repe¬ 
tition)  I  have  referred  to  this.  Yet  I  find  here,  frefh, 

14.  Some  account  of  the  ould  Churches  in  Chefler, 

now  ruinated.  267. 

In  another  Series  of  the  Maiors  Sc  Sheriffes  of  Chel- 
ter  (beginning  at  fol.  271.)  from  A.  D.  1257.  to  A.  D. 
1705.  being  continued  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  his 
Son,  Grandfon,  ’See.  with  Notes  of  remarkable  Occur¬ 
ences,  like  the  former,  I  obferve, 

15.  A  Lampoon  made  by  Mr.  Geo.  Boflock,  of  Chur- 
ton,  upon  Mr.  Edward  Button,  who  was  Maior  of 
Chefler,  A.  D.  1616.  between  the  leaves  305.  Sc  306. 
loofe. 

16.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lord  Vifcount  Savage  to 

the  firft'  Randle  Holme  then  Maior  of  Chefler,  dated  9 
Aug.  1634.  _  308. 

Fie  writes  very  kindly  ;  and  promifes  to  interpofe 
his  good  Offices  with  the  Earl  Marfhall  (Thomas  Howard) 
in  Cafe  he  fhould  have  conceived  any  difagreable  thoughts 
toward  the  City  in  general,  or  him  in  particular. 

17.  Narration  of  the  matter  of  fa£l,  as  it  palled, 

whereby  that  great  Peer  thought  himfetf  affronted  by  Mr. 
Maior  above-mentioned  (as  to  which,  more  may  be  feen 
in  the  Book  96.  B.  22.  fol.  32.  2.)  309.  b. 

18.  Hafly  Sketches  of  the  Fafhion  of  many  large 

Pieces  of  Plate,  given  from  the  City,  in  tyme  of  the 
Wars.  A.  D.  1643.  Sc  1644.  316. 

19.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme  Speeches  which  he 

fpake  publicly  at  his  Entrance  into  the  Office  of  his  Maio- 
rality.  A.  D.  1643.  an^  upon  his  going  out,  A  D.  1644. 
written  by  himfelf.  318. 

20.  His  Copy  of  a  Speech  he  made  to  Prince  Rupert, 

at  his  coming  to  Chefler,  11  March  1643.  319. 

21.  A  Diary  of  the  happy  Succeffe  obtained  by  Sir 

William  Brereton,  againft  Sir  Thomas  Aflon  of  Alton, 
(then  Commander  of  the  Kings  Army  in  Chefhire)  from 
his  coming  from  London  into  Chefhire,  28  January 
1642.  to  16  July  1646.  printed  at  London  the  fame 
Y  ear,  321. 

22.  Articles  concluded  upon,  1  February,  1645.  be- 
tweene  the  Comitioners  appoynted  on  the  behalfe  of 
John  Lord  Byron,  Feikl  Marfhall  Generali  of  North 

Wales, 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


Num.  21x5,  2126. 

Wales,  &  Gouernor  of  Chefter,  on  the  one  Party  :  & 
the  Comitioners  on  the  behalfe  of  Sir  William  Brereton 
Bart.  Commander  in  Cheife  of  all  the  Rebell-Forces  of 
Chefhier,  and  the  Leaguer  before  Chefter,  on  the  other 
Party  ;  for  the  Surrender  of  the  Citty  of  Chefter*  with 
the  Caftell  &  Fort  thereof.  328, 

23.  The  Boundaries  of  fome  Territory ;  which, 
perhaps,  may  be  that  environing  and  belonging  to 
the  City  of  Chefter,  between  fol.  332  &  fol.  333, 
loofe. 

24.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Opinion,  as  to 
precedence  in  public  Proceflions ;  given,  as  I  con¬ 
ceive,  upon  a  Difpute  between  the  Tailors  &  Weavers 
of  Chefter,  A.  D.  1690,  between  fol.  343  &c  344, 
loofe. 

25.  Hiftorical  Notes  relating  to  Chefter,  and  to  its 

Earles  &  Juftices  ;  but  principally,  in  Order  to  the  fix¬ 
ing  a  Series  of  its  Maiors  &  SherilFes,  down  to  the  year 
1616.  344. 

2126. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  many  fingle  Papers  & 
TraCts,  now  bound  up  together ;  and  exhibiting  ma¬ 
ny  Accompts,  Rentals,  Receipts,  Sec.  in  feveral  Parts 
of  Cheftiire,  during  the  time  of  the  Civil  War,  or 
foon  after. 

r.  Moneys  ditburfed  by  the  Conftables  of  Over, 
A.D.  it)46,  \Vith  part  of  an  Account  of  the  Rapine 
committed  by  fome  of  the  Parliament-Souldiers  there. 

220. 

2.  Prcpofition-money  advanced  to  the  Rebels  in  Over, 

&c.  with  Accompts  of  their  Rapine,  Free-quarterings, 
Thefts.  & c.  222. 

3.  A  true  Accompt  of  the  Tenants  of  Mr.  Edmund 
Peafhall  of  Over,  of  their  feveral  Rents  payd  to  the 
Committee  &  Collectors  of  the  Hundred  of  Edef- 
burie,  for  the  ufe  of  the  Publique  :  A.  D.  1645,  &c. 

251. 

4.  Rents  receiued  of  the  Malignants  Lands,  for  feven 
Rent-Stages  of  the  parties  hereafter  named,  being 
of  the  Inheritance  of  John  Earl  Rivers  (A  Fragment). 

254- 

5.  Two  Copies  of  a  Letter,  fubferibed  George  Ley- 

cefter,  Richard  Leigh,  &c.  &  fent  27  Janry  1645,  10 
Mr.  Bradfhawe,  fignifying  to  him,  that  Chrift  church 
College  in  Oxford  having  left  the  Tithes  of  Knuttesford 
to  one  Mr.  Wheeler,  &  he  having  affigned  the  fame  to 
Mr.  Charles  Trinder,  they  defire  him  to  ufe  his  Autho¬ 
rity  with  Mr.  Trinder  to  allow  them  fome  fitting  Stipend 
(as  30  pounds  per  ann.)  for  the  continuance  of  a  godly 
&  able  Minifter  in  the  Chapell  of  Knuttesford  ;  adding, 
that  in  cafe  he  fhould  refufe  fo  to  do,  they  believed  the 
People  would  be  foe  ready  to  looke  after  their  owne 
Rights,  that  Mr.  Trinder  would  fcarcely  enjoy  his  Title 
in  thofe  Tythes  &  Glebe-Lands,  with  fo  much  advan¬ 
tage  to  himfelf,  as  he  might  do  otherwife.  And  fur¬ 
ther  befeeching  him  to  moue  the  Committee  for  aTpe 
ciall  Order,  for  a  competent  allowance  to  their  Paro¬ 
chial  Chapell,  forth  of  the  College-Rents  due  within 
the  Parifh  of  Rofthorne;  for  leffc  then  100  pounds  per 
annum,  would  fcarcely  engage  an  able  man  to  any 
Church,  much  lefle  to  theirs,  which  was  a  full  Con¬ 
gregation.  255. 

6.  A  Ballance  of  his  Majefties  Ordinary  Receipts  8e 
Payments,  made  by  a  Medium  of  5  Yeares,  upon 
Certificate  from  the  Officers  of  the  Revenew,  by 
l'everall  Warrants,  anno  1635,  to  December  1640. 

257- 

7.  A  Booke  of  Receipts  &  Difburftments,  what 

William  Hammond  Cla.  haiie  reed,  and  how  he  hath 
dilburft  the  Money  hee  gathered  of  27  Mizes,  A.D. 
1644.  261. 

This  Accompt  was  delivered  in  upon  Oath  to  the 
Commiffioners  the  4  Nov.  1647. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


5i3 


Num.  2126. 


8.  A  particular  Rentall  of  the  Delinquents  Lands, 

both  Ould  Rents  &  Racke-Rents,  within  the  Pariffies  of 
A&on,  Church-Mynffiull,  Bartomley,  &  Copnall ;  and 
to  whnm  they  are  fett,  &  for  what  vallue,  for  this  pre- 
fent  Yeare  1646.  267. 

This  is  figned  by  the  Sequeftrators  for  Namptwich 
Hundred. 

9.  A  true  and  perticuler  Accounte  of  Peter  Hall,  See: 
Collectors  for  the  Parifh  of  Frodfham,  for  theife  two 
Yeares  laft  paft,  of  the  Names  of  thofe  that  are  in  Ar- 
reares,  that  haue  bin  due  iince  the  firft  of  March  1645. 

a77; 

10.  A  pariiculer  of  the  Arreares,  fince  Midforner  in 

1646,  due  to  the  State  out  of  Delinquents  Eftates  in 
Barrow-Parifh  ;  retorned  in  by  me  John  Lightefoote 
Colefter.  27  9. 

Thefe  are  followed  by  divers  like  Accompts  from 
other  Parifhes. 

it;  Rates,  according  to  which,  divers  parcels  of 
Land  belonging  to  Earle  Rivers  &  other  Delinquents, 
were  lett;  290. 

12.  A  particular  of  fuch  Tymber,  Withinwood, 

Wichwrod,  Kids,  Stocks,  &  Windings,  as  haue  been 
ordered  to  be  fallen  &  gotten  in  Eaton-wood,  and  in 
that  part  of  Holford  Wood,  or  M'ze,  lyingc  in  this 
parte  of  Northwich  Hundred  ;  and  by  whofe  Order,  & 
for  whofe  Vfe.  295. 

Thefe  two  laft  feem  to  have  been'  delivered  to  the 

Commiffioners,  upon  Oath,  the  30  September  1647. 

13.  A11  Accompt  of  Richard  Edge  for  Eftreyts  of 

the  Cpurt  for  the  Mannor  of  Nether-Knuttesford,  23 
Apr.  1650.  299. 

This  Accompt  includes  other  Eftreat-morteys  rec~d 
by  the  fame,  in  other  Years,  before  &  after;  as  alfo 
of  his  Dilburfements  :  and  is  followed  by  a  further 
Accompt  by  the  fame  Collector  for  the  Earle  of  Bridge- 
water. 

14.  The  Accompt  of  the  Conftables  of  Caftle-North- 

wiclj,  as  to  the  Rent  of  there  Townelhepe  due  to  Sir 
Thomas  Wilbraham,  but  paid  to  the  Sequeftrators, 
A.D.  1645.  3 12. 

15.  A  Valuation  of  the  Gleabe-Lands  &  Tythes 
.belonginge  to  the  Church  of  Knuttesford,  made  by 
Thomas  Swinton  &  Henry  Moreton  Collectors. 

.  312- 

16.  A  Fragment,  containing  Objections  againft  the 
Leafe  of  the  Glebe  &  Tilhes  of  Knuttesford,  made 
by  the  Dean  &  Chapter  of  Chrift-church  to  Mr  Wheler. 

3l3- 

17.  How  the  fame  &  other  Tithes  were  lett  by  the 

Commiffioners.  314. 

18.  A  perticuler  Accompte  of  fuch  Gleabe-Lands  & 

Tythes  as  haue  been  fett  by  us  (Thom.  Warburton  & 
other  Parliament  Commiffioners)  this  Yeare,  belonging 
to  the  Deane  &  Chapter  of  Chrilt-church  Oxon,  and 
be  in  arreare  &  un-collected, ,  &  now  due,  dat.  1  Janu¬ 
ary  1645-  3*5- 

19.  Accompt  of  all  the  Recepts  by  Arthur  Edgeley 
Receiver  within  the  Parifhes  of  AClon-Church,  Mynlhull, 
Bartomley,  8c  Church-Copnall,  out  of  the  Eftates  of 
the  Lord  C.holmondeley  &  01  her  Delinquents,  fince 
the  24th  of  June  1645,  to  the  24th  of  June  1646. 

316. 

20.  Sequeftred  Rents  payd  in  Wilton.  322. 

21.  The  Accompte  for  Kingfley,  deliuered  the  14th 

of  April  1647.  324. 

This  is  as  to  Money  levyed  there,  &  paid  to  the 
Commiflioners,  Thomas  C.holmondeley,  &c. 

22.  The  Accounts  of  Richard  Yearwood  of  Mob- 
berley,  as  to  Moneys  collefted  by  him  from  Mr  Thomas 
Mallorie,  &  others ;  dated  the  8th  of  June  1647. 

325- 

23.  Richard  Button  his  Accounts  to  the  Comminee 
of  Sequeftration,  as  to  the  Monies  raifed  from  the  De- 

6  P  meafne 


in 


ST4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2126 — 2128 


meafne  Lands  of  Robert  Tatton  of  Withenfliawe  Efq;  to 
the  25th  of  March  1646.  329. 

24.  The  Accompts  of  John  Williamfon  &  Peter  Deane 
jun.  Collectors  of  the  fequeftred  Eftate  of  Peter 
Leycefter  of  Tabley,  Gentleman,  dated  A.  D.  1645. 

34 5 6 *4: 

25.  An  Accompt  of  the  Eftate  of  Robert  Lord  Vif- 

count  Kilinorey,  within  the  Hundred  of  Bucklowe,  feized 
in  July,  A.  Dili  1643.  366. 

2 6.  Ac.compt  of  Moneys  paid  vnto  Mr  Rich.  Leigh 

Trefurcr,  out  of  the  Eftates  of  Roberte  Lord  Chol- 
mondeley,  &  Peter  Lefter  Efq;  in  Plumley  &  Little 
Peuer,  from  14  Nov.  1645  to  5  Dec.  1646.  368.  b. 

27.  lligh-Leigh  Rental,  for  Mr  Henery  Leghs,  A.D. 

1646.  3^9* 

28.  Accompt  of  William  Fearnhead  Collector,  forth 
of  the  Eftate  of  Henry'  Leigh  of  High-Leigh  Efq;  fe- 
queftered  for  the  Vie  of  the  Publick,  dat.  A.  D.  1645.  * 

37°- 

29.  Roger  Gleaue’s  Account  of  Moneys  levyed  out 

of  the  fame  Eftate,  fince  Midfomer  1643,  vntill  the  25th 
of  March  then  next  following.  372. 

This  is  followed  by  fome  further  Accompts  of  this 
Gleave,  from  the  fame  Eftate. 

30.  Other  Accompts  of  Moneys  levied  upon  the 
Eftates  of  the  Lord  Cholmondeley  &  other  Royalifts ; 
given  in  upon  Oath,  the  3  of  December  1646. 

385- 

This  Accompt  contained  72  pages;  of  which  the 
firft  27  are  wanting. 

2127. 

A  thin  Book  in  folio,  on  the  out-fide,  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme  entituled  “  Songs  &  Sonnetts.”  Look¬ 
ing  into  it,  I  find  fuch  a  Collection  indeed,  written  by 
different  Hands  (for  the  mod  part  bad  enough)  befides 
which  here  are  Epitaphs,  Lampoons,  Libells,  &c.  in 
Profe,  as  well  as  in  Verfe  ;  particularly,  fome  againft 
the  Welfh  and  Scots;  fome  for  King  Charles. the 
firft,  the  Bifhops,  &c.  and  others  againft  them ;  yet 
none,  in  my  poor  Opinion,  confiderable  enough  to  be 
particularly  mentioned  here ;  or  to  keep  me  longer 
from  deferibing  the  next  Book  ;  which  is 

2128. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  particular  Papers 
&  TraCls  now  bound  up  together  ;  being  (for  the  moft 
part)  of  a  like  nature  with  thole  in  the  laft  Book 
faye  one ;  and  further  fett  forth  the  Sufferings  of  the 
King’s  loyal  Subjeds,  by  thofe  who  aded  for  the 
Parliament  during  the  late  Civil  War.  In  deferibing 
them,  I  fhall  ufe  the  old  method,  and  begin  with, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Table  of  the  Things 
of  moft  Account  in  this  Book.  Which  is  followed 
by 

2.  Accounts  of  Propofition-Money  lent;  &  other 
Cods  &  Damages  fuftained  by  the  Inhabitants  of  the 
Towndhip  of  Hollingworth,  forfeverall  Years.  1. 

3.  The  Committee  of  Sequeftrations  Note  or  Ac¬ 
compt  of  all  the  Delinquents  lequeftered  in  Namptwich 
Hundred,  and  of  the  Orders  they  received  for  fufpend- 
mg  their  Sequeftrations.  The  Names  of  thofe  whoe 
ftande  dill  under  Sequeftration  ;  and  of  thofe  whoe  are 
dilchardged  from  Sequeftration  &  pardoned,  whofe 
Eftates  real  &  perfonal  are  not  worth  £ 200  ;  and  who 
have  taken  the  Negative  Oath  k  Covenaunte  ac- 
cordmge  to  the  Refotve  of  the  8th  of  December  1646. 

4.  Receipts  out  of  the  Eftates  of  the  Baron  of  Kinde’r- 

ton,  &  other  Delinquents.  IO  ^ 

5.  The  Accompt  of  Major  John  Bromhall,  as  to  all 

Receipts  St  Dilburfemems  relating  to  him,  his  Officers 

&  Souidiers  :  given  in,  upon  Oath  to  the  Commiffioners! 

the  1 1  th  of  September  1 645.  12lw 


Num.  2128; 


6.  Receipts  from  the  Lord  Kilmories  Demefne 
without,  &  his  Rents  within  the  Townc  of  ACton. 

29. 

7.  Moneys  levied  upon,  or  other  Loffes  fuftained 
by  the  Inhabitants  of  Over- Whitley,  &  Nether-Whitley. 

31. 

ThisAccompt  was  given  in  upon  Oath  25  July  164  c, 
by  the  R  ebells. 

8.  Accompt  of  the  Moneys  railed  and  paid  by  the 

Conftables  of  Lime  for  four  Years,  beginning  A.  D. 
■641.  39. 

This  was  alfo  delivered  in  upon  Oath,  A.  D. 
1645. 

9.  Accompt  of  the  Horfes,  &  their  feveral  Prices, 

advanced  to  the  Parliament-Forces  under  Coll'  George 
Boothe,  dat.  19th  March  1651.  45. 

10.  A  Declaration  of  the  Commiffioners  of  Array,  14 

February  1642,  occafioned  by  the  wicked  plundering  by 
Sir  Thomas  Aftons  Troopers.  47. 

11.  Copie  of  one  of  Sir  Thomas  Aftons  Warrants 

for  plundering  Sam.  Bucks  of  an  Horfe,  Flay,  &  Oates  : 
He  being  a  perfon  knowne  to  be  dilaffeded  to  his  Ma- 
jeftie.  Jb. 

12.  Original  Order  of  the  Committee  for  Sequeftra¬ 
tions  within  the  Hundred  of  Bucklowe,  dat.  27  of  July 
1648,  whereby  19  Shillings  remaining  in  the  Hands  of 
John  Skettell  late  one  of  their  Agents,  was  allowed  to 
his  Widow,  in  part  fatisfadion  to  her  for  his  3  yeares 


Service. 


49- 


13.  Propofuion  Money  raffed  by  Richard Pigott  in 
the  yeare  1644,  accordinge  to  Ordinance  of  Parliament: 
which  was  difburfed  by  him,  by  the  appoyntment  of 
Sir  William  Brereton,  &  Coll' John  Leigh,  A.D.  1646  & 
1647  ;  which  Dilburfements  are  not  fpecified  in  this 
Accompt. 

14.  The  Accompts  of  the  Conftables  of  Meire,  from 

A.D.  1642,  as  delivered  in  upon  Oath  to  the  Commit! 
fioners,  the  23  June  1645.  54. 

This  fhews  what  they  did  for  the  Parliament,  & 
what  they  loft  by  the  Prince’s  Army. 

15.  Original  Order  of  the  Commiffioners  to  the 

Conftables  of  Barrow,  dated  26  January  1646.  57. 

Requiring  them  to  appear  at  a  certain  Day,  to  bring 
their  Accompts  with  them,  &  the  Moneys  remaining  in 
their  hands. 

16.  Accompt  of  Moneys  &  Provifions  received  from 
the  Cunftables  within  the  Hundred  of  Broxton  & 
Hedelberev,  begininge  the  firft  of  Odober  1645; 

58. 

17.  Informations  given  upon  Oath  the  5th  of  April, 

1652,  before  Thomas  Stanley  Efq;  touching  certain 
Horfes  &  Money  by  Mr.  John  Leigh  advanced,  upon  the 
Propofitions  of  Parliament.  60. 

18.  Accompt  of  Moneys  owinge  vnto  &  received  by 

Richard  Barret  Chyrurgion,  &  his  three  Aliiftants,  for 
Service  performed  in  Chelhire,  to  the  26  of  May  1645, 
as  given  up  to  the  Commiffioners  of  Accounts  for 
Chelhire.  61. 

This  is  followed  by  fucceeding  Accompts  of  the 
fame  perfons. 

19.  Mr.  Greggs  k  Mr.  Gartfydes  Accompts,  dat. 
27  Nov.  1646,  as  to  the  Moneys  they  received  out 
of  Goldfmithes  Hall,  borrowed  toward  the  £12000. 

64.  b. 

20.  Original  Agreement,  made  the  8th  of  February 

1 665,  whereby  Edward  Tippinge  was  to  pay  15  Shil¬ 
lings  yearly  to  John  Davy  Vicar  of  Frodffiam,  in  lieu  of 
all  Dues  &  Ecclefiaftical  Rights  demandable  from  a  Te¬ 
nement  in  his  Occupation.  66. 

21.  Copies  of  feveral  Certificates  from  Sir  William 
Brereton,  &c.  in  the  behalf  of  Captain  Richard  Brereton, 
who  had  ferved  long  in  the  Parliament- Army.  67. 

22.  Original  Order  of  Sir  George  Booth,  &  other 
Commiffioners  of  Accompts  in  Chelhire,  whereby  they 

conllituted 


i'ifi 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae 


Num,  2128. 

conftituted  George  Wilfon  their  foie  Regiftar.  Dat.  8 
January,  1651.  73. 

23.  A  Sur  charge  to  the  Accompts  of  Coll  John  Legh, 
of  Moneys,  Goods,  &c.  received  by  him,  for  the  Com¬ 
monwealth  ;  for  which  hee  hath  not  accompted.  75. 

24.  Accompt  of  John  Wettenhall  Agent  to  the  Com- 

miflioners  of  Chelhire  touching  the  Moneys  accrewing 
from  the  Eleaven  Mizes  fettled  upon  Chelhire  toward 
payment  of  the  Souldiery  &  the  Britilh  Army  A.  D. 
1644.  from  the  Cattle  taken  from  the  Wellh  People,  & 
other  plunder,  &c.  Given  in  upon  Oath,  20  April, 
*649-  78. 

25.  Inventories  of  the  Goods  taken  from  the  Earle 

Rivers,  the  Lord  Kilmurray,  &  others  called  Delin¬ 
quents,  within  the  Hundred  "of  Bucklowe.  Deliver’d 
in,  upon  Oath,  23  June,  1645.  93. 

26.  The  Accompt  of  William  Penketh  Collector  to 
the  Sequeftrators;  given  in  upon  Oath,  25  Jan.  1648. 

1 1 5. 

27.  Accompt  of  his  Receipts  <k  Dilburfements  from 
the  Old  Rents  of  Wefton,  A.  D.  1645.  being  feized  by 
the  Sequeftrators,  as  belonging  to  the  Lord  Kiimorey. 

Here  are  more  of  this  Penketh’s  Accompts  relating' 
to  other  Sufferers  in  the  Kings  Caufe. 

28.  The  Anfwere  of  the  Commiflioners  for  Sequef- 

trations  within  the  Hundred  of  Bucklowe ;  to  a  pi  e- 
tended  Charge  deliuered  vnto  them  the  6th  of  Novem¬ 
ber,  1649.  by  the  Committee  of  Accompts  for  Chelhire, 
or  by  their  Clarke.  j  2  - 

This  is  the  Original,  figned  by  Warburton,  Pow- 
nall,  &  Bradborne,  who  Hand  in  their  own  Vindication. 

29.  Accompt  of  John  Page  one  of  the  Head-Confta- 

bles  of  Northwich-Hundred,  touching  public  Moneys 
received  by  him  A.  D.  1646.  ,2  7. 

30.  Loffes  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Nether  Knuttc-sford, 

by  the  Parliaments  Army,  in  Auguft,  1651.  1 ;  1. 

31.  Accompt  of  Thomas  Smyth  another  of  the  Head- 

Conftables  of  Northwich-Hundred.  i'2. 

32.  The  Rate  or  Charge  laid  upon  each  Hundred  in 

Chelhire,  toward  the  maintainance  of  the  Parliaments 
Army,  from  March,  1647.  vnto  June,  1634.  130. 

33.  Accompts  ’twixt  Mr.  Richardfon  &  Mr.  Ra. 

Fetherfton-halge,  touching  the  produce  of  the  Officials 
Courts  holden  within  the  late  Prebend  of  Maffau,  from 
the  28  of  Sept.  1616.  to  thefirft  of  June,  1619.  140. 

34-  Accompts  of  the  Dilburfements  of  the  Conftables 
of  Dutton,  from  A.  D.  1640.  to  1 64 5.  I46. 

35.  Accompt  of  John  Gleaue  Gent,  one  of  the  Head- 
Conftables  of  the  Hundred  of  Bucklowe,  1645.  15  >•  b. 

.  36.  Part  of  the  Libell  exhibited  by  Mrs.  Anne  Mofe- 
ley  in  the  Bilhop  ofChefters  Court,  A.  D.  1667.  again!! 

-  James  Boardman,  in  defence  of  her  Right  to  a  Pew  in 
the  Parochial  &  Collegiate  Church  of  Manchefter.  1  56. 

37.  Original  Letter  of  the  Commiflioners  of  Ac¬ 

compts  in  Chelhire,  to  the  Truftees  for  Sale  of  divers 
Lands  forfeited  to  the  Common-wealth  for  Treafon  : 
dat.  20  February,  1651.  Irg# 

In  Anfwer  to  theirs  of  the  7th  of  Ottober  ■  where¬ 
in,  as  it  may  feem,  thefe  Commiflioners  were  defired  to 
give  an  Accompt  of  the  Moneys,  Horfe,  Armes,  Plate, 
See.  received  by  Sir  William  Br  reton,  upon  the  Propo¬ 
rtions  of  Parliament ;  and  as  to  the  Arrears  of  Souldiers. 

38.  An  Original  Receipt,  dated  16  February,  1623. 
for  15  Shillings  receiv’d  by  Andrew  Megg  and  George 
Afrates  Grecians,  for  the  Ufe  of  the  Archbilhopp  of 
Dirach  (i.  -e.  Dyrachium  in  Macedonia)  Spate,  &  Muf- 
fack,  collected  by  vertue  of  his  Majefties  Letters  Patents, 
within  the  County  of  Yorke  :  together  with  the  Briefs 
deliuered  vnto  the  Parifhes  of  Leeds,  Gargrave,  Pannall, 
Kighley,  &  Water-fricfton,  in  the  Arch-Deaconry  of 
Yorke. 

Of  thefe  two  Procurators  or  Vicars,  the  latter  (who 
could  not  write)  putt’s  on  y  his  Mark  :  but  the  former, 

7 


Num.  2128,  2129. 


who  might  have  been  an  HieromonacHos,  Pappas,  or 
otherwife  in  holy  Orders,  wrote  (in  a  good  hand)  thus 
for  both 

AvS^sae  piyxkoyiw;. 

Tivfy  10?  xippzlti;  - - 

On  the  back  of  the  fame  Paper  is, 

39.  Another  Original  Receipt  of  the  fame  Greeks  for 
£y.  17  :  7.  together  with  the  Briefs  of  many  Towns 
within  the  Arch-deaconry  of  Yorke,  wherein  this  Sum 
feems  to  have  been  col  letted  ;  and  with  one  more  Brief 
&  2s  :  G^.colletted,  but  where  was  incertain,  the  Name 
of  the  Parilh  being  defaced  in  the  Brief,  dat.  21  June, 

160.  b. 

Here  Andrew  fubferibes  in  a  belter  &  more  Clerk¬ 
like  hand  ;  but  not  fo  correctly  as  before. 

40.  A  perfetfe  i.ift  of  what  Ho'rfes  &  Amies  I  Wil¬ 

liam  Wright  haue  received  forth  ofEdilbury  Hundred 
according  to  my  Commiflion  requireing  mee  to  demand 
the  fame.  With  a  juft  Accompte  of  all  the  feuerall 
Somines  of  Moneyes  deliuered  in  unto  mee  or  the 
Clarke  of  my  Company  for  the  Soldiers  pay.  forth  ofall 
tile  Townes  within  the  laid  Hundred  :  as  deliver’d  in 
upon  Oath,  the  12th  of  Auguft,  1C47.  162. 

41.  John  Ravenflmvs  Accounts  of  his  Receipts  & 
Dilburfements,  in  Adlim-Parifh,  and  in  part  of  Widden- 
bury-Pariffi,  as  deliver’d  in  upon  Oath,  16  Martij,  1647. 

42.  The  Informat:., n  of  John  Lownds  Servant*  vnto 
Phillip  Mmnwa tinge  Efq;  given  in  to  the  Committee  at 
Chefter,  12  March  1G46. 

This  is  concerning  257  Thravcs  of  Wheate,  267 
Thraves  of  Wheare-Straw,  A-  a  good  Ouantity  of  Hay 
&  Oates  fent  by  his  Mafter  to  the  relief  of  the  Parlia- 
ment-Garnfon  at  Namptwich  ;  befides  his  own  Loan  of 
1  en  Shillings  vpon  Propoffiflion.  dat.  12  March,  1646. 

43.  Original  Order  of  the  Commiflioners  for  th/lle- 

paire  of  Capt.  OI.egge  &  Capt.  Birkhened  with  their 
C.ompanyes  to  Hooton-Houfe  in  Worrall,  &  to  take  the 
Charge  thereof,  &  of  the  Prouifion  there,  dat.  10 
Jtdy,  r645.  ' 

44.  Lift  of  Recufants  in  Walton  cum  Fazakerlev  j 
and  in  Weft  Darbye. 

2T2Q. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  feveral  particular  Tratts, 
k  may  Ioofc  Papers,  now  bound  or  otherwife  faftened 
togethe:-,  and  on  the  out-flde,  by  the  third  Randle 
Holme  thus  emituled,  “  Funerall-Orders,  &  Church- 
Monuments  which  I,  thinking  fomewhat  too  gene¬ 
ral  for  tins  Collettion  ;  fliall  deferibe  it  more  parti¬ 
cularly  ;  thus, 

r.  'Die  fame  Mr.  Holme’s  Catalogue  of  the  Tilings 
of  molt  Note  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Monuments  in  Churches,  i.  e.  a  Table  to  the 

Church-Notes  contained  in  this  Book:  as  alfo  referring 
to  the  Amies  formerly  obferved  in  Houfes.  1. 

3.  Alphabetical  Table  of  Families  Names,  whofe 
Armes  are  entred  into  this  Book. 

4.  1  he  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Meinorahdums  of 

things  to  be  provided  for  great  Funerals.  3.  b. 

5.  IlisSons  Rates  for  lunerall-Work.  a. 

6.  His  Rates,  compared  with  thofe  of  Mr.  Rooe  of 

Manchefter,  for  the  Funeral  of  Sir  Rafe  Afhton  of  Midle- 
ton  Bar?‘  .  3.  A.  b. 

7.  His  Bill,  for  what  he  furniflied  at  the  Funeral  of 

Sir  Richard  Lloyd  of  Effeffe.  3.  g 

8.  The  Order  of  Proceffion  to  that  Funeral,  as  it 

feemes.  ibid. 

9-  His  Note  of  what  he  provided  toward  Sir  George 
Warburions  Funerall.  3.  b.  b. 

10.  Memorandums,  or  Direttions  to  fome  yotmg 
Officer  employed  in  difpofing  matters,  in  order  to  a 
great  Funerall.  4,  b. 

'Hie 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


5I<5 


Num.  2129. 

11.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Rates  as  to  things 
furnifhed  by  him,  for  the  Funeral  of  a  Vifcount.  5. 

12.  His  Bill  of  Funerall  Achievements  for  Sir  Richard 

Grofvenor  Knight  8c  Baronet ;  who  deceafed  Anno, 
1645.  _  5.  b. 

13.  Things  requifite  at  the  Funerall  of  a  Vifcont,  or 

Baron.  6. 

14.  Jacob  Chaloners  Table  to  feveral  Matters  con¬ 
tained  in  part  of  this  Book.  6.  b. 

This  is  now  of  little  Ufe,  by  reafon  that  the  book 
Ls  much  enlarged,  and  the  running  number  of  Leaves 
alter’d. 

15.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Bill,  for  what  he 

furnifhed  at  the  Funeral  of  Sir  H.  Vernon.  6.  c. 

16.  The  Funerall  Worke  (done  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme}  for  the  Hon"c.  Sr.  George  Booth  K'.  &  Bar'.  7. 

17.  His  Bill,  dated  18  November,  1658.  for  the 
Funerall- Worke,  8c  other  Neceflaries  appertayninge, 
made  for  the  Hon"'.  Sir  William  Williams  of  Vinall 
in  the  County  of  Carnarvon  Baronet,  deceafed.  10.  b. 

18.  A  like  Bill  for  the  Lord  Bulkley.  1 1. 

ig.  1  he  third  Randle  Holme’s  Funerall-Note,  or 

Bill,  for  Sir  Thomas  Midleton  of  Chirke.  u.  A.  b. 

20.  Order  of  the  Proceflion  to  the  Funeral  of  Sir 

Roger  Mo  fly  n  Bar1.  11.  b. 

21.  Order  of  the  Proceflion  to  the  Funerall  of  Co¬ 
lonel  1  Robinfon  of  Gwerfilr.  u.  B.  b. 

Now  comes  a  fmail  Trad  in  4^.  wherein  I  find, 

7.2.  Ihe  Number  of  Mxirners  at  Funeralls-,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  Degree  &  Eftate  of  the  Defunft.  1 2.  et.  25.  b. 

23.  ’1  he  Order  &  Manner  of  Apparell  for  Greate 

Fflates  of  Women,  in  tyme  of  Mourninge ;  made  by 
Margaret  Counteffe  of  Richmound,  mother  to  King 
Henry  vii.  in  the  8th  ycare  of  his  Raygne.  ibid. 

24.  Ihe  Proceedinges  to  the  Funerall  of  a  greate  Ef¬ 
tate.  14. 

25.  The  Procedinge  on  Horfe-back.  14.  b. 

26.  How  the  Hearfe  of  a  Marquis  is  to  be  made  & 

furnifhed.  15.  &  16. 

27.  The  Manner  of  Offering  at  a  great  Funerall. 

15.  b. 

28.  Of  the  Slopp,  Sur-cote,  8c  Trayne  ;  ufed  by 

Women  at  Funerafls.  16. 

29.  1'he  Ordinaunces,  Statutes,  8c  Rules  made  by 
John  Lord  Tiptoft,  Earle  of  Worcefler,  and  Ciinftable 
of  England,  by  the  Kinges  Commandment,  at  Windfor, 
the  29th  day  or  May,  anno  6  Edwardi  iv.  to  be  ob- 
ferued  8c  kepte  in  all  manner  of  Jufles-Royall  within 
this  Realme  oi  England.  Referuing  allwayes  to  the 
Oueene,  8c  to  the  Ladyes  prefent,  the  Attribution  and 
Gift  of  the  Prize,  after  the  manner  8c  forme  accuftomed. 

16.  b. 

30.  The  Sizes  of  Banners,  Standards,  Penons,  Guid- 

homes.  Pincels,  8c  Stremers.  17.  b. 

3 1  •  1  he  Office  and  Authoritie  of  a  Kinge  of  Armes 
in  his  Province.  ig, 

32.  Fees  due  to  the  Officers  of  Armes,  at  the  fune¬ 
rall  of  a  Knight.  2o.  b. 

33.  Armes  8c  Quartet ings  of  .  ....  haftily  tricked. 

21. 

Now  followes  another  Heraldical  Tradl  in  folio, 
wherein  fome  papers  are  inlerted.  Here  I  find, 

34-  The  Affile  of  Armes;  i.  e.  of  Standards,  Gui¬ 
dons,  Banners,  8c  Flaggs  or  Streamers.  22. 

35-  Chardges  or  ordinarye  Prifes  of  Standards, 

Targes,  Manteletts,  Heade-peces,  8cc.  ibid. 

36.  Degrees  of  Place  for  Men  8c  Women  of  Nobilittie. 

22.  b. 

37.  Ihe  Order  of  goeinge  to  the  Parlament.  ibid, 
(this,  as  in  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth) 

38.  The  Order  ofBatrell.  24. 

39.  Proceflion  of  the  Creating  Edward  Seymour  Earl 
of  Hertford,  Duke  of  Somerfet,  by  K.  Edward  vi. 

24.  b. 


Num.  2129. 

40.  Of  the  Clothe  of  Eftate,  &  other  Ceremonies  of 

Appurtenances  of  Honor,  for  Noblemen.  ibid. 

41.  ihe  Order  of  the  Obfeque  of  Sir  William  Gar- 

ratt  Knight,  late  (viz.  A.  D.  1555.)  Lord  Maior  ofLon- 
don-  25. 

(He  deceafed  27  September,  1571,  and  was  buried 
in  the  Church  of  St.  Magnus) 

42.  The  Order  of  Proceedings  to  (and  Offringe  in) 
the  Churche,  at  the  enterrement  of  an  Efquier.  25.  b. 

43-  Bartons  belonginge  to  Ranulphe  Erie  of  Chefter, 
temp.  R.  Henrici  u._  26.  b.  et  30.  b. 

44.  The  Antiquitie  of  certaine  Caftelles,  Abbeyes, 
Conduits,  Sc  fuche  like  auncyent  8:  commendable  Struc¬ 
tures  in  England,  with  other  thinges  of  Memorye  ;  ga¬ 
thered  out  of  certaine  Englifhe  Chronicles,  publifhed  by 
Grafton,  Stowe,  &c.  jbij. 

In  this  Traci  are  many  grofs  blunders,  the  Writer 
making  a  diftindion  of  his  Years  (no  matter  to  me,  whe¬ 
ther  right  or  wrong)  that  is,  into  thofe  «  before  Chrift,’ 
and  thofe  ‘after  Chrift  ;  ’  and  being  un-wary,  as  well  as 
ignorant,  has  made  wretched  Work. 
r  45.  Defcent  of  Qu  Elizabeth  from  Owen  Tuther  Sc 
Katherine  Widow  to  K.  Henty  v.  30.  b. 

46.  Nomina  Regutli  Anglie,  a  S'".  Edouardo,  ufque 
ad  fereniffimam  noltram  Reginam  Elizabetham.  3 1 . 

47.  Medfons  for  Horfes.  3 1  •  b. 

48.  The  Order  of  Funeralls,  for  a  Baron,  a  Knight* 

8c  an  Efq;  "with  Defcriptions  of  their  feveral  Hearfes  ;  as 
alfo  of  that  for  a  Vifcount.  o2. 

49.  An  Epitaphe  (or  Elegie)  upon  the  Deathe  of  the 
right  Honorable  Edward  Stanley  Earle  of  Derbie,  See. 

50.  Th’ Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Henry  Stanley  Earl 

of  Derby  ;  the  4th  of  December  1572.  36. 

5'-  'l  he  falfe  Charter  of  K.  William  the  Conqueror, 
to  Panlen  Loydon  ;  faid  to  have  been  founde  amongeft 
the  Recordes  of  the  Towre  ;  8c  to  have  been  delyveryd 
by  Thomas  Yale,  Efquire.  off.  b. 

52.  Defcription  of  the  Hearfe  for  an  Earle  or  Coun- 

te^e‘  .37. 

This  is  by  the  third  Randle  Holme ;  as  are  thofe 
abovementioned  at  NJ  48. 

53.  Sketch  of  the  Biiftiopof  Winchefters Hearfe,  being 

Prelate  of  the  Garter.  b. 

54.  The  fame  Mr.  Holme’s  Sketch  or  Trick  of  the 

Hearfe  of  George  Lord  Booth  Baron  de  la  Mare,  as  fett 
up  in  Bowdon-Church,  Aug.  1684.  38.  A. 

Here  is  likewife  Mr.  Holmes  Bills  for  the  things  he 
furnifhed  upon  that  occafion. 

55-  Kinge  James  his  Hearfe,  as  it  was  fet-up  in  Weft- 
minfter-Abbey.  ^9. 

This  is  a  Print,  and  fomewhat  damaged. 

56.  Sketch  of  the  Hearfe  fett  up  in  Sr.  Paules  Cathe¬ 

dral,  for  Sir  Chriftopher  Hatton  Lord  Juftite  (leg.  Chan¬ 
cellor  of  England)  39.  ’0_ 

57.  The  fame  Mr.  Holmes  trick  of  the  Hearfe  fett  tip 

for  the  Lord  Bulkclc-y  Vifcount  Cafhall  in  Ireland,  aiio 
*688.  40.  b. 

58.  His  Trick  of  the  Armes  of  Henthllvn,  in  Com. 

Pembrock.  jtjj^ 

59.  The  folemnity  ofOliuer  Cromwell  the  Lord  Pro¬ 
testors  Funeral,  23  November  165  .  .  40.  A. 

This  is  an  imperfect  printed  Newfpaper. 

60.  The  order  for  the  Funerall  of  Edward  Erll  of 

Darby.  4j. 

The  fecond  Randle  Holme  hath  noted,  that  this  is  of 
the  hand-writing  of  Sir  William  Dethick,  A.  D.  1572,  he 
being  then  Yorke-herald. 

61.  Defendants  from  Sir  Robert  Holland  Knight; 
fett  down  narratively  by  Sir  William  Dethick.  41.  b. 

62.  Project  for  a  book  containing  a  Defcription  of  the 

County  of  Derby,  as  it  feems.  41.  c. 

63.  Order  of  the  funeral  of  Mr.  John  Offley ;  who 

dyed  the  6th  of  September  1688.  ’41.  d. 

64.  Arm-’" 


Bibliothecae 


N'uml  2129. 

6 _> .  Anncs  of  Davenport,  in  the  Howfc  of  Rich.PooIe 
fomtyme  Maior  of  Chefler.  4  2- 

6;.  Notes  taken  by  Thomas  Chaloner,  A.  D.  1592. 
in  the  Parilh-Church  of  Lymme,  in  Com.  Cellr.  42. 

Thefe  are  copied  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme. 
After  which,  follows  a  tra£l  written  by  the  fecond  Randle 
llohne,  (into  which  many  Papers  have  been  inlerted  by 
the  third  &  fourth  Randles)  to  which  he  hath  prefixed 
this  generall  Title,  “The  order  of  the  Funeralls  of  diners 
perfons  in  Chefhier,  Lancafhier,  &  North-Wales,”  by  the 
lirft  “  Randle  Holme  of  Chefler  Deputy  to  the  Office  of 
Aimes,  and  his  fonne  Randle  Holme  junior.”  Herein 
I  find. 

66.  The  order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  John  Savage  Kt. 
Lciftenant  of  the  Cottniy  5c  Citty  ol  Chefler  ;  who 
was  buried  at  Macclcsfeild  the  24  of  January  1 597. 

42.  b. 

67.  The  Funerall  of  Sir  Robert  I.eicefler  ofTabley, 

Baronett  (inferted  asaforefaid)  44.  A. 

68.  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  Sir  Thomas  Egerton, 
fonne  Sc  heyre  to  the  Lord  Chancellor  ;  who  was  buried 
in  Dodleflon-Church.  His  funeral  was  folemnized  in 
the  Cathedral  Church  of  Chefler  the  26  of  September 
1599,  and  his  funeral  Dinner  kept  in  the  Bufhops  pallas. 

44. 

69.  Lift  of  the  Mourners  at  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Hugh 

Cholmley  of  Cholmley,  19  Aug.  160 1.  ibid. 

70.  The  order  of  the  Funerall  of  Tho.  Venables  Baron 

ofKinderton,  in  Deer.  1603.  44.  b. 

71.  The  order  of  the  Funerall  of  John  Conway  F.fq; 

ofPotrithan.  ibid. 

72.  The  order  of  the  Funerall  of  Hugh  Beflon  of 

Beflon  Efq;  buried  in  May  1608;  45. 

73.  The  order  of  the  Funerall  of  the  Lady  Euers. 

ibid. 

74.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Roger  Bradfhaw  of 

Hay,  Baronet.  45-  A  (inferted) 

75.  The  order  of  the  Funerall  of  Tho.  Wilbrarn  of 

Woodhey  F.fq;  buried  in  July  1610.  46. 

76.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Dame  Elizabeth,  Wife 
to  Sir  Thomas  Houlcroft  of  Vale-royal  ;  in  Febr.  161 1. 

146.  b. 

77.  The  Hatchments  vfed  for  Sir  John  Salifbury,  at  his 
Funerall,  in  July  1612.  ibid. 

78.  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  Sir  Richard  Grofvenor 

Bart.  46.  A.  b.  (inferted) 

79.  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  Sir  Robert  Williams  of 

Pentryn,  6  December  16S0.  46.  B. (inferted) 

80.  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  Sir  Thomas  Midleton  of 

Chirke.  46.  C.  (inferted} 

81.  Order  of  the  funeral  of  Elinor  Byron  Baronefte 
of  Rochell ;  who  dyed  in  Chefler  anno  1663. 

47.  (inferted) 

82.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Roger  Puleilon  ofEmrall 

Efq;  whodeceaftd  13  July.  1667.  47.  b.  (inferted) 

83.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Rafe  Afhton  of  Mid¬ 
dleton,  Knight  &  Bart.  47-  c.  (inferted) 

84.  The  order  (appointed)  for  the  funerall  of  Sir 

George  Booth  Bart.  4S.  (inferted) 

(This  was  A.  D.  1652.) 

85.  Part  of  a  Defcent  of  Andrew.  52. 

86.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Richard  Parry  of  Kiom 

Efq;  buried  in  July  1649.  52.  b. 

87.  Order  of  Mrs.  Warburton  of  Alley’s  Funerall  ; 

in  Auguft  1650.  ibid. 

88.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  John  Williams  Arch-bi- 

lhopp  of  Yorke;  buried  at  Llanygay-Church  .... 
1650.  ibid. 

89.  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  Sir  William  Williams  of 

Vinal,  Baronet :  Nov.  1658.  53.  (inferted) 

go.  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  Sir  Randle  Mainwaringe 
of  Pever,  Knight;  in  May  1612.  54. 

91.  Order  &  Mourners  at  the  Funerall  of  David 
Holland  of  Kinnralce,  Efq;  buried  in  January  1616.  ibid. 

Cat.  Harb.  Vol.  II. 


Harleianae.  5 1 7 


Num.  21  29. 

92.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Roger  Pulcfton  of 
Emrall ;  in  December  1 61 8.  54.  b. 

93  Order  for  the  Funerall  of  a  T.ord  or  Earle  (inferted) 

54.  A. 

94.  Order  for  the  Lord  Delamare’s  Funerall,  as  let 

out  by  Mr.  Laud  a  painter  in  London.  54.  A.  b. 

95.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Mr.  John  Sparke ;  in 

December  1637.  54. 

96.  Order  of  the  Funeral!  of  Mr.  John  Sparkes  Wife  ; 

in  A.D.  1639.  ibid.. 

97.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Mrs.  F.lianor  Wile  to 

Tho.  Thropp  Alderman  :  in  Auguft  1639.  ibid. 

9S.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Edward  Stanley  <>l 
Bickerftaft'Bart.  in  May  1640.  ibid. 

99.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Mrs.  Harper  Wife  to 
Henry  Harper  Attorney  ;  in  Auguft  164?.  ‘  ibid. 

100.  Order  ol  the  Funerall  of  Chriftian  the  Wife  of  Mr. 
Francis  Gamull  Alderman  of  Chefler.  A.D.  1640.  45.  b. 

101 .  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Katherine,  Wife  to  Mr. 
John  Wyrdon  Attorney;  in  December,  1642.  ibid. 

102.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Alderman  William  Ga- 

mul ;  in  April  1643.  ibid. 

103.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Henry  Bunbury, 

A.D.  1687.  (inferted)  55.  A. 

104.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Richard  Lloyd  of" 

Efles.  (inferted)  55.  b. 

1 05. .  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Richard  Bulkeley  of 
Beaumaris;  in  June  1621.  56. 

106.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Rich. Parry  Bifliop  of 

St.  Afaph,  in  September  1623.  56.  b. 

107.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Thomas  Hanmer  of 

Fenns  Efq;  in  February  1624.  ibid. 

108.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Aldermen  William  AI- 

derfey,  in  Auguft  i  625.  ibid. 

109.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  William,  fonne  to  Sir 

George  Booth  of  Durham,  in  April  1636.  57. 

no.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  the  Lady  Brereton, 
Wife  to  Sir  William  Brereton  Bart,  in  A.  D.  1 636.  ibid. 

hi.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  John  Lloyd  of  Yale  F.fq; 
in  April  1637.  '  57.  b. 

112.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  the  Lady  Booth, 
Wife  to  Sir  George  Booth  Knight  5c  Bart.  A.D.  1638. 

ibid. 

1 1 3.  An  Admonytion  to  futche  as  fantazey  the  ftudeye 

of  Antyquetyes.  ibid. 

'1  his  is  only  the  Exordium  of  a  Diftuafive  written  by 
Mr.  Sampfon  Erdefwike,  as  the  3d  Randle  Holme  will 
have  it  fol.  59.  b. 

114.  Order  of  Sir  John  Carters  Funerall. 

57.  A.  b.  (inferted) 

115.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  William  Allen  Maior 

of  Chefter  ;  in  Decemb-r  1631.  58. 

ii  6.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Henry  Salifbury 
Bart,  in  Auguft  1 632.  ibid. 

1 1 7.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Mrs.  Whittingham  of 

Midlewich  ;  in  Sept.  1632.  ibid. 

1 18.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  the  Lady  Bufhel,  Wife 

to  Thomas  Venables  Baron  ofKinderton.  ibid. 

1 19.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  the  Lady  Afton,  A.  D. 

1635.  58.  b. 

120.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Mr.  William  Fii  ton  of 

Carden:  in  July  1636.  ibid. 

1 2 1 .  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Peter  Leigh  of  Lime 

who  died  17  Febr.  1635.  39. 

122.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Edward  Whitby  Recor¬ 
der  of  Chefter  ;  in  Aprill  16^9.  ibid. 

123.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Tho.  Jrland  of  Bewfey 

Efq;  in  January  1638.  ibid. 

124.  The  Contents  of  Mr.  Sampfon  Erdefwicks  Per¬ 
ambulation  of  Stafford-fhire.  .  9.  b. 

I  doubt  much  whether  this  be  of  Mr.  Erdelwikes 
hand  ;  and  the  thing  itfelf  feems  to  be  a  projedl  for  the 
Hiftory  &  Antiquities  of  fome  other  County  ;  perhaps 
Eflex, 

6CL 


125.  The 


5*8 


Catalogus  Librorum 


MSS. 


Mum,  2129. 

125.  The  order  of  the  Funerall  of  Edward  Stanley 
Earle  of  Derby,  buried  at  Ormeikirke,  4  Deer.  1572. 

59.  A.  (inferted) 

126.  The  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  Sir  William  Stanley, 

who  died  anno  15  .  .  .  59.  C.  b.  (inferted.) 

127.  The  order  of  a  Knights  Funerall,  fett  forth  by 

Norroy  King  of  Armes.  59.  E.  (inferted) 

128.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church,  &  Manor-houfe 

of  Holdenby,  in  Com.  Northampt.  A.  D.  1572.  60. 

129.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Thomas  Moftyn, 

who  died  before  his  father,  A.D.  1641.  6c.  b. 

130.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Sir  Roger  Moftyn  in 

Aug.  anno  1642.  ibid. 

1 3 1.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  the  Lady  Leigh,  Wife 

to  Sir  Peter  Leigh  of  Lime,  Knight.  A.  D.  1639.  61. 

132.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  the  Wifeof  Tho.  Irland 

Efq;  in  February  1639.  ibid. 

133.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Mr.  Ch.  Bleafe’s  fecond 

Wife,  in  June  1647.  ibid. 

1 34.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  the  Lady  Brookes,  A  D 

1 6S°-  ibid. 

135.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  St.Giles  in  the 

Feildesnyghe  London  :  anno  1573.  61.  b. 

Ihen  follow  fome  Notes  (as  there  are  feveral  others 
in  this  book)  written  by  that  hand  which  the  third  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme  took  to  be  Mr.  Erdfwikes,  and  of  which  I 
have  feen  much  heretofore.  They  relate  to 

ij6.  Defendants  from  Malcolyne  (re&ius  Malcolm) 
King  of  Scotts.  ibid. 

!3 7-  That  Sir  George  Calvelegh  of  Lee,  had  many 
auncyent  Bookes  of  Armes.  ibid. 

138.  Defcent  ofWarburton,  putt  down  narratively. 

„  62. 

139.  Sir  Chnftofer  Hatton’s  quartered  Coats,  in  bla- 

fon*  '  63. 

140.  The  Pedegree  of  Mr,  John  Warburton  of  Ander- 
ton  :  fett  down  narratively. 

But  to  return,  I  find  yet 

1 4 1.  The  order  of  Funerall  for  Mrs.  Alice  Whit¬ 
by,  mother  to  Sir  Francis  Gainul ;  who  died  A.  D.  1640. 

62.  b. 

142.  Order  of  Funerall  for  Sir  John  Conway  of  Poltri- 

than  ;  in  Auguft  1640.  ibid. 

143-  1  he  Order  of  Funerall  for  Sir  Thomas  Brereton 
of  Owfacre  Kt.  in  June  1643.  5^ 

1 1.4“  Order  of  the  F  unerall  of  Sir  Hugh  Calveley  Kt.  in 
April  1648.  6  J  g3 

145.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parlour  at  Lea-hall  (Mr. 

Houghton’s  houfe)  in  Lancafliire.  65.  (inferted) 

146.  Armes  in  blafon,  as  quartered  by  Farington  de 

Wyrdon  &  de  Little-wood  in  Com.  Lancaftr.  Armig.  et 
Contra-rotulator  Com.  DerbitE,  A.  D.  1 589.  64. 

147.  Armes  in  blafon,  quartered  by  Olbaldefton  of 

Olbaldefton  in  Com  Lancaft.  65.  b. 

143.  Notes  taken  in  Winwicke-Church,  in  Com.  Lan- 

ca^r*  ibid. 

149.  Notes  taken  in  Manchelter-Church,  by  the  third 

Randle  Holme.  66.  (inferted) 

150.  Defcents  of  Millington,  &  Birkenhead,  loofe. 

66.  c. 

1 5 1.  Notes  taken  at  Prefcott-Church,  in  Com.  Lan- 

catr'  .  67.  (inferted) 

152.  Notes  relating  to  the  family  of  Birkenhead : 

from  Harlow  Church  in  Com.  Eflex,  &c.  ibid. 

I53 •  Notes  taken  in  Hale-Church,  in  Com.  Lancaftr. 
xt  ,  .  ,  67.  b.  (inferted) 

154.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Wygan  in  Com 
Llnc;1,lr'T  ,  .  63.  (inferted)  * 

I55-  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Fameworthe  (a 
Chapel  1  to  Prefcott)  in  Com.  Lancaftr.  68.  b. 

156.  Notes  taken  in  the  Churche  at  Bewmares.  70. 

xt  1  .  (inferted) 

157.  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Thornton  en  le 

Moores,  in  Com.  Ceftr.  jbjd. 


Num.  2129. 


15S.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parilh-Church  of  the  Whit, 
church  in  Com.  Salop.  70  b 

159.  Notes  taken  in  the  cheff  Pariihe-Church  of  Co- 

Ven«ey\T  ,  ibid. 

160.  Notes  taken  at  the  Parilhe-Churche  of  Tam. 

woorth,  A.D.  1590.  rjl 

1 61 .  Notes  taken  at  Lechfeld.  ibid." 

162.  Notes  taken  at  Hoult  in  Com.  Denbighe.  71  b 

163.  Notes  taken  in  the  Parith-Church  ofPretton  in 

Com.  Lancaftr.  7a.  (inferted) 

164.  Notes  taken  at  Warington  Church.  77 

165.  Notes  taken  in  Eccleiia  de  Derefburie  in  Com. 

Celtne.  72b 

166.  Notes  taken  in  Ecclefia  de  Frodfliam  in  Com 

Celtne.  ibid 

167.  Notes  taken  at  Alberburie  in  Com.  Salop. 

ro  xt  ,  75-  'inferted) 

168.  Notes  taken  in  Denbighe-Parilh-Church,  or 

Whuchurch.  ’g 

169.  Note  taken  in  Pottvarry-Church.  ibid" 

170.  Notes  taken  in  the  en  leFreers  in  Denbigh  upon 

Alton.  0 

1;  1.  Notes  taken  in  Heltllan  in  Com.  Denbich  7  An. 
gufti,  1591.  ' 

172.  Notes  taken  at  Tervyn  in  Com.  Ceftr.  ibid 

173.  Notes  taken  in  Whitford-Church  in  Com.  Flyn’t 

by  the  third  Randle  Holme.  77 .  (inferted)  ’ 

1 74.  Notes  taken  in  Fccles-Church,  by  the  fame  tin 

feted)  ■  '  - 

175  Notes  taken  in  Farneworth  Chappie,  within  the 
lanlh  Church  of  Prefcote,  A.D.  1635.  written  by  the 
fame.  1 

176.  Notes  taken  in  Wimborne-Minfter-Church  in 

Dorfetlhire.  .  79.  b.  (inferted) 

177.  Notes  taken  m  Much-Waltham-Church.  ibid 

178.  Notes  taken  by  the  third  Randle  Holme  in  the 
Church  of  Blew-morris,  (leg.  Beaumaris.)  80.  (inferted) 

179.  Notes  taken  by  the  fame  in  Wrexham-Church. 

r,  xt  ,  .  ,,  ,,  82.  (inferted) 

180.  Notes  taken  in  Mould-Church.  82  b 

18  1  Notes  taken  in  St.  Talkmans  (leg.  Alkmunds) 

Church  m  Salop  83.  (inferted) 

182.  Notes  taken  in . in  Com.  Salop  84. 

o  xt  ,  .  „  ,  (inferted) 

183.  Notes  taken  m  Ecclefia  Ouintonia,  in  Com 

GITell£  ,  •  r  84.  b.  (inferted)' 

184.  Notes  relating  to  the  family  ofHeydon. 

o  xT  ^  ,  -  ,  .  .,85-  (inferred)  et  8c.  b. 

1 85.  Notes  relating  to  the  family  of  Borne,  &c.  8^.  b. 

186.  Notes  relating  to  the  family  of  Tymperley. 

187  Notes  relating  to  the  families  ot  Whetcombed& 

S  ,  86.  (inferted) 

1 88.  Armes  m  blafon  of  the  Univerfity  of  Oxford 
the  feveral  Colleges  thereof,  &  their  Founders  &  Bene’ 
faftors  j  fett  down  by  the  third  Randle  Holme. 

1 89.  Armes  in  blafon  of  the  Univerfity  of  Cambridge 
and  of  the  Colleges  therein ;  by  the  fame.  99.  b.  (m- 

rpt  ,  ..  ferted)  etvid/112.  b. 

Ihen  lollow, 

190.  Jacob  Chaloners  Alphabetical  Lift  of  the  feveral 

Townes  in  Cheftlire,  with  the  names  of  the  Hundreds 
they  belong  to.  ^  lor.  (inferted) 

1 91.  Armes  of  the  German  Eledtors,  tricked  bv  the 

third  Randle  Holme.  ,  c6.  (inferted) 

192.  Notes  relating  to  feveral  who  fuffered  for  the 
Caufe  of  K.  Charles  1.  &  Charles  ir.  1 10.  b.  &  d. 

193.  Lift  of  the  Prote&ors  firft  Council.  1 10.  c! 

194.  Sir  William  Dugdales  Certificate  that  the  Armes 

of  Robert  Bennet  of  Ghefter  were  entred  into  the  Vifi- 
tation-book  of  that  County  A.D.  1664.  (This  is  by  his 
own  hand.)  <10.'d. 

*T  19 5-  The 


- 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


5  r9 


Num.  2 1  2g . 

195.  The  Style  of  Francis  Count  d’Oftervant,  made 
'Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  A.  D.  1447- 

no.  e.  (inferted) 

196.  The  3  Kinges  of  Cullens  Coats.  1 1 2.  b. 

197.  The  Amies  of  Jefus  the  Savior  of  all  Chriften 

beeleucrs  ;  devifed  (forfooth)  by  the  4  firft  Fathers  of  the 
Church  :  in  blafon.  ibid. 

1 98.  Trick  of  the  Armes  of  the  Earle  of  Lennox  &  the 

Countes  his  Wife,  as  allowed  by  the  Office  at  her  buryal 
A.  D~ni.  1 578.  at  Weftminlter.  ibid. 

199.  Armes,  in  blafon,  of  many  Cities,  Ports,  & 

Townes  of  England.  H4,&ii5.b. 

200.  Armes,  in  blafon,  of  many  Kings  &  Princes, 

efpecially  foreign.  115. 

201.  Armes,  in  blafon,  of  many  foreign  Kingdomes, 
Provinces,  &  Cities  ;  by  the  third  Randle  Holme.  1 1 6. 

&  1 18. 

202.  Armes,  in  blafon,  of  our  Engliffi  Biffiopricks. 

1  *7- 

203.  Notes  taken  in  Madeley-Church  in  Com.  Staf¬ 

ford,  anno  1581,  putt  down  by  the  third  Randle 
Holme.  1 1 8.  b. 

204.  Another,  taken  perhaps  by  the  fame  Mr.  Holme 

in  Wrynhill-Chapell.  ibid. 

Then  follows  a  little  Txadft  written  by  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme  containing 

205.  Notes  taken  in  Staffordffiire  by  William  Flower 
Norroy,  &  Robert  Glover  Somerfett,  A.  D.  1569.  119. 

206.  Notes  taken  in  Yorkffiier.  120.  b. 

207.  Notes  taken  in  Leicefterfhier.  121. 

208.  Notes  taken  by  the  fame  Gentlemen  at  their  Vi- 

fitation  of  Darbyfhire,  A.  D.  1569.  104. 

209.  Names  of  Gentlemen  in  the  feveral  Hundreds  of 
Derbylhire  ;  with  thofe  of  the  Ufurpers  of  Armes  ;  and 
of  them  who  were  declaimed  at  that  Vifitation.  127.  b. 

Here  is  inferted, 

2x0.  Tricks  of  fome  Tombs  and  Windows  in  the 
Churches  of  Drayton-Bafiet,  &  Sandon  in  Com.  Stafford 
taken  A.  D.  1 640,  by  another  hand.  129.  b. 

an.  Notes  of  Mr.  Auguftin  Vincent,  taken  in  Kent. 

130. 

212.  Notes  taken  in  Buckinghamfhier.  ibid. 

213.  Notes  taken  in  Hertfordffiier.  130.  b. 

214.  Notes  taken  in  Weftminlter.  130.  b. 

215.  Notes  taken  in  Worcefterfhier.  131. 

216.  Notes  taken  in  Cambridgefhier.  I3,-b. 

217.  Notes  taken  in  Nottinghamlhier.  ibid. 

218.  Notes  taken  in  Warwicklhier,  by  Mr.  Vincent, 

A.D.  1592.  >  132. 

219.  Notes  taken  in  Northamptonlhiie.  135. 

220.  Notes  taken  in  Rutlandshire.  139. 

221.  More  Notes  taken  in  Staffordlhier.  139.  b. 

222.  Notes  taken  in  Salley-Church  in  Com.  Derby  : 

relating  to  the  Family  of  Bothe.  140. 

223.  Notes  relating  to  Cudworth  ;  taken  from  the 
Church  and  Regifter  ofEaftfield  in  Com.Ebor.  140.  c. 

(Inferted) 

Next  comes, 

224.  Part  of  a  Pocket-Note-book,  (more  of  which 
I  have  feen  in  this,  and  fome  others  of  Holmes  MSS.) 
wherein  I  find  fome  Collections  from  Stowes  Annals,  and 

225.  Some  Notes  taken  in  Tattenhall-Church,  in 

Com.  Ceftr.  14 1.  i.  b. 

226.  Notes  taken  in  Norton-Chancell,  8  Auguft 

1684.  i4i.b. 

227.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Moyle  ;  taken 

by  the  third  Randle  Holme.  145.  A. 

228.  His  Notes  taken  in  Ruthyn-Church,  in  the 

County  of  Denbigh.  145. 

229.  His  Notes  taken  in  Corvaen-Church,  in  the 

County  of  Merioneth.  147. 

230.  Armes  in  Ruge-houfe,  in  the  fame  County,  ibid. 

231.  His  Notes  taken  in  Hope-Church,  in  Com. 

Flynt.  148. 


Num.  2129. 

232.  His  Notes  taken  in  Llanruft-Church.  (’tis  in  the 

County  of  Caenarvon.)  148.  A. 

233.  Part  of  a  Defcent  (ptyhaps  of  Wynne)  as  painted 

about  a  Room  in  the  Hall  of  Gwidder  in  the  fame 
County,  belonging  to  that  Family.  148.  C. 

234.  Notes  relating  to  Thomas  Powell  of  Hor- 
fley,  Efq;  and  to  Coll.  John  Robinfon  of  Gwerfitt. 

149.  A.  b. 

235.  Note  taken  by  thefame  Mr.  Holme,  in  Llangoth- 

len-Church  near  Chirk.  1 5 1 . 

236.  His  Notes  taken  in  Betteley  Church.  154.  A. 

237.  His  Notes  taken  in  Audley-Church  in  Com. 

Stafford.  ibid. 

238.  His  Notes  taken  in  Adderley-Church,  in  Com. 

Salop;  154.  A.  b. 

239.  His  Notes  taken  at  Chetwynd  in  Shropfhire. 

ibid. 

240.  His  Notes  taken  in  Chardley-Church.  in  Com. 

Lancaftr.  154.  B.b. 

241.  His  Notes  taken  from  the  Hall  of  Mr.  Yongeof 

Cayntons  houfe.  170. 

242.  His  Notes  taken  in  Edgmund-Church,  a  mile 

from  Newport  in  Com.  Salop.  1 70.  b. 

243.  His  Notes  taken  in  Wefton-Chappell  in  the 

County  of  Salop.  1  7 1 .  et  b. 

244.  His  Notes  taken  in  Rudgeley-Church,  in  the 

County  of  Stafford.  171.  b. 

245.  His  Notes  taken  in  Blithfield-Church,  in  the 

fame  County.  ibid. 

246.  His  Note  taken  in  Wolverhampton- Church,  in 

Com.  Stafford.  172. 

247.  His  Notes  taken  in  Snarefton-Church,  in  Com. 

Effex.  ibid. 

248.  His  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Bromley,  in 

Com.  Stafford.  172.  A. 

249.  His  Notes  taken  in  Newport-Church.  173. 

250.  His  Notes  taken  in  Sputty-Chapell,  in  the 

County  of  Denbigh.  173.  b. 

251.  His  Notes  taken  in  Wrixham-Church,  in 

Com.  Denbigh.  A.D.  1660.  ibid. 

252.  His  Notes  taken  in  Bangor-Church,  in  Com. 

Caernarvon,  anno  1650.  ibid. 

253.  His  Notes  taken  at  Holywell-Well  (alias  St. 

Winifreds  Well.)  175. 

254.  His  Notes  taken  at  Trevallin-Hall.  ibid. 

255.  His  Notes  taken  in  Weftbury-Church  in  Com. 

Wilfes.  1 75.  b. 

256.  His  Note  taken  in  St.  Afaph’s  Church.  1 7  5.  c. 

257.  His  Notes  taken  in  Whitchurch-church,  in  the 

County  of  Salop.  177. 

258. '  His  Notes  taken  in  Bradfield-Chapell  in  Com. 

Ebor.  _  178.  A. 

259.  His  Notes  taken  in  Muxton  or  Mucleton-Church 

in  the  County  of  Salop.  78. 

260.  His  Note  taken  in  Norton-Church,  in  the 

County  of  Salop.  ibid. 

261.  His  Notes  taken  in  Llandaguy-Church,  in  Caer- 

narvonffiire.  178.  b. 

262.  His  Notes  taken  in  Llanbider- Church,  by  Ru- 

thyn,  in  Com.  Denbigh.  ibid. 

263.  His  Notes  taken  in  Bathauerne-Parke-houfe. 

'79- 

264.  His  Notes  taken  in  Runcorne-Church,  in  Com. 

Ceftr.  180. 

265.  His  Notes  taken  in  Conway-Church,  ibid. 

26 6.  His  Notes  taken  in  the  Church  of  Grafton  in 

Com.  Northampton.  181. 

267.  Deicents,  put  down  narratively,  of  Brereton 
of  Brereton  ;  and  of  the  Family  of  Cotton.  A.  D.  1572. 

1 8 1 .  b. 

268.  The  fame  Randle  Holme’s  Notes  taken  in  Sef 

ton  Church,  in  Com.  Lancaftr.  182 

269.  Notes  taken  in  Warrington-Church,  by  the 

fecond  Randle  Holme,  A.  D.  1640.  184* 

270.  Notes 


t 'atalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


5-° 


Num.  2120,  2130. 

■270.  Notes  taken  in  the  fame  Church  by  the  Hand 
above  mentioned  at  No.  113.  184.  b. 

271.  Fragment  of  a  Dcfcription  of  the  Hundred  of 
Rocheford,  taken  in  the  Perambulation  of  Eflex.  (vid. 
iupra,  No.  174.)  !  85.  b. 

271.  Notes  taken  at  Leverpoole-Church,  in  the 
Countie  ofLancafter.  A.  I).  1590.  186. 

273.  Notes  taken  at  Namtwyeche-Churche,  by  the 

fame  Hand.  "  186.  b. 

274.  Notes  taken  in  Warington-Priory-Church  ; 
(difierent  from  thofe  before  mentioned  at  No.  269.) 

1 38.  8c  1 90. 

275.  Defcent  of  Bothe.  188.  b. 

276.  The  fecond  Randle  Holmes  Notes,  taken  in 
Farnwortb-Church  in  Com.  Cane.  27  Febr.  16 35.  1S9. 

277.  More  Notes  taken  in  Kydgeley-Church,  in  Com. 

Stafford.  x90, 

278.  Notes  taken  at  Colwyche-Church,  in  Com.  Ceftr. 

ibid. 

279.  Notes  taken  in  Lymme-Church,  in  Com.  Ceftr. 

A.  D.  1562.  ibid. 

280.  Notes  taken  in  the  Mynfter  at  Lichfi'ld.  190  b. 
One  of  them  (hewes  a  figure  of  Sir  George  Stanley, 

as  naked  to  his  Girdle  (perhaps,  becaufe  he  might  die 
during  the  time  of  Pennance  enjoined)  but  from  under 
his  fhort  Garment,  proceed  his  Thighs  and  Legs  armed; 
Spurs  at  his  Heels,  as  a  Knight,  &  a  Sword  by  his  fide. 

Now  follows  another  Heraldical  Treatife  written  by 
a  different  Hand,  and  containing, 

281.  Amies  in  Blafon  borne  by  divers  Noblemen  of 


the  NameofHoIand. 


191. 


X,  Li  111.  JL  l 


282.  Sir  George  Carewes  Scroule  of  Coates ;  col  It  died 

from  Churches  of  Devonfhire,  &c.  ibid. 

Thefe  are  in  Blafon  ;  and  the  Crofles  before  them 
fhew  that  they  have  been  entred,  from  hence,  into  tome 
other  book  :  the  hand  that  wrote  it,  by  fol.  219.  b.  &c 
220.  feeras  to  be  that  of  Thomas  Chaloner. 

283.  The  Armes  &  Howfes  of  the  Hollands,  with 

their  feverall  Differences,  according  as  they  remain  at 
thisday.  Anno  domini,  1388.  "  119  b. 

'1  his  is  done  by  Thomas  Chaloner  above-mentioned. 

284.  Armes,  with  Quarterings  of  Henfhawe  of  Hcn- 

fliawe-Hall ;  &  of  Smyth  of  Houghe  ;  both  in  Chefliire  : 
by  the  fame  hand.  220.  b. 

285.  A  Note  taken  from  Cunfton  or  Cunfdon,  within 

the  Bifhoprick  of  Durham  ;  putt  down  by  the  third  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme  2  2 1 

286.  Ills  Note  taken  in  Walton-Church,  in  Com.  j 

Leiceftr.  _  ibid.  j 

287.  His  Notes  taken  in  Benenden  in  Kent.  ?2i.  b.  { 

288.  His  Notes  taken  from  W ormefley- Abbey  in  Com. 

Hereford.  222 

289.  His  Note  taken  in  Frolfworth-Church  in  Com. 

Leiceftr.  222 

290.  His  Notes  taken  at  Holt,  or  the  Town  of  Lions, 

in  Com.  Denbigh.  222.  b. 

291.  His  Note  taken  at  Afhby-Folvyle  in  Com.  Lei- 

cc^r"  .  ibid. 

292.  His  Note  taken  at  Ighfield  in  Com.  Salop.  223. 

293-  Epitaph  of  William  Hooks  of  Conway,  Gent. 

who  was  the  41ft  Child  of  his  Father  ;  and  was  him- 
fell  the  Father  of  27  Children,  &died  the  2cth  of  March 

a  -nt  .  1637. 

294.  A  Note  concerning  Jane  Price  of  Dwyrud  in 
Meryonithfhirc,  who  deceafed  1  Auguft  1694  ;  who  had 
12  Chddren,  4 7  Grand  Children,  and  13  Great  Grand 
Children.  2J 

1  Ins  Paper ,  is  now  loofe,  as  are  fome  others  that 
follow  containing  fome  Epitaphs,  & c.  which  require  not 
to  be  particularly  mentioned. 

213O. 

A  Book  in  folio  confiding  of  feveral  particular  Trafts 

bound  up  together,  to  which  fome-body  has  prefixed 


this  general  Title.  “  18.  Julij  1645.  Com.  Ceftr. 
Macclcsfeild-Hundred.  This  Booke  is  a  Breviate  of 
luche  of  the  Delinquents  Names  and  real  Eftates  withirt 
the  fforefaid  Hundred,  as  are  (as  yett)  difeovered 
vnto  the  Committee  of  Sequeftrations  there.”  Bui 
this  feeming  to  me  to  be  too  fhort,  I  filial  1  endeavour 
to  give  a  more  latisfa&ory  account  of  it;  as  finding 
therein, 

1 .  A  Scedule  of  the  Names  of  the  feuerall  Delin¬ 
quents  within  Macclesfeild  Hundred,  whofe  Eftates  the 
Committee  Ids  Sequeftrations  iher  have  fequeftred.  2. 

2.  A  Bieviat  of  their  Eftats,  and  the  Tyme  when  they 

were  fequeftred.  '  2.  b. 

3.  A  Brief  of  fuch  Leafes  of  the  Farle  of  Darbies,  as 
h;ive  been  fliewed  to  vs  the  Commillioners  of  Maccles- 
feild-Hundred. 

4-  A  Brief  of  fuch  Leafes  of  Farle  of  Rivers  as  were 
fliewed  vnto  vs  the  fayd  Committee.  S. 

5  •'*  Brief  of  fuch  Leafes  of  Mr.  Maffies  in  Mottram, 
as  were  (hewed  to  vs  the  fayd  Committee.  1 

6.  A  Breif  of  Mr.  Afiiton’s  Leafes  in  the  faid  Parifli  of 
Mottram  ;  fliewed  to  vs  the  laid  Corami' tee.  16.  b. 

7.  A  Brief  of  luch  Leafes  of  Mr.  Davenports  Ten¬ 
nants  in  Wirneih,  as  were  fliewed  to  vs  the  fayd  Com- 

;  mittee.  ,  ^ 

|  8.  A  Brief  of  the  faid  Mr.  Davenports  Leafes  m 

j  Bradbury  and  Romely  ;  fliewed  to  vs  the  fayd  Com- 
j  In>ttee. 

|  9.  A  Brief  of  the  Leafes  of  the  Tenants  of  Edward 

Warren  of  Poynton,  Elq;  fhewed  to  vs  the  fayd  Com- 
1  mittee.  2 ; 

1  o.  A  Breif  of  Mr.  Warrens  Tenants  Leafles  in  Stock- 
1  port  ;  fhewed  to  us  the  fayd  Committee.  23. 

1  1.  Mr.  Warrens  Tenants  in  Ofterton  (which  lie 
bought  of  Mr.  Davenport)  their  feuerall  Leafes,  &c.  26. 

12.  A  Brief  of  fuch  Leafes  of  the  Tenants  of  Robert 

Stapleton,  Gent,  as  were  Ihewed  to  vs  the  fayd  Commit- 
tee.  zy. 

13.  A  Brief  of  fuch  Leafes  of  the  Tenants  of  Henry 

Leigh  of  High  Leigh,  Efq;  about  Taxall  ;  as  were 
fliewed  vnto  vs  the  fayd  Committee.  28. 

14.  A  Brief  of  Mr.  Shalcrofie  Tenants  Eftates  in 
Wayley,  &  thereabouts,  fliewed  to  vs  the  faid  Committee. 

29. 

t  5.  A  Brief  of  the  Coppie  hold  Leafles  made  by  Thomas 
Leigh  of  Adlington,  Efq;  deceafed.  29.  b. 

16.  A  Brief  of  certain  Leafes  of  fome  Tenants  of  Sir 
William  Maflies.  ,Q 

;  7-  A  Brief  of  fuch  Coppic-hoM  &  other  Lealis  of 
William  Short  Gent,  as  were  fihevved  to  vs  the  laid  Com¬ 
mittee.  ^  1 

t  iS.  A  Brief  of  fuch  Leafes  of  Roberte  Tatton  of 
"With  ins- ha  we  Efq;  as  were  fliewed  to  vs  the  faid  Com¬ 
mittee.  ^2. 

19.  A  Brief  of  fuch  Leafes  as  were  fliewed  vnto  vs 

the  fayd  Comittee,  by  the  Tenants  of  Sir  Edward  Fitton 
late  of  Gawfworth  deceafed.  37. 

20.  A11  Eftimate  of  the  Manour-Houfe  of  Pointon, 

with  the  Demeafne-lands  late  belonging  to  Edward  War¬ 
ren  Efq;  viewed  &  valued  by  vs  George  Newton  &c. 
Agents  to  the  Committee  of  Sequeftration.  41. 

21.  Valuation  of  the  Mannnr-hcufe  &  Demeafne- 

Lands  at  Loftoc,  heretofore  belonging  to  the  fayd  Ed¬ 
ward  Warren  ;  by  the  fame  Agents.  41.  b. 

22.  Eftimate  of  the  Perfonage-houfe  &  Clebe-Lands 
of  Stockport;  in  the  houlding  of  Edmund  Shalcrofie 
late  Reftor  there  :  valued  by  the  forefayd  Agents. 

42.  b. 

23.  Eftimate  of  the  Eftate  of  William  Shert  of  Difley 

Gent>  .  43. 

24.  Eftimate  of  the  Eftate  of  Dorothy  Shert  43.  b. 

25.  Eftimate  of  the  Eftate  of  Peter  Skelhornc  of 
Prefiburie. 

26.  Eftimate  of  Olliver  Hurft  his  Eftate  45. 

27.  Eiti- 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


521 


Num.  2130. 

27.  Eftimate  of  the  Eftate  ofTho.  Alcock  of  Deane 

Rowe.  45-  b* 

28.  Eftimate  of  the  Perfonage-houfe  of  Northerden, 

with  the  Lands  therevnto  belonging.  47- 

29.  A  Schedule  of  the  Manfion-houfe  Sc  Demeafne- 

lands  at  Henbury,  heretofore  belonging  to  William  Da¬ 
venport  Efq;  deceafed  ;  and  difpofed  of  by  Sir  1  homas 
MilwardKt.  formerly  Chief  Juftice  of  Chefter,  and  now 
a  knowne  Delinquent.  47*  k- 

30.  An  Eftimate  of  the  Eftate  of  William  Burges  of 

Macclesfeild.  49- 

31.  An  Eftimate  of  the  Demeafne-Lands  of  Gawl- 

Worth,  heretofore  belonging  to  Sir  Edward  l'ittonde- 
ceafed.  5°- 

32.  An  Eftimate  of  the  Demefnc-Lands  of  Peele,  late 

in  the  holding  of  Doflor  Nicholls.  5  1  • 

Thefe  Accompts  from  N°  20,  inclufive  ;  are  figned 
by  the  Commifiioners.  Then  follows, 

33.  The  Accompt  of  William  Barrett’s  Receipts  A 

Diiburfements,  from  the  4th  of  November  1643,  t0  t^15 
loth  of  July  1645,  he  being  a  Receiver  for  the  Sequef- 
trators.  52- 

34.  His  Accompt  of  the  Corne  found  at  Peeile  by  the 

faiil  Sequeftrators,  the  10th  of  September  1643,  after 
that  i  'octor  Nicholls  was  runn  away.  62. 

35.  His  Accompt  of  the  Oats  which  were  folde  from 

the  Demcafne  att  Peeile,  A.  D.  1644.  65.  b. 

’6.  His  Accompt  of  the  Moneys  received  for  Abbey- 
grafle.  Sc  Pafturing-graffe  at  Peeile,  in  the  yeare^M- 

37.  His  Accompt  of  Moneys  recciued  of  the  Earle  of 
Derbies  Rents.  68.  b- 

His  Receipts  from  the  Eftate  of  Mrs  Dauenport 
"of  Henbury  (As  alfo  from  the  Eftates  of  other  Delin- 
tts ). 

39.  John  Watts  his  Accompt  of  Toule-Corne  taken 
up  at  North  Eden  Millnes  fmee  the  26th  of  1'ebiuary, 
A.  D.  1613,  vntill  the  firft  of  March,  A.  D.  1646.  108. 
(This  includes  his  Diiburfements  alfo.J 

40.  Accompt  of  William  Barrett’s  Receipts  A  Difburfe- 

ments,  from  the  9th  of  November  1643.  to  the  24th  day 
of  Julie  1645.  _  121. 

This  Accompt  was  given  in  upon  Oath,  S:  is^figntd 
by  the  Connuiflioners. 

41.  Accounts  of  the  Receipts  8c  Diiburfements  of 

George  Newton,  &c.  Agents  to  the  Sequeftrators  for 
the  hundred  of  Maclesieeld  :  dated  the  iSth  of  July 
164  5.  _  .  l50- 

Thefe  were  likewife  delivered  in  upon  their  Oalhes, 
&  are  figned  by  the  Commifiioners. 

42.  Accompt  of  the  Receipts  8:  Diiburfements  of 

Humfrey  Hulme,  &c.  in  Winflow-I  arilh.  163. 

Thefe  were  received  upon  Oathe,  the  24th  of  July 
164.',  and  are  ligned  by  the  Commifiioners 

43.  Accompt  of  the  Receipts  8c  Diiburfements  of 

Hugh  Foden  Sc  other  Agents  for  the  Divifion  of  Prcft- 
burie  ;  deliuer’d  in  upon  Oath,  the  18th  of  July  1645. 
and  figned  by  the  Commifiioners.  172. 

44  Accompt  of  the  Receipts  8c  Diiburfements  of 
Richard  Button,  See.  from  the  Demeane  at  Withens- 
hawe  fince  Mr  Tattons  Houfe  was  taken  by  Aflault  by 
Colonell Duckenfeyld,  the  25th  of  February  164;.  185. 

This  was  received,  vpon  Oath,  24  July  <645.  and 
is  figned  by  the  Commiflioners. 

45.  John  Watts  his  Accompt  of  his  Receipts  Sc  Dif- 

burfements  from  Mr  Tattons  Cornc.  199. 

This  was  received,  vpon  Oath,  24  July  1645,  and 
is  figned  by  the  Commilliouers. 

46.  Edmund  Shelmerdyne  his  Accompt  of  Receipts 
Sc  Diiburfements,  for  the  Tylhes  belonging  to  the  Rec¬ 
tory  of  Northerden  :  received  by  the  Commiflioners 
vpon  Oath,  24  July  1645,  and  ligned  accordingly. 

47.  Thom.  Ryley  S:  Richard  Button’s  Accompt  of 
their  Receipts  &  Diiburfements  from  the  Tylhes  of  Nor- 

Cat.Harl.  Von.  II. 


Num.  2130, 2131. 

therden,  fince  Michaelmafs,  1644,  to  the  10th  of  July 
1645.  _  211. 

This  was  given  in,  upon  Oath,  24  July  1645,  an^ 
is  figned  by  the  Commiflioners. 

48.  Will.  Barretts  Accompt  of  Receipts,  Sc  Dilburfe- 
ments,  8cc.  from  the  24th  July  1645,  to  27  May  1647. 

2I3- 

This  was  deliver’d  in  to  the  Commiflioners,  vpon 
Oath,  who  figned  the  fame,  the  5th  of  April  1649. 

49.  A  Preferment  made  by  the  Church-Wardens,  &c. 

of  the  Parilh  of  Childwall,  the  30th  of  October  1635, 
according  to  the  Articles  ftt  forth  by  John  Bufhop  of 
Chefter.  (Imperfedt,  as  it  feemes)  292. 

C!l3f. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  feveral  hands ;  but  chiefly 
by  thofe  of  the  fecond  &  third  Randle  Holmes,  the 
laft  of  which  hath  on  the  outfide  bellowed  upon  it 
this  Title,  “  Deedcs  and  other  auntiante  Writtings  of 
feuerall  Familys  in  Chefhire.”  It  contains 

1 .  The  fame  Randles  Lift  of  the  Names  of  thofe  who 
owned  thefe  Deeds.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  His  Lift  of  the  Kings,  & c.  fome  of  whofe  Grants 
are  entred  into  this  Book.  ibid.  Then  follows  the  Col¬ 
lection  itfelf,  wherein  I  obferve, 

3.  Divifion  of  Mr  Edward  Whitbies  I.and  bought  of 

Robert  Vaudrey,  among  his  Sifter  Sc  his  Sifters  Children, 
by  order  of  the  Exchequer  of  Chefter.  3. 

4.  AbftraCts  of  Deeds  taken  out  of  the  Pedegree- 

of  Thornycroft  of  Thornycroft  in  Chelhire ,  anno 

1699.  5. 

5.  Notes  taken  out  of  Sir  George  Boothes  Deeds  & 

Roules,  by  Randle  Holme  Junior,  Alderman  of  Chefter, 
A.  D. 1653.  ii. 

6.  Copie  of  K.  Henry  vmths  Commiflion  (occafioncd 

by  the  Inroads  of  the  Scots)  to  George  Boothe  Efq;  au¬ 
thoring  him  to  niufter  all  the  able  men  in  Chelhire, 
except  Mariners  :  and  to  certify  the  Duke  of  Suffolk  his 
Lieutenant  Generali  in  the  North  how  many  Perfons 
furnifhed  with  Horfes  were  hable  t’occupie  a  Spere,  or  a 
Javelin  ;  how  many  were  Archers  ;  how  many  were 
liillmen,  and  how  many  principall  Men  might  be  picked 
out  of  the  whole  Number.  Yeven  the  loth  of  February 
in  the  34th  year  of  his  Raigne.  26.  b. 

7.  Copie  of  the  Letter  fent  by  Queene  Jane  Seymour  to 

the  fame  ;  Yeven  at  Hamptcn-Court,  the  12  of  Ofter. 
acquainting  him  that  She  was  deliucred  Sc  brought  to 
bed  of  a  Prince.  27. 

This  was  a  Circular  Letter  which  (lie  fent  through¬ 
out  the  Kingdom  ;  Sc  here  is  a  Trick  of  her  Signet. 

8.  The  Determination  made  anno  1  1  R.  Ilenrici  vn. 

by  ThomasStanlev  Erie  of  Darby  SrConftable  of  England, 
in  a  Caufe  of  Armes,  between  Sir  Thomas  Aslhc-ton  of 
Aslheton  Knight,  and  S'  Piers  a  Lygh.  ibid. 

9.  AbftiaCta  Cartarum  de  Sydeham  ;  ex  IJbro  Hen- 

rici  Lilley  Londinatis,  20  Junij  1625.  64.  b.  &  6c.  b. 

10.  Collectanea  qujedam  ex  lliftoria  Orderici  Vi- 

talis.  65. 

1  1 .  Notes  principally  relating  to  the  Family  of  Vernon, 
from  Mr.  Lilley  abovementioned,  Mr.  Roger  Dodfworth, 
See.  66. 

1  2.  Part  of  a  Difcent  of  Bothe.  67.  c. 

13.  A  larger  Difcent  of  Bothe,  by  the  fecond  Randle 

Holme.  68.  b. 

14.  Another ;  followed  by  many  Notes  illuftra’ing 
the  Genealogy  of  that  antient  Sc  honorable  Family.  70.  b. 

1 5.  AbftraCt  of  an  old  Deed  in  Cuftody  of  Mr.  Swe- 

tenham  of  Swetenham,  A.  D.  1663.  86. 

16.  Collettanea  ex  veteri  Libro  penes  Georgium  Booth 

Milit.  &  Baronettum.  ibid. 

In  thefe  Collections  many  Chelhire-Families  are 
mentioned. 

17.  AbftraCts  of  Deeds  penes  Henricum  Bunbury 

Arm.  A.  D.  1640.  90. 

6  R  18.  The 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


ii 


Num.  2131,  2  r  3  2 . 

if?.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Extra&s  from  old 
Deeds  ip  his  own  euftody,  A.  D.  1667.  100. 

Thefe  concern  many  Chcfliire-Families  ;  and  among 
them,  is 

19.  His  Abftraft  of  the  Frivy-Seal  fentby  K.  Charles  1. 

i  .:giit rates  of  Cl  idler,  for  the  I,oane  of  £  ioo. 

to  .  repaid  within  18  Months.  Given,  7  July,  anno 
Rcgni  2.  101. 

20.  Noate  of  th’enrollment  of  feuerall  Deeds  taken  & 

acki :Ovv:'-Jged,  which  are  ddiuered  to  Sir  George 
j'.  di  Kt.  &  Baronei t,  &  Cullos  Rotulorum  for  the 
C  ■  ’’  /  -tine  of  C.hefier,  by  Edward  Whitby  Efq; 
one  of  the  Executours  of  Robert  Whitby  late  Alderman 
of  the  C.ittieof  Chefler,  &  Cuflos  Rotulorum  of  the  faid 
Count’e  of  Chefter,  deceafed.  125. 

1  This  is  the  Original  figned  by  Sir  George  Booth, 
&  two  Witnefl’es.J 

2  j.  Ab  drafts  of  Deeds  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Ampfon 
of  Kilewich,  taken  in  April  1657,  by  the  fecond  Ran- 
.  1  .■  Ilolme  Alderman  of  Chefler,  and  Juftice  of  Peace. 


129. 

22.  H's  Abflra£ls of  fome  other  old  Deeds.  135. 

23.  Abflracls  of  other  Deeds  principally  relating  to 

the  Family  of  Biereton.  137. 

24.  Abltracls  of  Evidences  in  the  pofleflion  of  Sir 

Anku  M  :  wath.ge  Kt.  A.  D.  1574.  ibid. 

23.  Copies  or  Abfl rafts  of  Deeds  belonging  to  Mr. 
John  Warren  of  Pojnton  "Baron  of  Stockport,  A.  D. 

'377-  r  ,  .  I45*  b- 

t'V’g  -N  (e  are  fume,  taken  from  Originals  in 
the  poffefiion  of  othf  r  Perfons. 

20.  i  i,e  tl.irn  Randle  Holmes  Abflracls  of  Deeds, 
v  ’  J  !  :  1110:1  the  Fupeis  of  the  Sequeflrators  ; 

and  pm  ad  A.  D.  <C(>y.  132. 

Ampng  them,  I  find 

27.  Two  Original  Deeds,  written  upon  the  Leaves  of 
ft'is  lJoo!:,  &  .'timed  &ibaltd  in  due  forme,  A.  D.  16^2. 

.  being  f  Bu fine L  between  Walter  Lambart  &  the  fecond 
Randle  Holme.  197.  &  198. 

28.  Diploma  of  the  Univerfity  of  St.  Andrews,  which 
gave  the  Degree  of  Doftor  ofDivinity  (after  public  per- 

■  ell  Archdeacon  of 
Chiller,  f-  1  moily  Fellow  cf  St.  Johns  in  Cambridge, 
dat.  8  Julij,  16:0.  200.  b. 

Here  is  a  Trick  of  that  Univerfitics  Seal. 

from]  &Evi- 

e’er  on  er  the  I  miles  in  Gilden  Sutton,  bought 

aoS. 

3  '.  Original  Warrant  of  Thomas  Lord  Wentworth, 
Lord  Dcputye  of  Ireland,  to  the  Atturney  &  Sollicitor 
G'. :  '!.  for  drawing  up  a  Grant  to  William  Gilbert 
I  f-;  of  the  Office  of  Clearke  of  the  Councell  of  the 
Prouir.ce  cf  Connaght  ;  and  of  the  Office  of  Keeping  of 
t!-v  Mgr.vit  &  Rtc  -rds  of  the  faid  Prouince.  Giuen  at 


the  Callle  of  Dublin,  21  of  November,  1637.  204. 

Latlly.  come 

3».  Index  Virorum  :  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  thofe 
Pc:  for?  Names  who  are  mentioned  in  this  Book.  207. 

3  -  ■  Index  Lccorum  :  a  like  Table  of  the  Names  of 
Places. 


A  Bn-  in  folio  written  by  feveral  hands,  and  feme- 
what  Jamaged  ;  wherein  I  find, 

■■  A  Repertory  or  Table  of  the  Matters  contained  in 
the  following  rife.  At  the  begining. 

!  tel  ,  according  to  the 

I  radii  v  .1.  ,  (•  ..."  [ 

>  ¥ar7c“Er  !  -  >  Orders  ft  Remembrances, 

given  in  the  Dioccs  of  Norwich,  Uc.  after  the  primal 
Violation  of  the  Reverend  Father  in  God  Matthew 
Wren,  Lord  Bilhop  of  that  Sea,  A.  D.  1636.  *  j  J(. 

4*  Conftitutiones  Provinciates  Eboraceufium  Archfe- 

pifeoporum,  duobus  Libris.  j 

I  lie  TVaSaltis  in  line  truncatur.  ■ 


Num.  2133,^  :  i  '4 . 

2I33* 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio  written  by  divers  hands  ;  on 
whofe  out-fide  the  third  Randle  Holme  hath  written 
the  following  Title,  “  Maiors  of  Chefter,  and  other 
Affaires  which  fell  out  in  their  Yeares.”  But  I  find 
therein, 

1 .  His  Account  of  the  Thinges  of  mod  Note  in  this 
Booke  ;  taken,  anno  1668.  At  the  begining. 

2.  A  Collection  of  the  Maiors  who  haue  governed  this 
Cittie  of  Chefter. 

It  may  be  obferved  that  the  Colleftor  hath  prefix- 
ed  to  it,  many  Notes  relating  to  the  Scituation  &  De- 
feription  as  well  of  the  Shire,  as  of  the  Citie  ;  and  to  the 
Antiquitieof  the  Ciuie,  with  the  Priveledges  &  Grauntes 
to  the  fame,  both  from  the  Eries  thereof,  and  allfo  from 
the  Kinges  of  this  Real  me;  which  he  hath  borrowed 
from  Speeds  Chronicle;  the  Chronicle  of  Wales; 
Stowe’s  Chronicle ;  the  Collections  of  the  worthie  & 
grave  Citizen  Mr.  William  Alderfay  the  elder,  Mar- 
chant  ;  and  other  Authorities. 

The  Succeftion  of  Maiors  has  a  fhort  Preface  pre¬ 
fixed  by  the  faid  Handle  Holme;  and  begins  at  487. 
1  he  Method  obferved  by  the  Writer  all  along,  is  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  of  other  Books  of  this  kind?  He  di¬ 
vides  his  Work  into  Eight  parts,  and  putts  the  fame 
mto  as  many  Columns,  which  arc  wider  or  narrower, 
according  as  the  matter  required.  Into  the  firft,  he 
putts  the  Year  of  our  Lord;  the  fecond,  gives  the  fe¬ 
veral  Months  of  the  Year  ;  the  third,  fhewts  Eafter- 
Day  &  the  Dominicall  Letter ;  the  fourth,  the  Goul- 
den  Number  ;  the  fifth,  declares  the  Day  of  the 
Month  the  Kings  Ycare  began;  the  fixth,  offers  the 
current  Years  of  the  Kings  Raigne  ;  the  feventh,  re¬ 
members  you  of  the  Number  of  Years  pafll-d,  at  the 
Time  when  thefe  Annals  were  made  ;  be  the  eighth 
fumifheth  you  with  the  Names  of  the  Maiors  &  Sheriffes 
of  Chefter,  with  remarkable  Occurrences  happening 
there  &  elfevvhere,  from  A.  D.  1240,  to  A.  D.  1617,  in- 
clufive  ;  and  fo  byway  of  Continuation,  by  a  more ’un¬ 
able  hand,  to  A.  I).  1635. 

3.  Part  of  Mr.  Robert  Rogers’s  Coitions,  concern¬ 
ing  the  antient  State  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter.  53-. 

4.  The  abovementioned  Randle  Holme’s  Succeftion  of 
the  Maiors  &  Sheriffes  of  Chefter  from  A.  D.  1240,  to 
A.  D.  1509,  inclufive  :  with  References  to  his  Books, 
for  Proofs. 

He  obferves,  that  from  the  year  laft  mentioned,  mo'll 
of  the  like  Catalogues  agree,  and  are  true. 

21 34- 

a  Book  in  folio,  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  on  its 

back,  thusentituled,  “  Derbylhire,  &  other Pedegrees.” 

In  turning  it  over,  I  find, 

t  .  A  Pedegree  of  Fulnetby.  g0m 

2.  Pedegree  of  Catherall';  dated  A.  D.  1599.  q/ 

3.  percent  from  Bird  &  Bulkeley,  to  Catherall.  96. 

1  hen  comes,  by  another  hand, 

4.  1  he  Vifitation  of  the  Countie  ofDerbie,  made  bv 
William  l'lower  alias  Norroyc,  Kinge  of  Armes  of  tip 
I.aft,  Weft,  &  North  Parts  of  England,  beyond  the 
River  of  Irent;  in  the  Yeare  of  our  Lord  God  15C9. 

•  99. 

This  hath  but  few  Additions,  Continuations,  and 
Church  Notes. 

1  hen  follow,  by  different  hands, 

5.  Pedegree  of  Marfton  of  Affcott  in  Com.  Salop, 

with  fome  Proofs.  j  84.  a 

6.  Prceclaras  Familiae  de  Chaworth,  antiquiths  a  Ca- 
durcis  nuncupate,  vera  Delineatio  :  fumma  cum  Fide 
ac  Differentia,  ex  Chartis  antiquis  et  Mi  numentis  vetuftif- 
fimis  (vnde  Veritas  ipfa  poti'limum  eliii  fulet)  concinnata 
Lahore  et  Induftria  Willelmi  Flower  Armigeri,  alias 
Norroy  Regis  Armorum,  et  Robert!  Gloveri  alias  So- 
merfet  Heraldi  Armorum,  Anno  Salutis  1 581.  184.  b. 

7.  Stemma 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


523 


Num,  21 34,  2135. 

7.  Stemma  Familize  Londonienfiuiii,  de  Loundres, 

five  de  Londoni  js.  1  g  1 .  b. 

8.  Stemma  illuftris  Familize  de  la  Briewere,  quod 

Anglice  fonat  Of  the  Heath.  1  93.  b. 

9.  Stemma  Baronum  ab  Alfretonia,  et  Nortonia. 

194.  b. 

10.  Stemma  nobilium  Fquitum  quibus  cognomen 

Caltoft,  Lincolnienfis  Comitatus.  j  96.  b. 

11.  Stemma  Equitum  nobilium  cognominatorum  le 

Brette.  197.  b. 

12.  Stemma  Baronum  de  Drayton,  quibus  cocnomen 

Baffet-  _  198.  b. 

13.  Aylefburiorum  nobilium  Equitum  Stemma.  ■01. 

14.  Stemma  Familize  de  Kaynes.  202.  b. 

15.  Stemma  BaiTettorum  Baronum  a  Welledon  in  Co- 

mitatu  Northamptonize.  204.  b. 

16.  Stemma  nobilium  Ingenuorum  a  Pabenham. 

2° 7.  b. 

17.  Stemma  Engainorum  nobilillimorum  Baronum. 

T  ,  209. 

18.  Nobilis  et  antiqua  Profapia  clarorum  Equitum  ab 

Annefleia,  Notinghamenfis  Comitatus  Villa  cognomina¬ 
torum.  211  b 

19.  Nomenclature:  five  Denominationes  illorum  duo- 
decim  Armorum  five  Infigniorum  Gentilitiumhzereditario 
Jure  coalefcentium,  et  Majori  Scuto  five  complemento 
Armoriali  Georgij  Chaworth  de  Wyvcrton  in  Com. 
Nottingham.  Armigeri,  debito  Ordine  depictorum.  2 1 5. 

20.  Familiarum  ac  Stennnatum,  quo  quifque  Ordine 

inCadurcorum  profapiam,  Conjugum  copula  tranfinigra- 
runt,  vera  fuccinftaq;  Delineatio.  215.  b. 

21.  Extradts  from  Regifters,  old  Deeds,  &c.  proving 

the  Defcent  of  Chaworth  and  the  Families  allied  to  it ; 
befides  thofe  putt  down  with  their  feveral  Pedegrees 
abovementioned.  218. 

22.  Indentura  fatta  inter  Johannem  de  Medilton  & 

Aliciam  Uxorem  ejus  ex  parte  una,  et  Willelmuin  del 
More  et  Thomasiam  Uxorem  ejus  ex  parte  altera  :  fuper 
partitionc  hzefedita.tis  Petri  Maulcuerer  Militis,  et  Kate- 
rinze,  Patris  ac  Matris  earum  :  C.harta  Guilielmi  de  Mi- 
dilton  in  Querendal  et  Stokeld,  in  Com.  Ebor.  Armigeri, 
i2mo  die  Aprilis  1592.  230.  b. 

23.  Pedegree  of  Brooke  Lord  Cobham,  &c.  delivered 

to  George  Brooke  of  Afpall  in  Suffolk  Efq;  the  i6Febr. 
1592.  233. 

24.  Pedegree  of  Mildmay  as  it  was  made  from  auncient 

Evidences  for  Sir  Walter  Mildmay,  allowed  &  fubferibed 
by  George  Erie  of  Salope  Earle-Marlhall,  &  regiftred  & 
confirmed  by  Robert  Cooke  Efq;  Clarentieux,  a  principall 
Herrolde  &  Kinge  of  Armes,  See.  and  againe  confirmed 
Sc  fubferibed  by  the  fame  Clarencieux,  lor  Sir  Thomas 
Mildmay  of  Nowffiam  Knight.  2^9. 

25.  Pedegree  of  Lexington,  Everingharo,  Eaton, 

Roos,  &  Markham.  244.  b. 

a 6.  Stemma  Familize  de  Egerton.  246.!). 

27.  Another  Pedegree  of  Egerton,  feeming  to  be 

made  about  A.  D.  1604.  249.  b. 

28.  Defcent  of  Kemis.  251. 

29.  Pedegree  of  Morgan.  j  bid . 

30.  Tranfcripts  of  certain  old  Deeds,  from  the  Pede¬ 

gree  of  Mr.  John  Arundell  of  Trerife,  made  20  Aprill 
*607.  252. 

31.  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Pedegrees  entred  into 

this  Book.  257.  b. 

32.  A  like  Index  pointing  to  the  Coates  Sc  Crelte  here 

to  be  found.  259. 

2135- 

A  thin  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  a  Colleflion  of  Pa¬ 
pers,  as  well  Originals  as  Copies,  relating  princi¬ 
pally  to  the  public  Affairs  of  the  City  of  Chefter, 
before,  during,  &  after  the  Civil  Wars  ;  being  bound 
up  together  (but  not  in  the  exadteft  order)  by  the 
third  Randle  Holme  ;  who  at  the  beginning,  hath 


Num.  2135. 

prefixed  this  Title  to  the  whole,  “Seuerall  Letters  from 
the  Citty  of  Chefter,  Sc  from  the  Lords,  Gentry,  See. 
to  them  dureing  the  W'arrs  betwixt  the  King  &  Par¬ 
liament,  1641.  1642.  &c.”  They  are, 
i*  His  Majefties  Letter  to  the  Maior  &  Aldermen  of 
Chefter;  given,  at  Oxford,  7  November  1643,  being 
figned  by  His  Majefty,  &  counter-figned  bv  the  Lord 
George  Digbye.  At  the  beginning  without  a  Number. 

Hereby,  he  gave  them,  or  any  foure  or  more  of. 
them  (the  fecond  Randle  Holme  then  Maior  being  of 
the  Quorum)  full  Power  &  Authority,  from  time  to  time 
feafe  &  take  the  Lands  &  Hereditaments,  as  alfo  the 
Goods  &  Chattells  of  Sir  William  Brcreton  &  William 
Jolly,  and  all  others  in  adtuall  Re',  ellion  againft  him,  or 
ad  herring  or  contributing  to  the  Rebells,  within  the 
County  of  the  Citty  of  Chefter,  or  clfewhere  in  Ch  fibre, 
within  Five  Miles  of  the  faid  Citty  ;  and  all  Arrearages 
of  Rents  due  for  the  fame  Lands.  As  alfoe  to  receive 
all  fuch  Sommes  of  Money  as  are  due  to  Citizens  of  Lon- 
don  as  are  Rebells,  or  to  others  in  R  ebellion,  or  adhering 
or  contributing  to  the  R,  bells.  All  which  Moneys  they 
were  required  todifpofe  &  diftribute  to  &  for  the  main- 
tainance  of  his  Garrifon  in  the  Citty  and  Caftle  of  Chef¬ 
ter  ;  and  like  wife  towards  the  Entertainment  of  Sir  Abra¬ 
ham  Shipman  Knight,  Commander  there. 

2.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lord  Digby  (as  it  feemes* 
for  his  Name  is  not  fubferibed)  to  the  lame  Mr.  Holme, 
Maior  of  Chefter,  dated  from  Oxford,  9  November 
1643. 

Shewing  that  the  Kings  enlru'-ing  them  with  the 
whole  ^  dilpofing  of  the  Eltates  of  diiaffectcd  Perfons, 
was  a  thing  of  fo  much  confequence,  that  if  it  were  well 
hufbanded,  it  would  veryfarre  exceede  the  ordinary  Pay 
&  Charges  of  the  Garrifon.  And  that  His  Majefty  had 
faid  that  he  (Mr.  Holme)  who  was  Treafurcr  fo  well  for 
the  City  laft  Yeare  ;  muft  needs  be  a  good  Treafurcr  for 
him  &  the  City  this  yeare. 

3.  Original  Letter  from  His  Majefty,  &  counterfigned 
by  Sir  Edward  Nicholas,  to  the  Mai  r.  Aldermen  & 
Inhabitants  of  Chefter  ;  given  at  Oxford,  the  1  3th  of 
November  1643. 

That,  upon  the  approach  of  the  Rebells,  he  had 
giuen  Order  to  Sir  Abraham  Shipman  to  command  ia 
Cheif  there.  That  for  their  relief,  he  had  deligned 
confiderable  S:  prefent  force,  which  lie  hoped  would  be 
tymly  with  them  from  fcuerall  parts  ;  not  doubting  but 
that  they  would  take  C  ourfc  by  all  waics  to  defend  the 
Citty  ;  and  that  their  owne  Obfervation  had  taught  them 
that  it  had  bin  coftly  &  difadvantagious  to  thole  Citties, 
who  hailing  bin  loft,  haue  (vppon  neceffity  of  the  Place) 
bin  regained  by  him. 

4.  Original  Letter  of  James  Butler  Earle  of  Ormonde, 

ft  Lord  Lieutanant  of  Ireland  :  given  at  the  Caftle  of 
Dublin,  the  3d  of  February  1643,  to  the  fame  Maior  of 
Chefter.  K 

Recommending  a  Band  of  Souldiers  fent  from  Ire¬ 
land,  to  his  gxid  fauour  &  care,  for  their  fitting  Ac¬ 
commodation,  in  cafe  the  I.ord  Byron  fliould  be  (vpon 
any  imployment  abroad)  abfent,  at  the  tyme  of  their 
Arrivall. 

5.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  Kings  Commiflloners 
appointed  to  fell  the  forfeited  Eftates  of  the  Rebells  m 
or  near  Chefter;  to  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  Sir  Orlando 
Bridgman,  Sir  Robert  Brerewood,  Kts.  &  to  Colonell 
Francis  Gamull,  then  with  K.  Charles  1.  at  Oxford,  c. 

.  .  Complaining  of  the  heavy  Burden  lying  upon  the 
Citizens  by  theF rce-billeting  of  loooSouldiers  upon  them. 
That  the  Nobility,  Gentry,  &  Clergy,  utterly  refufe  to 
contribute  toward  the  maintainance  of  the  Garrifon  :  that 
the  Irilh  Strangers  are  excufed ;  that  the  meaner  Sort 
being  now  grown  unable  ;  and  the  forfeited  Eftates  pro¬ 
ducing  little  ;  the  burden  lay  upon  the  remaining  Citi¬ 
zens,  who  likewife  would  be  loon  undone.  That  as 
to  the  Commiffioners,  fome  utterly  refufed  to  act  ; 

others 


Catalogus  Librorurn  MSS, 


S24 


Num.  2135. 

others:  were  abfent  :  Mr.  Maior  fick  ;  and  the  daily 
Execution  of  the  Commiflion  devolved  upon  four  of 
them,  who  therefore  were  obliged  to  negleCt  their  own 
A  flairs.  For  which  reafon,  the  Cittizens  defired  to  be 
eafed  as  to  the  free  Quartering  of  Souldiers  upon  them  ; 
and  that  a  new  Commiflion  might  be  ifl'ued  out,  and  a 
greater  Number  of  Connniflioners  appointed. 

6.  Draught  of  a  Letter  from  the  Maior,  Aldermen, 

&  Sheriffes  of  Chefter,  to  Prince  Rupert,  then  at 
Shrew  fbury.  5-  b. 

Upon  occafion  of  his  Warrant  to  the  Commiflioners 
of  Array,  for  imprefling  of  300  Men  within  the  City  k 
County  Palatine  of  Chefter,  for  his  Majefties  Service, 
reprefenting,  that  K.  Henry  the  vin.  had,  by  his 
Graunt  (anno  Regni  1 4.)  exempted  their  City  from  any 
fuchimprefiing  ;  and  that  they  found,  when  it  was  laft 
beleaguer’d,  that  they  wanted  Men  fufficient  for  the 
Defence  of  the  Works ;  although  its  Situation  wasfuch, 
as  to  be  the  Key  of  Ireland,  Sc  the  Bulwark  of  North- 
Wales. 

7.  A  printed  Reprefentation  from  the  Commiflioners 

of  Scotland  ;  dated  24  February  1640.  7.  b. 

Shewing  their  Deteftation  of  Epifcopacy  ;  and  that 
they  long  to  fee  Juftice  done  upon  the  Lieutenant  of 
Ireland  (the  Earl  of  Strafford)  it  being  better  that  One 
periffi  then  Vnity :  That  is,  than  their  Combination 
with  the  Seditious  here  fliould  ceafe. 

8.  Original  Letter  of  Earl  of  Ormonde,  to  the  fe- 

cond  Randle  Holme  Maior  of  Chefter  ;  dated  1 3  Novem¬ 
ber  1643.  8. 

Requiring  him  to  take  Care  that  the  Souldiers  vnder 
the  Command  of  Sir  Fulkc  Hunnckes,  SirMichell  Ernie, 
Collonell  Gibfon,  k  Collonell  Byron  (upon  their  Land¬ 
ing  from  Ireland)  be  conveniently  quartered,  and  ac¬ 
commodated  with  fuch  Neceffaries  Sc  Provifions  as  are 
fitt  :  whereby  they  may  be  better  inablcd  &  incouraged 
to  doe  His  Majeftie  Service. 

9.  Original  Letter  from  the  fame  noble  Lord,  to  the 

lame  Maior;  dated  1  December  1643.  10. 

Recommending  to  his  Care,  another  parte  of  his 
Majefties  Army,  vnder  the  command  of  Collonell  Robert 
Byron,  Sc  Collonell  Henry  Warren,  upon  their  landing 
at  the  Port  of  Chefter. 

10.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Prince  Rupert,  to  the 

Bifliop  of  Chefter  :  dated  from  Leuerpoole,  16  June 
1644.  11. 

Defiling  him  to  promote  a  Collection  throughout 
his  Dincefe,  for  the  relief  of  the  Kings  Ollicers  Sc  Soul¬ 
diers  wounded  in  the  kite  Service;  and  to  pay  the  Moneys 
fo  collected,  to  Sir  Francis  Gamull  1  icutenant-Governor 
of  Chefter.  And  that  fince  the  Kings  Army  was  to 
be  withdrawen  from  thofe  parts,  if  the  Rebclls  fliould 
attempt  to  take  pofl’eflion  of  the  Countrey,  liis  Clergy 
fliould  exhort  all  perfons  to  prepare  for  their  own  De¬ 
fence  ;  and  not  to  adhere  to,  or  partake  with  the  fayd 
Rebells  in  their  Perfons  or  Eftafes. 

it.  Copie  of  the  Kings  Letter  to  the  Cittie  ;  given 
4  Deer.  1645.  (from  Oxford.)  12. 

That  he  would,  with  all  poflible  fpeed  fend  the 
Lord  Aftiley  or  Sir  Charles  Lucas,  or  both,  with  con- 
fiderable  forces,  to  their  Afliitance,  being  befieged.  But, 
it  feemes,  this  was  not  done. 

12.  Copie  of  his  Majefties  Brief,  given  at  Oxford, 

27  May,  anno  regni,  20.  14. 

This  was  for  applying  all  Moneys  collected  for  the 
Relief  of  his  Britilh  Subjects  in  Ireland  and  remaining  in 
the  Officers  hands  (by  the  mean  of  John  Watfon  Arch¬ 
deacon  of  Leighlin)  toward  the  fupport  of  Trinity-Col¬ 
lege  in  Dublin,  which  was  then  in  fuch  a  diftreffed  k 
mil'erable  Condition  that  without  fpeedie  Reliefe,  it  was 
like  to  be  diffolved. 

13.  Attefted  Copie  of  King  Henry  vmts  Placard 
(abovementioned  at  No.  6.)  againft  the  imprefling  of  any 
of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  City  of  Weft-Chefter.  15. 

J3 


Num.  2135. 

14.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Wilbraham,  to  his 

Coufin . dated  9  October  1642.  17. 

That  upon  the  quelling  of  the  tumult  lately  railed 
at  Namptvich,  befides  the  Ioffe  &  terrour  that  Towne 
had  fuftained  by  the  late  devouring  Troopes ;  the 
King  had  impofed  a  Fine  of  2000I.  upon  it,  without 
making  any  diftinCtion  betwecr.e  the  innocent  k  the 
guilty.  And  that  it  was  thought  that  at  the  Aflizes,.the 
Towne  would  be  indioled,  and  feverely  proceeded  againft. 
That  his  name  had  been  foifted  into  the  Catalogue  of  the 
guilty,  although  he  could  prove  that  he  &  all  his  Ser¬ 
vants  were  abfent  at  the  time  of  the  faid  tumult.  He 
therefore  defires  his  Coufin  to  draw  up  a  petition  to  the 
King,  letting  forth  his  particular  Services,  to  the  end 
that  he  might  be  fever’d  from  the  Delinquents,  and  not 
pay  for  their  fait. 

1 5.  Original  Letter  of  John  Lord  Byron  to  the  Kings 

Commiflioners  k  Sequeftrators,  for  the  Cittie  of  Chefter. 
dated  at  Chefter,  29  Aprilis,  1644.  _  *8. 

Defiring  them,  from  the  money  remayning  in  their 
hands  of  the  Profitts  of  Delinquents  Lands  fequeftred,  to 
pay  6ol.  to  Sir  Abraham  Shipman,  in  part  of  the  moneys 


due  vnto  him. 

16.  Original  Warant  of  Prince  Rupert,  to  the  Maior 

k  Sheriffes  of  Chefter;  dated  at  Leuerpoole  18  .Tune 
1644.  20> 

This  was  for  making  Proclamation  of  a  late  Impo- 
filionby  way  ofExcife,  laid  upon  Commodities,  by  the 
aduice  of  the  Lords  &  Commons  affembled  at  Oxford, 
and  putting  the  book  of  Rates,  k  the  Kings  Patent  re¬ 
lating  thereunto,  into  execution. 

17.  Original  Letter  of  Prince  Rupert,  to  the  Maior, 

Sheriffes,  &  Aldermen  of  Chefter,  dated  at  Whitchurch 
19  May  1644.  22- 

Rcquiring  them  to  receive  his  Serjeant-Major  k  Ge¬ 
nerali  of  his  Ordnance  William  Lcgge,  as  Governor  of 
their  City;  and  punctually  to  oblerue  &  follow  fuch  In¬ 
flections  as  he  fliould  deliver  vnto  them  for  the  regula¬ 
ting  of  that  Government. 

18.  Original  Warant  of  Prince  Rupert,  to  the  Maior 

k  Aldermen  of  Chefter  ;  given  at  Liverpoole,  1 1  June 
1644.  __  23-  b* 

Commanding  them  to  make  &  fettle  a  Rate  k  Af- 
feffment  upon  all  their  Inhabitants,  for  the  maintenaunce 
&  pay  of  the  Souldiers  of  the  Regiment  of  the  faid  Citty, 
&  the  Officers  of  the  fame  ;  as  likewife  of  the  Officers  & 
Myuifters  of  the  Garrifon  ;  and  to  pay  the  moneys  to  their 


Governor. 

19.  Draught  of  the  Kings  Commiflion  appointing  the 
Maior  of  Chefter  &  others  to  be  be  Sequeftrators  of  the 


w 


Delinquents  Lands  k  Eftates,  and  the  money  thence  ac-  , 
cruing,  to  be  for  payment  of  the  Garrifon  there.  25. 

20.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  ?  William  Legge  to  the  j 
Maior  k  Aldermen  of  Chefter,  dat.  17  April  1644.  27. 

Acquainting  them  that  Prince  Rupert  did  very 
well  allow  of  their  Exemption  from  prefling  any  of  the 
Inhabitants  of  that  City.  Only  he  defired  them  to  take 
order  with  fuch  loofe  perfons  as  were  fled  thither  from 
other  Quarters,  &  liued  out  of  command,  that  they  fhould 
be  fent  to  fuch  Companies  as  they  formerly  ferued  under 
in  his  Majefties  Service. 

21.  Original  Warant  of  Prince  Rupert,  to  the  Maior 

&  Sheriffes  of  Chefter,  k  to  the  Conltable  of  the  Caftle 
of  Chefter.  Given,  at  Chefter,  13  March"i  643.  29. 

Requiring,  that  the  Pryfoners  in  the  Caftle  of 
Chefter  be  removed  into  another  Prifon.  That  they 
fliould  punctually  obey  all  orders  they  fliould  receiue  I 
from  John  Lord  Byron  his  Feild-Marlhall  Generali :  and 
to  give  an  Accompt  of  all  the  money  raffed  out  of  the 
Delinquents  Eftates,  which  was  appointed  towardes  the 
raifing  k  mainteyning  the  Fortifications  of  the  Cittie,  to 
the  faid  Lord  Byron.  ] 

22.  Original  Letter  of  James  Bffhopp,  &  others  (figned 
alfo  by  the  Bifliop  of  Meath)  to  the  Maior  Aldermen  of 

Chefter, 


Bibliothecas  Harleianae, 


525 


Num  2 135. 

Chefter,  dated  from  Trinity  College  in  Dublin;  6  No¬ 
vember  1643.  3X. 

In  the  behalf  of  Dr.  Robert  Maxwell,  &c.  who  en¬ 
deavouring  to  colled!  moneys  for  the  Relief  of  that  then 
miferablyafflidled  College,  were  traduced  as  if  they  afted 
without  the  warant  of  the  laid  College. 

23.  A  fmall  Traft  written  by  the  fecond  Randle 

Holme,  Ihcwing  by  particular  fads,  1.  How  the  Citty  of 
Chefter  came  to  be  fo  greatly  impoverilhed.  2.  What 
great  Grievances  the  Citizens  had  fulfered,  3.  Propofals 
for  Redreffe  of  the  fame,  (fee  more  of  his  Papers  relating 
to  the  fame  Affairs,  at  fol.  46.)  33. 

24.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Robert  Brerewood  Re¬ 

corder  of  Chefter,  to  the  Maior  &  Aldermen  there, 
dated  at  Oxford  the  15th  of  February  1043.  36. 

Acquainting  them  that  the  King  had  made  him  one 
of  his  Judges  of  the  Kings  Bench,  by  reafon  whereof  he 
was  to  attende  in  the  Lords  Houfe  of  Parliament  as  an 
Afliftant,  and  therefore  deli  res  them  to  excufe  his  Abfence 
as  Recorder.  That  the  Kings  Proceedings  are  approved 
by  the  greater  parte  of  the  Lords  and  Commons  there 
affembled  ;  foe  that  that  Sclander  caft  vppon  his  Majeftie, 
that  he  proceeded  by  ill  Councel lours,  is  cleerly  taken 
off.  That  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  there  were  about 
140.  and  at  London  but  117.  whereof  17  were  looked 
vppon  as  malignant  as  any  at  Oxford.  That  there  were 
45  of  the  Lords  Iloule  ;  and  at  London  but  18  or 
thereabouts. 

25.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Francis  Gamul  to  Randle 
Holme  Maior  of  Chefter.  dated  at  Oxford,  13  February 

*643-  .  38. 

Shewing  that  he  had  receiued  a  faythful  affurance 
of  his  Majefties  Grace  Sc  Favour  to  the  Citty.  That  his 
Expreflions  were  full  of  indulgent  Regard  to  all  who  haue 
&£ted  their  Alleigance  there.  But  if  any  ftiould  draw 
back  from  theare  Dutye,  &  fuffer  a  fmall  occafion  (i.  e. 
a  late  defeat  by  Fairfax)  to  raife  a  highe  difeontent ;  they 
might  helpe  to  deftroy  a  good  Caufe  by  willfull  negli¬ 
gence,  or  ftubborne  difobedience.  That  when  Prince 
Rupert  Ihould  come  to  Chefter,  he  would  anfwer  juft  Pe¬ 
titions  with  wifdome  and  favour  ;  having  nobly  promifed 
to  refpect  the  Citty,  &c. 

26.  Original  Letter  Patent  of  the  above-mentioned 

Lord  Byron,  to  the  Maior  Sc  Aldermen  Commiftioners 
for  the  Garrifon  of  Chefter  :  dated  the  25  of  March 
1 644.  _  40. 

Requiring  them  to  pay  to  Sir  Abraham  Shipman 
Lieutenant-Governor  of  Chefter,  the  halfe  yeares  Rents 
Sc  Profitts  of  Sir  William  Breretons  fequeftred  Lands, 
lyinge  ncare  to  the  Coyc. 

27.  A  breviat  of  Examinations  for  clearinge  the 

Maior,  Aldermen,  &  Cittizens  of  Chefter  from  the 
Plott,  22  June  1648.  42. 

This  is  figned  by  Robert  Duckcnfield.  The  Plott, 
it  feems,  was  affirmed  to  betray  the  City  Sc  Caftle;  but 
nothing  is  faftened  upon  the  Maior  or  his  brethren. 

28.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  K.  Charles  1 .  to  Prince  Ru¬ 
pert,  given  at  Oxford  ^February  1643.  44- 

Recommending  Collonell  Francis  Gamull  (who  rai- 
fed  a  Regiment  of  Foote  for  his  Service ;  and  with  the 
fame  had,  with  much  faithfulnefs  and  refolution,  de¬ 
fended  the  City  of  Chefter,  when  it  was  attempted  by  the 
Rebells)  to  the  Princes  care  and  favour  :  willing  that  the 
faid  Coionell  might  not  fuffer  any  wrong  or  difadvantage, 
in  his  faid  Regiment  during  his  Abfence.  And  that  if 
the  Prince  fhould  think  fitt  to  make  him  Governour 
of  Chefter,  he  would  very  well  approve  of  the  Choice. 

29.  A  Remonftrance  or  Declaration  of  vs  the  Inha¬ 

bitants  of  the  County  Pallattyne  of  Chefter,  whofc  names 
are  fubferibed,  and  of  many  more.  5 1 . 

For  the  maintenance  of  his  Majefties  royall  and  fa- 
cred  Perfon,  Honor,  &  Prerogative  ;  and  prefervation  of 
the  Parliament,  Sc  the  Priviledges  thereof;  and  of  our  true 
&  undoubted  Religion,  Lawes,  Properties,  k  Liberties. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2135. 

3°-  Copy  of  the  Kings  Inftru&ions  to  Prince  Rupert 
for  taking  fines  of  Delinquents,  in  order  to  their  Pardon: 
and  reftitution  to  their  Eftates :  for  fequeftratipg  the 
Lands  of  Rebells  ;  for  taking  Accompts  of  his  antici¬ 
pated  Revenues  ;  for  receiving  all  publicque  Moneys  re¬ 
maining  in  the  hands  of  Collectors,  &c.  for  leavying 
Monethlv  Contributions.  Given  at  Oxford  the  fifth  day 
of  February  A.  D.  1 543.  52.  b. 

3 ’•  Copie  of  the  humble  Petition  of  diverfe  of  his 
Ma“”  loyall  Subjects  within  the  Cittie  of  Chefter,  to  the 
Lords  and  Gentlemen  now  in  the  Commiflion  of  Array, 
to  be  executed  in  this  Cittie.  55. 

Shewing,  that  they  hearing  of  the  faid  Commiflion, 
and  concerning  it  to  be  in  the  Judgement  of  the  Parlia¬ 
ment,  illegal,  contrary  to  their  exprefle  ordinance  and  or¬ 
ders  ;  as  alfoe  of  very  dangerous  confequence  :  do  hum¬ 
bly  pray  that  the  Execution  thereof  may  be  flayed. 

3>.  A  note  of  the  joyfull  Affent  given  by  many  who 
putt  themfelves  into  a  Pofture  of  Armes,  at  the  feditious 
training  at  Knutesford,  30  June  1642.  for  none  other 
end  ami  purpofe  but  for  the  joynt  Defence  of  his  Ma,ic.  & 
the  Pari1,  together. 

33.  Original  Letter  of  the  Earle  of  Ormonde,  to  the 

fecond  Randle  Holme,  Maior  of  Chefter,  as  it  feems; 
dated  from  Dublin,  2  December  1643.  §6. 

Recommending  another  band  of  Soldiers  fent  for  the 
Kings  Service  in  England,  to  his  care  for  good  Accom¬ 
modation  ;  and  requiring  his  Affiftance  and  further¬ 
ance  toward  the  revidlualling  the  Fleet  that  ftiould  brine 
them. 

34.  Copies  of  fome  Letters  from  &  to  Sir  William  Bre- 

reton,  during  his  feige  of  Chefter,  in  January  164c,  all 
relating  to  his  fummoning,  and  the  furrendring  of  the 
fame.  ^ 

35.  Original  Letter  from  Sir  William  Legge  the  Go¬ 

vernor,  to  Mr.  Randle  Holme  the  Maior  of  Chefter ;  24 
Aug.  1644.  _  60. 

Acquainting  him  that  he  had  given  order  to  ftoppe 
all  Cattle  &  Prouifion  from  goinge  out  of  Towne ;  and 
defiring  him  to  haue  a  fpeciall  eye  to  the  preferuation  of 
the  Maikett  gc-i 

36.  Copie  of  a  Warant,  perhaps  of  the  Governor  k 

Magiftrates  of  Chefter ;  given,  24  June  1644.  62. 

Requiring  the  Inhabitants  of  all  the  Townes  adjacent 
to  bring  in  their  Provifion  of  Victual's  (as Butter,  Cheefe, 
Bacon,  Muttons,  Veales,  <3c  Come)  for  the  fupport  of  the 
Garrifon,  8c  the  Relcifeof  them  that,  by  the  Enemie  fliall 
be  enforced  to  forfake  the  faid  Townes. 

37.  Original  Warant  of  John  Lord  Byron  to  Randle 

Holme  Alderman,  Sc  William  W  illiams  Mufter-mafter, 
in  Chefter.  Given,  the  19th  of  November  1645.  63. 

Requiring  them  to  l'eize  all  Horfes  vnfitt  &  vnabls 
for  the  Service  or  Dutie  in  that  Garrifon,  and  to  turne 
them  into  the  Rood-ee,  where  they  would  be  able  to  liue 
till  the  Citie  be  relieued,  and  preuent  the  vnneceflaiie  De- 
ftruftion  of  the  Provifions. 

38.  Original  Petition  of  Ralph  Wilcoxon,  to  the  fe¬ 
cond  Randle  Holme  Maior  of  Chefter.  64. 

It  feems  that  this  fellow  had  thrown  down  the  Crofs 
at  Chefter,  or  endeavoured  fo  to  do;  for  which  he  was 
laid  in  Gaol;  he  pretends  to  have  been  a  fuft'erer  for  the 
Royal  Caule ;  and  that  being  a  ftranger  in  Chefter,  he 
knew  not  the  fituation  of  the  Croffe,  and  (being  in  the 
darke)  did  not  difeerne  any  forme  of  a  Croffe,  much 
lefie  of  any  Crowne,  or  Armes  thereon,  and  how  in- 
firme  the  Croffe  was. 

39.  Attefted  Copie  of  an  order  from  the  faid  Lord 

Byron,  Lord  Field  Marfhall- General  of  his  Majefties 
Forces,  that  his  Majefties  printed  Proteflation,  being  a 
Try  all  general  throughout  all  his  Majefties  Armye  and 
Garrifons  ftiould  be  tendred  to  all  the  Inhabitants  of 
Chefter  being  men  above  1 6  yeares  of  Age,  and  to  all 
Women  above  fourteen  years  of  Age.  dat.  23  February, 
*643-  65. 

6  S  40.  His 


5i6 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2135. 

40.  His  original  order  to  Randle  Holme  Maior  of 

Chefter  dat.  5  March  643.  67. 

This  was  for  providing  Provifion  and  other  necef- 
faries  for  enterteynment  of  Prince  Rupert. 

41.  Original  Depofition  of  Mr.  William  Wilbraham  ; 

13  May  1644.  69. 

Concerning  Captain  Finch,  who  being  taken  Prifoner 
in  the  Kings  Service  neere  Nantwich  ;  had  accepted  of 
a  Commillion  to  be  Captain  of  a  Troope  of  Horl'e,  vnder 
'  Sir  William  Brereton. 

2.  Original  Receipt  of  Captain  John  Finch,  for  the 
Goods  of  the  abovementioned  Captain  Symon  Finch  ; 
who  had  forfeited  the  fame,  by  taking  up  Armes  againft 
his  .Majefty.  dat.  14  May  1644.  71. 

43.  His  Majefties  Proteftation,  made  in  the  head  of 

Ins  Army,  on  Monday  1 9  of  September  ;  and  read  in 
the  Churches  in  Cheiter  the  25th  of  September  ;  bis 
Majefty  being  then  in  the  faid  Citty.  (A.  D.  1642.  vid. 
27-  B-  3>3-b0  72. 

44.  Copie  of  a  Reprefcntation  from  Robert  Earle  of 

Ellex,  and  1  1  other  Lords  to  K.  Charles  1.  fetting  forth 
the  public  Grievances,  and  counfelling  his  Majefty  to 
fummon  a  Parliament,  which  might  bring  the  Authors  of 
the  faid  Grievances  to  a  legall  Triall,  and  condigne 
Puniftnnent  :  and  that  he  would  compofe  the  prefent 
Warre  with  Scotland  without  blood.  73* 

45.  His  Majefties  Speech  to  the  Aflembly  of  the  Loids 

at  Yorke,  the  24th  of  September  1640.  74. 

46.  The  Names  of  the  Lords  that  are  to  goe  to  Rippon, 

the  29  of  September  1640.  ibid. 

47.  The  Scots  Demaunds.  74.  b. 

48.  The  Proteftation  to  be  tendred  to  the  Women 

in  Chefter.  dat.  21  April  1645.  75. 

That  they  would  give  no  Aid  or  Intelligence  to 
Sir  William  Brereton,  or  to  the  Parliament  Forces  ;  and 
that  they  would  difcover  any  Plot  or  Practice  againft  the 
City.  But,  it  appears,  that  this  Proteftation  was  not 
actually  taken. 


49.  Addrefs  of  the  Commander  of  the  Kings  Army  in 
the  North,  after  they  had  fkirmifhed  with  the  Scots  ;  to 
the  Parliament,  for  rcdrefs  of  fome  Hardlhips  they 
labor’d  under  ;  and  againft  fome  Innovations  intended. 


75’ 

50.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  James  Lord  Strange  to 

Mr.  Rich.  Brereton,  Sc  Mr.  Hugh  Wilbraham.  6  Septr. 
1642.  7s. 

Affuring  them,  that  if  die  Commilhoners  of  Array 
'  lhould  make  any  plundering,  contrary  to  his  Requeft  to 
them  made  -,  he  would  joine  with  the  Countrey  againft 
them. 

51.  Original  Order  of  the  Lord  Byron,  to  the 
fecond  Randle  Holme,  dated,  28th  of  OClober  1645. 

78.  b. 

This  was  for  1 2  Wool-Packs  to  be  delivered  for  the 
Vfe  of  the  Fort  at  Chefter. 

52.  Another  from  the  fame  to  Mr.  Ruflell  &  Mr. 

Holme,  dated,  23  of  OClober  1645.  7 9.  b. 

Requiring  them  to  fee  that  fuch  Bedds  Sc  other 
things,  which  vpon  vepaire  of  the  feuerall  Breaches, 
lhould  be  taken  out,  were  putt  into  the  common  Store. 

53.  Another,  from  the  fame  to  Mr.  Holme,  dated, 

the  3  of  October  1645.  g0- 

Defiring  him  to  caufe  the  Bedds,  Wool-packs,  and 
©therNeceflaries  provided  for  the  making  vpp  ofBreaches, 
lhould  be  carried  according  to  his  Directions. 

54.  His  Warrant  to  the  fame  Mr.  Holme,  dated  6 

October  1645.  81. 

For  taking  from  the  Glovers  what  quantities  of 
courfe  Wool  he  pleafed,  to  be  made  into  Packs,  and  im- 
ployed  in  filling  up  the  Breaches. 

55.  The  Proteftation  abovementioned  to  be  taken  by 

all  Meii,  inhabiting  in  Chefter.  Signed  by  Sr.  Rich.  Grof- 
venor.  '82. 

56.  Copie  of  an  Agreement  made  the  23  day  of  Dc- 


Num.  2135. 

cember  1642.  at  Bunbury,  for  a  Pacification  and  fetling 
of  the  Peace  of  the  County  of  Chefhire,  by  Robert  Lord 
Kilmorey,  &c.  authorized  by  the  Lords  &  Gentlemen 
nominated  Commilhoners  of  Array  &  Deputy  lieutenants 
in  the  faid  County.  83. 

57.  His  Majefties  Speech  in  the  Starre-Chamber,  20 

June  1 616.  concerninge  Recufants.  85. 

58.  Forme  of  the  Combination  of  the  Seditious  in 

Chelhire,  againft  the  Commilhoners  of  Array,  fome  of 
whom  they  pretended  had  given  out  Threatnings  &  def- 
perate  Language,  that  they  would  plunder,  batter  downe, 
burne  the  houfes,  Sc  difarme  the  Perfons  of  all  fuch  as 
complie  not  with  them,  in  their  Way.  8 7. 

59.  Draught  of  a  Letter  dated  at  Knuttsford,  6th  of 

September  1642.  87.  b. 

Againft  the  Commilhoners  of  Array,  vpon  whom 
the  Writers  (perhaps  the  Gentlemen  abovementioned  at 
No.  50.)  defired  the  Lord  Strange  to  lay  his  Commands 
that  they  trouble  the  Countrey  no  more ;  neither  bv 
trayning,  threats,  dilarming,  or  pillageing.  And  declare 
themfelvcs  much  bound  vnto  his  Lordfhipp,  for  declaring 
himl'elfe  fo  farr  in  his  defires  of  Peace,  &  refolution  to 
forbeare  all  ACls  of  Hoftility  ;  and  not  to  goe  about  to 
difarme  that  County. 

60.  Lift  of  the  principal  Pi  ifoners  taken  at  Middlewicli, 

13  March  1642.  88. 

61.  Copie  of  Sir  Thomas  Affon’s  Apology  for  his 

Defeat  at  Middlewich,  13  March  1642.  89. 

61.  Copie  of  a  Speech  made  to  K.  Charles  1.  before 
the  Delivery  of  a  Petition  made  in  the  Name  of  the  whole 
County.  91. 

Here,  much  notice  is  taken  of  his  withdrawing  him- 
felf  from  the  Parliament,  with  Advice  to  return. 

63.  Form  of  a  Proteftation  to  be  tendred  to  all  his 

Majefties  faithful  Sc  loyal  Subjects.  Particularly  againft 
the  Forces  vnder  the  Command  of  tlv  Earle  ofEflex, 
Sir  William  Brereton,  Sir  Thomas  Middleton,  Sc  Coll. 
Mitton.  94. 

64.  Original  Note  of  Mr.  Mainwaringe  to  Mr.  Ran¬ 

dle  Holme,  certifying  Prince  Ruperts  pleafure,  &  the 
Governors  Order,  that  Handbridge  bee  forthwith  levelled 
to  the  ground  ;  &  none  to  build  up  again  there  :  dated 
the  23d  of  May,  A.  D.  1644.  94.  c. 

65.  Articles  to  be  confidered  upon,  in  order  to  the 

Surrender  of  the  City  of  Chefter.  95. 

66.  A  printed  Declaration  of  his  Highnefs  (the  Lord 

Protector)  for  a  Collection  towards  the  Relief  of  divers 
Proteftant  Churches  driven  out  of  Poland  ;  and  of  twen¬ 
ty  Proteftant  Families  driven  out  of  the  Confines  of  Bo¬ 
hemia.  96., 

The  Collection  was  made  in  Chefter,  25  April!  1638. 

67.  Originall  Warant  of  the  Lord  Byron,  to 
divers  Magiftrates  of  Chefter.  dated  14  January  1643.  98. 

For  obliging  the  Inhabitants  of  the  City  to  give  in 
an  exaCt  Account  of  the  Quantities  of  Corne  Sc  Meal 
remaining  by  them. 

68.  Several  Returnes  made  to  that  Warant.  99. 

Thefe  Papers  fhew  likewife  the  Number  of  Souls  ia 

each  Family  at  that  time. 

69.  Original  Receipt  of  Arthur  Lord  Capell  &  John 

Lord  Byron,  for  400  Ounces  of  Guilt  Plate  (which  they 
demanded  of  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter,  although  given 
by  the- BenefaCtors  to  the  City)  by  way  of  Aduance  or 
Contribution  to  the  Pay  and  Prouifion  of  Sc  for  the 
Forces  arriued  from  Ireland.  1 19.  et  vid.  125. 

This  bears  date  7  December  1643.  yet  ir  appears 
that  the  Plate  was  not  delivered  until  the  1 6th  following. 

70.  Original  Note  of  the  faid  Lord  Byron,  for^6c. 

which  he  borrowed  of  the  Citty  of  Chefter,  20  February 
1643.  1 19.  b. 

7  1 .  Copie  of  the  Articles  agreed  upon  by  the  Commif- 
fioners  on  both  fides,  for  the  Surrender  of  the  City, 
Caftle,  &  Fort  of  Chefter  into  the  hands  of  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  Brereton  :  1  February  1645.  121.  b._ 

72.  Preamble. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae, 


527 


Num.  2135,  2136. 

72.  Preamble  &  Proteftation  of  the  Houfe  of  Com¬ 
mons,  taken  by  themfelves,  and  tendred  to  the  whole 
Kingdom,  dated  5  May  1641.  and  printed  foon  after. 

123. 

73.  A  Lift  of  the  Souldiers,  Stores  &  Money,  8cc. 

taken  in  Dublin,  2  Atiguft  1  649.  1 24.  b. 

74.  A  printed  Aft  prohibiting  Correfpondence  with 
Charles  Stuart  or  his  Party. 

75.  A  printed  Proclamation  of  the  Iloufe  of  Commons 

recognizing  King  Charles  11.  8  May  1660.  128.  b. 

76.  Lift  of  the  principal  Perfons  taken  at  Worccfter- 

fight.  128.  c.  loofe. 

77.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Table  of  the  Things  of 

molt  Note  in  this  Booke  ;  made  A.  D.  1669.  129. 

2136. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  many  Trafts  bound  up 
together;  in  the  main Teeming  to  give  the  Parliament 
Sequeftrators  Accompts  of  the  Royalifts  Eftates  within 
the  Hundred  ofBroxton,  in  the  County  of  Cheftiire  ; 
the  Titles  of  which  will  follow  in  the  Order  as  I  find 
them.  But  in  the  beginning,  I  find 
j.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  the  Things 
of  1110ft  Note  in  this  Book. 

Then  follow, 

2.  The  Accounts  of  H  .  .  .  .  C.otgreue  8c  Tho. 
Deane  Agents  for  Sequeftrations  of  Papifts  8c  Delin¬ 
quents  Eftates,  within  the  Pariflies  of  Ecclefton,  Dodlef- 
ton,  &  Poulfton,  within  the  Hundred  of  Broxton,  from 
the  18  th  of  March  1645.  vntil  the  18th  of  March  1646. 

180. 

Thefc  were  delivered  in,  upon  Oath,  the  24th  of 
February- 1647. 

3.  John  Hulton’s  true  accompt  of  what  hath  beene 

received  out  of  the  Earle  of  Shrolbui^'es  Eftate  inMicle 
Trafford,  Hoole,  and  Coughall ;  as  due  for  the  yeare 
1646.  183. 

This  Man’s  Accompt  does  alfo  include  the  Moneys 
he  received  from  the  Lands  of  the  Lord  Kilmorey,  Henry 
Bunbury  Efq;  Sir  Francis  Gamull,  the  Earle  of  Derby, 
Sir  Richard  Grofvenor,  Peter  Venables  Efq;  the  Lord 
Cholmondeley,  Earle  Rivers,  Mr.  Cotton,  Sir  Hugh 
Calveley,  and  others,  and  was  delivered  in,  upon  Oath, 
the  24th  of  February  1647. 

4.  John  Ravenfhawes  accounts  from  June  24th  1645, 

vntil  24  February  1647.  19 1. 

5. - A  Cattalouge  of  the  Names  of  fuch  Papiits  8c 

Delinquents  who  haue  Eftates  within  the  Hundred  of 
Broxton,  &  County  of  Chefter,  and  haue  been  or  are 

fequeftred.  208. 

6.  An  Accompt  of  certeyne  I.ofles  which  Thomas 

Cholmeley,  Efq;  hath  fufteyned  by  the  Parliament- 
Officers  8c  Souldiers,  fince  the  beginning  of  the  Warr. 
dated  25  May  1647.  209. 

This  was  delivered  in  the  fame  day,  but  without 
Oath,  by  reafon  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Cholmondcley’s 
Servant. 

7.  Commiffioneis  for  Sequeftrations  within  the  Hun¬ 

dred  of  Broxton  ;  who  entred  vpon  the  Charge  4  March 
1645.  210. 

8.  The  Agents  or  Colledlors  of  the  Sequeftrations 

within  the  faid  Hundred,  anno,  1 646.  ibid. 

9.  Difcoueryes  of  Arreares  of  Rent  belongeinge  to  the 
feueral  Delinquents,  in  the  feueral  Townes,  anno  1645. 

210.  b. 

10.  A  true  &  perfeft  Accoumpt  howe  the  fequeftred 
Eftates  within  the’  Hundred  of  Broxton  bee  perticulerly 
fett,  Sc  to  whome,  and  at  what  Daycs  due  and  payable  : 
as  alfo  what  Iffues  out  of  every  Eftate,  and  when  any 
Eftate  is  difeharged  from  Sequeftration,  and  by  what 
Order ^and  vpon  what  Grownds.  Together  with  a  Bre- 
viate  what  euery  perticuler  Papift  Sc  Dclinquent-Eftate 
amounts  unto  (the  Charge  dedudled)  for  this  yeare  1646. 
with  a  Catalogue  of  the  Papifts  Sc  Delinquents  Names 


Num.  2136,  2137* 

that  remayne  vnder  Sequeftration,  at  the  end  of  this 
yeare  1646.  212. 

Some  parts  of  thefe  Accompts  proceed  ahnoft  through 
the  yeare  16-17,  an^  all  were  delivered  in  upon  Oath, 
24  February  1 647-8. 

11.  Raphe  Judfon's  Accompts  of  his  Receipts  8c 
Dilburfements,  within  the  Hundred  of  Broxton,  from 
the  9th  of  O&ober  1646.  to  the  24th  of  February  1647. 
when  the  fame  were  delivered  in  upon  Oath.  244. 

12.  A  true  Accompt  of  the  Arreares  of  Delinquents 
Rents  vnpayd,  as  due  in  the  years  1646,  Sc  1647,  g*uen 
in,  upon  Oath,  by  Thomas  Hancock  one  of  the  Col¬ 
lectors  of  Broxton-Hundred,  the  24th  of  February  1647. 

251. 

13.  Lawrence  Fletcher’s  true  Accoumpt  of  all  fuch 

monys  as  he  had  receued  from  Delinquants  Sc  Papifts 
Eftates  in  Broxton-IIundred  within  the  Parifhes  of  Tat* 
tenhall,  HjnJley,  Aldfurd,  Coddington,  Farnedon,  8c 
Shockleich,  &  the  Touneffiip  of  Harthill,  fince  the  1 8th 
of  April  1646,  to  the  3th  of  December  1646.  252. 

This  Ac.ompt  includes  likewiie  ihe  Difburfements  ; 
and  was  delivered  in  upon  Oath,  the  24th  of  February 
1647. 

14.  An  Accompt  of  Sir  Thomas  Smithes  ould  Rents 

due  at  Martinmals  1646.  265. 

13.  A  perticuler  of  the  ould  Rents  Sc  Racke-Rents 
of  Sir  Thomas  Delves  Sc  others,  received  by  John  Raven- 
fliaw,  from  the  24th  of  June  1646,  vntil  the  25th  of 
November  1646.  270. 

16.  A  true  Accompt  of  Thomas  Hancock  one  of  the 

Collectors  for  Broxton-Hundred,  of  all  his  Receats  of 
the  Arreares  of  Delinquents  Rents  within  his  Alotment, 
from  18  April  1646,  to  the  25  of  March  1647,  being 
due,  A.  D.  1643.  274. 

1 7.  A  true  Sc  juft  Account  of  all  the  munnies  received 

8c  dilburfed  by  John  Ravenfhawe  8c  Arthur  Edgeley 
Collectors  of  Broxton-Hundred,  from  the  1  of  January 
1644,  to  the  24  of  June  1645.  380. 

This  was  delivered  in  upon  Oath,  the  1 6th  of 
March  1647. 

18.  Another  of  their  true  and  juft  Accounts,  front 
the  24th  of  June,  1645.  to  the  29th  of  September. 

312. 

19.  Accompts  of  Arthur  Edgeley’s  Receipts  &  Dif¬ 
burfements,  from  1  Auguft,  1644.  to  24  June,  1645. 

3‘4- 

20.  A  Rental  of  Lord  Chouhaleys  ould  Rents  in 

Church-Mynfiiull.  321. 

Here  are  alfo  Rentals  of  the  I,ands  of  others  in  the 
fame  Towne-finp,  8c  Inventories  of  Goods. 

21.  Arreares  within  Arthur  Edgeley’s  Divifion  324. 

2?.  Dilburfements  of  Mr.  Richard  Leigh  Trealurer 

in  Blacklowe  Hundred,  fince  the  23  of  June,  1645. 

325. 

This  was  delivered  in,  the  4th  of  November  1647. 

23.  Lift  of  Perfons  noted  as  Recufants  ;  or  for  For¬ 
nication.  At  the  end. 


1  Oty/ 
•2,0 |g 


2137. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  (like  the  former)  of  particu¬ 
lar  Trafts  8c  Papers  bound  up  together ;  relating,  in 
the  main,  to  the  Accompts  taken  by  the  Sequeftra¬ 
tors  of  many  perfons  in  Cheftiire,  who  fuffered  for 
their  Loyalty  to  their  lawful  Soveraign.  Wherein 
I  find, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Table  of  the  Things  of 
moft  note  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Names  of  all  the  Inhabitants  of  Nether  Knutesford  : 

and  of  the  Owners  of  the  Houfes  there.  1. 

3.  A  true  8c  perfect  Abftradte  of  all  the  Receates  of 

Thomas  Hancocke,  from  the  20th  of  April,  to  the  2  of 
Nov..  164.6.  3. 

4.  A  particular  Accompt  of  all  fuch  Summes  of 
Money  as  haue  been  received  out  of  the  fequeftred 

Eftates, 


o 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


52S 


Nurti.  2137,  21 3$. 

Eftates,  fince  the  2  of  December  1 647.  within  the  Hun* 
dred  of  Bucklowe.  5. 

This  was  deliuered  by  Thom.  Warburton,  the  2 
July,  1648. 

5.  The  Accompt  of  John  Acfon  Colle&or,  A.  D. 

1643.  7. 

6.  An  Accompt  made  by  the  Sequeftrators  of  Buck- 

low-hundred,  as  to  feveral  perfons  Eftates.  9. 

This  Accompt  ends  in  A.  D.  164^. 

7.  Produce  of  the  Lord  Kilmorey’s  Eftate  within  the 

Hundred  of  Bucklow  ;  being  feized  in  July,  1643.  & 
difcharged  the  12th  of  Auguft,  1646.  15. 

8.  Accompt  of  the  Eftate  of  Sir  Edward  Moore  in 

Thelwall,  Lymme,  &  Gropenhall.  19. 

9.  A  perticular  of  the  Receipts  of  fuch  Summes  of 
Money  as  haue  beene  levyed  out  of  Delinquents  Eftates, 
within  the  Hundred  of  Bucklow;  from  1  July,  1643.  21  • 

This  was  delivered  in  upon  Oath,  by  Thom.  War- 
burton,  23  June,  1645. 

10.  A  Booke  of  Receipts  out  of  Delinquents  Eftates 

within  the  Hundred  of  Bucklowe ;  and  of  Dilburfe- 
ments  out  of  thofe  Receipts,  being  delivered  in  upon 
Oath  by  Thom.  Warburton,  23  June,  1645.  48. 

11.  Account  of  John  Lawrenfon  &c  John  Brufh,  as  to 

their  letting  of  Sir  Edward  Moores  Eftate  in  Bucklow- 
Hundred,  their  Receipts  from  thence,  &  their  Difbui  fe- 
ments.  A.  D.  1645.  59- 

1 2.  Monies  receiued  by  John  Lawrenfon  Colleftcur 

of  the  lequeftred  Eftates  of  Delinquents  within  Buck- 
low-Hundred.  64. 

13.  A  particular  of  the  Receipts  &  Diftmrfements  of 

fuch  Summes  of  Monye  as  haue  beene  leuyed  out  of 
Delinquents  Eftates,  within  the  Hundred  of  Bucklowe  ; 
A.  D.  1643.  &c.  66. 

This  Accompt  was  delivered  in  upon  Oath,  the 
4th  of  November,  1647. 

14.  A  particular  Accompt  howe  the  remainder  of  the 

Delinquents  Eftates  in  Bucklowe-Hundred  haue  bene  dil- 
pol'ed  of ;  and  by  whom  ;  and  what  hath  bene  difburf- 
ed  out  of  the  fame,  and  what  is  found  to  be  in  Arrere. 
A.  D.  1645.  102. 

This  Accompt  was  deliver’d  in  upon  Oath,  the  4th 
of  November,  1647. 

15.  A  particular  Accompt  how  the  Eftates  of  Delin¬ 
quents  were  fette  within  the  Hundred  of  Bucklowe,  & 
difpofed  of  in  the  yeares,  1645.  '-646,  Sc  1647.  with 
the  Names  of  the  Tenants  to  the  faid  particular  Eftates, 
and  their  Rents. 

This  was  deliver'd  in  upon  Oath,  the  4th  of  No¬ 
vember,  1647. 

16.  A  Booke  of  Accompts  how  the  Remayndour  of 
Delinquents  Eftates  within  the  Hundred  of  Bucklowe 
haue  bene  difpofed  of ;  by  whom  received  ;  and  what  is 
found  to  be  in  Arreare.  A.  D.  1645. 

This  was  deliveied  in  upon  Oath,  23  June,  1645. 

171. 

17.  A  Booke  of  Receipts  out  of  Delinquents  Eftates 
in  Bucklowe-Hundred,  fince  the  23  of  June,  1645. 

172. 

This  was  deliver’d  in  upon  Oath,  the  4th  of  No¬ 
vember,  1647. 

18.  A  particuler  Accompt  what  further  Difburfe- 

ments  haue  bene  made  out  of  Delinquents  Eftates,  in 
Bucklowe-Hundred,  from  the  23  of  June,  1645,  vntill 
the  4th  of  November  1647.  205. 

This  was  delivered  in  upon  Oath  bv  Thom.  War¬ 
burton,  the  Day  &Year  laft  abovementioned. 

2138. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  fundry  different  Tracts  & 
P..pers,  now  bound  up  together;  and, on  the  out- 
fide,  by  the  third  Randle  Holme  thus  entituled,  “  Irifh 
Wiftings,  Sc  Matters  concerneing  that  Kingdome  ;  ” 
«f  which,  what -follows  is  a  more  particujar  Catalogue. 


Num.  2138. 

1.  Original  Letter  of  Tho.  Gotts  of  Graies  Inne  to 

George  Ratclifte  Efq;  one  of  his  Majefties  Counfell 
learned,  dated  the  28  of  December  1632.  1. 

Recommending  Mr.  Hunt  his  kinfman,  to  be  em« 
ploied  about  the  Cuftomes  in  Ireland  ;  wherein  Mr.  Rat¬ 
clifte  had  gotten  fome  Intereft,  as  being  one  of  the  Fer- 
mors. 

2.  Original  Warant  of  Thomas  Lord  Vifcount  Went¬ 
worth,  Lord  Deputy  of  Ireland,  to  his  Majefties  Attor¬ 
ney  Generali  there,  dated  the  26  of  September  1637.  3. 

Requiring  him  to  drawe  vpp  a  Fyant  conteyning 
his  Majefties  lpetiall  Pardon  vnto  Martine  Kirovan  of 
Gallway  Merchant,  of  an  for  his  Offence  in  departinge 
that  Kingdome  without  Lycence  ;  contrary  to  the  Pro¬ 
clamation  in  that  cafe  mad&.&  prouided. 

3.  Ba.  Kelly’s  particular  of  certain  Lands  in  Gal- 

way.  _  _  5. 

4-  Will.  Crofton’s  Certificate  from  the  Auditors  Of¬ 
fice  of  Mr.  Michael  Cormac’s  Lands  in  the  County  of 
Mayo,  graunted  by  Letters  Patents.  A.  D.  1605.  to 
Sir  John  King  Kn‘.  in  free  Sc  comon  Soccage,  as  of  the 
Caftle  of  Dublin.  7, 

5.  Littera?  Patentes  Caroli  1.  Regis,  quibus  concedit 
Francifco  Domino  Aungier  Baroni  de  Longford,  Officium 
Clerici  five  Magiitri  Rotulorum,  Sc  Re^ordorum,  See. 
Cancellarie  Regni  fui  Hibernic  :  Tcfte,  &c.  16  Aprilis, 
annoregnii. 

6.  Juftice  Creflys  Opinion  concerneing  Fofterfhip 

among  the  Irifh  ;  and  of  the  means  of  preventing  the 
ufual  ill  effects  of  it.  1 1. 

7.  Notes  concerning  the  Eftates  held  by  feveral  of  the 

NameofRoch,  &c.  13. 

8.  Original  Letter  from  William  Juxon  Bifhop  of  Lon¬ 

don,  to  the  Officers  of  the  Cuftomes  in  the  Port  of  Chef- 
ter.  dat.  i6Septr.  1636.  14. 

Requiring  them  to  fuffer  iooo  Ounces  of  Plate  to 
be  fhipped  into  Ireland,  being  for  the  neceflarie  life  of 
Richard  Ofbaldefton  Efq;  imployed  thether  in  his  Ma¬ 
jefties  Service. 

9.  Mr.  Arch-deacon  Heighton’s  Information  to  the 

Kings  Commiflioners  of  the  State  of  the  Dioces  of  Closr- 
her.  17. 

10.  Order  of  the  Lords  Juftices  &  Councell,  in  Ireland; 

given  1 1  February  1632.  20. 

Obliging  all  Merchants  Strangers  importing  or  ex¬ 
porting  Goods  into  or  out  of  the  Port  of  Dublin,  to  pay 
3d.  pound  to  that  City. 

1 1 .  Copie  of  a  Letter  of  Ri.  Bolton  to  the  Maior  of 

Dublin;  dated  at  London,  24  November  1608.  21. 

He  was  imployed  as  Councill  for  that  City,  and 
proved  at  a  Irial  before  the  Judges,  that  the  King  had 
no  Inheritance  in  the  Subfidie  of  Poundage  by  courfe  of 
Common  Lavve  ;  but  that  the  fame  was  merely  given  by 
the  Statute  in  15  Hen.  vn.  And  fo,  that  the  City  was 
difcharged  thereof  by  thePrcvifo  of  the  fame  Acte.  And 
that  he  hoped  likewife  to  prove  that  the  word  Consue- 
tudo  was  vfed  for  the  Revenew-Cuftomc  in  the  tyme  of 
Hen.  n.  Ric.  1.  Sc  Hen.  in.  and  that  the  word  Customes 
(which  the  Judges  hould  to  be  the  proper  word  of  Reve- 
newCuftome)  was  never  invented  till  the  tymeof  Edw.  11. 

1 2.  Opinion  of  the  Judges  in  England  about  the 
Cuftomes  in  Ireland,  diiefted  to  the  Lords  of  the 
Priuie  Counfell,  and  dated  the  10  of  December  1601. 

22.  et  28. 

13.  Litters  Patentes  R.  Caroli  1.  quibus  concedit 

Chriftofero  Wandesforde  Armigero  Officium  Cuftodis  8c 
Magiftri  Rotulorum  Cancellarire  in  Regno  Hibernic. 
Tefte,  See.  11  die  Maij,  A.  D.  1633.  26. 

1 4.  Particular  of  the  Pofleffions  of  Patrick  Kirwarv, 
in  the  Countys  of  Gallway,  Sligoe,  Sz  Mayo.  27. 

15.  Letter  ofK.  Charles  1.  to  the  Lords  Jufliccs-of 

Irland  :  given  i3Maiei632.  32. 

With  an  Order  made  by  the  Committies  for  Irifh 
Affaires,  concerning  an  Exaftion  of  3  pence  per  pound, 

#5  vppon 


Bibliothecae  Harleiana: 


5  29 


Num.  2138. 

vppon  the  Merchants  Straingcrs  at  Dublin;  which  Order 
they  were  to  cauie  to  be  pun&ually  obferved. 

1 6.  Petition  of  Peter  Wyborne  &  John  Bullard  Mer¬ 
chants  Strangers,  to  the  King,  againft  that  Exaction.  «. 

17.  His  Majefties  iitle  to  the  Countrie  of  Ormond,  & 

other  Lands  in  the  County  of  Tiperary.  o  % 

iS.  Original  Letter  of  T.  Lord  Vifcount  Baltinglaffe 
to  Mr.  Radcliffe.  dated  22  January  1632.  °38.  * 

He  is  confident  that  the  Graunt  of  the  Cittie  (for  3d. 
£  v?Ui? d>)  lsgood’  and  not  auoidable  in  Lawe;  and  both 
Briitoll  and  moll  of  the  Citties  in  this  Kingdome  do 
quietly  colled  the  fame.  Yett  if  the  Lord  Deputie  fhould 
haue  any  defeire  to  dr  awe  it  unto  the  Kings  hands,  he 
would  be  ready  to  obbey  his  plealure  therein. 

19.  Petition  of  Robert  Cogan  one  of  the  Farmours  of 
11s  Majefties  Cuftomes,  to  the  Lords  Juftices  &  Coun¬ 
ted,  &c. 

.  Againfl:  Francis  Lord  Mount-Norris  another  of  the 
laid  termors,  who  by  his  own  fingle  Ad  pretended  to 
putt  him  out  of  the  Implovment  of  Colleding  the  faid 
Cuftomes,  going  againft  all  the  Authorities  which  had 
putt  him  in. 

20.  Copie  of  an  Order  of  the  Privy  Council  ;  dated 

at  Whitehall,  3  May  1632.  40 

Upon  the  Contioverfy  of  the  3d.  ip  pound  exaded 
upon  all  Merchants  Strangers  ;  which  was  to  be  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  Lord  Vifcount  Wentworth  defigned  Lord 
Deputy  of  Ireland,  &  the  Privy  Councill  there.  And 
that  m  the  mean  time  the  faid  Merchants  fhould  not  pay 
the  faid  three-penccs,  but  only  give  Security  :  and  that 
the  find  LoM  Deputy  &  Council  fhould  find  out  fome 
effectual  way  of  hindring  the  Merchant  Strangers  from 
retailing  their  Goods. 

2 1 .  His  Maj'eftics  1  ytle  to  the  Province  of  Leynfter. 

22.  Ihe  names  of  the  feuerall  Baronies  within' the 

feuerall  Counties  of  Rofcommon,  Sligoe,  Mayo,  &  Gall¬ 
way,  in  the  Prouince  of  Connaught.  4^. 

23.  Litters:  Patentes  R.  Caroli  1.  quibus  creavit  Ri- 

cardum  Wefton  Baronem  de  Neyland  in  Com.  Suff.  in 
Coiniteni  de  Portland  in  Com.  Dorfet.  Teftibus,  &c.  17 
die  l'ebruarij,  anno  Regni  8.  45_ 

24.  A  Note  of  the  Kinges  parte  in  the  County  of 

Mayo,  by  Bai  romes.  24  Sept\  1640.  30. 

25.  Propoficions  concerneing  the  keepeing  of  the 
Streetes  of  the  Cittie  of  Dublin  cleane ;  &  for  reduceing 
.  fettling  of  the  multitude  ofBeggers  in  or  nere  the  Cit- 

tic  ;  and  for  reforming  &  correcting  fundry  other  forts 
ol  difordered  Perfons  :  humbly  prefented  by  Sir  James 
Carroll  Kn\  Major  of  the  faid  Citty,  to  the  Right  Hon’""- 
the  Lord  Deputie,  28Novr.  1634.  rx- 

26.  A  true  Copie  of  the  Record  of  the  Lord  Falk¬ 

land  s  landing,  &  receiving  of  the  Sword,  as  Lord  De¬ 
putie-, General  l  of  the  Realme  of  Ireland.  r , 

27.  Recordum  dcReftitutione  polTdlionum  Margarets 

Comrnfla:  NorthfoJcia,  Filim  et  Heredi  Thomte  de  Bro- 
therton,  per  Richarduin  11.  anno  Regni  22.  56 

2S.  Notes  concerning  the  Barony,  Caftle,  &  Buriogh 
of  fort,  which  defeended  from  the  above  mentioned  Lady 
Margaret,  to  Howard  Duke  of  Norfolk;  and  into  which 
the  Sept  of  O  Nolan  int-uded  themlelves.  57.  etvid.  80. 

29  Part  of  an  Inquifition  taken  anno  35  R.  Ed  wardi 
1.  poft  mortem  Rcgeri  le  Bvgod  Comitis  Norff.  A  Maref- 
calli  Anglie,  de  Terris  et  Tenementis  fuis  in  Hibernia.  <;8. 

30.  Flow  the  Proceeding  is  vpon  the  Statute  of  Ho¬ 
mage;  and  by  what  Rule  they  gee  to  find  out  the  value 
of  the  Land,  dated  the  16  September  1640.  eg. 

3' -Letter  of  K.  James  1.  to  Sir  Arthure  Chichefter 
Knt.  his  Deputie  of  Ireland,  and  to  his  Chancel  lour,  &c. 
Given  vnderhis  privie  Signett,  the  13th  of  Maye,  anno 
regni  to.  _  6o> 

r  ir-  ^?C*ai‘n.S  dlat  houlds  it  time  to  conceme  him- 
felf  in  the  pointc  of  his  profitt,  and  particularly  for  the 
ltate  of  his  Exchequer  there,  which  he  much  defires  to 
Cat.  FIarl;  Vol.  II. 


Num. 


haue  ordered  k  guided  by  the  fame  Rules  k  Ordenanccs 
mat  are  in  vie  here,  &  haue  beene  approued  by  Inner 
experience  of  precedinge  times.  Wherefore  he  thinckes 
fill  to  erefl the  Offices  of  the  Clarke  of  the  Tallies,  & 
Clarke  of  the  Pells  of  Introitus  &  Exitus  in  that  King- 
dome,  in  like  forte  as  the  faid  Offices  are  at  this  executed 
heare.  And  becaufe,  at  the  firft  Execution  of  theft  faid 
Offices  the  Service  of  one  carefull  &  induflrious  Officer 
fame™  I“ffiaent  ’  Ie  aPPomts  Francis  Aiffiefley  for  the 

32.  Valuation  of  certain  Fee-farme-Rents  paid  in 
Ireland.  r 

3.3.  Breve  Mauricij  filij  Gerald!  Jufticiarij  Hibernii, 
direLtum  Vice-comni  Dtiblinia;  ■,  mandantis,  quod  thceret 
inqmlitionem  per  confilium  Maioris  et  Civium  Dublin, 
ubi  aqua  melius  &  commodius  de  curfu  fuo  pollit  affiimi 
“  c,’"“lla  ,ad  Civitatem  Dublin,  ad  emendacionen  eiuf- 
Henrfti*lta"S  Tefle’  &C'  ^  d‘e  AFrilli’  ami°  28  ra-gis 

34.  Notes  taken  from  the  Records  in  the  Towerfff 
London,  touching  many  Irith  Affaires.  68 

33.  Grants  made  to  Trinity-College  in  Dublin,  by  Qu. 
Elizabeth,  by  that  Cittie,  &  by  K.  James  r.  -Jj 

36.  Orders  eftablilhed  by  his  Majefty  K.  Charles  j. 

for  his  Councell  in  England,  which  he  now  commaund- 
eth  to  be  obferved  by  his  Councell  in  Ireland  :  with  fome 
additional  Orders  for  Ireland.  g  . 

37.  K.  Charles  I."  Inflruffions  for  Thomas  Vifcount 

V  entwo,  th,  Prefident  of  his  Counftll  in  the  North  parts  - 
b"df,n  ai  ?tiers  named,  being  appointed  to 

of  them'  &ld  CoUnfi:  ’  to  be  obferved  by  them  &  every 

'Jo  this  Traa  is  prefixed  the  Kings  Commiflion 
ereftmg  Sc  effabhfhmg  the  faid  Counfell,  bearing  teffe  ]  8 
Junij,  anno  regni  5.  6  8 

Pnff  frB0°krer.Of  t,huv"TC)'e0f  panc  of  thc  Landes9& 
i  olleflions  of  Randall  Earle  of  Antrim.  May  1641.  114  b 

39.  Tills  of  the  Kings  Privy  Councellors  in  Ireland,’  i 
Marlij  1032. 

40.  A  true  noate  touching  St.  Annes  Guild  (In  Dub. 

lin?)  according  to  the  Certificate  of  the  Commiffioners. 

A.  D.  1637.  j2  k 

Hereby  It  appeareth  that  the  old  Rents  belonging  to 
hat  Gild,  amounted  to  £s3  ,o  9j.  that  the  fame  were 
improved  to  £319  1  9.  but  that  they  were  worth,  ac- 
cording  to  their  true  yearly  Value  £75 y  i9 

y.  Ihe  Contents  of  Qu.  Elizabeth’s  Letters  Pat- 

the  JoTn  Te?e  ,27Jam’  ann°  "E™  aS.  direfled  to 
the  Lord  Deputie  k  C.ouncell  of  Ireland,  and  to  all 
other  her  louing  Subjefts  to  whom  it  fliall  apperteine. 

..  ,,  ™s  ™  f°r  the  peopling  k  inhabiting  of  the  Waftes 
cc  Rums  ol  the  Province  ol  Mounfter. 

42.  A  Briefe  of  Records  in  the  Tower,  concerning  di- 
vers  places  in  Connaght. 

43-  Copies  from  Vome  of  the  Records  in  the  Towct 
ol  London  relating  to  divers  Lands,  &c.  in  Ireland  - 
but  principally  to  the  County  of  Kildare.  i34.  ,36.  13s! 

Onnondbjedl'°nS  ^  ^  Title’ m  the  County9?} 

apo4ftiiledh.CKinSSTi,le  ,0  tha'  C°U",yi  Anfwe’rs 

40-  Another  Paper  about  the  fame  matter.  t4-  erU.'i' 

47-  Mr.  Charles  Monck's  Narration  of  his  viikffi., 
many  of  the  Sea-port  Towns  in  Ireland,  being  Survey  ”;: 
General  of  the  Cuftomes  there,  and  of  the  ffate  of  the 
feveral  Places  &  behavior  of  all  the  Officers  in  them  ■ 
from  the  agth  of  Auguft  1637.  t„  the  3  of  October  fob 
lowing,  both  included:  and  written  tcTthe  honnorabie 
Sir  George  Kadcliff  Knight,  one  of  his  Majefties  molt  ho¬ 
norable  1  rlvie  Councell  within  the  Kingdome  of  Ireland 
and  one  ol  his  Mafeflm  ham  &  Commiffioners  of  his’ 
L-ultomes  within  the  laid  Kingdoms. 

0  T  4S.  Abltraft 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2138 — 2142. 

48.  Abftract  of  the  Patent  of  K.  James  1 .  dat.  1 7  Janu- 
arij,  anno  regni  18.  At  the  end. 

Hereby  he  granted  to  Francis . .  .  &  his 

heirs  males  an  annual  Penfion  of  £  1 3  6  8. 

2139. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  the  hand  of  the  third  Randle 
Holme,  and  containing  more  of  his  Theological  Work?; 
as  to  which  I  being  in  much  haft,  fhall  fay  no  more  at 
this  time,  but  proceed  to. 

2140. 

A  Book  in  folio,  containing  one  Volume  or  part  of  feme 
Chelhire-Lawyers  common  Place  book  upon  which  I 
fhal  not  inlarge. 

2141. 

An  Heraidical  Book  in  folio,  on  whofe  back  the  third 
Randle  Holme  hath  written  this  Title,  “  Suffoulk  & 
Norfoulk  &  other  Pedegrees.”  It  is  written  by  feveral 
hands,  and  gives  the  Defcents  of  divers  of  the  Nobility, 
&  many  of  the  Gentry  of  other  Counties  befides  thole 
abovementioned  ;  particularly  of  Herefordlhire.  Here 
are  alfo  fome  Church  notes,  and  a  few  Collections  from 
Deeds,  &c.  conducing  to  illuftrate  the  Defcent  of  fome. 
Moreover,  I  find  herein. 

At  the  beginning, 

1.  The  Names  of  all  the  Mayours  of  the  Citie  of  He¬ 
reford,  from  the  7th  yere  of  K.  Richard  11.  to  the  fe- 
cond  of  K.  Charles  1.  inclufive. 

And,  at  the  end, 

2.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Pedegrees,  entred 
into  this  book :  with  another  like  table  to  the  Coates  & 
Crefts. 

2142. 

An  Heraidical  Book  in  folio,  written  by  divers  hands ; 
upon  which  the  third  Randle  Holme  had  bellowed  this 
T  itle  on  the  outftde,  “  Olde  C.helhire  Pedegrees,  &c.” 
wherein  1  find, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Defcents  in  this 
Booke.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  An  Alphabett  of  Townes  &  Names  of  Places  in  this 
Booke,  mentioned  by  Deedes. 

3.  The  fame  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabett  of  the  names 
of  Townes  &  Places  mentioned  in  Defcents  in  this  Book ; 
made  in  1663. 

Then  comes, 

4.  The  doughty  Deeds  that  was  done  at  the  feige  of 

Troy,  within  the  Twone  &  without.  1. 

An  idle  fragment,  pretending  to  fett  forth  fome  of 
the  Rudiments  of  Heraldry. 

15.  The  Chefhire-Pedegrees  before-mentioned.  3. 

6.  Narration  of  the  Defendants  from  Sir  Raffe  Ver¬ 
non,  who  lived  150  years.  30. 

7.  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Mr.  William  Booth, 
fon  Sc  heir  to  Sir  George  Booth,  who  died  A.  D.  1 636. 

1  28. 

This  is  fett  down  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme, 
who  hath  taken  much  pains  in  making  Additions,  &  Con¬ 
tinuations,  &  c. 

8.  The  firft  Randle  Holme’s  Lift  of  thofe  Perfons  who 

were  publickly  difelaymed,  at  the  high  Crofie  in  Chefter, 
by  Proclamation,  after  found  of  trumpet ;  att  the  Vifitation 
of  that  County-Palatine,  A.  D.  1613.  by  Sir  RichardSt. 
G  eorge  Norroy .  264. 

9.  A  printed  Precept  under  the  Hande  &  Seale  of 

Office  of  William  Dugdale  Norroy,  directed  to  the  highe 
Shireve  of  the  County  Palatine  of  Chefter ;  Sc  given  the 
6th  of  July,  anno  16  R.  C.aroli  11.  265. 

Requiring  him  to  forbear,  in  any  Writing  or  other- 
wife  to  attribute  unto  all  fuch  as  unlawfully,  and  without 
juft  Authority,  Vocation,  or  due  calling,  do  or  have  done, 
or  fhall  ufurp,  or  take  upon  him  or  them  any  Name  or 


Num.  2142 — - 2  1 44. 

title  of  honour  or  dignity,  as  Efquire,  or  Gentleman, 
or  other  :  until  the  faid  Perfons  fo  aHuming  thofe  Titles, 
{hall  ftand  to  &  juftify  the  fame  by  the  Law  of  Armes  of 
this  his  Majefties  Realm. 

10.  Lift  of  many  perfons  Names  inhabiting  within  the 

City  &  County  Palatine  of  Chefter.  26  :.  b. 

Some  part  of  this  feems  to  have  been  written  by  Sir 
William  Dugdale  before-mentioned. 

After  fome  blank  Paper,  and  fomewhat  before  the 
end,  remain 

1 1 .  The  Antiquity  of  the  family  of  Conftable,  taking 
their  fur-name  from  the  Office  of  Conftable  of  Chefter, 
called  in  Latin  Coneftabilis  &  Conftabularius,  five  Ma- 
gifter  Militum. 

The  fecond  Randle  Holme  for  this,  cites  Hen.  Pea- 
chams  compleat  Gentleman,  as  alfo  Speed,  Stow,  Fabian  3 
&c.  188. 

2143. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  feveral  Hands,  wherein  I  find, 

r.  Abftratts  or  brief  Reports  of  Trials  in  the  High 
Court  of  Star-Chamber,  in  the  feveral  Reign?,  to  that 
of  K.  James  1.  with  the  Orders  made,  or  Sentences  palled 
thereupon.  1  - 

Then  follow, 

2.  A  note  of  Fees  to  be  taken  by  the  Judges  &  theire 
Clerkes  in  the  tyme  of  theire  Circuytes,  in  Ireland.  72. 

This  was  figned  by  the  Lord  Chancellor  Sc  Judges  of 
Ireland,  1  July  1616. 

3.  Some  mixed  Law-Cafes  which  were  putt  be¬ 
tween  party  &  party  ;  with  the  Queries  arifing  therefrom. 


A  Book  in  folio,  containing  many  fingle  Tracts  &  Papers, 
written  by  feveral  Perfons,  and  relating  to  the  Parlia- 
ment-Sequeftrators  in  C.hefhire,  during  the  time  of  the 
Rebellion  againft  K.  Charles  1.  being  now  bound  up 
together,  Sc  are, 

1.  An  Abftratt  of  the  Arreares  due  out  of  Papifts  & 

Delinquents  Eftates  within  the  Hundred  of  Edelbury  ;  as 
they  were  giuen  in  to  us  Commiflioners  for  Sequeftrations 
from  the  Committee  at  Tarvin,  by  the  hands  of  James 
Gertfey  Gent,  in  February  1645.  whereupon  the  Agents 
were  order’d  to  colleCt  Sc  gather  the  fame.  1 . 

In  this  TraCt,  which  was  given  in  upon  Oath  23 
March  1647-8,  are  likewife  fome  other  Accompts,  viz. 

2.  A  true  &  perfect  Accoumpt  howe  the  lequeftred 

Eftates  within  the  Hundred  of  Edelbury  bee  particularly 
fett,  &  to  whome,  and  at  what  dayes  due  &c  payable  ;  as 
alfo  what  iflues  out  of  euery  Eftate,  and  when  any  Ellate 
is  difeharged  from  Sequeftration,  and  by  what  Order,  and 
upon  what  Grounds  ;  together  with  a  breuiate  {hewing 
what  euery  particlarPapift  and  delinquent  Eftate  amounts 
vnto  {the  Charge  deduced  for)  this  yeare  1 646.  with’aCat- 
talogue  of  the  Papifts  Sc  Delinquents  names  that  remayne 
vnder  Sequeftration,  at  the  end  of  this  yeare,  1646.  3. 

3.  A  like  Accompt  for  the  year  1647.  2 6. 

Then  follow, 

4.  A  particular  Accounte  of  the  moneyes  that  I  have  re- 

ceaued  out  of  the  Arreares  which  were  deliuered  by  the 
Committee  at  Taruin  to  the  Committie  for  Sequeftrations 
in  Edefbury-Hundred  ;  and  due  to  the  Common-wealth 
out  of  Papifts  &  Delinquents  Eftates  before  the  1  8th  of 
Februarie  1645.  38- 

5.  A  particular  Accounte  of  all  the  moneys  received 

out  of  the  Papifts  &  Delinquents  Eftates  in  Edefbury- 
Hundred,  by  the  Committee  for  Sequeftrationes  ftnee  the 
1 8  of  Febr.  1 645.  to  the  1 8  of  Febr.  1 646.  40. 

6.  A  particuler  Accounte  of  all  the  moneys  that  haue 

bine  received  out  of  Papifts  &  Delinquents  F.ftates  in 
Edefbury-Hundred,  by  the  Committee  for  Sequeftra¬ 
tions,  finee  the  18  of  Febr.  1646.  to  the  23  Martij 
1647.  51- 

~.  Richard 


Num.  2144. 

7.  Richard  Willcoxon’s  Accounte  of  his  Difburfe- 

ments  of  the  moneys  rayfed  out  of  the  fequeftrated  Eftates 
of  Papifts  &  Delinquents  in  Edelbury-Hundred,  fince  the 
18  of  Febr.  1645.  to  the  24  ofFebr.  1647.  55. 

1  hefe  laft:  four  Accompts  were  deliver’d  in  upon 
Oath,  the  20  April  1648. 

8.  Mr.  Raphe  Pooles  &  Mr.  Thomas  Braflies  Ac¬ 

compts  of  their  Receipts  &  Difburfements,  fince  ig  Au- 
gull,  1645.  to  .  .  .  May  1646.  taken  in  vpon  Oath,  the 
7th  day  of  September  1647.  66. 

9.  A  true  &  perfedt  Accompt  of  all  the  moneyes  re- 

ceiued  &  dilburfed  by  Mr.  Raph  Poole  one  of  the  Col¬ 
lectors  for  Northwich-Hundred  out  of  the  Eftates  of 
Papifts  &  Delinquents  fequeftred  ;  from  the  1  of  Septem¬ 
ber  1643.  to  the  15  June  1645.  83. 

10.  Part  of  an  Accompt  of  moneys  received  &  dif- 
burf'ed  by  Edward  Fletcher  one  of'  the  Collectors  for 
Northwich-Hundred,  during  Mr.  Raph  Pooles  abfence  ; 
from  the  14th  June  1643.  t0  the  19th  of  Auguft  1645. 

92. 

1 1.  His  Accompt  of  Receipts  &  Difburfements,  during 

Mr.  Pooles  abfence,  from  the  23  October  1645.  to  the 
10th  Febr.  1645.  98.  Impf. 

1  hen  follows  the  Accompt  of  two  of  the  Sequef¬ 
trators  of  Northwich-Hundred,  for  the  yeare  1648.  con¬ 
taining, 

12.  A  Catalogue  of  the  names  of  Delinquents  &  Pa- 

pifts  continewing  vnder  Sequeflration  in  the  yeare  1648. 
who  haue  Eftates  ;  and  of  fuch  as  haue  beene  taken  off 
lince  the  laft  Accompt  given  in.  1  i  o. 

13.  Delinquents  difeharged  in  whole,  or  in  parte. 

1 1 2. 

74.  An  AbftraCt  of  all  fuch  Fines,  Forfeatures,  Amer¬ 
ciaments  as  were  fined,  forfeated,  &  afeared,  at  the 
Court-Leete  &  Halmote  holden  for  the  Mannour  &  Bar- 
rony  of  Kinderton,  the  22  of  Aprill  1647.  coram  Thoma 
Smalwood  Gen.  Sencfchallo  ibidem,  per  Ordinem  Par¬ 
liament!.  l2o. 

15.  Another,  of  that  Court  held  the  22  &  23  of 

October  1646.  I2r- 

16.  Another,  of  the  Court  I.eete  &  Court  Barron 

for  the  Mannour  of  Brereton,  holden  by  the  fame,  the 
23  April  1647.  122. 

17.  Another,  of  that  Court,  holden  by  the  fame,  the 

26  of  October  1646.  123. 

18.  Another,  of  that  Court,  holden  by  the  fame, 

the  13  May  1646.  i24. 

19.  Another  of  the  Courte  Leete  &  Courtee  Baron  for 

the  Mannour  of  By  ley  cum  Yate-houfe,  holden  by  the 
fame,  the  15th  of  May  1646.  124.  b. 

20.  Another  of  that  Courte,  holden  the  21  of  May 

1647,  by  the  fame.  12$. 

21.  Another,  of  the  Courte  for  the  Mannor  of  Hole- 

ford  et  Loftock-Gralam,  by  the  fame,  18  May  1646. 

1 25.  b. 

^Thefe  Accompts  were  taken  in  upon  Oath  20  May 

_  22.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Names  of  Delinquents  &  Pa- 
pifts  vnder  Sequeftracion  ;  and  of  fuch  as  are  queftiona- 
ble  5  for  the  yeare  1647.  1*7 

Alfo, 

23.  A  particuler  of  all  the  Racke-rents  of  Delinquents 
in  Northwhich-Hundred,  fett  &  lett  to  the  Vie  of  the 
State,  by  the  Sequeftrators  of  the  faid  Hundred,  for  the 
Yeare  1647.  _  130. 

24;  Mr.  Hughon  Minfiiall's  &  Mr.  Robert  Carter’s 
Receipts  Sc  Dilburfemenls,  to  8  of  Auguft  1647.  132. 

Thefe  Accompts  were  taken  in  upon  Oath,  1 2  Au- 
guft  1647.  238. 

25.  A  Catalogue  of  Delinquents  Sc  Papifts  Names  in 
Northwich-Hundred,  in  that  Divifion  next  toward  Con- 
gleton  ;  and  alfoe  the  Names  of  fuch  others  as  we  re¬ 
member  in  the  other  Divifion  of  this  Hundred.  139. 

26.  Rentals  of  the  Lands  of  Delinquents  &  Papifts 

*4 


Num.  2144 —  2146. 

within  theHundreJ  ofNorthwich  (in  the  fame  Divifion) 
dimifed  &  lett  to  the  Vfe  of  the  Common-wealth  for  the 
Yeare  ,646,  by  Richard  Brooke,  See.  Sequeftrators: 
with  fome  other  of  their  Accompts.  ,  4  „  _ 

Thefe  were  deliver'd  in  upon  Oath,  the  nth  of 
Auguft  1647. 

2!+5. 

An  lieraldical  Book  in  folio,  written  &  tricked  by  feve- 
ral  hands,  but  principally  by  thofe  of  Jacob  C.haloner 
Sc  the  fecond  Randle  Holme.  It  is  on  the  out-fide 
by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  thus  entituled, Lincolne- 
lhire,  and  part  of  Staffordlhire-Pedegrees.”  But  1 
find  therein, 

1.  Armes  ih  Blafon  of  the  Lincolne-Ihire  Gentry  as 
they  were  painted  in  the  Lord  Treafurer  Burleigh’s  Gal¬ 
lery  by  order  of  Robert  Cooke  Clarencieux.  At  the 
beginning. 

2.  Armes  of  Lincolnfllire  Earles  St  Barons,  in  Trick. 

3.  Lincolnefliire  Pedegrees,  colMed  from  the  Viii. 
talionsof  1562.  &  t592.  with  Additions  &  Continua- 
tions. 

4-  Pedegrees  of  many  Staffordlhire-Families,  coliefted 

from  the  Vifitation  book  of  A.  D.  1 563.  with  feme  others 
relating  to  Families  in  other  Counties.  QQ 

5- _  Alphabetical  Table,  to  the  Armes  of  Families  ex', 

tant  m  this  Beok.  I  g  ^ 

6.  Table  of  the  Names  of  thofe  Families,  whofeArmes 
are  abovementioned  at  §  i. 

thi(BotkhabeliCal  T“Me  ‘°  ‘he  Pcde«rees  entr«i  Iwo 

8.  Order  of  the  Funeral  of  the  Lord  MordanP'at 
Turvdle  in  Bedfordihire,  1 6  Maye  1571.  ’ 

■  ?'•  1  ?c  ^arass  ofalJ  the  Gentlemen,  being  Inheritors 
within  the  Countey  ofLincolne.  ,  q  ’ 

Here  is  likewife  a  Valuation  of  their  Eftates  ■  I  fiC, 

pore,  according  to  what  they  were  taxed  :  for  none  ev 
ceed  500  Markes. 

to.  Lift  of  the  Shirevcs  of  Lincolnlhire,  downtoann 
.7  R.  Jacob,  t.  Ij8.b. 

2146. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  written  by  feveral  hands, 
but  principally  by  that  of  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  • 
whofeSon,  the  third  of  that  Name,  hath  (on  the  out’ 
fide)  bellowed  this  1  .tie  upon  it,  “  Pedegrees  of  feue- 
rail  places.  ° 

And  I,  in  turning  it  over,  do  find  therein, 

I'.lhe  th'rd  Randle  I,oIme’s  Alphabetical  Table, 
directing  to  the  Pedegrees  here  lett  down. 

2.  His  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  thofe  Fa- 
milies  whofe  Coates  ot  Armes  are  entred  here 

3.  His  Alphabetical  Table  giving  the  Names  of  Plats 
here  remembred. 

Then  comes  7* 

4.  The  Collection  itfelf,  which  is  very  numemuQ  . 
and  aftords  both  (Iiorter  Defcents  &  larger  Pedegrees  of 
laimhes  of  many  Goumlcs  (erpecialiy  of  Cheihire  and 
Staffordftnre)  in  no  order,  but  mixed  all  together-  feme 
of  'Vhteh  are  ftrengthned  with  Notes  taken  from  old 
Notes  &  ReC0‘ds  ’  and  m  forae  plnces,  with  Church- 

Among  thefe  I  alfo  obferve, 

5.  A  Confirmation  of  Armes  A  Creft  to  Robert  Gar- 
dmer  of  Lankasflnre  Gentleman  &  Yemon  for  the  Mouth 
H  iVa’c-  y  r  a"  Dcth!cke  aPs  Norroy  principall 
R  Edw  vt  Kmg  °f  Arm“'  '  ™e,’J  ' 5  Ap"‘’  ann°  3 

6  Oiigiual  Letter  of  Mr.  Ed.  Bromley  to  the  thM 
Kanule  Holme,  but  without  date  of  the  year.  yc  A 

Shewing  his  difpleafure  in  that  Mr.  Holme  had  fent 
him  hfcocheons,  with  a  difference  in  his  Armes,  which 
he  bare  with  none. 

7-  Original 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2146,  2147. 

7.  Original  Letter  of  Raphe  Lowndes  to  the  fame ; 

dated  28  April  1656.  ^  72-  A* 

Making  fome Enquiries  about  his  Family. 

8.  Confirmation  of  Armes,  &  Grant  of  a  Creft,  to 

John  Lowndes  of  Ouerton  in  the  Parifli  of  Aftbury  & 
County  of  Chefter,  by  Richard  St.  George  Norroy,  Efqj 
King  of  Armes.  dated  the  18  of  June  1612.  72. 

9.  Inftru&ions  given  by  Richard  Legh,  Efq;  High- 

SherrilFe  ofChelhire  to  the  third  Randle  Holme  for  his 
Trumpet-Banners,  15  February  1694.  72.  c. 

10.  Two  Original  Letters  of  Mr.  Edward  Legh  of 

Baguleghs  to  the  fame  ;  June  1680.  72.  d. 

About  his  Trumpet-Banners,  and  fome  miftakes 
Mr.  Holme  had  made  about  them. 

11.  Original  Letter  of  J.  Lowe,  to  the  fame  ;  dated 

12  April  1692.  95-  b- 

Shewing  that  Exceptions  had  been  made,  &  Com¬ 
plaints  to  the  Heralds  OfHce  above,  at  the  Interment  of 
Mr.  Motterlhed  with  Efcocheons,  notwithftanding  that 
he  had  left  a  very  full  &  plentifull  Eftate,  and  his  An- 
ceftors  ufe  of  the  like  ;  therefore  defires  that  fome  En¬ 
quiry  might  be  made. 

1 2.  Original  Letter  of  Joane  Hollinfliede,  to  the  fame  ; 

dated,  5  April  1692.  95-  c. 

About  the  fame  Affair. 

13.  Mr.  Holmes  Anfwer,  in  favor  to  that  Family,  and 
their  Right  to  bear  Armes. 

14.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Peter  Leicefter,  to  the  fame, 

dated  20  November  1672.  108.  c. 

Deliring  a  Defcent  of  Mobberley,  ffrom  whom  he 
was  defeended)  as  judging  that  the  account  he  had  given 
thereof  in  his  Book,  was  imperfect.  108.  c. 

15.  Another  from  the  fame,  to  the  fame,  dated  24 

February  1672.  108.  d. 

Randle  had  defired  Mr.  Leicefter  to  help  him  to  one 

of  his  Bcokesat  an  eafy  rate  ;  which  would  not  do  :  the 

other  directs  where  he  might,  for  his  Money  be  fupplied. 
Then  he  defires  Randle  to  l'earch  again  about  the  Defcent 
of  Mobberly  ;  I  fuppofe  for  nothing. 

16.  Confirmation  of  Armes  Sc  Creaft  to  Henry  Muf- 
kett  of  Halfton  in  the  County  of  Suffblke,  Gent,  by 
Robert  Cooke,  Efq;  alias  Clarencieulx,  principall 
Hereaulte  &  Kinge  of  Armes  ;  13  September  1576. 

120. 

17.  Original  Letter  of  Sylvanus  Morgan,  of  London, 
Bainter-Stainer,  to  the  fame  ;  dated  20  December  1681. 

1 28.  A. 

Here  is  a  Defcent  of  Naylor,  with  the  Armes  of 
thofe  of  Kent,  Sc  of  Huntingdon. 

18.  Articles  of  Enquiry  miniftred  by  George  Hall 

Bilhop  of  Chefter,  to  the  Advocates  Sc  Pro&ors  of  the 
Confiftory-Court  of  Chefter,  at  his  Vifitation  of  the 
faid  Court,  held  in  the  Cathedrall-Church  of  Chefter, 
the  8th  of  September  1665.  165.  c. 

2147. 

A  Book  in  folio  ;  feeming,  in  the  time  of  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth,  to  have  been  the  Debt-Book  of  Laurence  Wal¬ 
den  a  Corn-Mercht.  at  Kings  Lynne  in  Norfolk  ;  after 
whofe  death  probably,  it  came  into  the  hands  of  Ja¬ 
cob  C.haloner,  Sc  fo  to  the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  and 
afterward  to  his  Son ;  who  has  on  the  out-fide  thus 
entituled  it,  “  Defcents  &  Coates  of  divers  Shires.” 
Thefe  three  perfons  laft  mentioned  have  written  much 
on  the  vacant  places  of  the  faid  Book,  and  alfo  parted 
upon,  or  otherwife  added  many  Pedegrees,  Defcents, 
Sc  Fragments,  written  by  themfelves  Sc  many  others, 
among  which  I  can  perceive  fome  of  them  to  be  of  the 
hands  of  Auguftin  Vincent,  Sampfon  Lennard,  Rich¬ 
ard  Mundy  See.  So  that  the  whole  may  be  called, 

1.  A  Rhapfodical  Collection  of  Defcents,  8c  Armes, 
Englilh,  Wellh,  &  Irilh  :  with  fome  other  Notes  mif- 
rellaneous. 

At  the  beginning,  is 


Num.  2147 — 2149. 

2 .  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Pedegrees  mentioned 
and 

At  the  end 

3.  A  like  Table  of  the  Names  of  the  Families 
owning  the  Coates  of  Armes  extant  in  this  Booke  :  made, 
A.  D.  1659. 

2148. 

Codex  tenuis  membranaceus  in  fol.  minori,  diverfis 
manibus  exaratus  ;  quo  continentur. 

1.  Apographa  Litteraruin  atque  Brevium,  una  cum 
Regefto  Placitorum  Forenfium  ad  ampliffimam  Ab- 
batiam  S.  Werburgas  Ceftrenfis,  varijs  teinporibus, 
fpectantium. 

Notandum  vero,  hoc  in  optima:  notae  Codice,  plun- 
ma  folia  jam  nunc  defiderari. 

Prasmittitur. 

2.  Ranulfi  Holmefij  tertij  Index  Virorum,  i.  e.  hoc 
in  Codice  memoratorum  ;  incipiendo  tamen  a  folio.  53. 

Agmen  etiam  cogit, 

3.  Kjufdem  Index  Locorum,  a  folio  53.  pariter  inci- 
piens. 

2149- 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  chiefly  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme,  and  finilbeu  by  his  Son,  or  by  his  direction  ; 
who  alfo  hath  on  the  out  fide  given  it  the  Title  follow¬ 
ing,  ‘'Aunciant.Euidence,  and  other  Writtings  con- 
cerninge  feuerall  Chcfliire  Familyes,  Sec.”  all  which  I 
fhall  briefly  account  for  under  thefe  heads. 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Table  of  thofe  Gen¬ 
tlemens  Names  whofe  Evidences  are  here  abbreviated. 

At  the  beginning, 

2.  His  Table  of  other  Remarkables  to  be  found  in 

this  Book.  ibid. 

Then  follows,  the 

3.  Index  Locorum  ;  begun  by  his  Son,  or  Apprentice, 
as  it  ftiould  feem  ;  &  finiftied  by  himfelf.  Now  comes 
the  Work  itfelf,  which  feems  to  have  been  begun  by  the 
fecond  Randle  Holme,  A.  D.i  636. 

Herein  I  obferve, 

4.  Some  Texts  of  Scripture  alledged  by  him  to  evince 

the  Lawfulnefs  of  Pedegrees  Sc  Armes  ;  the  Right  of  In¬ 
heritance  ;  that  Townes  8c  Villages  took  Names  from  the 
Pofleflor  :  Examples  of  Burialls  Sc  Monuments  :  with 
two  Notes,  one  from  Mr.  Lambard  againft  them  that  take 
away  Coat-Armors,  or  Grave-ftones  from  Churches  : 
the  other  from  the  Proclamation  of  5  Hen.  v.  againft 
Ufurpers  of  Armes.  1 . 

5.  The  fecond  Randle  Holmes  Defcent  of  divers  Ho¬ 

norable  Families  who  have  Ihared  in  the  Barony  of  Wich- 
Malbank  (i.  e.  Namptwich)  by  reafon  of  the  Divifion  of 
the  fame  ;  as  he  made  it  for  Robert  Vifcount  Cholmon- 
deley,  A.  D.  1632.  2.  b. 

6.  Pedegree  of  the  Family  of  Dutton,  down  to 

A.  D.  1658.  taken,  by  the  fame,  from  a  larger,  as  it 
feems.  4.  b. 

7.  Compendium  Cartarum  quaruftdain  vetuftarum 

penes  ....  Downes  de  Worth,  Arm.  A.  D. 
1641.  5. 

8.  The  fecond  Randle  Holme’s  Abftrafls  of  Deeds, 

with  Tricks  of  fome  Seak-,  relating  to  Warburton,  Alh- 
ton,  Alton,  Dutton,  Kingefley,  &  many  other  Chefliirc- 
Families  Sc  Villages.  7.  b. 

Here  are  alfo  many  Church  Notes  relating  to  the 

Family  of  Dutton. 

9.  Hiftorical  Notes  relating  to  the  Towne-ftiip  of  Ne- 

ther-Tabley  in  Chefhire  ;  and  of  the  Family  of  Leicefter, 
the  owners  thereof  from  their  Settlement  there,  temp.  R. 
Henrici  111.  to  A.  D.  1647.  21. 

This  was  copied  by  the  faid  Mr.  Holme,  from  the 
Book  written  by  Mr  Leicefter  (afterwards  Sir  Peter  Lei¬ 
cefter  Bnronett)  A.  D.  1649. 

10.  Notes  taken  by  him  from  the  Exchequer-Office  in 

Chefter.  3 1 . 

1 1 .  More 


‘3 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


S33 


Num,  214^. 

It.  More  from  Mr.  Berkett's  (Birkenheved’s) 
the  Prothonotary  there.  32. 

12.  Tricks  of  fotne  Seals  }  with  a  few  Notes  taken 

from  Deeds  belonging  formerly  to  the  Abbey  of  St. 
Werburg.  39. 

13.  Abftra&s  from  Deeds  belonging  to  Tho.  PoWnall. 

14.  Part  of  a  Bill  in  a  Sute  between  Phillip  Egerton 
one  of  the  Sonnes  of  Sir  Rouland  Egerton  Kt.  &  Bart, 
deceafed,  &  Sir  John  Eggerton,  Bart.  &c.  Defendants. 

44. 

15.  Abftrafls  of  Deeds  had  from  Mr.  Wardley,  who 

belonged  to  George  Booth  Lord  Delatnere.  48. 

16.  Ex  chartis  Galfridi  Minfhull  Armigeri,  anno 

*648.  50.  b. 

17.  Three  Notes  out  of  Mr.  Kettells  Deeds.  51.  b. 

18.  Pedegree  of  Huxley,  as  labour’d  from  Deeds. 

52. 

19.  Notes  from  Deeds  relating  to  the  Family  of  1  il- 

fton,  &c.  53.  et  59.  et  64. 

20.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Huxley,  collected 
from  the  Evidences  of  George  Cliff  Efq;  62.  (vid.  52.) 

Thefe  are  followed  by  others  taken  from  Mr.  Til- 
ftons  Evidences. 

21.  Notes  relating  to  Morefbarwe  taken  by  the  third 

Randle  Holme  from  the  Deeds  of  Mr.  Whittingham  of 
Moreibarow,  ano  1666.  65. 

22.  Extracts  from  many  other  Deeds,  tending  to  the 
illuftration  of  the  Defcents  of  many  Cheihire-Families. 

66.  et  73.  b.  &  1  ]  2. 

23.  Grant  of  aCreft  to  Rauff-Egerton  of  Ridley  Efq; 

by  Thomas  Wryothefley  Garter,  &  John  Yong  Norroy: 
given  the  1 4th  day  of  April  1513.  71. 

The  Grant  is  in  French,  and  their  Seals  are  Seals  of 
their  Armes. 

24.  A  Coppieof  Qu.  Elizabeth’s  Charter  granted  to 

Frodiham  ;  being  taken  out  of  a  Coppey  therof  now  in 
the  hands  of  Sir  Thomas  Alton  of  Alton  Bar',  A.  D. 
*635-  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme.  no. 

25.  Copies  of  the  Pardons  granted  by  Rich.  nr.  & 

K.  Henry  vn.  to  John  Woode  of  Halton  Gentilman  ; 
with  Tricks  of  their  Seals.  1 1 1 . 

26.  The  Coppie  of  an  auntient  Court  Roule,  now  in 
the  hands  of  Sir  Tho.  Alton  Baronett ;  which  (by  fom 
way)  is  gott  from  amonge  the  Roules  in  the  Office  of 
Chelter,  and  contayneth  Shutes  of  the  Abbot  of  Chelter 
with  divers,  and  endorfed  “  Placita  Forreltii.”  1 1 8. 

Quan  e.  If  (upon  a  leifurely  Examination)  thisTraft 
may  not  prove  to  be  extracted  from  the  Book  lalt  def¬ 
erred,  that  is  2148,  which,  by  the  way,  might  from 
Mr.  Recorder  Whitby,  have  come  to  Sir  '1  homas  Alton  ; 
for  I  find  Mr.  Whitbies  hand  in  it. 

27.  More  Abftratts  of  Deeds,  Sec.  (befides  thofe  re¬ 

ferred  unto,  at  §.  22.)  relating  to  fundry  Families  of 
Chelhire,  &  other  Counties.  128.  b. 

28.  Tranflation  of  the  Letters  Teftimonial  of  Chrif- 

topher  Radzivil  Duke  of  Birze,  See.  Great  General  of 
Lithuania,  to  the  valiant  behavior  of  Arthur  Alton,  in 
all  the  proceeding  of  the  Warres  in  Lithuania,  where  he 
commanded  three  Companies  of  Foote.  Dated  at  Vilna 
1  Jan.  1623.  138.  * 

29.  Grant  of  a  Penfion  of  700  Florens  qp-  ann.  to  the 

laid  Mr.  Alton,  by  Sigifmund  King  of  Poland.  Given  at 
Warfaw,  23  of  April,  1635.  ibid, 

30.  That  Kings  Letters  Teftimonial  to  the  Valor  & 

other  good  Behavior  of  the  faid  Mr.  Aiton,  who  was 
lent  unto  him  by  the  King  of  England  in  the  tyme  of 
the  Turkiih  Warrs ;  and  whom,  by  degrees,  he  had 
advanced  to  the  Office  of  a  Lieutenant-Colonell.  Given 
at  Warfaw,  A.  D.  1630.  138.  b. 

31.  A  Pafs  from  the  Ruffian  Emperor  Michael  Theo- 
dorowitz  for  Sir  Arthur  Alton,  K'.  who  arrived  in  his 
great  Empire,  with  a  certaine  Number  of  Men,  Cap- 
taines,  &  Commanders,  lent  from  James  King  of  Eng¬ 
land,  Sec.  with  a  defire  to  ferve  him  againlt  their  com- 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2149. 


hlon  Enemy  Sigifmund  K;  of  Poland  i  where  he  did  per¬ 
forate  good  Service,  dureing  the  vacancie  of  his  Em- 
periall  Seate.  Given  in  Mufcowj  in  the  yeare  of  the 
World,  7122.  (i.  e.  1614.)  139. 

32.  Commillion  from  Gultavus  Adolphus  King  of 

Sueden  td  Colonell  Arthur  Alton,  far  the  raifirtg  a  Re¬ 
giment  of  Engliih  Souldiers,  and  tranfporting  the  fame 
into  his  Service,  dat.  19  Auguft,  1631.  139.  b. 

33.  Cofniflion  of  Algemoun  Percy  Earle  of  Nor¬ 

thumberland,  Lord  High  Admiral  of  England,  &  Captain 
General  of  his  Majefties  Army  &  Fleet  imployed  in  this 
Expedition.  Given  the  8th  of  April,  1 640.  Conftitut- 
ing  Colonell  Arthur  Alton  Serjeant-Major-General  of 
thofe  Forces,  that  (in  his  abfence)  were  to  be  at  New- 
Caltle  upon  Tyne,  vnder  the  command  of  the  Lord  Vif- 
count  Conwey  Generali  of  the  Horfe.  140. 

34 .  Commillion  of  Sir.  Thomas  Wentworth,  K'.  Earle 

of  Strafford,  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  Lord  Prefident 
of  the  Counfell  eftabiilhed  in  the  North  Part  of  Eng¬ 
land,  and  Lieutenant  Generali  of  his  Majefties  Armie 
imploied  in  this  Expedition.  Given  the  7th  of  Septem¬ 
ber,  1640  conftituting  (by  Authority  from  the  faid 
Algernoun  Earle  of  Northumberland,  as  Captain-Gene- 
rall)  Colonell  Arthur  Afton  Colonell-Generall  of  one  of 
the  Brigades  in  the  faid  Army.  1 40.  b. 

35.  Another  Commiflion  from  the  Earle  of  Stafford, 
given  the  17th  of  September  1640.  by  the  fame  Au¬ 
thority  appointing  this  Colonell  Afton  Serjeant  Major 
General  of  that  part  of  the  Army,  which  is  to  attende 
his  Majefties  perfon ;  confuting  of  the  Trained  Bands 
ofYorklhire,  and  fundry  other  Companies.  ibid. 

All  thefe  Commiffions  &  Teftimonials  have  Tricks 
of  the  Seals  appendant,  pretty  well  done,  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme. 

36.  The  Plea  of  the  Borough  of  Macclesfeld,  upon  a 
Quo  Waranto  iffued  againft  them,  ann.  24  Edw.  hi: 


140.  141. 

37.  Copies  of  certain  old  Deeds,  relating  to  the  Ma¬ 

nors  of  Minfule- Vernon,  Oldington,  Lowe,  Erdefwike, 
Wrenburge,  Chorleghe,  &c.  which  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme  had  at  Sir  Thomas  Afton’s,  A.  D.  1639.  142. 

38.  Dockets  of  Deeds  belonging  to  Mr.  Balls  of 

Boghton,  delivered  to  the  third  Randle  Holme,  by  Mr. 
Litlor.  i48. 

3Sb  Abftraft  of  the  Inquifitio  poft  mortem  Rich. 
Chomley  de  Chomley  Arm.  ann.  30  Hen.  vm.  150. 

40.  A  Note  or  Catalogue  of  all  fuch  Deeds,  Evidences 

&  Writeinges  as  were  deliuered  by  Mrs.  Frances  Gamull 
Widowe,  the  Reli&e  of  William  Gamull  late  Alderman 
of  Chefter,  to  Mr.  Will.  Gamull  fonne  of  the  faid  Wil¬ 
liam  Gamull,  the  16  of  June.  A.  D.  1643.  151. 

This  is  figned  and  attefted  by  proper  perfons. 

41.  Letter  of  K.  James  1.  to  the  Lord  Chichefter  his 
Deputie  of  Ireland,  &c.  Given,  the  10th  of  Auguft,  ann. 


regm  n.  153. 

For  the  delivery  of  Lands  to  the  cleere  yerely  val- 
lue  of  200  Markes,  lawefull  Money  of  England,  over 
and  above  all  reprifes  ;  to  Sir  Arthure  Srvage  Knight, 
one  of  the  Gent,  of  his  priuie  Chamber :  in  regard  that 
hee  had  beene  an  auncient  Servitor,  haueinge  held  fpe- 
ciali  places  of  Honnor  &  Comaund  in  the  Warrs,  and 
had  not  thither-to  tailed  of  his  Bountie  :  to  hould  the 
fame  in  free  &  comon  Soccage  as  of  the  CaiUe  of  Dub¬ 
lin,  &  not  in  Capite,  or  by  .Knights  Service. 

42.  Lands  held  by  Robert  Grofvenor  of  Hulme,  Efq; 
as  entered  into  his  Office  poft  Mortem,  ann.  4  Edw.  iv. 

165. 

43.  Lands  held  by  Hugh  Venables  of  Kindcrton  ;  as 

by  his  Office,  taken  ann.  8  Rich.  11.  165.  b. 

44.  Panell  of  a  Jury  before  Humphrey  DuckofGloT 

ter,  Jufl ice  of  Chefter,  ann.  10  Hen.  vi.  168. 

45.  Divers  Panels  of  Juries,  in  the  fame  Re  gn.  ibid. 

46.  Names  of  fome  Jurors  impanelled,  in  the  time  of 

K.  Edward  in.  169. 

6  U  47.  Names 


534 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2149,  2150. 

47.  Names  of  a  Jury  fworn  upon  an  Inquifitlon,  ann. 

14.  Edwardi  rv.  i6g.  b. 

48.  Names  of  many  Efehetors  for  Chefter,  gather’d 

from  Inquifitions,  Pedegrees,  &c.  170.  170.  d. 

49.  Names  of  many  Chainbcrlaynes  of  Chefter,  col- 

ledlcd  from  Deeds,  Pedegrees,  &c.  171. 

50.  Names  of  feveral  Coroners  of  Chefter,  or  in 

Chefhiret  172. 

51.  Names  of  many  Conftables  of  Chefter-Caftlc. 

172.  b. 

52.  Names  of  Barons,  Clerkes  of  Judges  Office,  or 

Attorneys  in  Chefter,  of  old.  173. 

53.  Names  of  the  Hundreds  in  Chefhire,  of  old. 

173.  b. 

54.  Names  of  divers  Sheriffes  of  Chefhire. 

175.  et  1 81. 

55.  I. iff  of  Lords  Chancellors  of  England,  down  to 

Sir  Francis  Bacon;  copied  by  the  lecond  Randle  Holme, 
ann.  1630.  .  \77- 

Randle  obferved  afterward,  that  this  Lift  is  er¬ 
roneous. 

56.  His  Note  (hewing  that  certain  of  the  Chefhire 
Barons  were  Benefactors  to  Weftminfter  Abbey,  and 
had  their  Armes  fett  up  in  the  Church  thereof,  among 
others  who  contributed  toward  the  Building  the  fame. 

178.  b. 

57.  R.  Willfon’s  Account  of  the  Chefhire-Barrons 

niaue  by  Hugh  Lupc,  abridg’d.  179. 

58.  A  Note,  or  Poem,  of  the  dowings  of  Randle 

Blundevilc  Earle  of  Chefter;  partly  out  of  a  Manu- 
feript  in  the  handes  of  Mr.  Bollock  of  Tathall ;  but  put 
into  Verfe  by  him,  A.  I).  1628.  179.  b. 

^9.  Copie  of  the  great  Charter  of  Confirmation  of  the 
Liberties  of  Chefter-Abbcy,  bearing  Tefte,  4  Julij,  anno 
fexto  R.  Henrici  v.  from  the  Origenall  in  the  hands  of 
John  Edwards  of  Cheueley  Gent.  182. 

60.  The  third  Randle  Holme's  Ab  ft  rafts  of  certain 

Deeds  in  the  cuftody  of  Mr.  Tho.  Motterihed  of  Matt- 
ram.  A.  D.  1692.  188. 

61.  Deeds  which  he  coppyed  (i.  e.  abriged)  from  the 

Originalls  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Hampton  of  Handley, 
A.  D.  1692.  189. 

62.  Some  of  his  Short  Notes  concerning  divers 

Townes  or  Eftates  in  Chefhire.  192. 

63.  His  Index  Virorum  ;  like  that  Locorum  toward 
the  beginning  ;  begun  by  another,  &c  finilbed  by  him- 
felf. 

2150 

A  Book  in  folio,  confi fling  of  many  fingle  Papers  &  par¬ 
ticular  Tracts,  written  by  feveral  perfons  and  at  feve¬ 
ral  times,  and  at  length  bound  up  together  by  the 
third  Randle  Holme  ;  who  hath,  upon  the  out-fide 
given  the  whole  Collection  this  General  Title,  “  Deedes 
&  Cuftomes,  with  other  Notes  conferning  the  Citty 
of  Chefter,”  &c.  whichlfhail  endeavor  briefly  to  def- 
cribe  in  the  following  manner  : 

1 .  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Account  of  the  Thinges 
of  moft  note  in  this  Booke,  taken  Anno,  1669.  At  the 
beginning. 

2.  The  Speech  of  Mr.  Robert  Brerewood,  at  the 
Maiors  Watch,  upon  Chriftmas  Eve  1584.  he  then  being 
Maior ;  as  it  was  made  by  Mr.  Knight  Clerke  of  the 
Pentice,  out  of  whofe  book  this  Copie  was  tranferibed. 

j  82.  b. 

3.  Abftraift  of  an  Indenture  made  the  9th  of  Qu.  Eli¬ 

zabeth,  between  the  City  &  Thomas  Benet  Pauer,  who 
thereby  covenanted  to  keepe  the  Streets  of  Chefter  in 
good  repaire,  during  his  Life.  ibid. 

4.  Form  of  the  Indenture  for  returning  two  Citizens 

to  fit  in  Parliament,  anno  1  Caroli  1.  182.  b. 

5.  A  Speech  i'poken  by  Tho.  Throp  a  youth  as  to  the 

Earle  of  Lciceller,  A.  D.  1 583.  being  made  by  Mr. 
Knight.  .  182.  A.  b. 


Num.  2150. 

Tins  Throp  was  Maior  of  Chefter  A.  D:  1615. 
and  was  mifliked  becaufe  he  dire&ed  himfelf  to  the  Earle 
of  Darby  ;  &  hauinge  ended,  fayd  “  God  bleffe  the  Earle 
of  Darby.” 

6.  The  Anfweare  of  William  Glafeor  to  the  fklande- 

rous  &.  vntrue  Articles  exhibited  by  RogerXey  Maior  of 
Chefter  Zz  Will.  Gerrarde  Recorder,  &  alfo  by  a  fewe 
nomber  of  Citezens  prefente  with  them,  in  the  name  of 
all  the  Citezens  of  Chefter;  entituled,  “Articles  conteyn- 
ing  Juche  Wronges  k  Injuries  as  William  Glafeor  De- 
putic-  Chamberleyn  hathe  done  to  the  Maior  &  Citezens 
of  Chtfter  by  countenaunce  of  yourLordihips  (the  Cham- 
berleyns)  Aufthoritie  there.”  183. 

7.  Original  Indenture  made  21  October  1633,  between 

the  late,  &  the  then  Sheriffes  of  Chefter.  upon  the 
Delivery  of  the  Prifon  of  the  Northgate,  &  the  Prifoners 
therein.  189.  b. 

8.  Another,  made  the  20th  of  Ottober  1634,  upon  a 

like  occafion.  190.  b. 

9.  An  Inventory  of  fuch  Bonds  &  other  things  as  are 

in  the  Treafurers  Box  in  the  Pentice;  and  *  of  other 
things  in  fome  of  the  Officers  hands  belonging  to  the 
Citty.  Received  from  (the  fecond  Randle  Holme)  Mr. 
Maior,  24  July  1644.  192. 

10.  Original  Warant  of  24  principal  Citizens  for 
Edward  Bridge  to  take  the  Tolle  at  the  Bridge-gatej 
in  the  vfual  place,  in  the  right  of  the  City,  vntill  the  Office 
fliould  be  confirmed  by  a  generall  Affemblie.  199. 

11.  A^Remembrance  for  Mr.  Popham,  touchinge  the 

Caufe  to  be  hard  before  the  Earle  of  Leyeefter  Cham- 
berlen  of  the  Countie  Palatine  of  Chefter,  againft  Mr. 
Glafeor  (vid.  fupra,  §  6.)  200_ 

12.  The  Accompt  of  William  Maffy  Alderman,  & 
William  Alderfay  Treforer  of  the  City  of  Chefter,  for 
one  whole  year  ending  in  A.D.  1587.  as  it  was  had 
&  made  before  the  Auditors,  the  30  Novemb.  1 589. 

206.  b. 

13.  A  like  Accompt  of  William  Maflfy,  &  Paule 
Chauntrell  Treafurer,  for  one  year,  ending  in  A.  D. 
1 586.  being  audited  the  fame  day  as  the  former.  2  ;  S .  b. 

1 4.  Complaynt  of  Rychard  Dutton  of  Chefter  Di  aper, 

to  the  Queenes  Highnes  Counfaill  in  the  Marches  of 
Wales.  209. 

Againft  two  perfons  who  had  borrowed  40  Shilling  - 
of  him  in  ann.  ult.  R.  Edwardi  vi.  upon  Security  ;  which 
Security  they  had  forcibly  regained,  and  would  not  pay 
the  money,  until  compelled  by  Law. 

15.  Exemplification  of  Q.  Elizabeth’s  Order  (as  made 

in  her  Court  of  Exchequer  by  William  Marqueiie  of 
Winchefter,  Lord  High  Threafurer  of  England,  Sir  Wal¬ 
ter  Mildmay  Chancelor  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer,  &c  j 
upon  the  Controverfie  the  Queenes  Highnes  and  the 
Maior,  Sheriffes  &  Citizens  of  Chefter,  concerninge  the 
Priviledge,  Prerogative  &  Jurifdiction  of  the  Count'/  Pa- 
lantine  of  Chefter,  &  the  Power,  Authorise  &  Jurifdidtion 
of  the  Court  or  Exchequer  there.  And  concerning  the 
Authoritie  &  Jurifdiftion  of  the  C.hamberlen  of  the  faid 
Co’untie  Pallantine.  And  concerneing  the  Liberties, 
Francheffes  &  Jurifdictions  of  the  laid  Maior  &  Sherifes 
within  the  faid  Citie,  by  reafon  of  diverfe  Contempts 
wherewith  the  late  Maior  &c  Mierifs  within  the  laid  Citie 
haue  bene  charged.  Tefte  Edwardo  Saunders  milite,  14 
Junij,  anno  Regi  5.  (Mr.  Glafeor  gott  the  better  of  the 
City)  211. 

16.  The  Claime  of  the  Maior,  Sheriffes,  Sc  Cuffomtrs 

&.  Citizens  of  Chefter.  j  24. 

17.  Cuftomes  (or  fees)  taken  moft  commonlie  amongft 

other  Cuftoms  here  not  named,  by  the  Cities  Officers,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Graunts  to  the  faid  Cittie,  and  vfed  tyine 
out  of  mynd  to  be  taken.  Sett  up  &  made  in  a  Table  by 
Henry  Gee  Maior  of  Chefter,  15  July,  an.  26  R.  Henrici 
via.  '  216.  b. 

1 8.  Matters  for  which  the  Threaffurers  are  yearc-ly  ac- 

comptable.  '  2ib‘. 

1 9.  Recital 


Bibliothecae  Harleianas. 


S3S 


Num;  2150. 

1 9.  Recital  of  part  of  K  James  1 .  Letters  Patents  granting 

the  ferm  of  Wines  imported  within  the  Port  of  Chefter, 
to  Robert  Singleton ;  except  the  ferm  of  the  Prize 
Wines,  which  were  granted  to  the  jVfciior  Sc  Citizens  of 
Chefter:  6  Junij,  anno  Regni  2.  220. 

Then  follows, 

20.  An  old  book  called  the  White  book  of  the  Pentice 
(or  a  Copie  of  it)  wherein  are  entred  a  multitude  of  Or¬ 
ders,  Coftorries,  Oaths,  Accompts,  and  other  matters  re¬ 
lating  to  the  bufmefs  of  the  City  of  Chefter,  being  (by 
far)  too  numerous  Sc  tedious  to  be  entred  into  this  Ihort 
Catalogue ;  all  which  I  fhall  therefore  now  omitt,  and 
refer  the  reader  to  the  abovementioned  Account  of  the 
third  Randle  Holme,  inferted  at  the  beginning  ;  or  rather 
to  the  Treatifeitfelf,  which  beginneth  at  fol.  222. 

It  may  be  obferved  that  the  faid  Mr.  Holme  hath  not 
only  added  much  frefh  matter  upon  the  vacant  leaves  or 
places  of  this  White  book,  but  hath  alfo  parted  to,  or  in¬ 
ferted  other  Papers  between  divers  of  the  Leaves  of  it : 
among  which  I  fhall  mention  thofe  only,  which  I  take  to 
be  of  the  more  material,  vizt. 

21.  Attefted  Copie  of  an  Indenture  made  the  2  of 

May,  36  Hen.  vm.  whereby  Richard  Walker  Clerk, 
Deane  of  the  Colledge-Churche  of  St.Johns  in  the  Cilie 
of  Chefter,  Davyd  Pole  Doftor  of  the  Lawes,  8c  James 
Fowler,  Prebendaries  of  the  5th  8c  6lh  Prebends  there, 
did  lett  to  William  Bird  Tanner,  certain  land  for  64 
yeares.  229. 

22.  VeracopiaCartae  qua  Prior  etConventus  five  Capi- 

tulum  Ecclefie  Cathedralis  &  Regularis  B  Marie  Coven- 
trenfis,  ratificant  Litteras  Rolandi  Coventrenfis  &  Lich- 
feldenfis  Lpifcopi  eidem  annexas.  dat.  18  die  Maij,  A.  D. 
1537.  229. b. 

23.  Petition  of  8  poor  aged  Aimes  Women,  dwel¬ 
ling  in  the  Almes-howfes  near  S.  John  Baptift’s  Church 
in  Chefter  ;  to  John  Bifhop  of  that  Diocefe,  A.  I).  1630. 

230. 

Shewinge  that  their  lodgings  were  much  out  of  re¬ 
pare  :  and  that  Mrs.  Johnfon  had  one  auntient  Deed, 
making  mention  of  the  firft  foundation  8c  ereftinge  of  the 
fayd  Almes-howfes,  &  of  others  the  Lands  of  St.  Anne 
there,  and  vpon  whofe  Charges  they  ought  Sc  are  to  be 
repayred,  They  therefore  beffeech  him  to  haue  a  fight 
8c  readinge  of  the  fayd  Deed  in  order  to  the  repayringe  of 
the  fayd  decayes. 

24.  The  Bounds  of  the  Liberties  of  the  City  of  Chefter, 

from  the  Charter  of  K.  Edward  ill.  232. 

25.  Accompt  of  Edmund  Gamull  Sc  David  Lloyd 

Aldermen  &  Mureugers  of  Chefter,  to  17  Deer.  ann.  31 
Eliz.  ^  244. 

26.  Bill  for  Parchment  5c  Wax  bought  by  the  Maior 

of  Chefter,  anno  39  Eliz.  &c.  244.  A.  b. 

27.  Bounds  of  t lie  feverat  Wards  in  Chefter,  as  they 

were  viewed  8c  regiftred,  A.D.  1533.  247. 

28.  The  Gable  Rents  of  Chefter,  as  they  were 

■viewed  the  fame  year ;  with  the  names  of  the  Tenants 
holding  thofe  Eftates,  A. D.  1633.  247.^ 

29.  The  Manner  &  Forme  of  the  Wateh  called  on 
Chriftmas-Eve  at  night,  Chrirtmas  day  at  night,  5c  St.  Ste¬ 
phens  night.  asaltred  from  theForme,  anno  34  Henr.vm. 

248.  b. 

30.  Fees  of  the  Yeoman  of  the  Pentice  ;  who  was  al¬ 
ways  Mr.  Mayor’s  Gentleman-Ufher.  273. 

31.  Fees  of  the  Serjeants  of  the  Peace.  274. 

32.  The  Maiors  Fees.  275. 

33.  The  Office  of  the  Sword-bearer.  ibid. 

34.  Fees  of  divers  other  City-Officers.  275.  b. 

35.  Orders  made  the  1  ith  of  June  1 629.  to  be  obferved 
by  the  ten  Almes-men  of  Mr.  John  Vernon.  288.  b. 

Then  follow,  upon  the  blank  Paper  of  the  fame  old 
book,  and  likewile  upon  freffi  Paper, 

36.  The  fecond  Randle  Holmes  Addition  of  Letters, 

Orders  of  Affembly,  and  various  other  matters  relating  to 
the  Affairs  of  Chefter.  289.  b. 


Num.  2150 — 2152. 

Herein,  or  after  the  fame,  I  find, 

37.  K.  Edward  ii.’  Writt,  and  an  Inquifition  made  in 

pursuance  thereof,  touching  the  Revenues  of  St.  John’s 
Hofpital  ih  Cheftcf.  3IO> 

38.  Air  Accompt  of  the  Seals,  Books,  8c  Plate  deliver’d 

to  William  Sparke  Maior  of  Chefter,  by  the  Treafurers 
there,  12  Oft.  1632.  341.  b.  344.  b. 

39.  Another,  to  Mr.  William  Ince  Mayor,  dat.  14  Oc¬ 
tober  1642.  346.  b. 

40.  Draught  of  an  Infcription  to  be  putt  upon  the 
Picture  of  Mr.  Joh'n  Vernon  Merchant  of  the  Staple  in 
London  ;  wheiein  his  Benefaftions  to  the  City  of  Chefter, 
where  be  was  borne,  are  particularly  recited.  349. 

41 .  Notes  about  his,  8c  other  Benefaftions  to  the  fame 

City.  _  350. 

42.  What  the  feveral  Companies  gave,  towards  a 
Bell  or  Cup,  to  be  run  for  at  St.  George’s  Race.  354. 

43.  The  planner  of  the  Showe  to  be  exhibited  pub- 
lickly,  on  St.  Georges  day,  1610.  (by  Robart  Amory) 

3Sfi- 

44.  Tranfiation  of  K.  Henry  vnth’s.  Charter  to  the 

City  of  Chefter.  357. 

45.  The  general  Affeffment  made  A.D.  1576.  for  a 

Stock  for  the  Poore,  when  the  Howfe  of  Correction  or 
new-howfe  was  erefted,  according  to  the  Statute  of  1 5  of 
Eliz.  368. 

46.  The  auntient  Forme  8c  Payments  toward  the  Mid- 

fomer  Watch  or  Shew.  372. 

Here  are  other  Papers  about  that  fhew  ;  with  fome 
Originals  about  the  Giants,  &c. 

47.  Original  Letter  of  John  Williams  to  the  third 
Randle  Holme,  dated  28  June  1703.  defiring  him  to 
marke  out  vpon  a  peice  of  Paper  Sir  Paul  Pyndars 
Fathers  Sc  Mothers  Armes :  which  he  did  accordingly. 

387. 

2151. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  almoft  wholly  written  8c 
tricked  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  who  on  the  back 
hath  entituled  it  “  Chtffiire  Monuments.”  Indeed 
here  is  a  large  Collcftion  of  Armes,  Epitaphs,  and  other 
Inscriptions  found  in  Cheffiire,  many  of  which  may 
now  be  loft  &  periffied.  Part  of  thefc  Mr.  Holme  co¬ 
pied  from  the  Books  of  Mr.  Sampfon  Erdefwike  & 
others  ;  the  reft  he  added  from  his  own  eie-fight,  as 
occafions  offered.  I  fhall  fay  no  further  of  it,  than  that 
it  contains, 

1 .  His  Obfervation  or  Divifion  of  Tombs  into  fundry 
Ranks  or  Claffes;  taken  from  the  Cutts  of  them  in  printed 
books,  fuch  as  Dugdales  Warwickfhire,  8c  St.  Pauls, 
Thoroton’s  Nottingham-ffiire,  Wright’s  Rutlandffiire, 
See.  within  the.  firft  Cover. 

2.  His  Table  or  Lift  of  the  feverall  Churches,  which 
have  afforded  notes  to  this  Collection.  At  the  beginning. 

3.  Names  of  the  Halls  &  Houfes,  wherein  he  took 
other  notes:  On  the  next  Page. 

4.  The  Colleftion  of  Church-notes,  beginning  with 

that  of  Aghton  alias  Afton,  21  April,  1596.  1. 

5.  The  Notes  taken  in  Halls  8c  Houfes  ;  beginning 

with  Lawton  Hall,  A.  D.  1587.  1 30. 

21  52. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  written  by  divers  hands, 
and  (by  the  third  Randle  Holme)  on  the  back  entituled, 
“  Pedegrees  wherein  I  find, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Pedegrees  entred 
within  this  book ;  made  anno  1669.  At  the  beginning. 

This  Alphabet  would  have  been  better,  if  it  had 
taken  in  all  the  Surnames  of  Families  mentioned  herein  j 
thus,  in  fol.  410.  b.  I  find  mention  of  Sir  Robert  de 
Harley,  anno  17  Edw.  in.  and  of  Malculin  de  Harley, 
anno  29  of  the  fame  Reign,  both  being  witneffes  ;  yet 
the  name  of  this  noble  Family  is  not  in  the  Table  above- 
mentioned. 

Then  follows. 


2.  The 


555 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  2152—2154. 

2 .  The  Names  of  the  Heads  of  many  Welfh  Families, 

with  their  Armes  in  blafou  ;  with  a  Ihorr  account  of  their 
Defendants,  and  where  they  have  fettled  ;  as  in  other 
Books  of  this  fort.  260. 

Intermingled  with  thefe,  and  alfo  fucceeding  them,  I 

find, 

3.  The  Collection  of  Pedegrees  mentioned  before, 
being  of  Families  both  Welfh  &  Englifh,  though  feeming 
to  have  been  written  by  a  Welfh-man.  As  to  thole  of 
Englifh  Families,  they  are  principally  of  Herefordfhire  & 
Shropfhire  ;  with  a  fprinkling  of  others  in  Worcefterfbire, 
Chefhire,  &  Staffordfhire  all  jumbled  together.  260.  b. 

Among  thefe  are  fome  Church-notes;  and  a  few  Co¬ 
pies  or  Extracts  from  old  Deeds. 

4.  Among  thefe  Pedegrees,  namely  at  fol.  340.  I  find 
a  note  relating  to  natural  Hiftorv,  8c  not  to'  Heraldry. 
It  is  a  fhort  Account  of  a  Tree  that  grew  in  Alhperton- 
Parke  in  the  County  of  Hereford ;  which  was  60  foot 
before  it  had  any  Bough.  Then  one  Bough  grew  out  fo 
longe  that  a  man  that  flood  vpon  the  Ground  might  touch 
the  end  of  it  with  his  hande.  Then  it  was  fifteene  Foot 
&  halfe  before  it  had  any  more  Boughes.  The  body  was 
3  I'adomes  in  compafs,  and  it  grew  very  upright,  &c. 

The  Pedegrees  are  fucceeded  by 

5.  The  faid  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table  to  the 

Coates  of  the  cheife  Houfes  in  Wales,  as  contained  in  this 
Booke  ;  which  he  made  anno  1669.  4,  - 

6.  Another  Table  direCling  to  the  Coates  &  Crefts. 

At  the  end. 

2I53- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  written  (for  the  far  greater 
part)  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme ;  and  by  his  fon, 
on  the  out-fide  thus  entituled,  “  Pedegrees  of  feueral 
Places.”  Herein  I  find, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table  di¬ 
reCling  to  the  faid  Pedegrees.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Ihe  Collection  itfelf,  which  is  large  8c  numerous 

and  both  adorned  &  juflified  with  tricks  of  Armes  &  Seals 
many  Extrads  from  old  Deeds  &  other  Writings,  and 
fome  Church  notes.  Moreover,  it  may  be  obferved 
that  the  third  Randle  hath  enriched  the  fame  with  many 
Additions,  Emendations,  8c  Continuations  ;  in  fome 
places,  down  to  the  year  1703.  ,  - 

In  this  Collection  of  Pedegrees,  which  although  it 
be  mixed,  yet  chiefly  relates  to  Chelhire-Families,  I  take 
notice  of 

3.  Confirmation  of  Coate  8c  Crefl  to  William  Allen  of 

Brudley  in  Com.  Ceflr.  by  Rich,  St.  George  Norroy, 
dat.  the  22  day  of  Augull  1613.  26. 

4-  Original  Letter  of  Thom.  Heape  an  Armes-painter 
to  the  third  Randle  Holme  as  Deputy  to  Norroy,  dat! 

15  OCt.  1660.  49.  A. 

it  ,°ffcnn£  his  Service,  to  act  under  him  within  the 
Hundreds  of  Salford,  Derby,  &  Blakeburne  inLancafhire. 

5.  A  Defcent  of  Brofter,  fett  down  by  Sir  William 
Dugdale,  A.D.  1663. 

6.  Grant  of  a  Crelt  to  Sir  George  Beverley  Kt.  by 
Darnel  Molyneux  Ulfter  Kinge  of  Armes  of  Ireland,  dat. 

20  of  January,  anno  2  R.  Jacobi  1.  83  b 

OfficHere  is  a  prctly  diftina  Trick  of  uifter’s  Seal  of 

Rid,  of  a  £re\:°  IohnJ  CraMch  Ge«- 
Ktdi.  St.  George  Efq;  Norroy.  dat  22  Auguft  ,60(1. 

the^Nm  °  Ihf  p.Randie  Hoi™  Alphabetical  Tabl^of 
*n  At  the  e^'5  mennonedi"  Preceding  Colleo 

2154. 

A  Rook  in  folio,  written  by  different  hands,  upon  tie 
omfuie  of  which,  the  third  Randle  Holme  hath  nut 
this  erroneous  Title:  “Creation  of  Nobility  -  Rob„ . 
Cooke,  Glover  Sotnerfett,  St  Jacob  Chaloner  Au 
rhores,’  Stc.  In  it  find. 


Num.  20^4.. 

t.  A  Coppey  of  Robert  Cooke  aks  ClarencyCux  Roy 
dc  Armes  his  Booke.  ,  1 

1  liis  is  that  which  is  called  Cookes  Baronage.  The 
prefent  Copie  is  but  indifferently  written,  &  the  Arihes 
as  indifferently  painted  ;  but  yet,  over  &  above,  embla- 
ioned.  rhe  fecond  Randle  Holme  hath  corre£ted  or 
noted  it  in  many  places  ;  and  perhaps  the  whole  Trad 
may  have  been  written  by  him  when  he  was  a  lad  or 
youth. 

Then  follow, 

2.  Creations  of  Dukes  from  temp.  R.  Edwardi  in.  and 

of  Marquifes  from  Rich.  n.  Earls  from  the  time  of  Wil¬ 
liam  the  Conqueror  ;  Vifcounts  a  tempore  Regis  Johan- 
ms  ;  and  Barons  from  the  time  of  the  faid  Conqueror  ; 
with  their  Armes  in  Blafon.  ^ 

This  Trad  may  be  of  the  hand-writing  of  Thomas 
Chaloner,  who  was  Ulfter  King  of  Armes. 

3.  His  Notes  about  K.  William  the  Conqueror ;  Sir 

Geoffroy  Charney  &  Sir  Amerye  de  Pavie  ;  with  the 
Armes  in  Blafon  of  the  Douglas  of  Scotland.  j  16. 

4.  His  breeiie  Noats  out  of  Polichronicon,  touching 

our  Nobility.  1 1 « 

5.  His  Succeflion  of  Englifh  Earls,  according  to  their 

Counties,  partly  in  alphabetical  Order  ;  written  A  D 
1585;  1*7. 

Eke  fecond  Randle  Holme  hath  put  this  Note  upon 
1  it,  “  This  is  to  be  incerted  with  Jacob  Chaloner’s  Notes 
in  Confutation  of  Yorke.” 

6.  His  Notes  concerning  the  Children  of  our  Kinge. 

179 . 

Tins  Trad  is  crofted  almoft  all  along,  as  having 
been  tranicribed,  perhaps  of  the  faid  Mr.  Holme’s  Ion? 
Roule  of  Kings. 

7-  Defcents  of  fome  Kings  Sc  Queens  of  France,  in 
French;  by  the  fame  hand. 

8.  Armes  in  Blafon  of  the  Lords  Barons  of  England 

fithence  the  Conqueft  ;  by  the  fame  hand.  195. 

9.  Part  of  a  Defcent  of  Talbot  Earl  of  Shrewfbury  ; 

by  the  fame  hand.  2Qi 

10.  Lift  of  the  Knights  of  the  Garter,  in  fome  time 

of  Qu.  Elizabeth’s  Reign.  2 10. 

1 1 .  Epifcopal  Sees  in  England  (Thefe  two  laft  by  the 
fame  hand  as  before.) 

12.  Orders  &  Degrees  of  Nobility  in  England.  211! 

13.  Proceflion  of  the  Nobility,  &c.  to  the  Parliament, 

A.D.  1578.  2Io 

14.  Abftrad  of  the  laft  Will  &  Teftament  of  K.  Henry 

VUI-  ,  215/ 

1  hen  follows  another  Copie  of  Cookes  Baronae-e  or 
Treatife. 

15.  Of  the  Creation  of  all  the  Nobilitye  of  F.nglande, 

fythence  the  Conqueft,  vntyll  this  Yeare  of  our  Lorde 
God,  1586,  wryttenby  Thomas  Chaloner  of  Chefter, 
in  Odober.  2^ 

This  feems  to  be  of  the  hand  fo  often  mentioned 
before ;  &  by  the  crofles,  feemes  to  have  been  tranferi- 
bed  ;  or  at  leaft,  a  great  part  of  it.  The  Armes  are 
only  in  Blafon  ;  and  here  8c  there  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme  has  been  noting  &  amending. 

16.  Manner  of  the  Creation  of  Edward  Seymor  Duke 

of  Somerfet.  ^0g_ 

1 7-  Of  the  Cloathe  of  Eftate  8c  other  Ceremonies  of 
Honour  for  Noble  Perfonages,  arcording  to  the  auncient 
vlages.  308. 

18.  The  Order  of  going  to  the  Payment,  309. 

19.  The  Order  of  Batteile.  312. 

20.  The  Aflifeof  Armes.  ibid. 

2 1 .  The  Order  of  the  Obfequie  of  Sir  William  Garrett 

Kt.  late  Lord  Maior  of  London.  313. 

Moft  of  thefe  little  Heraldical  trads  above  deferibed* 
may  have  been  taken  from  Mr.  Robert  Glovers  Books. 
Lallly  comes. 

22.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  whole  Book.  At 
the  end. 


9 


A  Book 


537 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas, 


Num.  2155. 

2  <55- 

A  Rook  in  folio,  almoft  wholly  written  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme  :  who  hath,  on  the  back,  given  it  this 
Title,  “  Barons  of  Chefhire  ;  Sc  Chefter-Siege.”  It 
does  indeed  feem  to  confift  of  two  Parts,  and  much  of 
the  firft  is  a  fort  of  Skeleton  towards  an  Hiftory  of 
Chefter,  confuting  partly  of  thefe  unfinifh’d  Heads, 

1 .  His  Defence  of  Bruite  ;  i-  e.  that  there  was  fuch 

a  man  as  Brutus,  who  conquer’d  this  Land.  But  his 
Arguments  are  not  convincing.  .  1. 

2.  Succeffion  of  the  Britilh  Kings  from  Brute  to 

Caflibelan.  _  4- 

Honed  Randle  fays  that  he  wrote  this  A.  D.  1693. 
from  a  MS.  of  Dr.  Williamfon. 

3.  Acts  of  the  Brittifh  Kings  ruleing  in  Brittaine  du- 

reing  the  Roman  Conqueft.  7.  b. 

4.  Lift  of  thofe  Emperors  of  Rome,  to  whom  the 

Brittaines  were  tributary.  _  ii- 

5.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Roman  Lieutenants  in  this 

Land,  during  the  Britains  Subjection  to  the  Roman  Go¬ 
vernment.  11.  b. 

6.  Bridfli  Kings  after  the  Romans  Departure  out  of 

Brittaine.  J5* 

7.  Of  the  Divifion  of  Brittaney  or  Engand  into  7 

Kingdomes,  called  the  Heptarchy.  i8.b. 

8.  Of  the  Kings  of  Mercia,  or  Merce-land.  19. 

9.  Of  the  Monarchy  of  England.  21.  b. 

10.  Of  Hugh  Lupus  Earl  of  Chefter,  Sc  his  Authority. 

25. 

11.  Some  fhort  Notes  concerning  Battles  fought  in 

our  late  Civil  War.  28. 

12.  How  K.  William  the  Conqueror  gave  the  Larl- 

dome  of  Chefter  to  Hugh  Lupus.  29. 

13.  Brief  Notes  concerning  the  Families  of  Dutton  & 

Harecourt,  See.  33- 

14.  Of  the  Earles  of  Chefter  before  the  Conqueft. 

34- b- 

1 5.  References  to  the  fecond  Randle  Holmes  Deeds  Sc 

Books,  touching  the  old  Earles  of  Chefter  ;  Sc  fundry 
old  Chefhire  Families.  42. 

1 6.  A&s  of  the  old  Earls  of  Chefter,  from  A.  D. 

1 140.  to  John  le  Scot.  43. 

17.  Of  the  Barons  of  Chefliire.  i 8.  &  60. 

18.  Historical  Notes  relating  to  the  old  Earls  of  Chef¬ 
ter  ;  by  another  hand.  57. 

19.  Some  others  collected  by  Sir  William  Dugdale 

from  two  MSS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library.  59. 

20.  The  Office  of  Juftice  of  Chefter.  66.  et  76. 

21.  Short  Defcription  of  Wirrhall-Hundred.  66.  b. 

22.  - Broxton-Ilundred.  69. 

23.  - F.dcfbury-IIundred  70. 

24.  - Bucklow-Hundred.  71. 

Moll  of  the  matter  from  No.  17.  above,  the  third 

Randle  Holme  collected  from  the  Writings  of  Mr.  John 
Leigh  of  Ridge. 

25.  The  Chamberlaines  Office.  73. 

26.  The  Sheriffes  Office.  74. 

27.  The  Office  of  the  Grand  Serjeant.  75. 

28.  Office  of  the  Conftable  of  Chefter-Caftle.  77. 

29.  The  Judicatores  or  Judges  Office.  78. 

30.  The  Chief  Ranger  of  the  Forefts  Office.  79. 

31.  Hiftorical  Notes  relating  to  the  Bifhops  and  Dio- 

cefe  or  Bifhoprick  of  Chefter.  81. 

This  TraCt  relates  likewife  to  that  of  Coventre 
&  Lichfeld  ;  of  which  that  of  Chefter  formerly  was  but 
a  part. 

32.  Of  the  Roman  Votive  Altar  found  at  Chefter;  a 
Trick  of  it  :  Sc  an  Explication  of  the  Infcription.  If  I 
remember  rightly  (after  above  20  years)  the  Stone  was 
given  to  the  Univerfity  of  Oxford,  and  placed  in  the 
Theatre-yard  among  the  other  Infcriptions  there. 

Now  follows  the  fecond  part  or  this  Book  ;  being 

33.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Narration  of  the  Siege 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2155,  2156. 

of  Chefter  by  the  Forces  under  the  command  of  Sir 
William  Brereton,  and  of  the  Remarkables  in  that 
place  preceding  the  fame,  from  February  1641.  97. 

Laftly  comes,  a  printed  Paper  entituled; 

74.  The  Royal  Martyrs:  or,  a  Lift  of  the  Lords, 
Knig  hts,  Commanders,  &  Gentlemen,  that  were  flain  in 
the  i'-ite  Wars,  in  defence  of  their  King  Sc  Country. 
As  all'u  of  thole  executed  by  High  Courts  of  Juftice  or 
Law-Martial.  London,  printed  by  Thom.  Newcomb.  1660. 

To  this  Book  the  laid  Randle  Holme  did  prefix 
35.  His  Table  of  the  principal  Matters  contained 
therein. 

2156. 

A  Book  in  folio,  like  that  inferibed  No  2147,  feeming  to 
have  been  another  of  Laurence  Walden’s  Debt-books, 
and  after  his  death  to  have  come  into  the  hands  of 
Jacob  Chaloner,  and  fo  to  the  fecond  &  third  Randle 
Holme,  who  have  repleniflied  it  with  Pedegrees  of  our 
Noble  &  Worfhipful  Families,  mix’d :  fo  that  the 
laft  hath  entituled  it,  on  the  back  thus,  “  Pedegrees 
&  Coates  of  feverall  places.”  Of  which  I  fhall  fay  no 
more  than  that  it  contains 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Matches,  inferted 
into  this  Book;  made  (as  I  take  it)  by  the  three  Randle 
Holmes.  At  the  beginning.  Then  follows, 

2.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  Pedegrees.  Then 
comes, 

3.  The  Collection  of  Pedegrees  abovementioned, 
103.  b.  among  which,  in  turning  the  book  over,  I  find 

4.  The  Genealogy  of  the  Right  Honourable  Thomas 

LordFairfaxof  Denton:  Baron  of  Cameron,  Lord  of  Man, 
and  the  Ifles.  This  is  a  printed  Paper.  149.  c. 

5.  Defcent  of  Margaret  the  Wife  of  William  White  of 

Bramblie  in  Hatnpfliire ;  and  of  her  two  Sifters,  from 
Margaret  the  Sifter  Sc  Heire  of  Michael  Poynant ;  with 
their  Defendants,  and  Mr.  Whites  Counfell  to  Wife  & 
Children,  and  his  Epitaph.  265.  c. 

This  is  alfo  a  printed  paper. 

6.  Pedegree  of  Thomas  Burgoyne  of  Long  Stanton 
Efq;  as  atteftedby  Robert  Cooke  Norroy,  A.  D.  1575. 

270. 

7.  A  Pedegree  made  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  for 

Mary  Jobfon  the  Wife  of  John  Savage  Alderman  of 
Chefter  ;  whereby  he  pretended  to  evince  that  fhe  might, 
from  K.  Edward  iv.  &  Arthur  Vifcount  Lille  his  bale 
Son,  quarter  180  Coats.  270.  b. 

8.  Jo.  Davies  Notes  conferr.inge  the  Pudfey’s  Familey. 

.  ?74- 

9.  Defcent  of  the  Lord  of  Ogheltree  al  's  Wgihiltree, 

as  attefted  for  Sir  Gilbert  Houghton  of  Houghton,  by  Sir 
William  Segar  Garter,  19  June  1618.  179.  b. 

10.  The  Pedegrey  Sc  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Chet- 
wood  ;  faith  fully  deduced  out  of  the  Records  of  the 
Realme,  and  other  authentical  Proofes,  added  all  along. 

280.  b. 

The  fecond  Randle  Holme  finds  fault  with  the 
Pedegree,  and  likewife  more  with  the  Amies  ;  although 
both  were  attefted  by  the  three  Kings  of  Armes,  Dethick 
Garter,  Camden  C.larencieux,  Sc  St.  George  Norroy. 
The  Pedegree  itftlf  is  continued  by  the  third  Randle 
Holme  to  A.  D.  1680. 

11.  The  Pedegree  of  John  Pultney  Efq;  with  the 

Matches,  Ifl'ues,  &  Cote- Armors ;  extracted  &  drawne 
A.  D.  1632.  285. 

1  2.  The  Lvne  Sc  Suceffion  of  the  Kings  of  Scotland 
to  K.  James  vi.  drawn  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme 
out  of  the  breefe  Chronicle  of  Scotland,  printed  A.  D. 
1623.  291.  b. 

This  is  continued  to  K.  Charles  n.  as  then  in  exile. 
13.  Pedegree  of  Sam.  Tirrick  of  London  Merchant  ; 
as  examined  by  Henry  Lily  Rouge  Rofe.  294.  b. 

Here  is  the  Trick  of  a  Shield  of  Armes,  taken  from 
a  Spanifli  Commander  inbordinge  a  Ship  in  Cadiz- 
6  X  Voyage,- 


538 


Catalogue  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2156 — 2  [59. 

Voyage,  A.  D.  1596.  by  John  Terricke  of  Clayton- 
Griffeth  Gent,  and  allowed  to  be  borne  by  that  Family, 
as  tricked  in  the  fame  page. 

14.  Pedegree  of  the  Family  of  Mack-Williams,  with 

their  feueral  Branches  &  Matches,  &  Armes  :  colle&ed 
&fettdowne  in  theyeare  1599.  301. 

This  Colle&ion  of  Pedegrees  is  fucceeded  by 

15.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Table  of  the  Names 
of  Coates  in  this  Booke,  made  A.  D.  1659.  At  the  end. 

2157. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  thin  folio,  all  tricked  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme ;  and  containing 

1.  The  Armes  of  many  Families,  moftlyof  Chelhire; 
taken  (perhaps  from  Funeral)  Efcocheons,  as  putt  up 
together  in  Bundles,  and  marked  with  the  feveral  Let¬ 
ters  of  the  Alphabet.  Thefe  Armes  want  all  the  Names 
of  their  Owners. 

2.  His  fable  of  thelmpalements  &  Quarterings  of  feue¬ 
ral  Famileys,  as  extant  in  the  faid  Bundles.  At  the  End. 

2  1 5  8 . 

A  Book  in  folio  confiding  of  feveral  Trafts,  bound  up 
together  (with  fome  loofe  Papers)  and  by  the  third 
Randle  Holme  on  the  out-fide  thus  entiuled,  “  The 
Accountes  of  the  Murrengeis  &  Treafurers  of  the  Citty 
of  Chefter.”  More  particularly,  I  find  therein, 
t.  The  fecond  Randle  Holmes  “Notes  out  of  the  Mu- 
rengers  booke  of  Cuftomes  for  Murage  of  Wares  & 
Merchandizes,  and  other  Incidents  due  to  the  Citty,  by 
Sea :  beginninge  in  December  1 6 1  7.”  J  o  3. 

'IhefeNotes  proceed  to  A.  D.  1654. 

2 .  Accompt  of  Moneys  received  from  many  of  the 

Cities  Tenants  for  feveral  Years.  173. 

3.  The  faid  fecond  Randle  Holmes  Notes  out  of  the 

Treafurers  Accounts  &  Citty  Rentalls.  192. 

They  are  of  the  Reigns  of  K.  Henry  vi.  &  Edw.  iv. 

4-  The  Accounts  of  Randle  Holme  &  Thomas  Alder- 
fey  Aldermen  &  Treasurers  ;  for  one  year,  ending  A.  D. 
l633-  304. 

5.  An  Accompt  between  Peter  Drinkwater,  &  Ran- 

dle  Holme  Sen.  Oftob.  1610.  3,8. 

6.  The  Accounts  of  Rich.  Leicefler  &  Randle  Holme 

Jun.  Aldermen  &  Treafurers  :  for  one  year,  ending 
A.  D.  1643.  320. 

2159. 

A  Book  in  folio,  to  which  the  third  Randle  Holme  hath, 
on  the  out-fide,  put  the  following  Title,  “The  Earles, 
Bilhops,  Abbotts,  &  Priuiledges  of  feueral  places  in, 
and  about  Chefier,”  Ac.  which  I  {hall  thus  deferibe: 

1 .  A  Difcourfe  or  Relation  of  the  ancient  &  moderne 

Eflate  of  the  Principalitie  of  Wales.  j . 

2.  Another  concerninge  the  Dutchieof  Comewall.  20. 

3.  A  Difcourfe  or  Relation  of  the  ancient  &  moderne 

Eftate  of  the  Erldome  of  Chefter.  3  j 

I  take  thefe  three  to  be  thofe  written  by  Judge 
Dodderidge.  ° 

4.  Defcriptio  Genealogist  Comitum  Ceftrue;  et  qua  de 

caufa  Comitatus  Ceftria;  devenit  ad  manus  primogenito- 
rum  Regum  Anglia:.  °  37- 

5.  Fragmentum  Annalium,  ut  videtur  Ceftrienfium  ; 

deannis  fcilicet  pofterioribus  R.  Richardi  11.  nec  non  de 
prionbus  Regni  R.  Flenrici  iv.  4?> 

C.  The  Succeftion  of  the  Erles  of  Chefter,  collected 
out  of  fundry  Authors  by  that  reverend  Divine  Mr. 
Robert  Rogers  fometyme  Arch-Deacon  of  Chefter.  49. 

lo  this  I  raft,  the  third  Randle  Holme  hath  made 
great  Additions  from  Sir  Simonds  D’ewes,  &  others. 

7.  How  Chefter  was  governed  before  it  had  a  Maior  • 

by  the  fame  Mr.  Holme.  6  7 

8.  The  Succeftion  of  the  Bifhops  of  Chefter  as  col- 
lefted  by  the  laid  Mr.  Rogers. 

Ihis,  Randle  Holme  continued  down  to  the  late 
pious  Bifhop  Stratford,  A.  D.  1690. 


Num:  2159. 

9.  Of  the  firft  buildinge  of  Churches,  &  the  Ereftion 

of  a  Monafterie  in  the  Citie  of  Chefter  ;  and  a  Suc- 
ceflion  of  Abbots  and  Deanes  in  the  fame  Monafterie  - 
gathered  by  Mr.  Robert  Rogers.  74.  ‘ 

In  this  Traft  are  comprehended, 

10.  Statuta  Ecclefite  Cathedralis  Chrifti  et  B.  Marim 

Virginis  Ceftr.  edita  per  fereniflimum  ac  potentifiimum 
Principem  Henricum  Oftavum,  Anglia;,  &c.  Regent 
ejufdem  Ecclefite  Fundatorem.  78.  * 

The  fame  Randle  Holme  hath  continued  the  Suc¬ 
ceftion  of  the  Deans  of  Chefter,  to  Dr.  Fogg  A  I) 
l692-  .  9,/ 

11.  His  Succeftion  of  the  Chancelloursofthe  Spirituall 

Court  of  Chefter,  to  Dr  Tho.  Wainwrigbt.  92. 

12.  A  Copie  of  an  Awarde  betweene  John  Abbot  of 
Chefter,  &  the  Maior  &  Cittizens  there,  made  anno 
1  Hen.  via. 

This  Awarde  was  made  by  Sir  Charles  Booth,  Sir 
William  Uvedall  Kts.  George  Bromley  Efq  ;  Anthony 
Fitz-herbert  Serjant  at  Lawe,  &  William  Rudell  the 
Queenes  Attorney  ;  upon  the  greate  Debate  longe  tyme 
dependinge  between  the  faid  parties  by  reafon  of  St 
Warburge-Fayre,  &  Fayre-Courts  ;  and  for  divers 
other  Liberties,  Franchifes,  and  Heriditaincnts,  in  contro- 
verfie. 

13.  Fees  due  to  the  Vicar  of  St.  Ofwalds,  for  Mar¬ 
riages,  Burialls,  Chriftianings,  &  Eafter  Roll.  ,00. 

Ihefe  are  fett  down  according  as  they  were 
agreed  unto  by  L.  Fogge  then  Vicar;  23  January  1676. 

14.  A  C.opie  of  the  •  'ouenants  betweene  the  Abbot  & 

the  Pan  (liners  of  Sr.  Ofwalds  in  Chefter  concerninge  the 
Parifh-Church.  Yeoven,  A.  D.  1481.  100.  b. 

Hereby  the  faid  Parilhioners  were  to  allow  40  Marks 
toward  the  new  Roof,  &c.  of  the  faid  Church. 

1 5'  The  Copie  of  the  Obligation  vnder  the  Cittie 
Seale  for  the  performance  of  that  Covenant.  101. 

16.  Verba  Fundationis  Cathedralis  Ecdefia;  fundata; 
per  bona;  Memoriae  inclitiffimumPricipem  Henricum  vm. 

.  ibid. 

17.  A  Copie  of  an  Inquifition  concerninge  the  Hof- 
pitall  of  St.  John  Baptift  in  Chefter,  ann.  1 5  Edw.  nr. 

Certifying  the  Revenues  of  the  faid  Hofpital,  k°the 
Difpofition  of  the  fame. 

1 8.  A  Copie  of  a  Letter  fent  from  the  Maior  of 
Chefter  to  Mr.  Robert  Johnes  Mafter  of  the  laid  Hof. 

P  n  ■■  v 

Requiring  him  to  maintain  3  Chaplens  &  1 5  Bedef- 
men  (chcilen .  from  the  Citizens)  there  ;  the  Revenues 
ot  that  Hofpital  amounting  yearely  to  32  pounds,  and 
aboue. 

19.  His  An  W:  importing  that  that  Hofpital  was  not 

able  to  maintain  fo  many  as  they  required  ;  and  that  he 
found,  as  many  as  ever  were  found  or  maintained  there. 
And  ft  the  Foundation  were  foe,  the  poor  Men  there 
mould  be  of  Chefter.  1Qg 

ACharter  granted  to  the  Mafter  Bretheren  &  Sif- 
ters  of  St.  John  Baptilts  Hall  in  Chefter  by  K.  Henry  the 
Fifth,  anno  regni  2.  I0g .b. 

2 1 .  A  Writt  of  Ouo  Warranto  directed  to  Thom 
Crewe  Mafter  of  St.  John  Baptilts  Hofpital  in  Chefter 
temp.  R.  Iienrici  vm.  Englilhed.  (containing  alio  the* 
Anfwer  occafioned  thereby.)  107.  b. 

Co0ve”ants  betweene  the  Abbot  &  Convent  of 
Chefter,  &  the  Deane  &  Chapter  of  St  Johns  there,  vpon 
th  one  part ;  and  the  Bretheren  of  the  Holpitall  of  St. 
John  there,  englifhed,  in  part.  IQ9. 

23.  Rents  gathered  by  the  Heire  of  Captain  Thomas 

Bot;,  .  .  .  io9.  c. 

I  nis  is  written  by  the  third  Randle  Hshne  upon  a 
loofe  piece  of  Parchment. 

24.  A  Rental  of  the  Pofieffions  of  St.  Georges  Gild 

or  Hofpital  in  Chefter,  as  due  25  March  1622.  1 10. 

25.  A  Rental  of  Lands  belonging  to  the  Colledge 

25.  A  Rental 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


Nu  m.  2159 — 2161. 

of  St  John’s  in  Chefter,  as  parcell  of  the  poffeflions 
thereof.  r  ur 

26.  A  Rental  of  the  Hofpitall  or  Fraternity  of  St. 

Anne  in  Chefter.  t ,  2> 

Thefe  Rentals  are  of  the  fame  Mr.  Randle  Holmes 
hand-writing. 

27.  A  Copie  of  the  Exemplification  of  an  Order  bc- 

tweene  the  Chamberleine  of  Chefter  ;  and  the  Maior  & 
Sheriffes  of  the  Cittie  of  Chefter.  Tefte  Edwardo 
Saunders  Milite,  1  \  Junij,  anno  5  Eliz.  n8. 

28.  A  Copie  of  the  Exemplification  of  the  Opinion 

of  the  Judges  concerninge  the  Liberties  of  the  Countie 
Pallatine  of  Chefter.  Tefte,  &c.  22  die  Martij,  anno  1 1 
Elizabethe  Regine.  I2j. 

29.  Certaine  Colle&ions  by  the  worthie  &  grave  Citi¬ 

zen  Mr.  W  illiam  Alderfay  Senr.  Marchant  ;  of  leuerall 
Priueledges,  Liberties,  Jurifdictions,  &  Franchefes,  &c. 
given  &  graunted  by  Charter,  vnto  the  Maior  &  Citizens 
of  Chefter.  I24 

Among  thefe  is, 

3°.  A  1  ranflation  of  the  Charter  granted  to  them 
by  Q •  Elizabeth,  &  bearing  Tefte,  13  June,  anno  regni 
1 6-  '  127. 

31.  A  Note  touching  an  Indenture  between  the  Citie, 
&  the  Executors  of  Rauph  Worfley,  about  the  delivery 
of  200  Marke  by  him  bequeathed  for  felting  poore 
people  to  worke  in  Chefter. 

32.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Table  of  the  Things 
of  moft  Note  in  this  Booke  ;  made  A.  D.  1669.  fol. 
antepenult. 

2l6o. 

A  thin  Book  in  fmall  folio,  wherein  are  contained, 
x.  The  Arraignement  of  the  Earles  of  Eflex  &  South¬ 
ampton,  in  Weltm  -hall,  1 9  February  1600.  1. 

_  2.  Speeches  of  my  Lord  of  Eflex,  the  Night  before 
his  Execution,  out  of  his  Chamber-window,  to  the 
Garde  j  and  from  his  Chamber  to  the  place  of  Execution. 

10.  b. 

3.  His  Behavior,  &  Prayer,  &c.  at  his  Execution, 
25  of  February  1600.  II# 

2  I  6  r. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  moftly  done  by  the  hand 
of  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  ;  whole  Son  hath  much 
enlarged  it  by  his  own  &  others  Performances,  and 
(upon  the  cover)  entituled  it“  Defcents  &  Coates  of 
diuerfe  Shires,  &c.  ” 

In  it,  I  find, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table  to 
the  Pedegrees  contained  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  His  Table  to  the  Coates  of  Armes  given  here, 
following  the  former  ;  and  is  fucceeded  by 

3.  The  mixed  ColleQion  of  Defcents  &  Pedegrees 
abovetnenlioned,  adorned  with  many  Tricks  of  Armes 
&  Seales,  extra&s  from  old  Deeds  &  other  Inftruments 
together  with  many  Additions  &  Continuations,  even 
down  to  the  year  1699. 

Among  thefe  I  fhall  alfo  particularly  mention,  J 

4.  An  Original  .Letter  of  Mr.  John  Downes ’to  the 

third  Randle  Holme,  daf.  16  O&ober  1663.  17-.  C. 

Shewing  his  _  concern  that  Mr.  Dugdale,  Norroy, 
would  notallow  him  to  be  of  kin  to  the  chief  branch  of 
the  Family  of  Downes ;  nor  to  bear  their  Armes  with  a 
Difference.  Intreating  him  therefore  to  fett  the  matter 
right,  &  to  fatisfie  Mr.  Norroy  ;  and  he  would  give 
him  40  Shillings,  or  more  if  required. 

5.  A  Trace  with  black  Lead,  in  Order  for  a  painted 

Atchievement  of  the  Armes  of  Peter  Warburton  Efq- 
Alderman  of  Chefter.  236. 

This  belongs  to  that  imperfe&  Tra£t  in  the  MS. 
No.  2163.  which  beginnethat  fol.  71.  (in  the  Catalogue 
§  8.)  This  Mr.  Warburton  was  afterward  knighted 


Num.  2161- 

made  a  Sergeant  at  Law,  and  cam-:  ro  be  a  Judire  in 
Weftminfter-hall.  b 

6.  Original  Letter  of  Thomas  Hulfe  of  Clive  Efq:  to 

the  third  Randle  Holme,  dat.  29  July  1692.  240.  c. 

Concerning  the  Quarterings  he  pretended  to,  but 
could  not  well  make  out. 

7.  Original  Letter  of  Tho.  Wood,  to  the  third  Randle 

Holme,  dat.  g  Auguft:  1669.  5, 

Shewing  that  honed  Randle  had  not  made  good 
h.s  Agreement  with  Mr.  Dugdale  Norroy,  &  was  in  home 
tribulation  therefore. 

8.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Henry  St.  George  Garter, 
to  the  fecond  Randall  Holme,  dat.  9  April  1641.  244.  b. 

About  the  Fees  due  to  him,  as  then  Norroy  ;  and 
requeftmg  his  Afliftance,  touching  the  Families  of  Povey, 
&  Orpe  or  Orve. 

9-  Original  Letter  of  Tho".  Meareto  the  third  Randle 
Holme,  dat.  3  November  1698.  248.  A. 

Defiling  him  to  reftifie  fome  miftake  in  his  Pede'gree. 
10.  Original  Letter  of  George  Tiler  to  the  fame  : 
definng  him  to  make  Efcocheons,  &c.  for  the  Funeral 
of  Madam  Hill,  late  Wife  of  Thomas  Hill  ofSoulton 
B-lq;  dat.  2  October  1632.  2-,  ^ 

II'.  Grant  of  a  Creft  to  John  Hartley  of  Man- 
chefter  Gent,  by  Will.  Seager  Garter,  dat.  2  Odober 
,632-  .  28;. b. 

12.  The  thud  Randle  Holmes  Alphabetical  Table 
to  the  Names  of  Places  mentioned  in  this  Book  At 
the  end. 

2162. 

A  Bock  in  folio,  written  (al moft  wholly)  by  the  hand 
of  the  fecond  Randle  Holme  ;  whofe  Son,  upon 
binding  of  it  up,  on  the  back,  gave  it  this  Title  ' 
I  entice;  Port- mote-Courts  Pleas.”  I  fliall  fay  no 
further  of  it,  (although  it  be  worthy  the  perufal  of  a 
t.helhire  Antiquary)  than  that  I  find  therein, 

*•  Jhe  ^hird  Randle  Holmes  Table  of  the  Things  of 
molt  Note  in  the  lame.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Abftraas  out  of  the  Records  in  the  Threafury  of 
the  t.itty  of  Chefter,  according  to  their  Preftes  ;  i.  e.  Col. 
kdlions  from  the  Rolls  of  the  Courts  of  the  Pentice  & 

X  ortmote,  from  anno  53  Hen.  ni.  to  ann.  18  Edw.  n. 

2x63. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio  done  by  feveral  hands  - 
and  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  0/  the  back,  emi 
tuled  Coates  &  Pedegrees  ;  wherein  I  find 
tricked^ rmeS  of  Welfll  Mnotts,  Nobles,  &  Gentry,  rudely 

Thefe  are  all  crofted  out ;  which  Ihewes  that  thiy 
have  from  hence  been  entered  into  feme  other  Book.  7 
.  1-  Docents  ofWelfliFamilies;  fome  in  Wellh,  others 
in  Engltih  (vid.  ante.  1.)  10  b  n  h 

Moft  of  thefe  are  alfo  daihed  out  for  the  name  rea- 
fon  as  the  former. 

3.  Armes  of  fome  of  the  Iriih  Nobility,  rudely  tricked 
fon  Thek  ^  llkewife  da!,led  °ut,  for  the  fame’kea. 

in  Com.  Warwick, 1  l Sfojor 'of  Ho  Tib? ^Cbvl's f. 
witi- 

Thefe  are  alfo  crofted  our.  's'  b’ 

ru'  anncicnt  Recordo  tounde  in  the 

Church  of  Buldewas  m  Shroplhire.  , 7  b 

croft  fth'S  rrcla'c  the  "°ble  0f  Burnell ;  and  is 

crofled  out  as  the  former. 

7’Ttf-de-grei‘f  °f  ShroP,hl’re  taken  narratively.  19.  b. 

he  nnnr‘S-1Si  rr'0ir-d  °Ut  33  the  former ;  and  fee  ms  to 
De  an  original  Vi(ironrtr..kc„u  .  .  ■  .  „ 


v>  .  _  .1*'  . .  ..  . 


54° 


( ’atalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2i6j — 2165. 

hath  putt  down  homo  Notes  relating  to  C.hefliire-Fa- 
milies. 

Then  follows. 

8.  Fragment  of  the  Original  Vifitation-book  oF  the 

C.ittve  of  Chefter,  taken  A.  D.  1591,  by  Thomas  Chalo- 
jierfor  the  Office  of  Armes  ;  and  feeming  never  to  have 
been  finifhed.  7  1  • 

Fragments  of  this  very  Book  appear  in  divers  others. 
See  N".  2161.  fol.  236.  and  in  the  prefent  MS.  14.  c. 

The  Pedegrees  in  this  Tract  are  taken  narratively  ; 
and  fome  of  the  Magiftrates  who  gave  the  Information 
touching  their  refpective  Families,  have  fubferibed  their 
Names  to  the  fame. 

9.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Alphabetical  Table  to 
the  Coates,  Crefts,  &  Pedegrees  in  this  Book.  99. 

10.  Ilis  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Names  of  thofe 
Families,  whole  Armes  are  rudely  tricked,  in  the  2 
full  Leaves,  and  in  the  8  laft  Leaves  of  this  Book.  I 

102.  b. 

11.  Lilt  of  the  Aldermen  of  Chefter,  in  anno  1590; 
with  the  Names  of  5  others  who  fucceeded.  104.  b. 

2  I  64. 

An  Hcraldical  Book  in  folio,  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  all  the  Pedegrees  in  this 
Booke.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  An  interleaved  Copie  of  Raphe  Brooke’s  Cata¬ 
logue  of  the  Englifh  Dukes,  Marquiffes,  Earles,  &  Vif- 
counts,  printed  at  London,  A.  D.  1622.  from  pag.  47. 
with  the  Armes  colored  by  Jacob  Chaloner,  &  the  Errata 
of  the  Prefs  amended. 

The  fame  Jacob  C.halloner  hath  added  mauy  other 
Correlations,  Explanations,  New  't  itles,  Pedegrees,  Sc 
Armes  ;  fo  that  the  Book  may  be  faid  to  be  improved 
&  carried  on  to  the  Year  1628.  After  which,  there  are 
yet  fome  more  by  the  fame  hand.  When  this  Book,  lb 
augmented,  came  into  the  poireffion  of  the  lecond  Ran¬ 
dle  Holme,  he  enriched  it  further  with  more  Notes  &  Def- 
cents  in  very  many  places  ;  which  notwithftanding,  did 
not  hinder  his  Son  from  adding  fome  more. 

Toward  the  end,  comes 

3.  The  third  Randle  Holme’s  Table  of  the  feuerall 

Catalogues  in  this  booke.  409. 

Which  is  followed  finally,  by 

4.  His  Alphabett  of  all  the  Titles  of  Honor,  whether 
Dukes,  Marquifes,  Earles,  Vifcounls,  or  Barons  ;  toge¬ 
ther  with  all  the  Surnames  in  this  Booke  :  made  A.  D. 
1670. 

2165. 

An  Hcraldical  Book  in  fmall  folio,  confifting  chiefly  of 
lool’e  Leaves,  or  fmaller  pieces  of  Paper,  (replenilhed 
with  Heraldical  Notes,  ufeful  in  a  Colle&ion)  parted 
in  an  old  Accompt-Book  5  which  I  fhall  but  briefly 
deferibe. 

1 .  At  the  beginning  is  a  Table  of  the  Names  of  the 
Coates,  Crefts,  or  Quarterings  in  this  Book ;  made  by 
the  fecond  Randle  Holme,  A.  D.  1634. 

2.  Badges  attributed  to  Brute,  Cadvvalyder,  S'.  Ed¬ 

mond,  S'.  Edwarde,  Englande,  Walles,  Irlande,  Marche, 
Vlfter,  and  Chefter.  1. 

3.  Radges,  or  Supporters  of  the  Kings  of  England, 
from  K.  Edward  in.  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  inclufive  1.  b. 

4.  A  large  Collettion  of  Armes  both  in  Trick  Sc  Bla- 

fon,  fometimes  with  Sc  fometimes  without  Quarterings  ; 
with  many  bare  Lifts  of  the  Names  of  Families  whofe 
Armes  were  Quartered  by  the  firft  Names  of  thofe  Lifts, 
&c.  2. 

Among  thefe  I  take  fome  Notice  of 

5.  The  Armes  and  Creft  of  Pierpoint  coloured.  3. 

6.  The  Armes  &  Creft  of  the  Lord  Scrope  of  Bol¬ 

ton,  painted  by  the  fame  hand  ;  i.  e.  by  Jacob  Chalo¬ 
ner.  4.  b. 


Ninth  2165 — 1167, 

7.  Trick  of  the  Achievement  of  Albrecht  Lord  of 

Puegheim  Sc  Horrn,  A.  D.  1558.  n. 

8.  Armes  in  Blafon,  of  the  Heads  of  many  Wclfli 

Families.  14.  &  15.  b. 

9.  An  Engraven  Print  of  the  Lord  Mordant’s  At- 

chievement.  17.  b. 

10.  Armes  in  Blafon,  borne  by  different  Families 
of  the  Name  of  Wood,  Woodward,  Irby,  &  Ayleff. 

20.  b. 

11.  Again,  as  to  Jackfon,  Gibfon,  Sc  Gybes.  21. 

12.  Impreffions  of  Wax  from  the  Seales  of  Smyth. 

13.  Armes  in  Blafon  of  the  Knights  of  the  Bath, 
made  at  the  Coronation  of  K.  James  1,  A.  D.  1603 

28. 

2166. 


A  Book  in  folio,  upon  whofe  out-fide  the  third  Randle 
Holme  hath  written  the  following  Title, 

“  Namptwich-Hundred.  The  Sequeftration  book  of 
Delinquents  Eftates,  for  being  true  for  the  King  of  hap¬ 
py  Memory  Charles  1.  within  thefe  Townes,  Nampt- 
wicli,  Wiftafton,  Woufton-Wood,  Alvefton  &  Leigh¬ 
ton,  A.  D.  1644.  1645.  1646.”  * 

At  the  beginning  is, 

The  faid  Mr.  Holmes  Table  of  the  Things  of  moft 
Note  in  this  Book,  which  was  delivered  in  upon  Oath, 
24  Febr.  1647. 

2167. 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  divers  Trails 

&  particular  Papers  bound  up  together,  &  by  the 

third  Randle  Holme  entituled  on  the  back,  “  Coates  & 

Quarterings,  See.”  as  containing, 

1.  A  large  Collection  of  Armes  borne  by  Families 

both  Well'll  &  Englifh.  1 . 

Among  which,  in  turning  the  Book  over,  I  alfo 
obferve, 

2.  A  Trick  of  the  Armes  'of  the  Knights  of  the  Holy 

Sepulchre  in  Jerufalem.  gg. 

3.  An  old  Table  to  part  of  this  Book.  12S.  b. 

4.  Armes  of  the  old  Earles,  Barons,  Sc  Gentry  of 

Chefhire.  150. 

5.  The  Armes  of  the  Worfhipfull  Companies  of  the 

Honorable  Cittie  of  I.ondone.  168. 

6.  Armes  of  many  Englifh  Earles  &  Barons.  170.  b. 

7.  Armes  of  our  Englifh  Bifhopricks.  173. 

8.  An  Engraven  Print  of  the  Atchievement  of  King 

Charles  1.  J73*b. 

9.  Armes  of  Foreign  Kings  &  Princes.  174. 

10.  Other  Armes  of  d. vers  of  our  Englifh  Nobility. 

176. 

11.  Armes  of  Englifh  Knights.  180. 

12.  Armes  of  the  Chefhire-G entry,  difpofed  in  way 

of  Alphabet.  152. 

13.  A  true  Coppey  of  Robert  Glover  Somerfet’s 

Book.  207. 

This  is  of  the  Armes,  perhaps  taken  from  his  Vifi¬ 
tation-book  of  Chefhire,  of  1 580.  to  which  the  then, 
young  C.opift  Jacob  Chaloner,  i'eems  to  have  added  the 
Armes  of  foreign  Kingdomes. 

This  Tra&  was  done  A.  D.  1 603. 

14.  The  Armes  of  all  the  Companeys  of  Chefter. 

230. 

Thefe  are  begun  by  the  third  Randle  Holme,  but 
not  finifhed. 

15.  Armes  of  the  City  of  I.ondon,  &  of  the  feveral 

Companies  thereof :  engraven.  23 4.  b. 

16.  A  'Fable  of  the  Coates,  Creftes,  and  Quarter- 
inges  of  this  booke  ;  collected  by  Randle  Holme  jun. 
A.  D.  1646.  At  the  end. 

Note  that  very'  many  Armes,  See.  have  been  in- 
ferted  by  the  third  Randle  alfo,  even  fo  lately  as  A.  D. 

1703. 


io4 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


Num.  2167 — 2173. 

1703.  8c  fince  ;  which  are  likewife  added  to  this 
Table. 

2168. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  wherein  are  contained, 
x .  A  Colle&ion  of  Precedents  according  to  the  Prac¬ 
tice  of  the  Prerogative-Court,  8cc.  in  the  times  of  Whit- 
gift  and  Bancroft  Arch-bifhops  of  Canterbury  ;  with 
fome  few  other  Inftruments.  By  thefe,  one  may  fee  8c 
obferve  not  only  the  Forms  which  then  obtained  ;  but 
may  alfo  pick  up  fome  particulars  of  Family-Hiftory. 

2.  An  Alphabetical  Index  to  the  faid  Collection.  At 
the  end. 

2169. 

An  old  Heraldical  Book  in  fmall  folio  done  in  the  time  of 
King  Henry  vi.  wherein  is  contained, 

1.  A  large  Collection  of  Armes,  of  foreign  Kings, 
Saints,  Nobles,  8cc.  fome  of  which  are  fabulous :  as  alfo, 
of  our  Englifii  Nobility  8c  Gentry ;  all  mixed  together  : 
which,  notwithftanding  that  fome  be  erroneous,  and 
others  want  the  Names  of  the  Perfons  to  which  they 
did  belong,  are  neverthelefs  of  fome  life  ;  and  have 
from  hence  been  entered  into  fome  other  Book. 

2.  Two  Medicines  againft  the  Sciatica.  69.  b. 

3.  A  Table  to  the  Armes  abovementioned,  begun  by 
Jacob  Chaloner,  and  finifhed  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme :  At  the  end. 

2i7°.  ^  . 

AiBook  in  folio,  wherein  is  contained, 

Part  of  a  Law- Common-place-book,  written  in  the 
Law-French. 

217  r. 

A  Book  in  folio,  wherein  is  alfo  contained, 

Another  part  of  the  fame  Law-Common-place-book ; 
by  the  fame  hand. 

2172. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  by  feverall  hands,  but 
principally  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme;  whole  Son 
hath  on  the  out-fide  given  it  the  following  Title, 
“  Deeds,  Leafcs  for  Lives,  8c  Fee  farme-Leafes,  made 
by  the  Maior  8c  Counfell  of  fuch  Lands  as  belonged 
to  Chefter.” 

In  it  I  find, 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Table  of  the  Things  of 
mod  Note  in  that  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  His  Table  to  the  Lands  belonging  to  the  Citty, 
Jet  in  Fee-farme,  and  paying  fmall  Rents  :  In  the  next 
Leaf. 

Then  follows 

3.  The  Colle&ion  of  Deeds  8c  Leafes  abovementioned, 
which  are  only  Abftra&s,  8:  not  Tranfcripts  ;  and  fince 
they  relate  wholly*  to  the  bufinefs  of  that  City,  I  judge 
it  not  material  to  fay  more  of  it  here,  but  rather  refer  the 
reader  to  the  book  itfelf. 

2173. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  by  the  fecond  Randle 
Holme  8c  others  ;  on  the  Cover  of  which,  the  third 
Randle  Holme  hath  written  the  following  Title, 
“  What  Writtings  8c  Deeds  are  in  the  Maiors,  Tre- 
furers,  8c  feueral  other  Chefts  8c  Defies,  in  the  Pentice 
of  the  Citty  of  Chefter.  Some  of  thefe  feeming  to 
be  more  remarkable  than  thofe  in  the  lalt  Book.  I 
Ihall  (notwithftanding  my  intended  Brevity)  make 
particular  mention  of  fome  of  them  in  thefe  Articles 
following : 

j.  The  third  Randle  Holme's  Table  to  the  Things  of 
moft  Note  in  this  Booke,  made  A.  D.  1669.  At  the 
beginning. 

Then  follows 

2.  The  Collection  itfelf ;  wherein  I  obferve. 

Cat,  Harl.  Von.  II. 


Num.  2173. 

3.  A  Letter  from  the  Privy  Counfaile  to  the  Maior* 
See.  for  fupprefting  of  Ale-houfes  unlawfully  kept  there  » 

8c  for  the  receivinge  of  the  Compofition  for  thofe  which 
were  to  be  allowed,  dat.  14  January  1609.  1.  b. 

4.  Another,  with  a  Lift  of  the  Names  of  thofe  Perfons 

who  only  were  to  be  permitted  to  retayle  Tobaccd  in 
Chefter;  dated  the  laft  of  Auguft  1633.  2. 

5.  Another,  with  certain  Articles,  for  incorporating 

certain  Malfters  in  every  County,  8c  fupprefting  the  reft, 
dated  the  3  of  February  1636.  2.  b. 

6.  C.ommiftion  of  K.  Charles  1.  to  the  Judges,  to 

bynd  by  Bond  all  In-holders,  Taverners,  Cookes,  Or¬ 
dinary-keepers,  8c  Ale-houfe-keepers,  not  to  drefie  any 
Red  or  Fallow  Deer,  Partrich,  Phefant,  or  Heath-pout, 
being  Game  for  his  Princeley  Difport,  8c  the  Recreation  8c 
Delight  of  the  Nobility  8c  Gentry,  given,  19  February 
1636.  4.  b. 

7.  Letter  from  the  Marquis  of  Hamilton,  Sc  the  Earl 

of  Holland,  enforcing  that  C.ommiftion.  dat.  16  July 
1638.  ibid: 

8.  Letter  from  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter  to  thofe 

Lords  againft  Rich.  Brifcow,  who  endeavour’d  to  putt 
the  Kings  Commiffion  in  Execution,  without  fufficient 
Authority,  as  they  conceived,  A.  D.  1638.  5. 

9.  The  Kings  Cotnmiflion  to  the  Maior,  8cc.  for  their 

adminiftring  the  Oaths  of  Supremacy  8c  Allegiance  to  all 
Commanders,  Officers,  &  Souldiers,  who  pafs  by  Chefter 
to  ferve  in  Ireland.  10  Jan.  anno  regni  17.  5.  b. 

1  o.  Letter  from  the  Privy  Council  to  the  Magiftrates 
of  Chefter,  dat.  1 1  March  1583.  7. 

Recommending  a  Collection  to  be  made  there  for 
the  Relief  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Namptwich,  which  was 
lately  burnt  down. 

1 1 .  The  Kings  Letter  to  the  Commiflioners  of  Array 

in  Chefhire;  given  7  Oftober  1642.  8. 

Commanding  them  to  take  a  fitting  Courfe  for 
placeing  a  competent  Garrifon  in  Chefter,  and  otherways 
making  the  fame,  in  fome  meafure,  defenfible  againft  fo- 
dayn  Surprizes :  and  for  furniftiing  the  trayned  bands 
with  Arms. 

12.  Letter  from  the  Privy  Council  to  the  Maior,  See. 

of  Chefter.  dat.  the  laft  of  February  1633.  8.b. 

About  counterfeit  Brafs  Farthings,  which  were  not 
to  be  fuffered  to  pafte. 

1 3.  Another,  about  their  providing  a  place  convenient 
for  laying  in  a  (tore  of  Gun-powder,  28  April  1639.  9. 

14.  Warant  from  Algernon  Percy  Earl  of  Northum¬ 

berland,  Loi'd  High  Admiral,  to  the  Maior,  26  June 
1638.  9-  b. 

Requiring  them  to  prefs  3  of  the  ableft  8c  belt  ex¬ 
perienced  Pilots  about  the  North-Weft  Coats  of  England, 
8c  to  difpatch  away  for  the  Downes  to  Sir  John  Penning¬ 
ton  Vice-Admirall. 

15.  Another,  from  the  fame,  dated  17  July  1638. 

ibid. 

Requiring  them  to  keep  thofe  Pilots  who  refufed 
his  Majelties  Service,  in  fafe  cuftody,  untill  his  further 
Orders. 

16.  Letter  from  Henry  Stanley  Earle  of  Derby  to  the 

Maior  of  Chefter,  dat.  28  Oclob.  1591.  10. 

Promifing  to  endeavour  to  eafe  thofe  in  Cheftei*, 
who  being  charged  with  Privy  Seals,  were  not  able  to 
lend  the  Money. 

17.  Sir  Hugh  Cholmley’s  Letter  to  the  Maior  See. 

dat.  17  December  1597.  ibid. 

Requiring  them  to  fend  in  their  I.one-Moneys  ;  or 
to  give  bonds  for  their  Appearance  before  the  Lords  of 
the  Privy-Counfaile,  to  fhew  Caufe  wherefore  they  refufed 
to  pay  her  Majefties  Lone,  according  to  the  Privy  Seales 
they  had  received. 

18.  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  to 

the  Commifiioners  for  the  Lone  in  Chefter,  20  Novr. 
1626.  }?- 

C  Y  Requiring 


54; 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2173. 


Requiring  them  to  accept  the  Lone-money  of  all 
fuchas  fbould  tender  the  fame,  without  fubfcribing  their 
names  :  and  to  bind  fuch  as  were  appointed  Collectors 
and  refufed  to  ferve,  to  anlwer  for  their  Contempt,  before 
their  board. 

1 9.  Letter  from  the  fame  Earle  of  Derby  to  the  Maior, 

&c.  dat,  25  September  1584.  ,,, 

Recommending  Mr.  Peter  Warburton  learned  in 
the  Lawes,  to  be  one  of  their  Aldermen. 

20.  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Commiffion  to  the  Bifhop, 

Maior,  Dean,  Chancellor,  &  Aldermen  of  Chefter,  2  3 
Novr-  1 593*  .  ibid. 

Cumanding  them  to  fearch  for,  examin,  committ, 
k  trye,  all  Seminary-Priefts,  Jefuits,  or  difguifed  Fugi¬ 
tives,  &  their  Abettors  or  Maintainers,  who  have  come 
from  beyond  the  Seas,  to  corrupt  her  people  in  matter  of 
Religion,  or  to  ftir  them  to  adhere  to  the  Pope,  or  Kinge 
of  Spaine,  or  any  their  Confederates,  Enemies  to  her 
State. 

2 1.  better  die  Commiffioners  appointed  to  examyn 
the  Account  of  a  late  Expedition  againfl  the  Pirats  of 
Algier&  rums,  to  the  Maior,  &c.  dat.  17  April  1628.  12. 

Requiring  them  to  pay  in  the  ico).  which  they  pro- 
unfed  to  contribute  toward  that  Service. 

22.  Letter  of  the  Privy  Council,  to  the  fame,  dat.  20 

April  1629.  12.b. 

Authorizing  them  to  employ  Captain  Edward  Holm- 
wood  m  the  erecting  an  Artillery-yard,  and  to  appoint  him 
Captain  thereof,  &  to  inftruCt  young  men  in  military 
Drtcipline.  .  etvid.  m.b. 

23.  The  Petition  of  divers,  to  the  Maior  &  Aldermen, 

for  an  Allowance  of  20I.  y  annum  to  the  Artilery  Gar¬ 
den  newly  felt  up.  12  b< 

24.  Letter  of  Mr.  Peter  Sharpe  Sub-deane  of  Chefter, 

to  the  Maior,  dat.  16  January  1606.  13. 

.  Explaining  himfelf  about  his  puttinge  downe  the 
Maiors  f  word  in  the  Cathedrall  ;  profeflinge  that  he  only 
leverently  layd  his  hand  vpon  the  fword,  without  either 
noidinge  or  gripinge  the  fame  :  fo  that,  if  the  fword  was 
ar.e.’  1l'V3S  t*le  S^dhiefTe  of  the  Scaberd,  not  the  violence 
o  his  hand,  that  caufed  it.  For  he  thruft  it  not  downe, 
but  touching  it  reverently,  faid  only  thefe  words,  I  pray 
you  forbeare  in  this  place. 

25.  Order  of  the  Bifhop  of  Chefter  &  others,  the 

Rings  Commiffioners,  1 1  Febr.  1606.  13.  b. 

Jhat  Mr.  Sharpe  fliould  declare  himfelf  forry  for 
tins  Ad;  &  Mr.  Maior  to  repair  to  the  Cathedral, 
with  his  iword,  as  formerly;  and  no  door  to  be  fliutt 
againft  him.  i  his  to  endure  untill  further  order  fhall 
be  taken. 

20.  Judge  Warburton ’s  Letter  to  the  Maior,  dat.  2 
March  1 6c 6.  ,  b 

About  a  Reconciliation  between  the  City  &  the  Pre¬ 
bendaries  of  Chefter. 

27.  Mr.  Hugh  Glafeours  Letter  to  the  Maior,  dat.  at 
London,  20  March  1606.  jbjcj 

r-  J,hat.  /u,d£e  Warburton  was  of  opinion,  that  the 
(.ity  fliould  be  contented  with  the  Order  lately  made  ■ 
and  io  was  the  Lord  Chancellor  at  firft  ;  untill  Mr  Gla' 
l€our  fliewd  him  feme  Remarks  he  had  made  upon  it. 

1  hen  lie  faid  that  he  would  write  to  the  Jullices  of  Affize 

“gh>  onth  SS  °f  ^  C“t'  “d  “  fa““*  *= 

,he M  ofTa^re,i'6r,3f  J°-  Y0U”E  “  the  Mai°r’  dated 

That  the  Caufe  between  Sir  William  Brereton  &  the 
City,  about  the  Privileges  of  the  Nuns  of  Chefter  had 
been  folemniy  heard.  And  ahho1  he  (hewed  far  more 
ancient  Charters  then  were  produced  for  the  City  ■  fome 
of  them  without  date,  home  from  Hugh  Lupus,  &  others 
of  newer  tymes  ;  yet  the  poffeffion  of  the  Toll  being 
ved  by  the  taking  thereof,  for  the  vfe  of  the  Cittv  for 
many  yeares,  gave  fuch  fatisfaflion  to  the  Court  that 
Sir  William  fell  far  (hort  of  his  Expedition  ’ 


Num. 


2I72- 

29.  The  Kings  Letter  to  the  Lord  Maior  of  Yorke. 

Given,  2  July  1637.  lb 

Commanding  him  to  frequent  the  Cathedral  Church 
there  vpon  Sundays  &  Holydays,  without  viing  the  En- 
fignes  of  his  Authority  therein.  This  Letter  was  fent  by 
ttieBuftiop  ofChefter,  to  provoke  theMaior  &  his  brethren 
to  come  to  the  choir  in  Chefter;  but  reafons  fatisfaflory 
were  giuen,  that  the  Maior  of  Chefter  is  not  fo  tyed  8tc 

30.  Letter  of  the  Chefter  Magiftrates,  to  the  High 

CommtHioners  at  Yorke,  A.  D  1 63 1 .  ,  b“ 

Shewing  that  their  Pourfuivants,  by  wronge  Infor- 
matton,  did  from  day  to  day  apprehend,  vnder  pretence 
°  ■  f U™c)r’  fuch  wh°  haJ  n°  private  Conference 
with  Will.  I  rynne,  when  he  was  at  Chefter  (who  was 
jultly  cenfured  for  a  fchifmatical  perlbn)  but  faw  him  only 
to  obferve  the  perfon  of  him  ;  and  others  who  faw  him 
not  at  all;  to  the  great  difquiet  and  expence  of  many, 
and  to  the  fubverfion  &  vndoinge  of  others. 

31.  Order  of  the  King  &  Council,  made  the  6th  of 

June  1636.  jkjj 

Commanding  the  Lord  Maior  8c  Citizens  of  Yorke 
to  furrender  up  their  new  Charter  ;  by  pretence  whereof 
they  excluded  the  Deane  &  Chapter  there  from  many 
antient  privileges,  and  prejudiced  many  of  his  Maiefties 
tenants  in  order  to  the  palling  of  another  Charter  to 
them,  whereby  what  might  be  fitt  fliould  be  granted  to 
them. 

32.  Another,  made  13  March  1636.  17. 

Upon  hearing  the  Caufe  between  the  City  of  Win- 

chefter,  &  the  Dean  &  Chapter  there,  it  was  refolved  by 
h.s  Majefty,  that  the  Cathedral  Church,  the  BiihopsPa- 
laceat  Wolvefgy  the  Church-yard,  and  the  Clofe  of  the 
laid  Church,  are  &  ought  to  be  exempted  from  alljurif- 
diction,  I  ower,  &  Authority  of  the  faid  Citty :  and  the 
•  Ia'i°r  A?  be  reflra}’ned  from  carrying  up  his  Regalia 
m  the  Choir  or  any  other  part  of  the  Cathedral  Church  ; 
but  to  have  leave  to  beare  thofe  Enfignes  of  Authority  in 
any  part  of  the  Precinitcs  orLyberties  iherof. 

,,  .  Ra,ndlf  ?oIme  obferves  «hus,  ‘  This  was  Tent  for  the 
Maioi  of  Chefter  to  perufe  &  follow  ;  but  to  no  purpofe  : 
lor  our  privileges  are  far  beyond  theirs.  For  we  do,  as 
cl  old,  ailefs  the  Clergy ;  and  haue  power  to  come  with 

Church ’d  Vpnght  before  the  Maior  m  any  Part  °f  the 

33.  Another,  made  25  January  1634.  ,8. 

Upon  the  Dean  &  Chapter  of  Canterburies  Remon- 
Ihanee  that  the  Magiftrates  there  had  affieffied  the  Clergv 
&  all  other  the  Inhabitants  within  the  Precin&s  of  the  favd 
Church,  toward  the  Shipping-money  :  that  the  Clergie 
there  fliould  aflefs  themfelves  &  Inhabitants,  as  they  haue 
formerly  done.  1 

Hereupon  Randle  Holme  obferves  that  this  was  fent 
to  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  to  induce  him  to  yield  to  the 
ike  Privilege ;  but  it  did  no  good  ;  for  the  Bifhop  & 
Clergy  were  affeffied  by  the  ('ity  the  fame  year. 

34-  Letter  from  Alderman  Robert  Sprofton  &  Mr 
Litler,  to  theMaior  of  Chefter  ;  dat.  27  May  1638.  30" 

.  ,.UP°0n  tbe  ful1  hearing  which  their  Caufes  had  before 
the  King  &  Council!,  where  they  found  fo  many  &  great 
Enemies,  that  had  not  his  Majefties  moft  gratious  Favour 
been  toward  the  City,  and  the  Lord  Keeper  &  Privie 
beale  proved  its  nole  &  faft-Friends,  all  had  been  loft 
1  hat  the  matter  of  the  Bifhop  &  Deane  &  Chapter  of 
Chefter,  whether  they  fhould  be  afTeffed  as  belonging  to 
the  County-Palatine,  or  to  the  County  of  the  City  is  to  be 
referred  to  the  hearing  of  the  Earle  of  Derby  and  two 
Judges.  That  the  Caufe  touching  the  Gloverftone  is 
loft  ;  it  now  being  to  be  noe  parte  of  the  County  of  the 
Cittie.  But  that  Sir  Thomas  Alton,  the  onely  Fingenere 
“  caufe  of  the  Cities  trobles,  is  ordered  to  paye  his  Ship- 
money  in  the  Cittye,  and  neuer  further  to  troble  the 
boarde  in  that  particuler. 

Here  are  divers  other  material  Letters  &  Papers 
about  thefe  matters,  but  the  purport  of  them  being  ffrom 
g  other 


Bibliothecas  Harleiance, 


543 


Num.  2173. 

other  hooks')  already  fpecified  in  this  Volume  of  Ca¬ 
talogue  I  chufe  here  to  omitt  them. 

■25.  The  Ciies  Breefe  conferninge  the  Gloverfton, 
fhewing  their  opinion,  that  all  Inhabitants  of  the  City, 
fhould  pay  all  Taxes,  Layes,  &c.  with  the  City.  Con¬ 
firmed  by  the  Judges  8c  other  great  Lords  Opinions,  and 
bv  he  Cuftorae  of  the  Citie  of  London.  Read  at  an  af- 
fembly  A.D.  1038.  34- 

6.  Letter  of  the  Privy  Council  to  the  Maior  of  Chefter 
&  others  the  Commiflionen;  there,  for  the  Contribution  :o- 
w  rd  the  Repayre  of  St.  Paides  Church  in  London,  dat. 
15  July  634.  40.  b. 

That  his  Majeftv  taking  a  gracious  Contentment  in 
the  good  Progrefs  of  the  fame,  finding  the  charge  of 
rcpaire  8c  beautifying  that  great  worke  to  rife  higher 
then  at  he  firfl  was  conceaved  :  is  pleas’d  out  of  his 
Princely  Zeale  towards  the  perfecting  thereof  (tending 
fo  rmv  h  to  the  honour  of  himfelfe  &  his  Government) 
to  vndergo  the  entire  Charge  of  buildinge  vp  the  whole 
Weft  end  of  that  Fabrick. 

37.  A  Certificate  from  the  Maior  of  Briftol  to  the 

Maior  of  Chefter  ;  to  fhew  that  the  Citizens  of  Chefter 
be  free  of  Cuftoms  at  Briftol,  dated  the  18th  of  Novem¬ 
ber  1  579.  41.  b. 

38.  A  Certificate  from  the  Maior  8c  Sheriffs  of  Briftol, 
to  drew  that  they  (the  Citizens  of  Bii(tol)  are  free 
of  Cuftoms  in  Chefter,  dated  the  7  of  June,  anno  34 
Lliz. 

39.  A  Certificate  from  the  Soueraine  of  New  Roffe, 

alias  Roffe- Pont  in  the  Comity  of  Wexford  in  Ireland  ;  to 
fliew  that  We  be  free  with  them,  of  all  Cuftoms;  and  they 
with  the  City  of  Chefter,  dat.  the  8th  of  September  A.  D. 
1587.  _  _  42.  b. 

40.  A  Letter  from  the  Maior  of  Wexford  in  Ireland  to 

the  Maior  of  Chefter ;  to  fhew  that  they  are  free  from 
Cuftoms  with  us,  and  we  with  them,  dated  the  20th  of 
October  1628.  .  43. 

41.  A  Certificate  from  the  Maior  of  Drogheda  how 

two  of  that  Towne  bought  of  another  there  a  certeyn 
quantetye  of  Onyon-Seeds,  which  they  did  fowe  in 
a  feafonable  tyme,  in  good  8c  fertyll  grownd,  well 
digged  Sc  dreffed  for  l'uche  purpofe.  Yet  notwith- 
ftanding  the  Seeds  did  not  fpringe  vpp  to  any  purpofe. 
Whereupon,  they  new-dug  the  grownd  8c  fowed  other 
Seedes  thereon,  which  did  growe  8c  come  to  profit,  dat. 
22  January,  anno  44  Eliz.  44.  b. 

42.  The  Braunche  for  the  Cittie  ofWeft-Chefler,  con- 

ceminge  the  Devife  of  Sir  Thomas  White.  45. 

43.  Carta,  qua  Willelmus Flower  didus  Norroy,  Rex 

Armorum,  Urbi  Ceftrenfi  confirmat  Arma,  fimul  atq; 
eidem  Criftam  cum  Supportatoribus  concedit.  dat.  3  die 
Septembris,  anno  22  Elizabethan  Regina:.  49. 

44.  Agreement  between  the  Executors  of  Mr.  Raufe 

Worfley  Sc  the  City,  to  which  he  bequeathed  200  Marks, 
for  fetting  the  Poor  to  Work.  dat.  29  Sept,  anno  17 
Eliz.  _  _  5 1  -  b. 

45.  A  Deed  provinge  the  Maiors  Authority  to  be  Admi- 
rall  vponthe  River  of  Dee,  from  Arnolds  Eyre,  to  Eaton- 
Ware  :  confirmed  by  Arthur  Planlaginet  Vice-Admiral  of 
England,  4Maij,  anno  20  R.  Henrici  vm.  yo.  b. 

46.  Letter  of  Henry  Stanley  Earle  of  Derby,  to  the 

Maior  of  Chefter,  dat.  9  January  1583.  73. 

Upon  their  Claim  of  Liberties  within  the  Compafs 
of  the  River  Dee  :  and  willing  them  to  make  known  to 
the  Judge  of  the  Admiraltie,  their  Tytle  to  the  fame  :  and 
whatfoever  the  Judge  fhould  determin,  he  would  allow. 

47.  A  Warant  from  the  Court  of  Admiralty  to  the 

Conftables  of  Chefter,  requiring  them  towarne  all  Saylors 
to  appear  before  the  Judge  of  thac  Court.  Geoven  1  of 
October  1635.  .  ibid. 

Randle  Holme  obferves  that  it  was  not  obeyed,  be- 
caufe  the  Maior  is  Mafter  of  the  Sea  within  the  Liber¬ 
ties  :  fo  the  Judges  Power  was  foon  quafhed,  8c  he  ftirred 
no  further  therein,  vid.  fol.  1 1 3.  b. 


Num.  2173. 

48-  Letter  of  theCity  to  the  Lord  Lea,  Lord  High 
Threfaurer  of  England.  74. 

Shewing  that  the  Sum  of  £330.  charged  upon  feve. 
ral  Citizens  there  by  Privy  Seals,  was  too  much,  after  fuch 
Services  as  they  had  done,  and  efpecially  confidering  the 
late  great  decay  of  their  Trade  :  They  defire  therefore, 
that  the  faid  Privy  Seales  may  be  recalled,  and  only  one 
to  be  directed  to  the  Maior  8c  Citizens  for too.  and 
they  would  readily  lend  it. 

49.  An  Order  of  the  King  8c  Council,  dated  6  June 

16,5.  34.  b. 

Upon  fome  Difference  between  the  Deane  8c  Chap¬ 
ter  of  Chicheftei,  8c  the  Maior  8c  Citizens  there ;  the 
Corporation  were  to  furrender  their  Charter  of  the  19 
Jacobi,  and  a  new  one  to  be  paffed  to  them,  with  all  Pri¬ 
vileges,  &c.  contained  in  the  former,  fave  that  theChurch 
8c  Clofe  of  Chichefter  fhould  not  be  iucluded  as  part  of 
that  City,  but  to  be  left  as  part  of  the  County,  as  aunci- 
enily  they  were.  Moreover,  that  the  City  fhould  bee 
ingaged  not  to  diflurbe  or  affront  the  Deane  or  his  De- 
putie,  or  their  Succeffors  in  the  Church  or  Clofe,  for 
matter  of  Precedencie  ;  nor  to  have  the  Mace  borne 
before  him  in  the  Quire. 

50.  Another,  dated  17  January  1635.  75. 

Upon  the  faid  Cities  AffeiTing  the  faid  Dean  8c 

Chapter,  8c  other  Inhabitants  in  the  Clofe,  toward  the 
Ship-money,  8c  levying  part  of  it  from  them,  when  as 
they  were  likewife  affeffed  by  the  Shireve  of  the  County  : 
that  the  Maior  fhould  pay  back  the  Money,  8c  the  Shireve 
only  to  affefs  them  for  the  future. 

51.  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council, 

to  the  Maior  8c  Vice-Chamberlain  of  Chefter,  12  July 
1576.  76. 

That  whereas  one  Francis  Elderman  a  German  was 
in  Prifon  there  for  certayn  lewd  Speeches  ;  forfomuch 
as  he  was  accufed  but  by  one  perfone,  with  whom  he 
was  at  Law,  8c  had  been  a  good  while  imprifoned  ;  that 
they  fhould  take  his  own  Bond  for  his  good  behavior 
fur  a  year,  and  felt  him  ac  Liberty. 

52  Another  to  William  Stanley  Earl  of  Derby,  dated 
29  April  1624.  76.  b. 

Requiring,  that  whatfoever  Irifh  fhall  come  to  Im- 
barke  himfelr  for  Ireland,  in  any  of  the  Port-Townes  of 
Chefhire  or  Lancafhire,  the  Magiftrate  fhall  examin  him, 
&  minifter  vnto  him  the  oath  of  Allegiance  ;  and  if  he 
fhall  refufe  to  take  it,  to  fend  him  up,  in  fafe  Cuftody. 

53.  Another,  to  the  Maior  of  Chefter,  dated  29  Fe¬ 
bruary  1631.  77. 

Prohibiting  the  keeping  of  Michaelmafs-Faire  there, 
divers  places  of  Lancafhire  Sc  North-Wales  being  infefted 
with  the  Plague. 

54.  A  Letter  from  A lgernon  Percy  Earl  ofNorthum- 

berland  Lord  High  Admiral,  26  July  1638.  77.  b. 

Conceining  the  3  Pilots  who  refufed  to  ferve  his 
Majefty  ;  whom  (were  he  not  loth  to  vndoe  them)  he 
would  have  fent  for  up  by  his  Meffenger  to  anfwer  that 
Infolency  ;  but  requiting  him,  for  a  terror  to  others, 
to  continue  them  ftill  in  Reftraint,  vntill  his  further 
orders. 

55.  Another,  to  the  fame,  dated  4  September  1638. 

ibid. 

Upon  the  humble  Submiffion  of  thofe  three  Pilots, 
who  were  to  thank  themfelves,  for  their  Neceflity  8c  Mi- 
lay.  That  though  he  delighted  not  in  the  Affliction  of 
any  Man,  yet  Offences  of  this  Nature  were  not  to  be 
paffed  over  eafily,  left  others  fhould  take  Incouragement 
by  their  example.  Yet  requiring  that  thefe  three  De¬ 
linquents  fhould  prefently  be  releafed,  without  further 
Punifhment. 

56.  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  to 
the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter,  dated  the  12  June  1629. 

77.  c. 

In  the  behalf  of  Richard  Stubbs  a  Carrier,  who  was 
robbed  of  a  Port-mantle  he  was  to  carry  from  London  to 

Chefter  j 


544 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.2173. 

Chefter ;  for  which  he  was  arretted  &  committed  to  Pri. 
fon  there,  the  jroods  in  the  fame  being  valued  at  f  ■  co 
and  yet  he  had  no  Notice  that  they  were  fo  much  worth' 
Dehrtng  therefore  that  the  Owner  would  deal  favorably 
with  hunt  &  requiring  them  to  take  fpccial  Care  that 
alltuch  awful  Courfes  fo  all  be  held  for  Stubb’s  relief, 
a  foould  be  agreable  to  the  Equity  of  the  Court  of  Ex¬ 
chequer  there  :  more  efpecially  iince  this  charitable  deed 
was  recommended  to  them  by  that  Board. 

57.  Petition  of  r ;5  Inhabitants  of  the  Tawnfoiri 
of  i armvorth,  A.D.  1623.  to  the Magiftrates of  Chetter. 

In  behalf  of  Mrs  Howards  the  Scholemarter  there, 
whom  they  extoll,  after  that  others  had  fo  mifufed  their 

K£“ii fc  &  Jmbfbeen  “  d”E“  °n°r,”S  thcir 

'f!he  DraP«'s  Charter,  granted  by  the 

war  ^  n “  Chd  6  Edw'  v>.  which  was  after. 

&  others  VP°n  *°me  Co"trover]y  'vith  Tho.  Sayers 

59-  A  Warant  from  Edward  Lord  Dudley,  fo/his 
Company  of  Players  to  paffe  &  play,  dat.  16  Febru- 
aiy  I595-  gi 

,  h”om  ihe  Speaker  of  the  I'loufe  of  Commons, 

to  the  Magiftrates  of  Chefter. 

Requiring  them  to  publifo  the  Declaration,  &to 
take  the  Proieftation  themfelves,  &  to  caufe  the  fam-  to 
be  taken  by  all  above  iS  yeers  of  Age;  certifying 
the  Names  of  thofe  who  flioultl  refufe  to  take  the  lame 

61.  Papers  relating  to  a  Controverfy  which  arofe 
A.  D.  1602.  between .Liverpole  &  Chefter,  about  Ship, 
pmg-oft  Souldiers  for  Ireland.  The  Liverpolians  being 
defirous  that  thofe  who  were  to  be  putt  on  board  their 
Ships,  fhould  be  {hipped  oft'  there,  &  not  at  Chefter. 
But  it  would  not  do-. 

62.  Abftratl  of  an  Order  touching  the  running  Ports  : 

who  mould  take  no  Letters  but  fuch  as  were  for  her 
Majefties  immediate  Service  :  and  that  a  Label!  be  added 
for  tne  Poftes  to  felt  downe  the  feverall  Dates  &  Tymes 
when  the  Paequet8  came  iirft  to  their  hands,  dated  the 
Writ  of  July  i6og,  8-  b 

63.  Notes  out  of  the  feueral  Audits  of  the  Accounts 

of  Minors,  Sheriff's,  Threafurers,  &  Leauelokers,  of 
Cheiter.  g6 

64.  Notes  extracted  oat  of  the  Bundle  of  the  Eftreats. 

65.  Notes  out  of  the  Audit-booke  in  Mr.  Drink  waters 

tune.  IoJ  ^ 

66.  Claim  of  the  Citizens  of  Coventre  to  be  free  of 

Toll,  &c.  in  Chefter,  dat.  2S  of  April  1652.  103.  b. 

I  his  had  not  the  Cities  Seal  to  it  ;  &  was  rejected.' 

67.  Ab (tracts  of  fome  old  Deeds  kept  in  the  Treafurv- 

Chcft in  Chefter,  A.D.  1652.  104. 

6$.  Abftrads  from  Wills  concerning  certain  Legacies 
bequeathed  to  that  City.  105.  b.  et  107.  b.i  1 2. 

69.  Certificate  of  the  faid  City,  dated  the  21  of  No¬ 
vember,  anno  18  Eliz.  107.  b.  et  100.  b. 

Shewing  that  the  Pageants  or  Whitfon-Plays  which 
v.  ere  piaycd  in  the  Maioraltics  of  Sir  John  Savage,  &  of 
Alderman  John  Hankey,  were  not  exhibited  out  of  their 
".v  "  Authority,  as  had  been  falfely  reported  :  but  by 
tli'it  pu roof  W°  °rderS  Aflcmbly  made  exprefsly  for 

70.  A  Certificate  under  the  Common-Seale  of  London 

purporting  that  all  free  Cityzcns  of  London  fhould  be  free 
from  payinge  of  any  Cuftom  in  Chefter.  Yeouen  the  2 
of  June  1587.  o  , 

•  p>  -  -  '  r  108.  b. 

1  u  C  15  was  after  contradided  by  the  Citty  of  Chefter 
lu  the Su te  wnh  the  Citty,  by  one  Hodges  a  Freeman  of 
J.ondon  about  Cuftoms  ;  and  the  Priviledges  of  Chefter 
were  proven  to  be  before  thofe  of  London 

71.  Order  of  the  Committee  of  Parliament  for  re- 

mouing  of  Obfl  ructions  in  the  Sale  of  Deane  &  Chapters 
Lands.  25  Jan.  1649.  r  ,4 


Num.  2173— 2176. 

.  For  feeuring  £114.  per  annum  in  Prefbury  to  the 
City,  for  the  maintenance  of  a  Scholemafter,  Ulher, 
&  24  Scholars  in  Chefter,  according  to  the  antient  In- 
ilitution. 


217+. 

A  thin  Book  in  folio,  wherein  are  contained, 

*•  he  jFird  Randle  Holmes  Table  to  the  Things  of 
moft  Note  in  this  Book.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Original  Accompt  of  the  Sequeftrators  of  the 

Kovali Its  Lands  m  Bucklow-Hundred  in  Com.  Ceftr.  as 
the  fame  was  deliver’d  in,  upon  Oath,  23  June  164c. 
oemg  for  the  years  1 643.  &  1 644.  J. 

3.  A  true  &  juft  Pre'fentment  made  by,  Robert  Ron- 
ule  CnappeU Warden  &  William  Stevenfonne  Sworne- 
!"an*  fort|le  Chappell  of  Hale  ;  of  all  things  belong- 
mge  to  their  Office  &  Duty,  accordinge  to  their  Charge. 

u  ft. 

75- 


A  thin  Book  in  folio,  wherein  I  find, 

1  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Table  to  the  fevcral 
Rentals  contained  herein;  , 

2.  A  Book  of  Survays  &  of  Inventoryes ;  that  is,  the 
Sequeftrators  Original  Accompt  of  the  Delinquents  or 
Roy  a  lifts  Eftates  within  the  Hundred  of  Edefbury  in 
Com.  Ceftrne,  for  the  Years  1645,  &  1646.  as  the 
fame  were  deliver’d  in  upon  Oath,  the  23  of  March 
1647-  o 


At  the  end  of  the  faid  Acccompt,  I  obferve, 

3.  Their  Table  for  the  ready  finding  of  any  particular 
mentioned  m  the  preceding  accompt.  fol.  penult. 

i-'tw  of  the  Sequeftrators  gave  themfelves  the  trouble 
of  making  ft  abks  to  their  Accompts. 


2176. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  particular  Trails  & 
looie  Papers  now  bound  up  together,  to  .all  which  the 
third  Randle  Holme  hath  given  this  Title.  “  Donations 
for  pious  vfes,  with  other  Church-Matters,  &c.”  At 
the  beginning  I  meet  with 

1.  The  third  Randle  Holmes  Table  to  the  Things  of 

moft  Note  in  this  Book.  * 

lhen  follows  the  Colle&ion  itfelf. 

2.  An  Abftracl  or  Breefe  of  fucheknowne  Summesof 
Money  as  the.  Pope  exafteth  of  alt  his  Mafle-Clergie, 
and  the  Superiors  of  them  of  theire  Inferiors,  and  that 
they  all  exaft  &  wringe  from  the  Laitie,  being  Recufam- 
1  apifts  in  his  Majefties  Kingdome  of  Ireland  ;  a  greate 
part  whereof  is  daylie  (ent  over  beyond  the  Seas,  to  fuch 
ufeas  the  Pope  appoynteth,  to  the  miferable  impovcrilh- 
inge  of  his  Majefties  Subjects,  and  the  maintenance  of 
his  capita]  1  Enemie. 

3.  Copie  of  a  mad  Paper  fixed  to  one  of  the  Doors 

of  Manchefter  Parifh-Church,  &  taken  oft’ the  2?  of  May 
i632-  .  .  4. 

Ibis  is  attefted  by  both  the  Church-wardens. 

4*  Forme  of  Sir  Ranulphe  Crews  Surrender  of  the 
Chapel  1  he  had  built  into  the  hands  of  the  Biftiop  in 
Order  to  be  confecrated  ;  with  fome  Prayers  luitable  to 
fuch  an  Occalion.  g 

5.  Rtafons  given  by  the  Church-Wardens  ofBick- 

ington  in  Somerfctfhire  for  their  Refufal  to  remove  the 
Communion  fable  from  the  place  where  it  now  ftandeth, 
and  hath  flood  fince  the  Reformation.  10. 

6.  A  Precedent  or  Form  for  the  confecrating  a 
Church  or  Chapell  by  John  Bridgeman  Biftiop  of  Chefter. 

ii. 

7.  Articles  of  the  Commons  aflembled  in  Parliament, 

in  maintenance  of  their  Accufation.  whereby  William 
I.avde  Arch-Bifhop  of  Canterbury  {lands  charged  with 
High  Treafon.  26_ 

8.  Litterrc  Pafentes  R.  Jacobi  1.  quibus  pricfentat 

7  Georgium 


Bibliothecas  Harleiance. 


Num  2 1  76. 


Num.  2176. 


Georgium  Snell  S.  T.  P.  ad  medietatem  Reftorie  de  Kir- 
by-Walley,  alias  Kirby-Wallizey:  Tefte,  See.  8  die  Febru¬ 
ary,  anno  regni  20.  1 7. 

9.  Inftrumentum,  quo  Georgius  Abbott  Cantharienfis 

Archiepifcopus  difpenfat  five  licentiam  concedit  Georgio 
Snell,  ut  una  cum  medietatem  Reftorie Ecclefte  parochialis 
de  Wallezey  Ceftrenfis  Diocefeos,  retineret  Rcftoriam 
Ecclefie  Parochialis  de  Warton  alias  Vaverton  ejufdem 
Diocefeos.  dat.  23  die  Augufti,  A.  D.  1631.  17.  b. 

10.  Inftrumentum,  quo  Johannes  Bridgeman  Epifcopus 

Ceftrenfis  aflignat  Georgio  Snell  S.  T.  P.  Archidiacono 
Ceftrenfi,  exerciiium  feu  poreftatem  exercendi  J  rifdic- 
tionem  Decanatuum,  feu  Officium  Decanorum  Ruralium 
de  Ceftria,  de  Frodfliam,  Bangor,  Malpas,  Medio  Wico, 
et  Wico  Malbano  in  Gom.  Ceftr.  dat.  2  die  Maij;  A.  D. 
>635.  18. 

n.  Liters;  Patentes  R.Caroli  1.  quibus  confirmat 
quafdam  Literas  Difpenfationum  conceflarum  Georgio 
Snell  S.  T.  P.  Tefte,  &c.  2  die  Septembris,  anno  Regni  7. 

19. 

12.  Inftrumentum  quo  Georgio  Snell  A.D.  Archidia- 

conatum  et  Dignitatem  Archidiaconalem  Ceftr  con- 
tulit.  dat.  quoad  Sigilli  appenfionem,  160  January, 
A.D.  1618.  per  Thomam  Morton  Epifcopum  Ceftren- 
fem.  19.  b. 

13.  Litters;  Tcftimoniales  Johannis  Epifcopi  Ceftrenfis 

pro  Georgio  Snell  Archidiacono  Ceftria;  in  ordinem  Doc- 
torum  in  facra  Theologia  inaugurari  apud  almam  fanfti 
Andrea;  Academiam  Scotia;  defiderante.  dat.  9  die  Maij, 
A.D.  1620.  ibid. 

14.  Certificatio  Thoma;  French  Univerfitatis  Oxoni- 

enfis  Regiftrarij,  Georgium  Snell  S.  T.  Profefforem  in 
Academia  Andreapolitana  creatum  ;  in  Academia  Oxoni- 
enfi  ad  eundem  Gradum  fuiife  admiffum,  16  die  Junij 
1621.  20. 

15.  Liters:  Johannis  Epifcopi  Ceftrenfis  pro  Induc- 
tione  Georgij  Snell  S.  T.  P.  in  Canonicatum  Ecclefite 
Cathedralis  Ceftrienfis.  dat.  2  die  Januaiij,  A.D.  1620. 

ibid. 

16.  Inftrumentum  ejufdem  Epifcopi  fuper  Repara- 
tione  Capella;  de  Afton,  et  inclufione  Ccemeterij  fumr- 
tibus  Thoma:  Afton  de  Afton  Baronetti.  A.D.  1639. 

20. 

17.  Inftrumentum  ejufdem  Epifcopi  fuper  C.onfecra- 

tioue  Capellte  live  Oratorij  de  Middleton  Parochia;  de 
Kirby-Lonfdale  in  Com.  Weftmerland.  21. 

18  Supp  icatio  Inhabitaniium  de  Middleton  pro  Con- 
feciatione  pra;lata;  Capella;,  dat.  A  D.  :6’4.  2i.b. 

19.  Inllrumenta  fuper  Conlecratione  Capelle  Sanfte 
Trinitatis  in  Magna  Lever  infra  Parochiam  de  Middleton 
Diocefeos  et  Archidiaconatus  Ceftr.  22. 

20-  Inftrumentum  ejufdem  Epifcopi  fuper  Confecra- 
tione  loci  feu  conclavis  pro  Capella  in  vl'us  Ranulphi 
Crew  Militis  Domini  Manerij  de  Crew  infra  Paru- 
chiam  de  Bartomley  in  Com.  Ceftr.  Left.  9  Augufti 
1635.  2i. 

2 : .  Inftrumentum  Taper  C.onfecratione  Capella;  five 
Oratorij  i1  fra  Parochiam  de  Edmonton  alias  Edelmeton  in 
Com.  Middlefex"  a  Johanne  Weld  fundatam,  per  Johan- 
nein  King  Lvmdonienfem  Epifcopum,  24  die  Maij  1615. 

23- 

22.  An  Inftrument  fliewing  that  John  Bridgeman 

Bifhop  of  (  hefter,  in  his  triennial  Vifitation,  8  June 
1 634.  at  Kirby  Lonfdale,  took  care  about  the  repair¬ 
ing,  adorning,  and  fuftaining  an  old  Chapell  at  Bar- 
wicke.  25-  b. 

23.  An  Indenture  made  18  April  1^03.  whereby 

Richard  Vaughan  Bifhop  of  Chefter,  for  a  certaine 
Summe  of  Money,  dimifed  to  James  Andcrton  Efq;  (for 
the  termeoffome  other  perfons  Lives)  the  Reftory,  Per- 
fonage,  and  Parifli  Church  of  Chidwall  in  Com.  Lancaft. 
parcel  of  the  diflolved  Monaftery  of  Holland  in  Lanca- 
firire,  ar.d  now  parcel  of  the  Bilbepriok  of  Cheftcr  :  at  the 
annual  Rent  of  £ 57  11  8.  26. 

Cat.Harl.  Von.  II. 


24.  Another,  made  3  Auguft,  ann.7  Jacobi  I.  whereby 
George  Lloyd  dimiled  (for  a  certaine  oummeofM  iit.  vI 
to  William  Nevell,.  an  Ilotife  m  Yorke,  for  eun ■■ 

Lives,  at  the  amient  Rent  of  ic  Shilling  per  A 

25.  Extraft  from  ihe  Will  of  Robert  Pr'ric”.  ' 
kyne  in  Com.  Lancaftr.  dat.  -  Novemb.  1  ’  1. 

2  .  Inftrumentum,  quo  Mag:,frr  V.  ill  1 
fon  Prior  toiius  Ordinis  Fratrum  P: '.dicaiorun:  in  Angiia.. 
ac  S.  I  heologie  D<  ftor,  vie  vol  '  rum 

Johannis  Holland  Prioris  Fratrum  Predicatorum  S. 
Dbminrci  C.  .  ie,  kc.  decn  Pi*<  efr 

bus  quoiidie  edebrandam  pro  born  flam  due  Cecilie 
Relicte  di.i  Willclmi  de  T<  rbt  ke  Mili  is,  et  j  ro  Animd 
bus  patiis  &  matrix  fue,  et  Willelmi  mariii  fui.  Qute 
quidem  Cecilia  preter  alias  Elcmofinas  diftis  Fratribus 
quam  largiter  effufas,  decern  Libras  pro  ne:e(farijs  eorum 
edifieijs  conftruendis  plcnarie  afiigr.avit.  Dat.  in  corunl 
provinciali  Capitulo  Novi  Caftri  fubter  Limam  celebrato 
in  Vifitaiione  ipfius,  A.  D.  1471.  27. 

27.  Dame  Cicill  of  Tcrbok  Lady  of  Toibokes  Will ; 

dated  7  March,  A.  D.  1466.  in  Englifhi  27.  b. 

Herein,  among  many  charitable,  decent,  £c  nc-ceflary 
Bequefts,  this  is  one:  “Alfoel  will  that  my  fonuc  Thomas 
of  Torboke  haue  13s  4d.  to  buy  him  an  Horfe  which 
Sum,  now,  will  purchafe  but  a  very  indifferent  fteed  for  a 
perfon  of  Quality. 

28.  Inftrumentum  quo  Nicholaus  Robinf  n  Range-  j 
renfis  Epifcopus  contulit  Hugoni  Burches  A.  M.  alternam  1 
paitem  Reftorie  de  Llan  D.iinam  in  Decanatu  Arruf- 
teley  Bangorenfis  Diocefet  s.  dat.  0  Martij,  A.D.1581.  28.  1 

29.  Littera;  Petri  Leigh  Militis  (Johanni  Bridgeman 
Ceftrenfi  Epifcopo)  Reftoria  Ecclefia;  Parochialis  dc 
Claughton  in  Com.  Lancaftr.  pro  una  vice  Patroni,  fuper 
prafentatione  Edwardi  Crefwell  A.M.  dat.  A.  D.  162L 

28.  b. 

30.  Littera;  quibusEdwardus  Croft  Patronus  Reftoria? 

dc  Claughton,  prsefentavit  eidem  Epifcopo,  Richardum 
Newton  Clericum,  in  A.  M.  dat.  9  Oftobris,  A.D; 
1629.  sS.b. 

3:.  Littera:  Danielis  Maiers  Subftittui  Jofephi  Crad* 
docke  Commiflarij  per  totum  Archidiaconatum  Rich¬ 
mond  quibus  commifit  Johanni  Tyfon  labourer,  admi- 
niftratienem  Bonorum  qua;  fuci  unt  Agnetis  Tyfon  :  2 1 
Martij,  A.  D.  1639.  ibid. 

32.  An  order  of  Edward  Dod  Baron  of  the  Exchequer 

of  Chefter,  for  putting-off  the  hearing  of  the  Caufe  be¬ 
tween  Dame  Mary  Savage  Widow  Plaintiffe ;  &  Thoma3 
Mallorie  Dean  of  Chefter  &  Elizabeth  his  YVife,  Defen¬ 
dants,  1  Auguft  1C24.  29. 

33.  The  Forme  of  protefting  of  a  Bill,  or  Returne. 

ibid. 

34.  An  Inftrument  whereby  Henry  Bridgeman  Deane 

Rural  of  Manchefter  of  the  Dioctfe  of  Chefter,  ap¬ 
pointed  l  .dmund  Mainwaring  LL.D.  to  exercife  all  man¬ 
ner  of  Jurifdiftion  belonging  to  the  Rural  Dean  of  Man¬ 
chefter  ;  paying  yearely  50I.  29.  b. 

35.  Letter  from  Dr.  David  Yale,  upon  a  Sequeft  ration, 

of  the  Fruits  of  the  Reftory  of  Crofton,  durmg  a  Va¬ 
cancy  ;  and  upon  Mr.  Clayton  (who  was  Fermor  thereof) 
his  making  queftion  of  the  Bifhops  Authority  to  allow 
out  of  the  Stipend  due  vnto  the  Minifter,  convenient  Al¬ 
lowance  vnto  him  thatferveth  in  the  Vacancy  :  and  al/o 
queftioning  his  Lordfhip’s  authoritic,  faying  he  cannot 
place  a  Minifter  there  in  fuch  Vacancy :  defiring  that  it 
be  intimated  to  Mr.  Clavton,  that  it  is  not  fife  to  queftion 
Authority  ;  that  none  but  the  Bilhop  can  adtnitt  any  to 
ferve  there  in  the  Vacancy ;  that  his  Lordftiip  hath  power 
to  fequefter  fuch  Stipend  ;  and  that  he  fhould  give  way 
to  the  Collection  ot  20  Markes  for  him  who  ierved  in 
the  Vacancy,  left  he  incurre  fuch  Contempt  as  could  not 
well  be  anlwered.  dat.  20  December  162-’.  30. 

36.  An  Inquifition  taken  at  Wigan  2 1  September, 

anno  22  Jac.  1.  bifore  Bp.  Bridgemm.  &c.  30.  b. 

6  Z  About 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


SV5 


Num.  2176. 

About  mifemployed  Moneys  belongeinge  to  the 
Schoole  of  Much  Woolton  in  the  Parilh  of  Chidwall  ; 
and  a  Legacy  bequeathed  to  the  Poore  of  R unworth, 

37.  Another  taken  at  Wigan,  before  the  fame  Bilhop 
Sc  other  Commiflioners,  at  Wigan,  4  Nov.  ann.  eodem. 

3 2- 

About  mifimployed  Moneys  given  towards  a 
Schole  at  the  Deane  Church  ;  towards  a  Schole  at 
Handley  ;  to  the  Poor  of  Ribchefter  ;  and  for  a  Work- 
houfe  at  Wigan ;  with  the  feveral  Orders  made  there¬ 
upon.  etvid.  41. 

38.  Another,  taken  at  Wigan  before  the  fame  Bilhop 
8c  other  Commillioners,  27  January,  the  fame  year.  34. 

About  mifimployed  Money  given  toward  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  a  Free-Schole,  or  of  the  Poor,  at  Boulton  ; 
&  toward  the  maintainance  of  a  Grammar-Schole  at  Pen- 
wortham  ;  with  the  Orders  made  thereupon. 

39.  An  order  made  iS  June  1629.  relating  to  the 

Free-fchole  of  Wigan.  38. 

40.  Moneys  given  to  Leyland- Schoole.  38.  b. 

41.  An  Inquifition  taken  at  Wigan,  18  Sept.  A.D. 

1628.  before  the  faid  Bilhop  &  other  Commiffioners  ad 
pios  ulus.  38.  b. 

About  mifimployed  Money  given  to  the  Free-Schole 
8c  Parilh  of  Garftang. 

42.  Another,  taken  there,  1  September  1626.  before 

the  fame  Bifhop,  8c  other  Commillioners.  39.  b. 

About  mifimployed  Money  giving  for  Ere&ing  a 
Grammar  Schoole  at  Ecclefton,  within  the  Parilh  of 
Prefcott. 

43.  An  order  made  2  Oft.  1627.  by  the  Commillion¬ 
ers,  touching  that  Schole.  42. 

44.  An  Inquifition  made  at  Chefter-Caftle,  3  1  Martij, 

anno  i6to  C.aroli  Regis,  42.  b. 

Touching  the  Lands  bequeathed  by  Edward  Aclon 
Efq;  toward  the  relief  of  the  Poor  at  Pever. 

45.  Another,  taken  at  the  fame  place,  before  the 

Bilhop  above-mentioned,  8cc.  4  v  b. 

About  a  Bequeft  to  the  Poore  of  Wrcnbury-Frilh  ; 
and  to  the  Poore  of  Marbury-Parilh. 

46.  Panells  of  divers  Juries  ad  pios  ufus.  44. 

47.  Agreement  of  the  AdminiArators  of  Walter  Rig. 
rnayden  of  Wedacre  Efq;  to  befiowe  100  Marks  (as  a 
Commemoration  of  their  thanckfull  Mindcs,  for  theire 
Comodities  receaued  by  the  deceafed )  to  bee  the  firlte 
Foundation  of  a  Free  Schole  to  be  erected  in  the  Pa- 
rifhe  Churche-yard  of  Garltang.  dat.  9  Marche  1602. 

4O.  b. 

4S.  Original  Order  of  the  faid  Bilhop  8c  other  Coro- 
miffioners  his  Colleagues,  for  Mr.  Richard  Greens  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  100  Markes  mentioned  in  the  lalt  Article; 
which  he  had  long  mifimployed  ;  together  w  ith  the  In- 
tereft  thereof,  8c  a  MulSL 

49.  A  Verdict  brought  in  the  16  of  July  1529.  finding 

that  Anne  Key  of  Bury,  left  a  bequeft  to  the  Poore 
there.  _  48. 

50.  An  Inquifition  taken  before  the  faid  Bifhop,  Sc 

other  Commillioners,  28  March  1627.  ^ 

When  a  Verdi£t  was  given  that  Henry  Travis  of 
Bedford  in  Com.  Lancaft.  Yeoman  did  bequeath  a  Rent- 
Charge  of  i  ol.  4*  ann.  toward  the  reliefe  of  the  Poor 
with  the  Parilh  of  Leighe.  Item,  upon  the  mifimploy- 
ment  of  a  Sum  of  Money  given  toward  the  ufe  of  a  free 
Schole  in  the  Towne  of  Hindly  8c  Abraham.  Item 
touching  feveral  Sums  given  toward  the  Founding  one 
Chapell  or  Houle  for  Divine  Service  &  Prayer  near  the 
Windy-bancke  in  Burton  Wood,  and  for  the  maintainance 
thereof ;  and  toward  the  maintainance  of  a  Minifter  8c 
Scholemaller. 

51.  A  Verdict  given  at  Wigan  .  .  .  September  1626. 

That  Mary  Langton  late  Wiffe  of  Robert  Langton 
Efq;  gave  300I.  for  erecting  8c  maintaining  a  Free  Schole 
at  Standilh  ;  and  loci,  toward  the  releife  of  certain 


Num.  2176. 

poore  woettten  of  the  Parilhes  of  Standilhe,  Leyland,  k 
Chorley. 

52.  Another,  dated  16  July  1629.  touching  the  mil** 
imjiloyment  of  a  ftocke  of  money  given  toward  the 
mamtenance  of  a  Minifier  feruing  in  a  Chappell  at  Crolby. 

,  53-  A  Booke  of  the  Towne-ftocke  of  Much-Crofi 
bie,  8c  of  the  Rent  due  for  the  fame,  14  July  1629.  58. 

54.  A  Catalogue  of  what  charitable  Giftes  haue 
beene  giuen  unto  the  Towne  8c  Church  of  Namptwiche. 

6o<  A. 

55.  Lift  of  feiieral  charitable  8c  pious  Gifts  left  to  the 

Parilh  of  St.  Mary  on  the  Hill,  within  the  Citty  of  Chefter, 
fince  A.  D.  i6co.  60. 

56.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Benefactors  to  the  Poore  of 

the  Parilh  of  Farndon.  6 1 .  A . 

57.  Pious  Gifts  giuen  to  the  Parilh  of  St.  Johns  within 

the  Suburbs  of  Chefter.  62.  A. 

58.  Of  a  Gift  given  to  Trinity-Church. 

62.  B.  and  two  leaves  further. 

59.  A  Cafologue  of  the  Benefactors  to  the  Poore  of 

the  Parilh  of  Tilfton.  g2. 

60.  Charitable  8c  pious  Gifts  to  the  Parilh  of  Tarvine, 

fince  the  yeare  1600.  6*.  A. 

61.  Extract  from  the  Will  of  Owen  Jones,  dated 
1 4  February,  1658.  wherein  are  many  public  Bequclts. 

63.  Ax 

62.  Of  Mr.  Richard  Ilarrifon’s  Bcquefi  toward  the 
maintainance  of  certain  Almes-men  in  C.helter.  64.  A. 

63.  A  Catalogue  of  Charitable  Gifts  as  haue  bin  giuen 

to  the  Church  of  Wrenbury.  64.  A. 

64.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Names  of  all  fuchPerfons  as 

haue  giuen  legacies  to  the  Poore  of  Sandbach.  6 5. 

65.  An  idle  Prophecy  in  the  Names  ofMerlin  8c  Bede! 

written  A.  D.  1655.  66.  A. 

66.  An  Order  taken  by  Agreement,  for  the  payment 
ol  a  Bequeft  to  the  Poore  of  Holt  in  Com.  Denbigh,  by 

1  Dame  Mary  Egerton  late  of  Ridley,  dat.  6  November 
,g27-  .  '  •  83. 

67.  Littera:  Patentes  R.  Edw.  vi.  quibus  fundavit  Li-- 

beram  Scholam  Grammaticalem  in  Macclesfelde  infra 
Parochiam  de  Preftburie  in  Com.  Ceftr.  Tefte,  See.  2i. 
die  Aprilis,  anno  Regni  Sexto.  84. 

68.  Rentale  Terrarum  8c  Tenementorum  Scholte  prB>. 
dicta;  aflignatarum. 

69.  Notes  of  Benefactions  left  to  the  Parochial 

Churches  of  St.  Peter,  8c  St.  Mary  in  Chefter  ;  8c  to  the 
Parilh  of  Farndon,  by  Richard  Partington,  8c  Elizabeth 
his  Relict.  ' 

70.  Mr.  John  Tilfton’s  Bequeft  to  the  Poore  Houfe. 
holders  of  Chefter. 

71.  Original  Summons  of  James  Anderton  of  Clay¬ 

ton  Efq;  and  William  Farrington  of  Worden  Efq;  to 
appear  before  Bilhop  Bridgeman,  and  his  Colleagues, 
Commillioners  ad  pios  ufus,  at  a  certain  day,  at  Wigan  j 
to  anfwere  to  luch  matters  as  fliould  be  demanded  of 
them,  dat.  16  July  1629.  91  b. 

72.  Original  Petition  of  Philipp  Bagtiley  of  Marshall 

to  the  faid  Bifhop  of  Chefter.  g2. 

Againft  certain  Executors  of  Executors,  who  mifi 
imployed  part  of  the  produce  ofceitain  Lands  bequeathed 
to  tfie  relief  of  the  Poor  of  the  Lordlhips  8c  Townes  of 
Over  Knotsford,  Nether  Knotsford,  Owlerton,  Chelford, 
Orftle,  8c  Withington.  Upon  which,  his  Lord/hip 
order’d  both  parties  to  appear  before  him  at  Chefter. 
Caftle  the  26  of  Auguft  1630. 

73.  Original  Letter  from  the  Ovcrfeers  of  the  Poore 
in  the  Parilh  of  Mottram,  to  the  Maior  8c  Aldermen  of 
Chefter.dat.  24  of  April  1633.  defiring  them  to  fend  by 
the  Bearer  an  Afrear  due  to  them  by  the  bequeft  of  Dams 
Eliz.  Bathe. 

74-  Original  Receipt  of  the  Schole-mafter  of  Rixton. 
for  Money  paid  unto  him  by  the  firft  Randle  Holme  as 
Treafurer  of  Chefter,  dat.  29  of  April  1633.  03.  b. 

75.  Another 


Num.  2  [76,  zr77. 

^75.  Another  for  Money  paid  by  the  fame,  for  the 
ufe  of  the  Poore  of  the  Towiie  of  Alheton  under  Lime 
in  Com.  Lancaftr.  being  the  gift  of  Dame  Elizabeth 
Booth  late  of  Bath,  dat.  x  Qdtober  16  ?3-  ibid,  et  95.  b. 

76.  Another,  for  money  paid  by  the  fame,  for  the 
Poore  of  Great  Budworth  in  Com.  Celtr.  5  April  1633. 

94.  &  95.  b. 

77.  Another,  for  Money  paid  by  the  fame,  for  the 

Poor  of  Wilmdlowe  ;  given  by  the  fame  Lady  Boothe 
6  Oft.  1633.  95- 

78.  Another,  for  Money  payd  by  the  fame  to  the 

Organiff  of  Wrexham,  by  the  Gift  of  Alderman  Valen¬ 
tine  Broughton,  dated  29  September  1633.  ibid. 

79.  Another,  for  Money  paid  by  the  fame  for  the 
Poor  of  Bowdon  ;  given  by  the  fame  Lady  Boothe,  dat. 

2  Oft.  1633.  96* 

80.  An  Inquifition  taken  before  Bilhop  Bridge- 
man  &  other  Commiflioners  ad  pios  ufus,  26  Aug.  1 630. 

97- 

Proving  that  a  certain  Houfe  in  Cliefler,  lateparcell 
of  the  Potreffions  of  the  diffolved  Monaftery  of  St. 
Anne  in  Chefter,  was  given  to  the  ufe  of  the  Free 
Grammar  Schole  in  Witton.  With  the  Order  taken 
thereupon. 

81.  Charitable  and  pious  Gifts  left  to  the  Parilh 

of  St.  Peter  within  the  Citty  of  Chefter,  fince  ann. 
1590.  98- 

82.  The  Earl  of  Shrewlbury’s  Gift  of  Troutbecfc’s 
Chapell  in  St.  Marys  in  Chefter,  to  the  Parifhioners. 

100. 

This  was  done  (the  faid  Chapel  being  out  of  re¬ 
pair)  by  Charles  Talbot  the  late  Duke  of  Shrewfbury, 
the  14  March  1690. 

83.  A  trewe  Relation  of  the  State  of  Governcment  of 
the  Free  Grammer-Schole  of  St.  Bees  in  Cumberland  ; 
by  William  Lickbarow  Schok-mafter  thereof.  134. 

Here  is  a  very  fad  Inftance  of  the  Knavery  &  Ava¬ 
rice  of  Truftees,  The  Schole  was  founded  &  well  en¬ 
dowed  by  Edmund  Grindal  A.  Bifhop  of  Canterbury, 
and  its  Pofleftions  much  augmented  by  K.  James  I.  but 
all  likely  to  go  to  ruin,  &  the  whole  Revenue  to  beiin- 
bezeled  ;  and  Mr.  Lickbarow,  after  200  pounds  fpent  in 
Law,  likely  to  be  murdered. 

2177. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  the  fecond  Randle  Holme 

&  his  Son,  containing  many  Memorables  of  certain 

Parifhcs  in  Chefter  ;  efpecially  thofe  that  follow. 

. .  Copie  of  the  Regifter  of  St.  Brigits  Parilh,  as 
to  Baptifms ;  from  A.  D.  1560.  to  A.  D.  ^S.inclu- 
five.  1  • 

2.  Again  as  to  Burialls,  from  A.  D.  156c.  to  A.  D. 
1666.  inclufive.  8. 

o.  Again,  as  to  Weddings,  from  A.  D.  1560.  to 
A.  D.  1(337.  inclufive.  __  l(5- 

4.  Abffraft  of  the  Regifter  of  Trinity-Church  from 

A.  D.  1532.  As  to  the  Lands,  Vellments,  Goods  & 
Utenfils.  23- 

5.  Receipts  8c  Dilburfements  there  from  A.  D.  1 532. 

1  to  A.  D.  1633.  with  Notes  of  Affeffments,  &  other 

Memorandums.  24- 

6.  A  Note  of  all  the  C.hriftenings  there,  fince  the 
25  of  April  1 59-'.  to  the  25th  of  September  1653.  55. 

7.  A  Regifter  of  all  the  W  eddings  there,  fince  26 

April  1598,10  18  July  1653.  73- 

8.  A  Regifter  of  all  the  Burialls  there,  fince  17  April 

1598.  to  26  July  1653.  84.  b.  et  104. 

9.  A  Regifter  of  the  Chriftenings  within  the  Parilh  of 
l  St.  Mary  on  the  Hill,  from  22  Deer.  1547.  to  18  Aug. 

1553,  I,3- 

10.  Another  of  the  Baptifmes,  from  26  Deer.  ’.570. 

to  xi  June  1574,  ll6- 

11.  Another  of  the  Weddings  ;  from  22  January 

j  547.  to  1  July  1552.  x3^ 


Num.  2177^ — 2179. 

12.  Another  of  the  Buryalfs,  from  22  December 

1547-  to  21  July  1553.  143. 

13.  A  Regifter  of  the  Chriftenings  &  Weddings 

within  the  Parilh  of  St.  Olave.  from  5  April  1611.  to 
21  June  1651.  161. 

This  begins  again  at  the  9  June  1654,  and  proceed- 
eth  to  30  May  1673. 

At  the  begimiing  is  the  third  Randle  Holmes  Table 
to  the  ihings  of  moftNote  in  this  Book. 

2178. 

Codex  membranaeeus  in  ft  1.  min.  Iniiio  mutilu  quo 
continentur, 

1 .  Traftatus  imperfeftus  de  Motu  ;  Johanni  forfan 

Chrlmarcho  adjudicandus.  •  1. 

2.  Univerfalia  Magri  Willehni  Mylleverley.  7. 

3.  Univerfalia  Magri  W.  P.  cum  Expolitione  fuper 

librum  Porphirij.  10.  b. 

4.  Incerti  opufeulum  de  Equivocis;  21. 

5.  Literalis  Sententia  fuper  Prasdicata,  per  Magrutn 

Robertum  Alyngtone.  29. 

6.  Materia,  five  Compendium  fuper  Sex  Principij9 

(forte,  per  Will.  Mylleverley.  vid.  Cat.  Cod.  MSS.  An- 
glias,  No.  898.)  78. 

7.  Univerfalia  Magri  Tartous.  101. 

8.  Univerfalia  Magri  Johannis  Sccrpe,  five  Sharpe, 

Tractatus  in  fine  truncatur.)  107.  b. 

2179. 

A  Book  in  fol.  min.  confiding  of  feveral  Trafts,  written 

partly  on  paper  ;  but  for  the  moft  part,  upon  pare!  - 

mentj  wherein  I  fmd. 

1.  A  particular  Catalogue  of  the  Contents  of  the 
Book;  according  to  the  Old  Letters  &  Numbers.  1, 

(vid.  infra.  No.  13.) 

2.  De  Electionihus,  deq;  varijs  Electionum  generibus 

1 2. 

3.  Ouod  Scolares  Oxonienfes,  et  Epifcopi  ad  Curiam 

Romanam  proficifcentcs  poflint  celebrare  Miffatn  in 
yeme  arfte  diem.  15. 

4.  Quod  Clericus  convictus  fuper  facto  coram  Secular! 
Judice,-  poftea  poteft  fe  purgare  coram  fuo  Judice.  ibid. 

5.  Sequntur  Formula;  nonnullas  in  Jure  Canonico 
ufurpatre  ;  e  quibus  fpecialitn  eas  memoratu  dignas  elTe 
exiftimo,  qute  inferifis  appareant. 

6.  Citacio  bona  pro  l'  ratrc  vocato  J.  Grace  qui  apof- 

tatavit.  1 6. 

7.  Confenfus  Thome  Luddelowe  Monachi  S.  Petri 

Salopie,  in  Abbatem  Monaftcrij  predicti  poll  mortem 
Fratris  Johannis  Hamptone  Electum.  1  5.  b. 

8.  Appellatio  Rogeri  Farvngtone  Rectoris  Ecclefie 

Parochialis  de  Bebyngtone  in  litem  vocati  per  Abbatem 
&.Monachos  Ceft  rentes,  fuper  fubtractione  annue  Pen- 
fionis  duafurn  Marcarum,  c'ictis  religiofis,  ut  pretende* 
batur,  debite  ;  ad  Dnm  Epifcopatum  Lichfeldenfem, 
dat.  8  die  Augufti  1393.  17. 

9.  Commifiio  ad  abfolvendum  Helifeum  ali&s  Heliam 

WodeCilTorem  Ceftrenfem  excommunicatum,  poftquam 
feribitur  pro  ejus  Corporis  captione.  1 9.  b. 

10.  Literaad  citandum  Bencficiatos  ad  interelfendum 

in  Synodo.  20. 

1 1 .  Liiera  ad  vocandum  Penitentem  ad  certam  Penft 

tentiam.  ibid. 

12.  Certificatorium  a  Capitulo  fuper  Eleftione  egre- 

gij  illius  et  probatiflimi  viri  Willelmi  Bothe  Due  Regine 
Cancellarij,  ad  Ecclefias  Coventrenfem  &  Lichfeldenfem 
per  mortem  Willelmi  Heyworthe  earundem  Epifcopi  va- 
cantes  ;  commcndantibus  eum  Papa;  Rege  Henrico  vi, 
cum  Regina  fua  Margareta.  21. 

13.  1  abula  quzedam  alphabetica  ad  refiduam  Codicis 

partem.  22. 

Sequuntur  in  membranis  exaratse. 

14.  Form'  las  quamplurimas  fuper  varijs  Caufis  et 
Negotijs,  e  Regiftris  Epifcoporum  Coventrenfium  ac 

x  Lichf 


548 


Catalogs  I  ibrofum  M.SS. 


N um.  2179. 

Lichfcldenfium,  maxima  ex  parte,  ut  vidctur,  collegia.-. 

28. 

Inter  illas  eminent, 

15.  Litera  Willdmi  Coventr.  &  Lichf.  Epifcopi  Jo- 

hanni  Lowe  Prefcitero.  28. 

Cui  facultatem  concedit,  in  F.ctlefia  de  R.  ct  Ca- 
pella  cle  T.  fingulis  diebus  Dominicis  &:  Feftivis  Miifas 
celebrandi. 

16.  Sequeftratio  pro  non  Solucione  Detiariorum  S. 

Petri.  28  b. 

17.  Sequeflratio  pro  non  Solucione  Subfidij  a  Pre- 

latis  &  Clero  ArcliidiaconaUs  Derbuca.'ls  i.pilcopo  con- 
ccfli.  29. 

18.  Commilfio  fub  nvitue  vi  ifiituclinis  obtentu.  29.  b. 

In  Caufa  fratr’s  Johanuis  Sudbury  Abbatis  Mo- 

naftcrij  de  BUrtone  fuper  Trentam,  gravia  Crimina 
Adulterij  &  Inconlinentie  cum  Margeria  Strettone  cle 
Magna  Overa,  et  Agnete  uxore  Petri  Gibbone  commifir, 
ac  eifdem  mulieribus  in  criininibus  hujufmodi  fepius  et 
notorie  adherebat,  eafdemq;  in  ipfis  Criininibus  publice 
tenuit,  in  Anime  fue  grave  Period  urn,  Ordinifq;  &  Re- 
ligionis  fnorum  Scandalum  manifeftum,  alioi  umqj  Ex- 
emplum  pemiciofum, 

19.  Litera  Privacionis  Walter!  Bofiun  Viearij  perpetui 

Ecclefie  parochialis  de  Lemyngton  Prioris,  ab  Officio  & 
Bencficio.  30.  b. 

20.  Indulgentia  40  dierum,  reparantibus  Viain  Re- 

giam  in  Villa  de  A.  verfus  Viliam  de  Ware,  conceflaper 
Nicolaum  Bubwith  Epifcopum  Londonienfem,  dat  13 
Januarij,  A.  D.  1406.  36. 

2 1.  Proceflus  in  Caufa  Divortij  inter  Maiotam  Ilalkote 

de  Parochia  de  Madeley,  et  Wiliehnum  de  Eryntone, 
propter  frigiditatem  ipfius  Willehni.  A.  D.  1415.  37. 

22.  De  Brevibus  Regijs,  et  Executionibus  eorundem, 

Multa.  39. 

23.  InterdiiSlum  Capelle  propter  prejudicium  Ecclefie 

Parochialis.  47. 

24.  Commiffio  ad  audienduin  Confediones,  et  ad 

minillranda  Sacramenta,  durante  Difcordia  inter  Retto- 
rem  &  Parochianos.  47. 

25.  Revocacio  Oratorij,  propter  abufus.  47.  b. 

26.  Licenciaconltruendi  Capellam.  48. 

27.  Licencia  conftruendi  Fontem  Baptifmalem  infra 

Capellam.  ibid. 

28.  Litera  conceffa  per  Abbatem  Monachis,  ad  per- 

hibendum  Teftimonium  in  Caufis.  49. 

29.  Litera  ad  celebranduin  unum  Annalepro  Reciore 
qui  nequit  vivere  de  Fructibus  Ecclefie  fue.  50.  vid. 

50.  b. 

3c.  Difpenfacio  fuper  defectu  Natalium.  ibid. 

3 1 .  Commiffio  N.  Epifcopo  London,  ad  difpenfandum, 

auctoritate  Apoftolica,  fuper  quarto  Confanguinitatis 
gradu,  per  Francifcuin  titulo  S.  Sufanne  Prefbiterum- 
Cardinalem.  jjj. 

32.  De  Procuratorijs.  35. 

33.  Procuratorium  Epifcopi,  ut  excufetur  a  Parlia- 

mento.  57.  b. 

34.  Procuratorium  ad  excufandum  Epifcopum  a  Con¬ 
vocation  Cleri.  38. 

33.  Procuratorium  ad  excufandum  Epifcopum  a  Con- 
temptu  Curie  Cantuarienfis.  ibid. 

36.  Procuratorium  generale  pro  Epifcopo,  in  omnibus 

caufis  in  Arcubus  ;  fub  Sigillo.  38.  b. 

37.  C.orrodium  conceflum  ab  Abbate  Monafferij  B! 

Marie  cle  Ebor.  63.  b. 

38.  Refignacio  Officij  Canccllarius  Oxon.  64. 

39.  Renunciatio  fatta fuper  Canonicatum,  et  Prebenda 

fafta  per  Procuratorein.  ibid. 

40.  Refignaiio  juxta  Formam  Conllitutionis  que  inci- 

pit  “Execrablis.”  ibid. 

41.  Creacio  Notarij  fub  Inffrumento,  per  Bullam  lpe- 

cialem.  .  64.  b. 

42.  Mandatum  ad  denunciandum  aliquem  Excom- 
municatum  pro  Contumacia :  et  Citacio  ad  diccndum 


Num,'2 1 7-0. 

Caufam  quare  feri! d  r.on  dJoeat  Regie  Majeftati.  6.;.  ef 
vid.  72.'  b. 

43.  Ad  denunciandum  aliquem  Excommun  catiun 

caula  Dilfumationis';  Purgacione  primitus  Gnu  ali  re- 
cepid.  _  65.  b. 

44.  Sentemia  genetalis  contra  detinentes  Cartas  alicu- 

jus  de  jure  Hereditatis.  66. 

45.  Sententia  generalis  contra  Alicnationcs  Frioratus, 

vel  locorum  Religioforum.  66.  b. 

46.  Sententia  generalis  contra  Mar.us  injeceutem  ia 


Clericum. 


07. 


47.  Sententia  contra  fubtrahentes  Oblationes  confuctas 

^  67.  b. 

48.  Litera  ad  vocandum  quondam  ad  Penitenciam.  pro 

vioiacione  Libertatis  Ecclefie.  68- 

49.  Litera  Purgacionis  cum  C.itatione  Biffamancium. 

68.  b.  et  vid.  69.  b.  et  71.  b. 

30.  Litera  Sententie  contra  fabricantes  falfas  Cartas ; 

ad  Exortacionem  alicujus  de  communi  forma.  69. 

31.  Litera  Teftimonialis  PrePoitero,  dc  purgacione  err- 

minis  Adulterij,  cum  cujufdam  Uxore.  70. 

32.  Litera  Teftimonialis  fuper  purgacione  criminis 

Adulterij.  ibid. 

53.  Litera  Teftimonialis  fuper  purgacione  criminis 

Fornicationis.  70.  b. 

54.  Litera  Cancellarij  et  Univerfitatis  Oxon.  fuper 

Fama  cujufdam  Cleric!  ejufdem Univerfitatis  72. 

35.  Teftimonialis  pro  aliquo  carente  Aure  dexira. 

71.  b. 

56.  Citacio  propter  injuftam  Detentionem  Dedmarum, 
et  propter  crimen  Illelionis  Fidsi  &  Perjurij.  72. 

37.  Citacio  fuper  Viro  adverlante  ab  Uxore  fua.  ibii. 

58.  Citacio  contra  anipiemes  viofenter  Mandatum  de 
manibus  Mandalorij.  73. 

39.  Litera  Licencie  ad  celebrandum  Matrimonium  iu 
Capella  feu  Oratorio.  73.  b- 

6c.  Commiffio  sd  celebrandum Matrimonium,  non  ob- 
ftante  quod  Eanna  n-  n  fmt  debite  edi'a.  ibid. 

6 1.  Litera  Sententie  contra  illos  qui  fuccederunt  Ar- 

bores.  ibid. 

62.  Sequeftrum  Fnidtuum  unius  Ecclefie,  quoufque 

reparantur  Cancellus  et  Rectoria.  74. 

63.  Sequeftrum  Metropolilani  pro  vacatione  Ecclefie. 

74.  b. 

64.  Sequeftracio  Fru&uum,  propter  fubtraftionem 

Divini  Servicij.  73,  b. 

63.  I.icentia  de  non  Refidente,  Scolis  infiflendo,  &rc. 
juxta  Canonem  “  Cum  ex  eo.”  76. 

66.  Litera  ad  petendum  Clericos  incarceratos.  76.  b. 

67.  Licentia,  pro  Moniali,  exeundi  Domum  fuam. 

7s- 

68.  Licentia  pro  Monacho,  eundi  de  una  Domo  in 

aliam  ejufdem  Ordinis.  ibid. 

69.  Litere  Teftimoniales  fuper  Converfatione  ejufdem 

Monachi.  ibid. 

70.  Teftimonialis  fuper  Sufccptione  Veli  Vitiuitatis. 

78.  b. 

71.  Abfolutio  Canonic!  Apoftate,  et  remiffio  ad  Do¬ 
main  propriam.  ibid. 

72.  Commiffio  certis  perfonis  ad  cognofcendum  de  & 

fuper  Dilapidatione  domorum  cujufdam  Prioratus  Mo- 
nialiuni.  ibid. 

73.  CommiffioPhilippi  de  Repyndone  Epifcopi  Lincoln, 
pro  examinafione  Ilolde  N.  qute  pom  pa ;  fyculi  et  mun¬ 
dane  converfationis  illecebras  voler.s  in  eterni  Thefauri 
divicias  commutare,  in  quandain  domum  infra  Cimi- 
terium  Ecclefie  parochialis  B.  Petri  Leyceftrie  rududi  de-  | 
lideret.  et  fic  fub  Vita  Anachoritica,  fpretis  Mundi  blan- 
dieijs  Cicatorem  fuura  vuleat  liberius  contemplate,  i:c. 

79-  I 

74.  Commilfio  ad  recipiendam  Purgacionem  cujuldam 

Prioris  diffamati.  ibid. 

7  ;.  I.  • 

IcUrandiim  pro  nalario  competent!.  79.  b 

5  76-  A.:nra 


Bibliothecas  Harleiance- 


549 


Num.  2179. 

76.  Litera  purgacionis  fuper  crimine  Apoftafie.  79.  b. 

77’.  Commiflio  ad  inquirendum  de  injurijs  illatis  Mo- 

nafterio.  .  .  .8o’ 

78.  Ad  inquirendum  de  quodam  feipfum  mterhciente, 
et  modo,  et  qualitate  rei,  cum  alijs  Articulis  neceffanjs. 

ibid. 

•70  Litera  Licencie  ad  exhumandum  Corpus  unius 
defundi.  .  8o>  b" 

80.  Commiflio  ad  transferendum  ofla  cujuidem  mor- 

tui.  .  .  ibld> 

81.  Ad  audiendum  compotum  unius  Gilde.  81.  b. 

82.  Querela  unius,  quia  Archidiaconus  noluit  citare 

Adverfarium.  '  ibid. 

83.  Litera,  quod  Judex  faciat  Juftitie  Complemen- 

84.  Commiflio  Decano  et  Capitulo  J.ichfeldenfi  ad 

expediendum  Permutacionem  de  Jurifdidione  Epifcopi, 
cum  alio  de  eorum  Jurifdidione.  86.  b. 

85.  Dimiflio  Refigiofi  de  Domo  fua  ad  Beneficium 

curatum.  87\b‘ 

86.  Difpenfatio  Epifcopi  cum  Rehgiofo,  ad  Benencium 

curatum.  88‘ 

87  Procuratorium  ad  aieftandum  Monachos  vaca- 

bundos.  J 

88.  Mandatum  ad  inquirendum  de  pollutioneEcclelie, 
et  forma  conftitu,  r.di  Suffraganeum.  ibiJ. 

Sg.  Litera  ad  compellendum  virum  herereUxon  fue. 

go.  Provifio  faBa  Priori  pod  Refignatiotiem.  89. 

01  Litere  Inhibiiiouis  per  OfEcialem  Dni.  Cancellarij 
Oxon.  s.;  ,7 

92.  Alio  modo.  _  .  ..  lbl^’ 

0  7.  Ad  inquirendum  de  pollutionc  Cimitenj.  92.  b. 

et  vid.  140. 

04.  Litera  Teflimonialis  fuper  Purgatione  Clerici  in- 

carcerati.  .  lbld". 

95.  Monition  pro  Satisfadione  facienda  pro  Valenua 

fada  in  Ecclefla.  93- b- 

96.  Commiflio  ad  examinandos  Teltes  fenes  et.  vate- 

tudinarios.  .  'b‘d' 

07.  Litera  ad  rogandum  ut  Peftilentia  depellatur  ;  cum 
Indulgencia.  98- 

98  Irdulgentia  conceffa  ab  Epifcopo  C.oventr.  et 
Lichfeld.  Hofpitali  S.  Trinitatis,  et  S.  Thome  Martiris  de 
Urbe  Romana.  ,  . ,.?9-b- 

qo.  Supplicationem  ad  Regem  contra  Prolnbmonem. 

100. 

too.  Mandatum  Archiepifcopi  ad  Epifcopum,  ut  faciat 
Jufticie  complementum.  .  . 

101.  Litera  ad  conflituendum  Pemtencianum,  per 

Vicarium  in  Spiritualibus.  ioo.b. 

102.  Litera  Indulgencie  pro  intrantibusFratermtatem 

S.  Cedde.  r  _  „  .lb’d' 

103.  Compofitio  inter  Religiofos,  Redores  cujufdam 

Ecclefie ;  et  Vicarium.  ..  toi.b. 

5  04.  Inftrumentum  Procurator^  ad  comparendum  in 

Vifitacione.  . .  „  „  103-b- 

1  o  c  Procuratorium  Epifcopi  in  Parliamento.  1 05. 
106.  Ad  inquirendum  pro  aliquo  volente  convolare 

adNupcias.  .  n  i°^'  b\ 

1  o  7.  Teflimonialis  fuper  aflignacione  vidus  Refignanti . 

'  106. 

jo8.  Refignacio  Prelacie  five  Dignitatis.  106  b. 

ioq.  Confirmacio  fada  per  Redorem  de  Southam, 
fuper  Penfione  folvenda  de  eadem  Ecclefla,  Ecclefie  Ca. 
h  d  1'  Li^hf"  106.  b. 

'  Mo  Certificatorium  Thefaurario  et  Baronibus  de 
Scaccario  de  Colkctoribus  deputalis  ad  colligendam 
Decimam*  108.  b. 

I'M' Certificate  ium,  abi  defertur  Querela  Official! 
Curie  Cantuarienfis.  11 

it-  Indentura  bona  fuper  convencione  Corrodij. 

rt2.  b. 

1x3.  Litera  bona  Indulgencie.  U4-b. 

Cat.Haiu..  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2179. 

1 14.  Litera  Premunicionis  pro  Vifitacione  Archidia 

conatus.  ll5-b* 

115.  Collacio  Hofpitalis.  _  ibid- 

11 6.  Procuratorium  Generale,  cum  diverfis  Claufls 

neceffarijs  in  Vifitatione  Epifcopi,  &  Synodi,  &c.  116. 

117.  Indulgencie  concelTe  Fratribus  et  Sororibus  Fra- 

ternitatis  S.  Cedde  Lichfeld.  118 

1 1 8.  Mandatum  ad  faciendam  Proclamationem  pro  vo- 

lentibus  objicere  contra  Eledionem,  See.  120. 

119.  Decretum  Eledionis  fade  per  viam  Spiritus 

Sandi.  (cum  alijs  ad  Eledionem  pertinentibus')  1 20.  b. 

1 20.  Litera  Purgatoria  cum  Excommunicatione  &  Ci- 

tatione  in  eadem  ;  de  optima  forma.  1 23.  b. 

121.  Mandatum  ad  monendum  feu  vocandum  Redo- 

rem  ad  pcrfonaliter  refldendum  in  Ecclefla  fua  ;  cum 
Certificatorio  fuper  eodem.  I2b\ 

122.  Articuli  propoflti  contra  Officialem  Archidi- 
aconi  Coventrenfls,  qui  erat  in  Pradica.  126.  b.  et  vid. 

140.  b. 

123.  Commiflio  ad  inquirendum  de  Pollucione  Ec¬ 
clefie,  et  ad  abfolvendum  culpabiles,  et  alia  facienda. 

t27. 

124.  Litera  Abbatis  et  Conventus  Stje.  Werburgas 
Ceflr.  Willelmo  Epifcopi  Coventr.  &  Lichfeld,  de  con- 
fentiendo  Penfioni  impofitse,  ad  terminum  vite  alicujus. 

127,  b.  et  vid.  141. 

125.  Litera  Sententie  contra  caufantesPollucionem  Ec¬ 
clefie  parochialis  de  Chefterfelde.  I3°- 

126.  Sententia  Compromifli,  fub  pub lica  forma.  13 1. 

1 27.  Inftrumentum  fuper  Litera  Teftimoniali  de  Aflig¬ 
nacione  Penfionis  de  aliqua  Ecclefla.  1 32.  b. 

128.  Inftrumentum  A pellacionis  Redoris,  qui  eft  fpo- 

liatus  a  poffeflione  Ecclefie  fue.  133.  b. 

1 29.  Provocacio  fuper  curacione  Decanorum  Rura- 

lium.  134.I). 

130.  Commiflio  fada  Suffraganeo  ad  benedicehdum 

Abbatem,  &c.  ...  127. 

1 31.  Commiflio  Epifcopi  alicui  ad  examinandum 

Eledionem,  et  earn  confirmandum,  et  Eledum  induci 
mandandum.  137.  b. 

Hie,  pluribus  inftrumentis  agitur,  de  Refignatione 
Willelmi  Pruyne  Prioris  de  Sondewalle  in  Com.  Stafford 
dc-q.  Eledione  Johannis  Adone  Monachi  S.  Petri  Salopie 
in  Priorein  per  viam  Spiritus  Sandi.  A.  D.  1436.  (et 

vid.  149.) 

132.  Donatio  et  Conceflio  nominata  proxime  Vaca- 
cionis  alicujus  Ecclelie,  per  Willelmum  Dnm  de  Ferrers. 

141. 

133.  Mandatum  ad  denunciandum  Excommunicatos, 

verberantes  quendam  Clericum.  141.  b.  . 

134.  Inftrumenta  varia  fuper  Refignatione  Wiftani 

Porte  Prioris  de  Repyndone  in  Com.  Derb.  et  Eledione 
Johannis  Overtone  in  Priorem.  142. 

135.  Inftrumentum  in  quo  continentur  Procefius 

Eledionis  Willelmi  de  Peyntone  (per  viam  Scrutinij)  in 
Abbatem  de  Lullelhulle  in  Com.  Salopian,  polt  mortem 
Rogeri  Norreys,  circa  A.  D.  1421.  145. 

136.  Aliud,  fuper  Eledione  (per  viam  Compromifli) 

Roberti  de  Backwelle  in  Abbatem  de  Rouceftre  in  Com. 
Staffordice  poll  Refignationem  Johannis  de  Chefwardyne. 
A.  D.  1636.  .  AI46-b* 

137.  Aliud,  fuper  Eledione  (per  viam  Spiritus  Sandi) 

Johannis  de  Watforde  in  Priorein  de  Wormbruge,  poll: 
mortem  Johannis  de  Law ley,  A.  D.  1373.  _  148- 

128.  Conftitutio  “  Qua  propter  ”  de  Eedionibus.  1 5 1 . 

139.  Certificate  Prockmationis  pro  liberacione  ali- 
cuius  incarcerati  in  Carceribus  Epifcopi.  I51-  b.  (et  vid. 

1 55-) 

140.  Litera  ad  predicandum,  exponendum,  et  femi- 

nandum  Verbum  Dei.  ,  lb*d:,. 

141.  Commiflio  ad  inquirendum  fuper  aliquo  horribili 

&Oo.  •  ,  -r>  -52/ 

142.  Mandatum  ad  denunciandum  Excommunicatos 

impedientes  JurildidionemEcclefiafticam.  152.  b. 

r  7  A  *43-  Optima 


55° 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Niim.  2179,  2180. 

-143.  Optima  Securitas  pro  annuo  Redditu  de  Monaf' 
terio.  _  _  153.  b. 

144.  Certificatorium  Clericorum  incarceratorum  et  de¬ 
li  lerandorum.  1 55. 

145.  Articuli  fuper  quibus  Heretici  five  Lollardi  de- 

b.‘nt  examinari.  157. 

146.  Adjuracio  fuper  predidtis.  157.8. 

147.  Informacio  ad  procedendum  contra  Hzereticos. 

158. 

Sequtintur  Conftitutiones  quasdam,  fcil. 

14S.  Ne  quis,  cujufcunque  gradiis  five  flatus  exiftat, 
Conelufiones  five  Propofitiones  aliquas  contra  fanam 
Do&rinam  Ecclefie  pertinaciter,  in  Scolis,  teneat  aut 
defendat.  1  59.  b. 

1 49.  Nullus  difputare  audeat  de  Articulis  per  Ecclefiam 

terminal  is  ;  prout  in  Decretis,  Decretalibus,  et  Conftitu- 
tionibus  Sinodalibus  continetur.  ibid. 

150.  Gardiani,  Prepofili,  et  Principals,  Univerlitatis 

Oxon.  feinel  in  fmgulis  Menfibus  inquirant  de  Moribus 
fuorum  Scolarium.  160. 

1 5 1.  Pena  violancium  pertinaciter  in  aliquo  hanc  vlti- 

111am  Conftitudonem,  five  Conflituciones  preferiptas,  in 
aliqua  fui  parte.  1 60.  b. 

152.  Quod  contra  Infamatum  fuper  crimine  Herefis, 

procedi  poterit  fummarie,  et  de  piano.  ibid. 

153.  Statutum  Henrici  Quarti  Regis  Anglie  apud 

Weftmonafterium  editum  contra  Lollardos,  Hereticos, 
et  eorum  fautores.  161. 

154.  Litera  premunicionis  ad  vifitand.  Prebendas  omni 

triennio.  1Q2. 

Sequuntur, 

155.  Citationes,  et  alia  quaidam  Scripta  Autographa 

Officials  Arcliidiaconi  Ceftrenlis,  parui  momenti,  et  in 
Schedulis  folutis.  163.  b. 

2l8o. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  being  all  upon  the  Subjeft  of 
Heraldry,  as  containing, 

1.  A  large  Collection  of  Funeral-Certificates,  being 
an  original  Book,  begun  by  the  firft  Randle  Holme  in 
the  Year  1616.  and  carried  on  (but  not  without  feveral 
Interruptions)  by  his  Son  and  Grandfon  to  A.  D.  1680. 
The  Intent  of  the  Certificates  was  to  preferve  the  Me¬ 
mory  of  the  Name  &  Family  of  every  Perfon  who  bore 
Amies  within  the  Limits  of  their  Deputation,  viz.  Che- 
fhire,  Lancafhire,  &  North  Wales  ;  the  time  of  their 
Deccafe,  their  Matches,  Poflerity,  &c.  A  matter  of 
very  good  L'fe  ;  undertaken  by  direction  from  the 
Office  of  Armes,  and  fit  to  be  for  ever  continued.  But 
how  it  happened  I  know  not,  (perhaps  by  the  unwilling- 
nefsof  people  to  pay  a  fmall  Fee,  when  their  own  Bufinefs 
is  tran  failing,  or  by  negligence,  or  both)  very  many 
of  the  Armes  are  not  paintedwith  Colors,  butonly  tricked 
with  the  Pen,  others  only  traced  with  Lead,  and  many 
wholly  omitted.  In  many  Certificates,  likewife,  the  Ori¬ 
ginal  Hands  of  thofe  Relations  who  gave  the  Information 
touching  their  refpedlive  Families,  have  not  been  putt  ; 
and  feveral  others  are  plainly  Copies  :  yet  this  Collection 
is  valuable,  and  fitt  to  be  confulted,  upon  occafion.  1. 

Herein  I  find. 

2.  The  Order  of  Mr.  Hugh  Leighs  Funerall  ;  by  the 

fecond  Randle  Holme.  125.  b. 

3.  The  Order  of  the  Funerall  of  Humphrey  Chetam 

of  Cleyton,  F.fq;  by  the  fame.  j  26. 

I  his  Collection  of  Certificates  is  fucceeded  by  fome 
Papers  moftly  written  upon  certain  fquabbles  happening 
between  tome  Chefter-Gentry,  or  their  haughty  Wives, 
about  taking  place  one  of  another  ;  being 

4.  The  Anfwer  of  Sir  William  Segar  Garter  to  a 
Queftion  propounded  touching  the  point  of  Precedency 
between  an  Alderman  of  Chelter,  in  Chelter,  and  a  pri¬ 
vate  Gentleman  A.  D.  1619. 

Here  Mr.  Garter  gives  his  Opinion  for  the  Alder¬ 
men,  but  not  for  their  Wives. 


Num.  2180. 

5.  Opinion  of  Sir  Richard  St.  George  Norroy,  in  the 

fame  Affair  ;  dated  18  July  1619.  1 37.  b. 

That  Mr.  Roger  Hurleflon  had  been  too  forward  in 
affronting  Alderman  William  Gamull. 

6.  His  Opinion  about  their  Wives  taking  place  dated 

the  2 1  of  February  1619.  l 

Clearly  for  Mrs.  Hurleflon  in  refpect  of  her  Huf- 
bands  Gentility. 

7.  An  Order  of  both  the  Kings  abovementioned  : 

given  the  29th  of  May  1620.  ijg.  b. 

That  Mr.  Hurleflon  &  all  Gentlemen  of  his  Ranke 
fliould,  within  the  City,  give  place  to  an  Alderman  : 
and  that  Mr.  Gamull  having  proved  his  Pedegree  for 
thirteen  Defcents,  and  Ihewed  a  Deed  of  the  time  of  K. 
Edward  11.  lealed  by  his  Auncefler  with  a  Seale  of  Armes 
of  the  fame  Coate,  which  now  he  beareth  ;  and  his 
Brother  and  himfelf  enjoying  the  fame  Lands  which  their 
paternal  Anceflors  enjoyed  in  the  tyme  of  K.  Henry  111. 
Mr.  Hurleflon  fhould  produce  his  Pedegree  andProofes, 
or  they  would  give  Mr.  Gamull  precedency  of  Gentry 
before  him. 

8.  The  faid  Norroy’s  Order  to  Mr.  Hurleflon,  to 

make  no  further  Queftion  or  Conteflation  in  that  matter ; 
he  having  omitted  the  making  proof  of  his  Pedegree^ 
dated  the  21  of  Augufl  1620.  139. 

9.  Original  Note  of  one  Honnyng  to  Mr.  Penfon  the 

Herald,  defiring  a  prefident  of  a  Knight  &  Baronet’s  re- 
figning  his  Knighthood  to  another.  i4I. 

1  o.  Precept  of  Thomas  Howard  Earl  of  Arundel  Sc 
Surrey,  &  Earl-Marefchal,  for  fummoning  Thomas  Griff- 
eth  of  Pantyllongdy  in  Com.  Flynt,  Efq;  to  appear  in 
the  painted  Chamber  at  Weftminfter,  to  anfwer  for  his 
not  giving  in  a  Certificate  to  the  Office  of  Armes  after 
the  Deceafeof  his  Predeceffor.  dat.  30  June  1638,  142. 

1 1.  Letter  of  Griffith  Hughes  Deputy  to  the  Office  of 

Armes,  to  the  faid  Mr.  Griffith,  dated  at  Llanverres  in 
Yale,  4.  Aug.  1638.  I42.  b. 

About  ierving  him  &  others  with  Monitions  from 
the  Earl  Marfhalls  Court  for  not  making  the  Certificate 
abovefaid. 

Here  is  alfo  a  printed  Black  Ticket,  iffued  upon  fuch 
Occafions. 

12.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Richard  St.  George 

Norroy,  to  the  firft  Randle  Holme,  dated  the  2 1  Julv 
1619.  \  * 

Importing,  that  he  had  receaued  Mr.  Gamulls  kind 
token,  without  half  a  hundreth  Waight  of  Chefhire 
Chefes.  That  as  to  the  Queftion  between  him  Sc  Mr. 
Hurleflon,  he  had  given  his  Opinion,  under  his  hand 
to  Sir  Thomas  Savage.  But  concerning  Aldermen  Sc 
Juftice  of  Peaces  Wifes,  he  could  fay  no  more  but  that 
Offices  &  Places  of  Majeftracy  can  give  no  place  to  their 
Wiues.  And  that  the  Chefe  of  16  Pounds  which  Mr. 
Holme  had  promifed  to  fend  his  fon  Henry  St.  George 
was  not  com  up. 

1 3.  More  Notes  about  the  fame  weighty  Affair  of 
Precedency.  i44.  b.  et  vid.  fupra.  14 1.  b.  et  149. 

14.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  Sampfon  Lennard  Blue- 
mantel,  to  the  firft  Randle  Holme  :  26  Nov.  162-. 

1 45- 

In  Anfwer  to  a  Cafe  put,  as  to  the  Cafe  of  Prece¬ 
dency  of  Barons  eldeft  Sons,  their  Wives  &  Children. 

It  feems  to  have  been  for  the  fatisfaction  of  Sir  Anthony 
St.  John  (who  was  a  Peers  Son)  or  of  his  Children,  vid. 
fol.  139.  b. 

*5-  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Richard  St.  George 
Norroy,  to  the  fame  Mr.  Holme  :  dat.  26  February 
1620.  *  ,46.  ' 

About  granting  a  Creft  to  Bridgman,  whofe  Armes 
he  was  loth  to  confirm  untill  he  had  feen  the  Grant  of 
them.  And  about  the  Cafe  of  Sir  Anthony  St.  Johns 
Children. 

16.  The  Duty  of  a  Serjeant  at  Armes;  in  French. 

147- 

17.  Original 


}7;  Original  Anfwer  of  Sir  John  Borough  Garter, 
William  le  NeVe  ClarencieUx,  and  Henry  St.  George 
Norroy,  dated,  the  21  June  1638.  to  the  Queftion  about 
Precedency  between  Edward  Whitby  Recorder  of  Chefter 
&  Robert  Brerewood  a  puifne  Juftice  in  the  Counties  of 
Caernarvon,  Anglefey,  &  Merioneth  ;  in  favour  of 
the  former.  j -Q 

18.  Reference  of  the  Cafe  &  Anfwer  above,  with  Mr. 
Bf  ere  wood’s  Petition,  to  Sir  Ralfe  Whitfield  his  Majefties 
Serjeant  at  Lav/,  Sir  John  Bankes  Attorney  Generali,  & 
Sir  Edward  Littleton  Sollicitor  Generali,  by  the  faid 
Earl  of  Arundell  &  Surrey  Earl-Marlhall,  21  June  1638. 

150.  b. 

This  is  the  Original  figned  by  his  own  hand. 
tq.  Draught  of. their  Summons  to  Mr.  Recorder 
W  hitby  to  attend  at  a  certain  time,  when  they  would  hear 
what  could  be  alledged  by  bo  h  parties.  ibid. 

2181. 

Codex  membranaccus  in  a  to.  ampliori,  quo  continentur» 

1.  Fragmentura  cujufdatn  Poematis,  de  re  Grammati- 
cali  traftantis. 

2.  Diftionariura  Latinum,  partim  Latine  et  partim 
Anglice  explicatum. 

2182. 

A  parchment  Book  in  large  quarto,  wherein  I  find 
A  Boke  which  is  callid  Brute  ;  or  the  Cronycles  of 
Englonde. 

It  comes  down  to  the  taking  of  Roan  by  K.  Henry  v. 
anno  regni  6to. 

2183. 

A  parchment-Book  in  4to.  badly  written,  and  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  the  firft  Page,  thus  entituled, 

“An  old  Natura  Brevium,  or  Abridgement.” 

The  Names  of  the  Judges  fhew  that  the  Trials  here 
abridged,  were  held  toward  the  end  of  the  Reign  ofK. 
Edward  the  firft,  and  the  beginning  of  that  of  his  Son. 

2184. 

A  parchment-Book  in  4to.  imperfect  at  the  beginning, 
wherein  is  contained 

Part  of  a  Year-book  of  the  Reign  of  K.  Edward  11. 
particularly  as  to  his  5.  6.  7.  8.  13.  &  14th  years. 

2185. 

A  Book  in  folio,  formerly  much  thicker  than  it  now  is, 
as  having  contained  322  pages,  at  the  leaft  :  whereas 
at  prefent  it  goes  no  further  than  the  92  page.  It 
treated  of  feveral  Parliaments  holden  by  Qu.  Elizabeth, 
including  that  of  the  29th  of  her  Reign.  To  all 
which  a  fable  of  principal  Matters  hath  been  made, 
&  is  placed  at  the  beginning. 

As  to  what  remains,  I  find  here, 

1.  An  Oration  made  tbe  23  of  January,  primo  Eliz. 

by  Sr.  Nicholas  Bacon  Knt.  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great 
Seale  of  England,  10  the  Nobles  &  Commons,  in  the 
prefence  of  her  Majefty,  in  the  beginning  of  the  Parlya- 
ment  then  houlden,  in  AnnoDni  1558.  1. 

2.  My  Lord  Keeper  Bacons  Anfwear  to  the  Oration 

of  St.  Thomas  Gargraue,  chofen  to  be  Speaker  of 
the  Parlyament,  difabling  himielf  thereunto  ;  yet  ad¬ 
mitted.  8. 

3.  The  Lord  Keeper  Bacons  Anfwer  to  Sir.  Thomas 

Gargraue  Speaker  of  this  prefent  Parliament,  his  Oration 
made  after  his  Admiflion.  10. 

4.  The  Lord  Keeper  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon’s  Oration, 
made  the  8th  of  May,  in  the  Parliament-Houfe,  before 
the  Queene,  the  Parlement  then  ending,  Anno  15 59. 

12. 

5.  Tbe  Titles  of  fuch  Bills  as  were  rejefted  in  the 
Upper  fiowfe  ;  as  alfo  of  fuch  as  palled  the  Houfe,  fome 
Members  of  the  faid  Houfe  dilfenting  therefrom  :  in  this 
fiilt  Selfion  of  the  fir  ft  Parliament  of  Qu.  Elizrbeth, 


Num.  2184,  2186. 


which  beganne  upon  the  23th  day  of  January,  anno  r. 
Eliz.  And  fome  other  Memorialls.  21. 

6.  A  Journall  of  the  Commons  Houf^  anno  1  Eliza* 
bethe  R"0. 

7.  The  Oration  of  Dr.  (Cuthbert)  Scott  Bifliop 
of  Chefter,  made  in  Parlyament-IIoufe  ;  anno,  1559. 

27. 

8.  The  Oration  of  Dr.  John  Fecnam  (Feckenham) 

Abbot  of  Weftminfter,  in  Parlyament-Howfe ;  anno 
l5S9-  36. 

9  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Patent  to  the  City  ofBriftol, 
granting  a  Privilege  as  to  the  time  of  lading  &  unlading 
of  Goods.  It  bears  Tefte  the  12  April,  anno  rc-gni  1. 

42. 

1  o.  Articles  for  an  Aft  of  Parliament  touching  Impro¬ 
priations.  _  44. 

1 1.  Q11.  Elizabeth  s  CommilTion  of  Inquiry  after  re* 

ftored  Abbey-Lands  in  Nottinghamlhire,  &c.  bearing 
Tefte  the  4th  of  March,  anno  regni,  2.  49. 

1 2.  Articles  to  be  enquired  of,  and  to  be  accomplilhed, 

upon  the  CommilTion  direfted  forth,  upon  the  new 
Statute  of  Dilfolution  of  the  Religious  Houfes  within  the 
County  ofNott.  $Xm 

i  ?.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speech  to  both  Houfes,  at  the 
opening  of  the  Parlyament,  anno  5  Eliz.  the  5th  of 
June  (12  of  January)  1562.  Her  Majefty  being  prefent. 

14.  Speech  of  Mr.  Williams  at  his  being  prefented 
by  the  Commons  as  their  Speaker,  15  Januarie  1562. 

58. 

15.  The  Lord  Keepers  Anfwer  to  that  Speech.  59. 

1 6.  The  Speakers  Reply  to  the  Lord  Keeper.  60. 

17.  A  Note  of  the  feveral  Prorogations  of  this  Par¬ 
liament.  gg 

18.  A  fhort  Journal  of  that  Parliament.  67." 

1 9.  Mr.  Speaker  Williams  his  Speech  at  the  end  of 

the  ....  Selfion.  gg^ 

20.  The  Lord  Keepers  Anfwer,  71. 

2 1 .  Coppie  of  a  Letrer,  written  in  the  Quecnes  owne 

hand,  and  by  herfelfe  drawne ;  to  the  Comons  in 
Parlyament,  about  their  Peticon  conceminge  Marriage 
&  Liberties.  y  $ 

22.  A  Speech  delivered  by  her  Majefty  unto  the  Lord 

Keeper  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon,  in  prefence  of  the  Upper 
Houfe  of  Parliament,  A.  D.  1563.  77. 

23.  The  Petition  of  the  Parliament,  for  the  Queeneof 

England  to  marry,  A.  D.  1563.  yg_ 

24.  An  humble  fuit  &  Petition  made  by  all  the  Lords, 

both  Spirituall  &  Temporall,  unto  the  Queenes  molt  ex¬ 
cellent  Majefty,  A.  D.  1563.  g^. 

This  was  deliver’d  in  a  Speech  by  the  Lord  Keeper 
(who  in  the  name  of  the  Peers)  befought  her  to  marry,  & 
to  fettle  the  Succelfion. 

25.  A  Ihort  Journal  of  the  upper  Houfe.  during  this 

Parliament.  gg 

26.  Form  of  a  Petition,  which  feems  to  aflert  a  Right 

in  the  Houfe  of  Commons  to  be  Judges,  with  the  Peers, 
as  to  W rits  of  Error.  g  g 

27.  An  Anfwer  to  the  fame;  fhewing  how  the 
Commons  parted  with  that  branch  of  their  Authority. 

9°. 

28.  Part  of  a  Relation  of  what  happened  in  Parliament 

upon  the  Dcceafe  of  Thomas  Williams  Speaker  of  the 
Houfe  of  Commons  ;  and  how  a  new  Speaker  was  to  be 
chofen.  ann.  8  Eliz,  ibid. 

2  I  86. 

A  Book  in  folio,  for  the  molt  part  copied  by  Will. 

Smith  Rouge-Dragon,  A.  D.  1612.  It  contains. 

The  Vifuation  of  Dorfetlhire,  as  taken  A.  D.  1562, 
with  fome  Additions  &  Continuations. 

I  know  not  of  any  Vifitation  that  was  made  of  that 
County,  this  Year,  It  is  faid  that  is  was  vifited  A.  D. 
x  565.  by  William Hervey  Clarencieux:  perhaps  this  may 

be 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


55i 


Num.  2186 — 2188. 

be  a  Copie  of  that,  only  here  the  Genealogies  are  putt 
down  by  way  of  Scheme,  &  not  Narratively. 

2187. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  written  and  tricked  by  fe- 
veral  Hands  ;  wherein  is  contained, 

1.  An  Alphabet  in  Blazon,  of  the  Armes  bom  by  the 

Chefhire- Nobility  &  Gentry.  1. 

2.  Chefhire-Pedegrees  &  Notes,  for  the  greateft  part, 
taken  from  the  Vifitations  of  A.  I).  1580.  &  1612.  but 
enriched  with  many  Continuations  and  Additions  by  Jacob 
Chaloner,  the  third  Randle  Holme,  &  others.  6. 

Among  thefe,  I  alfo  find 

3.  Some  Notes  extracted  from  a  Booke  of  Edward 

the  Blacke  Prince,  called  the  Regifter.  6.  b. 

4.  The  Defcent  of  Ballet,  by  Sir  Simonds  D’Ewes, 

with  his  Proofs,  j  50. 

This  was  to  eflablilh  the  legitimacy  of  Geva  daughter 
of  Hugh  I.upus,  from  whom  Sir  Simonds  pretended 
that  his  Children  by  his  firfl  Lady  were  defcended,  one 
of  whom  (who  died  in  her  Childhood)  he  caufed  to  be 
baptifed  by  the  Name  of  Geva. 

2188. 

A  Book  in  folio,  partly  Heraldical,  &  partly  Hiflorical ; 
as  containing 

Genealogical  Difcents  of  many  of  our  antient  Noble 
Families  :  viz1. 

j.  Montfort.-  1. 

2.  Defcendants  from  Joan  of  Acres  Daughter  to 


,  Edward  1. 

1.  b. 

3.  Warren. 

2.  et  13.  b. 

4.  Earles  of  C.hefler. 

2.  b. 

5.  Fitz-Piers,  Earls  of  Effex. 

3- 

6.  Bigod. 

3-b- 

7.  Marifchall. 

4- 

8.  Burgh,  or  de  Burgo. 

4.b. 

9.  Aubenei. 

5- 

10.  Fitz-AIan. 

5.  b. 

11.  Bohun. 

6.  b. 

12.  Vipont. 

7. 

13.  Defcendants  from  Lovsjl  Lord 

of  Tichmerche. 

7.  b. 

14.  Defcendants  from  Harold  Lord  of  Ewyas.  8. 

15.  Defcendants  from  William  Pantulfe  of  Wemme. 

8.  b. 

16.  Defcendants  from  Richard  1.  Duke  of  Norman¬ 
dy.  9. 

j  7.  Defcendants  from  Stephanus  de  Efcalarijs.  9.  b. 

18.  Monte-alto.  10. 

19.  Wake  &  Cottingnam  from  Stulta  villa.  io.  b. 

20.  Defcendants  from  the  firfl  Leofric,  here  called 

Earl  of  Leicefter.  n. 

21.  Rouuiai a  Earl  of  Lincoln.  ibid. 

22.  Lacy;  with  the  Matches,  of  Verdun,  Ginevill, 

&De  Burgo,  into  that  Family.  xi.  b. 

23.  Pont-Adomar,  Bello  monte,  &c.  12. 

24.  de  Belifmo  12.  b. 

25.  Defcent  of  Nevil,  from  Waltheof  1.  here  called 

Earl  of  Northumberland.  13. 

26.  Defcent  of  fome  Barons  of  Wallingford.  14. 

27.  Defcendants  from  Brus  de  Normannia.  ibid. 

28.  DTcentof  Ogle,  from  Bertram  Lord  of  Bothall. 

14.  b. 

29.  Defcendants  from  William  Bertram  Baron  of 
Mitlord. 

30.  Defcendants  from  John  Baron  of  Kilpec.  1 5.  b. 

31.  Defcendants  from  Thomas  de  Mufco-campo. 

16. 

32.  Stemma  parmhas  de  Burnell,  ex  Martyrologio 

Abbatia:  de  Bulde^as.  1  q  b. 

33.  Lovetoft. 

34.  Defcendants  from  Adam  de  Swinburne.  17.  b. 

35.  Defcendants  from  John  Tregoz.  j8. 


Num.  2188. 

36.  Defcendants  from  Robert  de  Grant-mefnilt  & 

Norman  Baron.  1 8.  b. 

37.  Defcendants  from  Herfaflus  another  Norman, 

here  called  Frater  Gonoras.  ibid. 

38.  Defcendants  from  Robertus  Blundus  de  Com. 

Staff.  >9- 

39.  Stemma  Baronum  de  Caftro-Cary  in  Com.  Somer- 

fet.  19.  b. 

40.  Stemma  Mufardorum  Baronum  de  Slaveley.  20, 

41.  Defcendants  from  Guido  de  Credona,  alias  Cre- 
dun,  aliis  Croun  (alias  Creoun)  in  Com.  Lincoln.  20.  b. 

42.  Defcendants  from  Euftachius  Count  of  Bologne, 

Lentz,  &  Arthois.  2 1 . 

43.  Defcendants  from  Saherus  de  Quincy  Senior. 

21.  b. 

44.  Defcendants  from  Richard  Engeine  Senr.  founder 

of  Finelheved  in  Com.  Northampt.  22. 

45.  Defcent  of  Mohun.  22.  b. 

46.  Defcendants  from  Ralf  Hill.  ibid. 

47.  Defcent  of  Pefehall  from  Harley  ;  of  Cornewall, 

or  De  Comubia  ;  &  of  Midilton.  23. 

48.  Genealogia  Werburgae  Virginis;  ex  Hifloria  Eli- 

enfi.  23-  J3- 

49.  Genealogia  Extraneorum.  ibid. 

50.  Defcendants  from  Radulphus  de  Querceto,  alias 

de  Cayneto.  24. 

51.  Defcendants  from  Petrus  de  Valonijs.  ibid. 

52.  Defcent  of  our  firfl  Kings  of  the  Eafl-Angles  ; 
taken,  becaufe  of  St.  iEtheldreda,  ex  Elienfi  Hiltoria. 

2.4.  b. 

53.  Defcendants  from  Fulco  de  Oyry  Lord  of  the 

Maner  of  Gedney.  25. 

54.  Defcendants  from  Walterus  de  Bello  campo.  ibid. 

55.  Pedegree  of  the  Family  of  Conflable.  25.  b. 

56.  De  Baronie  Galfredi  de  Saye.  26. 

57.  Defcents  of  Scoteney,  &  Ties.  ibid. 

58.  Stemma  Vavaforutn  de  Weflon  &  Newton.  26.  b. 

59.  Defcendants  from  William  Mortimer  Baron  of 

Bec-Crifpin  in  Normandy.  27. 

60.  Grefeleiorum  Stemma  antiquiffmium.  27.  b. 

61.  Defcent  of  Arfie.  28. 

62.  Defcendants  from  John  St.  John.  ibid. 

63.  Defcent  of  Harcourt.  28.  b. 

64.  Defcendants  from  Ivo  Talboys.  29. 

65.  Defcent  of  Talbot.  29. 

66.  Pedegradus  Baronis  de  Malpas,  exrotulo  antiquo 
in  Cuflodia  Willelmi  Brereton  Arm.  A.  D.  1 578.  29.  b. 

67.  De  partitione  Hrereditatis  Willelmi  Comitis  de 

Murray,  filij  Duncani.  30. 

68.  Difcendants  from  Giflebertus  Comes.  30.  b. 

69.  Pedegree  of  Lafcelles  of  Sourby.  31. 

70.  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Arden.  31.  b. 

71.  Armes  of  Watevill,  Sapi,  Watervill,  Colevill,  & 

Mon-pi’zon.  ibid. 

72.  Defcendants  from  Galfridus  deBello-campo.  ibid. 

73.  Prologus  fuper  Leges  Regis  Knutonis.  32. 

74.  HiftorioIaFamilke  de  Mefchinis ;  ex  Martirologio 

quod  fpe&at  ad  Dham  Annam  Dacres  Comitiffam  Arun- 
delias.  32.  b. 

75.  Defcent  ofBulmer  from  Elmedon.  34. 

76.  Gobion.  34.  b. 

77.  Defcendants  from  Hubert  de  Monte-canifo.  35. 

78.  Tony.  .  35 •  b. 

79.  Defcent  &  Poflerity  of  Edmund  of  Woodftock 

Earl  of  Kent.  ibid. 

80.  Defcent  of  Richard  Nevill  Earl  of  Warwick.  36. 

81.  Defcendants  from  William  Beauchamp  Earl  of 

Warwick.  ibid. 

82.  Defcent  of  Beauchamp  Earl  of  Warwick  from 

William  Manduit.  3^-  b. 

83.  Defcendants  from  William  Mandevile  Earl  of 

EfLx.  ibid. 

84.  Other  Defcents  of  Beauchamp  Earl  of  Warwick. 

37- 

85.  Defcent 


9 


Bibliothecas  Harleian® 


Num.  21? 


85.  Defcent  of  Weyland  from  Breufe  Lord  of  Clop- 

ton.  37* 

86.  Defcent  of  our  King  Henry  11.  from  K.  iEltred. 

38- 

87.  Defcent  of  our  K.  Edward  iv.  from  K.  Edward  in. 

'  ibid. 

88.  Notes  touching  the  Defcents  of  Morville,  De 

Vallibus,  Greyftoke,  8cc.  taken  from  Robert  Glover, 
Somerfet.  #  38*. 

I  fuppofe  that  many  of  the  Defcents  taken  into  this 
prefent  Collection,  were  alfo  firft  putt  down  by  him. 

89.  Defcent  of  the  old  Earls  of  Warwick  from  Rollo 

the  fir  ft  Duke  of  Normandy.  4°- 

90.  Defcent  of  Mortimer  of  Wigmore,  from  the  Earls 

of  Warren.  ibid. 

9 1 .  Defendants  frnm  Robert  de  Oyly  Baron  of  Hook- 

norton.  4°*  b- 

92.  Defendants  from  William  de  Bello-campo  de 

Com.  Bedeford.  41* 

93.  Defendants  from  K.  William  the  Conqueror. 

41. b. 

94.  Pedegree  of  Greiftock  (with  Defcents  of  Grinv 

thorp  &  Baffet.)  42-  b. 

95.  Defcent  of  Mowbray  from  Segrave,  8c  Cha- 

comb.  43  • 

96.  Pedegree  of  Howard.  43- b- 

97.  Defcent  of  Gray.  >  45-  4^- 

98.  Fitz-Alan  Earl  of  Arundell.  ibid.  Sc  47. 

99.  Beaumont;  Lovell,  Stapilton,  8c Norris.  45- b- 

100.  Ver  Earl  of  Oxford;  46.  b. 

rot.  Defcents  of  divers  antient  Families,  particularly 

Lucy,  8c  Dacre  of  Gillefland  &  Greiftock,  unto  their 
palling  into  the  Howards.  48-  b. 

What  follows  in  this  Book  is  almoft  wholly  written 
by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Thomas  Talbot  the  Antiquary,  viz'. 

102.  Notulm  e  Chronieo  Regum  Manniae.  ,.5°\ 

103.  Notulae  e  Chronica  Chronicarum  Florentij  Wi- 

gomienfis  Monachi.  5 1  • 

104.  Collectanea  ex  Chronica  Florentij  Wigornienfis 

(forte,  e  Cod.  ms.  qui  nunc  in  Bibliotheca  Bodlciana 
infc ribitur  ne.  f.  10.  5.)  52- 

105.  Notulze  ex  Cronica  Bernardi  Guidonis  Lodo- 

venfis  Epifcopi.  63. 

106.  Apographa  4  Cartarum,  ad  Clintones  Duos  de 
Colefltull  in  agro  Warwicenfi  cum  primis  fpettantium. 

64.  b. 

107.  Excerpta  ex  veteri  Hiftoria  Abbati-e  de  Abben- 

done  ;  qute  nunc  (ut  videtur)  exftat  in  Bibliotheca  Cot- 
toniana.  66. 

1 08.  Ex  libro  fecundo  de  Confuetudine  Ecclefia:  Rof- 

fenfis,  per  Benedictum  Monachum.  95. 

109.  Notuhe  qusedam  Hiftoricce,  e  diverfis  Cod.  mss. 

excerpta:;  et  fpeciatim,  de  Thoma  Beketto  Archiepifcopo 
Cantuarienfi,  e  Chronieo  Radulfi  deDiccto.  102. 

1 10.  Ex  Cronologia  de  fundatione  Monaftevij  S.  Au- 

guftini  Cantuariae.  103. 

hi.  Colleftanea  de  Succeffione  variorum  Norwicen- 
fis  Dioecefis  Epifc oporutn.  119. 

1 1 2.  Chronicon  breviculum  de  rebus  Anglicis  (et 
fpeciatim  Norfolcienfibus)  ab  A.  D.  33.  ufque  ad  A.  D. 
1366.  _  _  1  so¬ 

il  3.  Colle&anea  paucula  ex  Archivis  Monafterij  S. 
Joh.  Bapt.  de  Haghemon,  in  Com.  Salop.  123. 

1 14.  Ex  Libro  de  antiquisConfuetudinibusNormania:. 

viz'.  De  Vice-comite  &  ejus  Officio.  DeSenefallo  Ducis, 
et  ej us  Officio.  .  124. 

115.  Colleftanea  ex  Regiftro  Evidentiarum  Monafterij 
deNeuport-Painell,  in  Comitatu  Buck,  lmperf.  125. 


An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  written  by  the  hand  of 
Mr.  Hugh  Cotgrave  Richmond-Herald,  for  the  far 
greater  part ;  as  was  affirmed  by  Sir  Henry  St.  George 
Garter  King  of  Armes,  to  whom  I  caufe d  the  Book 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2189 — 2192, 

to 'be  (hewn  ;  and,  who  knew  the  hands  of  the  antient 
Officers  of  Armes  better  than  any  man  now  living  does. 

In  it,  are  contained, 

1 .  An  Alphabetical  Table  dire&irig  to  the  feveral  Pede« 

grees  &  Matches  here  exhibited.  *  1  • 

2.  Hugh  Cotgraves  Collection  of  the  Defcents  of  De- 

vonlhire-Nobility  8c  Gentry,  with  many  Continuations 
8c  Additions  by  Ralf  Broke  York-Herald,  8c  the  late 
Mr.  Simon  Segar  ;  as  by  their  feveral  hands  in  many 
places  interlperfed,  doth  appear.  15.  8022; 

2190. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  at  the  beginning  whereof? 

I  find  a  Frontil'piece  haftily  drawn  with  this  Title, 

“  The  Genealogies  &  Defcents  of  all  the  K  ings  of 
England,  fince  it  was  named  England  (to  fay)  from 
King  Egbert  the  firft  Monarch  thereof,  vntill  our  Sove- 
raigne  Lady  Elizabeth. 

Of  this  work,  nothing  remains  here;  unlefs  their 
Armes,  or  the  Armes  aferibed  to  thofe  before  the  Con- 
queft  at  fol.  2.  be  looked  upon  as  part  of  it.  But  in  the 
next  page,  is  another  Title,  viz. 

1.  The  Armes  &  Defcents  of  all  the  Dukes,  Mar- 

quifes,  Earles,  Vifcounts,  8c  Lords,  that  have  been 
created  in  England  fince  the  tyme  of  William  Conqueror, 
until  this  prefent  day.  2.  b. 

That  is,  this  is  either  the  Original  Book,  or  a  good 
Copy  of  Cooke’s  Baronage,  ending  with  the  Lord  Nor¬ 
ris.  The  Armes  are  all  tricked  in  the  Margins ;  and 
with  the  Armes  of  each  King  from  Edward  111.  their 
feveral  Badges  are  putt  down. 

2.  Armes  of  foine  Princes  of  our  Bloud  Royal ;  filew¬ 
ing  their  Differences  from  the  Kings  Armes.  2.  b. 

2191 . 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio;  wherein  I  find, 

1 .  Armes  of  fome  few  of  our  Nobility  created  by  King 

Henry  viii.  only  begun  to  be  traced  with  black  Lead, 
without  any  Notice  taken  of  their  Owners,  excepting 
only  the  Lord  Ruffel.  *• 

2.  Unfulfilled  Armes  of  Nobility  created  by  K.  Ed¬ 
ward  vi.  with  the  Names  of  four  of  them.  4. 

3.  Armes  in  Colors,  of  Nobility  created  by  Qu.  Mary, 

but  unfulfilled,  &  without  their  Names.  9. 

4.  Amies  in  Colors,  but  unfinfihed,  of  many  Nobles 
either  created  or  fummoned  to  Parliament  by  Queen 
Elizabeth;  with  their  Names,  8c  Notes  of  the  lame. 

12. 

5.  Among  thefe,  is  a  Relation  made  of  the  Petition 

of  Sir  Thomas  Weft  Lord  La  Ware,  anno  39  Eliz.  for 
an  higher  place  in  Parliament,  and  of  what  enJ'ued  there¬ 
on.  I5*  fr* 

6.  Armes  of  Nobility,  either  created  or  fummoned 
to  Parliament  by  K.  James  1.  with  their  Names,  8cc. 

18. 

Of  thefe,  fome  are  finilhed,  others  unfiniflied,  and 
the  reft  only  begun  to  be  traced  out ;  or  not  fo  much 
as  that. 

7.  The  like  for  many  of  the  Nobility  created,  or 

fummoned  to  Parliament  by  K.  Charles  1.  38. 

2192. 

A  Book  in  folio,  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  A  Survey  of  all  the  Cuftomary  Lands  Sc  Tene¬ 
ments  in  the  Mannour  of  Imberhorne,  in  the  Parrifiies  of 
Eft  Grinfted  &  Weft  Hoadly  in  the  County  of  Suffex. 

1. 

2.  Suivey  of  the  Coppie-holders  Lands  within  the  Ma- 

nnnr  of  Shefelde.  17.  8c  22. 

in  Demeafnes  :  lyeing  within  the  Parilhes  of  Hurley  8c 
Caple,  in  the  Countie  of  Surry.  2 3- 

4.  A  Survey  of  the  auncient  Maunfion  or  Manner 
called  The  Weeke,  lyeing  nigh  Maidfton  in  Kent.  24. 

7B  5-  A 


554 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2192 — 2194. 

5-  A  Survey  of  Swynehed-hall,  with  the  Demeafnes 
therevnto  belonging ;  and  of  diverfe  Tenements  in  Bar- 
neton,  Sc  Cumberbach.  24.  b. 

6.  Particular  of  the  Mannor  of  Allefborow.  27. 

7.  Lift  of  the  Reeves  &  Bedels  within  the  North  8c 

South  Parkes  of  Dichelinge.  30. 

8.  A  Rentall  for  the  Bedell  to  gather  the  Quit-Rents 

for  the  Mannour  of  Dichelinge.  3  1 . 

9.  Chickeringe-Hall  Rental :  for  the  halfe  yeare  ended 

at  S'.  Michaell,  1668.  ,2, 

10.  Rentall  ofBullocks-towne;  made  A.D.  1586.  33. 

11.  A  Lifte  of  the  Light  Horfe  within  the  Lath  of 

S  .  Auguftines  &  Cittie  of  Canterbuiy  ;  vnder  the  Com¬ 
mand  of  Sir  Thomas  Palmer  Bar1.  A.  D.  1638.  35. 

.  I2‘  An  Alphabetical  Table  of  proper  Names,  relat¬ 
ing  to  Warwick-fhire,  Leicefter-lhire,  &c.  37. 

I3-  Kuights  of  Warwick-fhire,  about  the  tyme  of  K. 
Edward  1.  40. 

.  Warwick-fhire  Nobility  Sc  Gentry,  as  they  are 
in  the  Gallery  at  Theobalds.  4 1 . 

l5 •  Warwickfhire  Juftices  of  the  Peace  ;  out  of  a 
Book  at  Theobalds.  .2. 

In  thefe  3  laft  Articles,  here  are  Shields  traced  out 
for  the  Annes ;  but  none  of  them  are  fupplied. 

2I93- 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  Leaves  regu¬ 
larly  printed  from  a  wooden  Form,  ferving  for  a 
Page,  wherein  an  Efcocheon,  with  a  Gentlemans  Hel¬ 
met  Sc  Mantle  are  cutt,  to  fave  the  Labor  &  Trouble 
of  drawing  the  fame  by  hand  :  Nine  of  thefe,  with 
their  proper  Spaces  filling  a  Page.  Above  half  of 
thefe  Efcocheons  are  filled  up,  Sc  the  Crefts  fupplied 
by  fome  Painter-Stainer,  who  had  a  pretty  good  hand  ; 
and  the  Names  of  the  refpe&ive  Perfons  written  down 
(fadly  enough,  God  knows)  by  his  Son  or  Apprentice, 
as  I  luppofe.  Ihe  whole  Colle&ion  is  wixtD,  as  not 
relating  to  any  particular  Countrey,  County,  Age,  or 
Order  of  Men  ;  and  yet  may  prove  to  be  of  good  U;e 
upon  fundry  Occafions.  ’ 

2194. 

A  Book  in  folio,  much  damnified  by  Moifture  ;  and  treat¬ 
ing  of  1  he  Lords  High  Stewards  of  England,  from  the 
time  of  K.  William  the  Conqueror,  to  that  of  K. 
Charles  1.  with  the  Trials  of  the  feveral  Criminals 
who  were  tried  before  them,  and  certain  other  mat¬ 
ters,  which  I  fhall  prefently  take  notice  of  ;  letting  the 
oucctlfion  of  thefe  High  Stewards  alone,  it  being 
foreign  to  the  bufinefs  of  this  Catalogue. 

1.  The  Trial  8c  Execution  of  Richard  Fitz-AIan  Earl 

or  Arundell ;  temp,  R.  Richardi  11.  6.  k. 

2.  Of  the  Trial  &  Execution  of  John  Lord  Tiptoft  • 

15  OCt.  A.  D.  1469.  rIt  ’ 

3.  Of  the  Trial  of  Edward  Plantaginet  Earl  of  War¬ 
wick;  anno  15  R.  Henrici  vn.  IIt  b> 

4-  The  Trial  &  Execution  of  Edward  Stafford  Duke 
of  Buckingham  ;  anno  13  R.  Herrici  vm.  ,  2.  b. 

5-  The  Triat  &  Executi°n  of  Qucene  Anne  Bulloi'me- 

1 5  May,  anno  28  R.  Henrici  vm.  ® 

6.  Of  the  Trial  &  Acquittal  of  the  Lord  Dacres  of  (he 

North;  anno  .  .  .  R.  Henrici  vm.  jg 

7.  Of  the  Arraignment  of  the  Lords  Darcy  &  Huffy  ■ 

anno  .  .  .  R.  Henrici  vm.  j  g  ^  ’ 

t  *  a  the  Arraignment  &  Execution  of  Thomas  Fynes 
Loid  Dacres  of  the  South  ;  anno  .  .  .  R  Henrici 

VIII. 

9.  Of  the  Arraignment  &  Executions  of  Henry  Com. 
ney  Marques  of  Exeter,  Henry  Pole  Lord  Montague, 

&  Edward  Neyill  ;  anno  .  .  .  R.  Henrici  vm  ,A  ’ 
to.  The  Trial  &  Execution  of  Edward  Seymour 
Duke  of  Somerfet,  t  Dec',  anno  6  R.  Edward!  y,  2a 

1  ','w  Tnt  Dudle>’  Uukc  Northumber¬ 
land,  William  Parre  Marquis  of  Northampton,  and  of 


Num.  2194 — 2196. 

drifts  EA2rl  “f  Warxvick ;  with  the  Execution  of  the 
hrit,  18  Augult  anno  1  R.  Maritc.  2‘ 

Dot'  Vo  ffC„,SaK“cl  &  Exccuti™  of  Henry  Gray 
Duke  of  Suflolk,  23  Febr.  A.  D.  1 55 • .  ,,  j 

h-\KA  LetterAlt™  t0  llM  Duke,  by  the  Lad iy  W 

cutioa!°r  K  Da“Shter’  a‘ittle  timebcfore  her  Exe- 

14.  Of  the  Arraignment  &  Execution  of  Charles  Lord 
Stourton,  &c.  anno  .  .  .  R.  Marks.  24  b 

of  Norfolke ■  la  °f Thom“ Ho"ml  ^ 

A  D  T™1  °f  PhiHl1  Ho"'ard  Earl  of  Arundei; 

Score;  A.  D.Vf “I  &  S“tenCe  °f  Mar*  Soci'of 

1  S.  Realons  to  moue  the  Queenes  Confclence  to  Ita- 
ceede  with  Seuenty  in  the  cafe  of  the  Oueene  of  Scots. 

19.  A  Dtfconrfe  touching  the  pretended  Matche  be- 
tweene  the  Duke  ol  Norfolke,  and  the  Queene  of  Scots. 

20.  A  Letter  written  by  Mr.  Secretarie  WalfingSm 

to  the  Secretarie  of  State  in  Scotland  ;  after  the  Eiecu- 
tion  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  A.  D.  1386.  46. 

2  i .  1  he  1  rial  of  Robert  Devereux  Earl  of  Effex,  & 
of  Henry  Wnothefley  Earl  of  Southampton;  with  the 
Execution  of  the  former,the  2  5  of  Febr.  A.  D.  1 60?.  5o. 

22.  Letter  of  K.  James  1.  to  the  Lords  of  the  Coun¬ 

cil,  for  the .  Delivery  of  the  laid  Earl  of  Southampton 
out  of  inion.  Given  at  Haly-Rood-Houfe,  1  April 
i6j3-  63.  b/ 

23.  Of  the  Arraignment  of  Henry  Broke  Lord  Cob- 

ham  :  A.  D.  160  .  .  .  '  /- 

24.  Of  the  Arraignment  of  Thomas  Lord  Gray 5 of 

Wilton ;  24  September,  A.  D.  160  .  .  66, 

25.  The  Trial  Sc  Condemnation  of  Sir  Robert  Carre 
Earle  of  Somerlett,  &  Frances  Howard  his  Wife  2-5 
May  16..  .  .  C  1  his  hath  cir  Francis  Bacons  Speech 
at  length.) 

~  ll'  J hc  Trial  ?f  Mervin  Lord  Audley,  Earle  °of 
Caltre-Haven  in  Ireland  ;  25th  of  April,  1631.  -g 

27.  A  Letter  to  his  Sifters,  a  little  before  his  Death 

28.  A  Letter  to  his  Son  the  Lord  Audley.  89  8b.' 

29.  His  Confeffion  of  Faith,  fent  to  his  Son  in* that 

Letter.  ^id 

30.  His  Speech  Sc  Behavior  at  his  Execution ;  1*4 

May,  1631.  ’gi* 

21  95- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  folio ;  quo  continentur, 

1.  Breve  R.  Edwardi  11.  fingulis  Vice-comitibus.  per 
totam  Angham,  deftinatum  ;  volente  eo  certiorari  que  Sc 
quot  Iiundreda  fint  in  Ballivis  illorum  ;  et  quorum  fint  • 
etque  &  quot  Civitates,  Burgi,  &  Ville  funt  inquolibet 
Hundredorum  illorum  ;  et  qui  funt  Domini  eorundem. 
i  elte,  &c.  5  die  Marcij,  anno  Regni  fui,  nono.  1 

2.  Certificate  Vice-comitis  Norft'.  fuper  pnemiffis. 

3.  Certificatio  Vice-comitis  Sufi'.  20 

4.  Certificatio  de  Comitatu  Cantabr.  28. 

5.  Certificatio  de  Comitatu  Huntingdon.  3i  -  h- 

6.  Certificatio  de  Comitatu  Midct. 

7.  Certificatio  de  Comitatu  Kane.  33. 

2196. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio ;  firft  ftamped  or  printed 
upon  a  wooden  Form,  in  one  Side  of  the  Leaf  only. 
Here  is  given  (to  fave  time  Sc  labor)  four  Efco¬ 
cheons,  with  Helmets  Sc  Mantles,  and  fpaces  for  Titles, 
in  a  Page  ;  to  be  filled-up  or  fupplied  by  the  Buyer  ;  in 
the  fame  manner  with  that  book  on  this  Shelf,  marked 
with  No.  9. 

Herein  are  contained, 

6 


1.  The 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


555 


Num.  2196 — 2198. 

1.  The  Armes  (with  many  Crefts)  of  the  Nobility 

&  Gentry  of  the  County  of  Suffex,  regiftred  at  the 
Vifitation  thereof,  A.  D.  1633.  Sc  1634.  by  John  Phili- 
pot  Somerfet,  &  George  Owen  Heralds ;  Marlhalls  & 
Deputies  to  Sir  John  Borough  Garter,  Sc  Sir  Richard 
S>  George  Clarencieux  ;  who  vifited  jointly.  I. 

2.  The  Armes,  (with  many  Crefts)  of  the  Nobility  8c 
Gentry  of  the  County  of  Surrey,  regiftred  at  the  Vifita- 
tion  thereof,  A.  D.  1623.  by  Samuel  Thompfon  Wind- 
for  Herald,  &  Auguftin  Vincent  Rouge  Croix ;  Mar- 
fhalls  &  Deputies  to  William  Cambden  Clarencieux.  37. 

2197- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  folio  ;  quo  continentur,  Apographa 
qusedam  Recordorum  quorundamin  ArceLondonienfi 
fervatorum  :  viz. 

1.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconite,  14  Edw.  in.  No.  15. 

1.  &  7.  11.  17. 

2.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconiae,  15  Edw.  111.  3.  b.  &  19.  b. 

3.  Ex  Rotulo  Franciae,  14  Edw.  in.  5.  8c  9. 

4.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconiae,  16  Edw.  111.  14. 

5.  Ex  Rotulo  Franciae,  17  Edw.  hi.  15.  &  21. 

6.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconiae,  17  Edw.  in.  21.  b. 

7.  Ex  Rotulo  Franicae,  18  Edw.  in.  22. 

8.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconiae,  18  Edw.  in.  22.  b. 

9.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconiae,  19  Edw.  in.  24. 

10.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  19  Edw.  hi.  25. 

11.  Ex  Rotulo  Franciae,  20  Edw.  in.  2 6. 

12.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconiae,  21  Edw.  in.  27. 

13.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  21  Edw.  in.  28. 

14.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  22  Edw.  in.  30.  b. 

15.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconis,  24  Edw.  in.  31. 

16.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconis,  25  Edw.  hi.  32.  b. 

17.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  2  5  Edw.  in.  33. 

18.  F.x  Rotulo  Vafconis,  26  Edw.  in.  34. 

19.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  26  Edw.  hi.  35. 

20.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconis,  27  Edw.  in.  36.  b. 

21.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  a 7  Edw.  in.  ibid. 

22.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconis,  28  Edw.  in.  38. 

23.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  28  Edw.  in.  38.  b. 

24.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  29  Edw.  in.  40.  b. 

25.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  30  Edw.  in.  42.  b. 

26.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis  de  anno  i  Richardi  n.  45. 

27.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  2  Rich.  n.  46. 

28.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  3  Rich.  n.  47.  b. 

29.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  4  Rich.  n.  50.  b. 

30.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  5  Rich.  n.  52.  b. 

31.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  6  Rich.  n.  55. 

32.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  19  Rich.  n.  57. 

33.  Ex  Rotulo  Francis,  20  Rich.  n.  ibid. 

34.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconis,  21  Rich.  n.  57.  b. 

35.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconis,  22  Rich.  n.  58. 

36.  Ex  Rotulo  Vafconis,  22  Rich.  11.  ibid. 

2198. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  many  Tra&s 
written  &  tricked  by  feveral  Perfons  8c  now  bound 
up  together :  being, 

1 .  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  haftily  tricked  from 

the  Vifitation  of  the  County  of  Cambridge,  taken  An. 
Dom.  1619.  1. 

2.  Alphabet  in  Blafon  of  the  Armes  of  Derby  Ihire- 

Gentry.  g. 

3.  Armes  in  Trick,  of  the  Noble  &  Worlhipful  Fami¬ 

lies  refiding  within  the  County  of  Eflex ;  taken  from 
Mr.  Henry  Lilly’s  Copy  of  the  Vifitation  of  that  County 
made  by  John  Raven  Richmond,  Marfhall  8c  Deputy 
to  William  Camden  Clarencieux,  A.  D.  1614.  12. 

4.  Some  few  Defcents  taken  from  the  Vifitation  of 

Eflex,  made  A;  D.  1634.  48. 

5.  Some  Armes  haftily  tricked  from  an  old  Vifitation 

of  Eflex.  30. 

This  Trad  hath  Additions  made  to  it,  from  the 
Vifitation  of  A.  D.  1634. 


Num.  2198,  2199. 

6.  Defcents  &  Armes  copied  from  the  Vifitation-book 

of  A.  D.  1634.  36. 

7.  Armes  of  Hertford-lhire  Gentry;  haflily  tricked 
from  the  Vifitation-books  of  A.  D.  1579.  &  l634-  76. 

8.  Part  of  the  Vifitation-book  of  Kent ;  made  A.  D. 

1589.  as  I  fuppofe  :  with  Additions  from  that  of  A.  D. 
1619.  _  86. 

9.  Armes  of  Leicefter-lhire  Families  ;  perhaps  tricked 
from  the  Vifitation  book  of  A.  D.  1563,8c  1564.  132. 

10.  Armes  of  the  Gentlemen  of  Leicefter-fhire,  A.  D. 

,42. 

11.  Armes  of  the  Gentlemen  within  the  County  of 
Warwycke,  A.  D.  1564. 

12.  Armes  of  Lincoln-fhire  Gentry;  taken  from  the 

Vifitation  of  A.  D.  1563.  ,5^. 

13.  Part  of  an  Alphabetical  Table  made  to  fome  C0I- 

Iedion  of  Armes.  ,  ^  2  ^ 

14.  Armes  of  the  feveral  Companies  within  the  City  of 

London.  181.  b. 

15.  Pedegrees  of  Barkham,  &  Johnfon  ;  the  former 
of  which  feems  to  be  of  the  hand  8c  tricking  of  ...  . 
Johnfon  late  Citizen  Sc  Painter-Stainer  of  London.  1 86. 

16.  Notes  of  Moneys  paid  or  received  by  divers  late 

Armes-Painters  of  London,  when  they  wrought  in  Co* 
partnerfliip.  l8g. 

17.  The  later  part  of  an  Alphabetical  Table  of  Fatni- 
lies  ;  written  by  Thomas  Knight  Chefter-Herald.  190. 

18.  Armes  8c  Epitaphs  taken  by  the  fame  Thom. 

Knight  in  divers  Churches  of  London.  ,  g  t . 

1 9.  Armes  of  many  Citizens  of  London,  taken  from 

the  Book  of  its  Vifitation  A.  D.  1633,  8c  1634.  195. 

20.  Armes  of  many  Norfolk  Families,  taken  (as  I 
fuppofe)  from  the  Vifitation  of  A.  D.  1612,  &  1613. 

205. 

21.  Armes  extraded  from  the  Vifitation-book  of  the 

County  of  Notingham,  made  A.  D-  1614.  213. 

22.  Armes  in  Blafon  of  many  Families  refident  in 

Notinghamdhire,  as  I  fuppofe.  219. 

23.  Armes  of  Notingham-lhire  Gentry,  regiftered  at 

the  Vifitation  of  this  County,  A.  D.  1663.  by  William 
Dugdale  Norroy.  '  220t 

24.  Some  Armes  of  Somerfet- Ihi re  Families.  222. 

25.  Collections  from  the  Vifitation-book  ofStaft'ord- 
fliire,  made  A.  D.  1583.  by  Robert  Glover  Somerfet, 
Marlhal  8c  Deputy  to  William  Flower  Norroy.  223/ 

26.  Colledions  from  the  Vifitation-book  ofStafi'ord- 
fhire,  made  A.  D.  1614.  by  Richard  Sr.  George  Norroy. 

233. 

2  7;  Armes  of  the  Gentry  in  the  County  of  Surrey, 
collected  from  Mr.  John  Withies  Copie  of  the  Vifitation- 
Book  of  this  County,  made  A.  D.  1623.  237. 

28.  Armes  of  Suflex-Gentiy,  taken  from  the  Vifita¬ 
tion-book  of  A.  I).  1634.  248. 

29.  Armes  of  the  Gentry  of  Weftmerland,  haftily 

tricked.  257/ 

30.  Anncs  of  Yorkfliire-Gentry ;  haftily  tricked. 

258. 

2199- 

A  thin  Book  in  folio,  at  the  beginning  whereof,  I  read 
this  following  Title.  “  The  maner  and  method ’to  true 
Mortification  :  by  the  godly  Father  Henry  Harp  ; 
as  l1 .  William  Peryn  Bachelour  in  Divinity  fayeth 
in  his  Spiritual l  Exercifes  8c  Ghoftly  Meditations/’ 

I  am  aftraid  that  bather  Peryn  is  fomewhat  out  in 
his  conjedure :  1.  Becaufe  Mr.  Wharton  (in  Append, 
ad  Cavan  Hill.  Litt.  pag.  1 49.)  fhews  that  Henry  Harph 
the  Francifcan  (bom  at  Hc-rp  or  Erp  in  Brabant)  died 
A.  D.  1478.  without  mentioning  this  Treadle  among  his 
other  Works.  2.  The  Preface  alludes  to  Queen  Elizabeth 
more  than  once,  efpecially  in  pag.  2,  where  are  thefe 
Words, — “  I  doubt  nothing  her  departure;  but  I  doubt 
that  God  will  not  lett  England  have  her  fo  long  as  fhe  is 
worthey  to  raigne.  And  yett  this  farr  I  dare  lay,  that 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


SS6 


Num.  2199 — 2202. 

(he  hath  no  farlher  Charter  of  her  Life  then  had  her 
noble  Father,  her  noble  Brother,  her  noble  Sifter.”— — 

3.  This  Author  was  no  Roman  Catholic ;  for  he  im- 
pugnes  the  Do&rines  of  that  Church  in  feveral  places  of 
his  Work ;  one  of  which  I  find  at  42.  a.  toward  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  which  page,  &  in  the  next,  I  obferve  thefe 
Words, — “  Infomoche,  that  fom  thinck  to  be  browghte 
to  the  perfyghte  medytacyon  &  memoryalle  of  Chryft  by 
having  hym  pi&oured,  graven,  or  paynted  with  the  moft 
bewtyfulle  phifnomye  that  kan  be  devyfed.  Sum  thincke 
ytt  avauncethe  moche  ther  Contemplacyone  to  have 
Chryft  pictured  or  paynted  in  the  moft  pituos  fafchyon 
that  kan  be.  Som  agayne  thincke  ytt  reyfithe  vp  ther 
mynds  more  depely  in  knowlage  of  God,  to  have  the 
Trinitie  pictured  or  paynted  with  3  faces  in  oon.  Theis 
men  that  fett  ther  affetts  &  pleafur  vpon  theis  forfayde 
things  fpende  moche  labur  in  waft :  for  they  might  fuer- 
lye  fee  Chryft  in  the  a£ls  of  his  lyffe,  in  hes  gloryous 
words,  in  hes  blyffed  converfation,  by  reding,  &  confy- 
dering  the  holie  Gofpells,”  &c. 

2200. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  thin  folio  ;  wherein  I  find, 

1.  A  Colle&ion  of  fabulous  or  fanciful  Armes, 

afcribed  to  the  Nine  Worthies  ;  the  Kings  of  Cullen  ;  and 
many  Kings  &  Princes  (fome  of  whom  never  exifted)  putt 
down  in  a  fort  of  Alphabet  in  blafon.  x. 

2.  Armes  in  blafon  of  the  Archiepifcopal  & Epifcopal 

Sees  of  England  &  Wales.  4.  b. 

3.  Fragment  of  a  large  Alphabet  in  blafon  of  the  Armes 

of  Englilh  Families.  5. 

T'his  ends  in  the  middle  of  the  letter  C. 

2201  . 

Codex  chartaceus  infol.  continetur, 

Regiftrum  Cartarum,  five  Evidenciarum,  de  Terris 
F.dmundi  Bohun  de  Treiyngfelde  in  Com.Suffblcias;  qui 
quidem  Edmundus  in  vivis  fuit,  anno  22  R.  Edwardi  iv. 

2202. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  divers  Mifcellaneous  Tracts 

&  Fragments,  written  by  different  hands,  now  bound- 

up  together.  They  are, 

1.  The  Cafe  of  Anthony  Afhley  C.owper  Earl  of 

Sliaftelbury,  argued  on  both  lides ;  with  his  Lordfhips 
own  Speech,  in  Banco  Regis,  'Term.  Trin,  anno  29  Caroli 
11.  upon  the  Illegality  of  the  Return  of  a  Warant  from  the 
Houfe  of  Peers  ;  by  virtue  of  which,  he  was  imprifoned 
in  the  Tower  of  London :  with  the  Opinion  of  the 
Court  thereupon  ;  whereby  he  was  re-manded  to  his 
Prifon.  1 . 

2.  Expreflions  collected  from  Greek  &  Roman  Au¬ 

thors,  &c.  chiefly  relating  to  Great  Britain  &  its  Inha¬ 
bitants.  T  hey  feem  to  be  of  the  hand-writing  of  the 
learned  Mr.  William  Camden,  in  order  to  be  inferted  into 
his  Britannia.  1 1 . 

3.  An  imperfeft  Copie  of  Cookes  Baronage  ;  with  the 

Armes  only  blafon’d  in  the  margin.  13. 

4.  Certayne  breiffe  Inftrudlion?  of  an  Attorney  in 

the  Common  Place,  or  Court  of  Common  Pleys  :  writ¬ 
ten  in  the  time  of  Qu.  Elizabeth  ;  &c  torn  in  the  begin- 
ning.  .  49- 

5.  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  F rauncis  Knowlles  to  his 

General,  who  (perhaps)  was  Sir  Francis  Drake  then  on  a 
Voiage  to  the  Indies.  The  writer,  being  in  cuftody,  de¬ 
fires  a  trial :  &  dates  Ills  Letter  aboard  the  Lettice  Le- 
cefter,  the  6  of  January.  54. 

6.  Part  of  a  Journal  kept  by  a  Servant  to  Captain 

Knowles  on  beard  the  Lettice  Leicefter.  3 3. 

’  Tis  great  pity  that  this  Journal  Ihould  he  fo  man¬ 
gled  as  it  is  ;  in  it  was  a  particular  detail  of  the  faid  Cap¬ 
tains  2c  others  Sufferings,  becaufe  they  declined  to  take 
certain  Oaths  which  the  General  would  impofe  upon  them 
and  all  others  under  his  command.  Here  was  likewife 


Num.  2202— -2206. 

interwoVen  Relations  of  the  Actions  at  the  Canary 
Illands,  St.  Jago,  St.  Domingo,  Carthagena,  &c.  during 
this  Voyage. 

7.  Fragment  of  a  Theological  Poem,  in  old  Englilh. 

•  e  1  7 *• 

8.  Copie  of  the  Will  of  Jamys  Scrobye  of  London 
Gentleman  ;  dated,  27  Sept.  ann.  24  R.  Eliz.  73. 

9.  Part  of  a  Chymical  Tradt ;  which  might  have  been 

of  good  ufe,  if  complete.  75.  to  the  end. 

2203. 

A  thin  Fleraldical  Book  in  folio ;  wherein  are  not  un- 
handfomely  tricked, 

1.  The  Armes  &  Seals,  of  Staffordlhire  Families, 
See.  from  the  Vifitation-book  of  that  County  made  A.D- 

1583- 

2.  An  Alphabetical  Table  at  the  end. 

2204. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  divers  hands,  &  containing 
the  feveral  Tradts  following  ;  vizt. 

1.  “  The  Tree  of  Common-Wealth;  inadeby  Edmund 
Dudlriy  Efquire,  late  Councellor  to  K. Henry  thefeventh  > 
the  fame  Edmond,  at  the  compiling  hereof,  being  pri- 
foner  in  the  Tower,  in  the  firft  yeare  of  K.  Henry  the 

Eighth.  1. 

2.  A  difeourfe  of  Trade,  compiled  for  the  Kings  moil 

excellent  Majeftie  ;  &  dated  30  Septemb.  1622.  89. 

3.  An  excellent  Treatife  of  a  State-Merchant,  or  mcr- 
chandifing  State;  confifting  of  Commerce,  Trade,  &Traf- 
fique ;  the  fundry  Defects  &  Abufes  therein,  &  abfolute 
Remedies  for  the  fame.  Prefented  to  the  Kings  moil 
excellent  Majeftie  that  now  is  (perhaps  K.  Charles  1.) 
(The  Author  calls  himfelf  William  Sanderfon  Gem.} 

1 10. 

4.  A  Treatife  of  Piracie  ;  difeoveringe  in  what  Ports, 

Havens,  &  Creeks,  all  alonge  the  Turkifhe  &  Spanilhe 
Coafts,  Pirates  maie  fell  their  Goods  fafelie  ;  haue  Vtc- 
tualls,  good  Refrefhinge  &  Wateringe :  and,  in  what, 
not.  With  the  manner  of  their  faylinge,  &  vfuall  Places 
of  aboad  at  all  Seafons  of  the  Yeare ;  and  advife 
how  to  prevent  &  furprife  them.  Written  by  Sir  He- 
nerie  Mainwaringe  Kt.  &  by  him  prefented  vnto  King 
James.  1 48. 

5.  A  Difeourfe  concerning  the  Money  &  Trade 
of  England  ;  by  Philo-patris  ;  dated  A.  D.  1649.  *67. 

2205. 

A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  wherein  are  contained 
what  the  Students  of  Heraldry  call  Church-notes ;  here 
being  an  account  of 

1.  The  Armes,  Monuments,  &  Infcriptions  found  in 

the  Cathedral  Church  of  Worcefter  &  its  Cloyfters  ; 
faid  to  be  taken  from  a  more  particular  Dcfcriptiou 
of  it.  1. 

2.  Defcription  of  the  Armes  &  Monuments  found  in 

the  Church  of  Great  Malverne  in  Worcefterlhire.  19. 

3.  Littell  Malvernes  Churches  Armes  &  Monu- 

mentes.  ao, 

I  have  heard  my  noble  Lord  the  late  Earl  of  Oxford 
fay  that  his  Anceftors  were  Benefattors  to  one  of  thefe 
Malverne-Priories  (I  think,  to  the  leffer  Malverne)  &  had 
an  Anniverfary  obferved  there. 

4.  Armes  &  Monuments  found  in  the  Church  of  All 

Sayntes  in  Evelham.  aj. 

3.  Others  obferved  in  St.  Lawrences  Churche  in  Eve- 
Ihame.  22. 

2206. 

A  book  in  folio,  containing  Arguments  about  the  Char¬ 
ter  of  the  City  of  London  ;  made  A.  D.  1683.  viz. 

1 .  The  Argument  of  Mr.  Solicitor  General,  in  Banco 
Regis,  in  Terinino  Hill.  A.  D.  1683.  upon  the  quo  Wa- 
ranto  brought  by  the  King  againll  the  City  of  London,  t. 

2.  Mr. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


557 


Num.  2206,  2207. 

2.  Mr.  Recorder  of  London’s  Argument  in  behalf 

of  the  City.  51- 

3.  Mr.  Attorney  General’s  Argument  for  the  King, 

pleaded,  30  April,  A.  D.  1683.  213. 

4.  Mr.  Pollexfens  Argument  in  the  Cities  Defence, 

1  May  1683.  487* 

2207. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  certain  Trads  now  bound 
together,  viz. 

A  Colle£tion  of  feueral  Speeches  &  Treatifes  of 
the  late  Lord  Treafurer  Cecill ;  and  of  feverall  Ob-  1 
feruations  of  the  Lords  of  the  Councell,  given  to  K. 
James  concerning  his  Eftate  k  Reuenue  :  in  the  yeares 
1608.  1609.  &  16.0. 

Thefe  are, 

x .  A  Letter  written  by  fome  of  the  Lords  of  the  Coun¬ 
cell  to  the  King,  A  ll  1608.  touching  meanes  to  advance 
the  Kings  revenues  by  vnvfuall  meanes;foas  theKing  would 
take  the  Act  vppon  himfelfe,  &  he  their  protedion.  2. 

This  looking  fomewhat  extraordinary,  1  foon  run 
this  Letter  over,  &  perceive  that  thefe  noble  Lords  acting 
by  fpeciall  Commidion  from  his  Majefty  (who  by  his 
continual  &  exceflive  Bounties  to  every  begging  Cour¬ 
tier,  had  run  himfelf  into  great  Debts  k  Want  j  had  looked 
into  every  Branch  of  his  Revenue  that  yet  remained ;  k 
deliberated  upon  means  of  improving  the  fame,  fo  that 
his  Dignity  &  Family  might  be  kept  8c  maintained  in  their 
due  fplendor.  Yet,  in  the  mean  time,  they  infinuate 
their  Advife,  that  he  would  hold  his  too  bounteous  hand 
for  the  prefent. 

2.  A  Collodion  of  fuch  things  as  Robert  Cecil  late 
Earle  of  Salifbury  thought  fit  to  offer  to  His  Majefly, 
vpon  the  necefiity  of  calling  a  Parliament,  A.  D.  1609. 

.12. 

3.  HisLordfhips  fir  ft  Speech  deliuered  to  the  Lower 

Houfe  of  Parliament.  1  • 

This  was  at  Whitehall,  the  King  and  Peers  being 
prefent;  and  in  many  Words  fetteth-I'orth  the  Kings 
wants,  and  the  Caufes  of  them,  with  the  necefiity  of 
frefh  Supplies. 

4.  A  Letter  from  G.  D.  to  his  Friend  A.  W.  at  Mid- 

dleburgh,  aduertifmg  him  of  the  Occurrences  in  the 
Parliament  ;  and  withall,  fending  him  a  Coppie  of  the 
late  Lord  Treafurer  Cecil’s  Speech.  46.  b. 

5.  Curias  Cancellarice  Prserogativa  et  fumma  Autho- 

ritas.  _  S2’ 

6.  The  Fines  of  all  manner  of  Writts  &  Patents.  85. 

7.  Ofthefeveral  Sorts  of  Courts.  87.  b. 

8.  An  Argument  exhibited  by  the  Lord  Keeper  in 

Parliament  proveing  that  Noble  mens  perfons  be  attach- 
eable  for  Contempts  committed  by  them  in  the  Queenes 
Majefties  Court  of  Chancerye,  in  difobeyinge  the  De¬ 
crees  made  there,  in  matters  examineable  in  the  fame 
Courte.  _  94- 

9.  Of  the  High  Courts  of  Juftice  in  England  ;  &  efpe- 

cially  of  the  Chancerye-Courte,  8c  of  the  Lord  Chan- 
cellour  that  judgeth  there.  95. 

10.  Ordinances  made  by  the  Lord  Keeper  Coventry, 

with  the  aidinge  k  afliftance  of  Sir  Julius  Caffar  Mafter 
of  the  Rolls,  anno  11  Caroli  1.  for  the  Redreffe  of  fun- 
dry  Errours,  Defaults,  8c  Abufes  in  the  High  Court  of 
Chancerye.  1 *4- 

1 1 .  The  Abufes  (and  Remedyes)  of  the  High  Court 

of  Chancery  ;  prefented  vnto  the  Lord  Keeper,  by 
George  Norbury.  1 1 9- 

12.  The  Cauie  beLweene  the  Mafter  of  the  Rolls,  8c 

the  Six  Clerks.  157- 

It  appears,  that  the  3  of  December  1637.  the 
Mafter  of  the  Rolls  (.hen  Sir  Dudley  Digges)  did,  by 
Petition,  complain  to  the  King  of  great  Incroachments 
8c  Ofurpations  made  by  the  Six  Clerkes,  upon  the 
Rights  8c  Profits  of  h’is  &  other  1'ubordinatc  Officers 
places;  befides  other  Things  pradii'ed  by  them  to  the 
Cat.  EIarl.  Vol.  II. 


Num. 2207,  2208. 

Subjects  general  Grievance  :  for  which  they  were  found 
faultie  by  the  C.ommiffioners,  8c  complained  or  in  Starre- 
Chamber.  This  Petition  being  referred  to  the  Judges, 
the  feveral  Complaints  of  the  Mafter  of  the  Rolls,  & 
feveral  other  Officers  in  Chancery  were  pleaded  by  Coun¬ 
cil,  &  largely  anfwered  by  the  faid  Six  Clerks. 

13.  Petition  of  the  Under-Cleiks  of  the  Six  Clerkes 
Office  in  Chancery,  to  the  Lord  Keeper  Coventrie, 
againft  the  faid  Six  Clerks,  their  Matters.  1 97* 

2208. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  divers  mifcclIaneousTrads, 
now  bound-up  together.  They  are, 

1.  Count  Arundells  Apologie  :  as  beinge  reftrayned 

for  acceptinge  the  Honor  of  Comes  Imperij,  without 
the  Queens  Leave,  in  reward  of  his  noble  Service  done, 
in  ayde  of  the  Emperor  againft  the  Turke.  Wherein 
arc  expreffed  the  cheife  Priviledges  helonginge  vnto  the 
fame  Honor  ;  and  his  Reafons  for  acceptinge  the 
fame.  1  * 

2.  A  Booke  of  Inftruclions  for  Mr.  Henry  Anderfoil 
Alderman  of  London,  Sheriue  of  the  Poultry-Compter, 
in  43  &  44th  yeares  of  Qu.  Elizabeth,  A.  D.  160 r .  9. 

3.  A  Breifeof  what  was  delivered  by  Don  Francdco 

de  Caftro  Extraordinary  EmbafFador  of  the  Catholicke 
Kinge  ;  in  the  firft  Audience  he  had  from  the  Doge  of 
Venice.  _  l7 • 

4.  The  Anfweare  of  the  Duke  of  Venice,  to  the  Em- 

baffage  of  D.  Francd'  odi  Ce.ftro.  18. 

5.  A  Letter  written  by  Cardinal  Peron  1  April  1697. 

to  the  Kinge  of  Fr-.nc-;  wr.erein  he  doth  recount  all 
the  Occurrences  of  Cardinal  Gioiofa,  conccrninge  the 
Agreement:  betweene  Pope  Paul  us  v.  8c  the  State  of 
Venis.  2  .  b. 

(1  A  Compavifon  of  the  Anfwearcs  made  by  the 
Kinpes  of  France  8c  Snaine  to  the  Pope,  upen  the  Adver- 
tillment  ofhis  excommunicating  the  Venetians.  33. 

7.  A  Dilcourfe  vppon  the  forcible  Reafons  which 

might  incite  the  Catholicke  Kinge  rather  to  the  Enterpiife 
ofEnglande,  then  that  of  Flanders.  37. 

'ihefe  5  laft  Trads  were  tranflated  out  of  Italian  by 
John  ?  Bowyer  Efq. 

8.  TheFourme  8c  manner  of  Keeping  the  Parliament 

in  Englond.  (Is  this  Hookers  ?)  58. 

Then  fallow,  the  Arguments  upon  the  Arguments 
of  Term.  Mich.  3  Caroli,  at  the  Kings  Bench-Barre  con¬ 
cerning  the  Lands . 8c  Liberties  of  the  Subjed. 

64.  vizt. 

9.  Sir  Dudley  Digges  his  Intrcdudion.  65.  . 

io-  Mr.  Selden  his  Arguments  ;  which,  by  Com¬ 
mand  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  was  made  fat  their  firft 
Conference  with  the  Lords)  touching  the  Libertie  of  the 
Perfon  of  every  Free-man  :  out  of  Prefidents  of  Records, 
k  Refolutions  of  Judges  in  former  tymes.  68. 

ix.  Mr.  Littletons  Speech.  94, 

12.  The  Objcdions  of  the  Kings  Counfell  (i.  e.  Ro¬ 

bert  Heath,  then  Attorney  General,  See.)  with  the  An¬ 
fweare  thereunto,  at  the  two  Conferences,  touching  the 
fame  matter.  109. 

13.  Sir  Edward  Cooke  his  Speech;  reported  by  the 

Biftiop  of  Lincolne,  9  Aprilis.  j  1 6.  b. 

14.  The  Subftance  of  Mr.  Attorney  Generalls  Ob¬ 
jcdions,  made  before  a  Committee  of  both  Houfes,  at 
the  Argument  that  was  made  by  the  Houfe  of  Commons, 
at  the  firft  Conference  with  the  Lords  ;  out  of  the  Pre¬ 
fidents  of  Records,  8c  Refolutions  of  Judges  in  former 
tymes  ;  touching  the  Libertie  of  the  Petl'on  of  every 
Freeman  ;  and  the  Anfweares  &  Replies  then  prefently 
made  by  the  Houfe  of  Commons  to  thole  Objections. 

128.  b. 

15.  The  Proteftation  of  the  Commons  affcmbled  in 

Parliament,  anno  1  Jacobi  1.  die  Mercury  zojunij  1604. 
in  an  humble  Addrefs  to  his  Majefty  touching  their 
Rights  8c  Privileges.  1 56. 

7  C  This 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


S5§ 


Num.  3208 — 2210. 


This  Copie  feems  more  to  be  regarded  than  fome 
others  that  I  have  been  ;  rot  only  for  its  correftnefs ; 
but  for  its  large  Initial  Letter,  a  Text  M.  which  (I  fup’ 
pofe)  was  cutt  in  Wood  &  damped  upon  the  paper 
purpofely  toddhngmlh  fuch  Copies  as  might  be  deemed 
authentic,  from  others  tranfcribed  by  ignorants  or 
enemies. 

16.  An  Englilh  Treatife  De  Sepuhura.  ,67 

17.  InfWions  to  be  kept  by  the  Land-Captavne's, 

as  by  the  Cap, aynes  that  have  Charge  of  Shipping  :  by 
Don  Martin  de  Padilla,  Captayn  General  of  the  Gallyes 
of  Spaigne,  &  of  the  Navy  Royal),  and  of  the  Catho. 
hque  Kmgs  Armie,  in  this  Expedition,  dated,  in  the 
Groyn,  i  Odtober  1597.  jg 

18.  A  Recital  of  the  Catlefliall  Apparitions  of  this 
prefent  1  ngon,  now  in  being:  vizt.  A.  1).  1610.  tor. 

Author  feems  to  be  a  German  Calviniii, 
defer, bes  Allronotntcady,  the  Appearance  of  the  nevj 
Star  A.  D.  1604  together  with  the  feveral  Comets 

s  sh  a-Keare-  a?‘CT".ard'  '°  that  great  one  in  A.D. 
161S.  1  he  Signification  of  all  which  he  largely  dc 

fenbes  as  an  Aftrologer  t  and  venting  his  Notions  & 
\rffies  as  Certainties  and  Prophecies  from  Cod  :  he 
liands  guilty  of  many  faifities ;  and  thefe  his  idle 

heed”dS  T  TV  °f  n°  m0re  re8ard  lhan  10  he 
heeded  as  Land-marks,  &  cauttcns  to  daerre  others  from 

attempting  to  lett  thcmfelves  up  as  privy  to  the  fecret 

Councils  of  the  ir.oft  High.  }  ec 

It  ’nu  Rt*ation  of  !ke  earriage  of  the  Marryages  that 
fitould  have  been  made,  between  the  Prince  of  England 
fv  Anna  the  Infama  Major  of  Spavne  ;  and  alfoe  after 
wtth  the  younger  Infanta  ;  by  Sir  Charles  Cornewallis! 

The  Prince  of  England  here  mentioned,  was  Prime 
Henry  ;  and  the  lime  when  thefe  matters  were  on  foot 
was  111,  and  about,  the  Year  ;6i  i. 

20.  A  Dlfcourfe  of  Mr.  John  Selden,  to  the  I  ord 
keeper  Sr.  Hands  Bacon,  of  the  aunciem  mention,  Co„ 
jundtion  01  Divifionof  the  two  greaie  Offices  of  Cbaun 
cellour,  St  keeper  of  the  Grcate  Seale  of  England  writ 
ten  m  anno  1617.  b  >  «nt- 

'  228. 

2209. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  folio,  quo  ccntinentur,  feflinante 
calarr.o  fenptas 

.  Notulai  deqmbufdamamiquis  Nontin, ’bus &Familiis 

feitatmi  colleftm  ex  Recordis  Scaccarij  Dili  Regis  li 
parte  Rememoratons  Regis  remanen.ibus  ;  incipLS 
cum  Hennco  tertto,  et  fie  ordinatim  procedendo,  pe? 
totum  fere  Regnum  R.  Edwardi  1.  1 

2  210. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confining  0f  feveral  Ttafts,  moltlv 
“t’b™1 ,1>!' dlflCrCW  hmdS-  &  Abound 

...  '■  ,T,he  Appointment  of  Attendants  &  Horfes  for  the 
king  (Henry  Vlti.j  &  the  Quec-ne  (Katherine  of  Spain) 
to  Canterbury,  &  fo  to  Callais  &  Guifnes ;  to  the  meet 
mg  of  the  French  King.  ’  mect 

Hen^vtf’ssh'?  f°r  a“  °fficerS  of  the  Houfehold  ofK. 
nenry  vn.  as  it  feemes. 

3.  A  Calendar  of  the  Rowle  of  the  Carons  •  as^ir 
Schle,"  ^  L“d  S,afi°rd-  b>’  Mr-  Swallow’of  the 

This  is  of  the  hand  of  Thomas  Knight  Cbel&r 
Herald,  &  fames  to  relate  to  their  Lands?  wMchS 
reverted  to  the  Crown.  'wi.cn  nad 

4.  Lift  of  the  feveral  Honors  in  England  •  as  th<=v 

appears  m  the  Booke'of  Offices,  down  to  ahn  u  t?’ 
copied  by  the  fame  Thomas  Knight  4  *“*■ 

tb  5h’1.h'N=“cs  ofEarronyes,  &  of  their  Owners,  (rem 
W^cKe  ^  *“•  to  tkac  ok  K-  Richard  it 

This  is  alfo  written  by  the  fame  Thomas  Knightf' 


Num.  22X0,  22ir. 

fi^Imperfea  Catalogue  of  ourEnglllh  Earles,  and  of 
the  Times  of  their  Creation  :  fett  down  (perhaps,  from 
Cookes  Baronage)  according  to  their  Titles,  fuccef. 

team  RCFfa0VY!;e  Armfs  of  thc  Englilh  Nobilhy, 
temp.  R. Eliz.  divided  according  to  their  feveral  Ouar- 
tenngs,  A-  filled-up  by  William  Smith  Rouge  Dragon 
with  the  Names  of  thofe  Families  whofe  Armes  L* 

omitted?1  q"“eredi  ,he  AlmeS  them,iIv“  bTing 

8.  A  Table  of  the  Englilh  Nobility  ;  wherein  5(bv 
feveral  Columns)  are  (hewn,  their  Titles  or  Dignities  - 
hetr  Surnames  &  Times  of  Creation  ;  their  Vfa“ 
toor  Baron, es;  Armes;  Crefis  ;  Supporters;  &M™ 

created!1^  My0163,1h.eB;U'0”!-  k  the  Lord  C°“4on, 
9-  Armes  of  many  old  Englilh  Knights  h.ttti,, 
tricked  (perhaps  by  Robert  Glover  Somerfet-Herald.) 

to.  Armes  of  King  Edward  i.  of  his  Nobilit?3)!- 
rnghts;  haMy  tricked  by  Tbo.  Knight,  Chelier.8,. 

as  in  “e  faft  Aride  “0W  ln°,hCr  ”  ,he  °'da, 

,b  1  n  ArCSc°lM  EnSM|b  Knights  llnfHIy  tricked  from 
Knight  °ke  °f  Mr’  D°a°r  Careiv>  by  the  lame  Tho. 

in  iArmeS  Rl,iSh,s  of  evcl7  in  England  ■ 

^  Ed"ard  thE  “  *  ha,lilV  uiclfed  by 

r  5.  Armes  with,  and  without  Crells,  of  Englilh  Gen- 
try,  mixed;  inched  within  printed  Efcocheons,  fix. 
feen  ina  Page  :  as  alfo.  Culls  without  Armes  tricked 

upon  like  Efcocheons  ;  by  fume  r’uimer  ’  k  d 

<ii;^wbrschiffirfavasUft^ 

merns  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

It  feems,  the  Author  defigned  this  for  the  Prel?3* 
thdr  QtrrgSBWl,n  °f  C°ke%>  &  H“dd“Ston,  with 
\7g  u°"TSm’  acDucum  Geldr“-  >SLb. 

S.  Au  Hereldlcal  Fragment  entituled  Napolemachia 
feemmg  to  have  been  written  by  the  Hand  of  Sir  Richard 

of  N^S  &  Sidlw  'he  D,:r“nt  of  lhe  K'ngt 

Arnies  S^oSa“  ?*“f> 

Jeffim  of  Daventre,  in  Com.  Norths ^ 
with  puarterings  &  Creft.  Armes  Xpt  '  ft 
combe  m  Oxfordlhire,  &  his  Matches.  ,j,™b 

2  211. 

A  thin  Book  in  fol.  relating  to  the  Free-Schole  at  Hat- 
row  on  the  Hill,  and  to  the  Hofpital  of  St.  Katherine 
neai  the  Tower  :  as  containing, 

I  in'ffivA  F  C“ip'  SiV™  l°r  tm  Da'ds  dclivered  »  Audrey 

3“k7aV^68o“InX  ‘°  her  br°ther  Mr-W'l  G,eenh^ 

r,-n3',l,Pe'ifn-0fLa0nard  Stockdai=  to  the  Parliament 
the  rebellious  times,  I  fuppofe  :)  pravintr  thpr 

tiom  b  d  t0  an  Accompt,  as  to  their  Adminiftra- 
3-  Litterm  Paten, es  Eliaabethse  Regime,  quibus  Li 

centtam  coneedt'  JohanniLym.cef:  fL  fiZplch- 

tarn^de  Harrowe  fuperMontcm  in  Com.  Midd.  Yeoman 
quandam  Scholam  Grammaticalem  de  unoPsedagogo  & 
Sub-Paedagogo,  mfra  Viliam  de  Harrowe,  de  n«o  eri 

praidiamr?rP'rp,e",a  Edu,catione  Puerorum  &  juvenum 
f'q  Parochtm  ;  ac  duos  Scholars  infra  Univetfita 
temo^n^ br  nec  non  duos  Scholares  infra  Univerfita- 
em.Oxon.Jtberahter  dotandj  «  manutenendi ;  eertafq; 

Vias 


Bibliothecas  Harleiamc. 


5  59 


Num.  22 1 1 — 2213. 

Vias  communes  tarn  inter  Edgeware  &  London,  quam 
in  alijs  locis,  reparandi  et  emendandi,  &c.  Telle,  &c. 
.‘9  die  Februarij,  anno  regni  14.  6. 

This  is  alfo  tranflated  into  Englilh. 

4.  Orders  &  Rules  made  the  1 8th  of  January,  ann. 
$3  Eliz.  by  the  above-mentioned  John  Lyon,  tobeob- 
lerved  by  the  Governors  of  his  Lands,  &c.  given  in  Cha- 

1 5. 

5.  Decree  of  the  Lord  Chancellor  Ellefmerc,  upon  a 

Bill  of  Complaint  exhibited  by  Sir  Henry  Hobart  Attor¬ 
ney  General,  againlt  the  Governors  of  the  Lands  & 
PolTdfions  of  John  Lion  :  whereby  the  faid  Governors 
were  ordered  &  adjudged  to  repair  the  High-Ways  be¬ 
tween  Edgeware  Sc  London,  &  Harrow  on  the  Hill  6c 
London  ;  made,  23  April  ann.  9  R.  Jacobi  1.  23. 

In  the  faid  Bill  was  likewife  a  Complaint  againlt  all 
Souls  College  Lord  of  the  Manor  of  Kingibury  in  Com. 
Midd.  or  fome  other  who  occupied  there  a  dole  called 
Cogdale-Clofe  left  by  William  Mulberry,  towards  mend 
ing  the  High  Way  from  Bufhye-Heath  in  Com.  Midd. 
to  London  :  but  no  further  mention  is  made  of  it  in  this 
Decree. 

6.  A  Rental  of  the  Lands  belonging  to  the  Free 
Schole  at  Harrowe. 

7.  Form  of  the  Commilfion  given  by  the  Governors 
of  John  Lyons  Lands,  to  William  Grey  Merchant- 
Taylor  and  John  Lyon  of  London,  Gent,  whom  they 
appointed  Surveyors  of  the  fame.  dat.  21  April  1659. 

33.  b. 

8.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Books  (with  their  Valuation) 

belonging  to  fomebody  in  whofe  hands  this  was,  the 
1 8th  of  November  A.  D.  1657.  o. 

Then  follows, 

9.  Letters  Patents  of  Queen  Elizabeth  ;  wherein,  by 
Infpeximus,  are  recited  thofe  of  K.  Henry  vi.  concern¬ 
ing  the  Liberties  &  Privileges  which  he  granted  to  the 
Hofpital  or  Free-Chapell  of  St.  Katherine  near  the 
Tower  of  London,  at  the  Inltance  of  the  then  Warden 
or  Mafter  Thomas  Bekynton  Do&or  of  Laws,  &  his 
Secretary  ;  as  afterward,  Bifhop  of  Bath  &  Wells  :  it 
being  founded  by  K.  Henry  111.  &  Eleanor  his  Queen. 

35. 

It  ends  abruptly  ;  I  fuppofe  through  the  Tran- 
feribers  lazinefs;  or  becaufe  his  wretched  Ignorance  was 
difeovered. 

2212. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  wherein  is  contained,  one 
Volume  of  an  Ordinary  of  Armes  tricked  within 
printed  Efcocheons,  20  in  a  Page. 

Note,  the  greatefl:  part  of  the  Names  of  thofe  Per- 
fons  or  Families  who  bore  thel'e  Armes  not  being  fett 
down,  this  Colledlion  is  not  of  that  ufe  that  it  might 
have  been. 


2213. 

A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  which  feems  to  have 
.  been  copied  by  Sir  William  Dethick  Garter ;  Sc  con¬ 
tains,  the  following  Collections  of  antient  Engliih 
Armes  ;  all  blafoned  in  French  ;  &  tricked  or  in¬ 
tended  to  be  tricked  in  the  margins. 

1.  Armes  of  K.  Edward  1.  his  Nobility,  &  of  the  Ban¬ 
nerets,  as  marked  with  black  Lead.  x. 

2.  Armes  of  Englifh  Knights,  according  to  the  feveral 
Counties  wherein  they  refided,  in  his  Time.  3.  b. 

-  3.  Ces  font  les  Nomes  &  les  Armes  abatues  des  grants 
Seigneurs.  22- 

4.  Armes  des  Seigneurs  &  Chevaliers  £  la  Tournay 
aupres  la  Ville  de  Dunltaple,  Fan  i6du  Roy  Edward  11. 

24. 

5.  Armes  de  la  Retenuance  du  Conte  de  Lancaflre, 

dans  la  France.  2^_  j3i 

6.  Les  Noms  &  les  Armes  des  Seigneurs  &  Nobles 
Hommes  qui  eftoient  aveque  le  Roy  Edward  1.  a  la 

2 


Num.  2213 — 2217. 

Seige  de  Karlaverock  enEfcoce;  Fan  de  Grace  i3ro. 

7-  Armes  of  many  old  Englifh  Knights  found  in 'a 
piece  of  an  old  Rolle,  fette  in  the  old  Book  of  Armes. 

8.  1  ables  to  the  Armes  abovementioned.  ^  1 

22  J4. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio  ;  written  &  tricked  bv  feve¬ 
ral  hands  :  wherein  1  find, 

t.  A  ColleQion  of  Englifh  Armes,  mixed  ;  four  in  a 
page.  ^ 

2.  Another  Colleaion  of  Armes,  mixed  ■  „;re 
Pagm  '  ,  8" 

As  to .thefe  Armes,  I  know  not  well  what  to  fay. 
Some  of  them  teem  to  have  been  taken  from  Vitation- 
books  ot  Counties,  Sc  others  from  Grants  if  the  Kiri's 
of  Armes,  but  here  they  are:  and,  feme  of  them  fuel! 
as,  perhaps,  may  not  eafily  be  found  elfewhere 

ParI  of  an  Alphabetical  Table  to  thel'e  '  Ann -■  . 
ending  after  the  Letter  E.  2  _  _ "  ’ 

, i,:n,riihifTabLe  completed  ;  &  others  made  or 

fin  (hed,  for  other  good  Heraldical  MSS.  in  this  ml, I  . 
L*T7  >  lhcn  bv  «»*»  Of  the  barbarous  fp.-lli,,,. 
ufed  by  Apprentices  &  other  ignorant  Perfoni  whf 
have  been  fett  upon  works  of  this  kind,  which  re, si, he 
much  Experience,  Care,  &  Accuracy  :  they  ouM-t  ni| 
(beforehand)  to  be  over-looked,  &  con  cftedkith  Jud^ 

4.  Some  few  Medicines  ;  as  for  the  Cure  of  Weak 
nefs  tn  the  back  ;  to  keep  the  Conduit  ft*  &c 
beginning  :  which  I  think  fcarcely  worthy  of  mention 

221  5. 

A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  folio  ;  wherein  I  find 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  folio  a  ir„  Trice  ’ 

2.  Armes  of  the  Kentifh  Gentry  hafliiv  t  Vked  •  nc~ 
haps  rnoft  of  them  at  the  Vifitation  of  this  County  A  T>’ 

16 1 9  8-c.  by  the  Croffes  made  at  very  many  of  the  Efco 
cheons,  with  Red  or  Black  Chalk';  it  nLy  feem  t  t' 

Book  ’  °m  nCC'  ““  e”trcd  int0  fome  «hcr 


A  Book  in  folio,  written  (as  I  fuppofe)  by  fome  young 
Praftmoner  m  Doflors  Commons  ;  &  Rjvi  ’  S 

Occafions^chl^fly  ^rmhe^Courts^^Dr^Gfibert^hekfon 

It  would  not  have  been  troublefome  for  me  to  have 
putt  down  fome  of  the  more  remarkable  Cafes  at  fuf- 
heient  length  :  but  when  I  confidered  that  the  Collector 
who  amafled  thefe  Proceedings  together,  looked  not  upon’ 
them  as  an  Iiiftonan,  but  intended  only  to  make  u'e  of 
them  oceafionally  as  Precedents  i  8t  hatl,  therefore,  al. 
molt  wholly  omitted  the  Names  ofPerfons  &  Places  - 
or  only  mentioned  them  by  their  initial  Letters  -  f 
though,  it  better  to  omitt  them  i  efpecially  fince  there  is 
m  A  fable  of  the  Contents  of  this  Book  ;  at  the 


A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  many  Trafis  &  finely 
Papers  now  bound  up  together.  They  all  relate  to 
Parliamentary  affairs  ;  particularly  to  thofe  tranfafled 
in  the  years  1627  &  162S.  and  are, 

A.D.’Iih6es7i”ESSl>eKh  the  firft  d“X  “f  the  Parliament, 

2.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speeche  for  explanation  of  the 
Kings  Speeche,  the  firft  day  of  the  Parliament ;  vizi. 
Martij,  A.  D.  1627-8.  2y 

Eledlfon C  SpeakerS  Speech  t0  his  Majefly,  upon  his 

4-  The 


5  6o 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS* 


Nu in.  2217. 


4.  The  Kings  anfvver  to  the  Speaker  by  the  Lord 
Keeper  ;  19  March  1627.  4- 

The  Lord  Keepers  reply  to  the  Speaker.  ibid. 

6.  The  Parliaments  Petition  to  the  King  for  a  Fall.  6. 

7.  Their  Petition  to  the  King  againft  Papifts.  7. 

8.  The  Heads  of  His  Majefties  Anfwer.  8. 

9.  His  Majeflies  Anfvveare  to  the  Petition  concerning 

Religion,  at  length.  9- 

ic.  Propofitions  to  be  taken  into  Confideration,  for 
prefente  neceffarie  Supplies.  10. 

1 1.  Sum  of  the  Arguments  ufed  by  feveral  Members 

of  the  Commons  houfe,  touching  the  Propofitions  for 
Supplies,  2  April  162S.  ii. 

12.  The  Archbifhop  of  Canterbury  his  Speech  at  a 
Conference  between  both  Houfes  :  25th  of  April  1628. 

13.  &  35. 

13.  Propofitions  from  the  Lords  to  the  Commons. 

ibid.  &  16. 

1 4.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speech  to  both  Houfes  of  Par¬ 
liament.  14- 

15.  Sir  Thomas  Wentworths  Speech  in  Parliament : 

22  March  1627-8.  _  17. 

16.  Sir  Francis  Seymors  Speech  in  Parliament  :  22 

March  1627.  18. 

17.  Sir  Robert  Phillips  his  Speech  in  Parliament ;  20 

March  1627.  >9- 

18.  The  Kings  Speech  at  Councel-Table,  declaring 

the  great  Satisfaction  he  took  in  the  cheerful  manner 
ufed  by  the  Commons  in  granting  him  the  Supply  :  14 
April  1627.  21. 

19.  The  Duke  of  Buckingham’s  Speech  to  hisMajef- 

tie,  at  the  Councell-Table,  upon  that  Occafion.  22. 

20.  Sir  John  Elliots  Speech ;  (hewing  his  diflike  at 

Mr.  Secretary  Cooke's  calling  the  Duke  of  Buckingham, 
a  great  man.  23. 

2  t .  His  Majeflies  gracious  MelTagc  to  the  Commons 
bv  Mr.  Secretary  Cooke.  24. 

22.  The  Petition  of  Right  ;  as  drawn  up  by  the  Com¬ 
mons,  &  amended  by  the  Lords.  25. 

23.  The  Kings  Anfweaie  to  the  fame  :  delivered  to 

both  Houfes  of  Parliament,  by  the  Lord  Keeper  ;  the 
King  beinge  prefent,  2  June  16:8.  26. 

24.  Speeches  in  die  Lower  Houfe  of  Parliament,  22 

March  1627.  beinge  the  fir  ft  active  day.  27. 

Thefe  are  all  abbreviated,  except  that  of  Sir  Robert 
Phillips. 

25.  Sir  Benjamin  Rudyerd  his  Speeche.  29. 

26.  Letter  from  Jol'eph  Hall  Bifhop  of  Exeter  to  the 
Houfe  of  Commons  ;  defiring  them  not  to  argue  away 
pretious  Time,  that  can  never  be  revoked  nor  repayred. 

31- 

27.  The  Duke  of  Buckinghams  Letter  or  Declaration 

to  the  Sea-men,  who  were  mutinous  tor  want  of  their  Pay; 
&  had  threatened  to  pull-downe  the  Walls  of  his  Howfe 
about  his  Eares.  32.  &  48. 

28.  A  Petition  deliuered  the  14th  of  A  prill  1628.  by 

the  Houfe  of  Commons,  to  the  Kings  molt  Excellent 
Majeftie  ;  againft  billeting  of  Souldiers  upon  private 
Families.  33. 

29.  Sir  John  Elliotts  Speeche,  to  induce  the  Remon- 

ftrance.  36. 

30.  Heads  of  the  Remonftrance.  40. 

31.  The  Remonftrance.  42. 

32.  The  Kings  Speeche,  ?.6Junij  1628.  touching  the 
Remonftrance  ;  &:  his  taking  of  Tonnage  &  Poundage. 

46.  b. 

33.  A  Kalcnchr  or  Schedule  of  the  Shipping  of  this 

Kingdome,  which  haue  beene  taken  by  the  Enemy,  & 
loft  at  Sea  within  3  years  I  aft  part.  47. 

34.  Recorde  for  Imprifonment.  49. 

This  is  a  Copy  ot  the  Judges  Opinion  given  ann. 

41  Eliz  that  the  Cable  of  any  Mans  Imprifonment  fhould 
be  fpecified  to  his  Gaoler. 

35.  His  Mai effies  Speech,  at  the  beginning  of  thefe- 


Num,  2217. 


cond  Seflion  ;  excufing  his  taking  of  Tonnage  &  Pound¬ 
age-  .  51* 

36.  Refolutions  of  the  Commons  to  adhere  to  die 

Articles  of  Religion  eftablifhed  by  Parliament,  anno  1 3 
R.  Eliz.  againft  the  Jefuits,  Arminians,  8c  all  others 
whodiffer  from  them.  52.  b. 

37.  Pleads  of  a  pretended  Confeflion  of  Dr.  Melvin  '; 
wickedly  fiandering  the  King,  the  Duke  of  Buckingham, 

&  theBilhops.  C3. 

38.  Meflage  of  the  King  to  the  Houfe  of  Lords  ;  1  2 

May,  anno  Regni  4.  54. 

This  Ihews  his  defire  to  retain  that  Branch  of  hi? 
Prerogative  of  imprifoning  without  (hewing  Caufe  :  but 
at  the  fame  time  piomifing  great  moderation  in  the 
ufing  it. 

39.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speech  to  the  Commons ;  de¬ 
firing  that  Bufinefs  might  be  done  without  Debyes  by 
Difcourfe  :  giving  the  Kings  confent  for  a  Confirmation 
of  Magna  Charta,  8cc.  with  repetitions  of  his  Majefties 
gratious  Promifes  unto  them. 

40.  My  Lord  Keepers  Speech  in  his  Majefties  Name, 
before  both  Howfes  ;  the  King  being  prefent.  57. 

Shewing  that  his  Majefty  hold?  Magna  Carta,  <xc. 
to  be  in  force  ;  and  that  he  will  gouerne  according  to 
the  I.awes&  Statutes  o(  the  Realm e  ;  and  therefore  de¬ 
firing  that  both  Houfes  would  proceed  to  the  Bufinefs  for 
which  they  were  fummoned. 

41.  The  Kings  Speech  in  full  Parliament,  before  the 

Petition  of  Right  was  read.  58. 

42.  A  Remonftrance  by  the  Howfe  of  Commons  to 

his  Majeftie,  concerninge  the  takinge  of  Tonnage  & 
Poundage,  25  June  1628,  (Not  delivered.)  59. 

43.  The  Cafe  of  the  Habeas  Corpus,  as  it  was  argued 

in  the  Court  of  Kings  Bench,  22  November  1627.  by 
Mr.  Sergeant  Bramfton,  for  Sir  John  Heveningham  ;  bv 
Mr.  Noy,  for  Sir  Walter  Earle  ;  by  Mr.  Seldcn,  for  Sir 
Edmund  Hamden  ;  by  Mr.  Calthorpe,  for  Sir  John  Cor¬ 
bet  :  &  (26  November  1627.)  by  Sir  Robert  Iieathe 
Attorncy-Generall  for  the  King  :  with  the  Refo- 
lution  of  the  Court,  deliver’d  the  next  day,  by  Sir  Ni¬ 
cholas  Hide  then  Chief  Juftice.  61. 

44.  Refolutions  taken  in  the  Commons  Houfe,  4 

April,  anno  4  Caroli  Regis,  concerning  the  Habeas  Cor¬ 
pus,  &  the  Immunities  of  all  Free  Men  from  Taxes, 
Loanes,  &c.  without  Act  of  Parliament.  82. 

45.  A  Petition  to  his  Majefty  from  the  houfe  of  Coma 

mons,  for  eftablilhing  Religion,  &  luppreiling  Papiftry  &’ 
Arminianifine,  deliuered  2  Febr.  162S.  83. 

46.  His  Majefties  Anfvveare  to  the  fame  Petition.  83. 

47.  Sir  John  Elliot  his  Speech  at  the  Committee  ;  301 

January  1628.  84.  { 

This  feems  defigned  to  retard  the  Kings  bufinefs.  4 

48.  Sir  Robert  Phillips  his  Speech  :  22  January  1628.1 

84.  b.  I 

Still  upon  the  old  fubjeft  of  Tonnage  &  Poun-I 
dage  ;  uppon  occafion  of  a  Seizure  made  upon  Mr. 
Roules. 

49.  Mr.Kirton  his  Speech,  the  26  of  January  1628.  85J 

This  man  fpitis  out  his  Venom  againft  the  Clergy.  I 

5c.  Sir  Francis  Seymour  his  Speech  ;  26  Januaryl 
1628.  ibid.  I 

This  Gentleman  (who  had  an  old  Picque  againft  theS 
Crown)  in  order  to  diftrefs  it,  cries  out  againft  Popery4 
Arminianifm,  Ambition,  &  Dr.  Mountague. 

5 1 .  Mr.  Pirn  his  Propofitions  to  the  Houfe  of  Parlia¬ 
ment  ;  29  January  1628.  85.  b.  1 

This  notorioufiy-feditious  perfon  could  likevvife 
make  a  pretence  of  Religion. 

52.  Sir  Walter  Earle  his  Speech,  the  27  of  January 

1628.  86.1 

Harping  upon  the  firing  of  Religion  ;  with  a  c  Let  us 
not  doe  Gods  Work  negligently,’  &c. 

53.  llis  Majeftyes  Speeche,  at  his  dilfolvinge  the  Par- 

:  jiament,  Marche  the  10th  1628.  87.;' 

7  54-  ’-Ike 


22i8. 

54.  Tile  Places  &  the  Perfons  (i.  e.  a  Lift)  of  the  Pri- 

vie  Counfell,  in  Ireland.  88. 

55.  Sir  Robert  Heath  the  Attorney  Generals  Infor¬ 
mation  againft  Sir  John  Elliot,  Mr.  Denzil  Holies,  Mr. 
John  Selden,  &c.  for  their  feditious  &  undue  behaviour 
in  Parliament :  7  Maij,  ann.  5  Caroli  Regis.  88.  b. 

56.  The  Plea  &  Demurrer  of  John  Seldon  Efq;  one  of 

the  Defendants,  to  the  faid  Information.  94. 

57.  Information  of  the  faid  Sir  Robert  Heath  Attor¬ 
ney  General,  againft  Francis  Ruflel  Earl  of  Bedford, 
Robert  Carre  Earl  of  Somerfet,  John  Holies  Earle  of 
Clare,  Sir  Robert  Cotton  Kt.  Sc  Bart.  John  Selden  Efq; 
&  Gilbert  Barrell  Gent,  for  tranfcribing  Sc  publifh- 
ing  a  ntoft  wicked  Sc  peftilent  Libel  againft  the  King. 

102. 

This  is  imperfeft,  between  the  Leaves  104.  Sc  J05. 

58.  The  Anfvvere  of  Frauncis  Earle  of  Bedford,  to  that 

Information.  107. 

Owning  that  the  Libell  was  fent  unto  him  by  Mr. 
Oliver  St.  John  of  Lincolnes  Inne,  who  had  it  from  Sir 
Robert  Cotton,  who  faid  it  was  written  about  ann.  1 2 
Jacobi  R.  that  his  Lordfhip  (not  conceiving  that  it  con¬ 
cerned  his  Majefty  K.  Charles)  had  Ihewn  it  to  the  faid 
Earl  of  Somerfet,  &  to  certain  Lords  of  his  Majefties 
Privy  Council. 


A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  fmall  folio  ;  written  by  the 
hand  of  Hugh  Thomas  an  Armes  Painter ;  wherein  he 
hath  putt  down  divers  Pedegress,  See.  Irifh,  Scotch, 
Englifh,  &  W'elfti.  But,  left  this  Account  may  be 
thought  to  loofe,  I  will  take  notice  of  the  following 
particulars. 

1 .  Armes  in  blafon,  of  Adams  of  Shropfhire,  Hig¬ 
gins,  Lhyuelin  Prince  of  Wales,  Congrave ;  Sc  Creft  of 
Giffard.  At  the  beginning. 

2.  Defcent  of  the  old  Kings  of  Ireland,  fabulous 

enough,  I  fuppofe :  fo,  to  thofe  of  Scotland  ;  &,  by  them 
to  the  Bruces,  &c.  "  1 . 

3.  Genealogie  of  the  Stuarts,  from  authentick  Re¬ 
cords ;  by  another  hand.  7. 

4.  Defcent  of  Charles  Middleton  Earl  of  Middleton  in 

Scotland.  *8. 

5.  The  Pedigree  Sc  Defcent  of  the  Serene  Sc  Illuf- 
trious  Prince  James  Duke  of  Hamilton,  Sc  Brandon.  24. 

6.  Defcent  of  James  Douglafs  Earl  of  Morton.  27. 

7.  Some  Notes  touching  the  Defcent  of  Leflie.  ibid. 

8.  Defcent  of  Sir  Randle  Mac  Donell  Baronet ;  col¬ 
lected  by  William  Hawkins  Ulfter,  A.  D.  1 704.  31. 

9.  A  Defcent  contrived  to  be  fctt  over,  or  near,  the 
Armes  of  Sir  Thomas  Clifford  •,  drawn-up  in  Latin,  fuch 
as  it  is,  by  one  Simon  Segar,  as  I  fuppofe  :  but  figned 
Sc  owned  by  Hugh  Thomas,  who  was  ignorant  of  Latin 
&  could  not  fo  much  as  tranfcribe  this  very  thing,  with¬ 


out  manifeft  blunders. 


.  33- 


10.  Defcentsof  the  Royal  &  Noble  Families  of  Braofe, 

or  Bruce.  34. 

11.  Defcent  of  Hereford.  -38. 

12.  Defcent  of  Waleron  Lord  of  Kilpec.  39. 

1 3.  Pedegree  of  Bridges  Lord  Chandos.  41. 

14.  Pedegree  of  Tempeft.  44. 

15.  Defcent  of  Croft  of  Croft.  4 5. 

16.  Pedegrees  of  Pye.  46. 

17.  Pedegree  of  Jones  of  Abergaveny,  from  Wroth. 

48. 

,  18.  Pedegree  of  Bolney.  32. 

19.  Pedegree  of  Fitz-Herbert.  53. 

20.  Defcent  of  Rudhal  from  Verdon,  through  divers 

great  Families.  33. 

.  Pedegree  of  Booth  Earl  of  Waringion.  56. 


22.  Defcent  of  Lewes  of  Maes  Gwin. 


23.  Defcents  of  Gwin  &  Cotter,  both  of  Ireland.  58 

24.  Defcents  of  Roth  of  Norton-Roth.  59 

25.  Defcent  of  Wroth  of  Paderton-Parke.  61 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


37.  Pedegree  of  O  Leary  of  Ireland. 


Num.  2218,  2219. 

26.  Pedegree  of  Unet  of  Caff  le-Frome.  62. 

27.  Defcent  of  Joberof  Allan.  63. 

28.  Short  Defcent  of  Groubert,  Groubere,  or  Groberd, 
of  Rufhall. 

29.  Pedegree  of  the  Lord  Manfell  of  Margan.  64. 

30.  Dilcent  of  certain  Branches  of  the  noble  Family  of 

Boothe.  53. 

3  1.  Difcent  of  Trefliam  of  Rufhton.  7  ir  . 

32.  Pedegree  of  Sir  John  Webbe  of  Odftock,  Bart. 

72. 

.  33 •  Difcent  of  the  antient  &  noble  Family  of  Fur- 
nivals,  Sc  of  Milborn,  who  would  tack  himfelf  unto  it. 

74. 

34-  Pedegree  of  Broughton.  76. 

35*  Pedegree  of  Good ;  to  an  antiquated  Virgin  of 
which  name,  Hugh  Thomas  was  married.  78. 

36.  A  little  Alphabet  in  blafon  of  fome  Scotch  Armes 

79- 

83- 

2219. 

A  Book  in  folio,  being  a  fort  of  Regiftre  for  the  Lord 
Lieutenant  of  the  County  of  Lancafter,  or  of  one  of 
his  Deputy-Lieutenants ;  wherein  I  find, 

1  •  Nomina  omnium  illorum  qui  fuerunt  Cancellarij 
Ducatus  Lancaftrie,  a  prima  eredlione  ejufdem  Ducatus  ; 
ac  fimul  in  quo  Regum  tempore  unufquifque  eorum  allo- 
catus  fuit  in  codem  Officio.  3. 

'I  his  Lift  is  continued  to  the  Reign  of  K.  Charles  1. 

2.  The  Names  of  all  thofe  Gentlemen  whoe  have 

beene  Sheriffes  within  this  Countye  of  Lancafter,  fince 
the  beginninge  of  Queene  Elizabethes  Reigne ;  continued 
to  the  1 6th  of  King  James.  5, 

3.  The  names  of  the  feveral  Parifhes  within  the  Couri- 

tye  of  Lancafter.  ym 

4.  Decima  annuatim  folvenda  Domine  Regine,  infra 

Comitatum  Lancaftrie.  7.  b. 

5.  The  auncient  Taxation  of  the  Fifteenth,  within  the 

County  of  Lancafter.  1 Q. 

6.  A  Taxation  of  the  feveral  Forrefts  Sc  Chaces  within 

the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  for  the  furniftiinge  ofSouldiers 
in  tyme  of  Warrs  ;  and  for  the  repayre  of  Bridges  de¬ 
cayed,  See.  at  fuch  tyme  as  the  reft  of  the  fayd  Countye 
ys  gawdable  (leg.  gcldable)  by  the  Fifteenth.  Made  A.  D. 
1JS2.  -  (  ,+. 

7.  Qu.  Elizabeth’s  Warant  or  Commiffion  to  Rychard 

Afhton  Lfquyer,  authorifing  him  to  borrow  money  of  all 
the  wealthieft  of  this  County,  by  force  of  her  Letters  under 
the  Privy  Seal :  and  to  tranfinitt  the  fame  to  Thomas 
Hennage  Efquyer.  Treaforer  of  her  Chamber.  Given  2 
April  1 570.  _  16. 

8.  Form  of  her  Majefties  Letters  to  the  monied  Per¬ 
fons  ;  promifing  payment  at  the  Years  end.  16.  b. 

9.  Letter  of  the  Privy  Council  to  Rychard  Afhton  Efq; 
Collector  of  the  Lone  within  the  County  of  Lancafter: 
requiring  him  to  certify  what  Moneys  he  had  received, 

&  from  whom  ;  Sc  to  whom  the  fame  had  been  paid. 
Alfo,  to  return  fuch  Privy  Seals  as  had  not  the  intended 
eftedt.  dat.  14  Odtober  1571.  ibid. 

10.  Mr.  Afhton’s  Certificate  made  to  the  Lords  of  the 

Privy  Council;  8  December  1570.  i~. 

i  r.  Their  Letter  to  him,  dated  21  Marche  1571.  re¬ 
quiring  him  to  write  to  fuch  as  had  been  negligent,  &  to 
order  the  obftinate  to  make  their  perfonal  appearance  be¬ 
fore  their  Lordfhips.  ,  3. 

12.  Her  Majefties  Letter  to  Edward  Stanley  Earle  of 
Derbye  &  to  this  Mr.  Afhton,  given  17th  of  May  1571. 
commanding  them  to  defire  fuch  as  had  lent  their  mo¬ 
ney,  to  forbear  demanding  the  fame,  lor  feaven  Months 
longer. 

13.  Her  Letter  to  Sir  Rychard  Molineux  Knight,  gi¬ 

ven  12  Januarye,  1 5S8.  for  another  Loan  of  Moneys 
upon  her  Privy  Seals.  19. 

14.  The  Names  of  all  the  Gentlemen  of  the  beft  cal- 

7  D  linge 


S6z 


Catalogus  Librorura  MSS, 


Num.  2219. 

Hnge  within  the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  whereof  choyfe  ys 
to  be  made  of  a  certen  number,  to  lend  vnto  her  Ma- 
jeftye  monye  vpon  Privie  Seals ;  in  Januarye  1588.  ig.b. 

15.  The  booke  of  the  Lone-Monye  within  the  Countye 
of  Lancafter,  in  the  Chardge  &  Collection  of  Sir  Rychard 
M  dlineux  Knight,  then  Sheritfe  of  the  fayd  Countye,  in 
Januarye  1588.  __  21  • 

1 0.  Letter  of  K.  James  1.  to  William  Farington  El'q; 
defiring  him  to  lend  20I.  upon  that  Privy  Seal  (although 
the  former  Loan  was  not  paid)  but  promifing  payment  of 
this,  on  the  24th  of  Marche  1605.  dated  the  laft  day  of 
July,  anno  regni  2.  33*  k; 

17.  The  Names  of  fuche  Lancafhire  Gentlemen  as  did 
lend  monye  vnto  his  Majeftvc  vpon  Privie  Seals,  in  anno 
Dm  1605.  /  34- 

iS.  Form  of  the  Aflociations  enter’d  into  by  many  of 
the  Lancalhire-Gcntry,  for  the  Defence  of  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth’s  Perfon,  againft  the  Confpiracies  of  Mary  Queen  of 
Scotts,  &  all  her  Adherents.  27- 

1 9.  General  Mufters  taken  within  the  Countye  of  Lan¬ 

cafter  ;  &  certifyed  by  the  Commiffioners  of  euery  Hun- 
dreth,  in  anno  primo  Marie  Regine,  et  anno  Domini, 
I553-  .  .  29* 

20.  A  general  Mu  (ter  certifyed  within  the  Countye  of 

Lancafter,  in  Januarye  1559*  et  anno  fecundo  Elizabethe 
Regine.  34\b. 

21.  The  number  of  Dymy-Lances,  Horfes,  Geldings 
for  Light  Horfe-men,  Armoure,  Municions,  &  Weapons, 
put  in  a  readinefs,  within  the  County  of  Lancafter  ;  &  of 
the  Names  of  them  which  doe  furniflie  &  keepe  the 
fame:  .  .  Auguft,  anno  16  Elizabethe  Regine.  35. 

22.  A  Certificate  of  a  general  Muller  taken  in  Auguft, 

anno  16  Eliz.  wherein  (befides  the  1230  men  furnilhed, 
as  in  the  article  above  :  are  further  certified  the  number 
of  1375  able  men  furnilhed  by  the  Countrie  :  as  alfo  the 
number  1477  able  men  meet  to  ferve  her  Majeftie,  which 
be  vnarmed.  47; 

23.  The  general  Mufter  certifyed  to  the  Counfell  in 

menfe  Junij,  anno  1 1  Eliz.  48- 

24.  A  Note  of  the  feveral  Parcells  of  Armour,  Weapon 

&  Furniture  for  a  Light  Iiorfc,  as  appointed  by  William 
Erie  of  Derbie  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Lancafliire,  in  an. 
dhi,  1 608.  48*  h. 

25.  QueenElizabeths  Comniiftlon  to  Henry  Earl  of  Der¬ 
by,  &  others,  for  muftering  &  excrcifing  the  able  men  of 
Lancafliire,  bearing  Tefte,  12  Maij,  anno  regni  1  4  49. 

26.  Init  ructions  for  the  Execution  of  that  Commiffion. 

A.D.  1573.  5°- 

27.  A  Certificate  made  in  October  1 573.  by  the  Gom- 

miflioners  of  Mufters,  for  the  levying,  furnifhing  & 
travniii<>r  of  600  able  men,  within  the  Countye  of  Lan¬ 
caster.  °  59-  k- 

28.  A  Kalender  of  the  feveral  1  Rates  of  Horfes  & 
Armor,  appoynted  by  the  Statute  of  4  &  5  Phil.  &  Mar. 
maintayned  &  kept  by  the  Subjects  of  this  Realme.  60.  b. 

29.  Ou.  Elizabeth’s  Commiffion  for  Mufters  in  Lan- 

cafhire  ;  to  Henry  Earl  of  Derby,  &c.  Tefte,  Stc.  2  die 
Junij,  anno  regni  16.  6 2. 

30.  LeLter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  to 

the  Lieutenancy  of  the  County  of  Lancafliire,  enforcing 
their  care  and  diligence  in  iecuring  the  fame  againft  any 
attempts,  dat.  29  May  1574-  63. 

-  31.  Certificate  of  the  general  Mufters  taken  within 
the  County  ot  Lancafter,  by  vertue  of  the  Queenes  Com- 
niiffiou  of  2  June,  anno  Regni  16.  65.  b. 

32.  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  to  the 
Commiffioners  appoynted  in  the  1 5th  yeare  of  Qu.  Eliz. 
for  the  taking  of  the  general  Mufters  in  the  County  of 
Lancafter,  dat.  21  March  A.  D.  1577.  66.  b. 

-  3.  Queen  Elizabeth’s  Letter  to  the  Earle  of  Derbye, 
the  Lord  Mounteagle,  and  the  reft  of  the  Commiffioners 
appoynted  in  the  1 5th  yere  of  her  Reigne,  lor  taking  of 
the  general  Mufters  in  Lancafliire.  Given  the  2 1  day  of 
Marche,  in  the  19th  yere  of  her  Reigne.  67. 

*6 


Num.  2219. 

Commanding  them  to  levy,  mufter,  Sc  trayne 
200  able  Men,  to  be  furnilhed  &  kept  in  readinefs  to 
ferve  as  Souldiers. 

34.  Commiffio  ejufdem  Reginte,  quit  concedit  autho- 
ritatem  Flenrico  Comiti  Derbye,  Willelnio  D.10  Mount- 
eagle  &c.  omnes&fingulosHominesadArma,  et  Homines 
habiles  ad  Arma  ferenda,  tarn  Equites  quam  Pedites,  et 
Sagittarios,  ac  Sclopetarios,  infra  Comitatum  Lancaftr. 
arraiandi,  infpiciendi,  et  triandi  ;  ac  armari  &  muniri 
faciendi,  &c.  Tefte,  See.  31  die  Maij,  anno  Regni  19. 

.  68. 

35.  Inftruftions  given  by  the  Lords  of  the  Privie 

Counfell,  to  the  late  Commiffioners  of  Mufters  in  the 
Countye  of  Lancafter :  accordinge  to  her  Majeftyes 
fpeciall  Letters  fent  herewith.  68.  b. 

36.  Orders  howe  euery  Perfon  that  fhal  be  frayned, 

fhal  be  fought  to  handle  &  ufe  his  Peece.  72. 

37.  Letters  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  to 

the  Sheriffe  &  fpeciall  Comniillioners  appoynted  for  the 
Mufters,  in  the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  dat.  18  of  March 
1579.  _  ,  72-  j>- 

Inciting  them  to  take  efpecial  care  in  the  conducing 
of  this  whole  Affair. 

38.  Preamble  of  the  Queens  Commiffion,  reciting  the 

Names  of  the  Comniillioners.  73.  b. 

39.  Inftrufticns  given  by  the  Lords  of  the  Privie 

Counfell  to  the  Commiffioners  for  Mufters  in  the  Coun¬ 
tye  of  Lancafter.  74. 

40.  Articles  for  Furniture  of  Horfe-meri.  69. 

41.  A  general  Certificate  of  the  Mufters  taken  within 

the  County  of  Lancafter  :  in  Marche,  anno  22  Eliza¬ 
bethan  Reginan  (unfinifhed.)  81.  b. 

42.  The  Forme  of  the  Precept  fent  by  the  Commiflion- 

ers  to  the  Conftables,  for  Somons  of  able  Men  to  appeare 
&  be  muftered  before  them.  Gyven  the  2  6rh  of  Aprill, 
ann.  22  Eliz.  82.  b. 

43.  A  Rayte  of  Taxation  for  300  able  men  levycd 

within  the  Countye  of  Lancafter ;  aftefled  the  18th  of 
April  1577  et  an.  19  Eliz.  R.  to  be  in  a  readinefs  from 
tyme  to  tyme.  _  83.  b. 

44.  A  Note  of  the  manner  of  the  Taxation  of  the 
Summe  of  156S  Pounds,  by  my  Lord  Livetenant  impo- 
fed  vpon  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Countye  of  Lancafter 
the  23  Julye  1586.  for  the  Arminge  of  600  Souldiers. 

84.  b‘ 

45.  A  Remembrance  of  the  manner  of  the  levying  of 

500  Foot-men  within  the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  the  1 2th 
of  Januarye  1587.  to  ferve  her  Majeftye  in  the  North 
parts.  85.  b. 

46.  Certificate  of  the  laft  general  Mufter,  anno  31 

Elizabethe,  et  anno  dhi  1583.  86. 

47.  A  Copie  of  the  Certificate  of  Sir  John  Birron 

Sc  Sir  Rychard  Sherburne  Kts.  Deputye-Livetenants  to  the 
Erie  of  Derbye,  for  the  Countye  of  Lancafter;  made  the 
25th  of  Ottober,  anno  31  Eliz.  according  to  the  effect 
of  his  Letters  to  them  directed  the  18th  of  October 
1389.  86. b. 

48.  A  Taxation  of  £27.  13.  4.  afiefied  vpon  the  In¬ 

habitants  of  the  Hundreth  of  Leyland  :  for  the  furnilh- 
inge  of  Nine  Souldiers,  appoynted  by  Letters  from 
Sir  John  Byron  Kt.  dated  the  20th  Marche  1586.  87. 

49.  The  Levye  of  25  Dymi  launces  in  Lancafliire  (80. 

Decembris  1587.)  ratable  after  the  Proportions  as  they 
Hand  aflefled,  by  C.ounfells  Letters.  87.  b. 

50.  A  Rate  made  by  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  of  Lan¬ 
cashire  for  the  levyinge  &.  furnilhing  of  500  Souldieis 
(whereof  the  juft  proportion  for  the  Hundreth  of  Leyland 
was  47  choife  men)  to  be  in  readinefs  before  the  fecond 
of  Januarie  next.  Gyven  the  22  of  December  1587. 

88.  b. 

51.  The  Impofition  aflefled  upon  the  County  of  Lan¬ 
cafter,  for  the  Reparation  of  Altinonghe?  by  Commiffion 
out  of  the  Court  of  Dutchie  Chamber  at  Weftminfter. 

89. 

52.  The 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


Nutn.  22ig. 

The  Imposition  &  Charge  layd  by  the  Deputye- 
Lyvetenants  of  this  Conntye  of  Lancafter,  for  the  putt 
tinge  in  a  readines  of  too  Men,  for  Irilhe  Service.  89.  b. 

c-j.  TheTymes  &  Places  appoynted  by  the  Commit- 
fioners,  as  direfted  by  the  Lords  of  the  Privie  Counfell, 
the  20  Auguft  1595.  for  the  levyingc  &furniflimgeot  the 
•Dymi-lances  Light-Horfemen,  &  oi  the  trayned  and  le- 
le£ted  Bands,  for  Service  of  the  North  parts  towards 
Scotland,  (i.  e.  for  Recruits.)  „  ,  .  9°* 

54.  The  forme  of  a  Schedule  for  Mullers  within  the 

Countv  of  Lancaller.  9°-  b- 

55.  Times  &  Places  appointed  the  14th  or  October 
1-05.  for  the  approaching  Mullers  in  this  County.  92. 

56.  Note  of  the  6co  Souldiers  trayned  by  Captaine 
Lathom,  A.  D.  1595- 

57.  Certificate  of  the  trayned  8c  felefted  Bands,  as  ot 

the  general  Force  of  the  Countye  of  Lancaller;  mufter’d 
Sc  viewed  in  November  1595:  by  venue  of  Letters  from 
the  Privie  Council,  dated  the  20th  of  Augult,  &  26th  of 
September  before.  ,  a.93* 

c8  Letter  from  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Councill,  See. 
vnto  the  Sheriffe  Sc  Jultices  of  Peace,  of  the  Countye  of 
Lancaller:  25  of  March  1603.  93-  b- 

Advertifino-  them  of  Queen  Elizabeths  Beceafe  ;  of 
the  King  of  Scotlands  Right  to  thefe  Crowns,  who  was 
acknowledged  here  ;  8c  defiring  them  to  proclaim  his 
Maiefty  forthwith,  in  that  County. 

ro  Form  of  the  Proclamation  upon  that  Occcalion  ; 
as  printed  by  Robert  Barker,  94  Marche.  602.  04. 

Here,  Robert  Leighe  Lord  Maior  of  London,  fignes 
before  the  Arch-bilhop  of  Canterbury. 

60  Letter  of  K.  James  to  the  Sheriffe,  Juftices  ot 
Peace,  &  Gentlemen  of  his  County  of  Lancafter,  yeoven 
at  Barwycke,  the  iSth  of  Apr-ill  1603.  95- 

Shewing  his  Wiilingnefs  to  fee  them  atYorke: 
but  becaufe  his  Trayne  was  lyke  to  be  greate  ;  defirmg 
theut  not  to  bring  with  them  above  two  Servants  a 

pW5i"  Addrefs  of  the  Lancalhirc-Gentry  to  the  King, 
upon  his  Acceflion  to  the  Crowns  of  thefe  Realms,  given 
the  lad  of  Marche  A  D.  1603.  ,  9J-  b- 

ба.  The  Kings  Proclamation,  requiring  all  Perlons 
to  hold  their  Offices,  and  to  aft  as  before  Qu.  Elizabeth’s 
Death  which  had  brought  to  him  great  fovrowe  & 
greefe  :  till  fuch  tyme  as  he  (hall  take  further  Refolu- 
fion  with  the  Advyce  of  his  Counfell  of  London  to  be 
publilhed.  Yeoven  at  Bartvicke,  8  Aprill,  in  his  firft 

Yere  9«- b’ 

63  The  Nomber  of  able  Men,  within  the  ieveral 
Hundreds  of  Lancafhire  ;  as  well  fumilhed  with  Armor 
&  Weapon,  as  un-furnilhed  :  as  they  were  muttered  in 
Oftober  St  November  159.5.  .  97- 

64.  Dayes  appoynted  for  trayning  ot  Souldiers  leti 
downe  by  the  Commiffioners,  22  Aprill  1596.  104. 

6-  Again,  as  appointed  1  Junij  1596.  104.  b. 

бб.  Inftruaions  for  the  Mutter-Matters  ;  as  appointed 

at  the  Court  at  Grenwich,  9  May  .599-  !°5- 

67  The  numberof  able  Men,  furmlhed  &  unfurnilhed, 

within  the  Hundreds  of  Londifdaile,  Derbie,  Leylande, 
&  Amoundernefs  ;  as  they  were  muttered  m  September 
&  Oftober  1608.  J°','b: 

68  The  Appoyntment  of  2C0  Souldiers,  levyed  within 

the  Count vc  of  Lancafter  to  ferve  the  Queenes  Majettie, 
A  D  1 336.  ann.  3  &  4  Phil.  &  Mar,  H2.b. 

60  A  like  Note  of  the  Taxation  for  300  Men  within 
the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  to  ferve  the  Queens  Majeftye 
at  Banvicke  :  21  December  1459,  amro  2  Eliz.  Regine. 

1  *3- 

70.  Souldvers  appoynted,  in  Lancaihirc  to  ferve  the 
Queenes  Majeftye  at  Lythe,  A.  D.  1359.  J‘3- b- 

1  The  Taxation  &  Appointment  ot  50  Men  into 
Ireland,  from  the  Countye  of  Lancafter  3  19  Marche 
.  I  14* 

-2.'  The  Taxation  of  5  Hundreths  within  the  Coun- 


Num.  2219. 

tye  of  Lancafter,  for  the  makinge  of  100  Souldiers  fur¬ 
nifhed,  into  Ireland,  3  Februarye  anno  16  Elizabethe 
Regine.  H4.b. 

73.  Taxation  of  the  Hundrethes  within  the  Countye 

of  Lancafter,  for  the  makinge  of  fixe  Mafons,  6 
Carpenters,  and  13  Laborers,  to  have  beene  fent 
into  Ireland  in  June  1576.  and  which  was  afterwards 
flayed.  11 5* 

74.  A  Taxation  made  within  the  Countye  of  Lancaf¬ 

ter,  the  12th  day  of  Marche  1576.  for  the  mufteringe, 
levying,  8c  fetfing  furth  of  1 2  able  Men,  to  ferve  her 
Majeftye  in  Ireland.  1 15*  b. 

7  v  A  Rayte  8c  Taxation  of  200  able  Men,  levyed 
within  the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  in  Julye  1  5S0.  by 
Warrant  under  her  Majeflies  hand;  &  to  be  tranfported 
into  the  Realme  of  Ireland.  116. 

yC.  The  Raite  8c  Taxation  of  100  able  men,  made 
8c  levied  within  the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  in  Aprill  1581. 
by  Warrant  vnder  her  Majeflies  hand ;  to  be  tranfported 
into  the  Realme  of  Ireland.  117. 

7 7.  A  note  of  the  Devifion  of  the  feuerall  Hundreths 

or  Wappentacks  within  the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  for 
the  levyinge  Sc  furnifhinge  of  50  Souldiers,  appointed  by 
the  Queenes  Majeftyes  Letters  of  Commiflion,  in  De¬ 
cember,  1582.  to  ferve  her  Majeftye  in  the  Realme  of 
Ireland.  11 8. 

78.  A  Raite  8c  Taxation  throughe  the  whole  Countye 

of  Lancafter,  aflefled  the  2  day  of  September  1584.  for 
the  Levyinge  of  200  able  Foote-men,  to  ferve  in  the  Realm 
of  Ireland.  _  n8.b. 

79.  A  notehowe  euery  Ilundreth  within  this  Countye 

of  Lancafter  ys  to  be  charged,  for  the  levijnge-out  of 
100  men,  for  her  Majeflies  Service  in  Ireland  :  without 
Date.  119.  b. 

80.  IIow  500  Souldiers  were  to  be  chofen  Sc  furnifhed 

before  the  1 2th  of  Januarye  1587.  .  120. 

81.  TheLevye  of  200  Souldiers  in  the  Countye  of 

Lancafter,  for  her  Majeflies  Service  by  Sea ;  in  the  Voy¬ 
age  to  Cales,  An.  Dai.  1 596.  .  1 20.  b. 

82.  The  Levye  of  50  Souldiers  in  the  Countye  of  Lan¬ 

cafter,  for  her  Majeflies  Service  in  Ireland.  And  alfo  40 
pounds  to  be  taxed,  to  pay  Marfhe,  for  an  increafe  this 
Yeare  1  ^96.  for  houldinge  the  Compofition  for  her 
Majeflies  Houfehould.  1 2 1 . 

83.  The  Mufler  of  Blackbume-LIundred  ;  as  taken 

29th  September  1608.  12/.  b. 

84.  The  Mufler  of  Salforde-Hundreth ;  as  taken  the 

3d  of  Oftober  1608.  122.  b. 

85.  A  Rayte  impofed  by  George  (Lloyd)  Bufheoppe 

of  Chefter,  vpon  the  Clergie  within  the  Counties  of  Che- 
fliire  8c  Lancafhyre  ;  by  vertue  of  Letters  from  the  Lords 
Grace  ofYorke,  grounded  upon  Letters  from  thePrivye- 
Counfell;  for  the  findinge  of  Horfe,  Armes,  Sc  other  Fur¬ 
niture,  28  Oftober  1608.  _  i23.b. 

S6.  The  Rate  fett  upon  the  Lancafhire  Gentry,  for 
levying  of  25  Dimy-Lances ;  to  be  furnifhed  before  the 
20th  January  158 7.  for  her  Majeflies  better  Service.  126. 

87.  A  Note  of  Remembrance  of  the  feueral  parcells  of 

Armor,  Weapon,  and  Furniture,  for  the  arminge  of  a 
Lance  to  Service  in  the  Feild.  127. 

88.  A  note  for  Remembrance  of  the  feueral  parcells  of 

Armore,  Weapon,  8c  Furniture,  for  the  arminge  of  a 
Dimi-lance  to  ferve  in  the  Field  ;  appoynted  by  William 
Erie  of  Derbye,  Lord  Ly  vetenant  of  Lancafhire,  an.  dni. 
1608.  ‘bid- 

89.  Agreement  between  Thomas  Walmyfley  Serjeant 
att  Lawe,  8c  others  for  finding  Sc  fumifhing  one  Demi- 
Lance,  by  Direction  of  the  Erie  of  Derbye  Livetenant  of 
the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  dated  the  laft  day  of  September 
1588. 

90.  A  feaconde  Viewe,  Levye,  &  Rate  of  the  25  Dimi- 
lances,  in  the  yere  1589.  appoynted  to  be  furnifhed  by 

-  fundry  Gentlemen  of  the  Countye  of  Lancafter,  as  of 
good  Will:  and  now  appoynted  for  the  levyinge, 

muftering, 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


5^4 


iMum.  2  2  I  9 - 222  1. 

mufleringCj  &  fumifhinge  of  the  Forces  in  the  fayd  Coun¬ 
ty^  A.D.  1595.  129. 

91.  Demi-lances  furnifhed  by  Statute,  within  the  Coun* 

tye  of  Lancafler  (without  Date)  130  b. 

92.  Light  Horfes  furnifhed  by  Statute}  as  likewife 
alfo  otherwife  aiTeatTed  vpon  dyvers  Gentlemen  of  the 
Countye  of  Lancafler  ;  &  to  be  furnifhed  of  ijood  Will 
A  D.  1595. 

93.  The  numbers  of  Knights,  Efquires,  Gentlemen, 
firee  holders,  See.  that  fhowed,  or  promifed  to  haue  in  a 
Readmes,  Armor  Weapons,  within  the  Hundreth  of 
Amondornes:  8  Aprill,  A°.  1613. 

As  for  the  name  of  the  Collector  of  fo  many  ufeful 
rapers  mto  this  Volume,  it  doth  not  hitherto  appear  to 
me.  Neverthelefs,  in  fol.  89. 1  finde  thele  words,  “  The  Im- 
pofition— — by  Edward  Standifhe,  William  Farrington 

I  homas  Lathome,  and  my  felfe  ” - and  in  fol. 28. 1  find 

that  m  aim  16  Ehz.  “  Sir  Thomas  Hefketh,  Edwarde 
J'£ndiSe  ?fq„;  ™ILam  Farrington  Efq;  Thomas  Stan- 
difhe  Efq;  &  Rychard  Lathome  Efq;”  were  all  Neigh¬ 
bours  together  m  Leylande  Hundred.  Sir  Thomas  Hefketh 
was  Sheriffe  of  Lancafhire,  ann.  5  Elizabeth  ;  Robert 
Helketh  (probably  his  fon)  was  Sheriff  of  the  fame,  ann 
42  Eliz.  and  Robert  Hefketh  was  alfoSheriff,  ann.  6  Jacobi 
Regis,  when  this  Collection  was  again  taken  in  hand,  and 
then  and  afterwards  fome  additions  made  unto  it.  Mr. 
Thomas  Lathom  is  often  named  as  an  expert  Officer  or 
Sou  Idler  toward  the  declining  of  QueenElizabeths  Reign. 

2  2  20. 

A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  fol.  Teeming  to  have  been  made 
by  fome  Paynter-Stayner  of  London,  in  the  time  of 
Queen  Elizabeth.  It  contains. 

1.  Armes  of  many  of  the  antient  Nobility  &  Gentry 

promifeuous.  j 1  ' 

2.  Fabulous  Armes  aferibed  to  the  nine  Worthies.  7. 
The  lad  of  thefe,  is  not  Godfrey  of  Bologne,  but  Sir 

Guye  of  Warwyck,  forfooth. 

3.  Armes  of  many  antient  Families,  which  have 

matched  with  Danvers.  7  j, 

4.  Armes  of  the  feveral  Companies  within  the  Citv  of 

London.  J 

5.  Again,  Armes  of  many  others  of  ourEnglifh  Gen¬ 
try,  promifeuous.  j  j 

6.  Armes  of  many  Kings  &  Kingdoms;  divers  of 

which  are  fpurious.  2g 

7.  A  fragment  of  an  ordinary  ;  exhibiting  the  Armes 
ot  many  Englifh  Families,  wherein  are  one  or  more  Che- 
verons. 

8.  Yet  more  Armes  of  Englilh  Gentry,  mixed.  36. 

9.  Other  Armes  promifeuous,  by  two  different  hands. 

Thefe  are  preceded  by  the  Armes  of  fome  Leiceihr. 
mire  Knights,  temp.  R.  Edwardi  1. 

10.  The  two  firlt  Leaves  of  a  Table  to  the  Armes  con 

tamed  in  this  book :  imperfect.  (J0 

2121. 

A  thin  Heraldical  Book  in  folio ;  the  greateft  part  where¬ 
of  feems  to  have  been  written  Si  tricked  by  the  hand  of 
Sir  William  Dethick,  Garter.  It  contains, 
copal  ArmcS  °f  Iile  Secs  Archiepifcopal  k  Epif- 

land  AmeS  of  the  Archiepifcopal  see  of  Dublin,  hr  ln- 

3-  A™s  °f  m:>"y  of  out  Englilh  Cities  k  Boroughs'; 
as  alfo  of  the  Towne  of  Calais.  °  * 

4.  Lift  of  Abbeys,  whofe  Armes  are  not  in  this 
booke. 

5.  Armes  of  many  of  our  Englifh  Abbeys.  \ 

6.  Armes  of  many  of  our  Englilh  Priories  i 

7.  Arma  Academia  Cantrabrigienfis  ;  Collegij  Re^alis- 

et  Collegij  de  Eton.  ^  ’’ 

8.  Arma  omnium  Anglia  (utrinfque  Provincije)  Epif- 

*4 


JNum.  2221  —  2223. 

coporum;  tempore  Matthai  Parkeri  Cantuarienfis  Ar- 
cniepilcopi.  f  , 

9.  Armes  of  feveral  Knights  of  the  Garter!  rth 
iome  of  their  Styles;  taken  from  their  Stalls  at  Windfor. 

10.  Armes,  in  fingle  Efcocheons,  or  tricked  feparatelv ; 
according  as  they  were  quartered  by  divers  of  our  Nobi- 

fc?  p  6  tlmA  °f  ^een  Elizabeth  :  done  by  William 
oinitn  Rouge-Dragon. 

2222. 

A  Book  in  thin  folio,  relating  to  the  Court  of  Admiralty ; 
as  containing, 

.  1.  Rules  &  Orders  to  be  obferved  by  all  Vice-Admi- 
raHs  ;  as  weft  for  the  prefervaiion  of  the  Jmifdidtion  of 
Je  Admiralty,  as  for  the  better  regulatinge  the  Affaires 

vantage11^1165  °f  ^  W’  ^  Ws  Majefties  Proffit  &  ad’ 

I  e  ^ate  tbete  Rotes  is  omitted  ;  as  are  alfo 
the  Names  of  the  Commilfioners  of  the  Admiralty  who 
figned  the  fame.  1 

2.  Statuta  contenta  in  Commiffibne,  pro  Caufis  Civi- 
Lbus  et  Piraticis. 

3.  Provifion  made  againft  ftraite  Netts,  &  DeftruChon 

of  Broode  Fifh.  b 

4-  Articles  for  the  Charge  at  Generali  Seffions  for  the 
Admiralty. 

„  5;  .forms  &  Precedents  of  various  Inffruments  or 
Writings,  vfed  in  Admiralty-bufinefs.  7, 

Sequuntur  alia  manu, 

6.  Articuli,  Capitula,  five  Interrogatoria  Jurifdiffionem 
Admrralitatis  Anghre  tangentia  k  concementia  in  Inqui- 
Imone  general!  pro  Duo  Rege  &  ejus  Admirallo  inqui- 
mndra  fuper  quibus,  debita  fieri  debet  Inquifitio  coram 

I  Admirallo  Anglia  k  fuis  Locum  Tenen- 

tibus  &  Commiffionarijs,  per  omnia  littora  Maris  ubiq;  lo- 
corum  infra  Jurifdiaionem  pradiflam,  quotiens  frbi  ex. 
pediens  vifum  fuerit.  2Q 

7.  Matters  to  be  enquired  after,  in  the  Admiralty.  3. 

2223. 

A  Book  in  folio  containing  numerous  Cohesions  from 
public  Records  &  private  Evidences,  relating  to  Places 
Perrons,  k  Families,  made  by  Mr.  Thomas  Talbot  & 
others,  at  the  inflance  (as  it  Teems)  and  for  the  ufe  of 
the  famous  Sir  Robert  Cotton;  who  hath  written  his 
name  with  his  ufual  additional  Title  of  Bruceus,  at  the 
top  ot  the  firfl  Leaf.  Among  them  I  find 
1.,  Albemarlia  Comites :  i.  e.  Succeflio  veterum  Albe- 
mar.ia  Comitum,  cum  defignationibus  uxorum  ac  libe- 
rorum ;  manu  prtefati  Thomas  Talboti.  , 

Adnotata  paucula  de  Placitis  coram  Rege  Henrico 

Hie  cemitur  manus  ejufdem  Dili  Robert!  Cottonh' 

A*  . rundeUi$ Comites;  five  fuccelfio  eorundem  ufque 
ad  filios  Alani,  per  Thomam  Talbotum.  A 

4-  Adnotationes  e  Recordis  in  Arce  Londinenfi  ter- 
Ta'lboli  ““  ad  ‘"ullreln  ^ruceorum  ftirpem,  manu 

5.  Quod  Ricardus  Talebot  ortus  fuerit  ab  AlanoBaffet- 

adnotano  defumpta  e  Chronico  Johannis  Everfdeni.  Manu’ 
ltidem  1  homas  Talboti.  24  ^ 

6.  Nomina  eoruro  qui  habuerunt  Cuftodiam  Terri, 

(five  Infulae)  de  Man,  ex  Recordis  ;  per  Talbotum. 

.  7-  Genealogia  Familiarum  de  Grey  de  Ruthin/’Haf- 
tinges  Comitum  de  Pembroke,  ac  Beauchamp  Comitum 
Warwicenfium  per  Brewfeos  ab  Hugone  de  Balon.  27. 

•  Ste.mma  Ifabella:  uxoris  Johannis  Nevill  Marchio- 
nis  Montis  Acuti :  manu  Thoma:  Talboti.  28. 

9.  Excerpta  e  Rotulo  Patentium  deanno  c  R.  Henriri 

in.  per  Tho.  Talbotum.  2_ 

10.  Adnotationes  Genealogies  circa  Familiam  de 
Multon  ;  manu  D.  Rcberti  Cottoni,  ut  videtur.  30. 

11.  Ad* 


Bibliotheca;  Harleianse. 


5^: 


Num.  2223. 

11.  Adnotationes  ex  Recordis  de  Epifcopis  Winto- 
nia:  ;  nec  non,  de  Terris  quibufdam  in  agro  Eboracenfi, 
per  Thomam  lalbotum.  3  '  • 

ic.  Stemma  Caroli  vnl,  Francorum  Regis;  manu 

Thoms  Talboti.  32,b- 

13.  Sremtna  Familial  de  Matravers.  34-  b.  et  36. 

14.  Adnotatio  ex  Recordo  circa  Viliam  de  Worfeld, 
in  agro  Salopienfi ;  per  Thomam  Talbotum.  ibid. 

15.  Notuls  ex  Rotulis  Finium,  anno  3  R.Henrici  hi. 

per  Thomam  Talbotum.  35- 

16.  Stemma  Fair.ilias  de  Malo-Lacu ;  manu  Thom. 

Talboti.  .37* 

17.  Sequuntur  et  alia  qusdam  Stemm3ta  brevicula, 

ejufdem  manu.  _  3^- 

id.  Notuls  de  prifcis  Ceftrie  Gomitibus ;  ejufdem 

manu.  ....  39* 

19.  Notuls  de  C.omitibus  Wintonis.  39  b. 

ao.  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Tounley.  40. 

ci.  Stemma  Joannis  Baronis  de  Grayftock  &  Mor- 
pat,  qui  dcditTerias  fuas  Uadulpho  de  Granthbrpe.  41. 

z2.  Stemmata  brevicula  Holandorum.  (manu  1  horns 
Talboti)  _  40-  et  vid.  46. 

23.  Stemma  Familis  de  Sto.  Medardo.  4+. 

24.  Stemma  Familis  de  W.ddgrave  ;  manu  Thoms 

Talboti.  .  45- 

25.  Stemma  Henrici  vn.  R.  Anglis.  46. 

2b.  Fats  Stemmatis  Familis  de  Grey.  46.  b. 

27.  Collectanea  tumultuaria  e  Recordis  Publicis, 

per  Thomam  Talbot.  47. b.  62.  105.  b.  xn.  124.  132. 

[  144-  »5d.  b. 

23.  De  Gulielmo  Bourghchier  Domino  Fitz-Warin, 
&  liberis  cjus,  adiiotr.tiunculs  ejufdem.  4'F  c. 

29.  Bedfordis  Comites,  ccc.nunuThomsTalboti.  50. 

30.  Bocingamis  Comites,  &c.  manu  Thoms  Talboti. 

57- 

31.  Adnotatior.es  qusdam  circa  Familiam  de  Ogle,  c 

Recordis;  manu  Thoms  Talboti.  08. 

32.  Notes,  &c.  relating  to  the  Family  of  Talbot,  &  to 

others  allied  unto  it.  48-  68. b.  157.  1 57,b> 

33.  Adnotatiunculs  de  varijs  rtgij  Anglorum  San¬ 
guinis  Principibus  ;  manu  T  o.  Talboti.  95. 

14.  'l  hom.  Talbots  Draught  of  a  Letter  to  one  Mr. 
Welthorp,  who  feems  to  have  bee-'  bound  with  another 
unto  him,  for  money,  dat.  23  Aprili;  1532.  .  95  b. 

-  35.  Short  Notes  from  the  Records,  relating  to  Ben- 
ham- Valence  in  Berklhirs ;  Stapleford  in  Will  [hire, 
Portlocke-Chafe  in  Somerfetfhire  ;  Welford,  &  Hamp- 
ftced  Marfliall,  in  Berkfliire.  _  100. 

36.  Ex  Inquifitionibus  pod  mortem  Ricardi  Danyell, 

qui  obijt  anno  x 5  R.  Edwardi  si.  nec  non  Elizabeths 
qus  fuit  uxor  Thoms  Menerel  ac  obijt  anno  11  R.  Ed¬ 
wardi  111.  fell  de  l’oreftis  in  Pecco  infra  Comitatem  Der- 
bienfem.  1 0  *• 

37.  Adnotatiunculs  Thoms  Talboti,  ad  varios  Anglis 

Prslatos  pertinentes.  102. 

38.  Succeflio  quorundam  Epifcoporum  Dunelnien- 

fium  ;  manu  Thoms  Talboti.  103. 

39.  Nomina  diverforum  qui  ortum  fuum  deduxere  ab 

Henrico  Tyes  :  manu  'Thoms  Talboti.  104. 

40.  Catalogus  Cancel lariorum  Ducatus  Lancaftris,  ab 

anno  Diii  1377.  manu  Thoms  Talboti.  106. 

41.  Notuls  de  quibufdam  e  prscipuis  Regijs  Minif- 
tris,  annis  5.  6.  k  7.  R.  Henrici  iv.  107.  163.  b. 

42.  Notuls  Thoms  Talboti  ad  iltuftrandos  plarima- 

rum  Anglis  veterum  Nobilium  Familiarum  Gencalogias, 
lucem  adferentes.  108.  135.  137. 

43.  Schemata  varia  Genealogica,  manu  Thoms  'Tal¬ 
boti.  ,  10S.  168, 

44.  Adnotatio  ejufdem  de  mortc,  &  piivato  Funere  D. 

Francifci  Walfinghami.  ‘  1  o.  b. 

45.  Epifcopi  Londinenfes  ;  manu  Thoms  Talboti. 

<:>  &  'a 7-  ,3I; 

46.  Tituli,  five  (ut  cum  Heraldss  dicam)  :  tyius  vd- 

bciti  Talboti  Salopis  Comiiis.  *24.  b. 

Cat.Haiu..  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2  22  7. 


47.  Thoms  Talboti  Notuls  qusdam  de  Obitibus  rion- 

nullqrum  Menevenfium  Epifcoporum.  .  _  125.  b. 

48.  De  Obitibus  diverforum.  in  Anglia,  Epifcoporum. 

126.  &  128. 

49.  Thoms  Talboti  notuls  de  plurimis  alijs,  inter 

Anglos,  Epifcopis.  128.  b. 

50.  Ejufdem  Collcttanea  varij  argumenti,  e  Recordis 

in  arce  l.ondinenfi  conlervatis.  133. 

51.  De  Cancel! ationibus  quarundam  Regiarum  Liteta- 
rumPatcntium  de  Dignitatibus  k  Honoribus  conceflarum; 
atq;  Damnationibus  Irrotulamentorum  eorundem  ;  fpe- 
ciatim,  contra  Georgium  Ducem  Clarencis,  tanquam 
Comitem  Warwici  k  Sar.  contra  Thomam  Gray  Comitem 
Huntingdon  et  contra  Annam  Rocheford  (i.  e.  Bdleinam) 
Marchioniffam  Peubrochis.  (manu  1  horns  Talboti) 

135-  b- 

52.  Staffordis  Barones  &  Comites;  manu  Thoms 

Talboti.  I3^m 

53.  .Comitcs  Sarum,  per  eundem,  136.  b. 

54.  Comites  Ormonis,  per  eundem.  141. 

5  5.  Suthlolcis  Comite,  et  Duces,  (per  eundem)  141. b. 

*5.'.  De  Creationibus  diverforum  Procerum ;  notuls 

Thoms  Talboti  e  Recore  is.  142. 

57.  Ejufdem  Notuls  de  Perdonauonibusa  R.Edwardo 

iv.  anno  regni  12°.  conceflts.  143.  &  134. 

58.  Ejuldem  Notuls  de  Perdonati'  nibus  conceflis  a  R. 

Edwardo  iv.  anno  regni  fui  1  imo.  143.  b. 

59.  lnquifitiones  poft  mortem  Radulft  Baffet  de  Dray¬ 
ton,  ann.  6  k  14  Rich.  11.  145. 

I  have  obferved  divers  other  Remarks  &  Notes  re¬ 
lating  to  this  noble  Family,  fett  down  by  Mr.  Talbot  iit 
this  book,  before  thefe.  vid.  156.  b.  1 57.  b. 

60.  Capitales  Pincerns  Anglis ;  per  Thomam  Tal¬ 
botum.  146- 

61.  Comites  Cornubis  ;  per  Thomam  Talbotum.  172. 

62.  Stemmata  familiarum  de  Clifford,  de  Grey,  de 

Codnor,  &  de  Wake.  176.  et  vid.  301.  b. 

63.  Menevcnfes  Epifcopi  ;  per  Thomam  Talbotum. 

177.  b.  &  vid.  219. 

6  ;.  Colleftanca  qusdam  e  Cartis  vetuftis  ad  familiam 

deSomervilepertinem.es.  180. 

65.  Collections  from  Records,  relating  to  Darcy, 
Scales,  A  Howard  ;  by  Tho.  Talbot.  181.  187.  b. 

66.  De  Comitibus  Britannis  ;  Adnotationes  Thoms 

T  alboti.  184.  b.  226.  c. 

67.  Pedegree  of  Hardewicke  of  Derbylhire.  189. 

68.  Dclcent  ofNevell  from  Bofwclle  &  Mountncy. 

189.  b.  &  vid.  231. 

69.  Defcent  of  Botiller  de  Sudeley.  192. 

70.  Thoms  Talboti  Colle&anea  ex  Rotulis  Cart  arum 

in .  arce  Londinenfi  fervatis.  _  _  195. 

71.  Adnotatio  de  Supeiioritate  maris  Anglie,  et  jure 

Officij  Admirallatus  in  eodem,  A.  D.  1286.  207.  b. 

72.  Adnotationes  de  Creationibus  Nobilium.  209. 

73.  Collettanca  brevicula  de  Libro  de  Tyn mouth. 

21 3* 

74.  Defcent  of  Henry  the  firft  Duke  of  Lancaitcr, 

from  De  Cadurcis.  2 1  f .  b. 

75.  Adnotationes  Thoms  Talboti  de  gente  Giffardo- 

rum.  216. 

76.  Ejufdem  Colle&anea  ex  Recordis,  fpe&anria  ad 

familiam  de  Cavendifhe.  2 . 7.  &  226. 

77.  Colle&anca  ex  Recordis,  de  Comitatu  Lancaftris, 

per  eundem.  224. 

78.  Adnotationes  circa  familias  de  Bourghchier,  et 

De  Ebroicis,  ab  eodem.  227.  b.  k  vid.  255. 

79.  Ejufdem  Collectanea  ex  Fvidcntiarum  libro  Gual- 

teri  Harecourt  Militis.  228.  b. 

80.  Genealogia  Anns  Bolens  Anglis  Regins  ;  nec 

non  Comitum  Ormondis.  234. 

81.  De  Fundatiohe  Prioratus  de  Merton  in  Com.  Surr. 

ex  Regiftro  ejulutm  Monafterij.  238. 

82.  Some  Notes  relating  to  the  noble  Families  of 

H aland.  &  Lovell.  248.  b- 

7  E  83.  Thorns 


5  66 


CatalogJS  Librcrum  MSS. 


Num.  2223,  2224. 

83-  Thoms  Talboti  Notula,  de  Comitibus  Kami®- 

253; 

84.  His  Notes  touching  divers  Nobles  attainted  in 
Parliament,  whofe  Families  were  redo  red  afterward. 

2  54* 

85.  Pars  Stemmatis  Familize  de  Oileio.  264. 

86.  Genealogis  nonnullorum  e  Familijs  de  Cheifnei, 

five  de  Chefneto  ;  &  deChaucumbe.  265.  b. 

87.  Stemma  Familia?  Dudleiorum.  285. 

88.  Vadia  Militum,  Hominum  ad  Arma,  Hominum 

armatoTum,  &  Sagittariorum,  per  R.  Edwardum  in. 
conceffa,  anno  regni  ig.  e  ada  parte  Rot.  Pat.  ejufdem 
anni.  286. 

89.  Stemma  Petri  Evre  de  Belton,  A.  D.  1593. 

287.  b. 

90.  Stemma  Pipardorum  de  Lacheforde.  288.  b- 

91.  Stemma  Talbotorum  de  Grafton.  304.  b. 

92.  Stemma  F^unilite  de  Strangways.  305. 

93.  Short  Notes  relating  to  umdry  Englifh  Earles  ; 

gathered  chiefly  from  Mr.  John  Stowe,  by  Dr.  John 
Dee,  as  I  conceive.  310. 

94.  A  Catalogue  of  divers  Original  Deeds  or  Inflru- 

tnents,  relating  to  Cardinal  Wolley  ;  to  his  two  Colleges 
of  Ippefwich  &  Ox  on  ;  or  to  the  little  Monafteries  fup- 
preffed  for  their  Endowment.  318. 

Thefe  are  faid  then  to  have  been  kept  in  the  Threa- 
faury,  in  the  Paflage  of  Weftminfler. 

95.  A  Note  concerning  William  Marquis  of  Berkeley. 

&  his  two  Wives.  321. 

96.  Mifcellanenus  Collections  &  Obfervations  of 
Mr.  Thomas  Talbot  ?  from  the  Records  in  the  Tower. 

322. 

97.  Regis  Iienrici  in.  Invitatio  Scholarium  Parifien- 

fium,  ut  fefe  in  Angliam  transferrent,  et  in  ea  (caufa 
Studij)  moram  faccrent.  Telle,  &c.  16  die  Julij,  anno 
Regni  13.  326.  b. 

98.  Mifcellaneous  ColleClions  from  the  Records  in  the 

Tower;  by  other  Hands.  332. 

99.  Short  Titles  to  many  old  Deeds,  faid  then  to  be 

remeaneing  in  a  Bagge  in  the  upper  Threafawry  at  the 
Pallace  at  Weftminffer.  ,  336.  &  340. 

ico.  Adnotatiuncula?  qua?dam  e  cujufdam  Monafierij 
Libro  irrotulatorio.  341.  b. 

101.  Adnotations  circa  Familiam  deFientes  fiveFienes. 

ibid. 

102.  AdnotationesexRecordisde  Summonitionibus  ad 

Parliamenta.  et  alibi  fupra  multoties.  343. 

•103.  Names  of  many  of  the  Lords  Prefidents  of  Wales. 

352. 

104.  Jufliciarij  &  Cuflodes  Terra:  Hibernia?,  Imperf. 


A  Book  in  folio,  written  by  divers  hands ;  that  is,  ei¬ 
ther  by  the  command,  or  by  the  hand  of  John  Ro- 
barts  Earl  of  Radnor,  Lord  Privy  Seal,  Src.  wherein 
are  contained, 

Tranfcripts  or  Extracts  of  the  mofl  material  or  cu¬ 
rious  Paflages  entred  into  the  Journal  of  the  Houfe  of 
Lords,  fitting  at  London  during  the  Civil  War ;  from 
the  9th  of  December  1643.  to  the  2 2d  of  February, 
1645.  both  inclufive  :  ending  abruptly  in  the  Treaty  of 
Uxbridge. 

Thefe  Materials  are  not  taken  jufl  as  they  lay  in  the 
Journal,  but  are  putt  fomewhat  regularly  together  ;  and 
his  Lordfhip  hath  often  added  his  own  Notes  or  Ob¬ 
fervations  ;  which,  perhaps,  may  be  met  with  no  where 
eife. 

That  this  Collection  was  not  made  by  his  Lordfhips 
Father  Richard  Rbbarts  Baron  of  Truro,  who  fided  with 
the  Parliament  (&  from  whom  to  them  is  a  Letter,  at  fol. 
66.  b.)  appears  by  the  Lord  Privy  Seals  hand  (which  is 
well  known  in  this  Library)  appearing  in  many  places  of 
this  Book :  but  that  it  was  done  after  the  Reftauration, 


Num.  2224 — 2227. 

is  manifefl  from  what  follows,  which  I  read  in  fol.  32. 
“  Earl  Northumberland,  who  was  the  great  Inftrument 
of  the  New  Modell,  &  compil’d  wholly  with  the  Inde¬ 
pendant  party,  about  this  Time:  and  who,  very  ho¬ 
norably,  after  the  faid  Houfe  of  Peers  was  flnitt-up 
with  a  Padlock,  by  the  Republicans  ;  &  when  the 
Lord  Robarts  was  fent  for  out  of  Cornwall,  by  Mef- 
fengers  from  them,  and  by  that  Power  was  confined  to 
the  County  of  EfTex :  the  faid  Earl  of  Northumberland 
did  (in  open  terms)  at  the  Chancery-bar,  voluntarily 
come  &  take  the  Commonwealth-Engagement,  in  the 
Sight  of  all  the  People,  viz'.  ‘  I  will  be  true  &  faithful!  to 
the  Commonwealth  of  England,  without  a  King  &  Houfe 
of  Lords.’  Yet,  upon  the  Reftitution  of  his  Majefty,  this 
Earle  was  made  a  Privy  Councellour,  &  Lord  Lieutenant 
of  the  Countys  of  SufTex  &  Northumberland ;  whether 
for  thofe  honorable  Atchievements,  or  for  what  other 
Caufe,  men  may  inquire.” 

222  5. 

A  thin,  but  ufefull,  Book  in  fMio.  relating  to  the  Arch-* 
bifhoprick  of  York  ;  as  containing  Lifts  of  the, 

1.  Dignities  within  the  Cathedral' Churche  of  York, 

&  at  the  Gift  of  the  Arch-bifhop.  j . 

2.  Prebends  within  the  fame  Cathedral  &  Metropoli¬ 
tan  Church,  at  the  Gift  of  the  Archbifliop.  1.  b. 

Thefe  two  Articles  are  furnifh’d  with  divers  Notes 
declaring  the  Value  &  Occupiers  of  mod  of  them. 

3.  Prebends  1  with  their  Valuation)  at  the  Gift  of  the 

Arch-bifhop  of  Yorke,  within  the  Collegiate  Church  of 
Southwell.  2. 

4.  Prebends  formerly  in  the  Chappell  of  our  Lady  of 

Yorke  ;  &  at  the  Arch-bifhops  Gift.  ibid. 

5.  Prebends  formerly  in  the  Collegiate  Church  of 

Beverly  (with  their  Valuation)  which  were  alfo  in  the 
Arch-bifhops  Gift.  ibid 

6.  Prebends,  with  their  Valuation,  formerly  in  the 

Collegiate  Church  of  Rippon  ;  which  were  alfo  in  the 
Archbifhops  Gift.  ibid. 

7.  Hofpitalls,  with  their  Valuation,  in  the  Arch- 

biifhopp  of  Yorke  his  Gift.  2.  b. 

8.  Parfonages  with  their  Valuation,  in  the  Archbi- 

fliopp  his  Gift.  ibid. 

9.  Vicarages,  with  their  Valuation,  in  the  fayd  Arch- 

biifhop  his  Gift.  "  ibid. 

1  ?.  The  Names  of  all  Monafteries,  Priories,  Nunries, 
Hofpitalls,  &  Cells,  within  the  Dioces  of  Yorke;  and  of 
what  yearly  Revenue  they  were.  ibid. 

11.  The  Names  of  all  the  Benefices  within  the  Dioces 
of  Yorke,  with  the  Names  of  the  Patrons  &  Giuers  • 
as  alfo,  the  Valuation  of  the  fame.  3.  b.  to  the  end. 

2226. 

A  thin  Book  in  folio,  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  A  Treatife  concerning  Judicature  in  Parliament 

by . 

2.  De  modo  convocandi  Clerum  Anglia  ad  Paria- 
mentum  Regis  Edvardi  filij  Ethelredi  Regis  :  qui  modo 
fuit  intimatus  Wilhelmo  Conqueftori,  et  per  eundem  ob- 
fervatus  :  prout  patet  in  Rotulis  temporibus  diftorum  Re- 
gum  fuperinde  confedtis  (ex  Regiflro  Arundel  in  Ar- 
chivis  reverendiflimi  Cantuarienfis  Archiepifcopi)  64. 

3.  About  the  Nature  of  an  Englifh  Parliament;  from 

Morrice  &  Cofins  Apol.  65. 

4.  Formula  Brevis  Regij  ad  fummonendum  Clerum 

Cantuarienfis  Diocefis,  ad  interefiendum  in  Parlamento, 
ex  Regiflro  Reynolds.  299.  et  vid.  ibid.  304. 

2227. 

A  Book  in  folio,  feeming  to  be  of  the  hand-writing  of 
Sir  William  Dcthick  Garter;  wherein  are 
1.  HiftoricaJ. Notes  collected  fronj  Hollinfliead’s  Hif- 

tory 


Num.  22 


-2229. 


tory  of  England  from  the  end  of  Hardicanutes  Refon  to 
the  end  of  that  of  King  Edward  r.  0  \ 

2.  De  Conrado  prime  Marchione  Mifniae.  17.  b. 

3.  Other  Hiftorical  Notes  collefted,  by  Sir  William 

Dethick,  from  Holinfheads  Chronicle;  beginning  at  he 
Year,  1087.  &  ending  in  the  year  1302.  j8. 

4.  His  Collections  taken  out  of  Gerard  Leghes  Ac- 

cedens  of  Armes.  74.  b 

j.  Notes  of  a  Difcent  of  Cobham.  94.  b.  &  9 5’.  b. 

2228. 

A  Book  in  folio,  being  an  antient  Copy  of  a  Treatife 

thus  entituled, 

“  The  Monarchic  of  Man  :  a  Treatife  Philofophicall 
S:  Morall ;  wherein  fome  Queftions  of  the  Politicks  are 
obviotlfly  difeuft  :  by  Sir  John  Elliot  K‘.  Prifoner  in  the 
Tower.” 

This  Gentleman  not  having  his  ambitious  Demands 
gratified  to  the  full,  turned  to  be  a  moll  bitter  Sc  impla¬ 
cable  Enemy  to  his  Sovereign  Iv.  Charles  1 .  againfl  whom 
this  work  feems  to  be  molt  especially  written.  Thus,  in 
his  Paragraph  (pag.  31.)  “  Whether  Lawes  have  an  In¬ 
fluence  upon  Princes  ?  ”  he  fays  it  is  a  “  Queftion  invol¬ 
ved  in  Difficulties,  as  lying  within  that  Mifterie,  the  Pre¬ 
rogative  of  Kings:  Which  is  a  Point  fo  tender,  as  it  will 
hardly  bear  a  mention.  We  may  not  therefore  handle 
it  with  any  roughneffe,  leaft  it  reflect  fome  new  Beame 
of  Terrour  on  our  Selves,  but  with  what  Caution  we 
may,  yet  without  prejudice  to  Trueth— fafely  render  the 
Opinion  which  we  have,  without  Sufpect  of  Flattery.” 
And  in  the  next  Page,  thus  :  “  For  thefe  Lawes  &  Pri- 
viledges  (which  wee  (hall  joyne  together,  makeing  but 
one  joy  nt  fubjeft  of  this  queft ion)  theDifcuffion  will  be 
eafier,  if  we  turn  our  Difquifition,  Sc  thus  ftate  it ;  What 
Power  the  King  has  upon  them  ?  Wherein  there  is  fuch 
a  Confluence  of  Flatterie,  conduceing  to  our  Prejudice  ; 
fuch  Labour  to  make  a  Monarchic  vnlimited,  an  Abi'o- 
lutenefs  of  Government  without  Rule  ;  foe  much  Affec¬ 
tion,  or  Corruption  rather,  fpecified  ;  fuch  Diftorffon  & 
Perverfion  of  Authorities  to  that  end  ;  Learning  made 
proflitute  to  Fallacie  ;  Religion  turn’d  to  Pollicie  ;  Hea¬ 
ven  brought  down  to  Earth  ;  Light  transform’d  to  dark- 
nefs ;  as  to  attempt  againfl  it  is  now  to  row  againft  the 
Tide,  againfl  the  Streame  and  Current  of  thefe  Tymes 
to  feeke  a  Paffage  vnto  Trueth.”  I  omitr  what  is  writ¬ 
ten  further,  in  pag.  38.  &c. 

1  his  Sir  John  Elliot,  as  I  have  heard,  in  Confede¬ 
racy  with  Sir  Henry  Vane,  Mr.  Hamden,  Mr.  Pym,  & 
another;  out  of  private  Malice  &  Reuenge,  did  contrive 
the  Civil  War  before  the  calling  of  that  Long  Parlia¬ 
ment  ;  and  by  the  Concurrence  of  Men  as  defperately 
wicked  as  themfelves,  gained  their  point. 

2229. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio,  written  &  tricked  by  fome 
old  Painter-Stainer,  in  the  Reign  of  K.  James  1 .  where¬ 
in  is  contained, 

1.  A  numerous  Colleftion  of  Armes  (with  many  of 
their  Crefts)  borne  by  our  Nobles  &  Gentry  of  England 
&  Wales,  putt  down  promifeuoufly. 

It  may  be  noted,  that  although  the  Colleftors  de- 
fign  was  to  amafs  together  a  great  Number  of  Armes,  as 
he  could  come  by  them,  without  any  Order  :  yet  he 
that  will  look  into  this  Book  will  ealily  find  fome  of 
them  difpofed  together  according  to  their  Charges,  as  by 
way  of  Ordinary,  others  putt  together  whofe  Owners 
Names  begin  with  the  fame  Letter,  as  an  Alphabet ; 
Others,  borne  by  perfons  of  the  fame,  or  a  like  Name  ; 

others  borne  by  thofe  who  lived  together  in  the  fame 
Community.  Of  this  lafl  kind,  an  Inftance  may  be  feen 
infol.  35.  where  you  have  the  Armes  of  Mr.  Camden, 
Ralf  Broke  or  Brokefinouth,  &  of  feveral  other  Officers 
fhen  living.  ^ 


Num.  2229,  2230. 

2.  At  the  beginning  &  end  is  an  Alphabetical  Table 
Armes  .abovementioned,  but  imperfeft ;  for  the 
firfl  Letter  A  is  wanting. 

2230. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  folio;  confuting  of  many  little 

i  rafts  now  bound  together  in  the  following  Order. 

1.  Armes  of  Buckingham fhire  Families,  taken  out  of 
an  old  Vifitation. 

2.  Armes,  with  fome  Difcents,  taken  from  the  Vifita¬ 
tion  of  this  County.  A.  D.  1634.  2> 

3.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  taken  from  the  Vifita- 

tion  of  Cambridgcfhire.  A.  D.  1619.  10. 

4-  Amies  of  Chefhire-Families  etched  in  Copper 
I  lates ;  perhaps  by  Daniel  King. 

Note,  the  firfl  Leaf  being  wanting,  thofe  Armes  are 
fupplicd  by  Pen  &  Ink. 

5.  Many  Chefliire-Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  from 

the  Vifitation  of  A.  D.  1580.  28. 

6.  Armes  of  the  Comifh  Families;  06. 

7.  Armes  of  Derbyfhire  Families  taken  from  the  Vifi- 

tations  of  A.  D.  1 569,  &  1 663.  4q_ 

8.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  of  Devonfhire  Fami- 
I:es,  taken  from  the  Vifitation  of  A.D.  1 564.  54.  &  6  c. 

9.  More  Devonfhire- Armes  &  Defcents,  taken  from 

another  Book.  _ 

10.  Armes  of  Dorfet-fhire  Families,  with  fome  Def- 
cems,  taken  (as  this  Colleftor,  Mr.  Kimbell  the  Armes 
Painter,  or  whofoever  he  was,  fays)  from  the  Vifitation 
of  this  County,  made  by  Robert  Trefweil  Blew  Mantcll : 
He  fhould  have  faid  by  Henry  St.  George  Richmond,  Sc 
Sampfon  Lennard  Blue-mantell  :  i.  e.  A.  D.  1623.  70. 

x  i .  Armes,  with  fome  Difcents  entred  Narratively  (as 
all  thofe  above-mentioned  are)  of  the  Gentry  inhabiting 
w  ithin  the  County  of  Durham,  as  they  were  regiflered 
at  the  Vifitation  thereof,  taken  A.  D.  161  e.  «n  . 

Herein  I  find,  79 

12.  A  Note  of  fuch  Perfons  (i.  e.  a  Lift  of  their 
Names)  as  were  Pifclaymed  at  that  Vifitation.  88. 

*3-  Armes  of  Ralph  Carr  Gent,  as  they  were  entred 
at New-caftle upon  line,  25  Auguft,  1 666.  in  the  Vifita¬ 
tion  of  the  County  of  Northumbei  land,  by  William  Dug- 
dale  Norroy.  6 

14-  Armes  of  Gloucefterfhire  Families  (with  fome 
Defcents)  as  they  were  entred  at  the  Vifitation  of  this 
County,  taken  A.  D.  1509.  Q2 

15.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  of  Hampfhire  Fami¬ 

lies,  as  they  were  regiflered  at  the  Vifitation  of  this 
County,  taken  A.  D.  1575.  IO, 

16.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  of  Herefordlhire-Fa- 

milies  ;  feeming  to  have  been  extrafted  from  the  Vifita- 
tion-bookof  this  County,  as  the  fame  was  taken  A.  D-. 
l634-  110. 

17.  Armes  Sc  Defcents  of  Kentifh  Families,  feeming 
to  be  chiefly  taken  from  the  Vifitation  of  A.  D.  1619. 
yet  fome  are  continued  to  A.  D.  1663.  when  another  Vi- 
iitation  was  begun  by  Sir  Edw.  Bysfhe.  Clarenc*.  122. 

18.  Fragment  of  an  Alphabet  of  Kentifh  Armes  in 

Irick.  139.  b. 

19.  Fragment  of  an  Alphabet  of  Kentifh  Armes  in 

Blafon  ;  by  another  hand.  ,4Q 

20.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  extrafted  from  a 
Vifitation  of  London  ;  perhaps  that  of  A.  D.  1633.  1 46 

2  1 .  Armes,  with  Defcents  of  Norfolk  Families  faid’ 
to  be  extrafted  from  a  Vifitation  of  this  County  taken 
A.  D.  1594.  when  Dr.  Parkhurft  was  (as  the  Writer 
thought)  Bifhop  of  Norwich.  ,54- 

i'his  is  but  random  talk.  I  do  not  find  that  there 
was  any  Vifitation  of  this  County,  in  A.  D.  1594.  As 
for  Bp.  Parkhurft,  he  died  long  before  ;  namely  in  A.  D. 
*575  5  but  was  Bifhop  of  that  Diocefe,  when  Clarencieux 
Het  vey  vifited  this  County.  Probably  therefore  the  Vi- 
fitation  meant,  might  bethqt  raken  in  or  about  the  Year 
1589.  by  Robert  Cooke  Clarencieux. 

22.  Armes 


t;  6  8 


Catalogs  Librorurh  MSS. 


Num- 


2  2.  Armes  of  Norfolk  Families  taken  from  an  old 
.feook  concerning  that  County.  _  167. 

2  :.  Armes  of  NorthamptonfhireFamilies,  copied  A.  D. 
1621.  probably  from  the  Vifitatibn  made  by  Augufhn 
Vincent  Rouge  Rofe,  A.  D.  1618.  169.  183. 

2 Alphabet  in  Blafon  of  Northamptonlhire  Families ; 
copied  from  a  book  written  by  Mr.  Gough  the  Painter- 
Stay  ner.  ...  '77,b- 

2  -.  Armes  of  fome  old  Families  refidmg  in  that  Coun¬ 
tv  -/taken  out  of  an  ould  Vilitation  of  Com.  Northamp- 

20.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents  of  Somerfetlhire 
Families  •  from  that  Counties  Vifttation,  taken  A.  D. 

*57%  *88- 

27.  Armes  taken  from  an  ould  Vifitat ion,  of  Suffolk. 

'  7- 

28.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  extrafted  from  the 

Vifita'ion of  Suffolk,  taken  A.  1).  1561.  196.  198. 

2u.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  ex  traded  fiom  the 

D.  1619.  207. 

-  _  Am  .  wi  h  D  fcettls  extracted  from  the  Vifita- 

tion  of  Wiltfhirc,  made  A  l").  1563.  and,  pethaps  aug¬ 
mented  from  tlv*t  of  A.  1)  1623.  220. 

-  , .  Artnes  of  Wiltfliire  Families,  tricked  within  printed 

Kfcocheons.  23*- 

32.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  of  Worcefteilhire 
Families  ;  taken  from  the  Vilitalicn-book  of  A.  D.  1 5C9. 

2  33-. 

o?.  Armes,  with  fome  Defcents,  of  Yoikfliire  fami¬ 
lies  ■  ex  traded  from  the  Vifitatior.  book  of  that  County, 
made  A.  D.  1584.  &  1585.  23 9-  258- 

Herein  I  likcwilc  find, 

34.  Nomina  et  Anna  illorum  I’quitum  de  Comitatu 
Fboracenfi,  qui  cum  Rege  Edwardo  1.  flipendia  mere- 
bant  in  Scotia,  et  alibi.  252. 

~r  Armes  found  in  Yoikfliire  Churches  &  Houfes. 

■  2J5-  b. 

It  may  be  obferved  that  the  mod  part  of  the 
Armes  &  Detents  now  contained  in  this  Volume,  are 
very  haflily  tricked  &  fett  down,  for  the  Colledorsown 
Ul'e  ;  his  Originals  being  probably  borrowed,  &  foon 
to  be  reflored. 

2231. 

A  thin  Book  in  folio ;  wherein  I  find  aTreatife  thus  en¬ 
titled, 

“A  learned  Treatife  concerning  the  feverall  Tenures 
in  thisKingdome  of  the  firft  Creation  Sc  Originall  of 
them:  as  alfoe  a  Declaration  of  the  Kings  Pi  erogative 
therein  :  divided  into  1 1  Chapters,  &  dedicated  to  Ro¬ 
bert  Cecil  1  Earle  of  Saliiburie,  and  Maifter  of  the  Wards, 
by  its  author  Robert  Hill. 

2232. 

A  Eook  in  folio,  wherein  are  fairly  written  Copies  of  the 
following  Letters,  Speeches,  &  Trafts. 

1.  Sir  Henry  Wotton’s  Letter  to  the  Kinge,  whereby 

he  makes  knownc  unto  him  his  entrance  into  the  facred 
Order  of  the  Myniftery.  1  • 

2.  The  Kings  Majeflyes  Speech,  the  firft  day  of  the 

Parliament  ;  being  the  19  February,  A.  D.  1623.  2. 

3.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speech.  _  4-  b. 

4.  Mr.  Speakers  Speech  to  the  King,  in  Parliament  ; 

27  February,  A.  D.  1623-4.  5. 

5.  The  Lord  Keeper  his  At.fweare.  5.  b. 

6.  The  Speakers  reply.  ibid. 

7.  The  Lord  Keepers  Anfwer.  8. 

8.  The  Duke  of  Buckinghams  Speech  to  the  Lords  & 

Commons,  at  White-hall,  24  Febr.  1623.  *°- 

This  Ihewes  the  Prince  of  Wales’s  proceedings  in 
Spain  in  order  to  obtain  the  Infanta,  and  the  Rellitution 
of  the  Palatinate  ;  and  upon  this  Occafion,  were  pro¬ 
duced,  Copies  of 

9.  A  Letter- from  his  Cathohque  Majelty,  vnto  the 

Comic  de  Olivares-;'  dated  5  November  1 622.  .18. 


Num.  2232. 

10.  The  Princes  Letter  to  the  Earl  of  Briflol  ;  from 
the  Sea- Side,  9  Odlober.  18.  b. 

1  r .  A  Letter  from  K.  James  to  the  Earle  of  Briftoll, 
24  Oftober  1623.  ibid. 

12.  Part  of  a  Letter  from  my  Lord  of  Briftoll  to  his 

Majefly.  19. 

13.  Another  from  the  Earle  of  Briftoll  to  his  Ma- 

jefty,  1  Novr.  1623.  ibid. 

14.  Another  Letter  from  the  Earle  of  Briftoll  to  His 

Majeftie.  1 9.  b. 

15.  His  Majeftyes  Anfweere  :  13  Novemb.  1623. 

ibid. 

16.  Part  of  a  Private  Letter  from  Mr.  Secretarve  to 

my  Lord  of  Briftoll  ;  dat.  13  Novemb.  1623.  20. 

•7.  Heads  ot  the  lalt  Anfvvere  from  Spayne  :  dat.  5 
Jan  1623.  ibid. 

Then  follows, 

18.  A  Conference  betweene  the  higher  Sc  lower  Iloufe 

of  Parliament ;  2  Martij,  at  Whitehall.  2c.  b. 

Here,  the  Speakers  were  the  Lord  Keeper,  the  Lord 
Cooke,  &  the  Arch  Bifliop  of  Canterburie. 

19.  The  Advice  of  both  Houfes  of  Parliament,  de¬ 

liver’d  to  the  King  by  the  Arch-bilhop  of  Canterburie, 
at  Theobalds,  5  Marcij  1623.  23. 

That  the  Treaties  both  for  the  Marriage  with  Spain, 
Sc  the  Palatinate,  may  not  any  longer  be  continued  with 
Honour  to  his  Majefly,  the  Safety  of  Religion,  the  Peace 
&  Welfare  of  his  Children  &  Pofferity,  and  the  Affu- 
rance  of  his  auncient  Allyes  &  Confederates. 

20.  His  Majeflies  Speech  to  the  Parliament,  8  Marcij 

1623.  23.  b. 

2 1 .  The  Prince  his  Speech  in  Parliament,  1 1  Marcij 

1623.  26. 

To  know  how  far  they  would  inable  the  King,  in 
cafe  of  a  War  with  Spain,  &c. 

22.  The  Addrefs  of  both  Houfes,  prefented  by  the 

Arch-bifhop  of  Canterbury,  14  Marcij,  1623.  27. 

Promifing  in  that  cafe  to  affift  him  in  a  Parlia¬ 
mentary  way. 

23.  The  Kings  Anfware.  27.  b. 

With  the  effect  of  what  was  fpoken  by  the  Prince, 

and  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  upon  that  Occafion. 

24.  The  Lord  of  Canterbury  his  Preamble,  when  he 
delivered  the  Parliament  Addrefs  to  the  King.  29.  b. 

25.  The  Tenor  of  that  Addrefs.  30. 

That  they  would  grante  him  for  the  prefent  the 

greatellAyde  that  ever  was  granted  in  Parliament,  to  be 
levyed  in  foe  (hortea  tyme  ;  that  is  3  Subfcdies,  &  3  Fif- 
teenes  ;  to  be  all  payd  in  one  whole  Yeare,  after  he 
fhould  make  his  Declaration  that  the  Treaties  were  bro¬ 
ken  off. 

26.  The  Kings  Refolution  declared  to  both  Howfes 

of  Parliament,  at  Whitehall.  23  March  1623.  31. 

Accepting  their  Grant,  and  promifing  that  the  mo¬ 
ney  fhould  be  laid-out  with  the  Privity  of  their  Commit¬ 
tees  ;  in  hope  of  further  Afliftance  from  them. 

27.  His  Majeflies  Speech  to  both  Howfes;  23  April 

1624-  _  .  ..  .  33- b- 

Granting  their  late  Petition  againfl  the  Growth  of 
Popery,  &c. 

28.  The  Effett  of  his  Majeflies  Speech,  made  in  the 

Banqueting-houfe  at  White-hall,  to  the  Lords  of  the  up¬ 
per  houfe  of  Parliament.  35. 

This  was  in  the  behalf  of  Lionell  Cranfield  Earl  of 
Midelfex,  then  I,ord  Treafurer;  who  was  impeached  by 
the  Commons  for  Bribery,  Extortion,  cheating  his  Ma¬ 
jefly,  &c.  The  King  after  many  kind  Expreffions  con¬ 
cerning  him,  fays,  “  But  if  by  Deceipt  or  Cofenage,  to 
help  himfelfe,  he  hath  hindred  my  Ellate,  he  is  worfe 
then  a  Devill and  concludes,  thus,  “  If  an  Angell 
become  a  Devill,  begge  I  will  not  for  him  ;  I  will  never 
meyuteyne  a  man  in  a  badd  Caufe.” 

29.  Confidcraiions  t.  ucliinge  a  Warre  with  Spaine ; 
ThisTrea  Te  is  in  piljit,  but  without  the  Authors  name. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


B69 


Num.  2232,  2233; 

tis  maybefeen  in  Dr.Hydes  CataL  Libb.Bibl.Bodl.,  under 
the  Title  Hispania.  Mine  old  Acquaintance  Mr.  An¬ 
thony  a’Wood  hath  not  aferibed  it  to  Sir  Henry,  yet  owns 
that  Sir  Henry  wrote  more  things  than  he  accounts  for. 
My  notion  of  SirHenrys  being  the  Author,  proceeds  from 
the  firriilitude  of  a  few  Ci'rcumftances,  as  of  his  long  Ex¬ 
perience  in  State  Affairs,  &  by  comparing  fome  Expref- 
fions  of  the  2d  Paragraph  in  pag.  38.  with  his  Letter  at 
the  beginning  of  the  book. 

Was  this  Treatife  compofed  by  Sir  Henry  Wotton  ? 
to  Charles  Prince  of  Wales.  38. 

30.  A  Letter  to  K.  James  from  Francis  Phelipps  Efq; 

fueing  for  his  Brothers  (Sir  Robert  Phelipps)  Libertie 
out  of  the  Tower.  69. 

In  this  long  Letter  it  is  alledged,  that  Sir  Robert, 
for  “  retiring  himfelfe  to  his  poor  home  in  the  Countrie, 
vpon  the  lad  receffe  of  Parliament,  was  arrefted  by  a 
Serj'  at  Armes  ;  brought  up  ;  <k  by  the  Lords  of  the 
Privy  Councill  was  comnii  ted  a  dole  Pril'oner  to  the 
Tower.”  But  it  appears  alfo,  that  Sir  Robert  &  this 
Writer  had  fpoken  words  agaim't  his  Majelty ;  &  that 
their  lather  died  in  the  Kings  difpleafure. 

31.  An  Effay,  or  Charattcr,  of  a  Kinge.  73. 

(T  his  is  imperfedl) 

2233. 

A  Book  in  folio,  relating  to  that  noble  Peer  Thomas 

Wentworth  Earl  of  Strafford,  who  loll  his  life  the  12th 

of  a  i  ay,  A.  i).  1641  ;  wherein  I  find, 

1.  An  attefled  Copie  of  the  further  Impeachment  of 

Thomas  Earle  of  Straffoide,  by  the  Commons  affembled 
in  Parliament.  }  • 

'i  his  being,  all  along,  written  but  on  the  one  half  of 
each  Page,  his  Lordfhip  hath  often,  with  his  own  hand, 
fett  down  his  own  Remarks  &  Obfervations  on  the  other. 

2.  This  noble  Lords  Notes  taken  from  theSpcech  made 

againfl  him  by  Mr.  Sollicitor  Generali  (Oliver  St.John) 
for  the  Houle  of  Commons.  40. 

3.  The  Anfweare  of  Thomas  Earle  of  Strafford  j  as 
well-  to  the  7  Articles  of  the  Commons  affembled  in  Par¬ 
liament,  firll  exhibited  againfl  him,  in  maintenance  of 
their  Accufation  of  High  Treafon  :  as  alfo  to  the  further 
Impeachment  of  the  Lid  Earle,  by  the  faid  Commons 
affembled  in  Parliament,  conteyned  in  28  Articles.  51. 

Tin's  is  likewife  written  but  on  one  fide  of  each  Page. 

4.  This  Lords  Notes  taken  from  the  Pleading  of  Mr. 
Attorney  Lamb,  who  was  of  the  Counfell  for  him.  163.  b. 

5.  His  [\TofcS  from  Mr.  Maynards  Speech  ;  who  (to  be 

fure)  was  againfl  him.  1^6. 

6.  I  .is  Notes  from  the  Depofirions  ofWitneffes.  168. 

7.  Heads  of  my  Lord  of  Straffords  Defence,  to  the  1  ft 

Article.  1 70. 

8.  His  Notes  from  Mr.  Maynards  Reply.  17Kb. 

o.  His  Notes  ft  um  the  Depolitions  touching  the  fecund 

Article.  172. 

10.  Heads  of -mv  Lord  of- Straffords  Defence.  172.  b. 

1 1.  Notes  from  Mr.  Maynards  Reply.  1 73.  b. 

j  2.  1  leads  of  my  Lord  of  Straffords  Rejoynder.  1  74. 

13.  Notes  from  the  Dcpufitions  to  the  third  Article. 

1 74.  b. 

14.  Heads  of  my  Lord  of  Straff  >vds  Defence.  175. b. 

j  5.  Notes  from  Mr.  Maynards  Reply.  178. 

16.  Notes  relating  to  the  fourth  Article.  179. 

Here  are  likewife,  Notts  from  the  Depolitions  of 

Witneffes. 

17.  Notes  from  Mr.  Whitlocks  Reply,  againfl  his 

Lordlhip.  183.  b. 

18.  Notes  relating  to  the  fifth  Article.  184.  b. 

Here  are  alfo,  Notes  from  the  Depofiticns  of  Wit¬ 
neffes. 

i  9.  Heads  of  the  Lord  of  Straffords  Defence.  1 88. 

20.  Notes  taken  from  Mr.  Glyns  Reply.  191. 

2 1 .  Some  Obfervations  of  the  Lord  Strafford  thereon. 

192. 


Num.  2233,  2234* 


22;  Notes  relating  to  the  fixth  Article.  1 92.  b. 

23.  Heads  of  the  Lord  Straffords  Defence.  1 93.  b. 
With  Notes  from  the  Depofilions  of  Witneffes. 

24.  Notes  from  Mr.  Glyns  Reply.  j  96.  b. 

2.5.  Heads  of  the  Lord  Straffords  Rejoynder.  198. 

2 6.  Notes  relating  to  the  eighth  Article}  the  7th 

being  paffed  over  for  the  prefent.  199. 

Here  are  yet  other  Notes  from  the  Depofitions  of 
Witneffes. 

27.  Heads  of  the  Lord  Straffords  Defence.  202.  b. 

28.  Notes  from  Mr.  Glyns  Reply.  204. 

29.  Heads  relating  to  the  ninth  Article.  204.  b. 

30.  Obfervations  upon  Mr.  Glyns  Replv.  205.  b. 

31.  Heads  relating  to  the  tenth  Article.  206. 

32.  Heads  of  the  Lord  Straffords  Defence.  209.  b. 

33.  Notes  from  Mr.  Maynards  Reply;  211. 

34.  Heads  relating  to  the  twelfth  Article.  211.  b. 

35.  Heads  of  the  Lord  of  Si  raffords  Defence.  213.  b. 

36.  Notes  from  Mr.  Maynards  Reply.  216.  b. 

37.  Pleads  relating  to  the  thirteenth  Article.  217; 

38.  Heads  of  the  Lord  Straffords  Defence.  219; 

3Q.  Notes  from  Mr.  Maynards  Reply.  219.  b. 
40.  Meads  relating  to  the  t  ;th  Article.  220. 

A  1  •  Heads  of  the  Lord  Straffirds  Defence.  223.  b. 

42.  Notes  from  Mr.  Palmers  Reply.  227. 

43.  Heads  relating  to  the  fifteenth  Article.  22S. 

44.  Heads  of  my  Lord  Straffords  Defence.  230.  b. 

45.  Notes  from  Mr.  Palmers  Reply.  233.  b. 

40.  Heads  relating  to  Articles  19  h  20.  234.  b. 

47.  Heads  relating  to  the  Lord  Straffords  Defence; 

236. 

48.  Notes  from  Mr.  Whitlocks  Reply.  238.b. 

49.  Heads  relating  to  Articles  20.  21.  22.  23.  24. 

239.  b. 

50.  Heads  relating  to  my  Lord  Straffords  Defence. 

244.  b. 

5  r .  Heads  relating  to  the  $3  Article.  247.  b. 

52.  Notes  from  Mr.  Whitlocks  Reply.  250. 

53.  Heads  relating  to  the  25  Article.  291. 

54.  Heads  relating  to  the  Lord  Straffords  Defence. 

252. 

55.  Notes  from  Mr.  Maynards  Reply.  252.  b. 

56.  Heads  relating  to  the  26  Article.  *253* 

57.  Heads  relating  to  the  Lord  Straffords  Defence; 

254.  b. 

53.  Notes  from  Mr.  Maynards  Reply.  295. 

59.  Heads  relating  to  the  27th  Article.  255.  b. 

60.  Heads  of  the  Lord  Straffords  Defence.  258.  b. 

6 1 .  Notes  from  Mr.  Maynards  Reply  261.  b. 

6?.  Heads  of  my  Lord  Straffords  Summing-up  his 

Evidence.  264. 

63.  Heads,  or  Notes,  from  the  Commons  General! 

Reply.  267. 

64.  Notes  from  a  Speech  of  Mr.  Pyme.  268.  b. 

65.  Extract  from  the  Statute  of  2^“Edw.  in.  relating 

to  1  reafon.  269,  b. 


A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  fundry  Treatifes  relating 
to  Parliamentary  Affairs,  now  bound  up  together,  in 
the  following  order. 

1.  A  Treatife  entituled  “Notes  of  the  Orders,  Pro* 
ceedings,  Punilhmenis,  &  Priuiledges  of  the  Lower- 
Hoiife  of  Parliament.”  j. 

As  to  the  Author,  I  cannot  find  him  out  for  cer¬ 
tain,  although  I  have  taken  fome  pains  to  inform  myfelf 
concerning  him  ;  who  makes  no  further  difeovery  of 
himfelf,  than  in  fol.  7  where  I  read  thefe  words,  “  Three 
of  the  l’rivie  Councell  (whereof  Sir  Edward  Rogers  the 
Comptroller  was  one)  deliuered  to  the  howfe  her  Majef- 
ties  exprefs  Coirmvandement,  that  they  fhould  proceed 
noe  farther  with  their  Suite ;  which  was  (in  a  forte) 
moved  to  be  reiterated,  bv  .a  Speeche  of  this  Writer 
W.L. - 

7  F  Might 


Cat.  Haul.  Vol.  II. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  2234. 

Might  not  this  W.  L.  be  William  Lambard  Recor¬ 
der  of  London  ?  1  he  frefheft  Inftance  or  Precedent  given 
by  this  Writer,  is  anno  29  Eliz.  when  (if  I  remember 
rjghtly)  Mr.  Lambard  was  alive. 

2.  Advice  to  the  Members  of  the  Lower  Houfe  of  Par- 
hament ;  directed  to  the  Authors  noble  Friends  of  that 
rioufe  :  probably  that  which  fat  in  1628.  18. 

.  As  t0  tbe  Author  of  this  Traci,  he  feemeth  in  feveral 
points  to  blame  the  Adminiflration  both  of  King  Charles, 
&  of  hts  father,  in  feveral  points ;  and  is  a  profefled  Ene¬ 
my  to  the  then  Duke  of  Buckingham  ;  he  faith  at  the  be¬ 
ginning,  that  he  had  miffed  of  his  Ele&ion  to  that  Par¬ 
liament,  although  he  had  ferved  in  fundry  other  Parlia¬ 
ments  j  that  he  was  no  military  man.  fol.  32.  b.  com¬ 
plains,  fol.  43.  among  ft  other  things,  of  Judges  being  re¬ 
moved  ;  and  is  refolved  to  diftrefs  the  Court,  a?  far  as  in 
him  hes.  Qu.  whether  this  Trad  may  be  attributed  to 
oir  r-dward  Coke  ? 

3.  A  true  Relation  of  everie  Daies  Proceedings  in  the 
I  arhament,  fince  the  beginninge  thereof,  beeinn-e  the 
2bth  of  January  1628.  0 

.  Herein  is  alfo  contained,  a  Supplication  of  the  Lords 
Spiritual  &  Temporal  to  his  Majeftie,  upon  this  point, 
mat  divers  of  the  naturall  borne  Subjefts  of  this  King- 
dome,  where  both  themfelves  &  their  Families  do  refide  • 
have  of  late  beene  created,  fome  Barons,  fome  Vifcounts 
S;  lome  Earles,  within  his  Kingdomes  of  Scotland  &  Ire¬ 
land  ;  &  doe,  by  reafon  thereof,  clame  as  of  Right,  to 
take  place  &  have  Precedencie  of  the  Peeres  &  Nobi- 
iitie  of  England,  &  theire  Children,  within  this  Realme. 

4-  Sir  Dudley  Diggs  his  Introduftion  to  the  Confe¬ 
rence  between  both  Houfes  upon  the  point  of  the  Liberty 
of  the  perfon  of  the  Subject.  ,  , 

_  5-  The  Speech  and  Argument  of  Mr.  John  Sclden,  be- 
fore  a  Committee  of  both  Houfes,  at  the  firft  conference 
with  the  Lords,  out  of  Prcfidents  of  Records,  &  Refolu- 
tior.s  of  Judges,  in  former  tymes  ;  touchinge  the  J.ibertie 
of  the  1  eriou  ol  euerie  Freeman.  1  ^  b. 

6.1  he  Subftance  of  the  Objections  made  by  Mr.^Atror- 
ney  General,  before  a  Committee  of  both  Howfes,  to  that 
Argument ;  and  the  Anfweares  8c  Replies  then  prefemly 
made  $>y  the  Houfe  of  Commons  to  thofe  Objections. 

7.  The  whole  Copies  of  the  Prcfidents  of  Records 

'ran  °/  0,8  (Mr.  Seldens  ?) 

mace  at  the  fii  ft  Conference  with  the  Lords,  touching  the 
Liberties  of  the  Perfon.  18^  b 

8.  The  fecond  Cooke  of  Records  alledged  upon  that 

Cccafiori.  r 

9.  flic  third  Booke  of  like  Records.  200 

10.  Mr.  Littleton  his  Argument,  before  the  Lord's. 

it.  The  Objeftions  of  the  Kings  Cnunfell  againftThe 
Declaration  of  the  Commons  ;  and  the  Anfwcare  there 
vmo,  by  Mr.  Littleton,  the  1 6th  of  May  1628.  222. 

is.  My  Lord  Cooke  (Sir  Edward  Coke’s)  Speech  or 
Argument,  30  Aprilis,  4to  Caroli  Regis,  2'o 

13.  The  Information  of  SirRobert  lteath  AttorneyGe- 
r.cnaU,  againlt  Sir  John  Elliot,  Mr.  Denfill  Hull  s  & 
others.  5 

J4.  Conclo,  25  Maij  1629.  5to  Carol!  Regis.  251b 

Tins  is  an  Order  of  the  two  Chief  Juftiees  for  Mr. 
Attorneys  Amendment  of  his  Information,  by  adding  a 
(holt  Uttufe  unto  it  ;  communicating  the  fame  to  the 
Council  of  the  Defendants  ;  and  about  their  Lordfltips 
declaring  their  Opinion  upon  the  whole  matter. 

i,h5Plia  &  Ucmurrer  of  John  Stiden  Efq;  one 
",  tlK  pc'frtldants,  to  the  Information  of  Sir  Rober 
Heath  Knight,  his  Majcllies  Attorney  Geneiall  .  n' 

16.  The  Addition  of  John  Selden,  rafq;  one  of  the 
Defendants  to  the  fatd  Information  ;  as  to  the  faid  In 
formation  altered  or  amended  by  the  faid  Attorney  Gene 


Num.  2234,2235. 

ral,  accofdmge  to  an  Order  of  the  Courte  the  e9th  May, 
5 to  Caroli  Regis.  y  y 

r  '7-  Petition,  to  the  Kinges  Majeftie,  of  Sir  John 
Elliot  Kt.  1  rffoner,  See.  concerninge  the  Loane  which  is 
faid  to  have  been  dehuered  ....  ,628.  but  not an- 
fwered. 

18.  Sirlhomas  Darnells  Cafe;  Mich.  30  Caroli  R. 

r  \9*  ,Cafe  °f  Sir  John  Coi'bett  Sir  Walter 
Earle,  Sir  John  Heminge,  8c  SirEdward  Hamden  Knights, 
22  Novr.  anno'31'  Caroli  1.  2%y 

This  Tradt  gives  the  Plea  of  Mr.  Keeling  agarnft 
the  Return  of  a  Writ  by  the  Warden  of  the  Fleet;  but 
leems  to  end  abruptly. 

2235. 

Codex  chartaceus,  in  fob  quo  continentur, 

1.  Modus  tenendi  Parliamentum.  r 

Sequitur  Tradatus  Normano-Gallice  feriptus,  8c  in 
C.apita  diftnbutus  ;  quorum  Tituli  font. 

2  Modus  procedendi  in  Placito  Terre,  in  Haftengo 
London.  j  ° 

3.  De  Huftengo  tento  de  Communibus  Placitis  in 

London.  ^ 

4.  De  Aftifa  Mortis  Antecefforis,  in  London.  16.  b." 

5.  I)e  Affifis  None  Diffeifine  vocate  Freflv  Force,  in 

London.  jy 

6.  De  Curia  Maioiis  London,  et  Cuftumis  Civitatis 

ejufdem,  et  diverfis  Cafibus  terminabilibus  in  eadem 
Curia.  jjj 

7.  De  Accionibus  perfonalibus,  et  Proceflibtls  in  Curia 

Vicecomit.  London.  ,4  ^ 

Sequuntur, 

8.  _  Tradatus  fupra-memorati,  cui  Titulus «  Modus  te¬ 
nendi  Parhamentum,”  exemplar  aliud.  26. 

In  margine,  habetur  h*c  Notula,  «  Hie  Modus 
tenendi  Parhamentum  fumebatur  ex  bfo  Libro  Itine- 
lario  lien.  vui.  ubi  recordaiur  vnde  authoritas  pendeat  ; 

1 5°9-” 

9.  Diarium  Parliamenti  tenti  apud  Weftmonafterium 

anno  prmio  Regni  Regis  Henrici  Octavi,  A.  D.  1509. 
per  J.  Tayler  Clericum  Parliamenti.  *4..  * 

1  o.  Diarium  Parliamenti  tenti  apud  Weftmonafterium, 
anno  tercio  Regni  Regis  Henrici  Odavi,  A.  D.  i-n* 

J.  Tayler  Clerico  Parliamenti.  ^ 

1  1.  Diarium  Parliamenti  tenti  apud  Weftmonafterium. 
anno  fexto  Regni  Regis  Henrici  Odavi,  A.  D.  1314. 

J  Tayler  Clerico  Parliamenti.  g0  '* 

12.  Diarium  ejufdem  Parliamenti  prorogati ;  videlicet 

a  1  2 mo  dieNovembris,  anno  feptimo  regni  R.  Hern ici 
Odavi,  ufque  ad  Diffolutionem  ejufdem  22  die  Decera- 
bris,  A.D.  1515.  Johanne  Tailer  Juris  Pontifkrij  Dodore 
Clerico  Parhamentorum  H~ai  Regis,  et  (eodem  tempore) 
Prolocutore  Convocauonis  C.leri ;  quod  raro  accidie. 

Memorandum,  on  the  out-fide  Cover  of  this  Vo¬ 
lume,  is  the  following  note.  “  From  this  Book,  which 
endeth  with  the  7  of  Hen.  vm,  there  is  no  Book 
extant  among  the  Records,  vntill  the  yeere  25  of  bis 
Reign.” 

13  Breve  R.  Ricardi  11.  pro  captior.e  Thome  Mor¬ 
timer  Militis,  de  diverfis  Proditionibus  accufati  :  ex  Rot. 
Clauf.  deanno  21  Regis  ejufdem,  membr.  14  dorf.  129! 

After  this  Tranfcript,  &  before  another,  the  follow¬ 
ing  Words  are  inferted  by  another  Hand  ;  “  Convenit 
cum  Recordo,  WilFus  Collet  Dep.  Jo.  Borough  MiT. 
Yet  this  is  not  an  accurate  or  faithful  Copie. 

14.  Breve  R.  Henrici  iv.  contra  Henricum  de  Percy 
nuper  Comitem  North  umbrae,  et  Thomani  Bardolf 
nuper  Dominum  de  Bardolfe  ;  ex  Rotulo  Clauf.  de 
anno  7  Regni  ejufdem  Regis,  membr.  8  dorfo.  1  ^o. 

This  is  figned  and  attefted  by  Mr.  William  Ryley. 

1  Breve  R.  Ricardi  11.  contra  Alexandrum  Nc-vils 
Archiepifcopum  Fbor.  Robertuin  de  Veer  Ducem  Hi- 
10  bernie. 


Bibliothecas  HarleiancC. 


57* 


Nurri.  2231; — -2240. 

bernie,  Michaelem  de  la  Pole  Comitem  Suffblcie,  Roi 
bertum  Trefiiian  &  Nicolaum  Brembre  Milites :  ex  Ro- 
julo  Clauf.  de  anno  11  ejufdem  Regis,  m.  12.  dorl'o  : 
attefled  by  Mr.  Collet  abovementioned.  131. 

223  6. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  mollly  of  blank  Paper  ;  but 
wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  A  Letter  from  K.  Charles  ii.  to  the  then  Duke  of 

York  his  brother  :  dat.  28  Febr.  1678-g.  1. 

Defiring  him  to  abfent  hiinfelf  for  fome  tyme  be¬ 
yond  Sea. 

2.  A  Journal  of  the  Commons  Houfe  of  Parliament, 

or  an  Abftradl  from  it,  from  its  meeting  the  7th  of 
March,  A.  D.  1678-9.  to  the  Prorogation  thereof  on  the 
27th  of  May  1679.  2. 

I  fuppofe  this  to  have  been  written  only  for  pri¬ 
vate  Ufe. 

2237. 

A  Book  in  folio,  haflily  written  in  a  bad  hand  ;  where¬ 
in  are  contained, 

Extra&s  from  the  Journals  of  the  Houfe  of 
Peers,  from  the  fecond  of  May  1648.  to  the  fixth  of 
February  1648-9. 

Whether  the  original  Journal  be  yet  remaining, 
I  know  not ;  but  I  perceive  that  herein  is  an  account  of 
the  1'reaty  made  with  the  King  at  Newport  in  the  Kle 
of  Wight,  which  I  believe  had  never  yet  been  publiflied  ; 
befides  many  other  remarkable  matters. 

This  book  feems  to  have  been  written  for  the  ufe 
of  John  Robarts  Earl  of  Radnor,  &  Lord  Privy  Seal  to 
K.  Charles  it,  which  Noble  Lord  hath  putt  down  cer¬ 
tain  Notes  therein,  efpecially  at  the  end,  with  his  own 
hand. 

22  3^. 

A  Book  in  folio,  for  the  greateft  part,  written  by  him  who 

wrote  moll  of  that  lalt  dei'enbed  ;  &  containing. 

Extracts  from  the  Journal  of  the  Lords  Houfe  of  Parli¬ 
ament  from  the  totliof  July  it  48.  to  the  23th  (or  28th) 
cf  April,  A.  D.  1648.  both  inclufive.  This  book  like- 
wifj  belonged  to  the  above-mentioned  Earl  of  Radnor, 
Lord  Pi  ivy  Seal;  and  gives  iundry  private  Remarks  & 
Obfervations  ;  efpecially,  thofe  relating  to,  &  in  vindi¬ 
cation  of  his  Father  the  Lord  Robarts,  written  &  in- 
ferted  by  feveral  hands  :  lbme  of  them  (as  it  feems  to  me) 
by  the  Father,  as  others  by  the  Son. 

2239. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  folio,  diverfis  manibus  feriptus  ; 
in  quo  continentur, 

Irrotulationes  Aftorum  in  Vifibus  Franci  Plegij  & 
Curke  Baronis  r.pud  Ely  Barton,  k  fexto  die  Aprilis, 
A.  D.  1619  ufque  ad  fecundum  diem  OCtobris,  A.  D. 
1637.  nernpe  tempo  ibus  Nicolai  Felton,  Johannis  Buck- 
cridge,  St  Francifd  White  Epifcoporum  Elienfium. 

2240. 

A  thin  Book  in  folio ;  wherein  I  find, 

1.  The  Names  of  Noble-men,  having  Eltates  within 

the  County  of  Effex.  1 .  b. 

2.  Nomina  Julliciariorum  Pads  in  Comitatu  Effexire, 

circa  A.  D.  1633.  2. 

3.  Nomina  Ballivorum  Hundredorum  &  Libertatum 

infra  Comitatum  prtediflum.  g. 

4.  NominaHundredoruni  infra  Comitatum  prredicium, 

5.  The  Names  of  the  Free-holders,  at  that  time, 

within  the  feveral  Towns,  Villages,  &  Hamlets  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  faid  Hundreds ;  upon  whofe  Lands  Iffues  might 
be  levied.  £>. 

This  is  the  original  Book  :  &  hath  received  the 

proper  Alterations  &  Amendments, 


Num.  2241,  224 is 
2241; 

Another  thin  Book  in  folio  ;  wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  An  account  of  the  Induction  of  Pcregin  Bartyd 

I.ord  Willoughby  of  Erefbye,  for  the  taking  of  his 
Place  in  the  Upper  Houfe  of  Parliament,  the  16th  daye 
of  Januarye,  A.  1).  1580.  i. 

2.  The  Title  of  Richard  Bartye  Efq;  (Father  to  the 

Lord  Peregrin  above-mentioned)  to  the  Stile  of  Lord  Wil- 
lughby  ofWillughbye  and  of  Erelbye,  in  the  right  of 
the  I,ady  Katherin  Duchels  of  Suffolk,  his  wife  ;  deba¬ 
ted  before  the  Commiffioners  by  her  Majeflie  appointed 
to  hear  the  fame.  1 .  b. 

Then  follows,  there  is  alfoe,  in  the  end,  added  a 
Refolution  of  certaih  Quellions  ;  although  none  of  them 
were  obje&ed  before  the  Commilhoners. 

Alfoe,  it  is  not  to  be  conceived  that  euery  thing  was 
fo  amply  recited  as  here  fett  downe  5  but  onely  the  mod 
material  Arguments,  (fol.  22.  b.)  being  Anfweres  to  the 
Lord  Latimers  Reafons. 

It  is  not  to  be  Wondered  at  that  Mr.  Banie  was  fo 
modell  as  not  to  make  the  moll  of  bis  Caufe,  if  what  I 

find  fol.  22.  b.  was  true  ;  vizi.- - “  for  the  Caufe  why 

he  defired  an  hearing  of  hi*  Right  fc  Interefl  was  fpecial- 
ly,  to  deliuer  her  Majeftie  from  Error,  that  Ihee  (by 
wrong  Information  had  conceived)  that  there  was  noe 
fuch  Right :  and  partdy  to  conferue  the  Right  to  his 
Sonne  (whom  he  Oppofed)  and  to  averre  the  Claymej 
though  he  Vied  nut  the  Stile  of  Dignitie.” 

However  he  concludes  thus, - “  there  is  therefore 

noething  left  to  impugne  it,  but  Wiiiulnes,  Malice  or 
Ignorence  ;  and  to  them,  (bccaufe,  in  theire  nature,  they 
are  all  infamous)  I  take  Excepcon,  and  foe  this  may 
fuffiee  for  this  matter.” 

2242. 

A  Book  in  folio  written  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  John  Saw¬ 
yer  the  cider;  and  containing  the  following  Pieces 

tranilated  by  himfelf :  vizt. 

1.  The  Hiltorie  of  the  vnltappie  Succeffe  ofPhilippa 
a  Woman  of  Catanca,  cheife  Governeffe  of  INaples  ; 
trauflated  (as  it  feems)  from  the  French  Edition  of 
P.  Matthieu:  And  corrected  by  another  hand. 

i  bis  Matthieu  owns  that  the  Story  is  taken  from 
the  end  ot  Boccas  de  Cafibus  Viroruin  illuftnuia,  v.  iio 
received  the  former  part  of  it  from  two  credible  peffoi.s, 
&  was  himfelf  a  witnds  of  the  Cataftrophe  ot  her  1  age.iv. 

Matthieu  further  intimate,  that  he  had  fitn  an  old 
French  Martufcript  of  this  part  of  BoccactS  Works.  On 
this  occafion,  I  take  leaue  to  add  that  in  this  noble  Li¬ 
brary,  the  faid  Work  appears  not  only  in  Latin,  (which 
hath  been  printed  feveral  times)  but  alio  in  old  French  • 
as  like  wife  in  old  Engiiili,  being  tranilated  from  the 
French,  by  Dan  John  Lidgate  Monk  of  Bury-St.  Ed¬ 
mund,  by  the  command  of  Humfrey  Duke  of  Glou- 
cefler,  into  old  Lnglilh  Verfe,  which  Trai.ilatiou  I  do 
not  remember  that  I  have  hitherto  feen  in  Print.  Lidgate 
calls  this  wretched  Woman  Phyiipor.  This  Story,  as  related 
by  P.  Matthieu,  has  loll  nothing  by  him,  being  vallly 
longer  than  it  is  in  Boccace  ;  and  enlarged  from  other 
Books,  befides  his  0*11  Notes. 

2.  The  Cathulicke  Statfmah;  of  elfe,  a  PoliticalDifcdrfe 

of  the  Confederacies  of  die  moite  Chriftian  Kinge, 
againde  the  forged  accufations  of  the  enimies  to  his  State; 
Dedicated  to  the  Kinge  by  rhe  Lorde  of  Ferrier.  In  Pa- 
ri6‘-  .  27. 

3.  A  Treat! fe  of  the  Ufurpation  of  the  King  of  Spaine 

ouer  the  Croune  of  France,  fince  the  Raigne  of  King 
Charles  the  8th.  With  a  Diicours  of  the  begining,  con¬ 
tinuing,  declyninge,  &  leffning  of  the  Monarchic  of 
France  ;  the  Realons  &  Pnetenfes  the  Chriftiah  King 
hath  to  the  Right  of  the  Empitr  :  by  Chridopher  BaL 
thafard.  1605.  100. 

'This  Tranflaiiun  Mr.  Bowyor  infciibes  “  To  hismofte 

worthy 


571 


Catalogus  Llbrofum  MSS. 


Num.  2242,  2243. 

worthy  and  belt  approued  Nephew  Sir  Richard  Anderfon 
Knight. 

а.  I'he  MeCtinge,  in  traneling  into  the  othere  World, 

of  Monngr.  Ludouico  Seraino  Attornie  Generali  to  the 
Chriflian  Kingc  Henry  4th.  and  of  Padre  Pietro  Cottonea 
Jefuite.  1 626.  128. 

9.  A  Difcourfe  of  Father  Giouanni  Mariana  a  Jefuic 
ofSpaine,  conferning  the  greate  Errors  which  be  in  the 
Jefuits  Forme  of  Gouerment.  Tianilated  out  of  Spanifh 
into  French,  and  out  of  French  into  Italian.  Printed  at 
Bordens,  1625.  _  _  J  34- 

б.  Of  the  Soueraigne  Giurifdiecion  of  Kings  ouer  the 
Gouerment  of  the  Church ;  againfl  cerraine  poynts  helde 
by  the  Bifhope  of  Angiers  ;  in  the  Controuerfie  betwen 
him  &  the  Conuocation-houfe  of  the  Cathedrall  Church. 

174; 

7.  A  mofl  humble  Remonflrance  made  by  the  Jefuits 

to  the  Chriflian  Kinge  &  his  Counfell.  252. 

This  is  fubicribed  by  P. Cotton;  and  is  written  againfl 
the  Ur.iverfity  of  Paris,  winch  had  long  and  loudly  de¬ 
claimed  .  gainft  the  Jefuitical  Dodtrines. 

8.  The  An  Ever  of  the  Rectors,  Deacons,  &  Scollers 
of  the  Vniuerfity  of  Paris,  to  that  Remonflrance.  253. 

9.  Ab  of  the  State  of  the 

Greate  Duke  of  I'ofcanie,  as  it  Hood  in  the  time  of  Co- 
fimothe  fecoiind,  the  20th  of  prill  1622.  254. 

Much  blank  Paper  remains  at  the  end. 


2243. 

A  Book  in  folio,  Ioofely  written  by  the  Direction  or  In¬ 
fluence,  or  by  the  hand  of  John  Robarts  Earl  of  Rad¬ 
nor,  fometime  Lord  Privy  Seal ;  feeming  to  contain 
many  of  his  Notes  &  Oi Nervations  upon  the  Rule', 
Ufages  &  Cuftomes  of  our  Englifh  Parliaments  ; 
among  which,  I  fhall  briefly  mention  thel'e  whichfollow. 
1  Ol  the  Original  of  Parliaments.  1 . 

2.  The  Number  of  the  Temporal  Peers.  2. 

3.  That  the  Commons  did  not  antiently  iitt  together 

with  the  Lords.  2.  b. 

4.  That  the  Commons  antiently  had  a  Speaker.  3. 

5.  I'he  Numbers  of  the  Lords  Spiritual  &  Temporal, 

fummoned  to  Parliament,  from  ann.  49  Hen.  tertij,  to 
ann.  22  Edw.  tertij.  6. 

6.  Precedent  ot  a  Free  Conference  demanded  by  the 

Commons  without  any  previous  Conference.  10. 

7.  About  application  to  the  Crown  by  the  Lords, 

Whether  certain  Bills  (wherein  the  Prerogative  was  con¬ 
cerned)  fhould  be  read.  x  1. 

8.  That  the  Speaker  of  the  Commons,  for  Sickneis, 

hath  been  removed.  12. 

9.  Ot  making  of  Lawes  in  Parliament.  13. 

10.  Whether  the  Kings  Afient  be  necefTary  to  all 

capital  Judgements  given  in  Parliament  by  the  Lords, 
either  be  ore  the  Judgement  be  given,  or  after  ?  16. 

1 1.  Concerning  Freedome  ot  .  peech.  18.  &  21. 

12.  Of  going  away  from  the  Parliament,  without 

leave.  20.  b. 

13.  The  Difference  betweene  an  Ordinance  of  Parle- 

ment,  &  a  Statute.  22. 

14.  Concerning  Adjournment  of  the  Houfe.  25. 

15.  Of  the  Lords  receiving  a  Meflage  from  the  Com¬ 
mons.  26. 

16.  That  Matters  of  Parlement  ought  to  bedifeufled 

by  the  Law  &  Courfe  of  Parlement.  27. 

17.  1  ouching  Procuratores  Cleri.  20. 

18.  Whither  the  King  bee  an  Eflate,  or  Heade  of 

the  3  Eltates.  without  being  an  Eflate  ?  30. 

19.  1  hat  Peers  of  the  Upper  Houfe,  are  not  bound 
to  anfwer  in  the  Commons  Iloufe  of  Parliament.  32. 

20.  Of  the  Arraignment  &  Condemnation  of  George 

Duke  of  Clarence,  in  full  Parliament ;  anno  18  Regis 
Edwardi  iv.  of  which,  noe  Memoriall  is  to  be  found,  in 
the  Records  of  Parliament.  36. 

It  is  added.  But  this  way  of  Proceedinge,  it  feems 


Num.  2243 — 2246. 

difpleafed  the  Commons,  in  that  the  King  fhould  inforce 
either  Article  or  Teflimony  againfl  the  Delinquent,  in  a 
capitall  Caufe. 

21.  Whether  the  Lords  in  Parliament,  can  glue  power 

to  any  Committee  or  Referees,  to  examine  Witneffes 
upon  Oath  ?  37. 

22.  For  what  Caufes  a  Peere  of  this  Realme  may  be 
imprifoned,  dureing  the  Sittinge  of  Parliament.  39. 

This  Article  containeth  the  whole  Proceedings  in 
the  Houfe  of  Peers,  with  relation  to  Thomas  Howard 
Earl  of  Arundell  &:  Surrey,  who  was  imprifoned  by  the 
King  for  a  perfonal  MifJemeanor. 

23.  Whether,  upon  an  Impeachment  of  the  Iloufe  of 

Commons,  ofTreafon  in  generally  without  alien  cl  going 
any  particular  Treafon  :  a  Peer  fo  impeached,  ought  to 
be  committed  ?  56. 

This  is  confidered  upon  the  Lord  Chancellor  Cla¬ 
rendon’s  Cafe,  who  was  accufed  by  the  Commons  11 
November  1667.  of  High  Treafon  Sc  High  Crimes  Sc 
Mifdemeanors,  in  generall  :  and  here,  likewife,  11:0ft 
of  the  Proceedings  in  the  Lords  Houle  againfl  h's  Lord- 
fhip,  are  particularly  related. 

24.  Whether  an  Attachment  out  of  the  Courte  of 

Chancery,  can  regularly  ifltte  ‘  againfl  a  Peere  of  this 
Realme,  for  nor  appearing  in  Chancery,  or  for  not  per¬ 
forming  a  Decree  nr  dt  there  ?  70. 

'1  his  Queffion  is  not  difeuffed  ;  but  only  Paper 
left  Blank,  whereupon  the  Confiderattou  of  it  was  to  be 
entered. 

25.  An  Order  of  the  Houfe  of  Peers,  made  the  inr-h 

of  June  1628,  obliging  the  Mnfcovia  Company  to  pay-eft 
their  Creditors  ;  and  regulating  certain  of  their  Affairs, 
in  Order  thereunto.  ‘  71. 

Thi-  was  occalEned  by  a  gc-nerall  Protection  p ranted 
from  the  King  &  Councell  to  that  Compa  y,  inrfcfpedt 
of  their  being  decayed  by  greate  Loffcs,  6:c. 

2244. 

A  very  thin  Book  in  final!  folio,  containing  only  one 
Trail,  which  isfentituhd. 

Severall  Greivances,  concerninge  Trade,  prefented 
to  King  James  by  Sir  Robert  Heath  then  Solicitor  Gene¬ 
rali,  vpon  Friday  the  28th  of  May  1624-  in  the  name  of 
the  Lower  Iloufe  of  Parliament,  in  the  Banquetiing 
Houfe  at  White  Hall. 

2245. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  bv  different  hands  ; 
wherein  are  contained, 

x.  A  Shorte  Vieweof  Henry  the  third  his  Life.  1. 
The  Author  was  Sir  Robert  Cotton  ;  &  this  Copie 
all  along  gives  his  Citations  in  the  margin. 

2.  A  Letter  written  by  a  Mr.  of  Arte  of  Cambridge,  to 

his  friende  in  London,  &c.  9. 

This  is  the  Libfell  called  Leiceflers  Commonwealth, 
commonly  aferibed  to  Rob.  Perfons  the  Jefuit. 

3.  Pia  et  utilis  Meditatio,  defumpta  ex  libro  Jobi, 

Cap.  20.  60. 

4.  The  fame  in  Englifh. 

2246. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  containing  a  Treatife  about 
Money  Matters,  which  bears  no  Authors  name,  nor 
hath  any  Preface.  Whether  it  be  in  print,  or  whether  it 
may  be  aferibed  to  Gerard  Malines,  in  this  my  abibnee 
from  my  Lords  noble  Library  of  printed  Books  now  at 
Wimpole,  I  cannot  fay.  In  order  therefore,  to  ap- 
prile  his  Lordlhipof  the  Defign  of  this  Treatife,  I  flail 
i’ubjoia  the  Contents  of  its  feveral  Chapters;  not  taken 
from  thofe  two  Leaves  at  the  beginning,  which  are 
added  to  the  Treatife,  but  from  tile  Work  it  fell. 

1.  Of  the  firft  Invention,  &Uie  of  Money.  1. 

2.  Of  the  Matter  of  Money.  3. 

3.  Of  the  Formes  of  Monev  ;  aundentlie,  Sc  now  in 

Ufe.  -  7.  b. 

4.  Of 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


573 


Num.2246,  2247. 


4.  Of  the  Proportions  held  betweene  Gold  &  Silver, 
auncient  &  moderne.  12\ 

r  Of  the  raifing  of  the  Price  &  Money,  both  of 
Siluer  &  Gold.  *9-b* 

6.  Of  bafe  Money.  _  .  2^- 

7.  Of  the  Inconveniences  in  generall,  growne  in  the 

matter  of  Money.  .  3b- 

8.  Of  the  low  Price  of  our  Siluer.  44- 

9.  Of  the  prohibition  of  forraigne  Moneys,  efpccially 

Spanifh.  .  5 1  • 

10.  Of  the  vnequall  Coynage  of  our  Moneys.  57. 

1 1 .  Of  the  great  incrcafe  of  the  Proportion  betweene 
Gold  &  Siluer,1”  and  the  things  valued  by  them  :  by  which 
there  is  growne  a  greater  wante  of  Money  in  England 
then  wav  in  auncient  times  :  and  of  the  Gaufes  thereof; 
and  of  the  Reamidies  which  may  be  applied.  63.  b. 

1  2.  Of  the  rayfinge  of  the  prifes  of  Money  by  our 
Neighbours,  &  the  defe&e  of  our  not  raifing  of  our 
Moneys  accordingly.  87. 

,3.  Of  the  benefitts  which  do  growe  vnto  the  State 
by  the  rayfinge  of  Moneys  ;  and  the  prejudices  which 
doe  grow  by  not  rayfing  of  it.  89.  b. 

14.  The  benefits  which  doe  growe  to  the  State  by  the 

not  rayfinge  of  Moneye  ;  and  the  prejudice  which  doe 
growe’ bv  the  rayfing  of  it.  93-  b- 

1 5.  Examinations  of  the  reafons  for  the  rayfinge  of 

Money.  99.  b. 

1 6.  Examination  of  the  Reafons  for  the  not  rayfinge 

of  Money.  .  , 

17.  Of  contracting  with  forraigne  Nations  by  Am- 
baffadors  to  keepe  their  Moneys  at  a  certaine  Standard. 

109.  b. 

18.  Of  the  ordayninge  of  Siluer-payments.  1 13. 

19.  Of  equallinge  the  Exchange.  1 1 9* 

20.  Of  reducinge  Moneys  to  the  lownefsof  auncient 
Values. 

21.  Of  rayfinge  of  our  Moneys  according  to  the  ray¬ 
finge  of  our  Neighbours.  .  1 29-  b- 

22.  Of  introducinge  two  different  Species  of  Money. 

.  x3.3-  b- 

22.  Of  Coymng  of  Moneys  without  diftindlion  of 
Weight.  b* 

This  Author  feems  to  have  fiounlhed  in  the  Reign 
of  K.  Charles  1.  for  in  foil,  t  3.  b.  &  54.  he  i'peaks  of  the 
year  1622.  as  of  time  perfectly  paffed  :  and  this  Treatife 
is  but  the  former  part  of  his  intended  Work,  as  may  ap¬ 
pear  in  fol.  147.  where  I  find  the  following  Words, 
about  raifing  the  Value  of  Money;  “and  for  this  purpofe 
I  intend  to  fett  downe  the  Hiltory  of  the  moft  memora¬ 
ble  railings  that  haue  bine  in  this  kind,  both  in  our  age, 
and  heretofore,  of  what  Nature  they  were  ;  and  how 
thofe  Stales  did  draw  their  benefitt  &  fubfiltance  out  of 
them.  Secondly  what  Extreamities  &  Contufions  thofe 
ravfings  did  drawe  vpon  the  faid  States  &  the  people 
thereof.  Thirdly,  what  reamidy  thofe  Eftates  haue 
applycd  to  reduce  &  fettle  thofe  Exfreamityes  &  Confu- 
fions  whereunto  they  were  fallen.  In  which  Hiftorye,  I 

lhall  come  to  touch fome  Examples  very  moderne”- - & 

concludes  the  prefent  Treatife  thus, - “  all  which  will 

require  a  longe  &  curious  Difcurfion  ;  but  1  doe  leaue  it 
vnto  a  feacond  Breathinge.’’ 

2247. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  partly  upon  parchment,  & 
partly  upon  paper  ;  the  number  of  whofe  Leaves  is 
all  along  noted  at  the  bottom,  by  the  hand  of  Dr.  John 
Covell  late  Mailer  of  Chrilts  College,  all  whofe  Ma- 
nuferipts,  not  of  his  own  hand-writing,  my  noble 
Lord  now  living,  bought  of  him  many  years  agoe. 
Herein  is  contained  a  Colledtion  of  Homilies  or  Pof- 
tills,  tarn  de  tempore  quam  de  Sanais,  for  the  whole 
year  ;  which,  becaufe  they  are  in  Englifn,  and  feem 
to  have  been  compiled  by  or  for  fome  Secular  Prieft, 
and  lhew  fomewhat  of  the  State  of  ReliQicn  here, 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.II. 


Num.  2247. 

about  the  times  of  K.  Edward  iv.  fo  K.  Henry  vn. 

I  will  take  the  more  pains  with,  by  deferibing  the  fame 
in  the  manner  following. 

1.  Firft  Sunday  in  Advent;  which  Title  is  prefixed 

by  Dr.  Coveil.  1  • 

Beginning.  “  Worlhipfull  F rends,  this  day  begyn- 
ncthe  J»e  Aduent,  and  it  is  callede  the  firft  Sonday  of 
Aduent  &  gracious  commyng  of  oure  Souereyne  Chrille 
Jhefu.” 

2.  Item,  Dominica  prima  Adventus  Domini.  2. 
Beginn.  “  Nowe  begynnethe  holy  Chirche  to  make 

mynde  &  mencione  of  the  commynge  of  oure  Souereyne 
Saviour  Crifte  Jhefu  into  pisworlde.” 

3.  Lem.  de  Aduentu  Crifti.  3.  b- 

Beginn.  ,c  Worlhipfull  Frenedis,  this  day  is  callide 

pe  firft  Sunday  of  Advente  of  Crifte  ;  pat  is  to  fey,  the 
Sonday  of  Crills  commynge.” 

4.  Item,  de  Adventu  Xpi.  ad  Judicium.  5-  b. 

Beginn.  “The  feconde  commynge  of  Crifte  to  the 

Dome,  flrallebe  fulle  egire  &  cruelle.” 

5.  In  die  Nativitatis  Domini  nri  Jhefu  Crifti.  7. 
Beginn.  Worfliipfulle  frendis,  alle  holy  Chirche 

joyethe  6c  gladdcthe  in  Mynde  of  the  blefsfulle  byrthe  of 
oure  Savioure  &  Souereyne  Crifte  Jhefu,  verrey  God  & 
Man.” 

6.  Item,  de  Nativitate  Dni  nri  Jftu  Xpi.  10.  b. 
Beginn.  “  San&us  Hugo  Cluniacenfis  reherfythe  & 

faythe,  pat  on  Criftemas  nyghte,  pe  mercifulle  modir  of 
God  apperid  vnto  hym  ;  havinge  hir  bleftide  Sone 
oure  SavyoureJhefu  in  hirArmys,  fayinge  onthiswyfe.” 

7.  Item,  de  Nativitate  Dili  nri  Jhu  Xpi.  13. 

That  famous  Doflor  Ifodorus  wriiethe  in  the  Story 

of  the  bleffide  Natiuite  of  our  Sovereyne  Saviour  Crifte 
Jhefu  in  this  wife. 

8.  De  Sanfto  Stephano  prothomarfire.  15.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Suche  a  day  is  the  fell  of  that  glorious 

Martir  Seint  Stevin,  pat  was  the  firft  Martir  pat  fuffred 
Dethe  for  the  Love  of  God  after  Crills  Afcenfione,  as 
the  Boks  of  the  Dedis  of  Apoftclis  tellith.” 

9.  De  Sto  Johanne  Evangelifta.  1 7.  b. 

Worfliipfulle  Frenedis,  fuche  a  day  is  pe  holy 

Fell  of  Seint  Johan  Evangelifte,  Cofyne  vnto  Crifte 
&  wel-belouede  :  to  whome  God  gafe  3  fpecialle 
prerogatyves  &  preuylegis  of  grace  before  aile  other 
Apoftlis.” 

10.  De  Scor.  Innocencium.  20. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  Frendis,  Suche  a  day  fliall 

be  pe  Fell  of  Innocents,  pat  day  is  callid  on  Englislhe 
Tonge  Childre-mas  day,  for  pe  multitude  of  Childre  pat 
were  flayne  for  Goddis  caufe,  6c  Criftis  fake.” 

11.  De  Sco  Thoma  Cantuarienci  Archiepifcopo.  22. 
Beginn.  “  This  day  is  pe  fell  of  pat  glorious  Marter 

Seint  Thomas  of  Caunterbery,  pat  was  flaynefor  perighte 
of  holy  Chirche,  &  of  pe  Realme  ofYngelande.” 

12.  In  die  Circumficionis  Dili  nri  Jfiu  Xpi.  25. 
Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  Frends,  fuche  a  day  Is  the 

holy  Fell  of  the  Circum  cifione  of  oure  Souereyne  Saviour 
Crifte  Jhefu,  callid  Newe  Yere-day.” 

13.  Item,  plus  de  Circumcifione,  Dfii  ilri  Jtiu  Xpi, 

26.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  Freendis,  pis  day  is  callede 
New  Yere-day  ;  as  who  fay  pe  endinge  of  pe  yere  pat 
is  gone  &  paffede  ,  Sc  pe  begynnynge  of  pe  yere  pat  is 
commynge.” 

14.  De  Epiphania  Dni  nri  Jtiu  Xpi.  28. 

Beginn.  “  This  day  is  called  pe  i2te  day  ;  but,  in 

trewthe,  it  is  pe  13  day  of  Criftemas  :  whiche  day  holy 
Cherche  callethe  pe  Epiphani.” 

1 5.  Dominica  in  Septuagefima.  30,  b* 

Beginn.  “  This  daye  is  callide  in  holy  Chirche,  the 

Sonday  in  Scptuagefime.  It  is  to  wiitc,  pis  tendir  & 
gofteley  Modire  holy  Chirche  takiihe  &  yevethe  atten- 
daunce  as  a  good  Modir  to  hir  Childe,  6c  perfeyvithe 
theme  in  Sikenefs  of  Syne.” 

7  G  16.  Item 


574 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS> 


Num,  2247. 

16.  Item,  Dominica  Septuagefima.  34. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  Freendis  ;  we  fynde  writ  in 

})e  Golpeile  of  Seint  Mathewe  J>at  is  rede  pis  day  in  holy 
Chirche  Matt.  20.  J>at  our  Souereyne  Savioure  Jhefu 
felde  vnto  his  Difciples  this  Parabil.” 

17.  Dominica  in  Sexagefima.  35. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  Frendis.  This  day  is  callide 

Ve  Sonday  in  Sexagefime.  This  worde  Sexagefime  is  a 
nombre  of  3  fcore  :  whiche  nombir  oure  Modir  holy 
Chirche  enformythe  euery  Mane  &  Womane  to  pinke 
how  fliorte  is  a  Mannes  life  inn  thefe  dayes.’5 

18.  Dominica  in  Sexagefima.  37.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  freendis,  we  finde  in  the 

Gofpelle  of  pis  day,  Luc.  8.  pat  oure  Lorde  Jhefu  Grille 
feide  vnto  pe  peple  pat  was  nighe,  of  diuerfe  Cities,  this 
Similitude.” 

if-  Dominica  in  Quinquagefima.  39.  b. 

Beginn.  “  I  fynde  writte  in  J>e  Gofpelle  of  J)is  day, 
Luc.  1.  .  whane  oure  Soueryne  Lorde  Code  Criit  Jhelu 
went  toward  the  Citee  of  Jerico.” 

20.  Item,  Dominica  in  Quinquagefima.  43.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  ffrenJis,  this  day  is  callede 

in  holy  Chirche,  the  Sonday  in  Quinquagefime.  Ye 
lhalle  vndirltonde  pat  pis  worde  Quinquagefime  is  a 
nombre  of  50  ;  which  nombre  betokenythe  Remiffy- 
one  of  forgifenes  of  Synne.” 

21.  Ferii4ta.  in  capite  Jejunij.  46.  b. 

_  Beginn.  “  Righte  worlhipfulle  freendis,yelhalle  fade 
on  Wedncfday  as  pe  comendable  Conditucione  of  holy 
Chirche  hathe  ordeynede  ;  for  that  day  is  callede  Caput 
Jejunij.  the  principalle  begynnyng  of  pat  holy  fad,  pat 
oure  Souereyne  Savioure  Crifte  Jhefu  halowede  in  his 
Manhoode.” 

22.  Item,  in  die  Cinerum.  48.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Confedione  is  a  godely  purgacione  of 

fynne.  Example;  in  bodily  Sikenes,  a  Leche  or  aFecifione 
firde  yevithe  to  the  Sike,  a  Preparatife  ;  feconde  a  Pur- 
gatife  ;  ande  aftir,  a  prophetable  Sanatife.” 

23.  Dominica  prima  Quadragefime.  ez. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  Freendis,  this  day  is  call'id  in 

holy  Chirche, pe  firde  Sonday  of  Quadragefime  or  Lent.” 

This  Quadragefime  is  a  nombre  of  40  :  for  frorae 
pis  day  to  Ell  erne  day  be  40  days/’ 

24.  Item,  Dominica  prima  Quadragefime.  54.  b. 
Beginn.  “Worlhipfulle  frenedis,  we  rede  in  the  Gof- 

pel.lc  of  this  day.  Matt.  4(0.  that  oure  Souereyne  Lorde 
(..ride  Jhelu  was  Iede  of  a  Spirite  into  Deferte,  that  he 
lhulde  be  temptide  of  Devetle.” 

25.  Item,  Dominica  prima  Quadragefime.  57. 

Beginn.  “  Recitetur  Evangelium,  ut  fupra.  Beatus 

Maximus  in  Sermone  de  Quadragefima,  feythe,  pe  De¬ 
velle  fuppofede  e<  ere  pat  Cride  was  mane,  for  pe  grete 
and  infenyte  Myracles  that  were  wrought  vpone  Erthe  in 
his  blelfide  Birthe,  ande  aftir  in  his  life.” 

26.  Dominica  fecunda  Quadragefime.  60.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Ihis  day  is  the  fecond  Sonday  of  clene 

Lent ;  wherefore,  as  he  haue  be  befy  alle  pis  yere  beforun, 
to  make  you  clene  and  oned  in  array  of  youre  Bodies* 
withouteforthe :  now,  ye  flialle  be  as  befy  to  purge  & 
dlenfe  youre  Soules,  withinforthe.” 

27.  Item,  Dominica  fecunda  Quadragefime.  62.  b. 
Beginn.  “  It  is  written  in  pe  Gofpelle  of  this  day, 

Matt.  That  oure  Souereyne  Savyoure  Crid  Jhefu 
went  oute  into  the  parties  of  Tiry  &  Sydone.” 

28.  Dominica  tercia  Quadragefime.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  frenedis,  this  dav  is  called  pe 

third  Sonday  of  clene  Lent.  We  rede  in  the  Gofpelle 
ot  tins  day,  how  oure  Savioure  Cride  Jhefu  voydede  & 
cade  cut  a  dombe  Develle  from  a  mane.” 

29.  Item,  Dominica  tercia  Quadragefime.  67. 

Beginn.  “  The  holy  Evangelifie  Seinte  Luke,  in  the 

Gofpelle  of  pis  day,  Luc.  1  r  .  rcherfithe,  how  oure  Soue- 
l-cyne  Savioure  Cride  Jhefu  voydede  Sc  drofe-outea  De- 
vellefrom  a  mane,  and  it  was  dombe  and  myghtenot  ipeke” 


Num.  2247. 

30.  Dominica  quarta  Quadragefime.  70.  b. 

Beginn.  “  1  his  is  the  fourthe  Sonday  of  Lente;  ande 

this  day  alle  holi  Chirche  makethe  mencione  of  an  holy 
mane  callid  Moyfes,  pat  was  a  Figure  of  oure  Lorde 
Cride  Jhefu,  many  yeeris  or  Cride  was  borne.” 

31.  Dominica  quarta  Quadragefime.  74.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Reuercnt  Sc  worlhipfulle  frendis;  oure  So- 

uerayne  Savyoure  Cride  Jhefu  lhewede  a  grete  myghteof 
his  Godhede,  as  pe  Gofpele  of  Seint  Johan  witneffethe 
this  day  red  in  holy  Chirche.” 

Note,  that  this  Sunday,  which  we  commonly  cad 
Mid-lent  Sunday,  was  formerly  called  Role-Sundav,  Sc 
Loaf  Sunday.  _  vid.75. 

32.  Dominica  in  padione Dni  nri  Jhefu  Xpi.  77. 

.  Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  frendis,  This  day  is  callede 
Pufiion-Sunday  :  for  this  day  the  Jewis  afletnblede  Sc  fulle 
adentyde  to  do  Cride  to  dethe,  becaufe  he  tolde  peme 
peir  fawtes,  &  reprevide  her  wickide  lyvinge.” 

33.  Item,  Dominica  in  padione  Dni  nri  Jhu  Xpi. 

_  .  .  80.* 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  &  Reuerente  Frendis,  pis 

day  is  callide  Padione-Sonday  ;  not  for  becaufe  our  Soue- 
reigne  Lorde  Crid  Jhefu  foffride  his  Padyone  pis  day  : 
but  it  is  callede  Padione-Sonday,  for  this  day  the  curfede 
ande  envyous  Jewis,  with  conlente  of  rhe  Bisflioppes  & 
pe  Scrybes  of  the  Lawe,  confpirede  &  ymaginede,  fro  pis 
day  forthe,  how  Sc  in  what  wife  pei  myghte  putt  him  to 
pe  dethe.” 

34.  Dominica  in  rarais Palmarum.  8r.b. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  Frendes,  this  day  is  callede 

Palme-Sonday  ;  but,  for  pe  Seruice  of  pis  day  is  longe,  I 
wolle  fchortly  tell  you  whi  it  is  callede  fo.”  ’ 

35.  Tenebre  tri urn  noclium  ante  Pafcha.  g->. 
Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  frenedis,  ye  lhalle  cum  to 

holi  Chirche  on  Wednyfday,Thurfday,  &  Friday  at  evene 
for  to  here  dyvyne  Seruice  ;  as  commendable  Codome  of 
holy  Chirche  hathe  ordeynde.  Ande  holy  Chirche  vfithe 

tho  3  dayes - pe  Seruice  to  be  faide  in  pe  Eventyde  in 

derkenes.  And  it  is  callede  with  divers  mene  Tenables  - 
but  holy  Chirche  calleth  it  Tenebras.’’ 

36.  Feria  quinta  Cena  Domini.  84.  b. 

Beginn.  “This  day  is  callede  Schir-Thurfday,  or  ellis 

pe  day  of  Crides  Maundy  ;  pat  is,  Maundy-Thurfday : 
for,  pat  day  fowpide  Cride  with  his  Difciples  beforne  his 
Padione  ;  and  gafe  them  there  his  owne  blellide  body, 
his  Flesfhe  Sc  Blode,  vndir  forme  of  Brede  Sc  Wyne  ; 
ande,  after  Soper,  inekely  he  waslhede  his  Difciples  Fete* 
to  Ihewe  example  of  Mekenes.  Ande  caufe  whi  it  is 
callede  Schir-Thurfday  is  this  :  forfaders,  in  olde  dayes, 
had  in  cudome  or  vfe,  for  to  fchere  the  heer,  pat  day,  of 
ande  Beredis,  &  to  make  peme  honed  withonte-forthe 
ageynes  Edyme-day.” 

37.  In  dieParafave.  8c.b. 

Beginn.  “  This  day  is  callede  Gode  Fryday  ;  'for  it 

turne  alle  Cridene  mene  to  gode,  pat  oure  Souereyne 
Savioure  Cride  Jefu  fufFrede  pat  day  his  precious  Padione 
for  alle  our  Redempcione  Sc  Saluacione  vndir  Pownce 
Pilate.” 

38.  Item,  in  die  Parafave.  89. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  Frenedis  oure  Souereyn  Sa^ 

vyoure  Cride  Jhefu,  as  this  day  he  fulle  obediently  mek- 
hyme  to  the  dethe/’ 

39.  Figura  in  die  Parafave,  de  Padione  Domini.  9  r. 
Beginn.  “  Owre  Souereyne  Savioure  Cride  Jhefu 

pis  day,  in  his  precious  Padione,  was  alle  fprent  with 
Blode.” 

40.  In  Vigilia  Paslhe.  92.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Worlliipfulle  Frendes,  on  Ederne-Euene 

pe  Pafcalle  (an  huge  Candle)  is  broughte  forth  to  be  ha- 
lowyde.  It  fignityethe  oure  Souereyne  Savioure  Cride 
Jhefu :  for  as  pe  Pafcalle  ys  Candylle  &  Tapere  in  the 
Chirche,  fo  is  Cride  principalle  ande  chefe  aboue  allee 
Seynts  in  Hevyne.  'i  he  Pafc-dle  alfo  fignifiethe  pe  piller 
of  Fyre  pat  yede  beforne  pe  Childrene  of  Ifraelle.” 

41.  Exortacio 


Bibliothecae  Harleiatlae. 


575 


Num.  2247^ 

41.  Exortacio  in  die  Pafche.  £4. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  frendis,  ye  fhalle  vndirlloiule 

)>at  J»is  day  in  fum  place  is  callede  Efterne-day,  in  fum 
place  Pace-day,  and  in  fum  place  Goddes  day.  Ye 
know  wele  pat  in  many  places  where  worfhipe  is  vfede, 
pe  manere  &  cuftome  is  for  to  voide-out  the  Fire  of  the 
Halle  that  day  ;  and  pe  Stoke  of  the  Chymney  pat  hathe 
bein  brent  &  blake  withe  Smoke,  it  is  pis  day  with  grene 
Rifhes  &  fayre  Floures  ftrewide.” 

42.  Item,  in  die  Pafce,  alia  Exortacio.  96. 

Beginn.  “  Right  Worfhipfulle  Frendis,  ye  fhalle  en- 

tenley  take  heed  pat  euery  mane  &  womarie  pat  pis  day 
wolle  dilpofe  pcime  to  receyve  CriH.es  blellide  Body  fa- 
crede,  he  mufle  be  clene  in  lyvinge.” 

43.  Item,  tercia  Exortacio  in  die  Pafce.  98.  b. 

Beginn.  “Worfhipfulle  Frendis,  ye  fhall  vndirltonde 

pat  oure  Souereyne  Savyoure  CriHe  jhefu  chargethe  aile 
Criftene  Mene  and  Womcne  of  3  dyvers  Obferuances : 
oon  is  Faflinge  in  Abflynence.” 

44.  Item,  quarta  Exortacio  in  die  Pafce.  102. 

Beginn.  “  WorfhippfuJIe  Frendis,  after  pe  laudable 

ConHitucion  of  holy  Chirche,  pis  day  ye  fchalle  receyve 
your  SouereyneSavyoure  Crifte  Jhefu  very  Goddes  body, 
in  fourme  of  Brede.” 

45.  Dies  Rogacionum.  104. 

Beginn.  “Thefe  3  dayes  Monday ,Tewfday,  &  Wed- 

nefday  by  commaundid  by  ConHitucione  to  be  faHed  of 
peme  that  be  of  lawefulle  Age.” 

46.  Item,  de  tribus  diebus  Rogacionum.  105.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Worihipfullefrenedis,  it  is  commaundede 

by  the  comendable  Cuftome  &  ConHitucione  of  holy 
Chirche,  pat  euery  Mane  &  Womane  pat  is  at  lawfulle 
age,  fhulde  fafte,  Monday,  Tewfday,  &  Wednefday,  & 
go  in  Procefiione ;  for  pei  be  callede  Rogacion-dayes, 
dayes  of  Prayer.” 

47.  Item,  de  oracione  Dominica.  ioy. 

Beginn.  “  Peraventure  ye  w.  lde  axe  a  queftione  and 

fey  I  can  not ;  but  my  Pater-nofter,  is  pat  Prayer  goode  ? 

I  fay,  like  as  Goulde  pa.'JIrhe  in  valure  alle  Metalle  in  his 
quantitie ;  fo  pat  Prayer  pe  Pater-nofter  excellithe  &  paf- 
fi the  alle  oper  Prayeres.” 

48.  In  die  Afcenfionis  Domini.  x  I0. 

Beginn.  “  Righte  worfliippfulle  Frenedis,  on  Thurf- 

day  next  commynge,  fhall  be  pe  holy  Fell  of  pe  Afcen- 
cione  of  oure  Souereyne  Savioure  Crifte  Jhefu  ;  which 
day,  as  holy  Chirche  makethe  mencione,  or  witneffethe 
it,  is.” 

49.  Item,  in  die  Afcenfionis  Domini.  1 1 2.  b. 

Beginn.  “Worfhipfulle  frenedis,  it  is  wit  pat  oureSo- 

vereyne  Savyoure  Crifte  Jhefu  afeendide  &  ftiede-up 
into  Hevene  for  5  caufes  &  refons  profitable  to  Man- 
kinde.” 

50.  In  vigilia  Pentecoften.  xx4_ 

Beginn.  Worfhipfulle,  it  is  to  witte,  pat  euery  Man 

and  Woman  pat  is  wele  difpofed,  wolle  pis  holy  Vigille  of 
Witfon-Eve  faff,  &  cum  to  divyne  Seruice,  myniftrede  Sc 
feide  in  holy  Chirche  pat  day.” 

51.  Item,  in  die  Dominica  Pentecoften.  1 1 5.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Righte  worfliippfulle  frenedis,  pis  day 

is  callide  Witt-fonday,  be  cauf'e  pe  holy  Gofte  pis  day 
brought  Wytte  &  Wifdome  to  alle  CriftesAppoftles  &  Dif- 
ciplis  &  fo,  bi  peire  Prechinge,  Doctrine  &  Teachinge, 
to  alle  Criftene  Peple.” 

52.  Item,  in  die  Pentecofte.  xx8. 

Beginn.  “  Hit  is  wrete  in  Actibus  Apoftolorum  pat  pe 

holi  Gofte  was  fende  from  Heuene  vuto  Apoftolis,  as 
Crifte  the  feconde  Perfone  in  Trinitie  hade  promifede 
vnto  peme,  in  his  bleflide  Afcenfione,  vnto  peire  conty- 
nualle  Comforte  &  eternalle  Recreacione.” 

53.  De  Fefto  k  Solempnitate  See  Tiinitatis.  120.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  frendes,  pis  day  is  pe  holi 

fefte  of  pe  blesfulle  Trinite  ;  &  righte  as.  holi  Chirche 
makethe  Mynde,  in  oper  tymes  of  pe  yere,  of  pe  Sone 
fecond  Perfone  in  Trinite,  as  in  Criftemas  j  &  of  pe  holi 


Num.  2247. 

Gofte  prid  Perfone  in  Trynite,  as  on  Wit-fonday  :  fo, 
pis  day,  holi  Chirche  makethe  Mynde  of  peSclempnite 
of  3  Perfones  in  Trynyte,_  Fadir,  Sone,  &  holi  G  fte.  ” 

54.  Item,  de  Solempnitate  See  Trinitatis.  123. 
Beginn.  “  Worfhippefulle  Frendis,  Ye  fhalle  vndir-* 

ftonde  pat  pe  fefte  of  pe  blesfulle  Trinite  was  fum  tyme  not 
halowide  nor  rei  erencede  in  holy  Chirche,  as  it  is  now.” 

55.  De  fefto  &  Solemnitate  Corporis  Chrifti.  123.^ 
Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  frendis,  pis  day  is  callede 

pe  feft  of  Corpus  Xpi,  pat  is  to  fey,  pe  holy  fefte  of  ver- 
rey  precious  God  his  Body,  pat  is  daily  offride  in  pe 
Aw  ter  of  pe  Prcefts  handes  vnto  pe  Fadir  of  Hevyne,  in 
rtinyfTyone  of  Syne,  to  alle  Jjat  be  in  perfyte  Lofe,  in 
perfite  Charite,  &  clennes  of  Soule.” 

In  the  mention  of  the  feveral  Indulgencies  granted 
to  this  day,  their  refpeebive  numbers  are  erafed. 

56.  Item,  in  die  Corporis  Crifti.  125. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  frendes,  It  is  to  be  remem- 

brede,  wite,  &  vndirftonde,  pat  oure  Souereyne  Savioure 
Crifte  Jhefu  willithe  &  grauntithe  pe  Sacramente  of  his 
bleflide  Body,  to  be  vfede  &  hade  in  cuftome  dayli  in  holy 
Chirche,  to  his  Reuerence  k  Worfhip,  Sc  Comforte  to 
Man,  for  4  Caufes,  Salles,  &;  Refons.” 

This  Poftill  or  Sermon  abounds  in  legendary  Sto¬ 
ries,  like  the  others  ;  among  which,  I  note  that  relat¬ 
ing  to  the  well  difpofed  Curate  of  Axbridge  in  Deven- 
fliire,  at  fol.  128. 

57.  In  fefto  Sci  And ree.  129.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  frendis  pis  holy  Apoftle  Seint 

Andrew  muft  be  had  in  Reuerence  k  Worfhip  ;  &  fall 
his  holi  Evin  for  3  fpecialle  Vertues  pat  God  endewede 
hyme  with,  in  his  Life,  and  after  his  Dethe.” 

58.  I11  lefto  Sci  Nicholai  Epifcopi.  1 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  Frendes,  Ye  fhalle  vndir¬ 
ftonde  pat  pis  holy  Bysftiop  &ConfefToure  SeyntNycholas 
owethe  to  be  commendide  in  holy  Chirche,  for  3  fpe¬ 
cialle  caufes.” 

59.  In  Concepcione  Beate  Marie.  1 37. 

Beginn.  “  Such  a  day  N.  holy  Chirche  make  the 

mencione  of  pe  Cenceptione  of  oure  Ladi  Seint  Mari, 
for  3  fpecialle  Caufes.” 

Here  is  another  legendary  Story,  how  this  Feaft  of 
the  Conception  was  firft  inftituled  upon  a  report  made  by 
^Egelfin  Abbat  of  Ramfey,  as  if  the  Bleflcd  Virgin  had 
faved  him  k  his  Ship,  in  his  return  from  Denmark,  in 
purfuance  of  a  bargain  ftricken  between  an  Angel  &  the 
Abbat  for  that  purpofe:  ThisStory  would  have  been  no  lefs 
currant,  if  the  Author  had  made  Lanfrancus  Archbifliop 
of  Canterbury  during  the  Reign  of  K.  William  the  Con¬ 
queror,  inftead  of  his  Anfelmus. 

60.  De  Sco  Thoma  Apoftolo,  qui  dicitur  Didimus. 

1 39.  b. 

Beginn.  “  This  holi  Feft  of  Seint  Thomas  of  Ynde, 
pat  holy  Apoftle,  fhalle  fpecially  be  hade  in  Reuerence 
&  Worfh'p,  for  3  Caufis.” 

61 .  Converfio  Sci  Pauli  Apoftoli.  1 42. 

Beginn.  “  Suche  a  day  N.  is  callede  pe  Conuerfione 

of  Seinte  Paule  ;  for  pat  day,  he  was  converted  and  tur- 
nede,  from  a  lyraunt,  &  made  Goddes  Seruaunt  j  of  a 
prowde  man,  he  was  made  a  meke  man  ;  of  a  Perfecu- 
toure,  &  a  Purfewer  of  Criftene  peple  bi  werkis  of  pe 
Fende  :  nowe  is  made  gode  to  God,  and  is  his  holy 
Apoflile. 

62.  Purificatio  B".  Marie  ;  feftum  Ypopanfi,  five  Can¬ 
delaria,  nuncupatum.  xJ4.  j,. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  frenedes,  On  N.  fhalle  holi 
Chirche  folempnyfe  pe  holy  Fefte  of  oure  Lady  ;  Seint 
Mary,  callede  the  Fefte  of  pe  Puryficacione  of  oure  & 
fpecially  for  3  thinges.” 

63.  Sancti  Mathei  Apoftoli.  148. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  Frenedis,  Yefhalle  vndir¬ 
ftonde,  pat  oure  Souereyne  Savioure  Crifte  Jhefu,  vvhane 
he  was  here  in  Erthe,  he  eleft  &  chofe  1  2  Apoflelles, 
for  to  fe  &  here  what  eucre  he  dide.” 


64.  Annun. 


576 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2247; 

£>.  Annunciacio  beate  Marie  Virginis.  15-. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle Frendes,  Vpon  N.  fhalle  be 
j-e  holi  fede  offe  Annunciation  of  oure  Lady  Scint  Mari ; 
and  for  J?is  Caufe,  as  it  is  written  in  fe  Gofpelle  of  Seint 
Luke,  Luce  prirao.”  _  . 

65.  Scquitur  Quedio  penmens  fefto  Annunciatioms 

Beate  Marie.  _  l$*m 

Beginn.  “  It  is  to  afke  a  Quedione,  whi  it  is  portiaed 
&  fett,  a  Wyne-pot  with  a  Lilly  fere  in,  betwix  oure 
Lady  &  Gabrielle,  at  hir  Salufacione  &  Annunciacipne.” 

66.  De  quinque  gaudijs  beate  Marie.  ibid. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  Frendes,  It  is  to  wit  &  vn- 

derdonde  Jjat  alle  fe  Men  &  Womene  J>at  haue  Devocione 
to  fade  or  worfhip  fe  5  Evyns  of  oure  Lady,  in  Worfhip 
of  hir  5  Joyes.” 

67.  In  fedo  Sci  Georgij  Martiris.  153. 

Beginn.  «  Januenfis  de  Sanctis,  tellithe  in  fe  Story 

of  Seinte  George,  fat  befide  fe  Cite  of  Cirene  fere  was 
an  horrible  Dragon.” 

68.  In  fedo  Sci  Marci  Evangelide.  J55- 

Beginn.  “  Righte  Worfhipfulle  Frendes,  I  fvnde  wry- 

ten  in  fe  Life,  Legend,  8c  Story  of  fe  holy  Evangelide 
Seinte  Marke,  fat  he  was  Peteris  Difciple.” 

60.  In  fedi's  Apodolorum  Philippi  &  Jacobi.  i56.b. 
Beginn.  “  Seynt  Philip  &  Jacob  were  holy  Apodelles 
of  C.ride  ;  and  becaufe  this  Fede  commythe  yerely  in 
Ederne-tyme,  it  is  not  commaundede  to  be  fadtde.” 

70.  De  invencione  Sandte  Crucis.  158.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Suche  a  day  N.  fhalle  be  fe  holi  fede  cal- 

lede  Invencion  of  fe  holy  Grofl'e  of  Gride  ;  or  elles,  fe 
Fynding  of  fe  Gros  of  Gride  fat  he  dyed-vpon,  for  mari¬ 
nes  redempeione  ;  vvhiche  euery  Man  &  Wornane  is 
bounde  to  worfhipe  &  reuerence,  for  his precius  Paffione.” 

7 1 .  Fedum  Nativitatis  Sci  Johannis  Baptide.  1 6 1 .  b. 
Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  Frendes,  Vpon  N.  fhalle  be 

fe  Fede  of  Seint  Johan  Baptide  ;  A'  he  is  callede  fo  af- 
terwarde.  For  he  baptizede  Cride  in  fe  water  of  dome 
Jordane  ;  &  fe  Eveneis  commaundede  to  be  fadide.” 

72.  In  fedo  Sanftorum  Apodolorom  Petri  &  Pauli. 

165. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  Frenedis,  Suche  a  day  N. 
fhalle  be  fe  Fede  of  Seinte  Petir  &  Poule.  As  Doftours 
fay,  bofe  were  marterizede  vpon  a  day  ;  bofe  vndere 
fat  curiide  Tiraunt  Nero  fuffrede  Paflione :  bofe,  in  f e 
Citee  of  Rome  fuffrede  peynfulle  Dethe.” 

73.  In  fedo  Reliquiarum.  168. b. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  frendis,  on  Sonday  nexteom- 

myng  fhalle  be  fe  holy  Fede  of  all  Relykes,  callede  Re- 
like-Sonday  :  whiche  be  lefte  here  in  erthe,  to  fe  grete 
magnificence,  honour,  &  worfhipe  of  God,  &  profite  to 
man  bofe  bodily  and  godly.” 

74.  In  fedo  See  Marie  Magdalene.  169.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Suche  a  day  fhalle  be  the  holi  Fede  of 

Mary  Magdalene,  fat  was  fo  holy,  fat  our  Souereyne 
Savioure  lovede  hir  8c  ihewide  hir  grete  tokinsof  Love, 
Mercy,  &  Grace,  above  many  Wommene.” 

75.  In  fedo  Sci  Jacobi.  J  73- 

Beginn.  “  This  Seint  Janies  was  an  holy  8c  fulle  de- 

voute  man  to  God,  k  he  came  &  difeendide  ol  an  holy 
Lyne  St  Kvnrede ;  for  he  was  our  Ladi  Seint  Mari  Sudir- 
fone,  called  Maria  Salome,  awnte  vnto  Cride.” 

76.  In  fedo  See  Anne  Matris  Marie.  174:  b. 

Beginn.  “  Ye  flialle  vndirdande,  fat  we  rede  of  5 

holy  Womene  fat  highte  anne  ;  lede  eny  vnkunnynge 
man  toke  oon  for  an  ofir.  Wherefore  l  wolle  telle  you 
of  fefe  5  Annes,  Sc  whiche  of  alle  fefe  was  oure  Ladies 
Moder.” 

77  Paflio  Sancti  Laurencij  Martiris.  176. 

Beginn.  “  Maximus  fe  Doclour  feithe  (fat  writethe 
of  fe  Story  of  Seinte  Laurence',  he  feithe  fat  fe  Pafhone 
Sc  Marttrdome  of  Seinte  Laurence  fat  glorious  Martir, 
lliynv  die  to  alle  holy  Chirche,  &  illumynithe  &c  lyghet- 
teimhe  alle  fe  Worlde.” 

78.  A ifumpcio  beate  Marie  Virginis.  17S.  b. 


Nu:n.  2  247. 

Beginn.  “  Suche  a  day  fhalle  be  f  e  holy  Fede  cf  f  e 
Affumpcione  of  our  Lady  Seinte  Mary.  For  fat  fame  dav 
our  Souerevne  Saviour  Cride  Jhefu  affumpte  Sc  toke-vp 
vnto  hyme  his  blcffide  Modir  Maria,  in  to  Heuene,  bothe 
body  8c  foule,  and  crownede  her  Quene  of  Bliffe.  Whiche 
day,  alle  Aungelles  in  Heuene  come  in  proceffione  to 
hir  with  Rods  &  fwete-fmeilinge  Floures  of  Paradife,  in 
token  fat  She  is  Rofe  holi  Sc  Flours  of  alle  Wornane  ;  & 
fo  f  ei  dide  Omage  vnto  hir  as  f  e  chefe  Princes  of  Bliffe.” 

79.  DeEvangclio  ejufdem  diei.  iSi.b. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  freendis,  Alle  holy  Chirche 

i  n  erthe  militant  joicthe  on  fat  day  of  fe  Affumpcione 
of  our  Lady ;  &  folempnyzethe  fe  fede  with  Redingc, 
Sc  Synginge,  to  Goddes  worfhipe  8c  fat  bleflide  merci¬ 
ful  !e  Modir  of  Godc.” 

80.  Sandti  Bartholomci  Apodoli.  184. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  frendes,  Ye  flialle  vndir- 

dondc  fat  fis  worde  Bartholomews  ys  as  rflyche  to  fey  as 
Filius  fufpendentis  aquas,  Sone  of  Wat  res  holding  vp.” 

Though  our  Author  was  not  the  mod  learned  Doc¬ 
tor  of  the  Age  wherein  he  lived,  nor  always  happy  in 
his  Etymologies  :  yet  as  to  this  he  may  beexcufcd,  be¬ 
caufe  it  is  none  of  his  own  ;  hut  taken  from  the  Inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  Scriptural  proper  N  ones  (commonly 
aferibed  to  Remigius)  which  is  generally  added  to  the 
Vulgar  Latin  Bibles,  efpecially  to  thole  written  about  500 
years  agoe,  or  later. 

81.  Natiuitas  beate  Marie.  1 86. 

Beginn.  “  How  this  h«  ;/  Fede  of  fc  Natiuite,  fat  is 

to  feyt  fe  Birthe  of  oure  Lady  Seinte  Mary  was  firde 
founde  :  a  grete  Cleike  callede  Johan  Belethe  tellethe.” 

82.  Exaltacio  Sandte  Crucis  Cridi.  iSS.b. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  Frendis,  This  day  is  callide 

fe  Exaltacione  of  fe  holy  Croffe  fat  Cride  dyede  vp 
one  ;  fat  is  to  fey,  The  Liftynge-vp  of  fe  Croffe  of 
Criffe.” 

83.  Jejunium  quatuor  Temporum.  19 1. 

Beginn.  “  The  Ouater-Temper  flialle  be  fis  Weke 

callede  fe  Ymber-dayes,  Wednyfday,  Fryday,  &  Satir- 
day  L  whiche  dayes  Kalixte  fe  Pope  of  Rome  ordeynde, 
by  a  Generalle  Councelle,  to  be  fadede  4  tymes  in  fe 
yere,  for  certeyne  Caufes  &  Refons  folowynge.” 

84.  Fedum  Sanfti  Mathei  Apodoli.  192. 

Beginn.  “  Seinte  Mathew  fe  holy  Appodelle  &  Evan¬ 
gelide  is  commendide  in  holy  Chirche  for  4  holy  Vertues 
fat  he  hade.’’ 

85.  Fedum  Sci  Michael  is  Archangel!.  193.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Suche  a  day  flialle  be  folempnyzede  fe  fed 

of  fe  apparicione  of  fat  glorious  Archaungelle  Seynt  Mi¬ 
chael,  Proved  of  Paradife,  &  of  fe  Joyes  ofHevene.” 

In  fol.  194.  is  this  Obfervation,  Seynt  Gregory 
fat  famous  Doclour  feithe,  Whan  God  wolle  do  eny 
wonderfulle  Werkcs,  he  fendith  for  his  Servaunte  Mi- 
chaelle,  as  for  his  Banerere ;  for  he  berethe  in  his  Schilde, 
in  Gowles,  a  white  Croffe :  This  is  the  Signe  of  his 
Annes.” 

86.  Sci  Luce  Evangelide.  196.  b. 

“  Worfhip  full  Frendis,  Ye  flialle  vndirdonde  fat 

oure  Sovereync  Lorde  Cride  Jhefu,  he  ordeynide,  con- 
ditute,  &  made  4  Evangclidcs  to  wivte  &  teflifie  fe  4 
Gofpeiles  of  God.” 

87.  In  fedo  San&orum  Simonis  5c  Jude.  198. 

Beginn.  “  Worfhipfulle  Frendes,  on  fuche  a  day  fhalle 

be  fe  holy  Fede  of  Seinte  Symonde  Sc  Jude,  holi  Apoi- 
tellis  of  Cride.” 

88.  In  folempnitate  omnium  Sanctorum.  201. 

Beginn.  “Worfhipfulle  Freendcs,  fuche  a  day  fhalle 

be  fe  folempne  Fed  of  alle  Seyntes  in  Hcvene,  Sc  Goddes 
chefe  Chofene  8c  F.lcctis,  callede  Alle-Halowe  i-day  or 
Alle-Halow-mas-day ;  to  fe  grete  Honour  8c  Magnificence, 
Worfhip  8c  Reuerence  of  alicmyghiy  God,  and  to  Manner 
profite  bothe  Body  &  Soule.” 

89.  Item,  in  folempnitate  omnium  S  ir.ftorum.  203. 
Beginn.  •*  Woniuplu lie  frendis,  Oa  e  c  oftely  Modir 

9  holy 


Bibliothecae  HarleiariSe. 


w 


Num.  2247 — 2250. 

holy  Chirche,  inducethe  a  manere  of  Doctrine  Sr  Ler- 
ninge to worfliipe  8c  reuerenceof  alle  Seyntes  in  Hevene." 

90.  In  die  Animarum.  204.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Worlhipfulle  frendis,  Ye  fhalle  come  to 

holy  Chirche,  devotely  heringe  your  dyvyne  Seruyce. 
And  fpecially  pray  to  God  for  alle  fe  pynede  Sowles  ]>at 
abide  in  fe  peynfulle  prefone  of  Purg  itory.” 

91.  Exortacio  brevis  in  die  Sepulture,  vel  Trigintalis, 

feu  Anniverfarijs  alicujus  defuncli.  206. 

Beginn.  “  Righte  worlliipfullefrcndes,  I  recomende 
vnto  your  devoute  prayers,  fe  Soule  of  cure  welbelouede 
I'rende  N.  whofe  Soul  God  hathe  it  frome  fe  Bod”,  8c 
take  it  vnto  his  Mercy  ;  fiat  callithe  Sc  criethe  for  helps 
Sc  focoure,  to  haue  parte  of  oure  fpecialle  fuffragijs  8c 
devoute  prayers." 

92.  In  die  Sepulture,  feu  Trigintali.  209. 

Beginn.  “  Righte  worfhipfulle  Frendes,  It  is  a 

grete  wei  ke  of  Pytee  b  Mercy  to  helpe  8c  comforte  feme 
fat  be  bounde  in  bodely  Prefone,  or  temperalle  Seruage  : 
myche  more  it  is  merytory  8c  medefulle  to  helpe,  focour; 
b  releue  foo  Soules  fat  be  bounde  &  peynede  in  fe  pre¬ 
fone  of  Purgatory ;  for  f  ei  may  righte  noughle  help  feifte 
felfes.” 

2248. 

A  parchment-Book  in  frnall  folio  ;  wherein  is  contained. 
The  Chronicle  ot  Brute,  whofe  Prologue  beginnfeth 
with  thele  Words,  In  the  noble  Land  ofSurrye  ther  was 
a  noble  Kyng  8c  mighty,  and  a  man  of  gret  renoin  that 
men  called  Dioclycian.”  But  the  work  it  felf  gives  the 
following  Exordium,  “  In  the  noble  Cite  of  gret  Tfoye, 
ther  was  a  noble  Knyght  8c  myghty,  8c  a  man  of  gret 
power,  that  Men  called  Eneas."  This  Chronicle  ends  ill 
the  fixth  year  of  our  King  Henry  vr.  upon  his  taking 
the  City  of  Roan. 

In  this  Exemplar,  the  laft  Quaternio,  fave  one,  is 
wanting  ;  which  may  eaftly  be  fupplied  from  other  Copies 
here  &  elfewhere.  It  may  be  noted,  that  if  any  hereaf¬ 
ter  fhall  endeavour  to  publilh  an  accurate  Edition  of  this 
Chronicle,  or  of  the  later  part  of  it ;  he  would  do  well 
to  collate  as  many  Copies  as  he  can  any  where  find,  be- 
caul'e  of  the  great  Difierences  between  them,  which  will 
be  foon  percieved. 

2249. 

A  vellum-Book  in  folio,  well  written,  b  containing, 

Part  of  the  Old  Teftament  in  Englilh  ;  being  of  one 
of  thofe  Tranflationscommonly  aferibed  to  John  Wycliffe: 
This  beginneth  in  the  1 9.  Chapter  of  Jolhua,  Sc  ends  in 
the  144th  Pfalm,  according  to  the  Vulgar  Latin  Bible. 

2250. 

A  paper  Book  in  folio,  confifting  of  divers  Tra&s  bound- 
up  together  in  the  Order  following. 

The  firfl  is,  an  imperfect  Theological  Poem  in  old 
Northern  P  iglifh,  written  upon  various  fubje&s,  vizt. 

1.  De  CC  umfione  Domini;  which  wants  the  begin¬ 
ning  ;  a  Li:  whereof  the  negligent  Book-binder  hath  in- 


ferted  between  the  Leaves  44.  &  45.  1 . 

2.  De  Epiphania  Domini.  1.  b. 

3.  De  Purificatione  Beate  Marie  Virginis. 

4.  De  Innocentibus,  et  Herode  Efcolanita.  (1.  Afcalo- 

nita )  10. 

5.  De  Septuagefima.  12.  b. 

6.  De  Sexagefima.  13.  bi 

7.  De  Quinquagefima.  14.  b. 

8.  De  Quadragefima.  15.  b. 

9.  De  Jejunio  quatuor  Terrporum.  1 7. 

ic.  De  diverfis  Datis  (i.  e.  of  things  that  were  done  at 

particular  times  or  Dates)  fol.  19.  b.  cbl.  1.  lin.  19. 

1 1.  De  Paflione  Domini.  ao.  b. 

12.  De  Pliato.  25.  b. 

13.  De  Juda  Proditore.  27. 

1 4.  De  Refurrebtione  Domini.  28. 

Cat. Haul.  Von.  II. 


Num.  2250. 


15.  De  Letania  Majore.  ^3.  b; 

16.  De  Lettinia  Minore.  34.  bi 

17.  De  Afcerifione  Domini.  36. 

18.  De  Einilfione  Spiriths  San£H.  40.  b. 

Thisfeems.to  end  abruptly.  Then  follows  by  ano¬ 
ther  hand,  and  in  another  fort  of  Verfe. 

19.  De  Sco  Martino  ;  or  a  Legend  of  his  Life.  48. 
Init;  Saynt  Martyne  wos  borne  in  the  Londe  of 

Savarie. 

,  20.  Speculum  Xpiani  ;  partly  in  Latin,  partly  in 
Eriglilh. 

This  is  but  ah  Abridgement  of  the  Treatife  bear¬ 
ing  that  Title,  whofe  Authors  Name  is  not  mentioned 
by  Leland,  Pits,  or  Dr.  Cave  ;  but  by  the  help  of  MSS. 
in  the  Library  of  Ctifpus  Chrifli-College  in  Oxford  (no. 
1  ^5.)  appears  to  be  John  Wattone.  When  this  Man 
flouridied  is,  as  yet,  tome  incertain  ;  but  a  Date  at  the 
end  of  this  Traft  fhews  it  to  have  been  written  A.  D. 
1477;  which  might,  pfobably,  be  in  dr  about  his  own 
time. 

2 is  Themata  Ddminicalia.  64.  b. 

22.  Divifio  Membrorum  Capituli  primi  Diete  prime. 

68. 


Thfefe  two  lafl:  Articles  feem  to  have  been  extracted 
from  Bonaventures  Dia’ta  Salutis. 

Then  follow  in  Englilh, 

23.  De  Erken waldo.  72.  b. 

This  is  a  Legendary  Poem  concerning  him,  written 

by  the  Hand  that  wrote  the  Legend  of  St.  Martin  before 
mentioned,  at  No.  1 9.  This  beginns  thus,  “  At  London 
in  Englondenozt  fulle  longe  fyihen.” 

24.  De  Sco  Johanne  Baptifta.  75-,b. 

Init.  “  Saynt  John  fe  belle  barne,  fe  holy  Baptifie.” 

25.  De  Sanfto  Albano.  77. 

Init.  “  Saynt  Albane  fe  holy  mon  rdos  here  of 

Engionde.” 

26.  De  San 61  o  Juliano  Confeffore.  *jj.  b. 

Init.  “Saint  Juliane  ]»e  Confeflour  borne  was  iri 

Rome.” 


27.  DeSanfto  Juliano  Hofpite.  ibid. 

Init;  “  Saint  Juliane  fe  noble  Herbargedur  of  noble 

kynne  he  come.” 

28.  De  Cruce.  79. 

Init.  “  The  holy  kode,  fat  ftvete  Tre,  god e  is  to 

haue  in  mynde.’* 

29.  Invencid  Sanfte  Crucis.  80.  b. 

Init.  “  Qwehe  Elfene  Come  to  Jerufalerhe,  feche  a 

fede  ho  nome.” 

30.  Saynt  Chiyriak.  81. 

Init.  “  Saynt  QUiriak  fe  Bisfliop  prechid  Goddes 

lawe.  ” 


31.  Saynt  Elehe:  81.  b. 

Init.  “  Saynt  Elene  was  in  Brfetayne  borne,  8c  corn* 

ene  of  heghe  Lyniage.” 

32.  Exaltacio  See  Crucis.  83. 

Init.  ”  The  holy  Rode  fat  was  foundene,  als  ze 

weten,  in  May.” 

Then  follow,  in  Profe. 

33;  A  Note,  fliewing  the  Diftance  from  Erthe  to 
Hevyne,  acording  to  Raby  Moyfes.  83.  b; 

34.  A  Medicine  for  fe  Axys.  ibid. 

35.  A  Sermon  for  Corpus-Chrifti-Day.  84. 

Init.  “  Gode  Men  &  Womrhen,  ze  fhalle  knaw 

Ivell  fat  this  is  ane  heghe  Fell  bf  Crifts  Body.” 

36.  Anfwers  for  unlearned  Priefts,  to  certain  Quef- 
tions,  which  were  wont  to  be  propounded  by  the  Layety. 

85. 

37.  De  Fefto  Apoftolorum  Philippi  8c  Jacobi,  Sermo 

brevis.  85.  b. 

Init.  “  Code  Men  &  \Vemeft,  fuche  a  day  ze  fchal 
haue  a  heghe  fefle  in  holy  Churche.” 

38.  Narracib  de  miraculo  Sci  Andree  ;  quomodo 
Diabolus  apparuit  SCo  Cuthberto  in  fpecie  Mulieris. 

86  b. 

/  H  39.  Another 


57« 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2 250,  2251. 


39.  Another  legendary  Story,  upon  the  benefit  of 

Sch rift,  or  Confeflion.  86.  b. 

The  Scene  of  this  horrible  Story  lies  in  Norwich. 

40.  Another,  about  the  Converfion  of  the  Jews  at 

Berytus.  ibid. 

41.  Another,  about  the  vain  Attempts  of  the  Jews  to 

rebuild  their  Temple  at  Jprufalem.  87. 

42.  Another,  about  a  Jew  that  was  robbed  in  his 

Joureny  between  Briftowe&  Wiltone  ;  who  was  relieved 
&  converted  by  the  Virgin  Mary.  ibid. 

43-  A  Theological  Trad,  de  x  Mandatis,  de  Vitijs  & 
Virtutibus,  be.  ^8. 

Init.  “  For  als  mykelle  as  ilke  Man  whils  he  lifs  here 
in  J)is  worlde,  &  is  a  Pilgreme  ilke  day  of  hys  lif.” 

After  only  fix  Leaves  of  this  Trad  were  written, 
three  Leaves  were  left  blank  (for  inferting,  I  fuppofe’ 
what  was  wanting  in  the  Exemplar;)  &  then  the  lame 
goes  on  regularly,  ’  to  the  end.  But,  in  the  kill  of  the 
laid  three  Leaves,  another  hand  hath  written. 

44.  Conftjfucio  Dhi  Robtrti  Wynchelefe  de  Juramento 
ac  Obediencia  Redoribus  five  Vicarijs,  de  illi's  Capella- 
nis  quiin  coruiu  Ecclefijs  five  Parochijs  celebrant,  inpen. 
dendis.  94. 

2  2  5 1  • 

A  Paper-book  in  fmall  folio,  bought  (many  years  agoe) 
of  Mr.  Richard  Jones  fince  deceafed.  It  feems  to 
have  been  written  by  the  hand  of  one  Shirley,  and 
afterwards  to  have  come  into  the  poffeflion  of  Mr. 
John  Stowe  the  Hiftorian,  &  is  now  imperfed,  and 
other  wife  damaged.  However,  it  yet  contains  a  great 
Colledion  of  Ditties  (as  they  were  then  called)  Ballads. 
&  other  Poems  of  John  Lidgate  the  famous  Monk  of 
Bury  St.  Edmund,  and  offontefew  other  Authors,  in 
the  following  Order. 

1.  A  Prayer  to  our  blefled  Lord  &  Saviour.  1. 
Beginning.  “  O  Jhu  Crift,  kepe  our  Lyppes  from 

pollucione.” 

2.  A  Prayer,  or  Application  to  the  blefled  Virgin. 

Beginn.  “  AI  hayle  Mary',  ful  of  Grace  !  ” 

3.  A  ftiort  Poem  upon  the  Lives  of  our  Kings,  from 
"William  the  Conqueror,  to  Edward  iv.  both  inclufive. 

I  perceive  that  Pits  will  have  Lidgate  to  have  died  A.  D. 
1440;  and  indeed,  the  Stanza  relating  to  K.  Henry  vi. 
looks  a<  ii  it  were  written  in  that  Kings  profperity  ;  but 
then,  here  is  another  Stanza  added  to  it,  in  favour  of  K. 
Edward  tv.  by  the '  fame  hand  ;  and  Pits  owns  that 
lie  did  receive  Information  that  our  Author  died  A.  D. 
1482:  Lea  little  fooner  then  the  King  Iaffc  mentioned. 

,  Beginn.  “  This  mighti  William  Duke  ofNorman- 
d)'c-  .  2.  b. 

4-  Medicinal,  Prudential,  &:  Theological  Advices.4.  b. 

~T  Beginn.  “  For  Helthe  of  Body,  &  for  Colde  thvn 
Iiede.”  1 

5.  I.ittera  Dompni  Jchannis  Lydgate  Monachi  Mo- 

naflenj  Sli.  I-idmundi  dc  Bury,  miffa  ad  Ducem  GIou- 
ceflne  in  tempore  tranflacionis  libri  Bochafii,  pro  opor- 
tumtate  Pecunie.  g 

wjue  ®eS,nn*  “  Bight  myghty  Prince,  and  be  it  youre 

of  is  Iike  ihis  “  ^ 

6.  Epitaphium  ejul'dem  Duel#  Gloucdlrie  - 

“  Souerayne,  Immortal,  Everlaftynge  Code' ’ 
"I'oftt  Subjcft  may  be  eaftly  dif- 
cerned  by  the  beginning  of  it  vizt  1 

“  ff-kel™"11  rr  "hifhe  k'P=°"e°biemaunce 
Mekely  in  Clurche,  to  kylTe  Stone  or  Tree 
Enhe  or  Iren  :  hathe  in  remembraunce  * 

What  they  dothe  meane,  and  take  the  Moralitie  ” 

8  Another,  upon  Stella  Celi  extirpavit.  Q  k 

rode.&“Th°"'  ieUen)!r  <%***  °f  W 


Num.  2 25 r . 

9.  Another,  upon  “  Ab  ininticis  noftris  defende  nos 
Crifte.”  10.  b, 

Beginn.  “  Moll  Souerayne  Lorde,  O  blesful  Crifte 
Jhefu.” 

Herein  the  King  (i.  e.  Edward  iv.)  his  Quene,  & 
hisModir  are  particularly  remembred. 
to.  Another,  upon  this  Lemma, 

“  Concilio  quifquis  eris,  qui  pacis  fidern  queris. 
Confonus  efto  Lupis,  cum  quibus  effecupis."  1 1.  b. 
Beginn.  “In  Councele  whatfoeuer  thow  be.” 

1 1.  Another,  upon  Women;  whofe  burden  is  like  this, 
“  Beaute  wil  fhewe,  thow  Hornes  were  away.”  13.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Off  Gode,  &  Kvnde  proceedith  al 
Beaute.” 

1 2.  Another,  in  the  difpraife  of  one  called  Jake  Hare  ; 
whofe  Burden  is  like  this,  “  Whiche  of  a  Bolle  (i.  e.  a 
Bowl  or  Pitcher)  can  pluke  out  the  lynenge.”  14. 

Beginn.  “  A  frowarde  Knave,  plainly  to  difervve.” 

13.  A  Poem  upon  the  Imperfection  of  Mans  Life; 

whofe  Burden  is  like  this,  “  Al  Stant  on  Chaunge,  like 
a  Mydfomer  Rofe.”  L  j 

Beginn.  “  Late  no  man  bofte  of  Konmngc  nor 
Vertu.” 

1 4 .  A  Ditty  feeming  to  be  taken  from  the  Canticles  ; 
being  written  partly  in  Latin,  &  partly  in  Fnglifh.  Its 
Burden  is  like  this,  “  Sonet  vox  tua  in  auribus.”  1  7. 

Beginn.  “  Rex  Salomon  fummus  of  Sapience.” 

15.  Another,  applyed  to  the  blefled  Virgin;  whofe 

Burden  feems  to  have  been(for  the  end  is  wanting) “  Veni 
coronaberis.’’  ,3 

Beginn.  “  Surge  mea  Sponfa  fo  fwete  in  Sighte.” 

16.  The  end  of  a  Dite  (whofe  beginning  is  wanting, 

by  reafon  of  the  lofs  of  a  Leaf)  feeming  to  have  been  a 
Satire  upon  the  manners  of  the  Times  then  prefent ; 
whofe  burden  is,  “  Conueyede  by  Lyne,  righte  as  a 
Rammeshorn.”  *  J  2Q_ 

17.  Upon  Humane  Nature,  that  aftefteth  what  is 

agreable  to  itfelf  with  a  Burden  like  to  this,  “  Thus 
euery  thynge  drawithe  to  his  femblable.”  20.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Trete  euery  Man  like  as  he  is  difpo- 
fede.”  r 

18.  Again  upon  the  mutable  State  of  Mans  Nature  ; 

with  a  Burden  like  this,  “  How  Ihulde  he  thanne  be 
Stable  in  livynge.”  b. 

Beginn.  “  The  Wrorlde  fo  wyde  ;  the  Ayre  fo  re¬ 
movable.” 

19.  Upon  the  inconfiftency  of  many  Mens  A&ions ; 

with  this  Burden,  “  It  may  w'ele  Ryme,  but  it  accor- 
dithe  noughte.”  '  ’  2(j 

Beginn.  “  Alle  thynge  in  kynde  defirethe  thynge 
ilike-"  .  ibid. 

20.  Againft  unfeafonable  Haft  ;  with  a  Burden  like 
this,  “  He  haftithe  w-ele  that  wifely  can  abyde”  27.  b. 

Beginn.  “  The  hafty  Man  failithe  neuer  Woo.”  ’ 

21.  Upon  Moderation  with  a  Burden  like  this  “  If  it 

in  Mefure  be.”  cg  p, 

Beginn.  “  By  Witte  of  Man  al  thynge  that  iscon- 
ceyvide.” 

22.  How  unable  Mans  underftanding  is  to  compre- 
hend  the  Works  of  Divine  Providence  ;  with  this  Bur¬ 
den,  “  Hoc  factum  eft  a  Domino.” 

Beginn.  “  O  Man,  thou  marrefte  in  thy  mynde.” 

23.  A  Ditty  to  the  blefled  Virgin;  with  this  kind 
of  Burden,  “  Haile,  Flos  campi !  O  Ave,  Jeffe  virgula!” 

31.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Haile,  bliffedeLady,  the  Modir  of  Crifte 
Jhefu.” 

24.  Upon  her  Affumption  ;  w-ith  this  Burden,  “  Ma¬ 
ria  Virgo  aflumpta  eft.”  ^4. 

Beginn.  “  Regina  Celi,  Qwene  of  the  Sowth.” 

25.  A  Ihort  Salutation  to  the  blefled  Virgin,  with  this 

Burden,  “  Ave  Regina  Celorum.”  5. 

Beginn.  “Haile  Luminary  and  benynge  Lanterne.” 

26.  An  Invocation  of  the  fame.  36.  b. 

4  Beginn. 


Bibliotheca  Harleianse. 


579 


Num.  225  r . 

Beginn.  “  0  thow  ioieful  Lighte,  eternal  ye  fhyne." 

27.  A  Ditty,  wherein  the  Author  feigns  how  dyuerfe 

Foules  praifed  Code  in  al  his  Werkes  ful  reuerently. 
withe  an  hevciily  Ympne.  37.  b. 

Beginn.  “  As  I  me  lenyed  vnto  a  joyful  place.” 

28.  Another,  wherein  many  Contraries  are  brought 
together  &  propofcd  enigmatically ;  with  a  Burden,  at 
the  fir  ft  like  this,  “  Is  this  Fortune,  or  is  it  Infortune  ; 
Thoughe  I  go  loofe,  I  tyed  am  withe  a  Lyne.M  38.  b. 

Beginn.  “  The  more  I  go,  the  further  I  am  be- 
hynde.”  It  is,  upon  the  Inftability  of  fublunary  Affairs. 

;sg.  Anothet,  Satirically  deferibing  the  wrong  adlions 

pradtices  of  many  forts  of  people  with  this  Burden, 
e<  So  as  the  Crabbe  gothe  forwarde.”  40. 

Beginn.  “  This  World  is  ful  of  Stabilneffe.” 

30.  Another,  wherein  our  blelfed  Savior  is  repre- 

fented,  tvs  rehear  fit  ng  the  particulars  of  his  bitter  P^ffion, 
the  Merits  thereof,  &  his  unparalleled  Love  to  Mankind. 
The  Burden  is,  moftly,  “  Was  like  a  Lambe,  offrede 
in  Sacrifice.”  4 1  • 

Beginn.  “  Beholde  !  O  Man  !  lifte-vp  thy  Eye 
ande  fe.” 

3 1 .  Verba  Magiftri  Jchannis  Lydgate,  contra  Honores 

Mundi:  in  one  Stanza.  43- 

Beginn.  “  Worldly  Worfhip  is  Joye  tranfitorye.’’ 

32.  The  Plaint  of  t'ue  blelfed  Virgin,  upon  our  Sa¬ 

vior:;  Crucifixion  ;  with  this  Burden,  for  the  greater 
part,  “  Thus  naylede  to  aTre.”  43.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Who  flial  gyve  vnto  my  hede  a  Welle  of 
bitter  Teerfe,  my  Sorw  to  compleyne  according  to 
its  Lemma “  Quis  dabit  Capiti  meo  fontem  lacrimarum:” 
taken  from  Jeremiah  tx.  1. 

33.  Le  Pleyntefe  countre  Fortune,  with  her  Anfw'ers. 

46. 

Beginn.  “  This  wrechid  Worldis  tranfmutacioune.” 

This  feems  to  have  been  tranflated  out  of  French  : 
and  in  the  Lenvoye  our  Author  complains  of  his  Lofs 
of  Memory' by  reafon  of  old  Age  ;  and  of  the  difficulty 
it  then  was  to"  compofe  in  Englilh,  fo  curioufly,  as  they 
did  in  France. 

34.  “A  Demawnde  by  Lydgate - Whiche  of  the  ! 

two,  by  juft  Compariloune,  Love  or  Money  in  valew  ! 
dothe  exceede  ?  ” 

Here  the  Poet  Ihews  that  Mankind  generally  gives 
the -preference  to  the  latter  ;  but  concludes  with  exhor¬ 
ting  ail  to  the  Love  of  God.  It  beginns  thus,  “  Eche 
man  i’olwithe  his  own  fantafye.”  47-  b. 

35.  A  Poem  of  three  Stanzas  only,  recommending  the 

Love  of  Vertu.  49-  b. 

Beginn.  “The  firit  Stoke  was  fader  of  Gentilnes  ” 
(This  is  printed  as  Chaucers,  in  the  laft  Edition  of  his 
\Vorks,pag.55i.) 

36.  A  Prater  to  the  blelfed  Virgin,  Confifting  of  24 

Stanzas,  each  of  them  beginning  with  a  Letter  according 
to  the  order  of  the  Englilh  Alphabet.  50. 

Beginn.  “  \1  myghti,  and  al  merciable  Qwere.” 

This  is  not  Lidgates,  but  was  made  by  Geffrey 
Chaucer  ;  and  is  printed  in  the  laft  Edition  of  his  Works, 
at  page  5SS  being  there  intimated  to  have  been  made  at 
the  req licit  of  Blanch  Duchefs  of  Lancalter  :  which  Edi¬ 
tion  thereof,  may  be  amended  in  divers  places,  from  this 
Copie. 

37.  A  ballad  upon  the  crafte  of  Lovyers.  53. 

Beginn.  “  To  moralile  a  Symilitude,  who  lifte 

thefe  Balletts  fewe.” 

This  is  alfo  aferihfed  to  Geffrey  Chaucer,  and  hath 
found  a  place  in  the  laft  Edition  of  his  Works,  namely,  at 
page  552.  Where  in  the  laft  Stanza  (to  bring  it  back  to 
Chaucers  twentyeth  year)  the  date  is  fett-down  thus. 

“  In  tlic  yere  of  our  Lorde  a  m.  by  reckoning, 

cccxl.  and  vii.  yere  following.” 

whereas,  in  the  prefent  MS,  it  Hands  thus, 

“  In  the  yere  ofe  God  a  m.  by  rekenynge 

Foure  hundrede  fifty,  and  ix.  yere  folwynge.”  ' 


Num.  2251. 

Here  is  a  difference  of  1 1 2  yeares,  the  laft  of  which 
falls  in  Lidgates  time  ;  to  whom  alfo  the  Language  feems 
more  fuitable.  I  need  not  omitt,  that  at  the  end  of  this 
Copy  is  a  Lenvoy  of  three  Stanzas,  which  are  not  in  the 
printed  Edition  abovementioned. 

38.  Fabula  duorum  Mercaturum,  de  &  fuper  geftis 

Romanorum.  5.6- 

Beginn.  “  In  Egipt  whilom,  as  I  rede  &  fynde.” 

This  Poem  is  upon  the  faft  Friendlhip  that  was  efta- 
blilhcd  between  thefe  two  Merchants,  as  was  between 
thofe  memorable  Friends  of  Antiquity,  Pylades  &  Gr- 
reftes,  or  Damon  &  Pythias.  The  Fable  is  plainly  taken 
from  the  anonymous  Monkifh  Tradt  called  Gefta  Roma¬ 
norum  ;  of  which,  feveral  written  Copies  are  extant  iri 
this  noble  Library  ;  where  the  two  Friends  pafs  all  along 
as  Knights  and  not  as  Merchants. 

3 9.  A  Ditty  or  ballad  upon  Dan  Joos  a  Monk  who 

had  long  continued  to  pradtice  particular  Devotions 
toward  the  Virgin  Mary  ;  particularly  in  reciting  certain 
Pfalms  or  Hymns  remarkable  for  her  name.  Whereupon 
when  this  Monk  died  fudcffnly,  he  was  found  with  a  fine 
red  Rofe  fpringing  out  of  his  mouth,  two  others  from 
his  Eies,  &  two  more  from  his  Ears :  with  the  name 
“  Maria  ful  fayre  i-graven”  vpon  them,  “in  lettris  of 
bournede  Golde.”  7 :.  b. 

Beginn.  “  O  Welle  of  Swetnes,  replete  in  euery 
Veyne.” 

The  Author  affirms  that  he  took  this  Legend  from 
the  “  Speculum  Hiftoriale  of  Vincentius”  Belvacsnfis. 

40.  A  Legendary  tale  of  a  young  Boy  who  lang  forth 

to  the  praife  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  after  he  was  murder'd 
by  a  Jew  who  had  cutt  his  throat.  7  1-  b. 

Beginn.  “  O  I,orde,  oure  Lorde,  thyn  name  how 
incrvelous.” 

This  is  the  Prioreffes  Prologue  &  Tale  in  Chau¬ 
cer  ;  and  in  our  prefent  MS.  the  laft  Stanza  is  purpofely 
omitted. 

41 .  Two  Stanzas  exciting  to  the  Love  of  St.  Anne  mo¬ 
ther  to  the  blelfed  Virgin.  77-  b. 

Beginn.  “  He  that  intendithe  in  his  Hcrte  to  feke.” 

The  Author  promifeth  “  a  devoute  Oreyfon  in  honour 
of  hiroonly  j”  but  it  is  omitted. 

4:.  One  Stanza  upon  this  Diftich, 

“  Vinum  Ladle  lava  ;  oleum  liquore  Fabarum  ;  En- 
cauftum  Vino  :  eastern  mundat  aqua.’’  ibid. 

43.  How  a  man  of  Paris  who  ufed  to  pray  for  the 
fouls  in  Purgatory,  being  purfued  into  his  Church-yard 
by  Enemies,  was  prefently  delivered  by  the  Dead  there 
“  who  arofe  out  ofe  their  Graves.” 

“  Somme  apperede  with  Gleyves,  and  fomme  withe 
Staves.”  78. 

Beginn.  “  Remembryd  by  Scriptures  we  fynde  & 
rede.” 

44.  Of  Wulfryke  a  Wilt-fhire-Prifte,  who  ufed  to 

fynge  or  fay  a  Made  of  requiem  for  alle  Criften  Soules ; 
and  therefore,  when  he  was  dying,  his  Companion  a 
neighbouring  Prieft,  faw  in  the  Church-yard  many  arife 
from  the  Graves,  appeareing  as  Children  in  white  Array, 
who  having  prayed  for  the  moribund,  tourned  againe  into** 
theyr  Graves.  78.  b. 

Beginn.  “  In  Wiltlhire  ofe  Ynglonde  two  Priftes 
Jjere  were.” 

45.  A  Ditty  of  three  Stanzas,  in  the  name  of  our  b!ef- 

fed  Savior.  79. 

Beginn.  “  My  fader  above,  beholdynge  thy  meke- 
neffe.”  This  feems  to  be  imperfedt. 

46.  Ihree  Stanzas  againft  immoderate  Care  &  Pains 

in  amalfing  of  Riches.  79.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Longe  will  be  Water,  in  a  Welle  to 
keche.” 

47.  Of  the  feveral  Complexions  of  Men,  a  Ballad  in 

3  Stanzas.  ibid. 

Beginn.  “  The  Sangwyne  man,  of  Bloode  hath 
hardynes.” 

48.  Anothe 


580 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2251 . 

48.  Another  of  four  Stanzas,  upon  the  fan:e  Subjedb 

80. 

Beginn.  “  Off  Yiftes  large,  in  Love  hathe  grete 
del’te.” 

49;  The  beginning  of  a  Poem,  perhaps  defigned  for  an 
Explication  of  rhe  Decalogue.  80.  b. 

Beginn.  “  The  highe  aftri-potent  audor  of  alle.” 
co.  An  obfervation,  inoneftanza,  upon  wife,  ftronge 
falle  &  nu  ke  men.  8 1 .  b. 

Beginh.  “  There  is  non  fo  wife  a  man.” 

51.  ihe  Tragedye  of  Adam.  83. 

Beginn.  “  Sodeyne  aepartynnc  from  this  Felicyte.’’ 

52.  An  Exemplayie  for  Princes  to  love  Vertu,  &  to 
leve  Pryde  ;  in  the  Tragedye  of  Nemprothe.  84  b. 

Beginn.  “  Ye  folkes  alle  that  this  Tragedye  reede.” 
5 3-  The  Tragedye  of  Jocafla  and  Ethiocles."  S7. 

^  Begmn.  “  In  this  Tragedye  thre  Thynges  ye  may 

54.  The  Tragedye  of  Duke  Thefeus  ScFarotheus.  88. 
Beginn.  “  The  vnfure  gladnes,  the  joy  tranfito- 

rye.” 

5J.  The  Tragedye  of  Hercules.  88.  b- 

Beginn.  “  Yitte  ouer  whelmede  was  worthy  Her¬ 
cules.” 

56.  The  Tragedye  of  Priame.  89.  b. 

Beginn.  Ck  This  I  ragedye  pytous  Sc  lamentable.” 

57.  The  Tragedy  of  Poiixeue.  go. 

Beginn.  ‘  Whanne  Surquydye  oppreffid  hath  pvtc  w 

58.  The  Tragedye  of  Kinge  Roboam.  ibid. 

B  ginn.  “  Alle  Philofofrcs  concludcn  and  dcvil'e.’’ 

59.  The  Tragedye  of  Kynge  Saul.  go.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Hathe  mynde  on  Saulle,  whiche  to  ellati* 

Royal. 

60.  Lenvoy  ofe  the  Story  of  LucrefTe  and  falfe  Tar. 

quine-  _  9  2 .  b. 

Beginn.  “  This  Tragedye  declarithc  in  pari)e.” 

61.  The  Tragedy  of  Jeroboam.  93.  b. 

Beginn.  This  Tragedye,  the  States  and  theyr  De- 

Srcs*”  93.  b. 

62.  Lenvoy  of  Dvdo  Qucne  of  Cartage.  04. 

Beginn.  “  O  fayre  Dydo,  molt  noble  in  Con- 

ftaunce.” 

1  fuppofe  I.idgate  did  not  write  her  Story,  or  Le¬ 
gend,  becaufe  Chaucer  had  done  it  before ;  as  he  alio 
wrote  that  of  Lucretia  (fee  above,  at  No.  6..)  both  which 
are  printed  wiih  his  other  works. 

63.  A  Poem  c  -ncerning  Vice  Sc  Vertu  ;  that  is,  for 
vertuous  L  .boure.  Sc  againft  Slouthe  Sc  Negligence.  9  5. 

Beginn.  “  Two  maner  of  Folk.es  to  put  in  remeiu- 
braunce 

Herein,  the  Author  treates  of  “  Thubal  &  rictagorns 
founders  of  Mufyke  ;  the  children  of  Stthe,  who  ionde 
tirft  the  hevenly  Mocyouns  ;  quod  Ennoke  primo  inve- 
nent  literas  Ebraycas,  que  confe&e  fuerant  durante  Dilu- 
'io,  in  Columpna  lapidea.  Item,  fecundum  Jeronimum, 
Lfdras  invenit  literas  Ebraycas,  fub  imperio  Zorobabdl. 
Piclagoras  fonde  firft  Y.  Carmentus  foundour  of  cure 
Latyn  Letters.  Omerus  founder  of  Eloquence.  T\;I- 
lius  of  Kethoryke.  Calcicatres  founde  firfte  Gravynge. 
Luclyte  &  Albumazar  were  founders  of  GeometrvV. 
Geres  fonde  firfte  the  tilthe  of  Laride,  Eolus  fonde  firfif 
Spcres  f..r  the  Werre,  Arifteus  fonde  firfte  the  vfa^e  ol‘ 
Mz'ke,  Cruddys,  &  Hony.  Pallas  fond  firfte  wevynge 
ofe  Clothe.  Fydo  fonde  firfte  Mefures  Sc  Balaun- 
oes  The  Tragedy  of  Sarnadapalle  thate  fonde  firfte 
Ydelnelie. 

64.  Lenvye  vpone  the  falle  of  Kinge  Amazies  Tra 

Scd)‘e’  !„0 

Beginn.  "Records  I  take  of  Princis  mo  thate  oone.”  1 

65.  Lenvoye  vpon  the  Kinge  Ailriages.  t00.  b! 
Bfcginn.  “  O  noble  Princis,  youre  Ktys  dothe  cn- 

erne.” 

f6.  Lenvoye  ofe  Crefus  the  Kynt  e  of  Liiyde  vpone 
Ins  Tragedye.  ’  ic.b. 


Num.  2251. 

Beginn.  “  Bnt  whereas  Tvfaumis  been  fette  on 
Crjeite." 

.1  6 AC  Lenvoi,ellpoIle  thc  Tragedye  of  Cyrus  Kynge  ofe 

Beginn.  “  Lo  here  of  Cyrus  the  wofui  aventure.” 

68.  Lenvoye  vpon  Jk  Tragedye  of  Araylius  (1.  Amu. 
lus)  &  Minutor  (1.  Numitor )  brethren  of  Albanye. 

.  10?.,  b. 

Bc-gmn.  “  But  whanne  Prynces  ben  feythful  ofe 
Entente.” 

Here  (viz.  in  fol.  103.  b. )  Shirley,  who  was  the  Co- 
pifte,_  or  tranfcriber  of  this  Exemplar,  has  clapped-iu  a 
marginal  note  of  “  Fallere  fallentem  non  eft  brans:  ” 
which,  if  allowed,  gives  an  in  lett  to  all  the  Villany  £e 
Wzckednefs  that  one  man  can  do  to  another  j  cither  as 
aggreflor,  or  by  way  of  Revenge. 

69.  A  Lenvoy  made  of  the  Tragedy  es  of  Princes  for  Le 

Synne  of  Lechery.  lc , 

Beginn.  «  This  Tragedye  gyvethe  vs  grete  warn- 
yngc.” 

70.  Lenvoye  vpone  the  Princes  thate  ben  lecherous  : 

or  the  Tragedye  of  Melchiades.  ,  0 ^  ^ 

Beginn.  “  The  ftormy  Trufte  of  euery  Comunalte.” 

7 1 .  The  Tragedye  of  Perfes.  ,  c  q 
Beginn.  “  Allas  this  Tragedy  dothe  inyn  Herte 

bleede.” 

72.  Lenvoy  vpon  Jk- Difpoficioune  of  Poetis.  107.  b. 
Beginn.  “  'J'o  diLryve  the  Difpuficio.une.” 

73.  The  Tragedye  of  J»e  Defolacoi.e  ol  Rome.  10S. 
Beginn.  “  Rome,  rememhre  of  thi  Foundacioune.” 

74.  A  Iragedye;  hov  SUwg  liter  of  Princes  caufitlie 

Subuerfioune.  IIC 

Beginn.  “  This  Tragedye  by  clierc  Infpeccioune/’ 
75-  f  he  Iragedye  ofeDukeHavyoune, a  Carlaginian. 

Beginn.  “  This  Tragedye  dothe  pitoufly  com- 
pleyne.” 

76.  A  Tragedye  to  ftnwe  whatc  folwithe  ofe  Stryves 

and  Daungiers,  in  Kynrede.  m.b 

Beginn.  ‘  1  his  Tragedye  afom,  declarithc  here.” 

77.  The  I  ragedye  of  Marcbus  Yianlus.  u  -. 
Beginn.  “  In  this  Tragedye,  Men  may  bcholde  ’& 

fee. 

,  7  s',  Th^  Tra^dye  of  Denys  (Dionyfius)  whiehe  euer 
dclzted  in  Mordre  an  J  Robberye.  x ,  7> 

Beginn.  “  This  Tragedye  yevithe  a  w,lrny^ge.''~, 

79.  '1  he  Tragedye  ofe  CaliBenes  (  .'alliffheuesl  1 1  q.b. 
Beg.  “  i  his  1  ragedyes  of  Califtenes.” 

80.  The  Tragedye  ofe  Kynge  Darye.  ,  x 

Beginn.  14  This  Tragedye,  pilous  for  to  here.” 

81.  The  Tragedye  of  Duke  Emenydes.  1  4.  b, 
Beginn.  “  This '1  ragedye  of  Duke  Emenydes.”* 

82.  The  Tragedye  of  Agathades  (Agathocles)  1  j  <■. 
Beginn.  c-  This  Tragedye  fhewithe  a  Figure.” 

83.  The  Tragedye  ofe  Lyfymachus,  and  ef  Anynce. 

Beginn.  “  This  Tragedye  fhewithe  an  apparence/' 
S4.  The  Tragedye  ofe  Duke  Brtnnyus.  u-. 
Beginn.  “  This  Tragedye  declarithe,  who  lifle  to 
here.’’ 

85.  The  Tragedye  of  Ptholome,  o>envife  callide  Phi- 

loPat"r-  .  11 7.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Next  to  Bochas,  in  ordre  compkvn- 
enge.”  r  1 

86.  The  Tragedye  ofe  Anthiochus.  1  iS. 

Beginn.  “  This  Tragedye  of  Antiochus.” 

87.  'Ihe  Tragedye  of  the  3  Scipiouns  of  Rome.  1 1 8.  b. 
Beginn.  “  I  his  'I  ragedye  ote  thre  Scipiouns.” 

88.  The  Tragedye  of  Hrvybal  ,  1.  Hannibal)  119. 
Beginn.  “  This  Tragedy  froward,  to  write  or 

reede.” 

89.  An  Example  of  Ingratitude.  119.  b. 

Begins.  “  This  'J  ragedye  dothe  naturally  com- 

pleyne. 

10  90.  The 


Bibliothecge  Harleianse. 


5Sr 


Num.  2251. 

go.  The  Tragedy  of  Jugurta.  l2o. 

Beginn.  “  This  may  wele  be  callid  Tragedye.” 

91.  1  he  Tragedy  ofe  Mytrides  (leg.  Mithridates.) 

120.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Myghty  Princes,  lift-up  youre  coragis.” 

gx.  The  Tragedye  of  Nero.  121.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Offe  this  Nero  to  write  an  Lenvoye.'' 

g2.  The  Tragedy  (or  tragical  Story)  of  Jafon  & 
Medea.  122. 

Beginn.  “  Whanne  Johan  Bochas  was  mofte  indi¬ 
gent.’' 

This  Poem  is  imperfett,  at  the  end  j  as,  what  fol¬ 
lows  is  at  the  beginning :  being,  as  I  think, 

g3-  The  Poem  or  Tragedy  of  King  Arthur.  128. 

g4.  The  Tragedy  of  Andronichus.  128.  b. 

Beginn.  “  In  this  Tragedye  ageyne  Andronichus.” 

95.  The  Tragedy  of  Philpot.  1,29. 

Beginn.  “  This  Tragedye  aforn  reherfithe  here.” 

96.  Of  Candalus  the  Kynge  of  Lyde  difceyved  be  his 

"Wyfe.  130. 

Beginn.  “  But  whan  that  Bochas  cafte  his  Booke 
afide.” 

97.  Of  Midas  the  riche  King  ofe  Frigie,  this  being 

tacked  to  the  former  Story.  1:1.  I'm.  penult. 

Beginn.  “  There  cam  a  Frigie,  Midas  the  riche 
Kynge.” 

98.  Of  Balthazar  the  grete  Kynge  of  Babiloyne. 

132.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Thanne  nexte  to  Bochas,  or  thate  he 
was  ware.” 

99.  Of  theQwene  Althea  doughter  of  Theflyus  Kynge 

ofe  Calcidoyne.  133.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Whanne  thate  Bochas  had  (hewed  his 
Sentence.” 

100.  A  Poem,  containing  divers  moral  Obfervations 

drawn  from  the  preceding  Story.  138.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Thus  Dethe  devowrithe  withe  his  bitter 
Galle.” 

Herein,  is  the  Story  of  Nifus  of  Magarence  &  Scilla 
his  Doughter. 

101.  Ofe  myghti  Sampfon.  147. 

Beginn.  “  This  Tragedye  gyvithe  an  Evidence.” 

102.  A  Ditty  in  praife  of  Poverty.  148. 

Beginn.  “  O  thou  Pouerty,  meke,  humble  &  dc- 

bonayre.” 

103.  Another,  containing  the  Author’s  advices  for. 

the  attainment  of  Virtue.  igi. 

Beginn.  “  As  out  of  Flony  Men  gete  ofte  Swet- 
nes.” 

104.  Advices  to  Children  or  Youth,  for  regulating 

their  behaviour.  153. 

Beginning.  “  Be  fymple  of  Chere ;  cafte  nate  thyn 
Ye  afide.” 

In  the  Lenvoye,  our  Author  Lydegate  names  him- 

felf. 

105.  Cautions  for  Youth  to  beware  of  deceitful  Wo¬ 
men.  154.  b. 

Beginn.  ct  Lokewele  aboute,  ye  that  Lovers  be.” 

At  the  end  of  this  Poem,  the  Copifte  mentioneth 
Dane  Johan  Lydigate  as  the  Author  :  yet  this  is  printed 
as  Chaucer’s,  in  the  laft  Edition  at  pag.  558. 

106.  A  Ballad  of  good  Counfell,  156. 

Beginn.  “  Confidre  wele  withe  euery  Circum- 

ftaunce.” 

This  is  pi-inted  (with  Lidgates  name  as  the  Author) 
in  the  fore-mentioned  Edition  of  Chaucers  Works,  at 
pag.  549.  and  furnilheth  us  with  a  Stanza  more  than  is 
here  printed. 

107.  A  Tranflation  of  four  Latin  Diftichs,  fetting 

forth  the  general  Degeneracy  of  Mankind,  and  DilTolu- 
lion  of  Manner?.  158. 

Beginn.  “  Yifte  is  made  Domes  man.” 

xo8.  Querela  Senis,  (Afcrfbed  to  Henry  Scogan,  in 
the  laft  Edition  of  Chaucer,  a*  pag.  546.)  158,-b. 

Cat.  Hari..  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2251. 

Beginn.  “  My  noble  Sones  and  eke  my  Lordis 
dere.” 

Here  the  Author  inciteth  them  to  the  practice  of 
Virtue  in  their  Youth  ;  and  quoteth  Chaucer  more  than 
once. 

109.  A  Ditty  tranflatcd  from  the  French  of  John 
.  ...  by  our  John  Lidgate  (vid.  fol.  172.)  and  inferibed 
to  Margaret  Queen  of  K.  Henry  vi.  as  it  feems.  It  is 
grounded  upon  many  Latin  fcriptural  and  other  Sen¬ 
tences.  1 6 1.  b. 

Beginn.  “The  tyme  approchede,  ofe  Neceffite.” 
no.  A  Ditty  upon  Prudence,  Juftice,  Temperance, 

73- 


&e. 


Beginn.  “  By  Sapience  tempre  thy  Corage.” 

111.  A  (hort  Ditty  entituled  Cato  in  xninorij  written 
for  one  of  our  Tranilators  Scholars.  174. 

Beginn.  “  Whanne  I  aduerte  to  my  Remem- 
braunce.” 

lt2.  A  larger,  entituled,  Liber  magni  Catonis.  i7<. 

Beginn.  “  For  thate  God  is,  inwardly  the  Wite.” 

Perhaps  this  may  have  been  tranllated  for  the  ufe 
of  the  fame  Perfon. 

1 1 3.  Another,  confiding  of  prudential  Maxims  & 
other  Sentences,  conceived  in  Latin,  &  tranflated  into 
Englifh  Verfe,  for  the  fame  young  noble  Youths  ufe  as 
I  conceive.  *79- 

Beginn.  “  Yffe  thow  lifte,  my  childe,  to  fete  thy 
hertly  Delite.” 

1(4.  The  fecond  &  third  Stanzas  of  the  Querela 
Senis  (vid.  fupra,  n“.  108.)  here  written  fuperfluoufly. 

183.  b. 

1 15.  The  two  firft  Stanzas  of  a  mor»l  Poem  tranllated 

from  Latin,  as  thofe  above.  ibid. 

Beginn.  “  No  (leg.  Lo.)  whatc  Wighte  thate  liftithe 
hym  for  to  rede.” 

Now  after  a  great  Chafm ;  follow, 

116.  A  Poem  explaining  the  Office  of  the  Mafs  ; 

which  Pitfeus  entituleth  De  audienda  Miffa.  204. 

Beginn.  “  V  e  thate  bethe  ofe  goode  Deuocyoune.” 

At  the  end  is  thitlhorte  Note,  “  Explicit  quod  Lide- 
gate ;  Amen.” 

117.  TheTreaiife  De  Regimine  Principum,  orSecre- 
tum  Secretorum,  commonly  afcribed  to  Ariftotle.  2 14.  b. 

Beginn.  “  God  almyghti  favc  &  conferme  oure 
Kynge.” 

This  Work  was  of  mighty  repute  in  days  of 
yore;  and  is  pretend,  d  to  have  been  tranllated  out  of 
Greek  into  Arabic  or  Chaldee,  by  one  John  a  Spaniard  ; 
&  from  thence  into  Latin,  by  Philipp  a  Frenchman;  & 
fo  into  Engliffi  Verfe  (with  many  Interpolations  &  Omif- 
fions)  by  Lidgate,  at  the  Requeft  of  K.  Edward  iv.  at 
it  may  feem  ;  becaufe  Dan  John  lived  not  to  finiffi  hit 
Talk.  T  his  appears  by  a  Marginal  Note  which  I  find  at 
fol.236.  in  the  Aords  following,  “  Here deyde  the  Tranf- 
latour,  a  noble  Poete  Dane  Johne  Lydgate ;  and  his 
followere  gan  his  Prologe  in  this  wife  ;  per  Benedict um 
Burghe.  This  Prologue  to  the  Continuation  do’s  thus” 

Beginn.  “  Where  Flowre  ofe  Knvghthode  the  Batel 
dothe  refuce.” 

Pitfeus  maketh  no  mention  of  this  Continuator ; 
but  (according  to  his  Cuftom)  fplitteth  this  Trealife  into 
two. 

118.  Proceffioune  of  Corpus  Crifti,  by  Lydgate. 

250.  b. 

Beginn.  “  This  highe  Fefte  for  to  magnifye.” 

This  ending  abruptly,  the  Tranfcriber  added  the 
following  Note  to  it,  “  Shirley  kowde  fyndeno  more  for 
this  Copye.” 

119.  Examples  of  Kings  and  Princes  unfortunate. 

.  .  254- 

Begmn.  “  Beholde  this  grete  Prynce  Edward  the 
Secunde.” 

This  feems  to  be  unfinilhed. 

120.  A  Sayenge  of  the  Nyghtyngale.  (This  Title  is 

7  I  plainly 


■h 


plainly  of  the  hand-writing  of  Mr.  John  Stow  the  An- 
nahlL)  _  _  255- 

lk-ginn.  “  In  June  when  Titan  was  in  Crabbes 
hede.” 

This  is  alfo  imperfect,  as  appeareth  by  the  Tran- 
fcribers  Note,  “  Of  this  Balade,  Dan  Johan  Lydgate  made 
no  more.’' 

121.  A  Ditty  to  the  bleffed  Virgin.  260.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Be  gladde  Mayde,  Moder  of  Jhefu.” 

122.  Another,  to  our  Lord  Jelus  261.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Crifte,  that  arte  bothe  Day  &  Lighte.” 

123.  Another,  to  the  Authors  Soul.  262.  b. 

Beginn.  “  O  thowe,  my  Soule,  gyfe  Lawde  vnto 

the  Lorde.” 

1 24.  Glo*  iofa  dicta  funt  de  te,  &c.  faid  to  be  tranflated 
by  Lidgate  Dan  Johan  the  Monke  ofe  Bury,  at  the  In- 
ftaunce  ofe  the  Bislhoppe  ofe  Exceftre,  in  Balade- wife. 

265. 

Beginn.  “  In  holy  Hilles  whiche  bien  of  grete 
Renoune.” 

12?.  A  Bailad  in  praile  of  Queen  Catherine,  Mother 
to  K  Kenry  vi.  268.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seynte  Valentyne,  ofe  Cuflom,  yeere  by 
yecre.” 

126.  A  Ballad,  or  Fable,  of  two  Beads  called  Bycorne 
Sc  Chichevache ;  whereof,  that  was  monftroufly  fat,  as 
eating  up  all  Hufbands  who  were  tradable  &  complacent 
to  their  Wives  :  &  this  was  poor  and  lean,  being  afligned 
to  live  upon  nothing  but  patient  and  obedient  Wives ;  of 
which  fort,  but  one  had  been  found  in  many  year’s  time. 

27c.  b. 

Beginn.  “  O  prudente  folkes,  takilhe  Heede.” 

127.  A  Ditty  upon  the  unhappinefs  &  inftabiHty  of 

all  worldly  affairs.  272.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Lyfte  vp  the  ieen  ofe  your  aduertence.” 

The  Author  (who  feems  to  be  Lidgate)  mentions 
the  unfortunate  ends  of  our  King  Henry  v.  &  other 
Englifh :  and  faith  that  he  took  his  Refreyde,  or  Burden 
from  his  Mayfler  Chaucier,  “who  wrote  ful  yore  agoo 
which  Burden  is,  “  How  this  World  is  a  Thurgh-fare  ful 
ofe  Woo.” 

1 1 8.  A  Ballad  accompanying  an  Eagle  prefented  to 
our  King  Henry  v.  &  his  Queen,  on  the  Day  of  their 
Efpoufals.  275.  b. 

Beginn.  “  This  hardy  Fowle,  this  Bridde  viCto- 
rious.” 

129.  Complaint  of  a  Lady  who  had  fettled  her  in¬ 
violable  Affection  upon  a  noble  Knight,  with  whom  flie 
had  been  bred-up  ;  but  he  knew  not  of  it.  276.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Allas!  I  woful  Creature.” 

130.  Advife  to  the  then  young  King  Henry  vi.  and 

among  many  other  Things,  particularly  to  imitate  the 
lingular  Virtues  of  his  Royal  Parents.  277.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Moll  noble  Prince,  of  Criften  Princes 
alle.” 

1 3 1.  A  Dirty  upon  the  Loves,  &  expe&ed  Marriage 
of  Jaques  Luchefs  of  Holland  (Hainault)  with  the 
Englifh  Prince  Humfrey  Duke  of  Gloucefter.  Upon 
both  whom,  our  Author  befloweth  the  greateft  Praifes. 

279.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Thurghe  gladde  Afpectis,  of  the  gode 
Cupide.” 

132.  A  Paraphraflical  Tranflation  of  Seaven  of  Ifopes 

Fabules.  283. 

Beginn.  “  Wyfdom  is  more  of  pris  than  Golde  in 
Coffres.” 

That  this  is  Dan  John’s  Work,  is  plain  from  the  lad 
Verfe  lave  one  in  this  page,  where  he  faith  “  1  was  born 
in  Lydegate.”  It  may  be  alfo  noted,  that  fol.  287  being 
wanting,  Mr.  John  Stowe  abovementioned,  hath  added 
the  firil  five  Verles  that  were  therein  to  the  bottom  of 
fol.  286.  b.  and  omitted  in  the  reft  ;  unlefs  they  were 
inferted  in  a  loofe  Paper  now  loft. 

J33.  A  Complaint  to  an  empty  Purfe.  298. 


Num.  2251,  2252. 

Beginn.  “  To  yow,  my  Purfe,  and  to  non  other 
Wighte.” 

The  three  firil  Stanzas  of  this  Poem  are  aferibed 
to  Chaucer  (I  believe  rightly)  and,  as  his,  are  printed 
in  pag.  549.  of  the  lafl  Edition  of  his  Works.  But  in 
the  prefent  MS.  here  are  no  lefs  than  20  Stanzas  mdre, 
upon  another  and  greater  fubject  of  Complaint ;  in  my 
poor  Opinion,  much  more  fuitable  to  Chaucer’s  circum- 
ltances  in  the  latter  time  of  his  Life  than  thofe  of  Lyd¬ 
gate.  For  here  the  Poet  complains  of  the  mutability  of 
Fortune;  the  Lofs  of  his  Wealth;  his  being  kept  poor 
in  Prifon  upon  falfe  Accufations  ;  the  bafenefs  of  his  pre¬ 
tended  Friends,  not  one  of  whom  now  gave  him  the 
leaft  Relief,  in  his  Diftrefs,  or  had  made  him  any  Vifit, 
though  they  all  adored  him  in  his  Profperity,  while  he 
could  do  them  good  Turns  ;  with  his  want  of  profpeCl 
of  ever  getting  out :  He  therefore  prepares  himfelf 
to  die,  and  implores  the  Aid  of  Jefus  Chrift  and  his 
Mother. 

134.  For  this  reafon  I  account  this  as  a  frelh  Poem 
of  that  great  Man  Geffrey  Chaucer  ;  and  as  thus,  29 

Beginning, 

“  Allas!  Fortune,  alas!  whate  have  I  gilte, 

“  In  Prifon  thus  to  lye  here  defolate.” 

135.  A  Ballad,  wherein  the  Author  enumerateth  many 

Sorts  of  Fcols;  and  feigneth  a  Convent  or  Fraternity  of 
63  fuch.  303. 

Beginn.  “  The  Order  of  Foies,  ful  yore  ago 
bigonne.” 

136.  The  Fable  ofthe  Horfe,  Goofe,  &  Sheep,  plead¬ 

ing  their  refpective  deferts  before  the  Lion  &  the  Eagle, 
who  fate  as  Judges.  306. 

Beginn.  “  Contrauerfies,  Plees,  and  al  Difcorde.” 

137.  The  Moralite  of  the  Hors,  the  Goofe,  &  the 
Sheepe ;  tranflated  bi  Dan  Johan  Lidgate.  3 1 4.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Of  this  Fable  conteynethe  this  Sentence.” 

138.  An  Allegorical  Poem,  chiefly  upon  the  Fall  of 

Adam  (imperfect  at  the  end)  3 1 6.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Alle  bufy  fwymmynge  in  the  ftormy 
Floode.” 

Here  feems  to  be  fome  notable  Confufion ;  for  at  fol. 
3 1 8.  &c.  the  firft  four  Sranzas  of  Chaucers  Ballad  be¬ 
ginning  with  “  O  Merciful,  &00  merciable,’’ are  inferted 
properly,  as  part  of  the  Poem  ;  which  may  be  Chaucers 
for  ought  I  now  know  to  the  contrary.  Whereas  what 
follows  in  the  faid  Ballad,  printed  in  the  laft  Edition  of 
Chaucer,  at  pag.  556.  is  a  mere  Love-Song,  foreign  to 
the  preceding  matter,  and  beginning  thus,  “  The  Caufe, 
“  at  this  time,  of  my  Writing.” 

2252. 

A  paper  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  by  feveral  Hands 
and  containing  the  Collections,  Obfervations,  &  Me¬ 
morandums  of  John  Colyn  Citizen  and  Mercer  of 
London ;  who  flouriflied  in  the  Reign  of  K.  Henry 
vm.  living  in  the  Parilh  of  St.  Mary  Wolnoth  :  which 
Collections,  &c.  are  in  Verfe  as  well  as  in  Profe,  and 
fett  down  upon  various  Occafions,  as  they  occurred  ; 
as  will  ealily  appear  by  the  following  Lift  of  the 
chiefeft  of  them. 

1.  Advifes  for  preferving  Helthe  of  Bodye ;  taken 

from  Lidgate  &  others.  1 .  b. 

2 .  A  Note  againft  harboryng  a  Frere  or  a  Farte.  ibid. 

3.  Sayings  againft  Prodigality,  &  other  Exceffes.  2. 

4.  Of  the  difterence  between  Troy-Weyhte,  &  Haver- 

depayfe-Weyghte.  ibid. 

5.  A  fpecyalle  Medfyne  for  the  Colycke  and  the  Stone. 

ibid. 

6.  A  Stanza  upon  the  Nine  good  properties  of  Wine. 

ibid. 

7.  A  mournful  Ditty  in  the  Name  of  Edwarde  Staf- 

fordeDuke  ofBoktngame  who  was  (unjuftly,  fome  fay) 
accultd  and  executed  tor  High  Treafon.  *  2.  b. 

8.  Proverbs;  i.  e.  Proverbial  Sentences,  perfuading 

to 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


S3; 


Num.  2254. 


to  Morality,  Religion,  &c.  where  one  may  find  excellent 
Advice,  although  delivered  in  homely  or  obfolete  Lan¬ 
guage-  3. 

9.  A  Series  of  the  Mayors  and  Sheriffes  of  London, 
from  the  firft  of  K.  Henry  iv  A.  D.  1399.  to  A.  D.  1 539. 
with  marginal  Obfervadons,  touching  the  principal  Oc¬ 
currences  which  happened,  almoft  in  every  year.  3,  b. 

10.  Lift  of  all  the  Paryslhe-Chyrches  withyne  the 
Gates  ot  thyfe  Cite  ofe  Londone:  (in  number  07.)  10. 

11.  Moneftarys  &  Colleges  withyne  the  Gates  ofe 
London,  (the  n  ...her  18,  including  ChapeUs.)  11. 

11.  P^rvslhys  mowte  the  Gates  of  London,  and 
within  the  Franchyle,  (in  number  8.)  ibid. 

13.  Moneftarys  wit howte  the  Gates,  and  within  the 

Franchefe;  (in  number  8.)  ibid. 

14.  Paryslhys  withowte  the  Frauncbefe,  in  the  Sub- 

barbyfe ;  (in  number  10.)  ibid. 

15.  Moneftarys  in  the  Subbarbyfe ;  (in  number  9.) 

1 1 .  b. 

16.  A  Determinacione  for  Aparance  apone  Enquelts; 

devyfede  by  25  perfons  electe  by  the  25  Aldvrmen  ine 
the  Wards.  Concludyde  in  the  monythe  ofe  Decembre, 
Anno  1519.  and  awtoryfedeby  Acte  of  Comone  Coun- 
celle,  the  aothe  day  of  Janyvere  folowynge :  to  endure 
for  a  hole  yere.  ia. 

17.  The  Condifllone  (or  Meaning)  of  a  Statute  faid  to 

be  made  an.  4  Edw.  nt.  (which  I  cannot  fo  find)  againft 
Galy-men  and  hother  Marchaunte-Str angers  who  being 
Foreftallers,  with  theft  Adherents,  cheated  the  Kings 
Subyetts.  1 4. 

18.  Ordynaunce  in  the  Cete  ofe  Londone.  That  the 

Patrones  or  the  Galyefe  fliall  kepe  there  Dorys  lhytte, 
at  the  ryngynge  of  Curfue  of  Berkynge-Chyrche ;  and 
not  retayle  their  Ware  in  Londone.  ibid. 

19.  Letter  of  K.  Henry  the  vii.  to  the  Mayer  & 

Sheriffs  of  Londone,  defiring  them  to  permitt  the  Galy- 
men  to  fell  their  fmall  Merchaundyces  (as  Glafle,  &c.) 
in  fuch  Manner,  &  in  fuch  Shopps,  as  had  been  ac- 
cuftomed  ;  within  a  limited  time.  14.  b. 

This  was  granted,  by  an  Aft  of  Court  made  for  that 
purpofe. 

20.  A  Petition  exhibited  to  K.  Henry  vm.  &  his  Par¬ 

liament,  in  the  Name  of  all  Englilh  Mercers,  Grocers, 
Drapers,  Gold-fmythes,  Skynners,  Haberdaffers,  Tay- 
lers,  Ledyr-fellers,  Purfers,  Poynt-makers,  Glovers, 
Powche-makers,  Sadlers,  Cutlers,  Pewterers,  Cowpers, 
Gyrdlers,  Founders,  Cordeners,  Vyntners,  Sporyars, 
Yoyners,  &c.  againft  a  grete  Multytude  of  nedy  pepylle 
Eftrangers ;  as  Frenslhe-mene,  Galy-mene,  Pycards, 
Flemyngs,  Keterycks,  Spaynyars,  Scotts,  Lumbards,  &c. 
who,  by  their  unlawfull  dealing  by  Retail,  and  continual 
hawking  throughout  the  whole  Kingdome,  ruined  our 
Natives.  15. 

Herein,  fome  Statutes  made  exprefslv  againft  thole 
Foreigners,  are  cited. 

21  Notes  relating  to  Wyllyam  of  Hatfelde,  &  to 
Leonelle,  Sons  of  K.  Edward  ui.  &  to  the  pofterity  of 
the  later.  17. 

22.  A  Note  concerning  the  Tytelle  of  that  Kynge  to 

the  Realme  of  Fraunce.  ibid. 

23.  A  Memorial,  as  it  feems,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Kings 

Privy  Councill,  complaining  of  a  great  abufe  prattifed  by 
Retaillers  of  Lycowr,  by  Suftranfe  ofe  lettynge  the 
Kynges  Lettyr  K  vppone  a  Potte  that  holdyjie  but  7 
Pynts  of  the  Kynge  Standarde,  whyche  Potte  yfe  occu- 
pyede  for  a  Galone.  1 8. 

Herein  is  ample  mentkm  made  of  the  Original  & 
Reafon  of  our  Weights  &  Meafures,  and  of  their  Propor¬ 
tions  ;  and  upon  occafion  hereof,  a  Copy  is  given  of  an 
Ordonnance  or  By-law  made  for  the  Cowpers  of  London, 
anno  22  R.  Henrici  vii.  and  figned  by  four  of  his  prin¬ 
cipal  Officers. 

24.  An  Ordynaunce  copyed  from  the  Boke  of  owr 
Lady  of  Wol-chyrche-hawe,  by  the  Stocks  in  Londone, 


Num.  2252. 


for  the  good  Rule  ofe  the  fame  Parysffie  :  made  A.  Dj 
*457-  '  2I.b. 

25.  A  Legendary  Story  of  a  Pope,  who  in  his  laft 

Sicknefs,  defired  his  Chaplain  to  fay  three  Paternofters 
for  him  when  hefhould  perceive  him  to  be  dying;  which 
it  is  faid  had  fogood  an  Effect,  as  to  begett  a  Cuftome  of 
doing  the  fame  for  others  alfo.  22. 

26.  A  Poetical  Paraphrafe  upon  Pfaltft  130.  De  pro- 

fundis  clamavi,  &c.  as  alio  upon  the  Kyrie  eleilon,  & 
Inclina  aures :  lor  the  Souls  in  Purgatory.  23. 

Begmn.  “  O  mortal  Man!  call  to  retnembraunce.’' 

27.  A  Poem  entituled  a  forrowfulle  Complaynte  for 

the  Ruyne  of  a  Realme.  2  - 

Beginn.  “  Sythe  profounde  Sorow,  my  harte  ys 
fore  grevyde.” 

The  Realm  meant  by  the  Author,  is  England  j 
whole  decay  he  aferibes  to  the  Pride,  Covetoufnefs,  and 
other  Vices  of  the  Prelats,  &  prircipai  Clergy. 

38.  The  Namys  of  the  KnygLs,  Cctezens,  Barons  of 
the  v  Ports,  and  Burgeffes,  comyngeto  the  Parleamente 
lummonde  at  Weftmynftre  one  Monday  the  17th  day 
of  Oftobre,  the  7th  yere  of  the  Reygne  of  Kynge  Kerry 
the  viith.  2g  1 

'1  he  Number  of  the  Commons  fitting  in  Parliament 
at  that  time  amounted  to  296. 

29.  Indictment  (in  Cafe  of  Prtemunfte,  upon  the  Sta¬ 

tute  of  17  Rich.  11.  Cap.  5.)  of  one  Edmonde  Grey 
C.lerke,  Perfone  of  the  Parislhe-Chyrche  of  Saynte  Benet 
Grafe-churche  of  Londone,  for  purchafing  &  impetrating 
ot  Pope  Nicholas  v.  a  certayne  Bulle,  conteynynge  ter- 
rabylle  Cawces,  and  publyslhyng  the  lame  agaynfte  hvs 
Paryslhens.  '  b' 

30.  The  Complaynte  of  Northe  to  the  Cardnall  Wol- 

fey‘  •  33-  b. 

Beginn.  “  Nowe  beynge  in  Prefone,  am  I  not 
abylle.” 

Here  is  one  Poem  fplitt  into  two ;  whofe  author 
owns  that  the  Caufe  of  his  Imprifonment  was  his  writing 
a  book  againft  the  Cardinal,  whefe  Pity  he  now  fupph- 
cates  in  the  molt  humble  manner  :  and  in  the  latter  part 
of  it  (confuting  of  Praifes  of,  and  Praircs  for  the  Cardi¬ 
nal)  he  hooks-in  Anagramatically,  his  Name  and  Titles 
Thomas  Lord  Legate  and  Cardinal.  An  imperfect 
Copy  of  this  Book  (whole  Author  calls  himfelf  N.  O.)  mv 
noble  Lord  was  pleafed  to  ffiew  me  very  lately  ;  and  ’ti's 
one  of  the  molt  virulent  Libels  that  I  ever  faw  written  by 
any  Lollard.  J 

31.  Notes  of  the  feveral  Acts  of  Parlement  paffyde  in 

Fuerer  and  Merche,  ann.  25  Hem-,  vm.  b. 

32.  Petition  to  the  King,  by  one  of  the  Menefters 
of  his  mofte  honourabylle  Chapelle,  for  his  gracious 
Letter  offe  Prefentacyone  ofe  the  Perfonage  of  B.  36. 

33.  John  Trevylyones  Petition  to  the  Kynge,  for  his 
gracious  Letter  of  Pardon  :  he  having  been  drevyne  by 
Chaunce  Medle,  for  Save-garde  of  hys  Lyfe,  to  gyve  a 
Strype  to  one  Wyllyam  Hyller;  of  whych  he  dyed. 

34.  A  brefe  Cronekell  of  the  Turkes,  from  Ottoman 

to  Solemane.  b> 

This  is  faid  to  be  taken  from  the  Account  pryntvde 
by  Tomas  Gybfone.  '  ' 

35.  The  Progeny  or  Defcent  of  the  Erlesof  Arundelle. 

38. 

36.  A  Letter  fende  by  Kynge  Jamus  iv.  of  Scotlande 

to  Kynge  Herry  the  vmth,  at  fuche  tvme  as  he  laye  at 
the  Sege  ot  Turwyne  in  Fraunce,  by  Ilaye  the  Scottvslhe 
Heralde  of  Armus.  ’ 

Expoftulating,  in  bitter  Terms,  the  pretended  inju¬ 
ries  he  had  received  from  our  King,  whofe  Countrey  he 
was  refolved  to  invade,  unlefs  he  would  defift  from  all 
further  Attempts  againft  France. 

37;  The  Mefage  that  was  done  by  Ilay  (or  Lyoune) 
Scottilhe  Heralde  to  Kynge  Herry  the  viuth,  when  he 
lay  at  the  Sege  of  Turwyne,  anno  1513.  41. 

Somoning 


l  ,l| 


E84 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2252. 


Somoning  him  to  return  to  his  Realm  of  England. 

Her  •  s  alfo  our  King’s  refolute  Anfwer,  not  to  break  up 
.he  Sie^e ;  that  he  had  provided  againft  any  Attempts 
from  Scotland  ;  whofe  King  (he  faid)  was  anointed  with 
Crown. s  of  the  Sun;  and  whom  he  more  efpecially 
blamed  for  mylfe-entietynge  his  Syfter. 

-8.  The  anffwer  to  the  Kvnge  of  Scotts  Letter,  lent 
by'Lycne  the  Scottylhe  Herawide,  from  Kynge  Herry 

the  yiutbe.  ,  , ,  .  ,  i2' 

She  •  ngthat  proper  Anfwers  had  before  been  given 
as  to  the  Injuries  he  pretended  to  have  received  ;  fetting 
forth  his  foul  dealing,  in  threatening  to  invade  England 
contrary  to  his  folemn  promife,  for  which,  he  and  all  his 
Poftcrity  ought  to  be  excluded  Jrom  the  poffeflion  of  its 
Crown  ;  Sr  fhewing  his  firm  Refolution  to  profecute  the 
War  with  France. 

39.  A  Ditty  entituled  The  Lamentacione  of  the  Kynge 

of  Scotts.  4 3;, b' 

Beginn.  “  As  Y  lay  mufynge,  my  felt  alone. 

This  is  upon  the  Scotts  King  James  iv.  who  invad¬ 
ing  England,  was  vanquifhed  &  flain  at  the  Battel  of 
Bramltone  or  Floddon,  A.  D.  15x3.  . 

40.  Bellum  de  Bramptone,  per  Frauncis  Dvngley  de 

Manifone.  45- 

This  is  a  Ballad  upon  the  great  Battle  of  Floddon- 
field,  wherein  the  chief  Commanders  of  the  Fnglifh  Army 
are  particularly  remembered.  It  beginns  thus,  O  Rex, 
Regum,  in  thy  Realme  celleftiale and  the  Burden  is, 

“  By  the  helpe  of  Saynte  George  owr  Ladyes  Knyght.  ’ 

4*1 .  -phe  Cempofyfyone  of  alle  Offryngs  withyn  the 
Cete  ofe  Londone,  Sc  Subarbz  of  the  fi  e.  n8.  b. 

This  Agreement  was  made  by  cholen  Arbitrators, 

17  December,  A.  D.  1 

42.  A  gretc  Myracle  of  a  Knyghte  callyde  Syr  Roger 

Wallyfborow..  5°  j5- 

This  Knight  being  in  the  Holy  Land,  had  a  mind  to 
bring-off,  pr: lately,  a  piece  of  the  Holy  Crofs  ;  accord¬ 
ingly,  his  1  high  open'd  miraculoufly,.  &  received  it. 
Miraculoufly  he  returned  to  Cornwall  his  Countrey;  & 
miraculoufly  his  Thigh  opened  again  and  lett  it  out.  A 
bitt  of  it  he  gave  to  that  parilli-Church  where  this  hap¬ 
pened,  thence  forward  called  Croffe-Parysfhe ;  the  Reiy- 
dew  he  gave  to  St.  Buryan’s  College. 

43.  Of  the  Right  of  the  Houle  of  England  to  the 

Oownus  ofFraunce,  Caftylle  8c  of  Legyons ;  &  vnto  the 
Dowchye  oi  Normandy.  Imperfect.  5 1  ■  b- 

Then  fellows  by  another  Hand, 

44.  A  long  Poem  entituled  The  Lyfe  of  Ij-.omy- 
done  Son  to  Ermones  King  of  Foyle  (or  Apulia-)  54. 

Beginn.  “  Mekely,  Lordyngis,  gentylle  and  fre.” 

1  his  feems  to  have  been  taken  from  fome  old  Ro¬ 
mance,  where  the  great  Valor  oflpomydone  the  Hero 
thereof,  is  fufficiently  celebrated  ;  particularly  the  great 
(but  un-neceffary)  Afts  he  did,  whereby  he  gained  the 
fair  Heirefs  of  Calabria. 

45.  A  fhovt  Song  upon  an  inconftant  Miflrefs.  84.  b. 

46.  Another,  upon  thofe  who  putt  off  their  Marriage, 

in  hopes  of  increafing  their  wealth  in  the  mean  Time, 
untill  their  Youth  be  fpent.  ibid. 

47.  A  Story  relating  to  the  Anfwer  given  by  an 

Englifh  Merchant  to  a  foreign  Lord,  who  ;  (ked  Why 
Engliih  people  not  only  eat  more,  but  entertain  with 
greater  Varieties,  than  thofe  of  other  Nations.  ibid. 

48.  Another,  concerning  a  Teflamer.t  made  by  a 

Lord’s  Sage  Foie.  &5* 

Now  comes,  written  with  different  Ink. 

49.  A  large  Poem,  at  the  end,  entituled  Le  moit 

Arthure.  86. 

Beginn.  “  Lordingis  that  are  lefte  and  dere.’’ 

This  I  take  to  be  tranflated  from  the  French  * 

*  Fran  ■■  he  Cnix-du  Maine,  ;«  hi,  BlUothe^ue  of  French  IVriten,  faith  that 
Chreflun  Tm.jc,  1‘tct,  born  a:  Trcye  tn  Champagne,  is  nvho  Jiou.ijke  !  .  D. 

UnS.  .--V  .  1:  Romance,  in  Snnekvnft,  ai,  The  Kr.ightuf  the  Sword  j  1 

(cal  •  The  R.  m^iico  of  the  Chare  Hr,  which  mentions  Lancelot,  and  was  finilhed 
Rv  fjioffccy  co  1  t^i.y,  who  douiilheo  A.  I).  It09i  Lancelot  du  Lac  ;  Tire  Grail ; 
he  The  Kr.o'ht  oi  ti  e'Lion. 


Num.  2252* 

Romance  of  K.  Arthur,  which  feemeth  to  have  been  in¬ 
vented  by  the  Armorican  Britans :  and  this  is  to  be  taken 
from  only  one  part  of  that  large  Work.  At  the  beginning, 
it  is  propofed  to  treat  of  the  great  Adventures  of  k. 
Arthur,  his  Knights  of  the  Round  Table,  the  San- 
gnvle  Sc c.  but  the  Work  itfelf  does  not  anfwer  thereunto. 
Here  ’sir  Launcelot  du  Lake  King  of  Benwike  is  the 
principal  Hero,  &  his  Intrigues  with  Q.  Gaynoure,  K. 
Arthur’s  Wife,  his  refufal  of  the  Lai  1  of  Atcalots  fair 
Daughter,  who  died  for  his  Love,  &  others  ci  his  Ad¬ 
ventures,  are  fully  related.  But  toward  the  end,  men¬ 
tion  is  made  of  the  War  which  broke-out  between  Mor- 
dreite  the  Ufurper  &  K.  Arthur,  who  flew  each  other  ; 
and  partly  concludes  with  the  Repentance  of  CL  Gay¬ 
noure  &  Sir  Lancelot,  who  having  taken  upon  them- 
felves  the  Habit  of  Religion,  ended  their  Lives  in  pious 
manner.  .  ,  , 

I  know  not  who  this  Poet  was,  but  guefs  that  he 
lived  about  the  the  time  of  K.  Henry  vji.  and  that  he 
might  have  been  a  Northern  man.  He  uleth  many 
Saxon  or  obfolete  Words ;  and  very  often  delighted 
himfelf  (as  did  the  Author  of  Tiers  Plow  man)  in  the 
Chime  of  words  beginning  with  the  fame  Letter,  as  (that 
I  may  give  one  example)  f  orvelle  the  wide  withouten 
wciie.”  fol.  ; ;  7.  b.  I  fuppofe  he  enlarged  upon  the  Story 
(which  was  too  large  before)  in  that  lie  mentioneth  the 
Tower  of  Lon  ion,  Syr  Lucan  de  Botellere,  tcc. 

c;c.  An  iEnigma,  leaning  to  deicribe  mans  pronenefe 
to  Sin  8-:  Evil,  notwithftanding  all  his  Reiolutions  againft 


free. 


-33-  -- 

Beginn.  cc  Thowghe  I  be  bonde,  yette  ante  1 

Now  follow  many  Poems  compofed  by  John  Skel¬ 
ton  Poet  Lanreatto  K.  Henry  vm.  visit. 

5 1 .  Parot.  1 34* 
Beginn.  “  My  name  ys  Parott  a  Byrde  of  Para- 

dyfe.’ ' 

Here  are  many  Songs  wherein  Skeltons  Parrot  is 
concerned,  who  often  purpofely  nipps  at  Cardinal 
Wolfey.  . 

52.  The  former  part  of  a  Song  upon  the  Inconitancy 
of  his  Miflrefs:  it  beginns  “Mornynge,  Mornynge.”  140. 

53.  A  Poem  containing  Prognoflications  for  the 

whole  enfuing  Year,  according  to  the  Day  of  the  Week 
wherein  the  Calends  of  January  do  happen  to  fall ; 
taken  from  a  book  falfely  aferibed  to  Ezechyelthe  Pro- 
phete.  l4'- 

Beginn.  “  Ye  Men  that  Wyfdomc  wylle  lerne.  . 

54.  The  Crafte  of  Lymnynge,  i.  e.  of  illuminating 

Books.  .  ,42* 

5;.  Quis  refurgat  ad  Malyngnantes  ?  aut  quis  itabit 
mecum  adverfus  operantes  Iniquitatem  ?  Nemo  Domine : 
being  an  Invettive  againft  the  Clergy  of  all  fons  and 
degrees;  with  fome  Strokes,  as  1  take  it,  againft  Cardi¬ 
nal  Wolfey  in  particular.  >  J4  7* 

Beginn.  “  Whatecan  hyt  avayle.’ 

Ihe  Author  of  this  Libell,  feveral  times  calleth 
himfelf  C.olyne  Clowte  :  and  at  the  end,  1  find  the  fol¬ 
lowing  Note,  which,  I  fuppofe,  was  meant  for  Witt. 
“  Quod  Colly ne  Clowte  in  opere  imperiedo;  in  ^  opere 
Temper  perfecto.  et  in  opere  plufquam  perfeCto.”  But, 
a  little  lower,  the  true  name  is  fet  down  ;  Quod  bcel- 
tonyus  Lawreatus,  this  by  John  Colyns  who  made  the 

Collection.  ,  .  , 

56.  Some  Latin  Verfcs  of  this  Skeltons,  inaccurately 
tranferibed.  ml53m 

Beginn.  “  Colinus  Clo^tus  quanquam  mon  carxnma 

37.  Prognoftication  of  wrhat  fhall  follow,  if  Chrift- 
mafs  be  on  a  Monday,  *bid. 

Beginn.  “  Yfe  Cryftmafe  dayT 

one  the  MonHaybe,  (  Medlyde  with 
A  troboii  s  Wynter  f  W-aiei  ltronge. 
ye  fliall  fee  J 


58.  Prog- 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


S8J 


Hum.  2252,  2253. 

58.  Prognoftications  from  Chriftmafs,  as  it  fell  upon 

any  day  of  the  Week.  ,*54- 

Beginn.  “  Lordyngs,  I  wameyow  al  beforne. 

59.  Conclufion  of  a  Relation  of  the  dying  Speeches 
of  certain  who  were  executed  in  the  time  of  K.  Henry 
viii.  the  preceding  Leaf  being  purpoiely  torne-out.  155. 

60.  A  Ditty  fetting-forth  the  lnconftancy  of  Fortune, 

from  a  Fable  of  a  Falcon  who  flew  from  the  other  Birds, 
to  the  top  of  a  Mountain  adorned  with  a  fine  Rofe- Iree, 
where  a  loving  Lion  Chofe  her  a  Nell.  lbld- 

Beginn.  “  In  a  fresfhe  mornynge,  amonge  the 
Flowrys.’' 

By  the  Falcon,  is  meant  Queen  Anne  Bolevne,  it 
being  her  Device  ;  by  the  Mountain,  England  ;  ana  by 
the  Lion,  K.  Henry  viii.  to  be  fure. 

61 .  A  Poem  of  the  Cardinalle  Wolfe.  1 5°‘ 

Beginn.  “  God  lave  Kynge  Kerry  owr  nobulle 

^  Tlis  I  take  to  be  one  of  Skelton’s  fcurrilous  Libells. 

62.  A  Poem,  not  fini/bed,  whofe  Author  gives  good 

Advices,  fed  vide  infra  No.  66.  . 1  57-  > 

Beginn.  “  O  Mortal  Man,  by  grete  Exaltacione.  ’ 

63.  Another  of  Skelton’s  Libells  again!!  Cardinal 

Wolfey.  .  PT1.  *58- 

64.  Prognoflications  from  the  Primes  tailing  upon 

any  Day  of  the  Week.  *59-  b. 

65.  Obfervations  as  to  the  changing  of  the  Moon, 
according  as  the  Prime  falleth  upon  any  Dominical  Let- 

ter.  t 

65.  The  Ditty  «  O  Mortal  Man,’  much  longer  than 
that  above  at  No.  62. 

67.  A  place  of  fome  Alchymillical  Author,  which 

promifmg  a  great  deal  too  much,  is  (as  I  fuppofe)  worth 
little.  ,6‘-b- 

68.  Orders  made  by  ten  elected  Parilhioners  of  Wol- 
chyrche-hawe  (where  f  our  John  ColynS  was  one)  26 
Novembyr  1520.  touching  paymeutfor  knolling  of  Bells, 

&  Burial  Is  within  that  Church.  1 63*. 

69.  An  Order  made  A.  D.  1526.  by  8  chofen  Parifin- 

oners,  whereo!  the  lame  John  Collyns  was  one;  touching 
payment  of  the  Prielt  celebrating  certain  Malles,  &  Ting¬ 
ing  Anthems  on  fome  particular  days.  165. 

no.  A  Note  out  of  a  Booke  callyd  Vitas  Patrum,  en¬ 
deavoring  to  envince,  that  lor  Falienes  &  Perjury,  this 
Land  fpewed-out  its  Inhabitants  3  tymus,  namely  the 
Breton?,  Salons,  &  Danys :  and  that  now,  in  owr 
dayes  (i.  e.  after  the  long  War  between  the  two  Rofes) 
by  fchedynge  of  Bl.odde,  it  ys  fofebylled,  that  we  be  not 
of  power  to  withlloode  owr  Enemyfe,  without  Myracle. 
r  ibid. 

71.  A  precyows  Reftoratyfe  for  a  Man  that  ysweke, 

&  lacks  Nature.  b- 

72.  A  Note  (hewing  the  number  of  Miles  making  the 

Diameter  of  thisTerreftrial  Globe.  166. 

73.  Short  Theological  Advices.  ibid. 

79.  Brief  Defcription  of  the  Lotte  of  St.  Thomas  of 

Caunterbery,  ■  ibldl 

This  was  an  old  Game  upon  the  Tables. 

7  c.  The  number  of  all  the  Kings,  from  Brutus  toK. 
Henry  vm.  lb,d- 

A  parchment  Book  in  fitiall  folio,  -written  by  feveral 
hands,  upon  feveral  Subjects  ;  partly  in  old  French, 
partly  in  Latin,  and  partly  in  old  Englilh  ;  partly  in 
Verfe,  &  partly  in  Profe  ;  and  of  whofe  feveral  1  racts, 
I  fliall  give  this  following  Account. 

I.  Vitas  Patrum.  f 

This  is  an  old  French  Poem,  taken  fiom  the  Le¬ 
gendary  Book  fo  called  ;  as  that  was  chiefly  collected 
from  St.  Hierome  &  Joannes  Caflianus.  This  without 
declaring  its  Authors  name,  doth  thus 

Beginn.  ‘‘En  1  onur  dedamuedele  omnipotent,- 
E  de  Marie  fa  dulce  mere  enfement. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.1I. 


Nani.  2253. 

E  de  tuz  Seinz  &  Seintes  communement, 
Pirrai  vus  fermun  ke  ci  trois  en  prefent 
Co  eft  de  Vitas  Patrum,  come  ic  l’entent.”  ^ 

2.  Another,  entituled  “La  Paflioun  noftre  Seignour:’ 

23. 

Beginn.  “  Mult  fud  grant  icele  Ele&iun, 

Dunt  ma  doleine  recut  fymund  veir 
pardun, 

Celui  edit  per  qui  uait  tut  le  mund.” 

3.  A  Tra£t  in  Profe,  with  this  Title,  “  De  la  paflioun 

Jhefu.”  _  _  33/  b-. 

Beginn.  “  Coe  avint  al  quinzime  an  qe  Tiberie 
Cefar  aveit  efte  Emperur  de  Rome,  e  al  difnefime  ail 
qui  Hcrodes  le  fiz  Herode  aveit  efte  Rei  de  Galilee,  e 
en  l'utifmekalende  d' Averil,  lei  eft  el  vint  &  neolime  ior 
de  Mars,  &  al  quart  an  del  Cunte  Rufin,  e  Lean,  en 
l'an  quant  furent  Evefques  Jofeph  e  Cayphas,  el  quint 
an  a  proef  la  pafliun  noftre  Seignur  :  Nichodemus  eferift 
cefte  Hyftorie  en  Ebreu  e  en  Latin.” 

This  is  conformable  to  the  Treatife  commonly  called 
“  Pfeudo-Evangelium  Nicllodcmi;”  which  in  days  ofyore 
obtained  much  ;  and  was  tranflated  into  divers  Lan- 


,t.  b. 


guages. 

4.  De  S.  Johan  le  Ewangel.  4‘- 

Beginn.  “  I.e  fecunt  travau?  as  Criftiens  aprbf  Ne- 
run  1‘Emperur,  fud  Domicien  l’Empcrur,  qui  apres  lui 
regna.  E  il  fift  amener  Sain  Johan  le  Evaungelifte  devant 
fei  :  ft  li  demanda,  parki  conge  il  feleit  edifier  les  Eglifes 
de  Elfefie  &  aillurs,  e  en  qui  nun  r” 

5.  De  S.  Johan  le  Baptifte.  43-  b- 

Beginn.  “  Al  tens  Herode  Rei  de  Judee,  eit  prouere 

per  nun  Zacharie  del  Lignage  Abie.  Si  out  une  feme 
del  lignage  Aaron,  e  ele  aueit  a  nun  Elizabet.’’ 

6.  De  S.  Bartholomeu.  45-  b* 

Beginn.  “  Coe  quitent  ?  cels  qui  fe  veut  devifer  les 

parties  del  rnunde  que  treis  Indes  funt  ;  la  pramiere,  eft 
cele  ke  s'pftent  vers  Ethyope  ;  la  fecund,  ki  s’eftent  vers 
Mede ;  la  tierce,  qui  eft  fin  de  tutes  teres  :  kar  dt  I’urie 
part  a  tuchiele  regne  des  tenebres.  u  unkes  iur  lien  eft.; 
del  altre  part  fine  al  grant  mer  de  Occian,  utre  la  quel 
nient  de  tere  nen  ad.” 

7.  Paflioun  Seint  Piere.  47-  b. 

Beginn.  “  Apres  Neron  Cefar  efteient  a  Rome  leS 

dous  fidels  maiftres  as  Criftiens,  Sein  Pere  e  Sant  Pol 
les  Apoftres  ;  par  les  queles  la  fei  noftre  Seignur  Jliu 
Crift  fut  efhalcie  en  Rome.” 

Hitherto,  all  is  written  in  a  round  Text  Hand  ;  per¬ 
haps  by  fome  religious  Perfon  ;  what  follows  is  in  an 
Englilh  Law  hand  as  old  as  the  Reign  of  K.  Edward  11. 
or  of  his  Father. 

8.  A  Song  inPraife  of  Women. 

Beginn.  “  Ouy  a  la  Dame  de  Parays  J 

deyvent  foy  e  leaute. 

Ore  entendent  a  mes  Dis 
e  ie  lur  dirroy  Verite, 

Si  nul  y  foit  qe  eit  mefpris 
vers  Fern  me  par  m  an  ( u )  efte . 

De  corteyfie  foit  for-banys 
ou  haftivementfoit  redrefle.  _ 

Quar  il  pert  fa  noreture 
certes  que  femme  deceit.” 

It  goes  on  in  this  kind  of  Stanza  ;  including  alfo, 
as  many  beginning  Alphabetically,  as  then  made  out 
the  French  Alphabet. 

9.  A  Poem,  upon  the  Contention  between  the 
Somer  &  the  Winter.  5*- 

Beginn.  “  Un  graunt  Eftrif  oy  Vantrer 
Entre  Efte,  £  Sire  Yver, 

Ly  queux  auerit  la  Seignurie.” 

Then  follow  certain  Receipts  in  old  Englilh  ;  being, 

10.  Vor  te  make  Cynople.  • b* 

11.  Vor  te  tempren  Afure.  ‘bid. 

12.  Vor  te  make  Gras-grene.  ‘bid. 

13.  Vor  te  maken  anobur  nianur  Grene.  ibid. 

7  K  ‘4-  Zet 


49* 


1  dreyt. 


58S 


Catalogus  Librorun;  MSS. 


Nu:n.  2253. 

14.  Zet  fur  Gaude-grene.  52  b. 

15.  Vor  te  couche  Seluer-foyl.  (as  alfo,  as  to  Gold- 

fcyl)  ibid. 

1 6.  Vor  te  maken  Iren  as  hart  as  Stel.  ibid. 

ly.  Vor  te  maken  Blank-plum  (i.  e.  Cerufe).  ibid. 

After  this,  two  Leaves  have  been  cutt-out ;  where¬ 
in,  probably,  other  like  Receipts  were  written. 

1 8.  Vita  Sci  Ethelberti  11.  Eft-Anglorum  Regis  atq; 

Martyris  ;  an  non  a  Giraldo  Cambrenfi  ?  (vid  Pitfamm, 
P»g-  *7? •)  .  5;.. 

lnit.  “  Gloriofus  ac  fummo  Rcgi  acceptus.  Rex 
Ethelbertus.” 

19.  Infulfa  precatiuncula,  qua;  ab  his  verbis  incipit, 
Anima  Xpi,  fanctifica  me  |  Corpus  Xpi,  falva 

me  f  Sanguis  Xpi,  inebria  me;  ”  cumhac  notula,  “  Qui 
hanc  Orariortem  devote  dixerit,  ter  milles  dies  Venie 
polUde^t.” 

20.  A  Poem,  written  in  the  form  of  Profe  ;  wherein 

the  Author  (who  loved  good  eating)  names  many  Dilhes, 
proper  to  particular  Times  &  Seaforis,  which  he  found 
molt  agreeable  to  his  own  Palate.  ^5. 

Beginn.  “  Quant  voy  la  revenue  Djrner,  fi  me 
argue  que  ly  temps  fe  remue,  lors  aym  Buche  fendue  : 
Cnarboun  clykant,  Tyfoun  fla'mbaunt,  Feu  de  Souche, 
meifne  de  joie.  Chaunt  quar  ie  I’eym,  tant  tot  le  Cors 
me  treffue.” 

2 1 .  An  old  Englith  Poem,  upon  our  Saviors  defcent 

into  HeU  ;  and  his  Difcourfes  there  with  Sathanas,  the 
Janitor,  Adam,  Eva,  Habraham,  David,  Johan  Baptilt 
&  Moyfes.  33..  b. 

Beginn.  “  A  He  kerkenej  to  me  non, 

A  Strif  wolle  Y  tellen  ou, 

Ot  Jhefu  ant  of  Sathan, 

Jo  Jhefu  was  to  Helle  ygan.’’ 

I  fancy  this  might  have  been  made  for  fome  Inter¬ 
lude  ;  to  be  a£ted  by  Friers  or  other  religious  Perfons. 

22.  A  Poem  containing  a  Dialogue  between  the  Soul 
&  the  Body  ;  fetting-forth  the  certainty  of  Death  & 
Judgment,  with  Cautions  againll  Pride,  Injuftice,  &c. 

57. 

Beginn.  “  In  a  Jeftri  ftude  y  Hod  a  lutel  ftrif  to 
here, 

Of  a  Body  Jat  was  un-god,  Jer  hit  lay  on 
a  Bere. 

Jo  fpekes  Je  Goft  wyj  drery  mod,  ant 
myd  forful  chere. 

Wo  wiht  Jy  Fleyfhe  Ji  foule  Blod,  whi 
lyff  Jou  nou  here.’’ 

23.  A  Ballad  or  Song,  made  by  one  of  the  adherents 
to  Simon  de  Montfort  Earl  of  Leicetter,  foon  after  the 
Battel  of  Lewis ;  which  was  fought  A.  D.  1 264.  58.  b. 

Beginn.  “  SitteJ  alle  ftille,  &' 
herknej  to  me, 

Je  Kyng  of  Ale- 
maigne  bi  mi 
Ieaute, 

JrittiJoufent  pound 
alkede  he. 

For  te  make  Je 
pees  in  Je  Coun- 
tre.” 

Herein,  the  Poet  (befides  this  Prince,  who  was  bro¬ 
ther  to  K.  Henry  111.  &  Earl  of  Cornwall)  reflects  upon 
John  Earl  of  Waren  &  Surrey,  Hugh  le  Bigot,  &  Prince 
Edward  (afterward  K.  Edward  1.)  by  name. 

24.  Another  in  French,  made  perhaps  by  the  fame 
Poet  after  the  Battle  of  Evefham,  which  was  ftricken 
A.  D.  1265.  when  Simon  de  Montfort. was  flain,  and  the 

^rebellious  Barons  were  utterly  difeomfited.  59. 

Beginn.  “  Chaunter  meftoit  |  mon  euer  le  voit  | 
en  un  dure  langage. 

Tut  en  .ploraunt  |  full  fet  le  chaunt  |  de 
.  :  r -  ' npftre.duz  Baronage, 


ant  fo  he  dude  more 

Richard,  Jat  Jou  be 
>ever  trichard, 

tri&hen  Ihat  thou 
never  more. 


Num.  2253. 

Qe  pur  la  pees  |  fi  loynz  apres  |  fe  lefle- 
rent  de  trere, 

Lur  cors  trencher  |  e  demembrer  |  pur 
falver  Engletere. 

Ore  eft  ocys  |  la  fiur  de  pris  [  qe 
taunt  favoit  de  guere, 

Ly  queus  Mountfort  |  fa  dure  mort  { 
molt  en  plorra  la  terre." 

The  Poet  looks  upon  him  as  a  Martyr  ;  and  rep-refs 
the  lofs  of  Henry  his  Son,  Hugh  Ie  Difpenfer  Juftice  of 
England,  &  others  who  then  loft  their  Lives  j  &  concludes 
with  a  Stanza  in  Englilh. 

25.  A  long  ballad  againft  the  Scotts,  many  of  whom 
are  here  mentioned  by  name,  as  alfo  many  of  the  Englifh 
befides  the  King  &  Prince.  But  particularly,  of  William 
Walleys  taken  at  the  Battle  of  Dunbar,  A.  D.  1 305.  of 
Simon  Frifell,  taken  at  the  Battle  of  Kyrkenclyf,  A.  D. 
1306.  both  whom  were  punifhed  as  Traitors  to  our  King 
Edward  the  Firft,  &  their  Heads  fett  (among  others 
of  their  Countrey  men)  upon  London  bridge :  and  of 
the  Coronation  of  Robert  de  Brus,  and  his  lurking  af¬ 


terward. 
Beginn. 


:LyftneJ,  Lordyn- 
ges,  a  newe  Song 
Jl3ch  ulle  bigyn- 


59.  b. 


Of  JeTraytours  of 
Scotland,  Jat  take 
bej  wyj  ginne.  J»Ich  underftonde  : 
Mon  Jat  lovej  falf- 
nelfe,  &  nule 
never  blynne, 

Sore  may  him 
drede,  Je  Iyf  Jat 
he  is  ynne, 

Selde  wes  he  glad  |  Jat  never  nes 
a-fad  |  of  nyje  ant  of  onde.” 

26.  A  French  Song  giving  Precepts  for  confolidating 
of  Friendftiip,  between  perfons  of  the  fame  Sex.  6 1 .  b. 

Beginn.  “  Cyl  qe  vodra  oyr  mes  Chauns 
en  foun  cuerfe  remyre. 

Si  il  en  fet,  ou  en  femblauns 
rien  touche  a  la  matire. 

De  un  Chauncon  en  Romauns 
ou  la  en  orrez  d’eferire, 

Le  lelfoun  a  leals  amantz 
vous  y  comencez  a  lyre.” 

27.  A  godly  fong,  chiming  often  upon  the  fame  Letter, 

as  pra&ifed  afterwards  in  other  Poems.  62.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Middel-erd  for  mon  was" 
mad 

un-mihti  aren  is  mefte 
mede 

Jis  hedy  haj  on  honde 
y-had 

Jat  hevene  hem  is  hefte 

to  hede  ^Jah  he  ben 

Ich  erde  a  blifle  budel  us  deme  done  ; 
bad 

Je  dreri  Domes-dai  to 
drede, 

Of  finful  fauhting  fonc 
be  fad 

Jat  deme  doj  Jis  derne 
dede, 

Jis  wrakeful  werkes  under  wede 
in  Soule  fotelej  fone.” 

28.  An  iEnigma,  gingling  again  upon  Letters.  63. 
Beginn.  “  Ic  hot  a  Burde  in  a  bour,  afe  Beryl  fo 

bryght ; 

Afe  Saphyr  in  Silver,  femly  on  fyht : 

Afe  Jalpe  Je  gentil,  Jat  leme J  wij  lyht ; 
Afe  Gemet  in  Golde,  &  Ruby  wel  rjht; 
Afe  Onycle  he  ys  on  y-holden  on  hyht ; 

Afe 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


Num.  2253. 

Afe  Diamaund  pe  dere,  in  day  when  he 
is  dyht ; 

He  is  Coral,  y-cud  wip  Cayfer,  ant 
Knyght  ; 

Afe  Emeraude  a  morewen  ]ais  may  havep 
myht.” 

Whether  the  Poet  meant  his  Midrefs  or  not,  I  have 
hot  time  to  examine  ;  yet  1  obferve  the  Lines  following, 

“  From  Weye  he  is  wifid  in  to  Wyrhale  ; 
Hire  nome  is  in  a  note  of  pe  Nyhtegale  ; 

In  an  Note  is  hire  nome,  nempnep  hit 
non  ; 

Who-fe  ryhtredep,  ronne  to  Johon.” 

29.  A  Song  in  praife  of  the  authors  Midrefs,  whofe 

name  was  Alyfoun.  63.  b. 

Beginn.  “BytweneMerffie  &  Averil  }  whenfpraybi- 
ginnep  to  fpringe 

pe  lutel  foul  hap  hire  wyl  |'on  hire  lud  to 
fynge, 

Ich  libbem  lonclonginge  |  for  femloked  of 
alle  pynge.” 

30.  Another  Love-fong,  written  as  Profe.  ibid. 
Beginn.  “  Wip  longynge  y  am  lad  |  on  molde  y 

waxe  mad  |  a  Maide  marrep  me, 

Y  grede,  y  grone  vn  glad  |  for  felden  y 
am  fad  |  pat  femly  for  te  fee. 

Levedi  pou  rewe  me  |  to  roupe  thou 
haved  me  rad  |  be  bote  of  pat  ybad  | 
my  lyf  is  long  on  pe.” 

31.  A  Ditty  complaining  of  the  badnefs  of  the  Time, 

and  the  great  Taxes  &  Fees  levied  &  extorted  by  the 
Kings  Officers.  64. 

Beginn.  “  Ich  herde  men  vpo  mold  make  muche 
mon 

hou  he  be  bep  i-tened  of  here  tilynge, 
Code  zeres  &  corn  bope  bep  a-gon 
ne  kepep  here  no  Sawe,  ne  no  Songe 
fynge. 

Nou  we  mote  worthe  nis  per  non  oper 
won 

mai  ich  no  lengore  lyue  wip  mi  le- 
fmge, 

Zet  per  is  a  bitterore  bid  to  pe  bon 
for  euer  pe  furpe  Peni  mot  to  pe  Kynge.” 

32.  The  Legend  of  Saint  Marine  Virgin.  64.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Herkep  hideward,  &  beop  dille, 

Y  preie  ou  zef  hit  be  or  wide, 

&  ze  ffiule  here  of  one  Virgine, 
pat  wes  y-cleped  Seinte  Maryne.” 

33.  A  chiming  Ditty  upon  the  fair  Sex,  with  whom 

(it  feems)  one  Richard  had  much  credit.  66. 

Beginn.  “  Weeping  hauep  myn  wonges  wet 

for  wilked  werk  ant  wone  of  wyt, 
Vn-blipe  y  be  til  y  ha  bet 

bruches  broken  afe  bok  byt, 

Of  Leuedis  love  pat  y  ha  let 
pat  lemep  al  wip  luefly  lyt, 

Ofte  in  Song  y  haue  hem  fet 
pat  is  vn-femly  per  hit  fyt. 

Hit  fyt  &  femep  noht 
per  hit  ys  feid  in  Song 
pat  y  haue  of  hem  wroht 
y  wis  hit  is  al  wrong.” 

34.  An  ingenious  Defcription  of  the  Authors  Midrefs  ; 

written  as  Profe.  66.  b. 

“  Mod  i  ryden  by  Rybbefdale  |  wilde  wymmen  for 
te  wale  |  ant  wrelde  wuch  ich  wolde  : 

Founde  were  pe  feired  on  |  pat  euer  wes  mad  of 
blod  ant  bon  |  in  boure  bed  with  bolde.” 

35. '  Another  Love-fong  which  thus  66.  b. 

beginns.  “  In  a  fryht  as  y  con  fare  fremede 

y  founde  a  wel  feyr  fenge  to  fere, 

Heo  glydnede  afe  gold  when  hit  glemede 
nes  ner  gome  fo  gladly  on  gere, 


S§ 


Num.  2253. 

Y  wolde  wyie  in  world  who  hire  kertede 
pis  Burde  bryht,  zef  hire  wil  were, 
Heo  me  bed  go  my  gates,  led  hire  gremede 
ne  kepte  heo  non  henynge  here.” 

36.  Another,  whofe  Author  complains  of  his  Mif* 
treiles  Cruelty  (written  as  Profe.)  67. 

Beginn.  “  A  wayle  whyt  afe  Whalles  bon  |  a  greirl 
in  golde  pat  godly  ihon  |  a  tortle  pat 
min  lierte  is  on  |  in  tonnes  trewe  | 
Hire  gladdiipe  nes  neuer  gon  |  whil  y 
may  glewe.” 

37:  A  French  Poem,  but  probably  made  by  an  En- 
glifhman,  anno  29  R.  Edwardi  1.  relating  the  Argu¬ 
ments  ufed  by  Gilote  a  debauched  young  Creature,  to 
make  her  acquaintance  Johane  as  bad  as  her  felf :  and . 
how  they  corrupted  the  Morals  of  many  Women,  at 
Winchelter,  Pontefrad,  &  other  places,  both  in  England 
Sc  Ireland.  67.  b. 

Beginn.  “  En  May,  pervne  matynes’en  alajuer, 

En  \  ,i  vert  LcL  :  .  'h  jcuene  Chivaler, 
Si  oyd  deus  Femmes  entre  medler, 

Ly  Cheualer  fe  aredut  priueinent  pur 
oyer.” 

38.  Ces  funt  les  Pelerinages  communes  que  Crediens 

fount  en  la  Seinte  Terre.  68.  b. 

39.  Ces  funt  les  Pardouns  de  Acres.  70. 

40.  A  Song,  I  think,  againd  the  Lawyers.  70.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Ne  mai  no  lewed  lued  libben  inlonde. 

Be  he  neuer  in  hyit  fo  hauer  of  honde, 

So  leiede  vs  bi-ledes.” 

4r.  A  Paraphrnfe  upon  our  Saviours  Parable,  related 
by  St.  Matthew,  Chap.  xx.  1 .  ibid. 

Begiun.  “  Of  a  mon  Matheu  polite, 

po  he  pe  Wyn-zord  whrote, 

And  wrot  hit  on  ys  boc  : 

In  Marewe,  men  he  fohte ; 

At  Under,  mo  he  brohte  ; 

Ant  nom,  ant  non  forfoc.” 

42.  A  Ballad  againd  the  Clergy,  in  general ;  or  againd 

fome  Bilhop  in  particular.  71. 

Beginn.  “  Hyrd-men  hatiep  ant  vch  mones  hyne, 
Foreucruch  aParosihe  heopolkepin  pyne, 
Ant  cladrep  Wyf  heore  cede  : 

Nou  wol  vch  fol  Clerc  pat  is  fayly, 
Wende  to  the  Byshop,  ant  bugge  bayly, 
Nys  no  Wyt  in  is  Nolle.” 

43.  A  Song  fetting-forth  the  good  effe&s  of  the 

Spring.  71.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Lenten  ys  come  wip  Loue  to  Toune, 
WipBlofmen,  &  withBriddes  ronne, 
pat  al  pis  Blifle  bryngep : 

Dayes  ezes  in  pis  Dales, 

Notes  fuete  of  Nyghtegales, 

Vch  Foul  longc  f;  .1-  ” 

44.  Another  about  Women j  &  giving  fome  advice. 

71.  b. 

Beginn.  “  In  May  hit  murgep  when  hit  dawes 
In  Dounes  wip  pis  dueres  plawes. 

Ant  Lef  is  lyht  on  Lynde  : 

Blofmes  bredep  on  the  Bowes 
Al  pis  wylde  wyhtes  Wowes, 

So  wel  ych  vnder-fynde.” 

45.  A  Ditty,  wherein  the  Poet  declares  his  Repen¬ 

tance  of  his  former  finfulLife,  now  that  Gout,  Old  Age, 
&  other  Evils,  have  overtaken  him  :  and  therefore 
beggs  God’s  Mercy.  73. 

Beginn.  “  Heze  Louerd,  pou  here  my  bone, 
pat  maded  Middel-ert  &  Mone, 

Ant  Mon  of  murpes  munne  : 

Trudi  Kynge,  ant  trew  in  trone, 
pat  pou  be  wip  me  fahte  fonc, 

Afoyle  me  of  Sunne.” 

46.  A  Love-Song,  whofe  Author  deferibes  his  beauti¬ 
ful,  but  un-relenting  Midrefs.  72.  b. 

5  Beginn. 


5S8 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nuin.  2253. 

Beginn.  “  Blow  Noriheme  Wynd,  fent 
pou  me,  my  Suetynge  ;  blow 
Norperne  Wynd  ;  blou,  blou,  blou. 

Ich  ot  a  Burde  in  Boure  bryht, 
pat  fully  femly  is  on  fyht, 

Menfkful  Maiden  of  myht 
Feire  ant  fre  to  fonde. 

In  al  pis  wurhliche  won, 

A  Burde  of  Blode  &  of  Bon, 

Neuer  zete  y  nufte  non 
Luffomore  in  Londe.”  Blow,  Sic. 

47.  An  Elegy  upon  the  Death  of  King  Edward  t.  73. 

Beginn.  “  Alle  pat  beop  of  huert  trewe 

a-ftounde  herkneth  to  my  Songe, 

Of  Duel,  pat  Dephap  diht  vs  news 
pat  makep  me  fyke  ant  forewe  amonge, 
Of  a  Knyht  pat  wes  fo  ftronge 
of  wham  God  hap  done  ys  wille  ; 
Me-punchep  pat  Dep  hap  don  vs  wronge 
pat  he  fo  fone  flial  ligge  ftille." 

4?.  A  Ballad  againft  the  French,  whole  Officers  ex¬ 
torting  too  much  from  the  Inhabitants  of  Bruges  in  Flan¬ 
ders,  were  murthered  there ;  and  the  French  Kings 
power,  commanded  by  the  Count  du  St.  Pol,  difcom- 
fited.  After  which,  K.  Philip  the  Fair  fending  another 
mighty  Army,  under  the  conduft  of  the  Count  d’Ariois, 
againft  thefe  Flemings  ;  he  was  killed,  and  the  french 
were  almoft  all  cutt  to  pieces.  73-  D- 

Beginn.  “  Luftnep,  Lordinges,  bope*| 

zonge  ant  olde,  a 

Of  pe  breynlhe  men  pat  were 

fo  proude  ant  bolde,  {  uefda 
Hou  pe  Flemysfhe  men  j 
boh  ton  hem  ant  folde —  J 

The  later  of  thefe  Battles  was  ftricken  on  Wednef- 
day  the  7th  of  July,  A.  D.  1301. 

49.  A  Praier  to  the  bleffied  Virgin,  in  French  Verfe. 

75* 

Beginn.  “  Marie,  pur  toun  Enfaunt, 

Qe  eft  Roi  tot  puiffaunt, 

E  tot  le  Mounde  garaunt, 

Nous  feiez  de  la  mort  garaunt, 

Qe  le  mau  Fe  mefcreaunt 
Nous  ne  eit  en  Baylie.” 

50.  A  Praier  to  our  bleffied  Savior.  ibid. 

Beginn.  Swete  Jhefu,  Kinge  of  blilfe, 

Myn  HuerteLove,  min  huerte  Lille, 
pou  art  fuete  myd  y  wilTe, 

Wo  is  him  pat  pe  fhal  mifte.” 

Each  of  the  following  Stanzas  begin  with  the  two 
firft  Words. 

7j.b. 


Another. 


Beginn.  “  Jefu  Crift  Heouene  Kynge, 

Zefvs  alle  god  endynge 
That  bone  biddep  pe  : 

At  pe  biginnynge  of  mi  Songe, 

Jhefu,  y  pe  preye  amonge 
In  ftude  al  wher  y  be.” 

52.  A  fhort  Ditty  upon  the  uncertainty  of  this  Life, 
and  the  approach  of  Death.  ibid. 

Beginn.  “  Wynter  wakenep  al  my  care, 

Nou  pis  Leues  waxep  bare, 

Ofe  Y  fike  &  moume  fare 
When  hit  comep  in  my  poht. 

Of  pis  worldes  joie  hou  hit  gep  al  to 
noht.” 

A  Ditty  upon  our  Lords  crucifixion;  written  as 


Profe. 

Beginn.  c 


When  y  feBlofmes  fpringe 
A  fuete  Loue  longynge 
Myn  Herte  pourh-out  ftong 
Al  for  a  Loue  newe 
pat  is  fo  fuete  &  trewe 
pbt  gladiep  al  my  Songe.” 

7 


76. 


Num.  2253* 

54.  A  Song  in  French,  written  as  Profe  ;  whofe  Au¬ 
thor  complains  of  his  Miftrefles  Inconftsncy.  76. 

Beginn.  “  Ferroy  Chaunfoun  que  bien  doit  eftre  oye 
De  maAmie  chaunterai  qe  in’ad  de  Guer? 
pie 

Bien  le  fai,  e  bien  le  voi, 

Qe  ele  ne  me  ay  me  mye 
Eole  ayme  vn  autre  plus  de  mo: 

F,  li  ad  perdu  la  Foi 
Que  ele  me  out  pleuvye. 

Je  pri  aDicu  e  Seint Thomas 
Qe  1!  la  pardolgne  le  trefpas 
F.  ie  ft  verroienjent  le  fas 
Si  ele  merci  me  crye.” 

55.  A  Song,  partly  Lathi  &  partlyFrench  a-  it  feems, 

of  an  Englifh  man  d  niring  the  fruition  of  his  Parilian 
Miftrefs.  (Itill  written  as  Profe.)  ibid. 

Beginn.  “Dum  ludis  floribus,  velud  lacinia, 

Le  Dieu  d'amour  moi  tient  en  tiel  an- 
gultia, 

Merour  me  tient  de  duel  e  de  miferia. 
Si  je  ne  la  ay  quani  amo  fuper  omnia.” 
This  Poet  was  probably .  a  lay-man  ;  and  had  no 
reafon  to  defpair. 

56.  A  Ditty  in  French,  whole  Author  complains 

of  the  pronefshe  lay  under  in  his  Youth,  to  purfuc  mat¬ 
ters  of  Love,  worldly  Honor,  and  other  Follies  <k  Vani¬ 
ties  :  but  now  advifes  people  to  gain  their  Shares  in  the 
Merits  of  Jhefus  C.hrift  crucified.  76.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Quant  fu  en  ma  juvente  |  e  en  ma  vo- 
lente, 

Molt  mis  ma  entente  |  certes  a  Jolifte 
Molt  fu  pefaunt  :  e  lent  j  e  chefcune 
Bounte 

Ne  penfoi  de  la  rente  J  que  me  ferroit 
demaunde.” 

57.  A  Praier  to  the  bleffied  Virgin.  78. 

Beginn.  “  Marie,  mere  al  Salveour, 

De  totes  femmes  eftes  flour, 

Vous  eftes  pleyne  de  graunt  docour, 

Vous  eftes  relu  al’peccheour.” 

58.  Dulcis  Jhefu  memoria  :  the  Authors  devout 

praier  to  our  blelled  Savior.  ibid. 

Beginn.  “  Jefu,  fuete  is  pe  Loue  ofpe, 

No  pinge  fo  feute  may  be, 

Al  pat  may  x.  ip  F.zen  fe, 

Hauep  no  fuetneffe  az  eyncs  pe.” 

59.  A  Divine  Poem,  putting  men  in  mind  of  our 
Lords  great  Love  to,  A  fuSerings  for  Mankind  ;  ex¬ 
horting  to  the  Service  of  God.  in  order  to  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  Salvation,  after  the  laft  Judgment.  78.  b. 

Beginn.  “Vne  petite  parole,  Seigneurs,  efcotez, 

De  ce  que  ie  yds  counterai  ne  me  bhu 
merez, 

Mes  moltz  desbiensa  prendre 
Si  vus  volez  entendre, 

Trelcous  vous  poez.” 

60.  A  Dialogue  between  98 r  bieffied  Saviour,  as  upon 

the  Crofs  ;  and  his  Mother.  79. 

Beginn.  “  Stonde  wel,  Moder,  -vnder  Rode  ; 
Byholt  py  Sone  witp  glade  mode, 

Blype  moder  myht  pou  be.” 

61’.  A  Ditty  upon  our  bleffied  Saviors  Paflion  Sc 
Death.  79-  b. 

Beginn.  “  Jefu,  for  pi  muchele  might  |  pou  zef 
vs  of  pi  grace, 

pat  we  mowe,  day  &  nyght  [  penken  o 
pi  Face. 

In  myn  Herte  hit  dop  me  god, 
When  y  thenke  on  Jefu  blod, 
pat  ran  doun  bi  ys  Syde, 

From  is  Herte  doun  to  is  Fot, 

For  ous  he  lpradde  is  Herte  Mod, 
Iiis  Wondes  werefo  vryde.” 

62.  Another 


Bibliotheca;  Harleiana?. 


589 


Num.  2253. 


62.  Another,  upon  our  Saviors  Crucifixion  ;  con¬ 
cluding  againit  mens  fwearing  by  his  Crofs.  80. 

Begimi.  “  I  fyke  when  y  finge,  for  Sorewe,  fat  y 
fe. 

When  y  with  wypinge  bihold  vpon  fe 
Tre, 

Ant  fe  Jhefu  fe  fuete. 

Is  Herte  blod  for-lete, 

For  fe  loue  of  me  ; 

Ys  Woundes  waxen  wete, 
fei  wepen  ftill  &  mete, 

Marie  rewef  fe.” 

63.  A  Ditty  concerning  the  blefled  Virgin,  which 

the  Author  feeras  to  have  made  one  morning,  as  he  was 
walking  for  his  diverfion,  from  Peterburgh.  80. 

Beginn.  “  Nou  fkrukef  Rofe  &  Lylie  flour, 

fat  whilen  ber  fat  fuete  favour 
In  Somer,  fat  fuete  tyde  : 

Ne  is  no  Quene  fo  ftark  ne  Hour, 

Ne  no  Levedy  fo  bryht  in  bour, 
fat  ded  ne  flial  by  glyde. 

Whofo  wol  Fleyflie-lufl:  for-gon,  &  Heuene- 
blifs  abyde. 

On  Jhefu  be  is  foht  anon,  f at  f erled  was  ys 
Side.” 

64.  A  Song  upon  his  courtingof  his  Miftrefs  (he  being 
a.  Clerk)  who  at  length,  gives  her  Confent.  80.  b. 

Beginn.  “  My  Def  y  love,  my  Lyf  ich  hate,  for 
a  Levedy  fhene  ; 

Heo  is  brith,  fo  daies  liht,  fat  is  on  me 
wel  fene. 

Al  y  falewe,  fo  dof  fe  Lef  in  Somer, 
when  hit  is  grene  ; 

Zef  mi  foht  helpef  me  noht,  to  wham 
lhal  y  me  mene.” 

65.  A  Song  to  Ins  Miftrefs,  whom  he  admires  as  the 

faireil  Maid  bituene  Lyncolne,  &  Lyndefeye,  Nor- 
hamptoun,  and  Lounde  (i.  e  London.)  80.  b. 

Beginn.  “  When  fe  Nyhtegale  finges  fe  Wodes 
waxen  grene, 

Lef,  Gras,  &  Blofme  fpringes,  in  Ave¬ 
ry  1  y  wene  ; 

Ant  Love  is  to  myn  Herte  gon,  witf  one 
Spere  fo  kene, 

Nyht  &  Day  my  Blod  hit  drynkes,  myn 
Herte  def  me  tene.” 

66.  A  Praier  to  the  blefled  Virgin,  concluding  with 

an  Ejaculation  to  the  holy  Trinity.  80.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Blefled  be  fou  Levedy,  ful  of  Heovene 
blilfe, 

Suete  Flur  of  Parays,  moder  of  milde- 
nefle. 

Prey  ze  Jhefu  f y  Sone,  fat  he  me  rede 
&  wyfie, 

So  my  wey  for  to  gon,  fat  he  me  neuer 
mifle.” 


67.  A  Song  in  praife  of  the  blefled  Virgin;  with  a 

detail  of  her  five  Joys.  S 1 .  b. 

Beginn.  “  Afey  me  rod  fis  ender  day, 

By  grene  Wode,  to  feche  play  ; 

Mid  herte  y  fohte  al  on  a  May, 

Sueteft  of  alle  finge, 

Lyfe,  &  ich  ou  telle  may,  al  of  fat  fuete  finge.” 

68.  A  Ditty,  upon  the  Comparifon  of  hoaiy  Old 

Age,  with  Youth  or  Manhood.  82. 

Beginn.  “  Iierkne  to  my  Ron,  1  Of  Elde  al 

As  ich  ou  tell  con  J  hou  yt  ges, 

Ofamodymon  )  „  , 

Ilithe  Maxiinion  j  So>  wlJ’oute  Les' 

Clerc  he  was  ful  god,*) 

So  moni  mon  vnder-  > 

ftod  :  J 

If  we  may  here  fuppofe  that  the  Poet  deferibes 
himfelf  ;  lie  was  willing  to  be  thought  to  have  been  en- 

Cat.Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Nou  herkne 
hou  it  wes.’’ 


Num.  2253. 

dowed  with  all  the  defirable  Bleflings  of  Body,  Mind, 
Eftate,  &  Friends  ;  but  by  living  Sixty  years  too  long  ; 
he  could  not  but  bitterly  lament  the  total  Change  he  now 
experienced  in  every  particular. 

69.  A  Ditty  to  the  blefled  Lady,  upon  our  Saviors 
Paflion  :  partly  in  Englifli,  &  partly  in  French.  83. 

Beginn.  “  Mayden,  Moder  milde,  oiez  cel  orey- 
foun, 

From  Shome  fou  me  fhilde,  e  de  ly 
mal  feloun. 

For  Love  of  thine  Childe,  me  rneuez  de 
trefoun, 

Ich  wes  wod  &  wildo,  ore  fu  en  pri- 
foun.’’ 

70.  fe  Gefte  of  Kynge  Horn  (this  Title  in  a  newer 

Hand).  g3. 

Beginn.  “  Alle  heo  ben  blyfe  |  fat  to  my  Songe 
ylyfe, 

A  Songe  ych  ulle  ou  finge  J  of  Allof 
fe  gode  Kynge. 

Kynge  he  wes  by  Welle  |  f  e  whiles  hit  y 
leffe, 

Ant  Godylt  his  gode  Quene  |  no  feyrore 
myhte  bene. 

Ant  huere  Sone  hihte  Horn  |  feyrore 
child  ne  myhte  be  born.” 

This  is  a  Romance  ;  rude  enough,  as  the  Age 
then  was.  It  feigns  how  Mury  King  of  Saracens  or 
Pagans,  landed  fuddenly  in  the  Kingdome  of  Suddene, 
where  he  flew  King  Allof  ;  and  Queen  Godylt  having 
efcaped,  he  putt  her  Son  Horn,  (who,  afterward,  proved 
the  mod  handfome  and  mod  valiant  Knight  in  the  world) 
into  a  Galley,  with  two  of  his  play-fellows  ;  which 
being  driven  into  the  Kingdom  of  Weftnefle,  he  was 
found  by  K.  Aylmar,  brought  to  Court,  &  deliver'd  to 
Athelbrus  his  Steward  to  be  educated.  Here  the  Prin- 
cefs  Rytnenild  fell  in  Love  with  him,  declares  her  Paflion, 
and  is  betrothed.  Horn,  hereupon,  leaves  her  for 
Seaven  years,  in  order  by  feeking  &  ending  great  Ad¬ 
ventures,  to  demonftrate  that  he  deferved  her ;  at  the 
end  whereof,  he  having  before  killed  K.  Mury,  reco¬ 
vered  his  own  Countrey,  &  done  many  other  great  Ex¬ 
ploits  ;  regains  his  Rymenild  from  the  Hands  of  iiis 
treacherous  Knight  Fykenyld,  leads  her  home.  &:  lives 
long  with  her  in  great  Joy  &c  Profperity. 

71.  An  Abridgement,  in  French,  of  the  Sacred  Hif- 

tory  from  the  Birth  of  Efau  &  Jacob,  to  the  matter  of 
Zirari  &  Cofbi.  92.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seigneurs,  vus  oy  avetz  molt  fouent  di- 
uerfes  Eftoyrcs  de  la  Bible,  que  plufors  funt  ;  de  Adam, 
Seth,  Noe,  Habraham,  Yfaac,  &  Jacob,  e  autres  plu- 
fours,  de  queux  ore  leyfir  ni  efl:  de  parler.  Jacob  e 
Efau  furent  deux  freres  gemels.” 

72.  Nomina  librorum  Bibliotece  :  i.  e.  SS.  Bibliorum. 

10 5.  b. 

Hie  recenfetur  Pfalterium  poft  Apocalipfin  ;  ag- 
menq;  claudit  lradlatus  qui  dicitur  “  Interpretationes 
Hebreorum  Nominum,”  S.  Remigio  Remenfi  Archiepif. 
copo  vulgo  adferiptus. 

73-  A  Ditty  to  Jefus  Chrifl  ;  wherein  the  Poet  be- 
waileth  his  pronenefs  to  Sin,  &c;  Jc6 

74.  A  godly  Ditty  upon  the  Vanity  &  Uncertainty 

of  this  World  ;  advifing  people  to  beware  of  themfelves 
and  to  apply  to  God  for  aflillance.  J0gt  ’ 

Beginn.  “  Luftnef  alle  a  lutel  frowe, 

Ze  fat  wolle  fou  felve  y-knowe 
Vnwys  fah  y  be  : 

Ich  ulle  telle  ou  afe  y  con, 

Hou  holy  Wrytfpeketh  of  mon  ; 
Herknef  nou  to  me.” 

75.  A  French  Poem,  wherein  the  Author  feigneth 
that  a  MinItrel,or  Jugler,  travelling  from  London  clad  in. 
a  fine  Tabard,  on  Ilorfeback,  met  the  King  and  his  Train. 
The  King  afking  him  divers  Queflions,  as  to  whom  he 

7  L  belonged 


. 

'  I 

V 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2253. 

belonged  See.  and  about  his  Horfe,  &  the  price  of  him> 
See.  this  fellow  anfwers  prepolteroufly  ;  evading  all 
quedions  with  the  greated  Impudence  :  and,  at  lad, 
prefumes  to  give  his  Majedy  Advice.  1 07.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seygnours  el’cotes  vn  petit, 

Si  orrez  vn  tres  bon  defduit.” 

As  to  the  meaning  of  the  Words  Trouverres, 
Chanterres,  Counteours,  Jugleours,  or  Juglours  ;  fee 
the  Eook  of  Claude  Fauchet,  as  alfo  of  Meneftriers,  or 
Minftrells. 

76.  Another  in  praife  of  the  fair  Sex.  no.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seigniours  e  Dames,  ore  efcotez, 

Ce  qe  vous  dirroi,  l’entendez.” 

77.  Another,  in  their Difpjaife.  in. 

Beginn.  “  Ouy  Femme  prent  a  Compagnie, 

Veiez  fi  il  fet  fen  ou  folye.” 

78.  Another,  upon  the  fame  ungrateful  Subjeft  ;  con¬ 
taining  divers  Englilh  Words  fprinkled  about  it.  112. 

Beginn.  “  Femmes  a  la  pye. 

Portent  Campagnie, 

En  maners,  e  en  morns. 

Efcotes  que  vous  dye, 

E  quele  affocye 
Y1  tienent  en  Amours.” 

79.  Another,  containing  many  Moral,  Civil,  &  Pious 
Advices  &  Indru&ions,  given  by  one  Urban  to  his  Son. 

112. 

Beginn.  “  Vn  fage  houme  de  grant  Valour, 

Qe  longement  vefqui  en  Honour, 

Vrban  elloit  apelee, 

En  fon  temps  mult  full  amee.” 

80.  Another,  being  a  fort  of  Libel  upon  the  Com- 
miflion  of  Traile-badon  iffued  by  our  King  Edward  1. 
near  the  end  of  his  Reign;  that  is,  about  A.  D.  1306. 

1 13.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Talent  me  prent  de  Rymer,  e  de  Gede 
fere, 

D’une  Purveaunce  qe  purveu  ed  en  la 
Terre. 

Mieux  valfit  vneore  que  la  chofe  full  a 
fere. 

Si  Dieu  ne  pregne  garde,  je  quy  qe  four- 
dra  guere.” 

Herein,  the  Author  fays,  that  he  ferved  his  Lord 
the  King  both  in  Peace  8c  War,  in  Flanders,  Scotland  & 
Gafcoign  ;  but  wanted  to  return  into  his  own  Countrey. 
He  names  fome  of  the  Commidioners  or  Judges  (who  are 
not  fo  particularly  mentioned  in  every  Chronicle)  in  the 
foilwing  Verfes  or  Rymes, 

“  Ly  Martyn,  &  lyKnoville  funt  gent  de 
piete, 

E  prient  pur  les  povres,  qu’il  eyent  fau- 
vete. 

Spigurnel,  e  Belflour,  funt  gent  de  cru- 
elte.” 

The  lad  Stanza  Ihewes  the  privacy  wherein  it  was 
written  ;  in  thefe  Words, 

“  Ced  Rym  fud  fet  al  Bois,  defouz  vn 
Lorer ; 

La  chaunte  Merle,  Rulfinole, 
l’Efperver. 

Efcrit  edoit  en  perchemyn  per  mout  re- 
menbrer ; 

E  gitte  en  haut  Chemyn,  qe  um  le  dud 
trover.” 

S 1 .  A  Song  upon  the  Man  in  the  Moon,  fo  dill  termed 
by  the  Vulgar:  and  reprefented  as  carrying  a  Bundle  of 
Thoms  on  his  Back ;  and  alfo  fitted  with  a  Twy-byl. 

114.  b. 

“  Mon  in  ]?e  Mone,  dond  &  drit 

on  his  bot-fork  is  burden  he  bere]>. 

Hit  is  muche  wonder  pat  he  na  doun  flyt 
for  doute  lede  he  valle,  he  fhoddrej) 
ant  fherej).” 


eyre 


Num.  2253. 

82.  A  Ballad  upon  an  intrigue  between  a  Lady  (who 

was  no  better  than  die  fhould  be)  whom  her  Hufband 
kept  enclofed  in  a  drong  Cadle ;  and  a  neighbouring 
Knight,  her  Lover.  n  5.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Pur  ce  que  plufours  ount  mervaille 
De  le  Chvaler  e  la  Corbaylle ; 

Ore  le  vus  vueil  ie  counter. 

Si  vus  pled  a  efcoter.'' 

83.  A  Satire  againd  the  fair  Sex.  x  17. 

Beginn.  “  Benefoit  Dieu  omnipotent, 

Qe  delivre  d’encombrement.” 

Here,  the  Author  who  called  himfelf  Gawein,  or 
Gaweyn  (as,  I  think  he  did  once  before)  feigns,  that  he 
being,  by  the  perfuafions  of  his  married  Friends)  likelv 
to  be  drawn  into  the  matrimonial  Noofe,  with  a  very 
lovely  Girl  to  whom  he  bare  the  greated  Adection,  was 
delivered  by  the  Interpofition  of  three  Angels  (I  fuppofe 
Authors)  named  Pieres  de  Corbloi,  Laurence,  &  Johan 
En  la  bouche  d’Or. 

84.  A  fmutty  Ballad  of  a  Squire  8c  a  Ladies  Woman. 

118. 

Beginn.  “  Vne  Fable  vueil  comencer, 

Qe  je  ov  l'antrer  counter.” 

85.  An  Englifh  Poem  upon  the  Interpretation  of 
Dreams  ;  pretended  to  have  been  found  by  David  a 
Prophete  of  grete  pris,  in  a  Cyte  of  Babyloyne.  1  1 9. 

Beginn.  “  Her  commenfez  a  boke'of  Swevenynge, 
pat  men  mete))  in  depynge.” 

86.  A  French  Poem  in  Commendation  of  a  new  Re¬ 
ligious  Order  called  “  Le  Ordre  de  bel  Eyfe.”  1 2 1 . 

Beginn.  “  Oui  vodra  a  moi  entendre, 

Oyr  purra  e  aprendre 
L’Edoyre  de  vn  Ordre  novel 
Qe  mout  ed  delitous  e  bel.” 

Here  the  Poet  feigns  his  new  Order  to  condd  of 
the  greated  People  of  both  Sexes,  who  lived  in  Houfes 
promifeuoufly  ;  none  being  excluded  but  thofe  of  low 
Degree.  That  they  were  bound  to  lead  their  Lives  in 
all  manner  of  Fxcefs  &  Luxury;  fetching  feveral Points 
or  Articles  of  their  Practice  from  the  Monaderies  of 
Sympringham  in  Lincolnfhire,  Beverley  in  Yorklhire ; 
from  the  Knights  Hofpitalers,  and  mod  of  the  other  Reli¬ 
gious  Orders  then  fettled  in  England;  whofe  Lives 
thereby  are  plainly  carped  at. 

87.  Another,  all  of  Ribaldry  ;  upon  the  Adventures 

of  a  poor  Knight,  &  Huet  his  Squire.  122.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Aventures  e  Enfeignment 
Fount  Solas  molt  fovent ; 

E  Solas  fet  Releggement, 

Ce  dit  Gwaryn  qe  ne  ment.” 

This,  perhaps,  may  be  but  an  Epitome;  and  Claude 
Fauchet  in  his  Account  of  this  Gwaryn  (or  Garin  as  he 
calls  him)  gives  a  different  Exordium  to  this  non-fenfical 
Performance;  whofe  twelfth  Line,  according  to  him, 
varies  not  much  from  the  fourth  of  the  prefent  Copie, 
being  “  Ce  dit  Garin  qui  pas  ne  ment.”  Claude  gives 
this  Chara&er  of  it,  “  Ced  un  Conte  de  lourd  Menfonge, 
&  dont  je  fay  mention  feulement  pour  Mondrer  a  quov 
de  ce  temps-la  on  prenoit ;  et  quelles  inventions  edovent 
edimees,  &  plus  agreables. 

88.  An  Englilh  Song  upon  the  Knaveries  ufed  by 

many  forts  of  inferior  people.  1 24.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Of  Rybaudz  y  ryme,  and  rede  o  my 
Rolle ; 

Of  Gedelynges,  Gromes,  of  Colyn  & 
of  Code ; 

Harlotes  Hors-knaves,  by  Pate  &  by 
Polle ; 

To  Devel  ich  hem  to  lyvre  ant  take  to 
tolle.” 

89.  Another  Englilh  Poem  containing  many  of  the 

wife  fayings  of  Hendynge.  125. 

Beginn.  “  Mon  );at  wol  of  Wyfdam  heren. 

At  wyfe  Hendynge  he  may  lernen, 

}>at 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse* 


S91 


Num.  2253. 

J)at  wes  Marcolves  Tone  : 

Gode  ])onkes  &  monie  Jiewcs, 

For  te  teche  fele  Shrewes, 

For  J>at  wes,  ever  is  wone.’’ 

In  the  Sequel,  the  Poet  addeth  another  Line  to  the 
Stanza,  being  in  the  nature  of  an  explanatory  Proverb  ; 
concluding  with  this  Burden,  “  quo})  Hendynge.” 

90.  An  Englilh  Poem,  with  this  French  Title  prefixed, 
“  La  Countefie  de  Donbar  demanda  a  Thomas  de  Efle- 
doune,  quant  la  Guere  d’Efcoce  prendrct  fyn.”  127. 

Beginn.  “  When  Man  as  mad  a  Kinge  of  a  capped 
man 

When  Mon  is  levere  oper  mones  Jjynge 
J?en  his  owen.” 

91.  An  Article  in  French  Profe,  entituled  “  La  Dif- 

tinccioun  de  la  Eftature  Jhefu  Grid  noflre  Seigneur : 
taken  from  the  fictitious  Epiftle  of  Lentulus  to  Tiberius, 
as  I  remember.  127.  b. 

92.  A  pious  Ditty  upon  the  Love  of  our  bleffed 

Saviour,  in  fuffering  the  Death  of  the  Crofs  for  loft  Man¬ 
kind.  128. 

Beginn.  “  Lutel  wot  hit  any  mon 

hou  Love  hym  havetj)  y-bounde, 

J>at  for  vs  o  J)e  Rode  ron 
ant  bohte  vs  wi}>  is  Wo  unde. 

])e  Love  of  him  us  have])  y-maked 
founde. 

Ant  y-caft  pe  grimly  goft  to  grounde.” 
Ever  &  00,  nyht  St") 
day,  he  have])  us  (  Theft  lines 
in  is  J)ohte,  \ are  the 

Henulnoutleofefat  |  Burden. 

Hefo  deore  bohte.  j 

93.  The  fame  lewdly  turned  to  the  Love  of  a  Woman. 

ibid. 

Beginn.  e*  Lutel  wot  his  any  mon 

hou  derne  Love  may  ftonde. 

Bote  hit  were  a  fre  W ymmon 
]>at  muche  of  Love  had  fonde. 

])e  love  of  hire  ne  lefte])  no  wyht 
lojige, 

Heo  have])  me  plyht  &  wytej)  me 
wy])  wronge. 

Ever  Sc  00,  for  my  Leof,') 
ich  am  in  grete  })ohte,  (  „je 
Y  jienche  on  hire,  ])at  y  C  ,ur‘ 
ne  feo  nout  ofte.”  J  den' 

Now  follow,  in  Profe, 

94.  Le  Aprife  que  le  Roy  Lewis  de  Fraunce  aprift 
a  Philip  foun  fitz,  quant  il  eftoit  en  Lit  mortiel  A  Tunis. 

128.  b. 

This  King  was  Louis  ix.  vulgarly  called  Saint 
Louis,  who  died  A.  D.  1270. 

95.  L’enquefte  que  le  Patriarchs  de  Jerufalem  fill  de 

la  Terre  a  Sarazyns,  par  le  comaundement  le  Apoftoille; 
pur  enfenfer  les  Criftiens.  29.  b. 

This  is  a  brief  account  of  the  Countreys  poffeffed  by 
the  Sons  of  Saladin  and  Saphadin  Sultans  of  the  Turks. 

96.  La  conifaunce  deles  Annes  des  Roys.  13 1. 

This  gives  the  Blafons  of  the  Armes  of  the  feveral 

Kings  then  in  being ;  but,  I  doubt,  that  fome  of  them 
may  be  fabulous. 

97.  Scriptum  quod  peregrini  deferunt  ab  Ecclefia 

SandiSalvatoris  in  Afturijs.  igi.b. 

Hie  datur  Catalogus  Reliquiarum  in  Archa  quadam 
deLignis  impenctrabilibus,  ab  Apoftolorumdifcipulis facia 
five  fabricata,  confervatarum  ;  atque  innumeris  Dei  mag- 
nalibus  plena.  Ouam,  ab  urbe  Jerofolimitana  tranftulit 
(nefcio  quis)  in  Affricam  ;  ab  Affrica  in  Cartaginem  ;  a 
Cartagine  in  Yfpalim  ;  ab  Yfpali  in  Tholetum  ;  a  Tho¬ 
le  to  in  Afturias,  ad  Ecclefiam  S.  Salvatoris,  loco  qui  di- 
citur  Onetum. 

98.  Legenda  de  SanCto  Etfrido  Prelbitero  de  Leomin- 

ftria.  132. 


Num.  2253,2254. 

Init.  “  Erat  Merwaldus  Rex  Merciorum  paganifmo 
deditus,  quando  SanCtus  prefbiter  Etfridus  (8  LeCtioni- 
bus)  ” 

99.  A  Prayer  or  Charm,  in  Latin ;  with  a  French 
Title  in  Verfe  (written  as  Profe)  declaring  the  ridiculous 
Ufes  that  were  to  be  made  of  it ;  as  for  obtaining  Vic* 
tory  in  Battle,  Safety  in  Tempefts  at  Sea,  &c.  133.  b. 

too.  Directions,  in  French,  for  praying  to  particular 
Angels,  in  Order  to  obtain  fundry  Bleflings.  134. 

10 1.  Like  Directions  for  repeating  particular  Pfalms, 

upon  fundry  Occafions.  ibid. 

102.  Gloria  in  excelfis  Deo,  en  Fraunceis.  134.  b. 

103.  Precatio  quae  ab  his  verbis  incipit,  “  Confiteor 

tibi,  Deus,  omnia  peccata  mea.”  ibid. 

104.  Oreyfoun  que  enveia  noflre  Dame  Seinte  Marie 

a  Seirtt  Moris  Evefque  de  Parys.  ibid. 

105.  Oratio  ad  Dominum  noftrum  Jeftun  Chriftum. 

*35- 

1 06.  Raifons  monflrants  que  Vm  doit  plus  volentiers 
juner  le  Vendredy  qe  nul  autre  jour  de  la  Simaigne.  ibid. 

107.  Quyeften  i'riftour,  Prifone,  Poverte,  ouchiet 
en  Maladie,  face  dire  Mefles.  come  defouz  eft  eferir.  ibid. 

108.  Ce  ly  que  fra  ces  Mefles  chaunter  en  le  honour 

de  Dieue  ce  Seint  Gyle,  yl  avera  ce  qu  il  en  dreite  Fey 
demaundera.  135.fi. 

109.  Quod  Mundus  ifte  totus  quoddam  Scaccarium 

eft.  ibid. 

xxo.  Directions  for  faying  particular  Prayers,  Pfalms 
&c.  upon  many  particular  Occafions.  136. 

111.  Seint  Hillere  Archevefque  de  Peyters  ordina  ces, 

Pfalmes  pur  prier  a  Dieu.  136.  b. 

1 12.  De  Amuletis  quibufdam  conficiendis.  137. 

113.  DoCtrina  Beati  Anfelmi  Cantuaiienfis  Archiepif- 

copi,  de  interrogandis  moribundis.  ibid. 

1 14.  A  Song  or  Libel,  partly  in  French,  &  partly  in 

Latin.  137.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Dieu,  Roy  de  Magefte, ") 
ob  Perfonas  trinas, 

Noftre  Roy,  e  fa  meyne,  |  Rex,  ut  fal- 
ne  perire  finas.  !  vetur,  falfis 

Grauntz  mals  ly  fift  aver,  f  maledictio 

gravefq;  ruinas,  detur. 

Celi  qe  li  paffer,  partes  | 
tranfmarinas.”  J 

Here  the  Author  taxeth  the  King  with  leaving 
England,  upon  his  own  will  only,  to  make  War 

in  foreign  parts  ;  of  opprefling  his  people  by  levying  a 
Fifteenth,  and  taxing  their  Wool,  &c.  half  of  the  pro¬ 
duce  of  which  did  not  come  into  his  Coffers,  but  was 
imbezzeled  by  the  Officers  who  collected  it. 

1 13.  Contemplacioun  de  la  Paffioun  Jhefu  Crifi. 

J3S-  b. 

1 1 4.  Legend  de  Martyrio  SanCti  Wiftani  Regis  Mer¬ 
ciorum,  A.D.  850.  140.  b. 

2254. 

A  Vellum  Book  in  finall  folio,  not  ill  written  ;  wherein 
are  mentioned, 

1.  A  Theological  Work,  thus  entituled  after  its  Con- 

clufion,  “  The  Treetis  J)at  is  kallid  Prickynge  of  Love, 
made  bi  a  Frere  Menour  Bonaventure,  ])at  was  Cardynal 
of  the  Courte  of  Roome.”  1 . 

2.  Another,  imperfeCt  at  the  beginning,  with  a  like 

Title  after  its  Conclufion.  2. 

I  have  not  now  Conveniences  by  me  for  examining 
this  matter,  whether  both  thefe,  or  which  of  them  be 
the  Tranflation  of  Bonaventure’s  “  Stimulus  divini  Arno¬ 
lds  j”  or  to  whom  elfe  one  of  them  may  belong  to. 

Within  the  firft  fpare  Leafe,  at  the  beginning,  are 
the  following  Notes,  “  Thys  boyk  longyth  to  Dame 
Alys  Braintwath  the  worchypfulle  Prioras  of  Dartforde 
(in  Kent)  Jhefu  mercy.” 

Orate  pro  anima  Dominae  Elizabith  Rede,  hujus 

loci - —  Orate  pro  anima  Johanne  Newmarche. 

a  At 


59 


Catalogus  I,ibro rum  MSS. 


Num.  2254,  2255. 

At  the  bottom  of  folio  1 .  are  the  Armes  of  Shirley 
A  Briwes  (or  Brewes)  quartered. 

2255. 

A  Velum  Book  in  fmall  folio,  plainly  written  &  illumi¬ 
nated  ;  containing  many  Poems  of  Dan  John  Lidgate 

the  famous  Monk  of  Bury  St.  Edmund  ;  and,  perhaps, 

of  others,  fett  down  in  the  following  Order. 

1.  A  Ditty,  to  which,  this  Rubric  is  prefixed, 

Ci  Confulo  quifquis  eris,  qui  pads  federa  queris, 
Confonusefto  Lupis,  cum  quibus  effe  cupis.” 

Beginn.  “  1  confeyl  what  fo  evyr  thou  be.” 

The  Advice  is  peftilent  enough ,  but  at  the  8th  Stanza 
it  is  quite  contradicted,  and  there  beginn  the  “  Verba 
Tranflator,”  which  make  8  Stanzas  more  ;  fo  that  the 
former  part  only  feems  to  have  been  taken  from  the  Latin. 

2.  Another  upon  the  mutability  of  human  Affairs.  3.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Lat  no  man  boofte  ofe  konnyng  nor 

vertu.” 

3.  Another,  againft  the  forked  Coiffures  or  Head- 

dreffes,  which  the  Ladies  ware  in  the  time  of  King 
Henry  vi.  6. 

Beginn.  Off  God  &  Kynde  procedith  all  bewte.” 

The  Burden  is  like  this. 

“  Bewte  wyl  fhewe,  though  Hornes  were  away.” 

'I  he  Lenvoy  beginns  thus, 

“  Noble  Prynceffys,  this  litel  fhoort  Ditce 
Rewdly  comiled  ;  lar  it  be  noon  offence 
To  your  womanly  merciful  pitee 
Thoughe  it  be  rad  in  your  audience,  See.” 

4.  Another,  againft  Self-Love  and  its  Off-fpring.  7.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Toward  the  Ende  ofe  froofty  Januarye.” 

The  Burden  is  like  this, 

“  Look,  in  thy  Merour,  and  deme  noon  other 
Wiht.” 

In  the  Lenvoye  the  author  declareth  his  name,  thus, 
“  Go  litel  Bille,  with  oute  Title  or  Date. 

And,  of  hool  herte,  recomaund  me 
Which  that  am  called  Johan  Lydgate,  &c.” 

5.  Another,  containing  Moral  &  other  wholfomc  Ad¬ 
vices.  1  2. 

Beginn.  “  AsofHonyMen  Gadren-out  Swetneffe.” 

The  Burden  is  like  this, 

“  Sewe  aftir  Vertue,  and  Vertu  thu  fhalt  leerc.” 

6.  Another  upon  the  Imbecility  of  Human  Nature.  1 4. 

Beginn.  “  The  World  fo  wyd,  the  Hair  (i.  e.  Air) 

fo  remevable.” 

The  Burden  is  like  this, 

“  IIow  fliuld  Man  than  be  ftedfaft  ofe  Livynge  ?” 

At  the  end  is  this  marginal  Note,  “  Explicit,  Joh. 
Lydgate.” 

7.  Another  upoh  Mifericordias  Domini  in  eternum 

cantabo.  .  17. 

Beginn.  tc  Alle  gooflly  Songis  &  Ympnes  that  be 

fonge.” 

The  Burden  is  like, 

“  Eternally  thy  Mercies  I  fiiall  fyng.” 

At  the  end  is  this  Marginal  Note,  “  Explicit,  quod 
Lidgate.” 

8.  Another,  in  the  the  praife  of  Peace;  written  after 

the  Death  of  our  King  Henry  v.  21. 

Beginn.  “  Mercy  and  Trouthe  mette  on  an  hihe 

Mounteyn.” 

Here,  every  Stanza  concludeth  with  the  word  Pees  : 
and,  at  the  End  is  the  fame  note,  “  Explicit  quod  Lyd¬ 
gate.” 

9.  Another,  enforcing  the  Duty  of  Paying  of  Tythes 

to  the  Church :  wherein,  the  legendary  Story  of  the 
Englifh  ApoflleSt.  Auftin  faying  Mafsat  Compton,  and 
how  the  old  Britifh  Lord  of  that  Town,  who  had  been 
accurfed  by  his  Prieft  for  with-holding  his  Tithes,  arofe 
from  his  Grave;  and  having  received  the  Difcipline 
from  the  faid  Prieft  (who  alio  arofe  out  of  his  Grave  at 
St.  Auftin’s  Call;  is  much  enforced.  24.  c. 

$ 


Num.  2255. 

Beginn.  “  Lyk  as  the  Bible  makith  mencioun.” 

At  the  end  is  the  Marginal  Note,  “  Explicit  quod 
Lidgate.” 

i  o.  Another,  upon  the  Pater-nofter ;  made  by  the 
Author  when  he  was  grown  old.  33. 

Beginn.  “  A-twixe  Dreed  and  trembly ng  Reve¬ 
rence.” 

At  the  end,  is  this  amrginal  Note,  “  Explicit,  quod 
Joh.  Lydgate.” 

1 1.  Another,  upon  the  Pfalm  De  profundis  clamavi 
ad  te,  Domine  :  Domine,  exaudi  vocem  meara.  40. 

Beginn.  “  Ilavynge  a  Conceyt  in  my  iymple  Wit.” 

Llere,  the  laft  Stanza  is  termed  Conclufio  finalis, 
wherein  the  Author  fays,  he  was 

“  Late  charchyd  in  myn  oold  dayes 
By  William  Curtys,  (i.  e.  Abbas  de  Bury) 
which  gafe  Comaundement 
That  I  fhulde  graunte  myn  affent 
Ofe  that  Kynrede  make  a  Memorial 
With  De  Profundi s,  whan  fo  that  it  be  fent.” 

At  his  Chirche  to  hang  it  on  the  Wal.” 

And  here,  is  the  ufual  marginal  Note  “  Explicit, 
quod  Lydgate.”  William  Curteys  above-mentioned,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Mr.  Willis,  was  made  Abbat  of  Bury  A.  D. 
1428  ;  who  alfo  finds  that  his  Succeflor  Babington  oc- 
currs  Abbat  A.  D.  1441.  But  the  late  Reverend  & 
Learned  Dr.  Matthew  Hutton,  in  his  more  accurate 
Tables,  now  preferved  in  this  Library,  fhewes  that  Abbat 
Curteys  was  not  fo  untill  A.  D.  1429;  and  that  he 
died  not  until  A.  D.  1445,  when  he  was  fuccceded  by 
Abbat  Babington  aforefaid. 

1 2.  A  Sort  of  Paraphrafe  upon  the  Hymn  or  Song  of 

St.  Ambrofe  &  St.  Auguftin.  43.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Te  Deum  laudamus  to  the  Lord  Sovc- 
reyne.” 

The  Burden  is,  “  Te  laudat  omnis  Spirilus.” 

Here  the  Author  ufes  manv  lofty  words,  &  much 
of  the  Latin  Original ;  as  fuitablc  to  the  Majefiy  of  the 
fubjedl. 

13.  The  Poet’s  Complaint  upon  the  Emptinefs  of  his 

Furfe.  45.  b 

Beginn.  “  Rihte  mihty  Prynce,  and  be  it  your  vville.” 

The  Burden  is  like  this. 

“  Oonly  for  lak  of  Plate,  and  ofe  Coignage.” 

At  the  end,  is  the  ufual  marginal  Note,  “  Explii  it 
quod  Lydgate thereby  affuring  us  ol  the  Author’s 
Name. 

1 4.  Teftamentum  Johannis  Lidgate  nobilis  Poete  47. 

Beginn.  “  Ohowholfom  and  glad  is  the  Memorye.” 

This  Poem,  which  confifteth  of  fevenl  Dittys,  was 

made  by  Dan  John  when  he  was  well  advanced  into 
years,  as  he  confeffeth  in  fol.  51.  ftanza  2.  fol.  51.  b. 
ft.  2.  &  fol.  52.  ft.  2.  and  having  attained  the  grace 
and  bleffing  of  Contrition,  he  bitterly  laments  the  Follies 
8c  Wickednefs  of  his  Childhood  and  Youth,  Teeming  to 
have  taken-up  in  his  Man-hood.  He  makes  mention  of  this 
his  Teftament  in  his  Paraphrafe  upon  the  Lord's  Prayer 
(above  taken  Notice  of  at  No.  10.)  at  fol  39.  b.  in  the 
following  w'ords. 

“  Fond  ther  no  Claufis,  but  Scrowys  al  to-rent, 
Nothing  etdumyned  with  Gold,  Afure,  nor  Red, 
Whichelhall  bejoyned  with  my  Teftament, 

Leya  on  my  Breft,  hour  whan  I  fhall  be  ded.” 

1 5.  The  Bleffed  Virgin’s  Complaint,  upon  our  Lord’s 

Crucifixion  ;  with  this  Lemma,  “  Quis  dabit  Capiti  meo 
fontem  lachrymarum,”  Jerem.  ix.  1.  664, 

Beginn.  “  Who  fhall  give  vnto  myn  heed  a  Welle.” 

16.  A  Poem  in  praife  of  lome  particular  Saints.  70. 

Beginn.  “  Bliffyd  Denys  of  Athenys,  cheef  Sonne.” 

Thefe  Saints  names,  in  the  Margin  againft  the 

feveral  Stanzas  appropriated  to  them  are  Dionifius, 
Georgius,  Xpoforus,  Blafius,  Egidius,  Katerina,  Mar- 
gareta,  Xpina,  &  Barbara  :  among  whom,  the  Author 
biddeth  our  St.  George. 


“  Of 


Bibliothecas  Harleiah&e. 


59  o 


ttum.  23  55- 

rt  Of  Ynglonde  callid  Prote&our  and  Patroun, 

Pray  for  Sixt  Kerry,  and  al  this  Repcun, 

Of  our  Enmyes,  by  Grace,  to  han  Victorye. 

17.  A  Poem  upon  the  two  Merchants  Friends  ;  taken 
from  the  Monkifh  Book  called  Gefta  Romanorum.  72\t 
Beginn.  «  In  Egipt  whilom,  as  I  reed  and(fynde.” 

At  the  end,  is  the  marginal  Note  “  Explicit,  quod 
Lidgate.” 

>8,  Another  upon  the  55  Gladneffys,  &  15  Hevy- 
jieflys  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  ^8. 

Beginn.  “  A-tween  myd-night  and  the  frefh  itrorwe 
gray.” 

This  hath  a  large  Prologue  &  Lenvoy ;  with  the 
marginal  Note  “  Explicit  quod  Lidgate.” 

19.  A  Ditty  againfl  Ingratitude;  upon  the  Occafion 
of  Tollies  being  murdered  by  Pompilius  Lamas.  93  •  b* 

Beginn.  “  Myn  auftour  now  Bochas,  writ  no 
lenger  procefle.” 

20.  The  Legend  of  St.  Giles,  paraphrafed  from  the 

Latin.  _  95; 

Beginn.  “  Off  Agatnenounvndir  the  large  Empire.’ 
The  Poet  concludes  with  a  Prayer  to  him,  ^ 

“  O  gracious  Gile,  ofe  poore  folke  chefee  patroun  ; 
at  the  Conclufion  whereof  is  the  ufual  Note  in  the  Mar¬ 
gin,  “  Explicit,  quod  Lidgate.”  _  , 

.  11.  Stella  Celi  extirpavit :  or  a  prayer  to  the  Virgin 

Mary,  for  Aid,  in  time  of  Pdlilence.  103. 

Beginn.  “  Thu  hevcnly  Queen,  ofe  Grace  our 
Lood-fterre.” 

2  2.  A  Paraphrafe  upon  the  15  Oes  ;  being  fo  many 
prayers  to  our  bluffed  Savior,  upon  the  Subject  of  his 
Paffion,  all  beginning  with  the  Letter  O  ;  as  may  be 
frequently  feen  in  the  old  Primers  either  written  or 
printed.  io4- 

Beginn.  cc  O  BlyflidLord,  my  Lord,  OCriflJhefu.’ 
At  the  end  is  the  ufual  marginal  Note  ;  “  Explicit 
quod  Lydgate.” 

^3  A  Ditty  reprefenting  our  blcfled  Lord  as  hanging 
upon,  the  Crofs,  and  calling  upon  impenitent  Sinners  to 
accept  of  his  Mercy,  &c.  1 1 1  • 

Beginn.  “  Upon  a  Crofs,  nayled  I  was  for  the.” 

24.  De  Sanfta  Maria  ;  i.  e.  a  Ditty  upon  our  Ladies 

five  joys  ;  as  to  which,  fee  her  Hours.  1 1  1 .  b. 

Beginn.  “  O  Queen  of  Hevene,  of  Helle  eek 
Empereffe. 

After  the  Conclufion,  is  the  Note  “  Explicit,  quod 
Ltdgate  ” 

2  r.  De  Ofculo  fafto  ad  Verbum  Caro  fadlum  eft. 
^Beginn.  “  Ye  devout  people,  which  kcepe  an  Ob- 
fervaunce,” 

Meekelv,  in  Chirche,  to  kifle  Stoon  or  Tre, 
Erth  or  Iren  ;  hath  in  remembraunce 
What  they  meene  ;  tak  the  Moralite.” 

25.  A  Prayer  to  St.  Leonard,  1  *4*^ 

Beginn.  “  Rcflc  and  Refuge  to  folk  difconfolate.” 
Perhaps,  the  Author  might  have  made  this  upon 

a  journey  to  his  Hofpital  at  York  ;  for,  in  the  laid  Stanz4 
fave  one  he  thus  proceeds 

“  O  glorious  Leonard,  pray  Jhefu  on  thy  kite. 

For  thy  Servauntis  refortyng  to  this  place,”  &c. 

27.  De  tribus  Virginibus,  Katerina,  Margareta,  & 

Magdalena.  11 5- 

'1  he  Rubrick  I  take  not  to  be  the  Authors,  be- 
caufe  he  exprefsly  diftinguifheth  the  laft  from  the  two 
former.  „ 

Beginn.  “  Kateiine  with  glorious  Margarete. 

The  end  is  followed  by  the  ufual  Note,  “  Explicit, 
quod  Lidgate.” 

28.  A  Ditty  upon  St.  Urfula,  &  her  Efeaven  Ihou- 

fand' Virgins.  1 1^- 

Beginn.  m  Ye  Britoun  Martin,  famous  in  par- 
fitene{re.” 

29.  De  SanQa  Ofuha  _  11 6.  b; 

Beginn."  “  Heyl,  body  Sitha,  maide  ofgret  Vcrtu.’ 

C.-M  .  JlARL.  Vet.  II. 


Num.  2255.’ 

36.  The  fifteeh  Toknys  a-forn  the  Doom:  Q  7- 

Beginn.  “  As  the  Doctour  Sanftus  Jeronimus, 
Which  that  knew  by  Infpiracioun.” 
Thefe  1 5  Signs  or  Tokyns  feem  rather  to  be  taken 
from  the“PrognofticonfuturiSecuii,”  written  by  Julianus 
Pomerius  Arch-bilhop  of  Toledo,  who  died  A.  D.  690. 

31.  A  Ditty  (hewing  that  vitious  people  do  not  long 

endure  in  this  World.  11 8-  b. 

Berinn.  “  This  wyde  Woourlde  is  fo  large  ofe 
Space.” 

32.  Another,  upon  Letabundus,  or  a  Sequence  for¬ 

merly  iifed  in  the  Public  fervice,  upon  the  fellivalS  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  and  upon  New  Years  day  _ 1 

Beginn.  “  Grounde  take  in  Vertu  by  Patriarkys 
olde.” 

After  the  end,  is  the  ufual  Note  written  in  the 
Margin,  “  Explicit,  quod  Lidgate.” 

cj.  Another  upon  flyttyng  Fortune.  12  6.b. 

Beginn.  “  Toward  Aurora,  in  the  monyth  ole 
Decembre.” 

The  Burden  is  “  Experience  llicweth,  The  world 
is  vary  able.” 

After  the  end,  is  the  ufual  Note,  “  Explicit,  quod 
Lydgate.” 

34.  Another,  vpon  wouiidly  Mtitabilite.  128.  b. 
Beginn.  “  So  as  I  lay  this  othir  Nyght.” 

The  Burden  is,  “  Timor  Mortis  conturbat  me.” 

35.  Advices  for  people  to  keep  a  guard  over  their 

Tongues.  131  b*. 

Beginn.  “  Svm  man  goth  ftille,  ofWyfdam  & 
Refoun.” 

The  Burden  is  odd  enough, 

“  Alle  goo  we  ftille,  the  Cock  hath  lowe  Shoon.” 
At  the  end  is  the  ufual  marginal  Note,  “  Expli¬ 
cit,  quod  Lydgate.” 

34.  A  Ditty  upon  the  bleffed  Virgin  ;  wherein,  Com. 
parifons  taken  from  the  heavenly  Jerufalem,  and  from 
its  Twelve  Gems,  are  applied  to  her.  135. 

Beginn.  “  On  hooly  Hillys,  moot  famous  of 
Renoun.” 

The  Burden  is,  “  Gloryous  thynges  be  feid  and 
fonge  of  the.” 

At  the  end,  is  the  ufual  marginal  Note,  “  Ex¬ 
plicit,  quod  Lydgate.” 

17.  Another,  to  her  Praife,  applying  the  fuppofed 
Virtues  of  Gems  unto  her ;  and  thrice  anagrammatizing 
upon  her  Name  Maria.  i  4°* 

Beginn.  “  Iieyl  vertuous  Jafpe  moll  fledfaft,  and 
our  Fcith.” 

The  Bufden  is  “  Ave  Jefle  virgula.” 

At  the  end,  is  the  ufual  marginal  Note,  “  Ex¬ 
plicit,  quod  Lydgate.”  .  . 

38.  Another  upon  Benedittus  Deus  in  doms  fuis,- 

142. 

Beginn.  “  God  departith  his  Gyfftis  dyverfly.” 

The  Burden  for  the  molt  part,  is 

In  al  his  Gyfftys  Lord  blellyd  muft  he  be. 

And  here/  at  the  end,  is  the  ufual  marginal  Note* 
ee  Explicit  quod  Lydgate.” 

39.  Another,  upon  Meafure;  in  refpeftboth  of  Medio¬ 
crity,  and  of  Juftice.  *43-  b. 

Beginn.  “  Men  wryte  of  cold,  how  Mefour  i3 
Trefour.” 

At  the  end,  the  ufual  Note,  “  Explicit,  quad  Lyd¬ 
gate,”  is  feen  in  the  Margin. 

40.  A  Paraphrafe  upon  the  Pfalm  Deus  in  nomine 

tuo  (i.  e.  Pfalm  53  of  theWulgate ;)  &  upon  the  Gloria 
Patri.  I^m  b- 

Beginn.  “  God,  in  thy  name  thou  make  me  faufie 

6  founde.” 

At  the  end  comes  the  old  Note,  £C  Explicit  quod 

Ditty  upon  almighty  God's  merdful  and  all* 

fuiiident  help."  ‘4- 

7  M  Beginn. 


59+  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nam  2255 — 2257. 


Beginn.  “  God  is  myn  Hclpere,  and  av  fhal  be.” 

Ilcre  our  Author  flrews  that  he  had  been  a  Tra¬ 
vel  lor  (I  fuppofe  upon  the  ail  airs  of  his  Monaftery)  in 
this  Stanza, 

“  I  have  been  ofTte  in  dyvers  I.ondys, 

And  in  many  dyvers  Rcgionns; 

Have  c-fkapyd  fro  my  Fools  hondys 
!n  Cities,  Oaftcllys  and  in  Touns, 

Among  Folk  ofe  fundry  Naciouns 

W erne  aye  forthe,  and  took  noon  hede  : 

I  afkyd  no  manere  Protecciouns  ; 

God  was  mvn  Helpe,  agevn  al  Drede.” 

And  at  the  end,  is  his  Name  in  this  marginal  Note, 
“  h  xplicit,  quod  Lydgate.’’ 

42.  Another,  upon  his  feigned  AHfion  of  the  cver- 
b Idled  Trinity,  See.  1  50.  b. 

Deginn.  “  l :n. lir  a  Park  full  prudentlv  pyght;” 
here  the  f object  being  grand,  feveral  words  do  often 
beginn  with  the  lame  Letter  ;  and  the  Burden  is 
“  Benedicht  fit  fancta  Trinitas.” 

A  Leaf  being  torn  out,  the  end  of  this,  and  the 
I  )itty .  are  wantin  ;.  H  r 
y.  thorn  the  help  of  a  Note  at  the  Conclution,  1  believe 
nnr  :h:s:'ifo  was  of  Dim  John's  Compofition. 

The  next  (as  I  obferve  juft  now)  is  imperfed  *, 
but  is  plainly  a  Prayer  to  St.  Edmund  it.  King  of  the 
I'  alt  Angles  A  Martyr,  the  tutelar  Saint  of  his  Monaftery 
be  Ban-lcuca  (or  Franchife)  at  Bury;  the  place  where 
our  pious  Author  was  profefled  and  refided.  1  5a. 

ihe  firft  Stanza  which  now  remains,  beginnelh 
thu=,  “  Our  Helpe  our  Sceour,  our  Mediatour,  molt 
cheefe.” 


And  at  the  end  is  the  ufual  Note  in  the  Margin 
“  Explicit,  quod  Lydgate.” 

44.  The  Poets  Satyrical  defeription  of  his  Miflrefs’s 
Perfon.  ^53-  b. 

Beginn.  “  My  fa vr  Lady  fo  frefshe.  ofe  hew.” 

At  the  end  is  the  ui'ual  Note,  “  Explicit,  quod 
Lvdeate.” 


45.  J  l’e  Conclufion  of  fome  Ditty  (not  now  eafily  to 
be  found  out)  in  three  Stanzas.  1  97. 

Beginn.  “  Put  out  his  lied  lyft  nat  for  to  dare.” 

I  hele  Stanzas  plainly  fet  forth  the  Puniflimem  in- 
ficlcd  upon  thievilh  Millers  &  Bakers  ;  by  putting  them 
only  into  the  Tmnbrell,  as  of  old;  but  into  AVooden 
Baltilc,  as  Hudibras  fays  ;  by  w  hich,  in  this  place,  is 
not  to  be  undent  cod  the  Stocks,  but  a  Superior  &  more 
Coiifpicious  Machine,  Called  the  Pillory. 

Our  Author  concludes - 


“  They  may  cleme,  be  juft  au£lo«e. 
Upon  that  Bailile  to  make  an  Endc. 
t:  Explicit  quod  Lydgate ’’ 


2256. 

A  Book  in  fmnl  1  folio,  written  partly  upon  Paper, 
and  partly  upon  Parchment  (that  is,  every  Ouarternio 
is  guarded  by  Parchment  Leaves)  wherein  is  contained, 

"I he  old  Chronicle  commonly  called  Brute;  be-  j 
ginning  thus,  “  In  die  Nobul  Londc  of  Surre.” 

b  ondtth  in- the  8th  Year  of  K.  Henry  vi.  upon  ; 
1  he  taking  of  Johan  d'Arc,  otherwife  called  La  pucclle  ! 
d’ Orleans. 

22  57*  I 

An  imperfc£t  Book  (for  it  wants  eight  Leaves  at  the 
beginning,  &  one  at  the  end  j)  in  large  4:0.  upon  both 
in- per  ami  Parchment ;  four  Leaves  being  included  m, 
or  guarded  by  two  of  Parchment.  It  contains, 

in  Dictionary, 

m:mv  or , whole  words  are  alfo  explained  in  Englifh.  In 
Ue  infide  of  its  prefent  Cover,  the  learned  Mr.  Samuel 
Knm  (  who  ibmetimes  wrote  l.imfelf  Canutus J  hath  putt 
down  this  Note,  “  Hie  Liber  vi  ietur  efle  Medulla  Gram- 
ctatavc  Galir.dij  fedauefior;  et  qutedam verba  omittun- 


Num.  2257 — 2259. 

tur  invicein:  but  whether  it  may  not  better  ao-ree  with 
t.ie“ Ortus vocabulorum,”  printed  by  Wynkynde  Worde, 
I  cannot  now  fay,  having  not  the  Book  at  hand  to  perufe! 

2258. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  written  upon  Paper,  A  chiefly 

relating  to  ourEnglilh  Hiftory  ;  w  herein  I  find, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  direfting  to  the  principal 
Matters  rehcarfed  in  the  enfuing  Work. 

2.  1  he  Epifiie  of  Pilate  to  libery  th'Emperour,  con- 

cernmg  our  Saviour  jefus  C-hrift ;  from  the  Speculum 
Hutoriale  of  Vmcentius  Belvacenfis  ;  likewife,  at  the  end, 
Ricardus  de  Sto.  Vicdore  ;s  named,  perhaps  by  Afincen- 
tiiis-  '  ,1. 

3.  A  Narration  concerning  St.  Fatricke,  &  his  Vm*a. 

tore  :  from  the  fame  Vincentius.  3 1.  b. 

4.  Of  oure  Lady  Sent  Mare  A'irgyncsgoynge  to  Egipte: 

from  the  feide  Vyncent.  32. 

I  _  5.  The  Genealogy  from  Adam  to  Ciprus,  Afo  to  the 
|  lr°lann\&c’  3 b.  &  34. 

:  6.  1  he  Genology  of  Sett  Kateryne  Virgine  A  Mar- 

I  "  33.N 

Notes  from  Johne  Hardynge  touchinge  the  origin  of 
the  Gcotts,  A  their  Subjetlion  to  England.  ibid. 

8.  The  Piddle  cf  Corneli,  that  he  wrote  out  of  Greke 

ynto  Laryne,  vnto  Crifpum  Saluft,  of  [’Hiftory  ofe  Troy 
wretyne  by  Dare  Friges.  -5/ 

Now  follows  the  main  work  entituled, 

9.  A  Brevyat  ofe  the  Cronacles  of  the  lie  or  Realmc 
ofe  Gret  Bretayne,  nowe  callyde  Ynglande  :  tranflatydc 

I  0UC  °*  Latyne  ynto  Inglyslhe,  out  of  the  Midoryens  bokes, 
j  St.  Gildas  the  Abbot ;  Geflrey  Monmouthe  ;  Rich.  Ci- 
edtre  Monke  of  Wedrayndre  ;  Mathcvve  Paris,  Monke 
of  Sent  Albane  ;  Sc  of  dyuers  other  IJidoriens  :  asHu^he 
Jenefes,  John!  laidynge,  Ac,  i.  e.  another  Chronicle  cued 
fob  96.  b.  Culman  the  Chronicler,  cited  fol.  103.  b.  Mat¬ 
thew  of  Weftminfter,  A  Sir  John  Froi Hard. 

J  his  Work,  after  a  Defciiption  of  Britain,  pretends 
to  commence  with  the  firft  Inhabitants  of  it,  and  ends  at 
the  dcceafe  of  K.  Edward  in.  and  is  the  original  of  the 
Author,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  K.  Henry  viy.  altho’  * 
fome  few  Notes  have  been  inferted  fince.  The  Colledtor 
is  not  free  from  miftakes  ;  &  believed  in  the  legendary 
Stories  then  in  fafliion  ;  but  othcrwile,  colleded  much 
good  matter.  He  feemeth  not  to  have  had  John  Hardvng 
by  him  when  he  firft  began,  but  to  have  made  fupple- 
menfal  Collections  from  him  afterward.  I  know  not  who 
his  Author  Hughe  Jenefes  was;  but  do  perceive  that  the 
Annals  of  Richard  of  Chichefter,  as  alfo  an  Abridgement 
°>  the  fame,  are  yet  remaining  in  the  Library  at  Corpus 
Chnfti-C Allege  in  Cambridge.  The  many  Akicances  left 
for  inferring  of  fiefh  matter  {hew  this  to  be  an  original 
bock  ;  w  hich  yet  appears  clearer  from  the  following  note, 
written  within  the  firft  fpare  Leaf  at  the  beginning.  “  Ray. 
noide  Mohune  Owner  hereof  by  the  gifte  of  John  Rc.vys 
Lawyer,  A  borne  in  the  Count)  e  of  Cornewalle ;  w  ho 
drewe  A  wrate  thys  Worke  wvthe  hvs  owne  hande,  and 
brevvatyd  owte  of  dyvers  ant)  k'e  Auc'tors.”  Whether  this 
Mr.  Rewys  (or  Reeves)  drew  dox.n  his  Annals  unto  his 
cv/n  time,  in  another  A^olumc,  I  have  not  now  opportunity 
to  enquire.  ' 

ic.  The  Sur-names  of  the  Perfons  of  Reputacione  that 
mti-ide  into  lngelar.de  wyth  William  Couqueror.  125.  b. 

2259. 

An  old  Heraldical  Book  in  very  fmall  folio,  written  upon 
paper,  whole  chief  Subject  is  the  Science  of  Heraldry, 
as  containing, 

t.  labula  Expoficionis  Armorum  ;  five  de  Regulis  & 
Diilerencijs  principalibus  :  that  is,  a  Table  of  the  princi¬ 
pal  Matters  treated  of  in  this  AVork.  j. 

1.  Some  few  Armes  promifeuoufly  tricked  or  colored* 
rudely,  as  the  performances  then  were:  the  Owners 
names  being  too  too  often  omitted ;  which  defeift  renders 
1 0  this 


Eiblio  thecae  Karleiarise. 


S95 


Niim.  2259. 

this  Book  much  Iefs  valuable  than  othctwife  it  would 
have  been.  6.  b.  7.  10. 

3.  The  namys  of  the  chefe  Chevtaynes  that  cam  with 

'William  Conqueror  in  to  Inglonde.  7.  b. 

4.  The  Arines  of  Derham,  quartering  Ryvefhall,  as  I 
take  it,  in  a  large  Efcocheon ;  with  the  name  Thomas 
Derham,  written  in  a  Scroll  above  it,  by  the  firfh  hand. 

1 0.  b. 

I  do  not  hence  conje&ure  that  Derham  mads  thefe 
Collections  ;  but  that  rather  that  he  might  have  been  the 
owner  of  them  ;  nor  do  I,  at  prefent,  find  his  name  as  an 
Officer  of  Armes. 

Now  comes, 

5.  The  main  Work,  fhewer.h  one  main  Branch  of  the 

Science  of  Heraldry,  touching  the  art  of  Blafoning  :  being 
written  in  Englifh,  or  French  or  Latin.  1 1 . 

Befides  this,  here  are  Quotations  from  the  learned 
Lawyer  Bartholus,  from  Burtholomauis  Anglicus,  Fran- 
cifcus,  the  Arbre  des  Battailes  of  Honore  Bonet,  Jaques 
de  la  Mont,  &c.  but  above  all,  from  the  Treatife  enti- 
tuled  Regula  Aurea  ;  which  Taft  is  cited  ahnoft  conti¬ 
nually,  from  fol.  69.  to  fol.  1 74. 

In  ihis  Work,  I  obferve  as  I  go  along, 

6.  The  Armes  of  fome  Communities  ;  as  of  the  Grey 
Friers,  or  Friers  Minors  of  London,  fol.  13.  b.  Villas  tie 
Wodcftokkc.  fol.  14.  The  trewe  Armys,  &  the  olde 
Armys  of  the  Cyte  of  London  (being,  St.  Paul  holding  a 
naked  Sword  in  his  right  hand)  fol.  62.  Of  the  Synke 
Ports,  fol.  39.  And  of  the  Univerftty  of  Oxford 
(of  which  this  is  the  oldeft  Infiance  that  I  now  remem¬ 
ber)  at  fol.  153. 

7.  Here  are  alfo  fome  Remembrances  of  Armes  anti- 

ently  fett-up  in  facred  Buildings  ;  which,  poffibly  may 
not  now  be  extant ;  or  the  notice  of  them  to  be  met  with 
elfe -where;  as  at  Bow  Chyrche.  fol.  53.  Ludgate 
Chyrche.  fol.  75.  Godftowe  in  Oxforthe-lherc.  fol.  105. 
Seynte  Martine  le  Graunde.  fol.  126.  b.  Seynt  Katcry- 
nez  at  the  Tower,  fol.  132.  Whyte  Frcrs  in  Flet-firete. 
fol.  166.  Lombard-ftrete.  70. 

8.  More  might  be  obferved  about  the  Armes  of  par¬ 
ticular  Families;  but  I  will  only  mention  thefe  fev; 
at  fol.  135.  are  the  Armes  of  Harley  my  noble  Lord’s  Fa¬ 
mily,  but  without  the  name.  At  fol.  24.  I  find  the  Armes 
of  the  ancient  &  noble  family  of  Pawlet  or  Poulet ; 
where  the  Swords  are  of  a  more  antique  Fafiiion,  than 
thofe  which  I  have  feen  delineated  in  Q.  Elizabeth’s  time. 
At  fol.  155.  are  the  Armes  of  Gorges;  now,  &  long 
fince  called  a  Spiral  Line  ;  and,  as  fuch,  delineated  by 
the  Herald  Painters.  Now  here,  this  book  fiieweth, 
that  theys  Armys  were  made  aftyr  a  Whyrle-pytte  of 
Water,  becaufe  of  hys  name,  in  Latin  Gurges.  At  fol. 
122.  are  the  Armes  of  Noryce  appelle,  Sc  of  Leyaltone 
appellawnt.  The  former  were  borne  with  a  Dyllerens, 
which  is  a  Crofs  Patee  Fichee.  The  Appellant's  Armes 
are  quarterly  ;  as  to  which,  pleafe  to  take  this  fiiort  Ac¬ 
count,  The  Appellaunts  Armys  were  gave  hym  at  o  tyme 
the  fyrft  of  the  Kyngs  Gyfte,  and  the  fecunde  of  the 
Due  of  Soinerfete  (Edmund  Beaufort)  quod  nota  bene, 
quia  raro  videtur.  Thefe  Armys  be  nat  comendyde,  be- 
cawfe  a  Grate  that  ys  fo  comen  a  thynge,  St  fo  fowle,  is 
feite  in  the  Honor,  i.  e.  in  the  Chief  point.  So  at  fol. 
8  1 .  are  thefe  Armes,  a  Quarter  bale,  Golde  ;  in  a  feld 
Sabylle :  with  this  Note,  “  Theys  Armys  be  nat  com- 
endabylle,  but  yf  (i.  e.  unlefs)  the  Metalle  fioode 
above.” 

9.  Upon  this  mention  of  Metal  in  Armory,  I  c'hufe  to 
bring  out  thefe  Notes.  At  fol.  1 38.  is  a  Ihield  thus  bla- 
foned,  He  berythc-  Golde.  Theys  Armys,  to  bere  Golde  or 
Sylver  alone,  &  no  more,  may  be  borne  welle;  and  fuche 
Armys  be  &  have  ben,  for  fuche  Armys  were  comyne  at 
the  begyninge:  and  this  juftifies  the  Axiom,  Anna  non  pof- 
fiunt  elfe  fine  Metallo.  fol.94.b.  In  which  page  another  may 
befound,Quilibetpoteft  aflumerefibiSignum,fednon  Arma 
which  is  explained  at  fol.  110.  by  an  Efcochcon  adorned 


Num.  2259,  22604 

with  an  odd  fort  of  a  Charge,  underneath  \vhich  is  this 
note,  “  Theys  be  none  Armys,  but  a  marke  as  Mar- 
chawnts  vfe.  For  every  mane  maye  take  by  me  a  Mark*’-, 
but  non  Armys,  withowte  an  Herowde  or  Purcyvawnte.’’ 
I  forbear  to  mention  the  ludicrous  Charge  in  the  Shield, 
at  fol.  139-b.  which  the  Compiler  {hews  to  be  no  Armys, 
and  tha:  fey  were  neuer  geuen  for  Annys  but  made  ior 
a  conceyte,  to  fetteabovt  a  Crcfie,  to  make  men  mufe  on 
hem  ;  and  fic  de  fimilibus.  It  L  not  too  late  to  add  the 
following  note  relating  to  the  Axiom  abovementioned, 
Anna  non  pufiunt  elfe  fine  metallo,  from  fol.  180. 
“  I  here  be  fome  in  Inglande  bere  withowte  any  Me* 
taile,  Herowds  fay  they  take  heme  of  ibeirowyne  Auto* 
ryte;.  &  fome  fay,  they  were  gelie  in  olde  tyme  ex  necli- 
gencia  Haraldy.  Bur,  how  fo  ever  thy  came,  at  thv:.  day 
they  be  callyn  none  Armez ;  and  alfo,  they  be  agaynd 
the  La  we  of  Arines  :  but  ther  be  3  or  4  fuche  Scochonys 
in  Inglande,  of  olde  Date/* 

10.  Here  are  many  more  ufefiil  Notes,  and  Refolves 
upon  Heraldical  Queftions  of  Importance,  which  I  pafe 
over,  as  not  needful  to  be  inferted  in  a  fhort  Catalogue  i 
concluding  with  this  Obfervuiion  about  our  King  Rich¬ 
ard  the  fecond’s  Supporters,  if  ir  be  true,  as  I  find  it  at 
fol.  76.  Kyng  Richard  the  ud.  for  Joke  the  two  Antloppvs 
for  hys  Bells,  &  toke  two  w'lytHertys,  berving  vp  the 
A rm vs  with  her  bakkys. 

In  this  Heraldical  Book  1  likewife  find, 
it.  The  Armes  a'cribed  to  the  World's  NineWorthics, 
in  blafon  ;  with  a  Ballad  in  their  Praile.  39.  b. 

12.  Lez  Armez  de  Roy  &  Scignours  d’Engletere 

plvs  aunceyux.  "  76.  5 

13.  Lcz  Armez  dez  pluis  noblez  Chivalers  d'Engle- 

tere-  .  185.  b. 

14.  At  fol.  53.  b.  is  a  large  Efcochcon  of  the  ArmeS 
borne  by  Sir  James  Strangw'yffie  Knight,  with  the  blafon 
of  the  lame,  as  given  (in  French)  by  Garter  ;  which  bia- 
fon  doth  alfo  appear  at  the  bottom  of  the  firfi  fpare  leaf 
of  the  book.  And,  indeed,  it  feemes  to  have  belonged  to 
that  andent  A  worfhipful  family,  not  long  after  it  was 
compiled  ;  for  higher,  in  the  lame  fpare  Leaf,  I  yet  read 
t:  Ifte  liber  confiat  Ricardo  Strattgways.” 

•_ . A  fief  the-  Table,  at  fol.  6.  the  fame 

name  is  added  ;  and  again,  at  folio  190.  where  the  work 
endeth  :  which  Richard  Strangways  was  no  Officer  of 
Amies  as  I  can  find.  But  at  fol.  1  2  i .  b.  are-“  Lez  Armez  le 
Roy  d’Engletere  &Fraunce,  &  Margaretc  fa  Ccmpayne,” 
with  the  following  Infcription  above  them,  “Ifte  libelhts 
fuit  compilatus  A-.  32'.  II.  vi"-  and  if  we  take  Gartcr 
to  be  the  man,  John  Smert  will  be  him,  for  he  was  Gartef 
anno  32  Hen.  vi.  and  had  but  one  Predeceffor,  namelv 
Sir  William  Bruges  ;  whom  he-  leenis  to  mean  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  Infcription.  which  he  hath  prefixed  to  the  whole 
Work  at  folio  1.  Penfa,  Succefi'or,  in  tui  cordis  oraculo 
de  primo  Predecdfore,  qui  hoc  rtobile  ex  pluribus  libris 
aggregatum  (fi  dici  poffit)  non  minus  Seipfo  predilexir ; 
itaque  et  pro  ejus  Dodore,  qui  quidem  in  hac  Lege,  fuis 
temporibus,  floruit  fine  pare.” 

2260. 

A  parchment  Book  in  a  long  4to,  wanting  divers  Leaves 
at  the  beginning,  and  written  in  old  Englifh  verfe  1 
wherein  was  contained, 

An  Explanation  of  the  Pater-nofter,  with  occafional 
Difcourfcs  or  Strictures  upon  thefeveral  Virtues  or  Vices 
which  the  Author  thought  Men  lhould  pray  for,  or 
againft  :  tranflated  from  the  Latin.  In  the  laft  Page  are 
thefe  lines. 

“  At  J>ys  tyme  I  wylle  no  more  fay 
But  ze  ]?at  haue  hird  f  ys,  I  zou  pray 
fat  ze  pray  for  fam  olde  and  zonge, 
fat  turned  f  ys  into  Englys  tonge, 

Whare  fo  fat  fay  be,  or  in  what  Stcde, 

Whefcre  fey  Lyue,  or  fay  beDede,  & c.” 


A  papef 


It  I  , 


Vi 


$9^ 


C'atalogus  Librorum  MSS- 


Num.  2i6i,  2262. 


I 


2261. 


A  paper  Book  in  final  folio,  or  elfo  in  large  4to.  in  which  ! 
r  is  contained  5  .  : 

1  A  Table  alphabetically  drawn  up,  &  referring  to  i 
the  Poly-chronicon  ;  but  wants  the  firft  Leaf. 

a  A  Tranflalion  of  the  Poly-chronicon  of  Ra-  1 
nulf  Hygden  Monk  of  Chefter  ;  different  from  that 
nude  by  John  de  Trevifa  ;  and  continued  down  to  the 
Year  1401. 

2202. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  mofily  of  original  Papers  and  j 
Letters,  now  bou.nUp  together,  with  regard  to  the 
order  of  time.  They  all  belonged  to  the  ate  molt 
noble  Prince  John  Holies  Duke  of  New-caftle  &c  as  ; 
Lord  Privy  Seal  to  Queen  Anne ;  and  of  which  I  ihall  1 
give  only  the  following  brief  Account.  i 

Complaint  (copied;  of  Dr.  Edward  Bowler  B.fhop  , 
of  Gloucelter,  againft  his  predeceffor  Dt.  Robert  l  ramp-  | 
ton's  ill  ufage  ofldm  ;  with  his  Reafons  for  wtll.-holding 
Inllitution  to  the  Vicarage  of  Stand*  in  the  County  of 
Gloucelter,  from  J.  Kimbcll.  (dat  ,4  March  .703.4)  . 

2  A  fiiort  Ab  11  raft  of  that  Complaint  or  Memorial ; 

Ihewing  that  his  Lordflfip  was  much  more  inclined  to 
have  fo  confiderable  a  living  as  that  of  Stand*  iettlcd  in  | 
his  own  family,  than  upon  Mr.  Kimbell.  S- 

Now  followed!  a  Traa  relating  to  the  Company  of  , 
Weavers  of  London  ;  comprehending  feveral  particular  , 
Papers,  whofe  Titles  follow  in  this  order, 

,  Severall  of  the  Complaints  of  divers  Liverymen  ct 
the  Weavers  Company,  againft  die  irregular  proceedings 
of  the  Bayliffs,  Wardens,  &  Affiftants  of  the  faid  Com¬ 
pany,  in  their  Government  thereof.  6 

This  was  prefcnted  to  a  private  Court,  held  27 

1'°4.C  The  Anfwer  of  the  faid  Bayliffs,  See.  to  the  find 
Comphmts.^fter  R^Jnuonl  or  Afts  of  this  Clom- 

Pa7’Pe0uhion  of  the  Mimfters  and  others  of  the  French 
8c  Dutch  Churches,  I.ondon ;  to  K.  Charles  in  pre- 
femed  in  June  1669.  praying  for  Protection  &  Lncou- 
raoement  for  their  Countreytnen  to  fettle  here.  S 

6  The  Weavers  Anfwer  to  that  Petition,  as  it  flood 
referr'd  to  the  Lords  Committees  for  Trade  &  Planta- 

ibid. 

tions.  .  _  ,  ,T 

7  Order  of  his  Majefty  m  Council  made  io  Novem¬ 
ber  1660.  for  entering  a  Noli  Prol'equi  againft  the  Wea¬ 
vers  profecuting  of  certain  Foreign  Weavers;  and  for 
,he  London-Weavers  to  prel'entfuch  Propohtions  as  they 
flvall  agree  upon,  for  Foreign  Weavers  to  be  admitted 

into  their  Society.  .  .  .! 1  ‘  j 

8  Another  Order  of  His  Majefly  m  Council,  made 

.  May  j  670.  approving  of  divers  of  thePropofals  exhi¬ 
bited  by  both  the  Parties  ;  which  were  afterward  re¬ 
duced  into  By-Lawes  of  the  faid  Company.  1 2 

Q  Of  the  like  Complaints  &  Proceedings  made  in 
a  jy  x68i.  touching  the  Admiflion  of  Foreign  Wea- 

‘  ’  12. 

vers.  .  ,  r 

This  Trad  being  ended,  I  come  to 
10  A  Lift  of  certain  Yorkfhire  Gentlemen  ;  de¬ 
signed,  perhaps,  for  Deputy-Lieutenants,  or  Juftices  of 

the  Peace.  „  .  „  .  ,  .  1  , ’. 

11.  The  Oath  of  a  Lord  Privy  Seale,  taken  by  his 
Grace  John  Duke  of  New-caftle,  the  29th  of  March 

I;  j2_'  a  Copy  of  the  Oath  taken  by  the  Clerks  of 

the  Privy  Seale.  ' 9 • 

t  >  Original  Letter  of  Ralph  Woddefon  to  Mr. 
Butler  dated  29  March  1505.  about  the  Fees  accruing 
to  the  i.ord  Privy  Seal ;  'with  a  Poftfcript  by  the  faid  Mr. 

Butler,  as  it  feemeth.  ... 

14.  Raphe  Woodefon  s  Certificate  touching  the  Caure 
of  G regions  being  turn’d  out  from  being  Secretary  to 


Num.  2261. 

the  late  Privy  Seale  :  with  a  Poftfcript  by  Mr.  Butler, 
dat.  29  March  1705.  23- 

15.  Docquet  (figned  Geo.  Piers)  of  a  Grant  unto 

John  Montagu  Efq;  commonly  called  Lord  Mount* 
Hermer,  only  Son  of  Ralph  Earle  of  Montagu,  of  the 
Office  of  Keeper  k  C.uftody  of  her  Majefties  great 
Ward-robe,  after  his  Father’s  Demife.  fealed,  4-Apnl 
1705.  -4* 

16.  Docquet  (figned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Gcdol- 
phin)  of  a  Warrant  for  payment  of  50,000  pounds,  part 
of  her  Majefties  Quota  of  300,000  Crowns,  to  the  King 
of  Pruffia  for  8000  Men  to  be  fent  by  him  for  one 
Year,  to  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  fealed,  5  April  1705.  25. 

17.  Docquet  (figned  Geo.  Piers)  of  a  Pardon  unto 

Francis  Sterry  Gent,  for  the  Muvther  of  Michael  Cam¬ 
pion,  whereof  he  had  been  found  Guilty,  fealed,  5 
April  1705.  26. 

18.  Docquet  (figned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol* 

phin)  of  a  grant  to  John  Croker  Gent,  to  befirft  Graver 
of  the  Mint,  with  the  Salary  of  2oclb.  3^  ann.  k  for 
Samuell  Bull  k  Gabriel  le  Clerc  ro  be  his  Affiftants, 
with  the  Salary  of  8olb.  ann.  apiece,  fealed  5  April 
1705.  ,  27* 

19.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  (figned  by  the  faid  Lord 
Treafurer)  for  4  Pounds  per  diem,  to  be  paid  unto  the 
above-mentioned  Duke  of  New-caftle,  as  Lord  Privy 
Seal  ;  in  lieu  of  the  antient  Allowance  of  Sixteen  Difhcs 
of  Meat,  fealed  5  April  1 705. 

20.  Docquet  of  a  Commifiion.  for  Lord  Godolphin, 
Lord  High  Treafurer  of  England,  to  be  Lord  Lieute¬ 
nant  of  the  County  of  Cornwall,  in  the  room  of 
John  Lord  Granville,  fealed,  the  12  day  of  April  1 70^. 

2V- 

2 1 .  Docquet  of  a  Warant  (figned  by  the  faid  Lord 
Treafurer)  for  the  above-mentioned  Lord  Mount-Henner, 
to  receive  annually,  from  his  Entrance  upon  the  Office 
of  Keeper  of  the  great  Warbrobe,  2000  pounds  for 
himfelf,  and  200  pounds  for  his  Deputy,  fealed  12 

A*2  2. 1  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  the  Creation  of  Ralph 
Earle  of  Montagu,  to  be  Marquifs  Mount-Hermer,  and 
Duke  of  Montagu,  fealed  12  April  1705.  33- 

2,.  Docquet  for  a  Patent  to  confirm  the  Election  of 
Dr. 'George  Bull  to  be  Bifhop  of  St.  David’s  made  by  the 
Precentor  &  Chapter  there,  fealed  the  12  of  April  1705. 

33\ 

24.  Docquet  for  a  Commiffion,  to  conftitute  Lewis 
Lord  Rockingham  Lieutenant  of  the  County  of  Kent, 
in  the  room  of  Charles  Earl  of  Winchelfea.  fealed  1 6 
April  1705.  _  ,  34* 

2-.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  Sir  John  1  revor  A.r. 
Mafter  of  the  Rolls,  to  be  Conftable  of  the  Caftle  of 
Flint,  with  the  Fee  of  10  Pounds  per  ann.  alio  to  be 
Keeper  of  the  Gaole  of  the  C.aftlc  of  Flint,  with  the 
yeaily  Fee  of  61.  is.  8d.  And  the  Office  of  Comptroller 
of  the  Records,  Pleas,  Fines,  k  Amerciaments  in  the 
County  of  Carnarvon,  in  the  room  of  Sir  Roger  Mo- 
ftvn  Baronet.  (This  is  figned  bv  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin,  and  was  fealed  16  April  1 7°5;)  35* 

26.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  John  Duke  of  New- 
caftle,  to  be  I.ieu-tenant  of  the  North  Riding  in  the 
County  of  Yoik,  in  the  room  of  John  Duke  et  Buck¬ 
ingham  and  Normanby.  fealed.  16  April  1705.  3°* 

P2  7.  Docouet  of  a  Warant  for  Richard  Earl  Rivers, 
to  be  Lieu-tenant  of  the  County  of  Eficx,  in  the  room 
of  Francis  Lord  Guilford,  fealed  (that  is,  palled  the 
Privy  Seal)  16  April  1705.  57- 

28.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  Thomas  Lye  Clerk, 
to  be  Vicar  of  Broad-hempfon  in  the  County  of  Devon, 
fealed  16  April  1705.  .  3H- 

20  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  Lewis  Gomes  an  Alien, 
to  be  a  free  Denizen  of  England,  fealed  the  18th  day 
of  April  1705.  c.  n  3"9- 

Copy  of  an  Inftrument,  whereby  Sir  Geoige 
0  .  Piers 


Bibliothecae  Harleiatiae. 


C 

.J 


97 


IS  um. 


2262. 


Piers  Bart,  one  of  the  Clerks  of  the  Privy  Seale  & 
Clerke  of  the  Councill  of  the  Court  of  Requefts,  (upon 
the  refignation  of  Sir  Charles  Bickerftaffe  Kt.)  doth 
conftitute  Ralph  Woddefon  to  be  his  Deputy,  dated 
the  20th  of  April  1705.  4°- 

31.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  conftituting  Edward  Nott 
Efq  ;  Lieutenant  &  Governor  Generali  of  the  Colony 
&  Dominion  of  Virginia.  Sealed,  2,5  April,  1705.42. 

32.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  Daniel  Park  Efq  ;  to 

be  Captain-Genetall  &  Governour  i:i  chief  of  the  Wands 
of  Nevis,  St.  Chriftophtrs,  Mount-ferrat,  Antegoa,  Bar- 
bouda,  Anguilla,  Sc  all  other  her  Majdlies  Wands,  Co¬ 
lonies  &  Plantations  called  the  Charibbe  Wands,  lying 
to  Lee-ward  from  Gaurdaloupe  to  the  Wand  oi  St.John 
de  Porto  Rico.  Sealed,  25  April,  1705.  43- 

33.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  Charles  Earl  of  Dor- 

fet  and  Middlefex  to  be  Lieutenant  of  the  County  of 
SufTex.  Sealed,  25  April  1705.  44- 

34.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  Henry  Duke  of  Graf¬ 

ton  to  be  Lieutenant  of  the  County  of  Suffolk,  in  the 
Room  of  Lionel  Earl  of  Dyfert.  Sealed  the  25th  of 
April,  1705.  _  4.v 

35.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  granting  to  John  Duke 

of  "Marlborough  the  Honor  and  Manor  of  Woodftock, 
the  Hundred  of  Wootton,  the  Advowfons  of  Blaclon,  Sc 
of  Stonesfield,  Woodftock-Park  Si  the  Deer  therein, 
with  divers  Meffuagcs,  Woods,  Lands,  ienements,  &,c. 
within  the  County  of  Oxon  ;  to  be  holden,  as  of  the 
Caftle  of  Windlor,  in  common  Soccage,  by  Fealty  ;  he 
rendering  yearly  on  the  2d  of  Auguft,.  at  the  Cable  oi 
Windfor,  one  Standard  or  Colours,  with  Three  Flower 
de  Luces  painted  thereupon.  Sealed,  thefecondof  May 
1705.  46. 

36.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  prefentmg  John  Swynfeh 

B.  D.  to  the  Re&ory  of  Evening  in  Gluucefter-fhire, 
vacant  by  the  promodon  ol  Dr.  Bull  to  the  Bifhoprick 
of  St.  David's.  Sealed  the  2d  of  May  1705.  _  4 S. 

37.  Accompt  of  the  Duke  of  New-caftlcs  Dividend  as 

to  the  Profits  of  his  Office  of  Lord  Privy  Seal  for  the 
Month  of  April,  17^5-  49- 

38.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Simon  Harcourt  Attorney 

General  to  her  Majefty  Queen  Anne,  dated  14  Fe¬ 
bruary  1704;  about  amending  divers  Inffruments  re¬ 
lating  to  the  Patent  conffitudng  Dr.  Atterbury  Dean  of 
Carlifle.  5°* 

39.  Copy  of  the  Petition  of  Mr.  Francis  Atterbury  to 

her  faid  Majefty,  for  amending  the  Patent  abovemen - 
tion’d,  which  ihe  was  pleafed  to  referr  to  Mr.  Attorney 
or  Mr.  Solicitor  General,  4  Febr.  1704.  $1. 

40.  Her  Majefty's  Original  Mandate,  under  her  Sig¬ 
net  &  Sign  Manual,  to  the  Duke  of  Newcaftle  Lord 
Privy  Seal,  for  Dr.  Atterburies  Patent  to  be  amended. 
Given  13  April  1705.  Sc  under  figned,  by  my  late 
noble  Lord  the  Earl  of  Oxford,  then  Principal  Secretary 


or  atare.  j -• 

41.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  conftituting  Thomas  Erie 
Efq ;  Lieutenant  General  of  all  manner  of  Ordnance. 
Munitions,  Provifions,  Stores,  cc  Habiliments  of  War, 
within  the  Kingdom  of  England,  Sc  Town  of  Berwick 
upon  Tweed ;  and  alfo,  Keeper  of  the  Meffuage  called 
the  Store-houfe,  belonging  to  the  Ordnance  ;  and  alfo, 
Keeper  of  the  Artillery-Garden.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  Sc  Sealed,  the  2  May  1 705.  54. 

42  Docquet  of  a  Lycence  for  Thomas  Duke  of  Nor¬ 
folk  (who  went  into  France  without  Lycence)  to  return 
into  her  Majefties  Dominions.  Sealed,  2  May,  i  70$. 

55- 

43.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  figned  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin,  conftituting  Sr.  William  Holly¬ 
wood  Bart.  Richard  Beke,  Edmund  Chaloner,  Jofeph 
Addifon,  &  Thomas  Goodman  Efqrs.  Commiffioners 
for  Appeals  and  regulating  the  Ex  die,  with  a  Salary 
of /Woo  per  annum  to  each  of  them.  Sealed,  9  May 
1705.  5^‘ 

"  Cat.  Harl.  Yoi..  II. 


Num.  2262* 

44.  Docquet.  of  a  Warant,  for  paying  to  Sir  Charles 

Hedges  Kt.  Principal  Secretary  of  State,  £.3000^  f* 
Her  Majefties  Secret  Service.  Signed  by  the  Lord  lrea- 
furer  Godolphin  &  fealed  the  gth  of  May  1705.  57- 

45.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conftituting  James 

Brydges  Efq  ;  Receiver  and  Pay-mafter  of  her  Majefties 
Army  in  the  Low  Countries,  in  the  room  of  Charles 
Fox  Efq  ;  figned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin,  and 
fealedthe  9th  of  May  1705.  .  5^- 

46.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conftituting  Charles 

Godolphin,  Samuel  Clark,  Thomas  Newport,  Sc  Wil¬ 
liam  Culliford  I’.fquires,  Sir  John  Werden  Bart.  Richard 
Breton,  &.  Thomas  Hall  Efqrs.  Commiffioners  of  the 
Cuftomcs,  with  the  Salary  of/'.  1  oco  per  annum,  to  each. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  &  lealed  the 
15th  of  May  1705.  59- 

47.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  William  Davifon  Efq  ; 

in  confideration  of  £.2cc.  whereby  her  Majefty  re¬ 
leafed  to  him  her  right  to  an  Eftate  at  Tanfield  in  the 
County  ofDitrhain,  which  lay  under  an  Extent.  Signed 
by  the  I^ord  Treafurer  Godolphin  $  8c  lealed,  16  May 
1705.  61. 

48.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  Reftitution  of  Temporal- 

ties  of  the  Bifliopr  ck  of  St.  Davids,  to  Dr.  George  Bull. 
Sealed,  the  16th  day  of  May,  1705.  62. 

49.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Offices  of  Steward  of 
the  Duchv  of  Cornwall  ;  Sc  of  the  Borough  Sc  Manor  of 
Bradninch  in  the  County  of  Devon  ;  and  Steward  of  all 
the  Caftles,  Manors,  Sc  Lands  within  the  Counties  of 
Cornwall  Sc  Devon,  parcell  of  the  laid  Duchy  ;  and  of 
Warden  and  Steward  of  the  Stannaries,  Sc  of  the  Stan¬ 
nary-Court  ;  &  of  Rider  Sc  Matter  of  the  Eorefts  &  Chacc 
of  Dart  more,  parcell  of  the  faid  Duchy,  to  Francis 
Godoiphin  Efq;  with  the  Annual  Fees  of  40  Marks. 
20  Pounds,  Sc  10  Marks.  Signed  by  the  I,ord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin,  and  fealed  16th  Day  of  May  1705. 

64. 

50.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  conftituting  Charles  Duke 

of  Grafton  Ideutenant  of  the  County  of  Suffolk,  in  the 
Room  of  Lionell  Earl  ofDyfart  in  Scotland.  Sealed  the 
i 6th  of  May  1705.  65. 

51.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  John  Crewe  Kt.  of 

three  Faires  to  be  held  yearly  at  Tarpolev  in  the  County 
of  Chefter.  Sealed  the  1 6th  of  May  1 705.  66. 

52.  Docquet  of  a  Licence  to  the  Matter,  See.  of  Cor¬ 

pus-  Chrifti  College  in  Cambridge,  to  purchafe  Sc  take  in 
Mortmain  Ten  Advowfons,  Sc  Lands  to  the  yearly  Value 
of  £.502.  Sealed,  23  May  1705.  67. 

53.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  (upon  the  Surrender  of 

Brook  Bridges  Efq;'  of  the  Offices  of  one  of  the  Two 
Auditors  of  the  Prefts  or  Imprefts  Sc  Foreign  Accounts, 
and  of  Firft  Fruits  8c  Tenths,  Cuftomes,  Sublidics  of 
Tonage  Sc  Poundage,  and  other  Subfidies,  and  of  the 
Mint,  Coynage,  and  olher  Accounts  ;  together  with  the 
annual  fee  of  100  Marks,  unto  Arthur  Mainwaring  Elq; 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin,  Sc  fealed  the 
23  of  May  1705.  68. 

54.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  Richard  Rigby  Efq;  of 

the  Office  of  Provoft-Marlhall  Generali  of  the  Illand  of 
Jamaica.  Sealed  the  23  of  May  1 703.  69. 

55.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  Payment  of  fuch  a  Sum 

unto  John  How  Efq  ;  Pay-mafter  General  of  the  Guards 
Sc  GarnTons,  as  would  make-up  what  had  been  before 
paid  unto  Charles  Fox  Efq;  then  Pay-mafter  General  of 
the  Forces,  the  Sum  of  £.98,969  :  i  o :  00  for  maintaining 
50C0  Men  abting  in  Conjunction  with  the  Forces  of  the 
Allies,  for  one  Year.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  &  fealed  the  24th  of  May  1 705.  70- 

56.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  the  Difcharge  of  Charles 
Fox  Efq  ;  upon  his  delivering  up  unto  James  Brydges 
Efq  ;  Pay  mafter  General  of  the  Forces  afting  in  con¬ 
junction  with  the  Forces  of  the  Allies,  fuch  Sumrnes  of 
Money,  Tallies,  Sc  Orders  of  Loan  &  other  falli<  .  Si 
Orders  in  lieu  of  M<  r.ey  imprelted  to  him.  Signed 


598  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2262. 

by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin,  Sc  Sealed  the  24th 
of  May  x  705.  _  7 1  • 

57.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  conftitiiting  Harry 

Mordaum  Efq ;  Treafurer  and  Pay-mafter  of  the  Ord¬ 
nance  ;  with  the  Salary  of  £40  per  annum,  in  the  room 
of  Charles  Bertie  Efq;  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin,  and  fealed  lire  •25th  of  May  1705.  72. 

58.  Accompt  of  the  Dividend  due  to  the  Duke  of 

Newcaftle  Lord  Privy  Seal,  from  1  May  1705.  to  the 
26  day  of  the  fame  Month,  inclufive.  73. 

59.  Docquet  of  a  Licence  empovring  the  Re£tor  See. 

of  Exeter-College  in  Oxford,  to  purchafe  &  take  in 
Mortmain  Ten  Advowfons,  Sc  Land  to  the  yearly  Value 
of  500  pounds.  Sealed,  9  June  1705.  74. 

60.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  incorporating  the  Inhabitants 

of  the  Towne  of  Glaftonbury  ;  with  power  for  them  to 
purchafe  Lands  to  the  yearly  Value  of  £.300.  Sealed 
the  20th  of  June  1705.  75. 

6 1.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Stratford  Clerk 

&  B.  D.  of  a  Canons  Place  in  Chrift-Church,  Oxon. 
Sealed  the  30th  of  June  1705.  78. 

62.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  payment  unto  Abraham 
Stanyan  Efq  ;  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Swifs  Can¬ 
tons  £-530  for  his  Equipage,  and  Five  Pounds  bv  the 
day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  Sc  Sealtd  the  30th  of  June  1705. 

,  79' 

63.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Anthony  Nicholl  Elq; 
Sc  Edward  Trelavvny  Clerk,  in  truft,  for  the  poor  In¬ 
habitants  of  the  Parilh  of  St.  Udy  in  Cornwall,  of  two 
annual  Faires  there.  Sealed  the  7th  of  July  1705.  80. 

64.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  directing  the  Auditor  Sc 

Receiver  of  her  Majefties  Revenues  within  the  County  of 
Northampton,  to  pay  unto  Edward  Lockett  Vintner  cer¬ 
tain  Sums  due  to  him  from  Edward  Lord  Griffin,  out  of 
his  forfeited  Eftate  there.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  Sc  fealed  7  July  1705.  81. 

65.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles 

Earle  of  Sunderland  appointed  Envoy  extraordinary  & 
Plenipotentiary  to  the  Emperor,  /.1200  for  his  Equi¬ 
page,  and  £.10  by  the  Day,  for  his  ordinary  Entertain¬ 
ment  •,  as  alio  Inch  Sumes  of  Money  for  Intelligen¬ 
ces,  See.  as  to  one  of  her  Majellies  Principal  Secretaries 
of  State  111  all  appear  to  be  further  due  unto  him.  Sub- 
feribed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  9th  of  July  1705.  82. 

66.  Docquet  oi  a  Patent  to  conflitute  Edward  Brere- 

ton,  George  Morley,  Sc  Anthony  D uncomb,  with  John 

Evelyn  &  Thomas  Baker  Efqrs.  Principal  Commiffion- 
ers  for  Prizes,  with  a  Salary  of  £.500  Per  ann.  to  each 
of  them.  Alfo  appointing  Anthony  Burnaby  Efq;  to 
be  their  Secretary,  with  a  Salary  of  £.400  per  annum, 
for  himfelf  Sc  Clerks;  and  William  Goflelin  Efq;  to  be 
Comptroller  or  the  Prizes,  with  a  Salary  of  £.500  per 
atm.  for  himfelf,  and  £.  100  for  two  Clerks.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  9th 
day  of  July  1705.  83. 

67.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Robert  Lydall  Gent, 
for  the  Terme  ot  14  yeares,  of  the  foie  ufe  Sc  benefit  of 
his  new  Invention  of  Separating  &  Refining  Gold  and 
Silver  from  Tinn ;  and  of  Melting  &  Smelting  black 
Tinn-Oar  into  good  merchantable  White  Tinn  much 
cheaper  than  can  be  produced  by  any  method  now  in 

ufe.  Sealed  the  19th  day  of  July  1705.  84. 

68.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  Henry  Andrews  Efq;  of 

the  Office  of  Pod  or  Carrier  of  all  her  M  a  jelly’s  Letters 
Sc  Difpatchcs,  between  the  Court  and  the  firft  Pod  Stao-e 
with  the  allowances  ot  2  .>  Shillings  per  diem.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  Sc  fealed  the  19th  of 
July  1705.  _  85. 

69.  Docquet  of  a  Releafe  made  by  her  Majefty,  to 
Dame  Ellinor  Oglethorpe,  for  not  keeping  in  due  Repa¬ 
ration  the  Hedges  and  Fences  ofthe  Manor  of  Stoughton 
magnainth.  Comuy  of  Huntingdon,  and  of  the  S cite 


Num.  2262. 

Or  Capital  Mcffuage  ofthe  faid  Manor,  which  Sir  Theo- 
phihis  her  deceafed  Hufband  had  taken  in  ferme  of  the 
late  King  James  u.  at  the  yearly  Rent  of  ^.200.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  Sc  fealed  the  19th 
day  of  July  1705.  86. 

70.  Prefidents  of  Caveats  taken  out  of  the  Books  in 

the  Privy-Seal  Office.  88. 

71.  Order  of  the  Marquis  of  Normanby  Lord  Privy 

Seal,  dated  1  May  1702  ;  that  no  Caveat  fhould  be  of 
any  longer  than  three  Months  after  the  Entry  thereof : 
but  that  thofe  who  fhould  put  them  in,  might  renew 
them.  89. 

72.  Order  of  the  Duke  of  New-caftle  Lord  Privy  Seal, 

to  the  fame  Effect,  dated - July  1705.  90. 

73.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  Payment  unto  Emanuel 
Scroope  Howe  Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to 
the  Elector  of  Hanover,  Sc  Dukes  of  Zell  Sc  Brunl'wic- 
Lunenburg,  £.500  for  his  Equipage,  &  Five  Pounds  bv 
the  Day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment.  Signed  bv  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin,  and  fealed  the  25th  of  July 

*7°  5-  92' 

74.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  payment  unto  Thomas 

LordRaby  now  (from  envoy  Extraordinary)  madeEmbaf- 
fador Extraordinary  to  theKing  of  Pruffia,  of  „€iooc.  for 
his  Equipage,  and  Ten  Pounds  by  the  day  for  his  or¬ 
dinary  Entertainment.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  &  fealed  25  July,  1705.  9^. 

75.  Docquet  of  a  Pardon  untojohn  Sparke  ofPlimouth 

Efq.  guilty  of  Mnn-fiaughter,  for  killing  John  Martin 
late  of  Plymouth  aforefaid.  Sealed  the  25th  of  July, 
1 7°5*  .  .  94- 

76.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  in  French,  dire&ed  to  the 

Sheriffs  of  Surrey  Sc  Sufifex,  to  pay  unto  Lewis  Lord 
Rockingham  Mafter,  and  to  the  other  Officers  of  the 
Buck-hounds,  their  ufual  Salaries,  to  the  24th  dav  of 
June,  1704.  Sealed,  the  25th  of  July,  1705.  95. 

77.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Henry  James  D.D.  of 

a  Prebend  in  the  Cathedral  Sc  Metropolitical  Church  of 
Canterbury.  Sealed,  the  28th  of  July,  1705.  96. 

78.  Docquet  of  a  Warrant,  for  payment  unto  George 

Stepney  Efq;  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Emperor  of 
Germany,  and  Plenipotentiary  :  three  pounds  by  the 
day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  Sc  fealed  the  28th  of  July 
1705.  97. 

79.  Accompt  of  the  Dividend  of  the  Privy  Seal,  from 

the  firft  of  April,  1705.  to  the  31ft  of  July,  1705. 
inclufive.  9S.  b. 

80.  Requeft  of  Will.  Cooke  to  the  Lord  Privy  Seale, 
for  a  Caveat  to  be  entred,  that  no  Grant  of  the  Office 
of  one  of  the  Clerks  ofthe  Signet  do  pafs,  untill  Notice 
be  given  unto  William  Cooke  Efq;  who  had  a  rever- 
fionary  Patent  for  the  fame.  dat.  3  Auguft,  1705.  ico. 

81.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d’effire  to  the  Dean  &  Chap¬ 

ter  of  Lincoln,  to  choofe  a  Biffiop  of  that  See,  void  by 
the  death  of  Dr.  James  Gardiner.  Sealed,  the  13th  of 
Auguft,  1705.  10 1. 

82.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Robert  Har¬ 

ley  Efq;  one  of  the  Principal  Secretarys  of  State, 
£.2000,  for  fecret  Service,  without  Account.  Signed 

by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  &  fealed  the  13th 
of  Auguft,  1705.  102. 

83.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  the  Difcharge  of  Charles 

Bertie  Efq;  upon  his  delivery  of  certain  Tallys  8c  Orders 
amounting  to  20700.  pounds,  unto  Harry  Mordaunt 
Efq;  prelent Treafurer  &  Pav-mafter  ofthe  Ordnance. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Gc  dolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  13th  Day  of  Auguft,  1705.  103. 

84.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Walter  Hamil¬ 
ton  Efq;  Lieutenant  Governor  of  the  Ifland  of  St. 
Chriftophtrs,  £.200  per  annum,  in  lieu  of  all  Prcfents 
from  the  Aflemblies.  Signed  by  the  Earl  of  Godolphin 
Lord  Treafurer;  and  fealed  the  ij.h  of  Auguft,  1705. 

104. 

85.  Docquet 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


599 


Num.  2262. 

S5.  Docquct  of  a  Pardon  &  Releafe  to  the  Eaft  Indx- 
Company  &  their  Servants,  of  all  Offences  againft  cer" 
tain  A<fts  of  Parliament,  in  England  or  beyond  the  Sea::, 
fince  the  226  of  July,  1702.  Sealed  the  15th  of  Auguft 
1705.  (See  lower  §.  197.)  105. 

86.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Jofeph  Roberts  Efq; 

(upon  his  father’s  furrender)  of  the  Ollice  of  Plumber  of 
the  Caftle  of  Windfor,  together  with  the.  Keeping  of  the 
Conduit  there ;  with  the  Pee  of  Twelve  pence  by  the 
day.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and 
fealed  the  25th  of  Auguft,  1705.  107. 

87.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Edward  Nicho¬ 

las  Efq;  £  30,000.  upon  Account  :  to  be  by  him  applied 
according  to  fuch  Eftablifhments  or  Warants,  as  he 
fhould  receive  from  her  Majeftie,  or  from  the  High 
Treafurer  for  the  time  being.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  25th  day  of 
Auguft,  1705.  io8. 

8S.  Docquet  of  a  Prefcntation  of  John  Younger  D.D. 
one  of  the  Clerks  to  her  Majefties  Clofet,  to  the  Deanery 
of  Sar.  Sealed  the  31ft  day  of  Auguft,  1705.  109. 

89.  Docquct  of  a  Grant  of  a  Leafe  of  Warwick- 

Houfe,  and  of  a  piece  of  ground  near  adjoyning,  unto 
Thomas  Earl  of  Suffex  and  Anne  Countcfs  of  Suffex  his 
Wife,  in  confideration  of  £ .200.  paid  ;  and  of  the 
faithful  Sendees  performed  by  the  faid  Earl  and  Countcfs ; 
to  hold,  upon  the  expiration  of  the  prefent  Leafes,  for 
different  Terms  of  years  ;  paying  yearly  Eourty  Shillings 
for  each.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  firft  of  September,  1705.  1 10. 

90.  Docquet  of  her  Majelt.  Royal  Afient  to  the 

Election  of  Doftor  William  Wake  to  be  bifhop  of  Lin¬ 
coln.  Sealed  the  29th  of  September,  1705.  112. 

91.  Docquet  ot  a  Prefentation  of  Thomas  Greene 

Clerkc,  to  the  Re&ory  of  Wood-church  in  the  County 
of  Cheffer  ;  void,  &  in  her  Majefties  Gift,  by  the  fimo- 
niacal  Contract  of  Robert  Janny.  Sealed  the  29th  day 
of  September,  1705.  113. 

92.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet, 
unto  William  Fleming  of  Rydall  in  the  County  of  Wcft- 
morland  Efq;  with  Remainder  to  the  Heirs  Males  of  his 
Father.  Sealed  the  29th  day  of  September,  1705.  114. 

93.  Copy  of  a  Warant  to  the  Queen’s  right  trufty 
&  well-beloved  Councellor  William  Cowper  Efq;  Keeper 
of  her  Great  Seal  of  England,  fubferibed  by  Sir  C.  Hedges 
authorizing  him  to  putt  the  fame  Seal  to  fuch  Initruments 
as  were  depending  either  at  Court,  or  in  Chancery,  at 
the  time  when  he  received  it  ;  or  to  fuch  of  them  as  he 
lhould  think  fitt.  Given  the  14th  of  October,  1705. 

1 16. 

This  is  attefted  by  one  John  Roberts,  if  I  miftake 
not  in  reading  his  Name.  I  have  known  divers  fuch  as 
could  write  their  Names  plainly,  affedt  Intricacy  &c  Ob- 
feurity  therein,  for  filly  &  ridiculous  Reafons  ;  chiefly 
arifing  from  Self  conceit  &  Pride.  I  think  that  all  thel'e 
fhould  oblige  their  Heirs  or  Succeffors  for  ever,  to  de-cypher 
their  feveral  Marks,  Monograms,  or  Flourifhes,  to  every 
Legal  demandment,  without  Fee  or  Reward. 

94.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  John  Hobart  Baronet 
of  a  Tuefdays  Market  (inftead  of  the  old  one  held  on 
Saturdays)  at  Aylelham  in  Norfolk  ;  together  with  an 
annual  Fair.  Sealed  the  24th  day  of  Odlober,  1705. 

r  •  117 ' 

95.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Herman  OlmiusElq;  of 

an  annual  Fair  to  be:  held  at  Braintree  in  Effex  ;  with 
a  Confirmation  of  the  Market  &  Fair  antiently  held  there. 
Sealed  the  24th  (of  October.  1705.  1  1  8. 

96.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Samuel  Lavor  Gent,  of 

of  the  Office  of  Water-Bayliffe  of  all  the  River  Thames, 
between  the  great  Bridge  of  Staines,  and  the  Head  of 
the  faid  River ;  and  of  all  Rivulets  anJ  Branches  running 
therein.  Sealed,  24th  day  of  Qttober,  1705.  119. 

97.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  Yeomans 
Efq;  Lieutenant  Governor  of  the  llland  of  A 11  lego,  the 


Num.  2262. 

allowance  of  £.200.  per  ann.  in  lieu  of  all  prefents  from 
the  Affembly.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin, 
&  fealed  the  24th  October,  1705.  120. 

98.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Lancelot  Blackburne 

M.A.  of  the  Deanery  of  Exeter.  Sealed  the  24th  day  of 
O&ober  1705.  121. 

99.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet 

unto  Thomas  Miller  of  Chichefter  Kt.  Sealed,  the  24th 
of  October,  1705.  122. 

100.  Docquet  of  a  Leafe  for  John  Tncledon  Gent.  & 

Anne  his  Wife*  to  be  keepers  of  the  Royal  Palace  of 
Weftminfter,  for  31  years,  with  the  fee  of  Six  Pence 
per  diem  ;  in  confideration  of  their  Surrender  of  a  for¬ 
mer  Patent,  and  a  Releafe  of  £.237  :  6  :  8.  which  be¬ 
came  due  to  them  upon  an  antienl  allowance  of  5s.  Sd. 
by  the  Day,  lor  Servants  &  Labourers  imployed  in  the 
execution  of  the  faid  Office.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  25th  of  October 
1 7°5-  *  123. 

101.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Samuel  Wight- 

wick  Clerk,  to  the  Redory  ofBurmalhin  Kent.  Sealed 
the  7th  of  November,  1705.  124. 

102.  Docquet  of  a  Licence  for  Henry  Earl  of  Lich¬ 

field  to  inclofe  the  Common  Ways  in  the  Towne  of 
Ditchley  near  Charlbury  in  the  County  of  Oxon,  lead¬ 
ing  from  Charlbury  to  Kidiington  ;  and  alfo,  to  inclofc 
the  common  Ways  in  Dichley,  which  lead  from  North- 
liegh  &  Stones-fieid  to  Enffone  :  provided  that  the  faid 
Earle  do,  at  his  own  coft,  make  a  new  Way  of  tire  fame 
breadth,  or  larger,  in  his  own  Ground,  leading  to  & 
from  the  Places  aforefaid  ;  and  as  convenient  for  Paffen- 
gers.  Sealed  the  7th  day  of  November,  1705.  125. 

103.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Dame  Elizabeth 

Lawfon,  Widow  &;  foie  Executrix  of  Sr.  Wilfrid  Law- 
fon,  Bart,  deceafed  ;  of  a  Legacy  of  £.600.  bequeathed 
to  her  Majefty  by  him,  in  recompence  of  all  fuch  Taxes 
as  he  ought  to  have  paid  to  her  Majefty,  or  to  K.  Wil¬ 
liam,  by  common  Affeffments.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  7th  of  November, 
1705.  126. 

104.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  for  making  Maria- Marga- 

rcta  Wife  of  William  J.ord  North  and  Grey,  a  free 
Denizen  of  England.  Sealed  the  7th  of  November, 
i7°5-  127. 

105.  Docquct  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Francis 

Godolphin  Efq;  Cofferer  of  her  Majefties  Houfehold, 
£•  1 00,000.  for  the  ordinary  &  extraordinary  Expences 
of  the  fame.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin, 
&  fealed  the  7th  of  November,  1705-  128. 

106.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Thomas 

Lloyd  Efq;  Pay-mafter  of  her  Majefties  Works,  /\4o,oco. 
for  the  Ufe  &  Service  of  the  faid  Works.  Signed  bv 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  7th  of 
November,  1705.  129. 

107.  Docquct  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Sir  William  Fle¬ 

ming  Bart.  of  the  Sunime  of  £  io95.ufually  paid  into  the 
Exchequer  for  that  Dignity.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolyhin  ;  &  fealed  7  Novr.  1705.  130. 

108.  Docquet  of  the  Prefentation  of  Robert  Aflieton 
Clerke  to  the  Rectory  of  Kirklington  in  the  County  of 
Yorke  &  Diocefe  of  Chefter,  ad  corroborandum  Titulum 
ejus,  whether  the  fame  was  in  her  Majefty’s  Gift,  by 
Laple,  orotherwife.  Sealed  the  14th  of  November  1705. 

131. 

109.  Docquet,  of  a  Grant  unto  Andrew  Quicke 

Efq;  of  two  Faires  yearly  within  the  Borough  of  Afti- 
burton  in  Devon-Afire.  Sealed,  the  14th  of  November 
Ir°5-  .  i32- 

1 10.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  in  confideration  cf^ii4. 
paid  to  Thomas  Walder  Gent,  of  her  Majefties  Right 
&  Title  to  certain  Annuities,  part  of  the  perpetual  In- 
tereft  payable  for  the  Bankers  Debt  ;  lately  belonging 
to  Richard  Taylor  late  Pay-mafter  of  the  Million-l  ot¬ 
tery  Tickets;  forfeited  to  her  Majefty  by  an  Extent 

7  J  ’  iffued 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2262. 

lflued  againft  the  faid  Taylor.  Sgned  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin;  andfealed  the  2  rft  of  November  1705. 

*33- 

hi.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Anthony 
Hodges  Efq;  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  Ifland  of 
Mount-Serrat  an  Allowance  of  200I.  per  annum,  in  lieu 
of  all  prefents  from  the  Aflfembly  of  the  faid  Ifland. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  21ft  of  November  1705.  134- 

1 1 2.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  conferring  the  Titles  Sc 

Dignities  of  Baron  of  Chatham,  &  Earle  of  Greenwich 
in  Kent  ;  upon  John  Duke  of  Argyle  in  Scotland. 
Sealed  the  26th  of  November  *705.  135- 

1 13.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  £4000.  per  annum  pay¬ 

able  out  of  the  Revenues  of  the  Pcft-Office,  to  William 
Cowper  Efq;  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great  Seale,  during 
his  Cuftodv  thereof,  to  commence  from  the  iithof 
Oftober  laft.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
andfealed  the  2bth  day  of  November  1705.  136. 

1 1 4.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Reftitution  of  the 

Temporalities  of  the  Bifhoprick  of  Lincoln,  unto  Wil¬ 
liam  Wake  now  Bifhop  of  that  See.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  artd  fealed  the  28th  day  of  No¬ 
vember  17-05.  >37* 

This  Reftitution  was  to  commence  from  the  death 
of  James  Gardiner  the  late  Bifhop. 

1 1 5.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  or  Place  of 

Maftsr  of  the  Temple  unto  Thomas  Sherlock  M.  A.  with 
the  Annuity  of  £37.6.8.  during  his  Life  ;  upon  the 
Surrender  of  Dr.  William  Sherlock  his  Father.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  &  fealed  the  28th 
of  November  1705.  138. 

1 1 6.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  payment  unto  John 

Howe  Efq;  Receiver  &  Pay-mafter  Generali  of  the 
Guards  8c  Garrifons  £357,000.  for  the  maintaining  of 
the  faid  Guards  &  Gairifons  ;  8c  for  payment  of  the 
Invalids  for  the  year  ijcG.  including  5000.  Men  to 
ferve  on  Board  the  Fleet.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin:  and  fealed  the  12  th  of  December 
1705.  L39- 

1 17.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  James  Bryd- 

ges  Efq;  Pay -m after  General  of  her  Majefties  Forces 
afting  in  conjunction  with  the  Allies£2,2oo,o22.  18.  10. 
vizt.  £886,  223:  18:6.  for  maintaining  40,000  Men  for 
the  year  1706.  £177,511  :  3  :  6.  for  maintaining  the 
additional  Forces  of  10,000  Men  for  the  fame  year. 
£222,379:  5:  10.  for  maintaining  10,210  Men  to  aft 
with  the  Forces  of  the  King  of  Portugal  the  fame  year. 
^£414, 166  :  13  :  6.  for  Subfidies  to  the  Allies,  that 
vear.  £48,630  for  making  good  the  payment  of  Subfi¬ 
dies  to  the  King  of  Pruflia.  £65,000.  for  payment  of 
Bounty-money  beftowed  on  the  Land  Forces  that  ferved 
in  Germany  A.  D.  1704.  £784  :  7  :  6.  for  the  addi¬ 
tional  Charge  of  the  Troops  of  Hannover  8c  Zell. 
£  1 5,296..  for  Levy-money,  to  make  good  the  IJorfes  of 
the  Englifti  Horfe  8c  Dragoons  that  were  killed  8c  dyed  of 
the  common  Diftemper,  the  laft  Campaign.  £15,670.  to 
make  good  the  Horfes  of  the  Englifh  Officers,  during 
the  laft  Campaign.  £96,729  :  13:4.  for  maintaining 
5000  Land-Forces  in  Catalonia,  for  the  year  1706. 
£7,631  :  1 6  :  8.  to  make  good  the  Charge  of  General 
Officers  8c  Contingents  m  the  Expedition  to  Spain.  And 
£2  50,000  for  her  Majefties  Proportion  in  profecuting 
the  recovery  of  the  Monarchy  of  Spain  to  the  Houfe  of 
Auftria.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ; 
and  fealed  the  1 2th  of  December  17C5.  140. 

1 1 S.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  John  Nunn 
Gent.  £120,000  towards  defraying  the  Charge  of 
rranfporling  Land  Forces.  Signed  bv  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin  ;  andfealed  the  12th  day  of  December 
1705.  142. 

1 19.  Docquet  c!  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Daniel  Parke 
Efq;  Captain  General  8c  Governor  in  Chief  of  the  Lee- 
ward  Iflands,  £1  200.  per  annum  for  his  Support,  and  in 


Num.  2262. 

lieu  of  all  Prefents  from  the  AfTemblys  :  with  fonte  Re- 
ftriftions.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  19th  day  of  December  1705.  r43- 

120.  Docquet  of  a  Coinmiffion  conftituiing  Daniel 

Blake,  Edmund  Clerke,  Charnock  Heron,  Abraham 
Magny,  k  Evert  Jollyvet  Efq;  Conuniffioners  for  licen- 
fing  Sc  regulating  Hackney-Coaches  8c  Stage  Coaches  ; 
with  a  Salary  of  £100.  per  annum  apiece.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  i$th  of 
December  1705.  _  *44- 

121.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  making-up  the  Ac - 

compt  of  Sir  Henry  Bellafyle  Kt.  late  Governor  of  Gal¬ 
way  in'  Ireland,  amounting  to  £  t  229  :  4  :  7-  ant^  to  ^  !r- 
c£t>o.  infuper  upon  Captain  Dunbar.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  andlealed  the  lyth  of  De¬ 
cember  1705.  !45* 

122.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Harry 

Mordaunt  Efq;  Treafurer  8c  Pawn  alter  of  the  Ordnance 
£300,000  for  Land  &  Sea  Services,  performed  Sc  to  be 
performed  by  the  Office  of  the  Ordnance.  Signed^bt 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  andfealed  the  2  2d  ol 
December  1705.  *46- 

1  23.  Letter  of  Ra.  Gowland  a  Receiver  for  the  late 
Duke  of  Newcaftle  in  the  North,  to  Mr.  Wenman ;  dated 
from  Durham,  1 1  O'ftober  1706.  about  tranlinitting 
Moneys  which  he  had  received.  148. 

1  24.  Docquet  of  a  Coinmiffion  conftituting  Thomas 
Lake,  John  Harwood,  Robert  Lowndes,  1  homas  Good- 
hall,  Sc  William  Congreve  Efqs.  Commiflioners  for 
granting  Wine-Licenfes;  with  the  yearly  Salary  ol  £200. 
apiece.  Signed  by  the  Lord  frealurer  Godolphin  ;  8c 
fealed  the  26th  of  December  1705.  149. 

1 25.  Docquet  of  a  Pardon  unto  Robert  Prefgrave,  late 
Clerke  to  Guy  Palmes  Efq;  late  one  of  the  four  Tellers 
of  the  Exchequer,  of  all  Frauds  and  other  Mifdemeanors 
by  him  committed  whilft  under  the  faid  Mr.  Palmes ; 
and  alfo  for  having  been  in  France,  contrary  to  Aft  of 
Parliament  in  that  behalf.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin  ;  k  fealed  the  5th  of  January  1705-6. 

15°. 

126.  Docquet  of  a  Pardon  unto  John  Smith,  of  all 
Robberies,  Thefts,  and  Burglaries,  by  him  committed, 
rafted  by  immediate  AVarant,  the  7th  of  January  1  705-6. 

151. 

1 27.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  conferring  the  Dignity  of 
a  Baronet  upon  Sir  William  Holford  of  Welham  in 
the  County  of  Leicefter  Kt.  Sealed  the  9th  of  January 
1705-6. 

j  28.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  Thomas  Earle  of  Weft- 
rooreland,  &c.  of  the  Oflices  of  Mafter  I'orefter  Sc  Kee¬ 
per  of  Cfifte  Baylywicke  in  the  Foreft  of  Rockingham, 
in  the  County  of  Northampton,  and  of  the  Woods  with¬ 
in  the  fame  Baylywicke  :  and  alfo  of  the  feveral  Walks 
thereto  belonging.  With  a  Reftriftion.  Signed  by  the 
I.ord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  19th  of  Ja¬ 
nuary  1705-6.  _  J  53- 

129.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  impowering  the  Lord  Trea¬ 

furer  Godolphin  to  appoint  Receivers  General  through¬ 
out  England  and  Wales,  of  the  Moneys  granted  by  Act 
of  Parliament,  to  be  ravfed  A.  D.  1706.  with  luch 
Powers  in  their  Commitfions,  as  he  fhall  think  lilt  k 
proper.  Signed  by  his  Lordlhip ;  and  iealed  the  1 6th 
of  January  1 705-6.  *55- 

130.  Docquet  of  the  Prefentation  of  Moles  Hodges 

D.  D.  to  the  Vicarage  of  St.  Maries  in  Warwick.  Sealed 
the  2  3d  of  January  1705-6.  1  &■ 

131.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Dane  Clara  Wood, 

of  the  1  flues  of  £250.  levyed  on  Anthony  Row  Efq; 
purfuant  to  a  Proceis  iffued  upon  him  ;  for  that  he  being 
one  of  the  Contraftors  for  the  late  Duties  upon  Fire- 
hearths  k  Stoves  had  not  pafs  d  his  Accounts  :  figned 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  feaied  the  z6th 
of  January  1705-6.  .  15J- 

1 2  2  Docaeet  of  a  Commifllon  conftiO.itmg  liaac 
H  Tcwnfeud 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


601 


Num.  2262. 

Townfend  Efq;  a  Commiffioner  in  quality  of  a  princi¬ 
pal  Officer  of  the  Navy  ;  particularly,  for  the  Yard  of 
Portfmouth;  with  a  Salary  of  £500.  per  annum  :  in 
the  room  of  Sh  William  Gifford  Knr.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  firft  day  of 
February  '705-6. 

133.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  conftituting  Sir  William 

Giffard  Knt.  a  Commiffioner,  in  quality  of  a  principal 
Officer  of  the  Navy  ;  with  a  Salary  of  £500.  per  annum. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  firft  of  February  1705-6.  !59- 

134.  Docquet  of  aWarant,  to  pay  unto  James  Stan¬ 

hope  Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  King 
of  Spain,  L500.  for  his  Equipage  ;  and  £5. by  the  day, 
for  his  ordinary  Entertainment.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  2d  of  February 
1705-6.  1^°‘ 

135.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  confhtuting  John  Duke 

of  Marlborough  Lieutenant  of  the  County  oi  Oxford,  in 
the  room  of  Mountagu  Earl  of  Abingdon.  Sealed  the 
8th  of  February  1705-6.  I^1- 

136.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Edward  Ilarle  Efq; 

of  the  Office  of  one  of  the  Serjeants  aQ  Armes  in 
the  City  of  London  ;  with  the  annual  Ice  of^ico  :  7  :  6. 
figned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  13th  of  February  1705-6.  lf>2- 

137.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  Ann  Evans  Widow  of 

£200.  levyed  by  Thomas  Skinner  late  Sherifle  ot  Dor- 
fet-fhire,  upon  an  Outlawry  profecuted  by  the  faid  Ann, 
on  a  Judgment  for  ^2000.  recovered  by  her  againft 
George  Knvpe  of  Semeley  in  the  County  of  Wilts  Gent. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the 
13th  of  February  1705-6.  ‘^3- 

138.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Sir  John  Miller 
Baronet,  of  £1095.  payable  by  his  lather  upon  his  re¬ 
ceiving  that  Dignity.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  13th  day  of  February  1705-6. 

164. 

139.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  John  Bay  well  M.  A. 

to  the  Rectory  of  St.  Ive  in  Cornwall.  Sealed  the  20th 
ofFebruary  1705-6.  l65- 

140.  Docquet  of  aWarant,  to  pay  unto  Paul  Methuen 

Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Duke  of 
Savoy  ;  £500.  for  his  Equipage,  and  five  Pounds  by  the 
day  lor  his  ordinary  Entertainment :  with  a  further  Al¬ 
lowance  for  Intelligences,  ficc.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  20th  ol  Fe¬ 
bruary  1705-6.  I66. 

141.  Another  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Dame  Clara 

Wood,  of  the  Iffues  of  £250.  levied  on  Anthony  Row 
Efq;  with  aClaufe  direfting  Sir  Robert  Beachcroft  &  Sir 
Henry  Fumefs  late  Sheriffes  of  London  and  Middelfex, 
who  levied  the  fame,  to  pay  them  accordingly.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  20th 
of  February  1705-6.  _  1^7- 

142.  Docquet  of  aWarant  authorizing  the  Subjects 

of  England  to  make  a  Loan  of  £250,000.  to  the  Em¬ 
peror  of  Germany,  on  a  Security  of  his  Lands, 
Rents,  &  Revenues  in  Silcfia,  and  alfo  on  the  Security  of 
the  States  thereof;  at  an  Intcrell  of  £8.  per  Cent,  per 
annum  :  toward  the  more  vigorous  carrying  on  the  War 
again  11  the  French  King  in  Italy,  and  for  the  eftettual 
Relief  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy.  Appointing  alfo  Sir 
William  Hodges  &  others  Trultces  for  taking  the  faid 
Loan,  Sc  managing  the  Returns  thereof  to  Prince  Eugene 
pf  Savoy  in  Security  lor  pa; 

of  the  Prill  i  Summe.  _  168. 

Here  his  Grace  queried  whether  he  might  lawfully 
pafs  a  Privy  Seale,  appointing  Trultees  to  aft  in  fuch 
manner  as  above  exp  relied.  Which  two  eminent  Law¬ 
yers,  Sam.  Dodd  and  W.  Jeil'op  ani'wered  in  the  affirm¬ 
ative  the  26  Februarij,  1705-6.  whereupon,  it  palled  the 
Privy  Seal  that  day.  . 

143.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Philip  Ryley  Efq;  ot 
Cat.  IIabl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2262. 

rhe  Office  of  Serjeant  at  Armes  in  Ordinary,  to  attend 
the  Lord  High  Treafurer,  or  Commiffioners  of  theTrea- 
fury  for  the  time  being  :  with  the  Fee  of  three  Shillings 
per  diem,  and  two  Shillings  fix  pence  per  diem,  in  lieu 
of  Board-Wages.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  27th  of  February  1705-6.  169. 

144.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  for  Algernon  Sey¬ 

mour,  commonly  called  Earl  of  Hertford,  to  be  Lieu¬ 
tenant  of  the  County  of  Suffex.  Sealed  the  13th  of  March 
1705-6.  17°* 

145.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  for  14  Years,  unto  Daniel 

Peck  Gent,  of  the  foie  Benefit  of  his  new  Invention  for 
making  lie  refining  of  White  Salt,  for  all  Ufes,  from 
Sea-Water,  Brine-Springs,  &  Rock-Salt,  much  cheaper 
than  by  any  method  nowin  ufe.  Sealed  the  13th  of 
March  1705-6.  17Im 

146.  Docquet  of  a  Chartre  incorporating  John  Moore 

Bifliop  of  Norwich,  Nicholas  Onley,  Robert  South,  & 
George  Smallridge,  Doctors  in  Divinity,  James  Vernon 
Sc  William  Lowndes  Efqrs.  &  others,  Governors  of  the 
Grey-Coate-Hofpitall  inTotthil  Fields,  of  the  Foundation 
of  Queene  Anne  ;  with  perpetual  Succeffion,  &c.  Sealed 
the  13th  of  March  1705-6.  1 72* 

147.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  William  Powlet 

Efq;  commonly  called  Lord  William  Powleit,  of  all  his 
Arrears  of  the  Rent  of  £500.  per  annum,  referred  in  a 
Grant  made  unto  him  by  K.  William  &  Q.  Mary  of  all 
Fines,  Penalties,  &c.  to  be  held  for  41  years.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin:  and  fealed  the  18th  of 
March  1705-6.  173. 

148.  Original  Letter  of  T.  Boteler  to  the  Duke  of 
Newcaftle  Lord  Privy  Seal;  dated,  July  the  9th,  1706. 
concerning  certain  Docquets  that  were  fent  therein.  174. 

149.  Docquet  .of  the  Oueens  revocation  of  her  Grant 

unto  Marmaduke  Dean  Sc  William  Nicholes  Gent,  of  the 
Office  of  Comptrollers  of  the  Cuftomes  in  the  Port  of 
Chelter,  &c.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  3d  of  April  1706.  176. 

150.  Docquet  of  the  Oueens  Revocation  of  her  Com¬ 

miffion  for  treating  &  confulting  concerning  an  Union 
of  the  Realms  of  England  &  Scotland.  Signed  by  Henry 
Ludlow;  and  fealed  the  9  th  of  April  1706.  177. 

1 51.  Docquet  of  a  new  Commiffion,  for  treating  con¬ 

cerning  an  Union  of  the  Realms  of  England  Sc  Scotland. 
Signed  by  Henry  Ludlow ;  and  fealed  the  9th  of  April 
1706.  I7®- 

152.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Henry  Mill  Gent,  of 

the  foie  Benefit  of  his  Invention,  for  14  Years,  of  a  new 
Mathematical  Inftrument  contrived  for  the  cafe  of  per- 
fons  riding  in  Coaches,  Chariots,  Calalhes,  and  Chaifes. 
Signed  by  Henry  Ludlow  ;  and  fealed  the  10th  day  of 
April  1706.  179‘ 

153.  Docquet  of  aWarant  in  French,  for  the  She¬ 

riffs  of  Surrey  Sc  Suffer-:,  to  pay  unto  Lewis  Lord  Rock¬ 
ingham, Mailer;  and  other  the  Officersof  the  Buck-hounds, 
their  ufual  Wages  for  one  year,  ended  the  Michaelmas  be¬ 
fore.  Sealed  the  24th  of  April  1706.  180. 

154.  Docquet  (upon  a  Surrender  of  the  Rangerflup  of 
Baglhot-Parke,  made  by  Richard  Earl  of  Ranelagh,  Sc 
Charles  Earl  of  Arran)  of  a  Grant  of  the  fame  Office, 
unto  the  fame  Earl  of  Arran,  with  the  annual  Fee  of 
£5:6:  8.  for  99  years,  if  the  faid  Earl  of  Arran,  Eli¬ 
zabeth  Countefs  of  Arran,  or  James  Duke  of  Ormonde, 
or  either  of  them  (hall  fo  long  live.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  25th  of  April  1 706. 

181. 

153.  Original  Letter  of  Councellor  Jeffop  (before 
mentioned  at  §  142.)  to  the  Duke  ofNew-caffle  Lord 
Privy  Seal  ;  dated,  7  May,  1706.  Shewing,  that  by  the 
Aii  of  Parliament,  the  Queen  might  give  Licence,  under 
her  Privy  Seale,  to  Perfofis  to  come  out  of  the  l'rench 
Kings  Dominions,  tho’  they  may  have  formerly  home 
Armes  there.  1  ^2; 

1  c 5.  Docquet  of  a  Licenfe  to  the  College  of  the  Lacy 
y  O  prances 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


6oz 


Num.  2162. 

Frances  Sidney  Suffex,  to  receive  in  Mortmain,  Lands, 
&c.  to  the  yearly  value  of  £500.  and  alfo  Ten  Advou- 
fons.  Sealed,  the  8th  of  May,  1706.  183. 

157.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Ralph  Blomer,  Clerk, 

of  the  Dignity  of  a  Canon  of  the  Cathedral  &  Mc-tropo- 
litical  Church  of  Canterbury.  Sealed  the  8th  day  of 
May,  1706.  1S4. 

158.  Dccquet  of  a  I.ycence  unto  Francis  Cottington, 

Efq;  who  hath  been  in  the  French  Kings  Dominions,  with¬ 
out  Lycence  :  to  return  unto  her  Majefties  Dominions. 
Sealed,  the  Sthof  May,  170 6.  185. 

159.  Docquet  of  a  Licenfe  to  Dame  Hellen  Trant 

Widow,  her  Son  &  Daughters  to  return  into  England, 
upon  a  Diftribution  of  the  Bounty  of  j£jooo.  given  them 
by  a  Private  Act  of  Parliament,  upon  the  Sale  of  the  for¬ 
feited  Eftate  of  Sir  Patrick  Trant  in  Ireland.  Signed  by 
Henry  Ludlow  (who,  as  I  have  heard,  being  much  in 
Debt)  afterward  Ihot  himfelf ;  and  fealed,  the  8th  of 
May,  1706.  186. 

1 60.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d’Efiire  to  the  Archdeacon 
&  Chapter  of  Llandaffe  ;  empowering  them  to  choofe  a 
Bifhop  to  that  See.  Sealed  the  22ft  of  May,  1706.  >87. 

1 6 1.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Daniel  Pul- 
tcney,  Elq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  King 
of  Denmark,  ^500.  for  his  Equipage,  &  ^£5.  by  the 
Day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin ;  &  fealed  the  22$  of  May,  1706. 

iSS. 

162.  Docquet  cf  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Chief  Car¬ 

penter  of  all  her  Majefties  Works  within  the  Kingdom 
of  England  unto  John  Churchill  Efq:  (upon  the  Surrender 
of  his  Father  in  Law)  with  the  ufual  Fee  of  1 2d  per  diem. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  5  and  fealed 
the  25th  of  May,  1706.  1S9. 

163.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Sir  Charles 

Hedges,  Kr.  .Tjoco.  for  Secret  Service,  without  Acct. 
hgned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  j  and  fealed  the 
29th  of  May,  1706.  j90i 

164.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conflituting  Anthony 
Duncomb,  John  Evelyn,  Thomas  Baker,  Nicholas  Pol- 
lexfen,  5c  Fleetwood  Dormer,  Elq  s.  Principal  Commif- 
fi oners  for  Prizes,  with  a  Salary  of  .£300.  per  annum  to 
each  of  them  :  and  Anthony  Burnaby,  Efq;  to  be  their 
Secretary,  with  a  Salary  of  .£400.  per  annum  to  himfelf 

Clerks :  and  William  Go!felin,Efq;  to  be  Comptroller 
with  a  Salary  of  /50 o.  per  annum  for  himfelf,  and  £  too . 
per  annum  for  two  Clerks.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea- 
lurer  Godolphin:  and  fealed  the  31ft  of  May,  1706. 

1 9 1 . 

1C5.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conflituting  John  Dan¬ 
vers,  Thomas  Aram,  Humphry  Griffith,  Edward  Brere- 
ton,  and  1  homas  Hopkins,  Elq1'.  Commiffioners  for  the 
management  of  the  Duties  upon  Salt  &  Rock-Salt,  with 
the  Salary  of  ^£500.  per  annum  to  each  of  them  :  and 
1  homas  Broderick,  Elq;  to  be  Comptroller  of  the  faid 
Duties  (inflead  of  the  faid  Thomas  Hopkins)  with  a  like 
yearly  Salary  of  £ 2 30.  for  himfelf  &  Clerks.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the' 3 iff 
of  May,  i7c6.  192. 

166.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Charles  Hobfon,  Gent, 

of  the  Offices  of  Chief  Joyner  of  her  Majefties  Works, 
within  the  Tower .  of  London,  or  elfewhere  in  England  : 
with  feveral  Salaries,  amounting  in  the  whole  to  £52  : 
12  :  6.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  31ft  of  May,  1706.  193. 

167.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  Edmund  Dummer,  Efq- 

of  the  Office  of  Clerk  of  the  Great  Wardrobe  ;  with  the 
ufual  Day-W  ages  Sc  Liveries  ;  Winter  S:  Summer  Vef 
tures,  &c.  and  an  Allowance  of  £300.  per  annum  in  lieu 
of  1  oundage.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  • 
lealed  the  5th  of  June,  1706.  ’ 

16s.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  delivering  unto  Tho¬ 
mas  Worrell,  Gent,  the  Eftate  of  William  Johnfon,  who 
was  outlawed  at  the  Suit  of  the  faid  Worrel,  for  a  Debt 


Num.  2261. 

of  £2  20.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin* 
and  fealed  the  5th  of  June,  1706.  1 95- 

169.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Bromfield,  Efq; 
of  the  Office  of  Ranger,  alias  Riding  Forefter,  in  the 
New  Foreft,  within  the  County  of  Southampton  ;  with 
the  Fee  of  Six  Pence  per  diem.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  5th  of  Jane,  1706. 

196. 

170.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  Robert  Al  'erfey  of  the 

foie  Ufe  &  Benefit  of  his  Invention  of  a  Floating  Dam  ; 
by  means  of  which,  he  is  able  to  carry  Barges,  Lighters, 
Sc  other  Veffels,  over  the  greatefl  Platts  &  Shallows,  in 
any  navigable  River:  during  the  terme  of  14  years. 
Sealed  the  5th  of  June,  1705.  197. 

171.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Cove,  for  14 

years,  the  foie  Benefit  of  his  new  Invention  of  making 
Lamp-black,  not  yet  pra&ifed  in  England ;  which  will 
be  of  great  advantage  to  the  Service  of  the  Navy,  and  to 
all  Trades  throughout  the  Kingdom,  ufing  the  fame. 
Sealed  the  5  th  of  June,  1706.  198. 

172.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conflituting  Foot  On¬ 
flow,  William  Strong,  George  Towneftnd,  Philip  Rilev, 
Efqr\  Marmaduke  Wyvell,  Bart.  Edward  Noell  &  ChriV- 
topherMountague,  Efq,s.  Commiffioners  of  the  Revenue 
of  Excife,  with  a  Salary  of/j8oo.  per  annum,  to  each  of 
them  ;  and  to  John  Boys,  Efq;  (who  was  in  the  lafl 
Commiffion)  his  Arrears.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  5th  of  June  1706. 

199. 

173.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  for  managing  &  col¬ 

lating  the  Cufloms  ;  conflituting  Charles  Godolphin, 
Samuel  Clark,  Thomas  Newport,  William  Culliford, 
Efqr’.  Sir  John  Werden,  Bart.  1  homas  Hall,  Efq;  &  Sir 
Matthew  Dudley,  to  be  Commiffioners,  with  a  Salary  of 
A 1 000.  per  annum  to  each  of  them.  And  alfo  continu¬ 
ing  Richard  Savage,  Efq;  their  Secretary,  with  a  Salary 
°f  £400.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  5th  of  June,  1706.  200. 

1 74.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Jett  Junior 

F.fq;  to  be  Auditor  of  her  Majefties  Revenues  in  London, 
Weflminfter,  and  28  Counties;  with  all  Fees,  ike.  ex¬ 
cepting  feveral  Salaries  of  £200.  per  annum,  heretofore 
enjoyed  by  former  Auditors  in  certain  of  the  faid  Coun¬ 
ties.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  Sc  feal¬ 
ed  the  i5thofJune,  1706.  201. 

175.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  the  Lord  High  Admi¬ 

ral  of  England,  to  caufe  feveral  Naval  Stores  to  be  fold 
to  the  beft  Advantage,  and  to  pay  the  proceed  of  the 
fame  to  the  Treafurer  of  the  Navy,  upon  Account.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1  eth 
of  June,  1706.  202. 

176.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sidney  Godolphin 

Efq;  of  the  Offices  of  Auditor  of  her  Majefties  Revenue 
within  the  Counties  of  Lincoln,  Nottingham,  Derby,  & 
Chefler;  with  all  Fees,  See.  except  the  Salarie  of  £200. 
per  annum,  heretofore  enjoyed  with  the  faid  Offices. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  15th  of  June,  1706.  203. 

17;.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  Thomas  Willugh- 
by,  Bart,  of  the  Office  of  High  Steward  of  the  Honour 
of  Peverell  in  the  Counties  of  Nottingham  &  Derby  :  at 
the  yearly  Rent  of  One  Pepper-corne.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  15  th  of  June, 
1706.  204. 

>78.  Docquet  of  a  Warant.  to  pay  unto  Charles  Duke 
of  Somerfett,  Mailer  of  her  Majefties  Horfes  7)20,000. 
towards  defraying  the  Extraordinary  Expences  of  her 
Majefties  Stables.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  lealed  15th  of  June,  1706.  205. 

179.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conflituting  Tho- 
ma-,  Coleby,  Henry  Vincent,  Kendrick  Ediibury,  Tho* 
mas  Harlow,  Denzil  Onflow,  Thomas  Here,  &  Thomas 
Reynolds,  Elq  '.  Coqimiflioners  for  Victualling  Her  Ma¬ 
jefties  Navy  Royal  ;  with  a  Salary  of  £400.  per  an:  um 
9 


Bibliothecae  HarleianaC. 


Nuni.  2262. 

to  each  01  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafufer  Godol- 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  15th  of  June,  1706.  206. 

180.  Tho.  Bale’s  Copy  of  a  Caveat  left  by  Chrifto. 
Digges,  againfl  any  new  Charter  or  Letters  Patent  re¬ 
lating  to  the  Weavers  Company  of  London,  that  might 
come  to  pafs  the  Great  Seal,  dated  the  1 7th  June,  1 706. 

207. 

181.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conftit&dng  Edward 
Lloyd,  Henry  Cornifh,  Robert  Pooley,  Richard  Dyot, 
and  John  Molefworth,  Efq'\  to  be  Commiffioners  for  the 
Duties  upon  ftampt  Vellum,  Parchment,  &  Paper,  with 
a  Salary  of  £300.  per  annum  to  each.  Alfo  William 
Bridges  junior  Efq;  to  be  their  Secretary,  at  £200.  per 
annum  for  himfelf  &  Clerks.  And  Richard  Uthwayt, 
Efq;  to  be  paid  his  Arrear.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea- 
furer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  2 2d  of  June,  1706. 

209. 

182.  Docquet  of  her  Majefties  Royal  Affent  to  the 

Election  ot  Dr.  John  Tyler  Dean  of  Hereford  to  be  Bi- 
Ihop  of  Llandaff.  Sealed  the  2  2d  of  June,  1 706.  210. 

183.  Part  of  an  original  Letter  from  Percivall  Potts, 
to  the  Duke  of  Newcaftle  Lord  Privy  Seal,  without 
Date  :  feetning  to  excufe  the  abfenee  of  one  of  thejClerks. 

T84.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituring  John 
Duke  of  Rutland  Lieutenant  in  the  County  of  Leicefter, 
in  the  room  of  Bafil  Earl  of  Denbigh.  Sealed  the  26th 
of  June  1706.  213. 

185.  Original  Letter  of  T.  Boteler  to  the  Duke  of 

Newcaftle  I.ord  Privy  Seal,  dated  29th  June  1 706.  about 
his  Graces  Fees  ;  &  Precedents  about  Caveats  in  that 
Office.  2 1 4. 

186.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Charles  Earl 

of  Peterborow  &  Monmouth,  appointed  Ambaffador  Ex¬ 
traordinary  to  the  King  of  Spain,  jT  1 500.  for  his  Equipage 
and  one  hundred  Pounds  per  Week  for  his  ordinary  En¬ 
tertainment.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  firft  of  July  1706.  2 1 6. 

187.  An  order  of  the  Duke  of  Newcaftle  Lord  Privy 

Seal,  upon  the  Caveat  enter’d  before  him  by  Chrif- 
topher  Digges  (vid.  fupra  §  180  )  againft  the  palling  any 
Privy  Seal  for  the  altering  or  enlarging  the  prefent  Char¬ 
ters  of  the  Company  of  Weavers  of  London,  appointing 
to  hear  the  Parties  concerned  at  Welbeck,  the  2d  of  the 
next  Auguft.  dated  the  xoth  of  July  1706  ;  and  figned 
by  his  Graces  own  hand.  217. 

188.  A  Memorandum,  that  Notice  was  given,  that  his 

Grace,  upon  the  Weavers  Petition,  had  putt-off  the 
Hearing  of  their  Caufe  on  the  2d  of  Auguft,  unto  a  fur¬ 
ther  time  to  be  named  by  himfelf.  2 1 8. 

189.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  Reftitution  of  theTempo- 
raltys  of  the  Bifhoprick  of  Llandaft’e,  to  John  Tyler 
Biftiop  of  that  See.  Sealed  the  12th  of  July,  1706. 

219. 

190.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Samuel  Dunfter 

Clerk  to  the  Rectory  of  Chinner  in  Oxfordlhire,  in  her 
Majefties  .Gift  by  the  limoniacal  Contract  of  John  Pocock. 
Sealed  the  12th  of  July  1706.  220. 

191.  Docquet  of  a  Chartre  incorporating  Sir  Thomas 

Alleyn,  Bart,  and  many  other  Perfons,  by  the  name  of 
the  Amicable  Society  for  a  peipctual  Allurance-Ollice, 
ednfifting  of  2Doo  Perfons  of  either  Sex,  &  to  have  per¬ 
petual  Succeffion,  & c.  with  power  to  purchafe  Lands, 
&c.  to  /'2000.  per  annum  :  and  John  Hartley  Stati¬ 
oner  (v.  ho  projected  this  Corporation)  to  be  Regiltrar 
thereof  during  his  Life;  lealed,  the  a  2d  day  of  July 
1706.  221. 

192.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Samuel  Prat,  D.D.  one 

of  the  Clerks  of  her  Majefties  Clofet,  of  the  Deanry  of 
Rochefter.  Sealed,  the  26th  of  July  1 706.  223. 

193.  Copy  of  the  Duke  ofNewcailles  Order,  upon  the 
Caveat  enter'd  before  him  by  Alexander  John ftowne  Efq; 
againft  the  parting  any  Privy  Seale  relating  to  the  Eftate 
of  the  late  Sir  Roger  Strickland  Bart-  out-lawed  for  high 


Num.  2262. 

Treafon  ;  appointing  an  Hearing  of  the  Parties  concerned 
at  Welbeck,  the  next  22d  day  of  Auguft.  dated  the  29th 
day  of  July  1 7  ofi.  224. 

194.  A  Brief,  or  State  of  a  Cafe,  drawn- up  in  Anlvver 
to  the  Pretenfions  of  Mr.  Johnftowne  to  Sir  Roger 
Strickiands  Eftate,  being  upwards  of  jfSco.  a  year ;  View¬ 
ing,  among  other  things,  that  Mr.  Johnftowne,  without 
Merit  or  Service,  procured  from  K.  William  a  Grant  of 
^300.  per  ann.  out  of  this  Eftate ;  and  afterwards,  allcdg- 
ing  Charges  in  maintaining  his  Title,  he  obtained  a  fur¬ 
ther  Giant  of  the  whole  Eftate,  without  a  Fine,  to  hold 
for  31  years,  at  the  annual  rent  of  6s.  Sd.  After  above 
13  years,  Queen  Anne  Grants  to  l,ieutenaut  General 
Cholmondeley  (in  confideration  of  the  frequent  hazard  of 
his  Life,  and  expence  of  his  fortune  in  the  Service  of  the 
Crown)  the  fame  Eftate,  to  hold  for  1 8  years,  after  Mr. 
Johnftownes  Term  of  3 1  years  fliould  be  expired ;  the 
Lieutenant  General  paying  a  Fine  of  £2500.  and  an  an¬ 
nual  rent  of  the  Ellates  real  value.  Hereupon,  Mr. 
Johnftowne  (being  loth  that  his  Intereft  in  the  fame  fliould 
be  determined  after  3 1  years)  lodges  a  Caveat  againft  the 
Lieutenant  General ;  wherefore  the  Lord  Privy  Seal  ap¬ 
points  the  hearing  mentioned  in  the  preceding  Section. 

225. 

195.  An  Abftraft  of  her  Majefties  Leafe  unto  George 
Cholmondeley  Efq;  of  feveral  Manors  &  Lands  in  York.; 
lhire:  to  commence  A.D.  1718.  i.  e.  after  the  de^ 
termination  of  Mr.  Johnftownes  Grant,  (lee  lower,  §  204.) 

227. 

196.  Docquet  of  a  Regrant  of  the  Cuftody  of  the 

Hundreds  of  Oake  &  Mooreton  in  the  County  of  Berks, 
and  of  the  Offices  of  Steward  &  Bayliffe  there,  under  the 
yearly  rent  of  £10  :  10  :  o.  without  Fine  ;  unto  Sir 
John  Stonehoufe  Bart,  (or  James  Stonehoule  Efq;  his 
brother,  or  John  Jennens  Efq;)  for  99  years,  if  they 
or  any  of  them  fo  long  fliall  live :  upon  the  lame  con- 
fideration  :  and  upon  confideration  of  a  Surrendrey  made 
of  Queen  Catherines  Demife  of  the  fame  unto  Sir  John 
Stonehoufe  the  Father,  A.  D.  1681.  229. 

This  is  figned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ; 
and  was  fealed  the  t  ith  of  Auguft  1706. 

197.  State  of  the  Cafe  as  to  the  Queens  Warant  dated 

the  1 3th  of  Auguft  1705.  for  a  pardon  to  the  old  Eaft 
India  Company,  under  certain  Limitations  ;  as  to  which 
before  his  Grace  the  Lord  Privy  Seal  fuffered  it  to  pafs, 
he  had  the  Opinions  of  two  eminent  Councellors,  un¬ 
der  their  hands ;  namely  Jo.  'Burton,  and  Will.  Jeffop; 
the  15th  of  Auguft  following.  230. 

This  Paper  is  tranfpoiei  through  miftake  ;  and 
ftiould  have  been  placed  before  that  above  deferibed  at 
§  85. 

198.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  John  Chet- 
wynd  Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Duke 
of  Savoy,  £ 500.  for  his  Equipage,  &  £5.  by  the  Day  for 
his  ordinary  Entertainment  ;  with  further  Sums  for  Intel¬ 
ligence.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ; 

&  fealed  the  3  ill  of  Auguft  1706.  232. 

199.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Anne  Smith 

one  of  her  Majefties  Maids  of  Honor,  the  yearly  Penfion 
of  three  hundred  Pounds,  during  her  Service,  or  her 
Majefties  plealure.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  31ft  of  Auguft  1706.  2^3. 

20c.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Janies  Verdon  Clerk, 
of  the  Advowfon  of  the  Parifh-Church  &  Rectory  of 
Eaft  Derhani  in  Norfolk,  for  40  years.  Sealed  the  31ft. 
of  Auguft  1706.  234. 

ao  1 .  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Lord  Wharton 
of  the  Offices  of  Warden,  Chief  Juftice,  &  Juftice  in  Eyre, 
of  all  her  Majefties  Forefts,  Chaces,  Parks,  &  Warrens, 
on  this  fide  irent;  with  the  Annuities  of  one  hundred 
Pounds,  &  one  hundred  Markes.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  31ft  of  Auguft 
1706.  235. 

2C2.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Paul  Methuen 


V). 


6c>4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2s6i. 

Efp;  appointed  envoy  extraordinary  to  the  King  of  Por- 
tueai  /too.  for  his  Equipage,  and  £j.  by  the  day  for  his 
o-dinary  entertainment  j  with  further  Sums  for  Intelli¬ 
gence.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphtn  ; 
fealed  31  Auguft  1706.  236- 

20  7.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Robert  Mar- 
ley  Efq;  one  of  her  Majefties  Principal!  Secretary's  of 
State,  2000I.  for  her  Majefties  Secret  Service,  without  Ac¬ 
count.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and 
fealed  the  3 1  ft  of  Auguft  1 706.  2 3 7- 

204.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  George  Cholmondeley 
Efq;  of  Sir  Roger  Stricklands  Eftate,  to  coiiience  upon 
the  Determination  of  Mr.  Johnftownes  Grant.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  31ft 
of  Auguft  1706.  (vid.  fupra.  §  195.)  238. 

203.  Original  Letter  of  Mr.  T.  Boteler,  to  the  Duke 
of  Newcaftle  Lord  Privy  Seal,  dated  the  5  th  of  September 
1 706.  chiefly  upon  the  fubjedt  of  Caveats  lodged  in  that 
Office  :  and  Summons  for  Hearings  ifi'ued  from  thence  ; 
as  to  which,  he  fays  the  Lord  Privy  Seal  may  grant  new 
ones  as  often  as  he  pleafes.  24°- 

206.  An  Account  of  all  the  Patents,  8cc.  fealed  in  the 
Office  of  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Newcaftle  Lord  Privy 
Seale,  from  Lady-day,  1706.  to  the  5th  of  November 
1706.  and  the  Fees  of  them.  With  an  account  of  the 
Private  Scales  in  that  time.  242 

2:7.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Dr.  Edward  Chand¬ 
ler  "of  a  Praebendarys  Place  in  the  Cathedral  Church  of 
Worcefter.  Sealed  the  3d  of  Oftob  r  1706.  245. 

208.  Docquet  of  Prarfentation  of  John  Honywood 

Clerk  to  the  Rectory  oFJftrmarlh  in  the  County  of  Kent. 
Sealed  the  3d  of  October  1 706.  2  -46. 

209.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pav  unto  Chnltian 

Temple  one  of  the  Maids  of  Honour,  the  yearly  Penfion 
of  l  300.  during  Pleafure.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trealu- 
rer  Godolphin  ;  fealed  the  1 1  th  October  1 706.  _  247. 

210.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  determining  the  Offices  of 

Vice-Admiral  &  Lieutenant  of  the  Admiralty  of  England 
&  of  Lieutenant  of  the  Navies  &  Seas  of  this  King- 
dome,  granted  to  Sir  George  Rooke,  with  the  Wages  of 
2cs.  by  the  day  ;  and  Wages,  Allowance,  &  Entertain¬ 
ment  of  ten  Shillings  apiece  by  the  Month  for  1 6  Men. 
Sealed  the  nth  of  OStober  1706.  248. 

211.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  contouring  Daniel  Furzer 
&  William  Lee  Efqrs.  Surveyours  of  her  Majefties  Navy 
Sc  Ships,  with  the  yearly  Salary  of  <300.  to  each  of  them. 
Signed,  at  more  than  ordinary  length  by  the  Lord  Trca- 
furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  nth  of  Oftober  1706. 

249. 

212.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Henry  Sykes  Clerk, 

to  "the  ReCtory  of  Eaft  Marfey  in  the  County  of  Effex. 
Sealed  the  26th  of  October  1706.  25°- 

2 1  3.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftitutmg  Mitford 
Crowe  Efq;  Captain  General  Sc  Governor  in  Chief  over 
the  Elands  of  Barbadoes,  Sta.  Lucia,  Dominica,  St.  Vin¬ 
cent,  &  the  reft  of  the  Charibee-Iflands  lying  to  the 
Windward  of  Guardaloup ;  in  the  room  of  Sir  Beville 
Granville  Kt.  fealed  the  26th  day  of  Oaober  1706. 

214.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Mitford 

Crowe,  Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  King 
of  Spain,  £.500.  for  his  Equipage,  &  £.5  by  the  day 
for  his  ordinary  Entertainment:  with  allowance  of 
further  Sums  for  Intelligence.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  aSih  day  of  Oc¬ 
tober,  1706.  252. 

215.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Charles  Hedges  Gent, 

of  the  Office  ■  i  Secretary  of  the  Iflands  of  St.Chriftopher, 
Nevi-,  Mountferrat,  Antegoa,  and  other  the  Leeward 
Charribbe-lflar.ds  in  America.  Sealed,  the  9th  of  No¬ 
vember,  1706.  253. 

216.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  George  Hutchinfon 
Gem.  of  the  Office  of  Regiftar  of  all  Goods,  Ships,  Ac. 
fcized  for  illegal  Importation  or  Exportation;  and  of  all 


Num.  2262. 

Informations  &  Suits  concerning  the  fame :  with  the 
Salaries  of^.106.  13s.  qd.  and  £.93.  6s.  Sd.  per  annum. 
Signed  by  the  L.ord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  &  fealed  the 
9th  of  November,  1706.  254. 

217.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Charles  Darliquenave 

Efq ;  of  the  Office  of  Paymafter  of  all  her  Majefty’s 
Works,  concerning  the  Repaire,  New  Buildings,  &  well 
keeping  of  all  her  Majefties  Houfes  of  Accefle,  and  others, 
in  time  of  Progreffe  :  with  feveral  Fees  amounting  to  49. 
per  diem.  Signed  by  the  Lord  lreafurer  Godolphin; 
and  fealed  the  16th  of  November,  1706.  2 55. 

218.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Richard  Reynolds 

Dr.  of  Laws  &  Chancellor  of  Peterburgh  to  the  Rectory, 
of  St.  Peters  in  Northampton,  with  the  Chapells  of 
Upton  &  Kingfthorpe ;  void  by  the  Promotion,  of  Dr. 
Wellbore  Ellis  to  the  Biftioprick  of  Kildare  in  Ireland. 
Sealed,  the  18th  of  November,  1706.  256. 

219.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Mitford  Crow 

Efq;  Governor  of  Barbadoes,  See.  £.2000  per  annum 
for  his  Support;  and  in  lieu  of  all  Prelents  from  the 
Affemblies  :  except  only  a  temporary  Alignment  of  an 
Houfe,  or  Rent  for  the  fame.  Signed  by  the  Lord  1  rea- 
furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  25th  of  November, 
1706.  2S7- 

220.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  George  Step¬ 

ney  Efq ;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  States 
Generali,  &  her  Majefties  Plenipotentiary  ill  the  Nego¬ 
tiations  entred  into,  in  concert  with  other  Princes  & 
States,  for  what  relates  to  the  Common  Intereft :  ^.500. 
for  his  Equipage,  with  ,£.5.  by  the  day  as  Envoy,  k  £.3. 
by  the  day  as  Plenipotentiary,  fer  his  ordinary  Enter¬ 
tainment.  Alfo  an  allowance  of  further  Sums  for  Intelli¬ 
gence.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and 
fealed  the  23th  of  November,  1706.  2 59- 

221 .  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Commiflary 

General  of  all  her  Majefties  Forces  of  England,  unto 
Michael  Hyde,  Efq  ;  in  the  room  of  Henry  Lord  Wal¬ 
den.  Sealed  the  30th  of  November,  iyc6.  '  261. 

222.  His  Grace  the  l.ord  Privy  Seales  Dividend  of 

Fees,  from  the  firft  of  Auguft,  1706.  to  the  30th  of 
November,  1706  inclufive.  262. 

223.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  George  Auguftus  Elec¬ 
toral  Prince  of  Hanover  ;  of  the  Dignities  of  Baron  of 
Tewkefbury,  Vifcount  North-Allerton,  Earl  ofMilford- 
Haven,  Marquis  &  Duke  of  Cambridge,  &  to  the  Ileires 
Males  of  his  body.  Sealed  the  7th  of  December,  1 706. 

263. 

234.  Docquet  of  a  Confirmation  unto  Sir  Charles 
Hedges,  Kr.  Dr.  of  Laws,  whom  Prince  George  had 
conftituted  his  Lieutenant  of  the  High  Court  of  Admi¬ 
ralty  of  England,  k  Official  Principal,  &  Commiflary 
General  k  Special  in  the  laid  Court,  k  Prefident  & 
Judge  thereof.  With  a  Salary  from  her  Majefty  of 
j£.8oo.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  I  reafurer 
Godolphin  ;  fealed  the  9th  of  December,  1 706.  264. 

22 5.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  Charles  Darlaquinave 

Efq;  Paymafter  of  the  Works,  ^.40,000.  upon  Ac¬ 
count,  for  the  Service  of  the  faid  Works.  Signed  by  the 
l.ord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  11th  ol  De¬ 
cember,  1706.  ‘  2  6 

226.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  Chnftopher  farewell, 

Philip  Bennet  Senr.  k  Thomas  Huffey,  Elqr\  &c.  of  a 
Weekly  Market,  and  two  Annual  Fairs  to  be  held  at  the 
Towne  of  Wincalton  in  the  County  of  Somerfet :  upon 
a  Surrendry  of  a  Patent  granted  to  the  faid  Towne  by 
K.  Philip  k  Q.  Mary.  Sealed  the  1  xth  day  of  December, 
1706.  2^7-  j 

227.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  caufing  to  be  cutt- 
down  k  fold,  fo  many  old,  dotard,  and  decayed  Trees  m 
the  Foreft  of  Vvindfor,  being  fit  only  for  Fuel,  as  would 
rail'e  £-400.  clear  of  all  Charges  ;  to  be  paid,  as  her 
Majefties  Royal  Bounty,  unto  Thomas  Specring,  &c. 
without  Accompt  ;  towards  rebuilding  the  Panin. 
Church  ol  Port-chefter  in  the  County  of  Southampton. 

1- j, ned ' 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


605 


Nam.  2262. 

Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed 
the  r  1  th  of  December  1706.  268. 

228.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Sir  Thomas 

Littleton  Bart.  Treafurer  of  the  Navy,  a  Sum  not  exceed- 
ing  £.2,000,000.  by  way  of  Impreft,  for  the  Service  of 
the  Navy,  and  the  Victualling  thereof.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  nth  of 
December  1706.  269. 

229.  Docket  of  a  Grant  unto  Peregrine  Bertie  Efq ; 

of  the  Office  of  One  of  the  Tellers  in  the  Exchequer,  in 
the  rome  of  Thomas  Coke  Efq ;  figned  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  1 2th  day  of  De¬ 
cember  1706.  270. 

230.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Charles  Earle  of  Sun¬ 

derland,  of  the  Olfiee  of  one  of  the  Principal  Secretaries 
of  State,  in  the  room  of  Sir  Charles  Hedges  Kt.  with 
the  Fee  of  One  Hundred  Pounds  per  annum.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  C2lh  of 
December,  1706.  271. 

231.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  creating  Henry  Earl 

of  Kent,  Vifcount  Goderick  in  the  County  of  Hereford, 
Earl  of  Elarold  (Iiarewold  ?)  in  the  County  of  Bedford, 
and  Marquifs  of  Kent.  Sealed  the  1 3th  day  of  December, 
1706.  272. 

232.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  granting  unto  Sydney 

Lord  Godolphin,  the  Titles  of  Vifcount  Rialton,  and 
Earl  of  Godolphin  in  the  County  of  Cornwal.  Sealed 
the  14th  day  of  December,  1706.  273. 

233.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  creating  William 

Cowper  Baronet  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great  Seale  of 
England,  Baron  Cowper  of  Wingham  in  the  County  of 
Kent.  Sealed  the  14th  of  December,  1706.  274. 

234.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  creating  Sr.  Thomas 

Pelham  Bart.  Baron  Pelham  of  Laughton  in  the  County 
ofSufiex.  Sealed,  the  14th  of  December  1706.  275. 

235.  Original  Letter  or  Note,  from  Mr.  W.  Wen- 

man  to  Mr.  Tench,  an  under-Clerk,  or  Deputy  to  Mr. 
Gofling  in  the  Privy-Seale-Olfice  :  fhewing,  that  his 
Grace  the  Lord  Privy  Seale  did  remitt  his  Fees  for  the 
Lord  Treafurer s,  &  the  Lord  Keepers  Creations,  dated 
14  December  1706.  276. 

236.  Docquet  of  a  Pardon  unto  William  Whitchurch 
the  younger,  convid  of  Manflaughter,  for  the  killing 
of  John  Fry.  Sealed,  the  1 3th  of  December  1 706.  277. 

237.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  John  Cooke  Kt. 
of  the  Office  of  Clerk  of  the  Pipe  in  the  Exchequer  ; 
and  of  feveral  other  Offices,  therewith  ufually  granted  ; 
for  term  of  Life.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go- 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed,  the  18th  day  of  December  1706. 

278. 

238.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  creating  John  Lord 

Poulelt,  Earl  Powlett  of  Charmworth  in  the  County  of 
Dorfet.  fealed,  the  18th  of  December  1706.  279. 

239.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Stan¬ 
hope  Efq;  Envoy  extraordinary  to  the  King  of  Spain, 
and  now  her  Majeflies  Plenipotentiary  there,  £3.  by  the 
day,  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment ;  with  further  Sums 
for  Intelligence.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed,  the  iSth  day  of  December  1706. 

280. 

240.  Copy  of  a  Warant  under  the  Royal  Signet,  for 

allowing  unto  Sir  Edward  Seymour  Bart,  late  Trea¬ 
furer  of  the  Navy,  the  Sum  of  £452,5 10  :  1  :  94  with 
other  Sums  therein  mentioned.  Given,  the  28th  of  Oc¬ 
tober,  anno  quinto  of  Oueen  Anne.  281. 

In  this  the  late  Duke  of  Leedes,  who  was  prede- 
ceflor  to  Sir  Edward,  is  mentioned,  about  that  Sum. 

241.  Copy  of  a  Docquet  of  the  preceding  Warant  al¬ 
lowing  unto  the  fame  Sir  Edward  Seymour  the  Sums  of 
£452,510.  1  :  92.  by  him  received:  and  of £2, 081  :  8  :  o 
in  Bonds  of  Infolvents  :  and  of  other  Sums,  faid  to 
to  have  been  figned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin. 

282. 

242.  Original  Letter  from  Counfdor  Jeflop,  to  the 
Cat.  Hari..  Vol.  II. 


Num.  22624 

Duke  of  Newcaflle  Lord  Privy  Seal,  dated  18  Deer 
1706,  purporting  that  he  had  been  with  Mr.  Edward 
Harley,  who  thought  his  Grace  might  fafely  lett  Sir 
Edward  Seymours  Warant  pafs  the  Privy  Seale,  for  Rea- 
fons  therein  given.  283. 

243.  Original  Docquet  of  Sir  Edward  Seymours 

Warant  above-mentioned.  Signed  by  the  I,ord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin;  and  fealed,  the  19th  of  December 
1706.  285. 

244.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  How 

Efq;  Receiver  &  Pay- mailer  General  of  the  Guaids, 
Garrifons,  &  I.and -Forces,  £357,000  upon  Account  ; 
for  maintaining  the  Guards  &  Garrifons  ;  and  for  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  Invalids  for  the  Year  1707,  including  5000 
Men  to  ferve  on  board  the  Fleet.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  2  ill  day  of  De¬ 
cember  1706.  286. 

245.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James 

BrydgesEfq;  Paymaller  General  of  the  Forces  abroad, 
the  Sum  of  £  1,105,469  15:4  upon  Account,  vizt^'893, 
706  :  8  :  6  for  maintaining  the  40,000  Men  for  the 
yeare  1707,  which  were  railed  toad  in  Conjunction  with 
the  Forces  of  the  Allies.  £211,762  :  iC  :  10  for  main¬ 
taining  10,000  additional  Men  for  the  Service  of  the 
year  1707.  and  for  her  Majefties  proportion  of  the  3000 
Palatins  for  the  fame  year,  which  were  taken  into  the 
Service  the  laft  Cainpaigne.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  21ft  of  December 
1706.  287. 

246.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  creating  Evelyn  Earle 
of  Kingflon,  Marquifs  of  Dorchetler  in  the  County  of 
Dorfet  :  with  remainder  to  Gervafe  Pierepont  Baron  of 
Ardglafs  in  Ireland.  Sealed  the  21ft  of  December  1706. 

289. 

247.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  granting  the  Title  of 

Marquis  of  Lindefey  in  the  County  of  Lincoln,  unto 
Robert  Earle  of  Lindefey,  Lord  Great  Chamberlain  of 
England  ;  with  remainder,  to  the  Heirs  Male  of  the 
body  of  Robert  late  Earl  of  Lindefey  by  Elizabeth  his 
fecond  Wife,  daughtet  of  Philip  late  Lord  Wharton. 
Sealed  the  21ft  of  December  1706.  290. 

248.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  creating  John  Lord 

Poulett,  Vifcount  Hinton  St.  George  in  the  County  of 
Somerfet  and  Earl  Poulett.  Sealed,  the  24th  of  Decem¬ 
ber  1706.  291. 

249.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  granting  unto  Thomas 

Lord  Wharton  the  Dignities  of  Vifcount  Winchindon  in 
the  County  of  Bucks,  and  Earle  of  Wharton  in  the 
County  of  Weflmoreland.  Sealed  the  24th  of  December 
1706.  292. 

250.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  granting  the  Titles 

of  Vifcount  Malpas,  &  Earle  of  Cholmondeley  in  the 
County  of  Chellcr,  unto  Hugh  Lord  Cholmondeley. 
Sealed  the  24th  of  December  1706.  293. 

251.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Sir  Philip 

Meadows  Knt.  Knight-Marfhall  of  her  Majdlies  Houfe- 
hold  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  &  Plenipotentiary 
to  the  Emperor  of  Germany  ;  £500  for  his  Equipage, 
£5  by  the  day  as  Envoy,  and  £3  by  the  day  as  Plenipo¬ 
tentiary  ;  with  further  Summes  for  Intelligences,  8cc. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed, 
the  26th  day  of  December  i  yc6.  29 5. 

252.  IJocquet  of  a  Warant,  to  grant  unto  Charles 

Churchill  Efq;  the  Office  oi  Chief  Governor  of  the 
Ifland  of  Guernefey,  and  the  Iflands  &  Forts  thereto  be¬ 
longing  ;  the  Ifland  of  Alderney  only  excepted.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  28th 
of  December  1706.  296. 

253.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  granting  to  Henry 

Howard,  commonly  called  Lord  Walden,  the  Dignitys 
of  Baron  of  Chefterford  in  the  County  of  Eflex,  and  of 
Earl  of  Bindon  in  the  County  of  Dorfet.  Sealed  the  30th 
of  December  1706.  297. 

254.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  granting  the  Office  of 

7  P  Lieutenant 


(  ! 


l :  4 


A/f 


606 


Catalogs  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2252. 


Lieutenant  of  the  Tower  of  Lcmdon  unto  William  Ca- 
d  'uar.  Efq;  Brigadier  General  of  her  Majefties  Forces  ; 
in  the  room  of  Charles  Churchill  Efq;  fealed  the  fecond 
day  of  January  1706-7.  298. 

^55.  Docquct  of  a  Warant  for  creating  Sir  Charles 
()  Mara  Knt.  a  Baron  of  the  Kingdom  of  Ireland,  by  the 
Title  of  Baron  of  Tirawley  in  the  County  of  Mayo. 
Sealed  the  8th  of  January  1706-7.  299. 

2^6.  Docquetofa  Grant  unto  Peter  Valette  Merchant, 
of  the  foie  Benefit  (for  fourteen  years)  of  his  Invention 
for  making  Paper  by  a  Windmill  &  Brafs-Engines, 
never  before  praCtifed  in  England.  Sealed  the  8th  of  Janu¬ 
ary  1706-7.  300- 

257.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Thomas 

Coke  Efq;  Vice-Chamberlain  of  her  Majeflies  Houfe- 
houid,  the  yearly  Sum  of  £6 00,  over  &  above  the  an- 
tient  Profits  belonging  to  that  Place.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  8th  of  Ja¬ 
nuary  1706-7.  301. 

258.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  fames  d'Ay- 

rolle  Efq;  employed  in  her  Majeflies  Service  at  the 
Hague  :  £2  by  the  day,  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment : 
with  further  Sums  for  Intelligences,  &c.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  8th  of  Ja¬ 
nuary  1706-7.  3°2* 

259.  Docquet  of  a  Licence  for  William  Stonor  Efq; 

(who  went  into  the  French  Dominions,  without  Licence, 
&  bore  Armes  under  the  French  King)  to  return  into 
England.  Sealed  the  15th  of  January  1706-7.  303. 

260.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles 

Earl  of  Sunderland  one  of  the  principal  Secretaries  of 
State,  the  yearly  Salary  of  .£1850.  in  lieu  of  hisPenfion 
allowed  him  in  refpect  of  the  faid  Office.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  22d  of 
January  1706-7.  304. 

261.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Edward 

Nicholas  Efq;  ^30,000,  upon  Accompt ;  to  be  by  him 
paid  according  to  fuch  Eftablilhments  or  Warants,  as 
he  fhall  receive  from  her  Majefty,  or  from  the  High 
Treafurer.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
&  fealed  the  2 2d  of  January  1706-7.  305. 

262.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Paul  Methuen 
Efq;  appointed  Ambaflador  Extraordinary  to  the  King 
of  Portugal  ;  £1 000.  for  his  Equipage,  &/ic.  by  the 
day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment  :  with  further  Sums 
for  Intelligence.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  sad  day  of  January  1756-7. 

306. 

263.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Ireland  & 

Thomas  Newland  of  £175,  produced  by  the  Sale  of  cer¬ 
tain  Timber  &  Trees  lately  cut-down  upon  the  Lands  of 
Thomas  Agates  Junior  in  Weft  Grinfted  in  Su flex,  and 
lei  zed  by  virtue  of  two  Writts  of  Capias  Ut-lagatum. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed 
the  2  2d  of  January  1706-7.  307. 

264.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  and  Reflitulion  to  Whit¬ 

church  Merchant  of  all  that  was  forfeited  by  him  by  the 
homicide  and  killing  of  John  Fry  ;  whereof  he  was 
convi&ed.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  2  2d  of  January  1706-7.  308. 

265.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles 
Earl  t.f  Manchefter,  appointed  Ambaflador  Extraordi¬ 
nary  to  she  Republick  of  Venice  ;  £1500.  for  his  Equi¬ 
page,  Sc  ft -.by  the  day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment: 

the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the22dof 
January  1706-7.  309. 

266.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  the  Heirs,  &c. 

of  Sir  Job  Harvey  of  Aldenham  in  the  County  of  Hert¬ 
ford  deceaftd,  upon  whom  K.  Charles  n.  did  confer  the 
Dignity  <>f  a  Baronet  ;  from  the  Sum  of  £1095.  ufually 
paid  for  it.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  29th  of  January  1706-7.  310. 

2  7.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Barret  Efq; 


Num.2262. 

of  her  Majefties  Right  to  &  Intereft  in  divers  Sums 
amounting  to  £384  :  2:  34  Englifh  Money  ;  and  alfo 
of  a  fourth  part  of  the  perfonal  Eftate  of  James  Pigou, 
which  lately  belonged  to  James  Baron  an  alien  Enemy  ; 
in  Truft  ;  that  two  third  parts,  when  recovered,  fhouid 
go  to  Stephen  Boux  ;  and  the  remaining  third  part  to 
Frances  Pigou,  to  the  ufe  of  her  &  her  Children.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  29th 
of  January  1 706- 7.  311. 

268.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Nathaniel  Booth  Efq; 

of  the  Offices  of  Steward  ot  the  Honor  &  Caftle  of 
Windfor,  and  of  the  Court  of  Record  in  the  fame  ;  the 
Office  of  Clerk  to  the  Conftable  of  the  faid  Caftle,  & 
of  Clerk  of  the  faid  Caftle;  and  the  Cuftody  of  the 
Seal  of  the  faid  Court  :  upon  the  Surrender  of  Thomas 
Staples  and  John  Whitfield  fc.fqrs;  fealed  the  5th  day  of 
February  1706-7.  313. 

269.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles 

Mafon  Efq;  Receiver  and  Paymafter  for  Tranfports, 
£  i44jCO  2.  upon  Account  ;  toward  defraying  the  Charge 
of  tranfporting  Land-Forces.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  5th  of  February 
1706-7.  313. 

27c.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James 
Brydges  Efq;  Pay-maftcr  General  of  her  Majefties 
Forces  abroad  £1,045,8 13  :  ti  :  10  upon  Account,  vizt. 
£.3 7>5°°  t0  defray  the  Subfidies  payable  to  the  King  of 
Denmark,  for  the  Service  of  the  year  1707.  ,£150,000 
to  defray  the  Charges  of  13,000  Men  in  the  Service  of 
the  King  of  Portugal,  for  the  year  1707.  £ 160,000 
for  Subfidies  to  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  for  the  year  1707. 
.£5,952  :  7  :  6  for  Subfidies  to  the  Landgrave  of  Hefle- 
Caflell,  for  the  year  1707.  £5,052  :  7  :  6  for  Subfidies 
to  the  Elector  of  Treves,  for  the  year  1707.  £4,761: 
18:6  to  the  Elector  Palatin,  for  the  year  1707. 
£^0,000  to  defray  the  Charge  of  8000  Men,  lent  to  the 
afliftance  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  for  the  year  1 707. 
£445,350  :  14  :  2  for  maintaining  20,562  Men,  to  be 
employed  in  Spain  &  Portugal,  &  for  the  General  Offi¬ 
cers,  Contingencies,  &c.  for  the  Garifon  of  Gibraltar  ; 
&for  General  Officers  ferving  the  King  of  Portugal, 
for  the  year  1707.  £186,296  -.4:2  for  maintaining 
8,833  Men,  additional  Forces,  to  be  employed  in  Spain, 
or  Portugal,  &  for  the  General  Officers  &  Contingencies, 
for  the  year  1707.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  &  fealed  the  5th  of  February  1706-7.  314. 

271.  Docket  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  the  fame 

James  Brydges  Efq;  £220,083  :  7  :  6  upon  Account, 
vizt.  £37,012  :  7  :  6  as  her  Majefties  Share  of  Agio 
Bread,  &  Forage  for  1  2,000  Prufiians  employed  in  the 
Netherlands.  £20,000  as  an  additional  Subfidy  to  the 
Landgrave  of  Hefle-Caflel  for  the  year  1707.  £1 1,298 
Levy-money  for  recruiting  the  Englilh  Horfes  which  died 
or  were  killed  A.  D.  1706.  £1,775,  to  make  good  the 
like  Lofs  fuftained  by  the  Troops  of  Hanover.  £  1 50,000 
toward  profecuting  the  fuccefies  of  K.  Charles  in.  for 
recovery  of  the  Monarchy  of  Spain  to  the  Houfe  of 
Auftria.  Signed  by  the  Lord  'Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  1 5th  of  February  1 706.7.  316. 

272.  Original  Letter  of  Dr.  Tenifon  late  Archbifhop 

of  Canterbury,  to  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Newcaftle 
Lord  Privy  Seal,  dated  1 7  February,  1706.  317. 

That  He  knows  not  Mr.  Leadbeatcr,  but  has  heard 
well  of  him,  from  his  Friends,  who  had  obtained  of  the 
Queen  for  him,  a  Prefentation  to  Houghton ;  which 
Living,  during  the  Vacande,  is  without  all  doubt  in  her 
Gift  alone. 

273.  Docquet  of  the  Prefentation  of  Matthew  Lead- 
beater  Clerk,  to  the  Redory  of  Houghton  in  the  Countv 
of  Southampton,  void  by  the  Death  of  the  laft  Incum¬ 
bent  ;  and  in  her  Majefties  Gift,  pro  hac  vice,  by  virtue, 
of  her  Prerogative  Royal,  and  by  vacancy  of  the  See 
of  Winchefter.  Sealed  the  17th  of  February.  1706  7. 

3*9* 

9  274.  Eocqu.t 


Bibliothecae  Harleiance. 


Num.  2262. 


274.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Savery  Efq  ; 

of  the  foie  Benefit  of  his  new  Invention  for  making 
double  Hand-Bellows,  which  by  the  power  of  Springs 
and  Screws,  will  produce  fuch  a  continual  Blaft  (not- 
withflanding  the  Su&ion)  as  may  melt  any  fort  of  Metal, 
in  a  common  fort  of  Wood  or  Coal-Fire  :  for  fourteen 
years.  Sealed  the  19th  of  February,  1706-7.  320. 

275.  Docquet  of  a  Pardon  unto  Thomas  Tyrell  Efq  ; 

convidt  of  Manflaughter,  for  the  Death  of  John  Brad- 
ham  Efq ;  fealed,  the  19th  of  February,  1706.  321. 

276.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Mills  B.  D. 

of  the  Office  of  Greek  Profeffor  in  the  Univerfity  of 
Oxford;  with  the  yearly  Fee  of  £.40  payable  by  the 
Treafurer  of  Chrift-church  there.  Sealed,  the  19th  of  Fe¬ 
bruary,  1706-7.  322. 

277.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Robert 

Harley  Efq  ;  her  Majcfties  Principal  Secretary  of  State, 
£.3000  for  her  fecret  Service,  without  Account.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  26th 
of  February  1706-7.  323. 

278.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles  Earl 

of  Sunderland,  one  of  her  Majefties  Principal  Secre¬ 
taries  of  State,  £.300©  for  her  fecret  Service,  without 
Account.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  26th  of  February,  1706-7.  324. 

279.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  authorizing  the  Lord  High 

Treafurer,  to  appoint,  throughout  England  and  Wales, 
Receivers  Generali  of  all  Sums  granted  by  Parliament, 
to  be  railed  in  the  year  1707.  Signed  by  his  Lordffiip  ; 
and  fealed,  the  26th  of  February,  1706-7.  325. 

280.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Baldwyn  Leighton 

Efq  ;  of  the  Office  of  Warden  of  the  Fleet,  and  of  the 
Cuftody  of  the  Prifon  &  Gaol  of  the  Fleet,  with  the 
Salary  of  £.7:  12: 1  payable  yearly  by  the  Sheriffs  of 
London  Middlefex  ;  &c.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin ;  Sc  fealed,  the  26th  of  February, 
1706-7.  326.  ’ 

28 1 .  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Charles  Duke  of  Bol¬ 
ton,  of  the  Offices  of  Governor  &  Captain  of  the  Ifle  of 
Wight ;  Governor  of  Carilbrooke-Caftle,  &  of  all  other 
Caftles  &  Fortreffes  within  the  faid  Ifle  ;  of  Conflable 
and  Door-keeper  of  the  Caftle  of  Carifbrooke  ;  &  of 
Steward,  Receiver,  &  Bayliff  of  all  her  Majefties  Ma¬ 
nors,  Lands,  Tenements,  Woods,  &  other  Revenues 
there  ;  of  Governor  &  Captain  of  Sandon-Fort ;  of 
Keeper  of  Carifbrooke-parke  ;  and  of  Coroner  wdthin 
the  laid  Ifle:  with  the  ufual  Fee  of  13s.  6d.  per  diem, 
and  all  other  Fees,  Wages,  &  Allowances  enjoyed  by 
the  late  John  Lord  Cutts.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed,  the  6th  of  March,  1 706-7. 

328. 

282.  Reprefentation  of  the  Bayliffs  Sc  Wardens  of 

the  Weavers  Company  of  London,  to  the  Lord  Privy 
Seale,  the  7th  of  March,  1706-7.  that  a  Common  Hall 
of  the  whole  Livery  being  fummoned,  a  great  Majority 
were  for  palling  the  new  Charter ;  and  therefore,  in  the 
name  of  the  whole  Communalty  of  the  faid  Company, 
they  humbly  befeech  his  Grace,  forthwith  to  pals  the 
faid  Patent  under  the  Privy  Seale.  329. 

283.  Lift  of  the  Names  of  the  feveral  Weavers,  who 

were  for  or  againft  paffing  the  New  Charter,  the  7th 
day  of  March,  1706-7.  330. 

There  were  for  it  9 1  ;  and  againft  it,  but  3. 

284.  Original  Petition  of  divers  of  the  Weavers  of 
London,,  who  were  againft  a  new  Charter  to  the  Lord 
Privy  Seale.  Signed  by  39  of  their  Hands,  againft  the 
proceedings  of  the  other  Weavers  who  were  for  it  • 
and  praying  that  their  Attendance  on  him  at  Welbeck, 
m’ght  be  difpenfed  with  ;  &  that  he  would  hear  them 
upon  his  return  up  to  London.  (See  the  Sections  187.  & 

1 88.  above)  332. 

285.  Another,  Signed  by  247  hands  Englifh  &  Fo¬ 
reign,  of  London-Weavers  not  free  of  the  City,  to  the 
Lorde  Privy  Seale,  complaining  of  ill  Pra&ices  in  the 


Num.  2262,  2623. 


Company,  and  defiring  to  be  heard  againft  the  new 
Charter.  333* 

286.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Auditor  of 

her  Majefties  Revenues  within  the  Counties  of  Mon¬ 
mouth,  Anglefey,  Brecknock,  Cardigan,  Carmarthen, 
Carnarvan,  Denbigh,  Flint,  Glamorgan,  Merioneth, 
Montgomery,  Pembroke,  Sc  Radnor :  and  alfo  of  the 
Office  of  Auditor  of  the  Revenue  within  the  Counties 
of  Lincoln,  Nottingham,  Derby,  &  Chcfter  :  to  Sidney 
Godolphin,  Efq  :  to  hold  the  fame,  during  his  good 
behaviour,  with  the  Fee  of  £.20  per  annum.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  10th 
day  ofMarch,  1706-7.  333. 

287.  Docqnet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Auditor  of 

her  Majefties  Revenues  within  many  Counties  &  Cities, 
to  Thomas  Jett  Efq;  To  hold  during  his  good  be¬ 
haviour.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin; 
and  fealed,  the  10th  day  ofMarch,  1706-7.  337. 

288.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  Creating  Sir  Chrif- 

topher  Wandesford,  Bart,  a  Baron  &  Vifeount  of  the 
Kingdome  of  Ireland,  by  the  Titles  of  Baron  Wandes¬ 
ford  &  Vifeount  Caftle-comer  in  the  County  of  Kil¬ 
kenny.  Sealed,  the  14th  of  March,  1706-7.  '  338. 

289.  Docquet  of  a  Lycence  for  Nicholas  Breton, 

Efq  ;  to  inclofe  an  High  Way  leading  from  a  Fountaine 
called  the  Stepps  in  the  Town  of  Norton  &  County  of 
Northampton  :  fo  that  he  make  another  Way  in  his  own 
Ground,  as  convenient  for  Paffengers.  Sealed,  the  19th 
of  March,  1706-7.  33^ 

290.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  William  Thomplbn 

Efq  ;  from  the  Arrears  of  a  yearely  Rent  of  £5  13: 8. 
referv’d  by  K.  James  1.  for  the  Manor  of  Humblefton  and 
other  Lands  in  the  County  of  York;  intended  by  K. 
Charles  the  Second  to  have  been  reduced  to  £.2  per 
annum,  in  confideration  of  a  Grant  made  by  Mr.  Thotnp- 
fon’s  Anceftors  to  the  faid  late  King,  of  the  Scite  of 
the  Caftle  of  Scarborough,  which  was  not  efte&ually 
done,  by  reafon  of  a  miftake  in  the  Letters  Patents. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Goolphin,  and  fealed 
the  19th  of  March,  1706-7.  ^40 

291.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  making-up  the  Ac¬ 

counts  of,  Sc  difeharging  Charles  Fox  Efq ;  late  Pay- 
mafter  of  the  Forces  abroad,  from  the  Sum  of 
£.663,667:  li :  1 1.  by  him  paid  to  foreign  Forces  for 
her  Majefties  proportion  of  their  ordinary  Pay  ■  and 
alfo  her  Moiety  of  their  Ex  traordinarys,  Waggon-moneys, 
Forrage,  Levy-money,  Tranfports,  &  other  incidental 
Charges.  But  fur-charging  him  vvith£.7,oi2: 9: 1  i-J..  paid 
by  the  States  General  for  the  Pay  of  feveral  Regiments. 
Her  Majefty  alfo  difeharging  the  Duke  of  Marlborough 
from£.7,499 : 1 9 : 10J .  andfrom£.2,3oo.  by  him  received 
&  juftly  applyed.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin;  and  fealed  the  19th  ofMarch,  1706-7.  34X. 

292.  Docquet  of  a  Re-grant  unto  James  Duke  of 

Ormonde  of  an  Houfe  Sc  Lands  in  Richmund  alias 
Sheene,  by  him  forfeited  for  not  Inrolling  her  Majefties 
Le'.ters  Patents  granting  the  fame  unto  him  within  Six 
months  after  their  Date,  according  to  a  Provifo  therein 
contained.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  • 
and  fealed  the  19th  of  March,  1706-7.  343- * 

293.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Richard  Topham, 
Efq  ;  of  the  Office  of  Keeper  of  the  Records  in  the 
Tower  of  London  (or,  at  leaft  of  the  ufual  Salaries  an¬ 
nexed  to  that  Place)  after  the  deceafe  of  William  Petyt 
Efq  ;  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and 
fealed,  the  j  9th  of  March,  1706-7. 


3  45* 


2263. 


A  fecond  Volume  of  Docquets,  See.  relating  to 
the  Office  of  the  Privy  Seal,  in  the  Years  1707.  and 
1708.  being, 

1.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Knightley  Chetwood 
D.  D.  of  the  Dignity  of  Dean  of  Gloucefter.  Sealed  the 
26th  of  March,  1707.  1. 

2.  Docquet 


6  o8 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2263. 

2.  Docquel  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Lofci  Fairfax 

of  all  Goods  whatfoever,  which  before  the  25th  of  Ja¬ 
nuary,  1706,  have  been  call  away,  wreck’d  or  loft  ; 
or  which  before  the  25  O&ober,  1711.  fhall  be  caft- 
away,  wreck’d  or  loft,  in  any  of  the  Rocks,  Shelves, 
Shoales,  Seas,  or  Banks,  in  or  between  the  Latitudes  of 
6  and  36  Degrees  of  North  Latitude  in  the  Weft  Indies  ; 
and  which  before  the  25  October,  1711.  (hall  be  re¬ 
cover’d  by  the  faid  Lord  Fairfax  :  one  full  Eighth  Part 
thereof  being  referved  to  her  Majefty.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  2d  day  of 
April,  170  7.  2. 

3.  A  Copy  (attefted  by  W.  Wenman)  of  a  Report 

made  to  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin,  by  Sir  Robert 
Cotton  &  Sir  Thomas  Frankland  Poft-mafters  General, 
upon  Mr.  Dummers  Petition  to  be  releafed  of  his  Con- 
trad  about  the  Weft  India  Pacquet  Boats,  dated  the  2d 
of  April,  1 707.  4. 

That  Mr.  Dummer  is  Deficient  in  his  Contrad  with 
her  Majefty  to  the  Sum  of  £.5, 919:6:7.  That  when 
he  fhall  have  paid  in  £-855: 16:: 6.  received  by  him  for 
the  Freight  of  Faffengers ;  the  Deficiency  will  be 
£.5,063:  i°;  1.  That  if,  after  his  Lofles,  He  fiiall  be 
rigoroufly  tied  up  to  perform  his  Contrad,  it  would 
very  much  tend  to  ruin  him.  Yet,  notwithftanding  his 
prelent  Difability,  they  think  it  not  reafonable  that  her 
Majefty  fliould  take  the  rifque  Sc  hazard  of  the  Lofs  of 
the  Boats  from  the  Enemy  ;  or  pay  the  prime  Valuationt 
of  thofe  which  have  been  loft,  they  having  been  built  of 
a  much  greater  Burthen  ;  and,  confequently,  at  greater 
Expenfe  than  was  contraded  for,  Sc  with  other  Views 
and  Defigns,  & c. 

4.  Copy  of  a  Report  from  Sir  Edward  Norlhey, 
Attorney  General  to  her  Maiefty  :  dat.  3.  Apr.  1 707. 

6. 

That  he  had  confider’d  the  London-Butchers  Pe¬ 
tition  exhibited  againft  the  Petition  of  Charles  Hore  Sc 
Richard  Hore,  for  3  weekly  Markets  to  be  holden,  at  a 
place  (now  newly  by  them  affigned)  called  Vinegar 
Ground,  for  the  fale  of  all  Skins  of  Sheep  Sc  Lambs 
killed  within  the  bills  of  Mortality :  and  that  the  faid 
Markets  would  not  be  inconvenient  to  any  ;  nor  had  the 
Butchers  any  fufiicient  caufe  of  complaint. 

5.  Copy  of  the  faid  Butchers  Petition  to  the  Queens 
Majefty,  defiring  to  be  heard,  by  their  Council,  againft 
the  laid  Market,  before  the  Grant  of  it  fliould  pafs.  7. 

6.  Copy  of  the  Petition  of  the  abovementioned 
Charles  Hore  &  Richard  Flore,  to  the  Queen ;  fctting 
forth  their  Services  to  the  Publick ;  and,  as  a  recom- 
penfe,  defiring  to  have  the  Markets  aforefaid,  to  be 
holden  in  St.  Johns  Street  near  Hickes’s  Hall. 

7.  Copy  of  a  Report  of  Sir  Simon  Harcourt  So¬ 
licitor  General,  to  the  Queen  :  dat.  8  March,  1706-7. 

9- 

Setting  forth  that  he  had  confidered  the  feveral  Al¬ 
legations  ol  the  I  lore’s  Petition,  Sc  having  acknowl¬ 
edged  the  Public  Services  done  by  them,  agrees  that 
the  Markets  by  them  prayed  for,  to  be  held  near  Hickes’s 
Flail  cannot  by  Law  be  granted  ;  becaufe  not  only  that 
Neighbourhood,  but  the  Seflions  of  Peace  forMidelfex 
would  be  incommoded.  But  that  if  the  like  Markets 
fliould  be  granted  to  the  Petitioners  for  40  years,  to 
be  held  in  Vinegar  Ground,  it  would  be  to  nobodys 
Damage.  This  was  done  upon  her  Majefties  Reference 
unto  him. 

8.  Tranflation  of  Mr.  Hores  Patent  for  fuch  Mar¬ 

kets  to  be  held  on  Vinegar  Ground,  as  drawn  by  Mr. 
Jeffop;  bearing  Tefte  7  Aprilis,  anno  fexto  Anna;  Re¬ 
gina-  iio. 

9.  Another  Copy  of  the  fame.  12i 

10.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  in  French,  to  pay  unto 

Lewis  Lord  Rockingham,  and  the  other  Officers  of 
her  Majefties  Buck-hounds,  their  ufual  Salaries  unto  Mi- 
chaelmafs  laft.  Sealed,  the  1  ith  oi  April,  1707.  13. 

& 

f 


Num.  2263. 

if.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  Abraham  Darby  Smith, 
of  the  foie  Benefit  of  his  new  Invention  of  calling  Iron 
Bellied  Pots,  and  other  Iron  Bellied  Ware,  in  Sand 
only,  without  Loam  or  Clay.  Sealed,  the  1  ith  of  April, 
1707.  i4; 

12.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pav  unto  Francis  Vif- 
count  Ryalton,  Cofferer  of  the  Houfehould,  £.  1 00,000. 
upon  Account,  for  the  ordinary  &  extraordinary  Ex- 
penfes  of  her  Majefties  Houfehold.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  Sealed  the  nth  of  April, 

1707.  15- 

13.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  ratifie  &  confirme  to 

the  antient  Guild  Sc  Company  of  Weavers  London, 
their  former  Privileges :  and,  for  the  better  Govern¬ 
ment  of  the  faid  Company  within  the  Cities  of  London 
and  Weftminfter,  Borough  of  Southwark,  and  ten  Miles 
round  the  fame,  to  incorporate  them,  fealed  the  21ft  of 
of  April,  1707.  16. 

This  Charter  was  nevr  fealed  the  15th  of  Novr  1707. 
after  fome  alterations  made  in  the  Queens  prefence. 

14.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Harry  Mor- 

daunt  Efq;  Treafurer  Sc  Pav-mafter  of  the  Office  of  Ord¬ 
nance,  the  Sum  of  £300,000.  upon  Account ;  for 
Land  Sc  Sea-Services  performed  &  to  be  performed. 
Signed  by  the- Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed 
the  22d  of  April,  1707.  17. 

15.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conftituting  Robert 

Hunter,  Ffq;  Lieutenant  Sc  Governor  General  of  Vir¬ 
ginia,  in  the  room  of  Edward  Nott,  Efq;  fealed  the 
2zd  of  April,  1707.  18. 

16.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  George  De 

la  Val  Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Em¬ 
peror  of  Fez,  Morocco,  Tali  alette  &  Suz,  £.500.  for 
his  Equipage,  &  £.5.  by  the  day  for  his  ordinary  Enter¬ 
tainment  :  with  Allowance  of  further  Sums  for  Intelli¬ 
gence,  &c.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  25th  of  April,  170 7.  19. 

17.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  for  promoting  the 

Trade  of  this  Kingdome,  and  for  infpefting  &  improving 
the  Plantations  in  America  &  elfewhere,  conftituting 
Prince  George,  William  Lord  Cow'per  keeper  of  the 
Great  Seal,  Sidney  Earl  of  Godolphin  Lord  Treafurer, 
Thomas  Earl  of  Pembroke  Sc  Montgomery  Prefident  of 
the  Privy  Council,  John  Duke  of  New  caftle  Keeper  of 
the  Privy  Seale,  Sc  feveral  others  Commilfioners  for  that 
purpofe.  Sealed  the  25th' of  April,  1707.  20. 

1 8.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Spencer  Comp¬ 

ton  Efq;  /. 40,000.  upon  Account ;  to  be  by  him  paid 
and  applied  according  to  fuch  Warants  as  he  fhall  receive 
from  her  Majefty  or  the  Lord  Treafurer.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  29th  of 
April,  17c  7.  21. 

19.  Docquet  of  a  Commifiicn  conftituting  Thomas 

Earl  of  Pembroke,  See.  Lieutenant  General  Sc  Governor 
of  Ireland,  in  the  room  of  James  Duke  of  Ormonde. 
Sealed  the  30th  of  April,  1707.  22. 

20.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  conftituting  Algernoon  Earle 

of  Efl'ex  Conitable  of  the  Tower  of  London,  with  the 
F’ee  of^.icoo.  per  annum,  in  the  room  of  Montague 
Earle  of  Abingdon.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin,  and  fealed  the  30th  of  April,  1707.  23. 

21.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  William  Perfe 

Clerk  to  the  Rectory  of  Weft  Iltflerton,  in  the  County 
of  York.  Sealed  the  7th  of  May,  17c 7.  24. 

22.  Original  Receipt  of  John  Dann  Goldfmirh  (who 

afterward  brake.  Sc  ruined  both  himfclf  &  Mr  Coggs  his 
principal,  herein  alfo  mentioned)  for  £63:  10:  o.  re¬ 
ceived  ol  Mr.  Tench  of  the  Privy  Seale  Office,  for  the 
ufe  of  the  Duke  of  Newcaftle  Lord  Privy  Seale.  da*ed 
9  May,  1707.  25. 

23.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  Sir  Robert 
Bedingfield,  Kt.  Lord  Mayor,  &  the  Lord  iv!ayor  ofthe 
City  ot  London  for  the  time  being,  Sir  Rober.  Clayton, 
S!  lhomas  Stamp,  SrJohn  Fleet,  and  feveral  othtrs 

Ccm- 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


609 


Num.  2263. 

Oommiffioncrs  the  Lieutenancy  of  the  faid  City  of 
London,  Suburbs,  &  Liberties  thereof.  26. 

The  time  of  Sealing  is  not  cildoiT d  (See  lower, 
at  $  42.)  . 

2 ;  ,  Dccquet  flf  a  Grant  of  a  Prebend  in  the  Collegiate 
Church,  of  Windfor,  to  Thomas  Goddard,  M.  A. 
Sealed  the  21ft  of  May,  >707.  27- 

2  c.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  a  Petition  of  £.3000. 
per  Annum,  out  of  the  Revenues  of  the  Poft  Office,, 
into  James  Duke  of  Oueenfberry,  in  confederation  of 
his  eminent  Services ;  to  hold,  duiing  her  Majeflic-s 
Life.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and 
foaled  the  21ft  of  May,  1707.  2S. 

26.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Provoft- 

Marfhall  General  of  Ea.badoes,  unto  George  Gordon 
Li'q;  in  the  room  of  James  Hannay  Elq;  Sealed  the 
2  ilt  df  May,  170 7.  2  9- 

27,  Docquet  of  a  C.ommiffion  conftituting  William 

Douglas,  Alexander  Wedderburn,  John  Montgomery, 
John  Whetham,  &  David  RofsEfq'.  Commiffioners  of 
the  Excife  in  Scotland,  with  the  yearly  Salary  of  £.300. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
these!  of  May,  1707.  _  3°* 

2d.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  conforming  Algernoon  Earl 
of  Eli  ex  Lieutenant  of  S:  in  the  Hamlets  belonging  to 
the  Tower  of  London,  in  the  room  of  Mountagu  Earle 
of  Abingdon.  Sealed  the  23d  of  May,  1707.  31  • 

20.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Clement  Cottrell  Efq; 
of  the  Office  of  Afliftant  Mailer  of  the  Ceremonies  5  in 
Caules  only  where  the  Mafter  of  the  Ceremonies  cannot 
pei-fonally  be  for  the  Receipt  Sc  Entertainment  of  all 
Ambmir.dors,  Sc  Meffengers  of  Foreign  Princes,  and 
other  Strangers.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  28  th  of  May,  1707.  .  .32. 

30.  Docquet  of  a  Commifiion,  conftituting  Sir  Alex¬ 

ander  Rigby,  James  Ifaacfon,  Sc  Lionel  Norman,  Efqrs. 
Sr.  Robert  Dixon,  &  William  Boyle  Efq;  Commiffion- 
ers  or  the  Cuflomes  S:  Subfidies  in  Scotland,  with  a 
Salary  of  £. qco.  per  annum  to  each  of  them.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  Sc  fealed  the  ad  of 
June,  1707.  33- 

31.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d’Eflire  to  the  Dean  S:  Cusp- 

ter  of  Ely,  to  choofe  a  Bilhop  to  that  See.  Sealed  the 
cth  of  June,  1707.  34- 

32.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d’Efiire  to  the  Dean  and 

Chapter  of  Winchefler  ;  to  choofe  a  Bifhop  to  that  See. 
Sealed  the  51b  of  June,  1707.  ,  35* 

33.  Docquet  of  the  Royal  Afient,  for  Sir  Jonathan 

Trelawney  Bart.  Bifhop  of  Exeter,  to  be  Bifhop  of  .Win¬ 
chefler.  Sealed  the  1  oth  of  June,  1707.  36. 

-4.  Docquet  of  a  Difchargc  unto  Robert  Luqy  Efq; 
late  Rcccivor  of  the  Temporal  ties  belonging  to  the 
Biflioprick  of  Saint  David,  as  to  divers  Sums  by  him  fo 
received;  alfo  a  Dilcharge  unto  Walter  Jeffreys  Gent, 
of  another  Sum  ;  and  a  Grant  of  more,  unto  Dr.  George 
Bull  the  now  Bifhop  of  that  Sec.  Signed  by 'the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin,  and  fealed  the  11th' of  June, 
1707.  37- 

or  Docquet  of  a  Patent  confirming  the  Statutes  made 
by  Dr.  John  Covcll  Mafter  of  Chrlfts  College  &  others', 
the  Executors  or  Truftees  of  Dr.  Thomas  Plume  laie 
Archdeacon  of  Rochefter,  who  left  about  £.tS, 000.  to 
be  laid  out  on  a  Purchafe  of  Lands  for  the  maintenance 
ofa  Prdfeflbr  of  .Mironomy  cc  Experimental  Thilofophy 
in  the  Uuiverfity  of  Cambridge  ;  who  had  accordingly 
l:\vd  cut  the  Money,  &  drawn  up  the  Statutes.  Sealed 
the  nth  of  June,  '1707.  _,38- 

;6.  Do co net  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Parkins  Efq*,  of 
the  Office  c’f  Comptroller  of  the  Duties  of  Excife,  and 
new  Impofis  in  Scotland  ;  with  the  Salary  of  £. 206.  per 
annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and 
Sealed  the  nth  of  June,  1707.  39- 

37.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  ere&ing  the  Office  of 
Infpcdor  of  the  Out-Ports  Colie  dors  Accompts,  in  Eng- 
Cat.  Uarl.  Vcl.  II. 


Num.  2263. 

land :  and  granting  the  fame  unto  George  LangtonEfq  ; 
with  the  Salary  of  £.400.  a  year  for  himfelf,  St  £. 200.  a 
year  for  four  Clerks.  Signed  by  the  Lord  lreafurer 
Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1  ith  of  June,  1707.  4°- 

38.  OriginalPetition  of  Charles  Hore  &  RichardHore 

(one  hand  figning  both  their  Names)  to  the  Lord 
Privy  Seale  ;  Ihewing,  that  her  Majefties  Grant  of  a 
Market  to  them,  hath  been  delayed  in  his  Office  by  rea- 
fon  of  a  Caveat  entered  againft  it  by  the  Butchers; 
who  hope,  by  their  common  Purfe,  to  make  the  Royal 
Grant  too  tedious,  &  too  expenfive  for  them  to  obtain. 
Wherefore,  they  pray  for  an  hearing  before  his  Grace, 
and  that  the  Butchers  may  be  fummoned  in  Order 
thereunto.  41* 

39.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Charles  Idore  &  Richard 

ITore  Cent,  of  a  Market  to  be  held  thrice  a  Week  for 
4  years,  in  Vinegar-Ground  in  the  Parifli  of  St.  James 
Clerken-wcll.  Scaled  13th  June,  1707.  43- 

40.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Charles  Graydon  Gent, 

of  the  Office  of  Receiver  General  &  Caffiier  of  the 
Cuftoms  in  Scotland  ;  with  the  Salary  of  £-S°°’  TP* 
annum  for  himfelf,  &  £.230.  per  annum  for  Clerks 
under  him.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin, 
and  fealed  1  he  13  th  of  June,  x 707.  44- 

41.  Docquet  "of  a  Grant  unto  John  Crook-fhanks 
Gent,  of  the  Office  of  Comptroller  General  of  the  Ac¬ 
compts  of  the  Cuftomes  in  Scotland  ;  with  the  Salary  of 
f.2oc.  per  annum  for  himfelfe,  and  £.100.  per  annum 
lor  his  Clerks.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin, 

&  Sealed  the  13th  of  June,  1707.  .  _  45- 

42.  Docquet  of  a  Confirmation  of  the  Liberties  and 

Privileges  of  the  City  of  New  Sarum,  with  Additions 
and  Alterations  ;  by  a  New  Charter  ;  upon  a  Surrender 
of  that  granted  by  K.  James  11.  Sealed  the  13th  of 
June,  1 707.  .  46; 

4:.  Docquet  of  a  Com  million  of  Lieutenancy  for 
the  City  of  London ;  being  the  fame  with  that  before 
deferibed  at  §.  23.  Sealed  the  i8lh  of  June,  1 707.  47- 
44.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  the  Owners  & 
Freighters,  &  others  concern’d  in  the  Ship  Worcefter, 
fuch  Sum  ms  of  Money  as  fhould  feem  juft  &  reafonable 
lobe  paid  in  fatisfaction  for  the  lame.  Signed  by  thcLord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  x8th  of  June, 
1707.  4^- 

4  5.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  de  Critz  Gent, 
of  the  Office  of  one  of  her  Majefties  Serjeants  atArmes 
in  Ordinary,  with  the  Fee  of  3s.  by  the  day;  and  2s.  6d. 
by  the  day;  for  Board-Wages.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
'ireafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  1 8th  of  June, 
1707.  49- 

46.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  conftituting  William  Water- 

fon  Efq;  Surveyor  of  the  Cuftomes  in  the  Out-Ports  of 
England.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  foaled  the  2  ill  of  June,  1707.  _  50. 

47.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  Reftitution  of  the  Tempo¬ 
ralities  of  the  Biffiopric  ol  Winchefler,  unto  Jonathan 
now  Biflipp  of  that  See.  Sealed  the  25th  of  June,  1707. 

51- 

4?.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet, 
unto  Sir  Henry  Furnefe  Kt.  Sealed  the  26th  of  June, 
1707.  52- 

49.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet, 

unto  Sir  Francis  Dafhwood  Kt.  Sealed  the  26th  day  of 
June  1 707.  53* 

50.  Docquet  of  a  Commifiion,  conftituting  Prince 

George  Generaliffimo  of  all  her  Majefties  Forces  in 
Great  Britain,  Ireland,  &  elfewhere.  Sealed  the  28th 
of  June,  1707-  _  54- 

51.  Docquet  of  a  Revocation  of  the  Letters  Patents 

whereby  her  Majefty  had  constituted  Prince  George 
Generaliffimo  of  all  her  Forces  in  England  Sc  Ireland, 
and  elfewhere.  fealed  the  28th  of  June,  1707.  55. 

r  2  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Prince  George  of  the 
Offices  of  Iligh  Admiral  of  Great  Britain,  Ireland, 
7  Q  Wales j 


6io 


Catalogue  Librorum  MSS. 


Niim.  2263. 

Wales ;  and  of  her  Majefties  Dominions,  Plantations* 
&  Territories,  in  any  parts  beyond  the  Seas,  pofl'efled  by 
any  of  her  SubjeQs :  and  of  Captain  General  of  her 
Fleets,  of  the  fame  Kingdomes,  Dominions,  to  Places. 
Sealed  the  28th  day  of  June,  1707.  -5.  ’ 

t  53-  Docquet  of  a  Revocation  of  the  Patent  whereby 


Num.  226-1 


„  ‘  me  rater.t  wnereDy 

Prince  George  was  conftituted  High  Admiral  of  England, 
Ireland,  Sc  Wales;  and  of  the  Dominions,  Plantations  & 
Territories  in  any  parts  beyond  the  Seas,  poffefied  by  any 
of  her  Majefties  Subjects  :  and  alfo  Captain  General  of 
her  I-leets  of  the  fame  Kingdomes,  Dominions,  &  Places, 
fealed  the  28th  of  June,  1707.  r* 

54-  Docquet  ofa  Grant  unto  Sydney  Earle  of  Godol- 

pmn  of  the  Office  ol  Treai'urer  of  theExchequer.  fealed 
the  28th  of  June,  1707.  g 

55-  Docquet  of  a  Warant  determining  certain  Letters 
Letters  Patents  bearing  Date  the  8th  of  May,  1702 
whereby  her  Majefty  granted  unto  Sidney  Lord  Godoli 
phin,  the  Office  of  frealurer  of  her  Exchequer.  Sealed 
the  28th  of  June,  1707. 

56.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  Samuel  Barnardifton 
.Bart.  to  other  Executors  of  Arthur  Barnardifton  Efq- 
of  certain  Lands  late-  of  Alexander  Butterworth  Efq! 
leized  by  K.  Charles  11.  by  an  Extent,  upon  four  Bonds 
,  r  4-22oo.  each  ;  and  all  Arrears  thereof.  To  hold,  fo 
long  as  the  faid  Lands  ftiall  remain  in  her  Maieftv’s 
Majefty  s  hands ;  at  the  yearly  Rent  of  3s  4d.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  ireafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  28  th 
of  June,  1707. 

57.  Docquet  of  a  Lvcenfe  for  the  Company  of  Iron- 

mongers  London,  to  take  and  hold  in  Mortmain  fuch 
Lands,  Tenements,  &c.  as  maybe  by  them  fettled  ac¬ 
cord, ng  to  the  laft  Will  of  Sir  Robert  Geffrye  Kt.  and 
Alderman  of  London  deceafed.  Sealed  the  ift  of  July 
*7-7-  £l 

58.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Keeper  of 

the  Privy  Lodgings  to  Wardrobe  at  Hampton-Court 
with  the  fee  of  iad.  per  diem,  unto  Richard  Marriott 
Eiq.  upon  the  Surrender  of  James  Marriott  Efq;  fealed 
the  1  ft  of  July,  1707.  1 

59-  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  giving  her  Maieftics 
Royal  Affcnt  for  Dr.  John  Moore  Wp  ofNoSh 
to  be  Biffiop  of  Ely.  Sealed  the  2d  of  July,  1707.  61.  * 
00.  Docquet  of  an  Inftrument  declaring  her  Majefties 
Determination  of  certain  Letters  Patents  conftituting 
Charles  Earl  of  Sunderland  one  of  her  Principal  Secre- 
tarres  of  State  :  and  alfo,  her  Grant  of  the  Office  of  one 
•  it o 5‘P“  Secretaries  of  State  unto  the  faid  Earl 
with  the  Salary  of  £.  too.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Ireafurer  Godolphin;  and  Sealed  the  loth  of 
July,  1707.  J  ^ 

61.  Docquet  ofherMajefHcs  Determination  of  certain 
Letters  I  atents  conftituting  Robert  Harley  Efq  ;  one  of 
her  Principal  Secretaries  ol  State;  with  the  Salary  of 

doloh-'  per  ,S'gned  b>'  tlle  Lord  Ttraforer  Go- 

dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1 9th  of  |uly,  1707.  67 

Fitn  Harfi™' r  W [°  pay  “W0  -<ohn  VHfcoiit 
fitz-Hardmg  Treafurer  ol  her  Majefties  Chambet, 

e  T011  Accoum.  for  the  Expence  &  Service  of 

that  Office.  Stgned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ? 

•nd  fealed  thecoth  of  July,  ,707  “uorpnin  , 

j?*  ™  »>■'.. . s-  a,; 

„r6F'rD7rl'Pi:C'!  incorporating  Anthony  Bow- 
yei  Efq,  John  Chamberlavne  Efq-  Irhilm.l  • 

D.1V  fe.  Subforibers  ,0  2  jdvm  sl’k  ^ 
the  Charitable  Corporation  for  Relief  of  indufirious 
Poor,  by  afttlbng  them  with  fmall  Sums  upon  Pledges 
at  lega  Imereft.  Sealed  the  24th  of  July  ,  727.  6E8  ' 

e  Uoc,l ;JCI  °P“  'Varam,  to  pay  unto  John  Duke  of 


Netvcaftle  Lord  Pmy  Seale,  U.  by  the  day,  in  lieu  of 
he  anttent  Dyett  of  16  Difltes  of  Meat :  her  Majefty 
thinking  fitt,  rather  to  grant  the  faid  daily  Summe  thaA 
hat  the  fate)  Dyett  fhould  be  taken  in  kind.  Signed  by 

ofejul°q‘  ,707 !  G0d°lphini  “d  faled  24th  day 

66.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  granting  ,he  Dignity  of 'a 
Bai  onet  unto  Nicholas  Williams  Erq  ;  of  Edwins-Ford 
in  the  County  of  Carmarthen.  Sealed  the  28th  of  July 

2707. 

67.  Docquet  of  an  Inftrument  declaring  her  Majefties 
Confetti  fo,-  ,he  Umon  &  Confolidation  of  the  Parilh 
Churches  of  St.  Join,  and  St.  Laurence  in  the  Town  5 
Southampton.  Sealed  the  2d  of  Auguft  1707 

6?.  Docquet  of  her  Majefties  Dormant  Letters/ (or 
Dormant  Warant)  to  authorize  the  Treafurer  &  Unde" 
Treafurer  of  the  Exchequer,  &  the  Commiffioners  of  the 
Treafury  r«r  the  time  betng;  to  make  Payment  from 
time  to  time,  of  all  fuch  Fees,  Salaiies,  &  Wages,  as  have 
been  accuftomed  to  be  paid  to  the  Treafure",  or  Com- 
jntfltoners  of  the  Treafury  ;  Chancellour  8t  Under- 
I  reafurer  to  all  other  Officers  to  Minifters  of  the  Exche- 
quer  as  have  been  heretofore  allowed,  and  as  by  the 
Ireafurer  &  Under- 1  reafurer  of  theExchequer  (haft  be 
hought  fitt  to  be  allowed,  in  fundry  Cafes)  Signed  by 
the  Lord  T  reafurer  Godolpltin  ;  and  fealed  the  ad  day  of 
Auguft,  1707.  ■> 

,  6 9-  Docquet  of  a  Lycenfe  to  the  Lady  Elizabeth  Hat- 
cher,  to  continue  &  reftde  in  France :  provided,  (Ire 
do  h  not  pretend  ,0  the  Liberty  of  coming  into  any  ot¬ 
her  Majefties  Dominions,  without  Lycenfe  under  the 
Pnvy  Seale  for  that  purpofe  firfl  had  &  obtained,  upon 
the  fevered  I  enalties.  Sealed  the  2d  of  A  uguft  ,  7o7 

to/ffo  fqUad°(  anWararr,/!°  ?ay  Ullt°  John  F°ckling. 
ton  Efq  ;  fecond  Juftice  of  Chefter,  /.200.  ner  annum 

as  an  Addition  to  the  Profits  of  his  Place.  Signed  b/ 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  thf  ad  of 
Auguft,  1707. 

71.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Chriftonher 
Rhodes  Gent.  Secretary  or  Chief  Clerk  to  the  Commif¬ 
fioners  for  enquiring  into  the  Lolfes  at  the  Ifland  of 
I  !?  A"lenC1’  "hereof  y;.,  00.  will  be 

advanced  to  him  :  as  alfo,  fuch  Charges  as  (hall  be 
rnc, dental  ,n  hts  fatd  Office.  Signed  by /he  Lord  Trea! 
furer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  ad  of  Auguft,  1707 

FIUvT  tD/Cqf  /  °f  a  Wara“  t0  W  ™<°  Nathafoel 
Efhvick  Gent.  Secretary  or  Chief  Clerk  to  the  Commif- 
lioners  for  enquiring  into  the  LolTes  at  St.  Chriftonhers 
£.lSO.  whereof 00 ..will  be  advanced:  befides  his 
incrdental  Charges.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go 

dolphin  ;  and  fealed,  the  ad  of  Auguft,  [707. 

.  7k „Uocti“et  of  a  Grant  unto  George  Tilfon  Efo  -  of 
the  Office  of  Auditor  of  the  Excife  It  new  Imp!  °! 

K  h  Td  ’7'rh  arSah7  °,f  Per  annu“>-  Signed 

by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed,  the  fecond 
day  of  Auguft,  1707.  „ 

74-  Docquet  of  a  Grant  umo  Thomas  Hodges  Efo- 
of  the  Office  of  Attorney-General  of  Barbadoes ;  m 
reftde  there,  and  execute  the  faid  Office  in  his  own  Per 
fon;  except  m  cafe  of  Sicknefs,  or  other  Incapacity. 
Sealed  the  9th  of  AuguJl,  1707.  ,  - 

,0  It  ST’!  Copy  Of  the  Report  trade 

to  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphm,  by  Sir  Robert  Cotton 
and  Sir  Thomas  Frankland  Poft, nailers  General  cor 
cemmg  Mr.  Dummer’s  new  Propofais  for  comr’aftiug 
with  the  Queen,  on  a  new  foot,  about  the  Weft  India 
1  acquet-Boats.  dat.  i4th  of  Auguft  1707  80 

This  is  drawn-up  with  fuch  Friendffiip  &  Fav/r 
toward  Mr  Dummer  (who  was  a  very  able  &  worthy 
1  crlorg  as  I  have  often  heard;  as  was  confident  with 
tneir  Duty  to  the  Queens  Majefty. 

76.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  for  Seftitution  of  the  Tem- 
poralttes  of  the  Bilhoprick  of  EIv,  umo  Dr.  John  Moore 
7 


now 


Bibliothecas  Harleiarto 


61 1 


Num.  2263. 

now  Bifliop  of  that  See.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  &  fealed  the  ihthof  Auguft,  1707.  82. 

77.  Docquet  of  the  Prefentation  of  Lewis  Atterbury 

LL.D.  to  the  ReCtory  of  Shepperton  in  Middlefex,  void 
by  the  Deprivation  of  Matthew  Kirby,  for  his  not  taking 
the  Oaths  within  the  time  prefcribed  by  the  Laws. 
Sealed  the  16th  of  Auguft,  1707.  83. 

78.  Docquet  of  a  Commiflion  conftituting  Sir  "William 

Dowglas  of  Kelihead  a  joint  Commiflioner  of  the  Excile 
in  Scotland,  with  the  yearly  Salary  of  £300.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  29th  day 
of  Auguft,  1707.  "  84. 

79.  Docquet  of  a  Pardon  unto  Dr.  Matthew  Kirby 
late  Rector  of  Shepperton,  of  all  Crimes  &  Offences  by 
him  committed,  in  holding  the  laid  ReCtory,  after  he 
was  inftituted  &  induced  to  the  fame,  not  having  taken 
the  Oaths,  nor  fubfcribed  the  Declaration,  within  the 
time  limited  by  Law.  Sealed,  the  29th  of  Auguft,  1707. 

8  5. 

80.  Docquet  of  a  Commiflion  conftituting  Thomas 
Coleby,  Henry  Vincent,  Kendrick  Edifbury,  Thomas 
Harlow,  Den'zil  Onflow,  Thomas  Bere,  and  Thomas 
Reynolds  Efq".  Commifficners  for  Victualling  the  Navy 
Royal,  with  a  Salary  of  £400.  to  each  of  them.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  firft 

.  day  of  September,  1707.  86. 

81.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Cole  Efq  ;  of  the 

foie  Benefit  of  his  new  Invention,  for  the  more  eafy 
drawing  of  any  Burthens  in  &  upon  all  Carriages  upon 
Wheeles.  Sealed  the  lirft  of  September  1707.  87. 

82.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Henry  Furnefe  of 

the  Summe  of  £  1095.  ufually  paid  for  the  Dignity  of  a 
Baronet.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ; 
and  fealed,  the  firft  day  of  September,  1 707.  88. 

83.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Sir  Nicholas  Wil¬ 
liams,  of  the  fame  Summe  of  £1095.  ulually  paid  for 
the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  firft  day  of  September,  1707. 

89. 

84.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Ralph  Duke  of 

Montague  Mafter  of  the  Great  Ward-robe,  £ico,ooo. 
for  the  Ufe  &  Service  of  the  faid  Great  Ward-robe. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the 
8th  of  December,  1707.  g0- 

85.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Lord  Cowper, 
Baron  of  Wingham  Chancellour  of  Great  Britain,  of  an 
Annuity  of  £400.  Signed  by  ihe  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  20th  of  September,  1707. 

9r- 

86.  Docquet  of  a  Commifi  >n  conftituting  Laurence 

Wright,  Anthony  Hammond,  Dennis  Lyddel,  Beniamin 
Tymewell,  George  T°llett,  Efq”.  S'.  Thomas  Hopfon 
K'.  George  Saint  Lo,  Thomas  Jennings,  Henry  Greenhill, 
William  Wright,  Ifaac  Townes-end  Efqr*.  &  Sir  William 
Giffard  K'.  Commifiioners  of  the  Navy:  and  Sir  Richard 
Haddock  to  be  Comptroller  ;  Daniel  Furzer  &  William 
Lee  Surveyour ;  and  Charles  Scrgifon  to  be  Clerk  of  the 
Afts;  with  the  Salary  of  £cco.  per  annum  to  each  of 
them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and 
fealed  the  20th  day  of  September,  1707.  92. 

87.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Sir  Francis  Dafh- 
wood,  from  the  Sum  of  7,1095.  ufually  paid  for  the 
Dignity  of  a  Baronet.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  4th  of  October,  1707.  93. 

88.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  granting  unto  Paul  Jodrell 

Gent,  the  Office  of  CJnder-Clerk  of  the  Parliament  •  to 
attend  upon  the  Commons  of  England  in  Parliament 
iaffembled  :  with  the  yearly  Fee  of  £  10.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  4th  of  Oc¬ 
tober,  1707.  94. 

89.  Docquet  of  a  Commiflion  conftituting  Daniel 
IBlake,  C.hamock  Heron,  Abraham  Magny,  Evert  Julh- 
vet,  &  George  Clerk  Efq  \  Commifiioners  for  the 
| Regulating  &  Lycenfing  Hackney  Coaches  within  Lon- 


Num.  2^6 3; 

don  and  Weftminfter,  &c.  with  the  Salary  of  £100. 
per  annum  to  each  of  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  4th  of  Oftober  1707. 

.  9°-  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  a  Prebend  In  the  Cofle- 
grate  Church  of  Weftminfter,  unto  Thomas  Knipe  D.D. 
Sealed,  the  4th  of  October,  1707.  p6. 

91.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  granting  unto  Paul  Jodrell 
Junior,  the  Office  of  Under  Clerk  of  the  Parliament, 
after  the  Determination  of  his  Father  Paul  Jodrell  Seniors 
filtered  therein.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  &  fealed  the  4th  of  October,  T707.  97. 

9 Docftuet.°f  a  Warant  for  Cutting-downe  within 
the  New  Foreft  in  the  County  of  Southampton,  for  the 
Service  of  the  Navy  Royal,  Three  Hundred  Trees  yearly; 
being  Inch  as  may  be  found  moft  proper,  and  be  beftfpared 
during  the  terme  of  40  yeares.  And  alfo,  for  felling 
yearely  fuch  Irecs,  or  parts  of  Trees,  as  fhall  be  found 
not  ufefull  for  the  Navy;  employing  them,  together  with 
the  Bark  Lops,  Tops,  &  Offal- Wood,  to  the  belt  ad¬ 
vantage  for  her  Majefties  Ufe.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
1  realurei  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  29th  of  October 

17°7‘  TV  r  98. 

tv  \?°ccluet  .  a  Commiflion  conftituting  William 
Duke  of  Devonfhire  Lieu-tenant  of  the  County  ofDerby. 
Sealed  the  29th  of  October,  1707. 

94.  1 he  London  Weavers  humble  Reprefcntation  to 

the  Lord  Privy  Seale.  IOO_ 

,  Uefi^g  that  Search  may  be  made  upon  all  Weavers 
for  1  en  Miles  around  the  City  of  London,  who  are  not 
1-  rce  of  their  Company,  as  well  as  upon  thofe  that  are 
l-ree.  f  or  the  Intent  of  Searching  being  to  difeover 
frauds  &  unlawful  Practices;  if  thofe  who  are  not 
Members  of  the  Company  be  exempted  from  Search,  it 
will  give  them  the  greateft  Opportunity  and  Encou¬ 
ragement  for  Frauds  &  unlawful  Practices  in  the 
Weaving  Trade. 

95.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  John  Holt  late  Chief  Juftice 
of  the  Queens  Bench ;  dated  7  Novr.  1 707.  IOr. 

Shewing  that  he  had  difeourfed  with  the  Lord 
Chancellor  Cowper  about  the  Weavers  Propofal,  which 
h.s  Lordfhip  thought  reafonable,  &  fit  to  be  complied 
with  ;  with  whom  likewife,  he  himfelf  concurred. 

96.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Samuel  Noyes  Clerk 
to  the  ReCtory  of  S‘.  Maries  Church  in  Berkhampftead 
in  Hertfordfhire.  Sealed  the  12th  of  November,  1707. 


_  9"-  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Duke  \f 
Devonfhire,  of  the  Offices  of  .Warden  &  Chief  Juftice  in 
Eyre,  of  all  Her  Majefties  Forefts,  Parks,  Chafes,  & 
Warrens,  beyond  Trent  ;  with  the  yearly  Summe  of 
£100.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  & 
fealed  the  12th  of  November,  1707.  IOj, 

98.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Mitford  Crowe 
Efq;  Captain  General  in  Chief  over  the  Ifland  of  Barba¬ 
dos,  & c.  the  Allowance  of £2000.  per  annum,  for  his 
iupport  in  that  Employment,  and  in  lieu  of  all  Prefents 
from  the  Affemblies  :  with  a  reftriCtive  Claufe,  as 
ufual  in  fuch  Cafes.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  12th  of  November  1707. 

99.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Gamaliel  Laaden 

Clerk  to  the  ReCtory  of  Eaft-Merfey  in  the  County  of 
Effex.  Signed  by  Sir  George  Piers ;  and  fealed  the 
1 2th  of  November  1707.  IO£ 

100.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  Charles  Hedgis 

Kt.  of  an  Annuity  or  Penfion  of  £1300.  and.  after  him 
to  Sir  Richard  Raines  Kt.  Judge  of  the  Prerogalive 
Court  of  Canterbury,  during  her  Majefties  Life.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  tjlh 
of  November  1707.  10g 

101.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  pafling  the  Aqcompts 
of  Anthony  late  Vifcount  Falkland,  as  Treafurer  of 

j  the  Navy  Royal,  &  Marine  Affaires.  Signed  by  the  Lord 

Treafurer 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2263. 

Treniurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  a6lh  of  November 
1707- 

102.  Docquet  of  a  Lycence  (to  commence  upon 
the  Determination  of  the  prefem  Gram)  unto  Sir  Iliac 
Rebow  Kt.  to  erect  &  maintain  two  ljriH-Hou.es  at 
Harwich,  with  Lights  to  be  continually  burning  therein 
dui-inn  the  Night-Seafoo,  for  the  fafety  of  all  Ships  pafltng 
by  that  Port',  taking  one  Halfpenny  per  ion  from  all 
Btitifh  Ships  paffing  by  the  faid  Lighbhoufes  ;  and  one 
Penny  per  Ton,  from  all  Strangers,  Strangers  Ships, 

Sc  Veflels :  rendring  to  her  Majelty  the  yearly  Rent 
of  Five  Pounds.  Signed  by  the  I.ord  lreafurer  Go- 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  26th  of  November  170;.  110. 

tor.  Docquet  of  a  CornmilTmn  continuing  or  con- 
liituting  John  Evelyn,  Thomas  Baker  Efqrs.  Sir  l  ho. 
mas  Skipwith  Bart.  Matthew  Barton  &  Charles  killi- 
rrew  Elqrs.  Principal  Commiffioners  for  Prizes  t  with 
rite  yearly  Salary  of  £500.  unto  each  of  them.  Alfa, 
unto  Anthony  Burnaby  Efq;  the  Office  of  Secretary  to 
the  faid  Commiffioners,  with  the  yearly  Salary  017,400. 
for  himfelf  &  Clerks  t  and  to  William  Collelin  Lfq; 
the  Office  of  Comptroller  of  the  faid  Prizes,  with  the 
yearly  Salary  of/jjoo-  for  himlelf  &  two  Clerks.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  &  fealed  the  26th 
of  November  1707.  .  '  L  , 

104.  Docquet  of  a  new  C.hartre  to  tnc  anttent  Guild 
or  Company  of  Weavers  of  London  :  having  Tome  Al¬ 
terations  from  that  fealed  In  April  laft.  Sealed  the 
22th  of  November  1707.  .  ,  ,  _  1 g', 

toe.  Tran  Union  of  Francis  Baird  the  French  Centals 
Certificate  to  Conful  Hemings.  dated  in  the  llle  of  Ma¬ 
dera,  the  27th  of  May  1 707.  u3'4', 

Shewing,  that  as  the  late  French  king  had  made 
Centals  in  the  Illes  Aqores  independent  of  his  Cental 
General  at  Liibon,  whereby  his  Subjefts  were  better 
protected  8c  ailifted  ill  their  Commerce  :  lo,  her  Majelty 
having,  in  like  manner,  made  Benjamin  Hemings  her 
Conful  there,  the  like  Benefits  did  &  would  accrue  unto 
the  Englifh  trading  in  thofe  parts. 

,  06  The  Realbns  of  the  Englifh  Merchants  now  re¬ 
dding  in  the  Hand  of  Madera  for  the  Independency  ot 
their  Confullhip,  from  that  of  the  Conful  General  at 
Lilhon.  dated,  1 8  February  1704-5.  "6* 

107.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  conlhtutmg  John  Milner 
Efq.  her  Majedies  Conful  General  within  the  Dominions 
&  Kingdome  of  Portugal ;  under  fevcral  Reductions.. 

Sealed  the  2d  of  December  1707.  .  Tr.- 

ic8.  Reafons  on  the  behalf  of  Benjamin  Heminge 
Efq;  Conful  of  Madera,  &  of  the  Merchants  trading  thi¬ 
ther,  8c  to  other  parts  of  the  King  of  Portugalls  Domi¬ 
nions,  againflMr.  Milners  Bill.  ,fl°\ 

,00  "A  Memorial  of  Mr.  Milners  Cafe  relating  to  his 
Cqmmiffion  for  the  Confullhip  of  Portugal,  now  lying 
before  his  Grace  the  Lord  Privy  Seal  -,  agamlt  which, 
Sir  Jeffrey  Jeffreys  hath  entered  a  Caveat.  122. 

1 10.  Docquet  of  aWarant,  to  grant  the  Dignity  or  a 
Baronet  unto  Edward  Goodere  of  Burhope  in  the  County 
of  Hereford  Efq;  fealed  the  3d  of  December  1 707.  1 24. 

1 1 1  Docquet  of  a  Patent  conitituting  John  Henley 
l  f„.  Receiver  General  of  Prizes,  with  the  Salary  of 
/H  oo  per  ann.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol- 
Shin,  and  fealed  the  ?d  of  December  1707.  laj. 

112  Copy  of  Sir  Simon  llarcourt  then  Attorney. 

General  his  Report  to  her  Majelty,  upon  the  Peti¬ 
tion  of  Mr.  Francis  Collins  Merchant,  dated  19th  De, 
cember  1717.  ,  ,  f126' 

The  Petition  was  for  Licence  to  buy  Oooo  toot  ot 
Black  lriih  Marble,  defigned  to  be  vied  in  or  about 
St.  Pauls  Church  in  London,  w  hich  was  taken  by  a 
French  Privateer,  8c  carried  to  Havre  de  Grace. 

ii-  Original  I.etter  of  my  late  noble  Lord  the  Earl 
of  Oxford,  to  the  Duke  of  New-Caftle  Lord  Privy  Seale, 
accompanying  the  Report  above-mentioned,  dated  at 
Whitehall,  8  December  1707.  129. 


Num.  2263. 

1 14.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Alice  Hill  in 

confideration  of  her  Service,  as  one  of  her  Majedies  Bed- 
Chamber-Women,  the  like  Annuity  or  yearly  Penfion 
°f^S°Q.  as  other  her  Bed-Chamber-Women  have.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  10th 
of  December,  1707.  13°* 

1 15.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  William  Ca- 

dogan  Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  States 
General,  &  Plenipotentiary  in  the  Negotiations  entred  into 
by  her  Majefty,  in  concert  with  other  Princes  &  States, 
for  what  relates  to  the  common  Intereft  :  £500.  for  his 
Equipage,  and/5,  by  the  day  as  Envoy  ^Plenipotentiary, 
for  his  ordinary  Entertainment :  with  allowance  ol  further 
Summes  for  Intelligences,  8cc.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  icth  of  December 
1707.  131. 

1 16.  Docquet  of  aWarant,  to  pay  unto  Charles  Dar- 

tiquenave  Elq;  Paymafler  of  her  Majedies  Works, 
£40,000.  upon  Accompt,  for  the  Ufe  and  Service  of  the 
faid  Works*  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  10th  of  December  1707.  132. 

1 1 7.  Docquet  of  a  Licence,  unto  certain  Perfons  ( at 

the  Indance  of  Francis  Collins  Merchant J  to  go  into 
France,  8c  buy  8c  fetch  from  thence  the  Black  lriih 
Marble,  abovementioa'd  at  §  112.  Sealed  the  17th  ot 
December  1707.  1  ?3- 

118.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Sir  Tho¬ 

mas  Littleton  Bart.  Treafurer  of  her  Majedies  Navy 
j£2,oco,coo.  upon  account ;  for  the  Ufe  8c  Service  of 
her  Majedies  Navy,  and  the  Vidtualling  thereof.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  19th 
of  December  1 707.  1 34* 

1 1 9.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  James  Bryd- 

ges  Efq;  Pavmader  General  of  her  Majedies  Forces  in 
the  Netherlands,  £1,158,556  :  9  :  4.  upon  Accompt, 
vizt.  £89.1,272  :  3  :  (-.  for  maintaining  40,000  Men  for 
the  year  1708.  £-34,251  ;  13  ;  4.  for  our  proportion  of 
3000  Palatines,  for  the  year  1  708.  .£’43,251  :  12:  6.  for 
our  proportion  of  maintaining  4639  Saxons  for  the  year 
i7'8.  £'9,269  :  16  :  6.  for  our  proportion  of  maintaining 
Bothmars  Regiment  of  Dragoons,  for  the  year  1708. 
Signed  by  the  I.ord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the 
20th  of  December  1 707.  13  v 

l  20.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  appointing  Charles  Go* 
dolphin  Efq;  one  of  the  Com  midi  oners  of  the  Cudomes, 
already  directed  to  keep  a  General  Regifter  of  all  trading 
Ships  in  England  y.  to  enter  into  the  fame  all  Ships  of 
Scotch  Property  at  the  time  of  ratifying  the  Treaty  of 
Union  :  which  Services  performed,  he  is  to  be  dyled  Rc- 
gider  General  of  all  trading  Ships  belonging  to  Great . 
Britain  ;  with  a  Salary  of  £500.  a  year.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  24th  of  Dc-' 
cember  170.7.  137.  - 

1 2 1.  Docquet.  of  a  Commidion,  condituting  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam.  Honywood  Bart.  Edmund  Chaloner,Jofeph  Addifoiy 
Thomas  Goodman  Efqrs.  and  James  Afhburne  Gent/ 

I  Commiffioners  for  Appeales,  and  regulating  the  Excife,: 
with  the  yearly  Salary  of  £200.  Signed  by  the  Lord. 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  24th  of  December* 
1707.  1 3^*  J*j 

122.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  HoweJ 

Efq;  Receiver  8c  Paymader  General  of  the  Guards,  Gar- 
rifons,  and  other  Land  Forces,  £51 1,734  ;  8  :  6.  upon 
Accompt ;  for  maintaining  the  Guards  &  Garrifons  of 
Great  Britain  ;  and  for  payment  of  the  Invalids  for  the 
year  1708,  including  5000  Men  to  ferve  on  board  the 
Fleet.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and 
fealed  the  29th  of  December  170 7.  * 39-  j 

12^.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Howe  Efq;  of 
the  Office  of  Receiver  8c  Paymader  General,  of  all  the 
Guards,  Garrifons,  8c  other  Forces  in  Great  Britain ; 
with  tbe  Fee  of  20s.  by  the  day,  to  be  paid  out  of  the 
Edabfidnnent  of  the  faid  Forces.  Alfo  to  be  Pay-mafter 
of  all  the  Moneys  appointed  for  the  maintenance  ot  the 
j  difatled 


Num.  2263. 

difabled  &  fuper-annuated  Officers  Sc  SoulJiers  belonging 
to  Chelfea-Hofpital ;  with  the  like  Salary  of  20s.  by  the 
day.  out  of  the  Moneys  fett  apart,  for  the  Service  of  the 
faid  Hofpital.  Signed  by  the  Lord  T reafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed,  the  29th  of  December  1707.  *4°- 

124.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Bryd- 
ges  Efq;  Pay-mafter  General  of  our  Forces  in  the  Ne¬ 
therlands,  &c.  £ 1. 7;  0, 603  :  7  :  8:  upon  account ;  vizt. 
/'c86,67  i  :  12  :  6-. for  maintaining  the  Forces  eftablifhed 
to  ferve  in  Spain  Sc  Portugal,  h  for  Forrage,  Waggon- 
money,  Baggage-money,  Sc  the  Gavrifon  at  Gibraltar. 
£494,689  :  8  :  6.  for  our  proportion  of  the  Subfidies 
payable  to  the  Allies,  for  the  year  1708.  £500,000.  for 
the  augmentation  of  thehorces,  to  flrcughthcn  the  Army 
of  the  Duke  of  Savoy  ;  for  making  the  Alliances  good 
with  the  King  of  Portugal.  £10:, 000.  to  defray  an  ex¬ 
traordinary  Subfidy  granted  to  the  Duke  of  Savoy  in  the 
year  1707.  £22,957  :  2  :  o.  to  compleat  the  Summe  of 
£42,957  :  2  :  o.  being  our  proportion  for  the  Troops  of 
the  Landgrave  of  Heffe-Caflel,  employed  in  Italy,  for  the 
year  1707.  And  £12,284  :  19:8^  for  Fortifications 
&  other  Services  at  Gibraltar,  in  the  year  1707.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  29th 
of  December  1707.  _  £42- 

j  25.  Docquett  of  a  Lycenfcto  the  City  of  Carliile,  to 
purchafe  Sc  hold  in  Mortmain,  any  Manors,  See.  to  the 
yearly  Value  of  £600.  fealed  the  7th  of  January  1707-8. 

143- 

126.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d’Eflire,  to  the  Dean  Sc 

Chapter  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Norwich  ;  vacant 
by  the  Tranflation  of  Dr.  Moore  to  the  Bifhoprick  of 
Ely.  Sealed,  the  12th  of  January  1-07-8.  144- 

127.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d'Eflire,  to  the  Dean  Sc 

Chapter  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Chuller ;  void  by 
the  Death  of  Dr.  Nicholas  Stratford.  Sealed  the  12th  of 
January  1707-8.  l45- 

12K  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d  fflire,  to  the  Dean  & 
Chapter  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Exeter ;  void  by 
the  Tranflation  of  Sir  Jonathan  Trelawny  Bart,  to  the 
Bifhoprick  of  Winchelter.  Sealed  the  x  2th  day  of  Janu¬ 
ary  1707.  r4^r 

129.  Docquet  of  aLycenfe  unto  the  Borough  of  Staf¬ 

ford,  to  purchafe  Sc  hold  in  Mortmain,  any  Manors,  8cc. 
to  the  yearly  Value  of  £400.  Sealed  the  1 2th  of  January 
1707-8.  1 47- 

130.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Potter  D.  D.  of 
the  Office  of  Regius  ProfefTor  of  Divinity  in  the  Univer- 
fity  of  Oxford,  together  with  a  Canons  Place  in  the 
Cathedral  Church  Oxford,  properly  belonging  to  the 
Regius  ProfefTor  of  Divinity  there.  Sealed  the  20th  of 
January,  1707. 

131.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Henry  Boyle  Efq;  of 

the  Office  of  Under  Treafurer  of  the  Exchequer.  Sealed 
the  20  of  January,  1707-8.  T49- 

132.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Henry  Boyie  Efq;  of 

the  Office  of  Chancellour  of  the  Exchequer.  Sealed  the 
20th  of  January,  1707-8.  150. 

133.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Prance  Palmes 

Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Duke  of 
Savoy,  £500  for  his  Equipage,  and  £5.  by  the  day 
for  his  ordinary  Entertainment ;  with  allowance  of  fur¬ 
ther  Suinmes  for  Intelligences,  See.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  2  ill  day  of  Janu¬ 
ary,  1707-8,  I5I- 

1 34.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Thomas  Earl 
of  Stamford,  William  Lord  Dartmouth,  Henry  Lord 
Herbert  of  C.herbury,  Sir  Philip  Meadows  Kt.  John  Poul- 
teney  8c  Robert  Monkton  Efqrs.  conftitutcd  (amongfl: 
others)  Commiflioners  for  promoting  of  Trade,  the 
yearely  Salary  of  £  1000.  to  each  of  them.  And  further, 
to  pay  unto  the  four  Clerks  of  the  Privy  Council,  for 
their  Care,  the  allowance  of  £400.  Pcr  annum  ;  to  the 
two  Keepers  of  the  Council  Chamber,  the  allowance  of 
£73,  per  annum  ;  and  to  William  Popple  junior  Sccre- 

Cat.  Harl.  Vql..  II. 


Num.  2263. 

tary  to  the  faid  Commiflioners,  for  himfelf,  Chiefe  Clerk* 
and  other  Officers,  £1150.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  211I;  of  Janu¬ 
ary,  1707-8.  IS2- 

135.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  difeharge  Charles  Earle 

of  Mancheiler  from  1527  Ounces  of  Gilt  Plate,  and 
5213  Ounces  of  White  Plate,  deliver’d  to  him  out  of 
the  Jewel-Office,  as  Ambaflador  of  K.  William  to  the 
State  of  Venice ;  and  alfo  from  252  Ounces  of  Gilt 
Plate  Sc  1124  Ounces  of  White  Plate  deliver’d  him  as  an 
Ambaflador  to  France.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  &  fealed  2  1  Jannary  1707-8.  154; 

1 36.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Henry  Worl'e- 

ley  Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  King  of 
Spain  Charles  in.  £500.  for  his  Equipage  ;  and  £5.  by 
the  day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment,  with  allowance 
of  further  Summes  for  Intelligences,  See.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ,  and  fealed  the  2  ill  day 
of  January  1707-8-  1 55- 

137.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  White  Kennet  D.  D. 

of  the  Deanry  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Peterborough. 
Sealed  the  28th  day  of  January  1707-  -;.  _  156* 

138.  Docquet  of  a  Pnefentalion  of  Bryan  Sixfmithe 

Clerke  to  the  Rectory  of  Wadingham-St.  Marie  Sc  St. 
Peter  cum  Snitterby,  in  the  County  of  Lincoln.  Sealed 
the  28th  of  January  1707-8.  _  *  5.7- 

139.  Docquet  of  tbe  Royal  Aflent,  for  Sir  William 

Dawes  Bart,  to  be  Bifliop  of  Chefter.  Settled  the  2d  day 
of  February  1 707-S.  *5^- 

140.  Docquet  of  the  Royal  Aflent,  for  Dr.  Charles 

Trimnell  to  be  Bifliop  of  Norwich.  Sealed  the  fecond  day 
of  February  1707-8.  1 59- 

141.  Docquet  of  the  Royal  Aflent,  for  Dr.  Ofspring. 

Blackall  to  be  Bifliop  of  Exeter.  Scaled  the  fecond  day  of 
February  1707-8.  J6o- 

142.  Copy  of  the  Count  dc  Brianqons  Letter  in 

French  to  the  Earl  of  Sunderland:  deliring  a  Licenfe 
for  Mr.  Lullin  to  return  from  France,  into  any  of  her 
Majcflies  Dominions,  dat  3  February  1707-8.  161. 

143.  Docquet  of  a  Warrant  empowering  the  Lord 

Treafurer  to  appoint  Receivers  Generali  of  the  Taxes 
throughout  Great  Britain.  Signed  by  his  Lordlhip  ; 
and  fealed  the  4th  of  February  1707-8.  163. 

144.  Docquet  of  a  'Warant,  to  pay  unto  Robert  Har¬ 

ley  Efq;  her  Majefties  Principal  Secretary  of  State, 
£3000  for  fecret  Service,  without  Account.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  4th 
day  of  February  1707-8.  164- 

145.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  the  Earle  of 
Sunderland  one  of  the  Principal  Secretaries  of  State, 
£3000.  for  fecret  Service.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin  ;  Sc  fealed  the  4th  of  February  1707-8. 

165. 

146.  Docquet  of  a  difeharge  to  Edmund  Dumracr 
Efq;  of  his  late  Contract  relating  to  the  Weft  India- 
Pacquet  Boats,  he  paying  into  the  Pofl-Office£507 :  2 :  6. 
due  to  the  Queen  for  Freight  of  Pafleiigers.  And  alfo, 
from  a  Deficiency  of  £5, 063  :  10  ;  1.  Further  Autho¬ 
rizing  the  Poll-mafter  General  to  enter  into  a  new  Con¬ 
trast  with  the  faid  Mr.  Dummer  for  finding  5  Pacquet- 
Boats,  each  of  the  Burthen  of  140  Tons,  for  continu¬ 
ing  a  Corefpondence  with  the  Weltern  Iflands  in  Ame¬ 
rica  ;  he  being  allowed  the  Tonnage  of  Goods  out  &c 
home,  and  all  freight  of  Paflengers ;  together  with  a 
yearly  penfion  of  12,000.  pounds  while  the  War  lhall 
laft,  Sc  £8coo.  in  time  of  Peace  :  the  Income  by 
Letters  being  referved  her  Majefty.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  5th  of  Fe¬ 
bruary  1707-8. 

147.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Robert  Earrv 
Clerk  to  the  Vicarage  cf  North-fleet  in  the  County  of 
Kent,  and  in  the  Peculiar  Jurifdiclion  of  Canterbury. 

fealed  the  1 2t’n  of  February  1707-8.  l6S- 

148.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Thomas  Seamier 

-  R  Clerk 


*•> 


614 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2263. 

Clerk  to  the  Rectory  oF  South  OckinJen  in  Effex  ;  void, 
by  the  Promotion  of  Dr.  Ofspring  Blackall  to  the  Bi- 
flloprick  of  Exeter,  fealed  the  x  2th  of  February  1707-8. 

169. 

14?.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Erafmus  Lewis  Efq; 
of  the  Offices  of  Prothonotary  &  Clerk  of  the  Crown  in 
the  Counties  of  Carnarvon,  Anglefey,  Sc  Merioneth, 
after  the  Intereft  of  Ellis  Lloyd  the  prefent  Officcer  (hall 
be  determined.  To  hold,  during  the  Lives  of  John 
Stepney  Sc  George  Lewis  jun.  Efqrs.  Sealed  the  12th  of 
February  1708-9.  170. 

150.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  conftituting  Henry  Boyle 

Efq;  one  of  the  principal  Secretaries  of  State,  inftead  of 
Robert  Harley  Efq;  with  the  Salary  of  £  1 00.  per  annum. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  13th  of  February  1707-8.  171. 

1 51.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  a  Prebend  in  the  Col¬ 
legiate  Church  of  St.  Peter  in  Weftminfter,  unto  Dr. 
Samuel  Bradford.  Sealed  the  19th  of  February  1707-8. 

172. 

152.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Ilenrv  Boyle 

Efq;  one  of  the  principal  Secretaries  of  State,  £7 o<  o. 
for  her  Majefties  fecret  Service,  without  Account. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  2  iff  of  February  1 7-7-8.  1 7  3. 

153.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Henry 

Boyle  Efq;  one  of  the  principal  Secretaries  of  State  the 
yearly  Salary  of  £  1  ,H;,o.  in  lieu  of  the  Penfion  allowed 
him  in  refpett  of  the  faid  Office,  without  Account. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  lealed 
the  2  iff  of  February  1 707-8.  174. 

1 54.  Docquet  of  a  Patent  (upon  the  furrender  of 

Roger  Whitley  jun.  Efq;)  unto  Daniel  Peck  Efq;  of  the 
Offices  of  Recievor  of  the  Queens  Revenues  in  North 
Wales  with  the  yearly  Fee  ol  /30.  and  an  Allowance  of 
20s.  per  Cent,  for  all  Moneys  pay’d  by  him  into  the 
Exchequer  :  and  of  her  Recievor  within  the  County  Pa¬ 
latine  of  Chefter,  with  the  yearly  Fee  of  10  Pounds, 
and  the  like  Allowance,  for  the  Portage  of  money  into 
the  Exchequer.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  2  ill  of  February  1707-S.  175. 

155.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  unto  John  Hilton 
M.  A.  of  the  Vicarage  of  Stone-houfe  in  the  County  of 
Glouceller.  Sealed  the  25th  of  February  1707-8.  176. 

t  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Nicholas  Clagett 
D.  D.  to  the  Rectory  of  Hecham  in  the  County  of 
Suffolk,  dated  the  25th  of  February  1707-8.  177. 

1  C7.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Henry  Moore  to 
the  Rectory  of  Eaft- Wood-hay  in  the  County  of  South¬ 
ampton.  fealed,  the  25th  of  February  1707-S.  178. 

158.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  Reffitution  of- Tem¬ 
poralities,  unto  Charles  Trimnell  Biffiop  of  Norwich. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  j  and  fealed 
the  25th  of  February  1  707-8.  1 79. 

1  ;q.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  Reffitution  ofTem- 
poraities,  unto  Dr.  William  Galtrell  Biffiop  of  Chefter. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed, 
the  25th  of  February  1707-8.  180. 

160.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  Reffitution  of  Tempo- 
rallies,  unto  Dr.  Of-fpring  Blackall  Biffiop  of  Exeter. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  25th  of  February  1707-8.  181. 

j  6 1 .  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Sir  Charles  Hedges 
Kt.  from  the  Quantity  of  1009  oz.  3  d\v.  of  White  Plate 
delivered  to  him  out  of  the  Jewel  Office,  as  late  one  of 
ifie  Princij  ;  S  .  ries  of  State.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin and  fealed  the  25th  of  February 
'  1707-8.  182. 

162.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Anne  Wyvill, 
in  confideration  of  her  Service,  as  one  of  the  Queenes 
Maids  of  Honor,  the  yearly  Penfion  of  £300.  with  a 
Provifo  for  Mary  Stanhope  Wife  of  Charles  Fane  Efq; 
figned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  25th  of  February  1707-8.  183. 


Num.  2263* 

1 63.  Docquet  of  the  Prefentation  of  Robert  Canon 
D.  D.  to  the  Archdeaconry  of  Norfolk.  Sealed  the  4th 
of  March,  and  again  the  10th  of  March,  1707-8.  184. 

1 64.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Henry  Earle 

of  Galway  appointed  Ambaffador  Extraordinary  to  the 
King  of  Portugal],  ;£i  oao.  for  his  Equipage,  and  ^10. 
by  the  day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment  ;  with  Al¬ 
lowance  of  further  Summes  for  Intelligences,  See.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  10th 
of  March  1707-8.  j8c.' 

165.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Edward  Thwaites 

M.  A.  of  the  Office  of  Greek  Profeifor  in  the  Univerfity 
of  Oxford,  in  the  room  of  Dr.  Thomas  Mills  promoted 
to  the  See  of  Waterford  Sc  Lifmore  in  the  Kingdome  .of 
Ireland,  fealed  the  icth  of  March  1707-8.  186. 

166.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Norman  Mcckaikell 

Gent,  of  the  Office  of  Clerk  of  the  Markets  of  St.  Mi¬ 
chael  a  Is  Briclge-Towne,  Spykes  Towne,  and  all  other 
Townes  within  the  lffand  of  Barbados..  Sealed  the  ;  2th 
day  of  March,  1707-8.  187. 

167.  Docquet  of  a  I.vcence  unto  Anthony  I.ullin,  to 

return  from  the  French  Dominions,  into  Great  Brit.iin. 
Sealed  the  12th  of  March  1707-8.  1 88. 

168.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Harry  Mor¬ 

dant  Efq;  Treafurer  &  Pay-malier  of  the  Ordnance 
£300, 00c.  upon  Acct.  for  Land  &  Sea-Services  per¬ 
formed  or  to  be  performed  by  the  Office  of  Ordnance. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  20th  of  March  1 707-8.  189. 

169.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Henry  Barret 

Clerk  to  the  Rettory  of  Hertcft  Sc  B'oxted  in  Suffolk, 
fealed  the  25th  day  of  March  1708.  190. 

170.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Richard  Gregfon 

Gent,  of  the  Office  of  one  of  the  Keepers  of  the  Coun¬ 
cil  Chamber,  with  the  Fee  of  2s.  6d.  by  the  day.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  20th 
of  March  1708.  19 1. 

171.  Docquet  of  a  Licence  unto  the  City  of  London 

Governors  of  the  Hofpitals  of  St.  Bartholomew  Sc 
Bethlehem,  to  purchafe  Sc  hold  in  Mortmain,  any  Ma¬ 
nors,  See.  to  the  value  of  ^3000.  per  annum  to  the 
benefit  of  Sr.  BartholeVnews  Ilofpital  ;  and  of  £2000. 
per  annum  Bethlehem-Hofpital.  Sealed  the  '29th  of 
March  1708.  192. 

172.  Docquet  of  a  Licence  unto  the  Governors  of 
the  Poffeflions,  Revenues,  Sc  Goods  of  the  Hofpitals  of 
Edward  vi.  King  of  England,  of  Chrift ;  ofBride-wdl  ; 
Sc  of  St.  Thomas  the  Apoftle:  to  purchafe  &  take  in 
Mortmain,  any  Manors,  Sic.  to  the  value  of^qcco.'  per 
annum  for  Chrifts  Ilofpital ;  £2000.  per  annum  for 
Bridewell  Ilofpital  :  and  ,£3000.  per  annum  ior  St, 
Thomas’s  Hofpital.  Sealed  the  29th  of  March  1-708. 

r  .  r93- 

173.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  Charles  Lloyd  of 

Milti.L! alias  Maes  y  velin  in  the  County  of  Cardigan  lit. 
of  the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet.  Sealed  the  firffc  of  April 
i;cS.  i94. 

174.  Docquet  of  anew  Charter,  to  the  Borough  of 

Bewdley  in  the  County  oi  Worccffer.  'Sealed  the  20th  of 
April  1708.  195. 

175.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Offices  of  Steward 

of  the  Dutchy  of  Cornwall,  and  of  the  Boiough  Sc 
Manor  of  Bradminch  in  the  County  of  Devon;  S:  Ste¬ 
ward  of  all  the  Caftles,  Manors  Sc  Lands  within  the 
Counties  of  Cornwal  Sc  Devon,  parcel  of  the  faid 
Dutchy;  &  of  Warder.  Sc  Steward  of  the  Stannary 
Court  ;  Sc  of  Rider  &  Mailer  of  the  Foreft  Sc  Chace  of 
Dartmore,  parcel  of  the  faid  Duchy  ;  unto  Hugh  Bof- 
cawen  Efq;  with  the  annual  Fees  of  40  Marks.  20 
pounds.  Sc  10  Marks,  with  an  additional  Salary  of 
icool.  per  annum  :  in  the  room  of  Francis  Godolphin 
Lord  Ryalton.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  Si  fealed  the  2 2d  of  April  1708.  196. 

176.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  oi  the  Office  of  Chancellor 

of 


Bibliothecae  Elarleianae. 


Nutn.  2263. 

of 'the  Exchequer,  unto  John  Smith  Efq;  in  the  Room 
of  Henry  Boyle  Efq;  now  one  of  her  Majefties  principal 
Secretaries.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  22d  of  April  1708.  197. 

1 77.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Under 

Treafurer  of  ihe  Exchequer,  to  John  Smith  Efq;  in  the 
ruom  of  Henry  Boyle  Efq;  now  one  of  her  Majefties 
principal  Secretaries.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  22d  of  April  1708.  198. 

178.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Dr.  White  Kennet 
Dean  of  Peterborough,  to  the  Rectory  of  the  United 
Churches  of  St.  Mary  Aldermary  St  of  St.  Thomas  the 
Apoltle,  in  London,  &  of  the  peculiar  Jurifdiction  of  Can¬ 
terbury,  void  by  the  promotion  of  Dr.  Ofspring  Blackall 
to  the  See  of  Exeter.  Sealed  the  27th  of  April  1 708.  199. 

179.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Robert  Brabant 

D.  D.  one  of  her  Majefties  Chaplains  inOrdinary,  of 
a  Prebend  in  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Worcefter  ;  void 
by  the  promotion  of  Sir  William  Dawes  Bart,  to  the  See 
ofChdter.  Sealed  the  27th  of  April  1708.  aoo. 

180.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d’Eflire  to  the  Dean  & 

Chapter  of  St.  Afaph,  empowering  them  to  ele£t  a 
Bilhop  to  that  See,  void  by  the  death  of  Dr.  William 
Beveridge.  Sealed  the  29th  of  April  1708.  20 1. 

18 1.  Docquet  of  a  Commmiflion  continuing  or  con¬ 

ftituting  Edward  Lloyd,  Robert  Pooley,  Richard  Dyot, 
John  Molefworth,  &  Richard  Martin  Elqs  Commiffioners 
of  the  Duty  arifing  upon  damp'd  Vellum,  Parchment  k 
Paper,  with  the  yearly  Salary  of  £300.  to  each  of  them  : 
William  Brydges  Jun.  Efq;  to  be  their  Secretary,  with  the 
Salary  of  £  2  00.  per  annum.  Signed  by  theLoid  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  fealed  the  firft  day  of  May  170S.  202. 

183.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Craven  Peyton  Efq  ;  i 

of  the  Offices  of  Keeper  of  the  Change  St  Money  within 
the  Tower  of  London,  &:  Keeper  of  the  Coinage  of  Gold 
8t  Silver  within  the  faid  Tower  or  elfewhere  in  England  ; 
in  the  room  of  Sir  John  Stanley  Bart.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  liritof  May, 
170S.  204. 

184.  Docquet  of  a  Commiflion  continuing  &  con- 

ftituling  Prince  George,  feveral  great  Minifters  of  State, 
with  Thomas  Earl  of  Stamford,  William  Lord  Dart¬ 
mouth,  Henry  Lord  Herbert  of  Churbury,  Sir  Philip 
Meadows  Senr.  Kt.  John  Pulteney  8t  Robert  Monckton 
Efqrs.  &  Sr.  Charles  Turner  Kt.  Commiffioners  for  pro¬ 
moting  Trade,  and  for  infpedting  and  improving  the 
Plantations  in  America  and  elfewhere.  Sealed  the  4th 
of  May  ;  and  again  the  26th  of  June,  1 708.  becaufe  of  a 
miflakc.  205. 

185.  Docquet  of  a  Commiflion,  continuing  or  con- 

flituting  Charles  Godolphin,  Samuel  Clarke,  Thomas 
Newport,  William  Culliford,  Efqrs.  Sir  John  Worden, 
Sir  Matthew  Dudley,  &  Sir  John  Stanley  Barts,  C0111- 
miflioners  for  managing  &  collecting  the  Cuftomes,  with 
a  Salary  of  £.  iceo.  per  annum  to  each  of  them.  Alfo, 
the  faid  Charles  Godolphin  to  keep  a  generall  Regifter 
of  all  Ships  trading  to,  from,  or  coalt-wife  in  England  : 
and  Ricliaid  Savage' Efqr;  to  be  Secretary  to  the  faid 
Commillioriers,  with  a  Salary  of  /.40c.  per  annum. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the 
4th  of  May,  17C.S.  2c6. 

186.  Original  Certificate  to  the  Duke  ofNew-caflle 

Lord  Privy  Seale,  of  the  Amicable  Society,  fetting  forth 
that  Mr.  Vaughan  was  employed  by  that  Society  to  de¬ 
fend  their  Rights  agninff  the  Charter  palling  for  Infurers 
on  Lives  ;  and  to  juftifie  the  faid  Mr.  Vaughan  againft 
the  Reflections  of  tin;  Infurers  in  their  Petition,  dat.  23 
February,  1707-8.  Signed  by  Mr.  John  Hartley  their 
Regifter,  &  fealed  with  their  Common  Seale.  208. 

1S7.  Copy  of  the  Queens  Warant  for  Incorporating 
the  Company  of  Infurers  upon  Lives.  Given  the  8th -of 
November,  1707.  210. 

188.  Heads  of  a  Charter  to  the  Company  of  Infurers 
upon  Lives.  212. 

10 


NuiTTT'226  j. 

189.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  incorporate  William 

Branthwayt  hfq;  and  others,  by  the  Name  of  Infurers 
upon  Lives.  Sealed  the  4th  of  May,  1708.  216. 

190.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Alexander  Cairnes  of 

Monaghan  in  Ireland,  Efq;  the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  Sealed  the  5th  of  May; 
1708.  '  217. 

191.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Shore  Efq;  of 

the  Office  of  Serjeant  of  all  Trumpets,  Drums,  &  Fifes; 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed 
the  5th  of  May,  1708.  218. 

19’.  Docquet  of  a  Commiflion,  to  conftitute  or  con¬ 
tinue  John  Danvers,  Thomas  Aram,  Humphry  Griffith; 
Edward  Brereton,  8c  James  Cardonnc-11  Efqrs;  Com¬ 
miffioners  for  the  Receipt  8c  Management  of  the  Duties 
upon  Salt,  8c  Rock  Salt,  with  a  Salary  of  £500.  per 
annum.  Alfo,  Thomas  Hall  Efqr  ;  to  be  Comptroller 
of  the  faid  Duties,  with  a  Salary  of £350.  per  annum, 
for  himfelf  Sc  Clerks  in  the  room  of  1  nomas  Brodrick 
Efq;  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and 
fealed  the  5th  of  May,  1708.  219. 

193.  Docquet  of  a  Commiflion  conftituting  John 

Lovelace,  Captain  General  &  Governor  in  Chief,  over 
the  Provinces  of  New  York,  and  the  Territories  depend¬ 
ing  thereon ;  and  Captain  Generall  Sc  Commander  in 
Chief  of  the  Militia  fc  of  all  the  Forces,  by  Sea  Sc  Land, 
within  the  Colony  of  Connecticut.  Sealed  the  nth  of 
May,  1703.  221. 

1 94.  Docquet  of  a  Commiflion  conftituting  John  Lord 

Lovelace  Captain  General  &  Governor  in  Chief,  over 
the  Provinces  of  Nova  Ctefarea  or  New  Jerfey.j  in  the 
room  of  Edward  Lord  Cornbury.  SealeJ  the  1  ith  day 
of  May,  1708.  222. 

195.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Comp¬ 

troller  of  the  Accounts  of  the  Army,  to  Sir  Philip  Mea¬ 
dows  Junior  Kt.  &  Thomas  Broderick  Efq;  with  the 
Salary  of  ^1500.  per  annum  for  themfelves;  ^300. 
per  annum  to  their  Secretary  ;  and  £900.  per  annum 
to  defray  the  Charges  of  the  Office,  as  Houfe-Rent,  Sa¬ 
laries  to  Clerks,  &c.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1 7th  of  May,  1708.  223. 

196.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Robert  Mocker  Gent, 

of  Three  Faires  to  be  held  yearly  at  Church-Towne  in 
the  Parifh  of  Cambourne  in  Cornwall.  Sealed  the  24th 
of  May,  1708.  224. 

197.  Docquet  of  a  Confirmation  to  Richard  Earl  of 
Burlington  ot  an  antient  Weekly  Market,  and  an  annual 
Fair,  within  the  Manor  of  Setel  in  the  County  of  York  ; 
and  of  feveral  other  new  Fairs  to  be  held  Yearly  within 
the  Towne  of  Setel.  Sealed  the  24th  of  May,  1708. 

224. 

198.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  David  Lance,  of  the 

Office  of  Mailer- Plaifterer  of  all  her  Majefties  Works  ; 
with  the  Fee  of  1  2  pence  by  the  Day.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  8c  fealed  the  24th  of  May, 
1708.  226. 

199.  Docquet  of  a  Giant  of  the  Royal  AfTent,  for 

Dr.  William  Heetwood  to  be  Bilhop  of  St.  Afaph. 
Staled  the  24th  day  of  May,  1708.  227. 

2C0.  Docquot  of  a  Grant  unto  James  Duke  of  Queenf- 
beiry,  of  the  Dignities  &  Titles  of  Baron  of  Rippon, 
Marquis  of  Beverley,  and  Duke  of  Dover:  after  his 
deceale  to  go  to  his  Son  Sc  his  heirs,  8cc.  Sealed  the 
24th  day  of  May,  1708.  228. 

201.  Original  Letter  of  T.  Boteler  to  the  Duke  of 
New-caftle  Lord  Privy  Seale,  dated  the  firft  of  June, 
1 708,  about  certain  bufinefles  depending  in  that  Office; 

229. 

202.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  David  Bandinell  Efq; 

of  the  Office  ofVifcount  of  the  Ifle  of  Jerfey,  in  the 
room  of  James  Corbett  Efq;  fealed  the  3d  of  June. 
1708.  _  231. 

203.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Chapiin  Elq; 
of  the  Office  of  Mafter  or  Keeper  of  the  Tennis-Court, 

near 


6i6 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num,  22(13. 

hear  the  Cockpit,  and  all  other  Tennis-Courts,  as  lately 
enjoyed  by  his  Predeceflbr:  with  the  Fees  of  8  pence  per 
diem,  &  £  1 20.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the  LordTreafarer 
Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  3d  of  June,  1708.  232. 

204.  Docquet  of  a  Commillion  constituting  James 

Earl  of  Seafield  Chief  Baron  of  the  Exchequer  in  Scot¬ 
land  ,  &  Keeper  of  the  Seale  of  that  Court ;  and  John 
Smith  Efq ;  one  of  the  Barons  of  the  Exchequer  in 
England,  John  Scrope,  Alexander  Maitland,  k  John 
Clerke  Efqrs;  to  be  four  other  of  the  Barons  of  the  Ex¬ 
chequer  in  Scotland  ;  with  the  yearly  Salary  of  _£  1.000.  to 
the  Earle,  and  £100.  to  his  Deputy  for  keeping  the 
faid  Seale;  &  /'500.  per  annum  to  each  of  the  others. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  lealed 
the  3d  of  June,  1708.  _  233. 

205.  Copy  of  the  Warant  for  a  Commillion  to  the 

Earle  of  Seafield  to  be  Chief  Baron  of  the  Exchequer  in 
Scotland.  Given  the  1 3th  of  May,  1708.  234. 

2c6.  Docqucf  of  a  Grant  unto  Robert  Booth  M.  A. 
one  of  her  Majefties  Chaplains  in  Ordinary,  to  be  Dean 
ofBriltol.  Sealed  the  5th  of  June,  1708.  236. 

207.  Docquet  of  a  Pratfentation  of  Evan  Evans  Clerk, 

to  the  Vicarage  of  Suttetton  in  the  County  of  Lincoln. 
Sealed  the  5th  of  June,  1708.  237. 

208.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  a  Prebend  in  the  Ca¬ 

thedral  Church  ofWorcefter,  unto  Jofias  Sandby  M.  A. 
Sealed  the  1  oth  of  June,  1708.  238. 

209.  Docquet  of  a  Charter  for  incorporating  the  Com¬ 

pany  of  Armourers  of  the  City  of  London,  and  all 
Perfons  working  &  making  Veflels  k  Wares  of  Copper 
&  Brafs  with  an  Hammer,  within  the  fame  City  k 
Suburbs,  and  all  other  places  for  five  Miles  round  the 
fame,  by  the  Name  of  the  Armourers  &  Brafiers  in 
the  City  of  London  :  with  power  to  purchafe  and  dif- 
pofe  of  Manors,  &c.  to  the  yearly  Value  of  /500. 
fealed  the  12th  of  June  1708.  239. 

210.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Thomas  le 

Fcvre  Efq;  appointed  Secretary  of  the  extraordinary 
Ambafly  to  the  King  of  Portugal,  /300.  fur  his  Equi¬ 
page,  and  40  Shillings  by  the  day  for  Ins  ordinary  En¬ 
tertainment  ;  with  further  Summes  for  Intelligences,  &c. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed 
the  19th  day  of  June,  1708.  240. 

21 1.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Alexander  Caimcs 

of  Monaghan  m  Ireland  Baronet,  of  the  Summe  of 
L’io9v  ufually  paid  for  that  Dignity.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  k  fealed  the  19th  of  June, 
1708.  241. 

212.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Hoo  Efq  ;  Ser¬ 

jeant  at  Law,  of  two  annual  Faires  at  Wednefbury  alias 
Wedgebury  in  Stafford-fhire.  Sealed  the  2d  of  July, 
1708.  .  _  242. 

213.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  k  Reftitution  of  Tempo¬ 

raries,  unto  William  Fleetwood  now  Bifliop  of  St. 
Afaph  ;  to  commence  from  the  time  of  the  Death  of 
Dr.  William  Beveridge  late  Bifliop  there.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  3d  of 
July,  1708.  243. 

214.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  William 

Chetwynd  Efq;  appointed  Refident  at  Genoa,  £300. 
for  his  Equipage ;  and  £3.  by  the  day,  for  his  or¬ 
dinary  Entertainment  :  with  allowance  of  further  Summes 
for  Intelligences,  &c.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  3d  of  July,  1708.  244. 

215.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  the  Lord  Treafurer 
of  Great  Britain,  the  Barons,  &c.  of  the  Exchequer  in 
Scotland,  to  do  and  performe  all  things  neceflary,  for 
the  effe&ual  dilcharging,  mitigating,  or  compounding 
of  all  Penalties  Sc  Forfeitures,  which  are  or  lhall  be 
eftreated  in  the  Court  of  Exchequer  in  Scotland,  upon 
any  Perfon  or  Perfons,  who  in  Equity  and  good  C  on- 

.  be  relieved  th  .  d  by  the 

Eord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  c;d  day  of 

July,  1708.  245. 


Ntim.  2263. 

216.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Robert  Harley 

Efq;  from  the  following  Quantities  of  White  Plate, 
vizt.  3998  oz.  1  dw.  delivered  unto  him  as  Speaker  of 
the  Houfe  of  Commons,  anno  13  R.  Gulielmi  111.  4019 
07.  10  dw.  as  late  Speaker  of  the  Iloufe  of  Commons  ; 
and  997  07.  1 2  dw.  as  late  Secretary  of  State.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  2  2d  of 
July,  1708.  246. 

217.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  John  Duke  of 

Marlborough,  from  7396  oz.  17  dw.  of  White  Plate  de¬ 
liver’d  him  as  Ambaifador  to  the  States  Generali ;  from 
412  Ounces  of  Gilt  Plate  ;  and  from  693 9  oz.  15  dw. 
of  White  Plate  as  Captain  General  &  AmbaiTador  afore* 
faid.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and 
fealed  the  2 2d  day  of  July,  1708.  247. 

218.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  the  Chief  Baron,  &c. 

of  the  Exchequer  in  Scotland,  to  ceafe  Proiecution  upon, 
k  to  cancell  «:  deliver- up  all  forfeited  Coaft-Bonds  ;  if 
it  be  made  duely  appear,  that  the  Ships  for  which  they 
were  given,  were  driven  (by  Strefs  of  Weather)  into 
Foreign  Parts,  and  that  the  Cuftomes  for  their  Goods 
were  paid.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin; 
and  fealed  the  2  2d  of  July,  1708.  248. 

219.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  the  Lord  Treafurer  of 

Great  Britain,  k  the  Officers  of  the  Exchequer  in  Scot¬ 
land,  to  compound  &  regulate  all  Matters  &  Abufes  re¬ 
lating  to  Seizures  on  Proiecution  of  any  Goods,  Wares, 
and  Merchandizes,  imported  or  exported,  into  or  out 
of  Scotland.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
&  fealed  the  2 2d  of  July,  170S.  2^9, 

220.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  authorizing  the  Sur- 

veyour  General  of  the  Woods  on  the  South  Side  Trent, 
with  the  Approbation  of  fome  of  the  Juftices  of  the  1  eace, 
for  the  County  of  Gloucefler,  &  other  Officers  of  the 
Foreft  of  Dean,  to  fell,  cut-down,  k  fell  vearly,  fuch 
Quantitys  of  Scrubbed  Beach,  Birch,  Holly,  Hazle, 
Thornes,  k  Orle,  as  fliall  amount  to  the  Summe  of 
/7000.  to  be  paid  to  Henry  Segar  Gent,  toward  fa- 
tisfying  the  Remainder  of  the  Summe  of  £14,000.  de- 
figned  him  by  the  late  King  William.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  2 2d  of  July, 
1708.  250I 

221.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  difcharge  John  Smith 

Efq;  from  the  Quantity  of  4003  oz.  iS  dw.  of  White 
Plate  delivered  to  him  as  Speaker  of  the  Houfe  of  Com¬ 
mons.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and 
fealed  the  2 2d  of  July,  1708.  231. 

222.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  like  to  that  above  at  § 

220.  for  raifing;£.25co.  to  be  paid  to  Charles  Earle  of 
Berkeley,  toward  fatisfying  the  remainder  of  £6000. 
defigned  him  by  the  late  King  William.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  22 d  day  of 
July,  1708.  252. 

223.  Docquet  of  a  commiffion  to  continue  or  con- 

flitute  Sir  William  Hollywood  Bart.  Edmund  Chaloner, 
Thomas  Goodman,  James  Afhbmne,  &  Walter  Hunger- 
ford  Efqrs.  Commiffioners  for  Appeales,  and  regulating 
the  Excife,  with  a  Salary  of  £.200.  per  annum  to  each 
of  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  31ft  of  July,  1708.  253. 

224.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge,  unto  Walter  Moyle 

Efq;  for  his  Omiffion  in  not  inrolling  certain  Letters 
Patents  of  K.  Charles  11.  whereby  the  Manor  of  Car- 
nanton  in  Cornwall  was  (amongft  other  things)  demifed 
to  Sir  John  Coryton,  Bart,  for  99  years.  Alfo,  a  Dif¬ 
charge  unto  Edward  Progers  Efq;  for  his  Omiffion  to 
inroll  an  Indenture  of  Leafe,  whereby  he  claimes  a 
Meffuage  call’d  the  Great  Gate  houfe,  &  other  Mefuages 
in  Weltminfter.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  3 1  ft  of  July,  1708.  254. 

225.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James 
Craggs  Efq:  appointed  Secretary  in  the  Court  of  the 
King  of  Spaine,  £300.  for  his  Equipage,  and  40  Shil¬ 
lings  by  the  Day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment ;  with 

I  ^  7  Allow- 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


617 


Num.  £263. 

Allowance  of  further  Summes  for  Intelligences,  Sic- 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  3 1  ft  of  July,  1708.  256. 

226.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Michael  Cole  Gent,  of 

the  foie  Benefit  (in  England  &  Ireland)  of  his  Invention 
of  a  new  kind  of  Light,  compofed  of  one  entire  Glafs 
of  a  globular  Shape,  with  a  Lamp  ;  which  will  give  a 
clearer  &  more  certain  Light  from  all  parts  thereof,  with¬ 
out  any  dark  Shadows,  or  what  elfe  may  be  confounding 
or  troublefome  to  the  Light,  than  any  other  Lamps 
that  have  hitherto  been  in  Ufe.  Sealed  the  31ft  of  July, 
1708.  257. 

227.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  Prince  Charles  Bro¬ 

ther  to  the  King  of  Denmark,  of  the  yearly  Sum  of 
£.4000.  during  the  joint  Lives  of  her  Majefty  8c  the 
laid  Prince.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin} 
fealed  31  July,  1708.  258. 

228.  Accompt  of  the  Dividend  of  the  Fees  at  the 
Privy  Seale  for  4  Months  ;  vizt.  from  the  firft  of  April, 
1708,  to  the  31ft  of  July,  1708,  inclufive,  259. 

229.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Adams  D.D. 

one  of  her  Majefty’s  Chaplains  in  Ordinary  of  a  Prebend 
in  the  Free  Chapell  of  St.  George  within  the  Caftle  of 
Windfor.  Sealed  the  7th  of  Auguft,  1708.  261. 

230.  His  Grace  the  Lord  Privy  Seal’s  Qurere,  whe¬ 

ther  he  could  legally  pafs  a  privy  Seale  to  difcharge 
Charles  Fox  Efq;  from  feveral  Sums  of  Money  by  him 
paid  to  the  Army,  though  the  Mufter  Rolls  of  certain 
Regiments  be  not  returned  ?  i(n. 

Below  is  the  Affirmative  Anfwer  of  Sir  Edward  Nor- 
they  Attorney  Generali,  written  with  his  own  Hand,  and 
dated  the  7th  of  Auguft,  1 708. 

231.  A  Copy  of  the  Inftrument  prepared  to  pafs  the 

Privy  Seale,  for  Charles  Fox  Efq;  his  Difcharge.  Given 
the  1 5th  of  July,  anno  7  Annas  Regina;.  263. 

232.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  make  Jofhua  Kocher- 

thal  &  53  other  Perfons  of  both  Sexes,  (who  being 
German  Lutherans,  &  reduced  to  the  utmoft  Want,  by 
the  frequent  Incurfions  of  the  Enemy  into  the  Palatinate  in 
Germany,  are  lately  come  into  England,  in  order  to 
fettle  in  New  Yorke)  free  Denizens  of  this  Kingdome, 
and  to  grant  them  fuch  Liberties  and  Privileges,  as  the 
natural-born  Subjects  of  England  do  enjoy.  Sealed  the 
1 2th  of  Auguft,  1708.  265. 

233.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Francis 
Vifcount  Ryalton  Cofferer  of  her  Majefties  Iloufehold, 
jf.  100,000.  upon  Account;  for  the  ordinary  &  ex¬ 
traordinary  Expences  thereof.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin  j  and  fealed  the  21ft  of  Auguft,  1708. 

26  6. 

234.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  William  Hulett,  Gent, 

of  two  Faires  to  be  held  yearly  at  Milverton  in  Somerfet- 
fliire.  fealed  the  21ft  of  Auguft,  1708.  267. 

235.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Elizabeth 

Hales  one  of  the  Maids  of  Honour,  the  yearly  Penfion 
of  £-3°°-  with  a  Claufe  in  behalf  of  Chriftiana  Temple, 
now  the  Wife  of  Thomas  Littleton  Efq;  figned  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  21ft  of  Au¬ 
guft,  1708.  _  268. 

236.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  authorizing  the  Barons 

of  the  Exchequer  in  Scotland,  to  obferve  a  Standing 
Rule  in  all  Cafes  where  Compofitions  are  due  to  her 
Majefty,  at  palling  Signatures  in  favour  of  Purchafers 
called  Angular  Succeffours  :  that  one  Sixth  pan  of  the 
valued  Rent,  be  taken  from  all  Sorts  of  People,  without 
any  manner  of  Diftinction  whatfoever  ;  and  the  fame  to 
be  ducly  anfvvered  8e  payd  to  her  Majefties  ufe.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  21ft 
of  Auguft,  1708.  269. 

237.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Robert  Peafe  Merchant 
of  the  foie  Benefit  of  his  Invention,  of  making  Green 
Oyle  by  a  peculiar  method  of  preparing  &  boyling  ma¬ 
terials,  principally  of  the  product  of  Great  Britain,  never 
before  pra&ifed  in  her  Majefties  Dominions  ;  fitt  for 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2263. 

Ufe  in  the  Woollen  Manufacture  ;  and  for  making  Toft 
Sope  for  Bleaching  Linnen  ;  and  is  alfo  eatable.  Sealed 
the  2  ill  of  Auguft,  1708.  270. 

238.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  upon  a  Surrender  of  the 

Office  of  one  of  the  Clerks  of  ha-  Majefties  Signet,  to 
Jofeph  Moyle  Efq;  during  his  Life,  fealed  the  21ft  of 
Auguft,  1708.  271. 

239.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  Miles  Granger  Gent, 
of  the  Offices  of  Receiver  of  her  Majefties  Revenues  in 
North  Wales,  with  the  yearly  Fee  of  £.30.  and  the  Fee 
of  20s.  for  the  Carriage  of  every  Hundred  Pounds  by 
him  to  be  paid  into  the  Exchequer.  Alfo  the  Office  of 
Receiver  of  her  Revenue  within  the  County  Palatine  of 
Chefter,  with  the  yearly  Fee  of  ,£.  10.  and  20s.  for  Car¬ 
riage  of  Money  as  aforefaid.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  2 1  ft  of  Auguft  1708. 

272.- 

240.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  make  James  Kendall  an 

Alien  borne,  a  free  Denizen  of  Great  Britain,  fealed  the 
4th  Day  of  September,  1708.  273. 

24  r.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  difeharging  Charles 
Fox  Efq;  late  Pay-mailer  of  the  Forces  atling  in  con- 
jun&ion  with  the  Allies,  from  feveral  Sums  of  Money  by 
him  paid,  amounting  to  £.1,068,029  :i8  :  5J.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin,  and  fealed  the  4th  of 
September,  1708.  'J-74- 

242.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Hugh  Boulter  D.D. 

to  the  Redory  of  St.  Olave  in  Southwark.  Sealed  the  4th 
of  September  1708.  275. 

243.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Charles  Roderick 

D.D.  to  the  Deanry  of  Ely.  Sealed  the  4th  of  September 
1708.  376. 

344.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  the  Borough  of  Knaref- 
borough,  within  the  Duchy  and  Honor  of  Lancafter  & 
County  of  York,  of  feveral  yearly  Faires  to  be  holdcn 
there.  Sealed  the  4th  of  September  1708.  277. 

245.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Receiver 

General  of  the  Duties  upon  ftamp’d  Vellum,  Parch¬ 
ment  and  Paper,  to  William  Frankland  Efq ;  in  the 
room  of  John  Evelyn  Efq  ;  with  a  Salary  of  ,£300.  per 
annum,  for  himfelf  &  Clerks.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  1  ith  of  September, 
1708.  278. 

246.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  an  yearly  Salary  of 

£100.  unto  William  Allanfon  Efq;  the  Treafurers 
Remembrancer  in  the  Court  of  Exchequer  in  Scotland. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed 
the  1  ith  of  September  1708.  279. 

247.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Poftmafler 

General  to  Sir  Thomas  Frankland  Bart.  8c  John  Evelyn 
Efq;  with  the  yearly  Salary  of  £ 2000 .  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  nth  of 
September,  1708.  280. 

248.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Steward  & 
John  Tarver  Efqrs.  Remembrancer  of  the  Exchequer  in 
Scotland,  of  the  yearly  Salarys  of  £  ieo.  apiece,  during 
their  joynt  Lives;  and  the  whole  £200.  per  annum  to 
the  Survivor  of  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  &  fealed  the  1  ith  of  September,  1708.  281. 

249.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Colin  Mackenzie  & 
John  Tyas  Efqrs.  Clerk  of  the  Piper  in  the  Exchequer 
of  Scotland,  the  yearly  Salarys  of  £100.  apiece,  during 
their  joint  Lives  ;  and  the  whole  £  200.  per  annum  to 
the  Survivor  of  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  &  fealed  the  nth  of  September,  1708. 

282. 

250.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Charles  Vernon 

B.D.  to  the  Vicarage  of  Weft  Ham  in  the  County  of 
Effex.  fealed  the  1  ith  of  September  1708.  283. 

251.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Chief 
Keeper  of  the  Stores  within  the  Tower  of  London,  to 
Robert  Lowther  Efq  ;  with  the  Fee  of  3s.  by  the  day. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  8c  fealed  th 


25th  of  September,  1708. 

7s 


284. 
252.  Doc- 


6xg  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2263. 

4-2.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  unto  Guy  Palmes  Efq; 
of  a  Panfion  ofa£  1006.  per  annum  out  of  the  Revenues 
of  the  Port;  Office,  during  the  joynt  Lives  of  her  Ma- 
jefiy  &  him.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  27th  of  September,  1708.  285. 

2 53.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Surveyour 
of  the  Petty  Cuftomes,  and  of  the  Subfidies  of  3s.  per 
Tun,  and  of  1 2d.  per  pound  in  the  Port  of  London  ;  to 
Thomas  Gibfon  Gent.  Jonathan  Green  Merchant,  & 
John  Allen  Gent,  during  the  Lives  of  Richard  Lumley 
Sc  William  Lumley  Efqrs.  younger  Sons  of  Richard 
Earl  of  Scarborough  :  with  the  yearly  Salary  0^300. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  be  fealed  the 
27th  of  September,  1708.  286. 

2  34.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  in  the  Univerfity 
of  Glal’gow,  annually  during  her  Majefties  Life,  the 
Salaries  of  £40.  to  the  Profeffor  of  the  Oriental  Lan¬ 
guages.  £25.  to  the  Profeffor  of  Humanity.  £3 o.  to 
the  Profeffor  of  Botany.  £22.  to  the  Principal  of  the 
faid  XJniverfity,  by  way  of  Augmentation  of  his  prefent 
Salary.  £  1 1 .  to  the  three  Profeffors  of  Philofophy,  as 
an  Augmentation  to  their  refpe&ive  Salaries.  And  ^20. 
to  the  Profeffor  of  Greek,  as  an  Augmentation  to  his 
Salary.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  & 
fealed  28th  of  September,  1708.  287. 

255.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  the  Seven 
Profeffors  in  the  Univerfity  of  Edenburgh,  vizt.  of  Phi¬ 
lofophy,  of  Mathematicks,  3  more  of  Philofophy,  of 
Humanity,  &  of  Hebrew,  the  yearly  Sum  of  £210. 
during  her  Majefties  Life;  the  fame  to  be  divided  equally 
amongft  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  28th  of  Septemper,  1708.  2 '8. 

236.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Robert 
Jackl'on,  who  hath  rtfided  at  :  tockholm  as  Commiffary, 
during  the  Abfence  of  John  Robinfon  Efq  ;  (it  fhould 
have  been  written  Clerk)  her  Majefties  Envoy  extraor¬ 
dinary  there,  20  Shillings  by  the  day  for  his  Allowance  ; 
&  in  lieu  of  all  Charges  &  other  Pretenfions  whatfoever 
on  that  Account.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  18th  of  September  1708.  289. 

257.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  to  continue  &  confti- 

tute  Alexander  Wedderbum,  John  Montgomery,  John 
Whetham,  David  Rofs,  &  Alexander  Forbes  Efqrs. 
Commiffioners  of  the  Excife  in  Scotland,  with  the  yearly 
Salary  £300.  to  each  of  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  28  th  day  of  Sep¬ 
tember,  1708.  290. 

258.  Docquet  of  a  new  Prefentation  of  Dr.  Charles 
Roderick  to  theDeanry  of  Ely,  he  having  forfeited  the 
former  by  omitting  to  fubferibe  the  Declaration  by  Law 
required,  touching  his  Conformity  to  the  Liturgy  of  the 
Church  ofEngland.  fealed  the  2d  of  O&ober,  1708.  291. 

259.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  upon  a  Surrender,  of  a 
piece  of  Ground,  with  certain  Edifices,  near  to  St.  James’s 
Palace,  unto  James  Craggs,  Samuel  Edwards,  &  Charles 
Hodges  Gentlemen,  for  the  Terme  of  50  years,  at  the 
old  Rent  of  5  Shillings  per  annum.  In  Truft,  to  alfign 
the  Premifes  to  fuch  Ufes  as  fhall  be  appointed  by  Sarah 
Duchefs  of  Marlborough.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  9th  day  of  Oflober,  1708. 

292. 

260.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Craggs 

Efq ;  appointed  Refident  in  the  Court  of  the  King  of 
Spain,  .^300.  for  his  Equipage,  &  £y  by  the  day  for 
his  ordinary  Entertainment ;  with  allowance  of  further 
Summes  of  Money  for  Intelligences,  &c.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1 6th  day 
of  Oftober,  1708.  294. 

261.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Chriftian 

Cole  Efq;  appointed  Secretary  at  Venice,  £  2.  by  the 
day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment :  with  allowance  of 
further  Summes  for  Intelligences,  &c.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  16th  of  Oc¬ 
tober,  1708.  295. 


Num.  2263. 

262.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  Laws 

Efq;  appointed  Secretary  at  Bruffels,  40  Shillings  by  the 
day  for  ordinary  Entertainment ;  with  allowance  of 
further  Summes  for  Intelligences,  See.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1 6th  of  Oc¬ 
tober,  1708.  296. 

263.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  Philip  Legeyt  Efq; 

of  the  Office  of  Procurator  in  the  Hie  of  Jerfey.  Sealed 
the  1 8th  day  of  October,  1708.  297. 

264.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Cowper  &r 

John  Cowper  Sons  of  Spencer  Cowper  Efq ;  of  the 
Office  of  the  Execution  of  the  Laws  Sc  Statutes  concern¬ 
ing  Bankrupts  during  their  Lives,  or  the  Life  of  the 
longer  Liver  of  them  ;  from  and  after  the  determination 
of  the  Intereft  of  Orlando  Bridgeinan  Efq ;  therein. 
Sealed  the  30th  day  of  O&ober,  1708.  298. 

265.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  appointing  Com¬ 

miffioners  of  the  Excife  in  Scotland.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  13th  of  November, 
1708.  299. 

This  is  the  fame  with  that  before-mentioned  at  § 
255.  but  was  ordered  to  be  a-new  fealed. 

266.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Charles  Dar- 

tiquenave  Pay-mafter  of  her  Majefties  Works,  £40,000'. 
on  Acc'.  for  the  Ufe  Sc  Service  of  the  faid  Works. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed 
the  1 7  th  day  of  November,  1708.  30a. 

267.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Scrope  Earle  of  Bridge- 

water  of  four  Faires,  to  be  held  yearly  at  Brackley  in 
Northamptonlhire.  Sealed  the  17th  day  of  November, 
1708.  301. 

268.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Spenfer  Comp¬ 
ton  Efq  ;  £  40,000.  on  Account ;  to  be  by  him  paid,  as 
directed  by  her  Majefty,  or  the  Lord  Treafurer.  Signed 
by  his  Lordlhip,  and  fealed  the  2461  of  November,  1708.. 

302. 

269.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  revoking  the  whole 

Commiffion  for  Prizes ;  and  authorizing  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  to  appoint  Perfons  to  fue  for  all  Prizes  already 
taken  Sc  not  accounted  for,  &c.  Signed  by  his  Lordlhip, 
and  fealed  the  24th  of  November,  1708.  303. 

270.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Earle  of  Pem¬ 

broke  &  Montgomery,  of  the  Offices  of  High  Admiral  of 
Great  Britain  &  Ireland,  See.  and  of  Captain  General  of 
her  Majefties  Fleets  in  all  her  Kingdoms  &  Dominions. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the 
29th  of  November,  1708.  304. 

271.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Ste¬ 

phens  Gent.  &  William  his  Son,  &  the  longer  Liver  of 
them,  the  yearly  Summe  of  £130.  for  exercifing  the 
Office  of  Keeper  of  the  Exchequer-Court  in  Scotland  ; 
and  for  finding  Paper,  Pens,  Ink,  Parchment,  Coles, 
Candles,  and  other  Neceffaries  for  the  fame,  and  the 
Officers  thereunto  belonging.  And  alfo  to  pay  unto  the 
faid  James,  the  further  Summe  of  £  70.  per  annum,  in 
recompenfe  for  the  Lofs  of  his  Perquifites  in  the  Office 
of  Deputy  Ulher  of  the  faid  Court,  occafioned  by  the 
Union.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and 
fealed  the  firft  of  December,  1708.  305. 

272.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conftituting  Thomas 
Earle  of  Wharton  Lieutenant  General  &  General  Go¬ 
vernor  of  Ireland  ;  in  the  room  of  Thomas  Earl  of 
of  Pembroke,  &c.  Sealed  the  4th  of  December  1708. 

306. 

273.  Docquet  of  the  Confirmation  of  a  Warant  made 
by  K.  .Charles  11.  to  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Hland  of 
Portland  in  the  County  of  Dorfel ;  that  for  every  Tun 
of  Stone  that  fhould  be  digged  wi.hin  the  Com¬ 
mons  of  the  faid  Ifland  (except  luch  as  fhould  be  taken 
for  his  own  Ufe)  there  fhould  be  paid  i2d.  Threepence 
whereof  to  be  accounted  for  to  the  faid  King,  and  the 
other  9d.  to  be  retained  to  the  ufe  of  the  faid  Inhabi¬ 
tants.  Her  Majefty  doth  alfo  grant  to  Anthony  Earle 
of  Shaftefbury  Sc  Maurice  Afi’.eley  Efq;  to  be  Receivers 

of 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


619 


Num.  2263. 

of  the  9d.  aforefaid,  during  her  own  Life,  in  Trull  for 
the  faid  Inhabitants,,  and  all  former  Arrears  of  the  laid 
Nine-pences.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin ; 
and  fealed  the  7th  of  December  1 708.  307. 

274.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  incorporate  all  who 
are  now  Fan-Makers  Fan-Mounters,  or  Makers  of  the 
Materials  or  Parts  of  Fans,  in  London  k  Weftminfter  & 
m  20  Miles  round  with  a  Licence  to  purchafe  Lands, 
&c.  to  the  Value  of  £  500.  per  ann.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godoiphin  ;  and  fealed  the  9th  of  December 

1708.  3°9- 

275.  Copy  of  the  Sign  Manual,  for  the  Attorney  or 

Soliicitor  General  to  prepare  a  Bill  to  pafs  the  Gre  t  Seal, 
for  incorporating  the  Fan-makerS _  of  London  &  Welt- 
minder,  St  20  Miles  a-round  them.  Given  the  ^d  day 
of  October  1708.  3 

276.  Heads  of  Powers,  &  Claufes,  humbly  propoleo 

to  be  inferted  in  a  Charter  for  incorporating  the  Fan 
makers  in  the  Cities  of  London  St  Weftminfter,  and  20 
Miles  round  the  fame.  .  311- 

277.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Norris  Gent, 
of  the  Office  of  Clerk  of  the  Navy  or  Naval  i  office  m  the 
Ifl and  of  Jamaica  ;  with  a  Claufe  obliging  him  to  ref.de 
in  the  faid Ifland.  be.  led  tie  8th  of  December  1708.  314- 

278.  Docquet  of  a  Gram  unto  Lionel-C.ranfield  l.arte 

ofDorfet  &  Middlefex,  of  the  Office  of  Conftable  of 
Dover-Caftle,  &  ‘A  arden  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  fealed 
the  8th  of  December  1708.  31  • 

279.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  How 
Efq;  Receiver  &  Pay-inafter  General  df  k  for  the  Guards, 
Gariifons,  &  other  the  Land  Forces  £600,000.  upon 
Account  •,  for  maintaining  the  Guards,  k  Garrifons  in 
Great  Britain,  &  for  payment  of  the  Invalids  for  the 
year  1709.  including  5000  Men  to  ferve  on  board  the 
Fleet.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin  ;  and 

fealed  the  15th  of  December  1708.  31*- 

280.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Sir  Thomas 
Littleton  Bart.  Treafurer  of  the  Navy,  £2,000,000.  upon 
Account  ;  for  the  Ufe  &  Service  ot  the  Navy,  and  the 
Victualling  thereof.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trealurer 
Godoiphin;  and  fealed  the  1 5th  of  December  1708.  3 1 7. 

28 1 .  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  untojames  Brydges 

Efq;  Pay-mafter  General  of  the  Forces  abroad,  the 
Sum  of  £2,500,000.  upon  Account;  toward  defraying 
the  Charges  of  our  Armies  under  his  Pay  ;  and  for  our 
proportion  of  Subfidies  to  the  Allies ;  and  all  other 
Charges  incident  to  the  fame  for  the  year  1 7-  9.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1  ;th 
of  December  1708.  3llj- 

282.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Samuel  Fowler 
Clerk,  to  the  Vicarage  of  Standifh,  with  the  Chapells 
of  Sale,  Ranwick,  &  Hardwick,  in  the  County  of 
Gloucefter,  void  by  Lapfe.  Sealed  22  December  1708. 

.3' 9- 

*83.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  John  Vifcount 
Fitz  Harding  Treafurer  of  the  Chamoer,  £50,000. 
upon  Account  ;  for  the  Expence  &  Service  of  that 
Office.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin; 
and  fealed  the  22d  of  December  1 708.  320. 

284.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  Lord 
Somers  Preftdent  of  the  Privy  Council,  the  yearly  Summe 
of  €1500.  vizt.  ^1000.  in  lieu  of  ten  Dilhes  every  Meal; 
and  Jcoo-  per  annum  as  of  her  Majefties  Bounty. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  2  d  of  December  1 708.  321- 

085  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  Sir  Charles  lrioyd 
Baranet,  from  /1095.  dually  paid  for  that  Dignity 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin  ;  and  lealed 

the  2 2d  of  December  1708.  322. 

286.  Docquet  of  a  Lycence  to  Sir  Thomas  Felton 
Bart,  to  ir.clofc  a  certain  Horfe-way  leading  through  his 
own  Grounds  at  Playford  in  Suffolk;  there  being  one 
other  ancient  High  Way  near  adjacent,  as  convenient 
for  Travellers.  Sealed  the  23d  of  December  1708.  323. 


Num,  2263.’ 

287.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  James  Earle  of  Seaffeld 

of  an  yearly  Penfion  of  efjooo.  out  of  the  Revenues  of 
the  Poll-Office,  during,  her  Majefties  Life.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin ;  and  fealed  the  23d  of 
December  1708.  324- 

288.  Docquet  of  a  new  Commiflion  of  the  Cuftoms, 

for  John  Shute  Efq;  to  fupply  the  place  of  Samuel  Clark 
Efq;  deceafed  ;  with  the  ufual  .Salary  of  £1000.  per 
annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin  ; 
and  lealed  the  23d  day  of  December  1708.  325. 

289.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Thomas 

Mickle-thwait  Efq;  Receiver  k  Pay-malicr  for  Trans¬ 
ports,  £200,006.  upon  Accoupt ;  toward  defraying  the 
Charge  of  fanfporting  Land-Forces.  Signed  by  the 
I.ord  Treafurer  Godoiphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1 h  of 
January  1708-9.  327- 

290.  Docquet  of  a  Pr?efentation  of  John  Cockburn 

D.  D.  to  the  Re£tory  of  Curry-Malet  in  Somerfet-ffiirc. 
fealed  the  1 9th  of  January  1708-9.  32S. 

29 1.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  unto  William  Whitfield 

M.  A.  one  of  her  Majefties  Chaplains  in  Ordinary,  of  a 
Prebend  in  the  Cathedral  &  Metropolitical  Church  of 
Canterbury.  Sealed  the  19th  of  January  1708-9.  329. 

292.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  John  Rayner 

Efq:  Attorney  General  of  New  Yorke,the  yearly  Salary 
of  £  1 50.  without  Account.  Signed  by  the  LordTreafurer 
Godoiphin  ;  lealed  the  19th  of  January  1708-9.  330. 

293.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  impowering  the  Lord 

Trealurer  to  appoint  Receivers  pf  the  Land  fax  through¬ 
out  Great  Britain.  Signed  by  his  Lordfhip  ;  and  fealed 
the  2d  of  February  1 708-9.  33  r  - 

294.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Henley  Efq; 

of  one  Faire,  to  be  holden  yearely  upon  the  Downs  or 
Hills  called  Lamberts  Caftle  k  Hawk-church-Downe,  in 
the  Parifhes  of  Whitchurch,  Cannon,  &  Hawk-church 
in  the  County  of  Doifet.  Sealed  the  9th  of  February 
1708-9.  33% 

295.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Thomas^Ea.l 

of  Stamford,  William  Lord  Dartmouth,  Sir  Philip 
Meadows  Kt.  John  Poultney  &  Robert  Monkton  Efqrs. 
Coiilmiffioners  for  promoting  of  Trade,  the  yearly  Sa¬ 
lary  of  £1000,  to  each  of  them;  the  Arrears  due  to 
Henry  Lord  Herbert  of  Cherbury  (one  of  the  faid  Com- 
miflioners)  at  the  time  of  his  Deceafe  ;  and  the  Salaries 
due  to  other  Officers  a&ing  under  them.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin  ;  and  fealed  the  9th  of  Fe¬ 
bruary  1708-9.  333* 

296.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Roberts  Gent, 

of  the  Office  of  Drawing,  Writing,  k  Ingroffing  to  the 
Great  Seal  of  Great  Britain,  of  all  Grants,  Lycenfes, 
&  Prote&ions,  w  hereby  any  perfon  {hall  be  authorized 
to  gather  the  Aimes  &  Benevolences  to  be  given  for  the 
Poor  of  any  Houfe,  llofpital,  or  Spittle  ;  and  for  all 
fuch  as  Ihall  have  fuftainc.l  lofs  by  cafual  Miffiap,  Fire, 
Temped,  or  Sea.  To  hold  the  fame  during  his  naturall 
Life,  with  the  Fee  of  £20.  per  annum,  fealed  the  12th 
of  February  1708-9.  _  335* 

297.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  authorize  the  Juftices 
of  the  Common  Pleas,  to  permitt  James  Earl  of  oalif- 
bury  an  Infant,  to  fuffer  feveral  Recoveries  of  divers 
Honors,  Caflles,  Parks,  Manors,  Rettories,  Advow- 
fons,  Lands,  Tenements  &  Hereditaments  in  the  Coun¬ 
ties  of  Middlefex  &  Hertford,  notwithftanding  his  No¬ 
nage  :  in  order  to  a  Settlement,  upon  his  intended 
Manage  with  the  Lady  Anne  Tufton  Daughter  to  the 
Earl  of  Thanet.  Sealed  the  12th  of  February  1708-9 

33% 

298.  Docquet  of  a  Commillion  appointing  feveral 

perfons  to  be  Conftniffioners  for  taking  Subfcriptions  for 
inlarging  the  Capital  Stock  of  the  Bank  of  England  ;  to 
enable  it  to  comply  w'ith  that  Company’s  Pi opofition, 
agreed  to  by  the  Houfe  of  Commons.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godoiphin  ;  fealed  the  16  th  of  February 
1708-9.  3  7' 

e  299.  DCC- 


5 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


620 


Num.  2263,  2264. 

209.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  conftituting  James  Duke 
of  Queenfbury  Sc  Dover  one  of  her  Majellies  Principal 
Secretaries,  befules  thofe  in  being :  with  the  Sum  of 
=£100.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Ireafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  16th  of  February  1708-9. 

338- 

300.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  authorizing  the  Lord 
High  Admiral  to  give  Orders  to  the  principal  Officers  Sc 
Commiffioners  of  the  Navy,  to  fell  feveral  Naval  Stores, 
for  her  Majefties  bell  Advantage.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Tr-  afurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  19th  of  February 

1708-9.  ,  339' 

301.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Manningham 
D  D.  one  of  the  Chaplains  in  ordinary,  of  the  Deanery 
of  the  Chapel  Royal  with  theGaftle  of  Windfor,  with  the 
Deanery  of  Wolverhampton,  &  Regiftry  of  the  Knights 
of  the  Garter.  Sealed  the  23d  day  of  February  1708-9. 

34°- 

302.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Mandevile  D.  D. 
of  a  Prebend  in  the  Collegiate  Chapeil  of  Windfor. 
Sealed  the  23d  day  of  February  1708-9. 

303.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  Thomas  Wibergh  Efq; 

of  the  Office  of  Serjeant  at  Armes  in  ordinary,  to  attend 
upon  her  Majellies  royal  Perfon  when  there  is  no  Parlia¬ 
ment  ;  and  in  time  of  Parliament,  on  the  Speaker  of  the 
Houfe  of  Commons  :  to  hold  during  his  good  behaviour, 
with  the  Fees  of  3s.  per  diem,  and  of  as.  6d.  per  diem. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  andlealed  the 
23d  of  February  1 708-9.  342- 

304.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Duke 

of  Queenfberry  &  Dover,  one  of  the  Principal  Secretaries 
of  State,  the  yearly  Salary  of  £1850.  in  lieu  of  his  Pen- 
fion  allowed  in  refped  of  the  faid  Office.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  16th  of 
March  1708-9.  343- 

305.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Duke 

of  Queenlberry  Sc  Dover,  one  of  the  Principal  Secretaries 
of  State,  £3000.  for  fecret  Service,  without  Account. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the 
16th  day  ofMarch  1708-9.  344- 

306.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Hugh  Wynn 

Clerk  to  the  Rtdory  of  Abersilaw  in  the  County  of 
Anglefey.  Sealed  the  23d  of  March  1708-9.  345- 1 

2264. 

A  Book  in  folio,  containing  many  other  attefled  Doc- 
quets  and  other  original  Papers,  relating  to  the  Of¬ 
fice  of  the  Privy  Seale,  in  the  Years  1709.  1710.  and 
1 7 1 1 .  vizt. 

1 .  Docquet  of  a  Warant  direfling  the  Treafurer  of  the 
Navy  to  pay  unto  Thomas  Earle  of  Pembroke,  &c. 
Lord  High  Admiral  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  &c. 
the  yearly  Salary  of  ,67000.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea- 
furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  30th  ofMarch  1709.  1. 

1 .  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  conftituting  James  Boyle 
Efq;  one  of  the  Commiflioners  of  the  Excife  in  Scotland 
(in  the  room  of  John  Montgomery  Efq;)  with  the 
yearly  Salary  of  £400.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  30th  of  March  1709.  2. 

3.  Docquet  of  a  Licence  unto  James  Corry  M.  D.  to 

return  from  France  into  her  Majefties  Dominions,  fealed 
the  30th  of  March  1709.  3. 

4.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  incorporating  the  Fan- 

makers,  within  London,  Weftminfter,  &  20  Miles  round 
the  fame.  New  fealed  the  1 6th  of  April  1709.  4. 

5.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Harry  Mordaunt 

Efq;  Treafurer  Sc  Paymalter  of  the  Ordnance  the  Sum 
of  £300,000.  upon  Account,  for  Land  &  SeaService,  per-  ■ 
‘formed  or  to  be  performed  by  that  Office.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  20th  of 
April  170  9.  •  5. 

6.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  to  the  Englilh  Company  tra¬ 
ding  to  the  Eafl  Indies,  of  all  the  Debts  transferred  to 
her  Majefty  by  the  Governor  Sc  Company  of  Merchants 


[  Num.  2264. 

of  London  trading  to  the  Eafl  Indies ;  for  ending  all 
Differences  between  the  faid  two  Companys,  and  uniting 
the  fame.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  21  ft -day  of  April  1709.  6* 

7.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  difchargeall  the  Manors, 
Mefuages,  Lands,  &  Hereditaments,  ot  Charles  Earle  of 
Peterborough  &  Monmouth,  within  the  Counties  of 
Bedford  Sc  Northampton,  from  all  Charges,  Extents, 
Seizures,  Debts,  Claims,  St  Demands,  which  her  Ma¬ 
jefty  is  intituled  unto,  upon  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  4th  ot  May  1709. 

,  7* 

8.  Docquet  of  her  Majefties  Acceptance  of  the  old 

Eaft  India-Companys  Surrender  of  their  Corporation-Ca¬ 
pacity  or  Body  Politick,  and  ot  all  their  Charters,  Capaci¬ 
ty's,  R  ights  Sc  Powers  for  ading  as,  or  continuing  to  be  a 
Corporation.  Sealed  the  7th  of  May  1 709.  8. 

9.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles  Yif- 
count  Townffiend,  appointed  one  of  the  Ambafladors  Ex¬ 
traordinary  Sc  Plenipotentiaries  to  the  States  General ; 
£1500.  for  his  Equipage,  Sc  £ 100 .  by  the  Week  for  his 
ordinary  Entertainment ;  with  allowance  of  further 
Summes  of  Money  for  Intelligences,  &c.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed,  the  nth  of 

May  1709.  9- 

10.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Byde  Efq;  of 

the  Office  of  Advocate  General  or  Judge  Martial  of  all 
the  Land-Forces  in  Great  Britain.  Sealed  the  12th  of 
May  1709.  _  jo. 

1 1 .  Docquet  of  a  Warant  authorizing  the  Archbiihop 
of  Canterbury  to  grant  unto  John  Smith  Efq;  and  Sir 
Charles  Hedges  Kt.  Letters  of  Adminiftration  of  all  the 
Goods,  Chattels,  &c.  of  the  late  Prince  George  of  Den¬ 
mark  ;  to  the  end  that  they  may  give  a  true  &  juft  Ac¬ 
count  of  the  fame.  Sealed  the  19th  day  of  May  1709. 

x  t. 

12.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  difeharge  Paul  Methuen 

Efq;  Son  &  Executor  of  John  Methuen  Efq;  late  Ambaf- 
fador  Extraordinary  to  the  King  of  Portugal,  from  the 
Summe  of  £202,071  :  1  :  8,  by  the  faid  Methuen  paid 
purfuant  to  the  Treaty  with  the  faid  King,  and  for  De¬ 
fence  Sc  Prefervation  of  Gibraltar,  and  other  Services. 
And  alfo  for  fundry  payments  made  by  him  to  feveral 
Forces,  as  well  for  our  proportion  of  their  ordinary  Pay, 
as  for  furnilhing  the  Army  with  Neceffarys  for  feveral 
Campaigns.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  21ft  of  May  1709.  12. 

13.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  payment  of  divers  Sa- 
larys  Sc  Allowances  for  Officers  &  others,  to  be  paid  at 
Edenburgh  without  Fees  or  Charges,  by  the  hands  of 
Archibald  Douglas  Efq;  who  is  appointed  Receiver  Ge¬ 
neral  and  Paymafter  in  that  behalf.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  21ft  of  May  1709. 

*3- 

14.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  rear  Admiral 

of  Great  Britain  &  the  Admiralty  thereof,  unto  Sir  John 
Leake  Kt.  with  the  Fee  of  i6s-  by  the  day,  and  allow¬ 
ance  for  twelve  Men  at  the  rate  of  10s.  apiece,  for  every 
four  Weeks.  Sealed  the  24th  of  May  1 7°9*  *4* 

1 5-  Copy  of  the  Petition  of  Charles  Bruce  Son  & 
Fleir  of  Thomas  Earl  of  Aylefbury,  to  the  Queen ;  pray¬ 
ing  that  a  Warant  for  Licenceing  the  faid  Earl  to  return 
into  this  Kingdom  may  be  prepared  &:  pafs  the  Privy 
Seal,  he  having  long  refided  beyond  the  Seas  in  Obfer- 
vance  of  an  A  cl  of  Parliament  paffed  the  9  Will.  III.  it 
being  now  doubtful  whether  he  be  within  the  late  Ad  of 
Grace,  or  not.  ,l5- 

16.  Copy  of  a  Report  of  the  Attorney  Sc  Sollicitor 
General  (Sir  James  Montague  Sc  Sir  Robert  Eyre)  to  her 
Majefty,  certifying  that  ihe  might  lawfully  grant  luch  Li¬ 
cence.  dat.  28  May  1709. 

17.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  upon  a  Surrender,  of  a 
Grant  or  Regrant  of  feveral  Offices  relat  mg  to  the  Honor, 
Palace,  Chace,  Parks,  Warren,  See.  of  Hampton- Court, 

cj  unto 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


6zi 


Num.  2264.. 

Unto  Charles  Lord  Halifax*  Charles  M'ountague  F.fq;  his 
Nephew,  &c,  for  their  Lives,  the  Interefl  of  Edward  Pro¬ 
pers  Efq;  in  feme  of  them,  being  nrft  determined.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  2d  of 
June  1709.  19* 

18.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  permitt  Thomas  Verney 
an  Infant  to  fuffer  l’everal  Recoveries  of  divers  Mefluages, 
Lands,  &c.  in  the  Counties  of  Leicefter  &  Kent,  notwith- 
Handing  his  Nonage  :  in  order  to  make  Settlements  of 
the  laid  E dates  on  a  Marriage  to  be  had  between  him 
h  Elianor  Leigh,  one  of  the  Daughters  of  Thomas  Lord 
Leigh*  Sealed  t  he  41b  day  of  June  1709.  20. 

1  9.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  the  Earl  of  Sun¬ 

derland,  Principal  Secretary  of  State,  £3000-  for  fecret 
Service,  without  account.  21. 

20.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Henry  Boyle 

F.fq;  one  of  the  Principal  Secretarys  of  State, /3000.  lor 
fccret  Service,  without  account.  22. 

Both  theie  are  figned  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go- 
dolphin  ;  and  were  fealed  the  8th  of  June  1 709. 

2 1 .  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Horatio  Wal¬ 
pole  Efq;  appointed  Secretary  to  her  Majeftys  Ambafla- 
dors  Extraordinary  &  Plenipotentiary's  for  the  Treaty  of 
a  General  Peace;  £''■,00.  for  his  Equipage,  and  £2.  by 
the  day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment :  with  further 
Summes  for  Intelligence,  & c.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  8th  of  June  1709. 

22.  Docquet  of  a  Lycence  unto  Thomas  Earl  of  Aylef- 

burv.  to  return  unto  &  abide  in  Great  Britain.  Sealed  the 
ioth  of  June  1709.  24. 

23  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  Sir  Rich¬ 
ard  Onflow  Bart,  and  others,  Commiffioners  for  putting 
in  execution  an  Act  of  Parliament  for  appointing  Com- 
miflioners  to  treat  &  agree  for  fuch  I.ands,  &c.  as  (hall  be 
judg’d  proper  to  be  purchas’d  for  the  better  fortifying 
Portfmouth,  Chatham,  &  Harwich.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  13  th  of  June  1709. 

25. 

24.  Docquet  of  a  Leafe  (upon  a  Surrender  of  the  for¬ 
mer  Leafe)  unto  James  Graggs,  Samuel  Edwards,  and 
Charles  Hodges  Gent,  of  the  lame  PremilTes,  with  others 
additional  of  Edifices  &  Ground,  to  the  fame  Perfons,  in 
trull  for  the  Duchefs  of  Marlborough,  for  the  terroe  of 
99  years,  if  the  Duke,  or  faid  Duchefs,  or  Mary  Duchefs 
ot  Mountague  (hall  fo  long  live  :  with  fevcral  Covenants. 
Signed  bv  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the 
13th  of  June  1709.  26. 

2  5.  Docquet  ot  the  Grant  of  an  Annuity  of £200.  pet- 
annum  unto  Wiiliam  B'cticow  Gent.  Grandlbn  to  the  late 
Dr.  John  Wallis,  for  his  farther  Incouragement  in  the  ex- 
ercife  of  the  A  i  t  of  Decyphering.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1  yth  of  June  1709. 

28. 

26.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  the  Heirs,  Executors, 

See.  of  Robert  late  Earl  of  Sunderland  from  the  Quantity 
of  1247  oz.  10  dw.  of  white  Plate  deliver’d  to  him  as 
Chamberlain  of  the  Houfehould  to  K.  Williamm.  Signed 
hv  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  i 7th 
of  June  1709.  29. 

27.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Hugh  Earl  of 

Loudoun  Keeper  of  the  Seal  appointed  to  be  kept  in  Scot¬ 
land,  in  place  of  the  Great  Seal  there ;  the  falary  of 
£  2000.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  27th  of  June  1709.  30. 

28.  Docquet  ol  a  Difcharge  to  the  Heirs,  Executors, 
&c.  of  I  _,ewis  late  Earl  of  Feverfham,  from  the  Quantity 
1008  oz.  15  dw.  of  white  Plate  deliver’d  him  as  Chain - 
berlayne  to  the  late  Queen  Dowager.  Signed  by  the  Loid 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  27th  of  June  1709, 

31- 

29.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  unto  John  Earle  of  Marr  of 
the  yearly  Penfion  of  C2000.  during  her  Majeflies  Life, 
out  of  the  Poft-Oflice.  Alfo,  of  the  yearly  Penfion  of 

Cat,  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2264^ 

£ 1000 .  out  of  the  faid  Office,  unto  the  fame  Earle* 
during  Pleafure.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  2d  of  July  1709.  32. 

30.  Original  Letter,  in  French,  of  Mr.  Schmettau,  to 

Monfr.  Bonet.  dat.  6  July  1709.  33. 

This  is  about  Expediting  the  palling  of  his  Patent ; 
of  which  he  is  in  very  great  haft. 

31.  Original  Letter  of  Frideric  Bonet  Refldent  of 

Pruflia,  in  French  ;  to  the  Duke  of  Nevvcaftle  Lord  Privy 
Seal,  dated  the  7th  of  July  1709.  35.  t. 

This,  covering  or  inclofing  the  Letter  preceding  of 
Mr.  ue  Schmettau  ;  and  recommends  the  "Writer  thereof 
and  his  blilinefs,  the  fhort  Dil'patch  of  the  Patent  above 
mentioned,  to  his  Grace.  In  doing  which,  his  Grace 
would  have  the  Satisfaction  of  obliging  an  honed  Gentle¬ 
man  ;  Monfr.  d;  Schmettau  being  (no  lefs  than)  a  near 
Relation  ot  Monfieur  le  Baron  tie  Schmettau  Minifter 
ol  State  and  Plenipotentiary  of  the  King  of  Pruflia  his 
Mai  ter. 


32.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Samuel  Schmettau  Gent, 
of  the  foie  Benefit  of  his  new  invented  Method  in  making 
Salt,  in  fuch  manner  as  has  not  heretofore  been  ufed,  for 
14  years.  Provided,  that  the  nature  of  the  -alt  be  not  al¬ 
tered  by  the  faid  Invention.  Scaled  9th  of  July  1 709. 

37. 

3  3.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  to  conftkute  &  continue 
Sir  Alexander  Rigby  Kt.  Lionel  Norman,  William  Boyle, 
i  ho  mas  Fullerton,  &  John  Kent  Efqrs.  Commiffioners 
of  the  Cuftomes  in  Scotland,  with  a  Salary  of  /400.  per 
annum  to  each  of  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  fealed  12th  July  1709/  38. 

34.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  John  Smith  Efq; 
&  Sr.  Charles  Hedges  Kt.  Adniiniflrators  to  the  late 
Pdnce  George  of  Denmark,  and  to  Spencer  Compton, 
Efq;  Treafurer  of  his  late  Royal  Highnefs,  from  feveral 
Sums  paid  in  that  Adminillration :  with  allowance  of 
what  fhould  be  further  done  therein  by  them,  in  purfu- 
ance  of  her  Majeflies  Direftions.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  12  of  July  1709.  40. 

35.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  directing  the  Method  of 
paying  the  Officers  of  the  Exchequer  in  Scotland  ;  and 
determining  feveral  Letters  of  Privy  Seal  which  did  di¬ 
rect  Money  to  be  imprefted  at  the  Receipt  of  the  Ex¬ 
chequer,  for  that  Service.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafu¬ 
rer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  1 2th  of  July,  1709.  42. 

36.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of/the  Offices  of  Ranger  of 

the  Great  Park  &  Little  Park,  &c.  at  Windfor,  unto 
James  Graggs,  Samuel  Edwards,  &  Charles  Hodges 
Efqrs.  during  the  Lives  of  Sarah  Duchefs  of  Marlborough 
&  others  then  intcreftcd  therein  ;  in  fruit ;  the  Profits 
to  be  difpofed  of  to  Inch  Ules  as  (hould  be  appointed  by 
the  laid  Dutchefs  or  her  Executors' or  Adminiftrators. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  i’reafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed 
the  12th  day  of  July,  1709.  4.3. 

37.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conftituting  Archibald 

Doug] id's  Efq;  Receiver  General  of  all  her  Majeflies 
Laud-Rents  &  Cafualties  in  Scotland  ;  and  alfo  Pay. 
mafter  of  all  Salaries,  Penfions,  &  Allowances  payable 
in  Scotland:  with  the  yearly  Salaries  of  £.400.  for  him- 
felf,  Sc  f.50.  for  his  Deputy  or  Clerk."  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1 6th  of  July 
»7®9«  _  45. 

38.  Docquet  ot  a  Grant  to  Jeremiah  Weifliamer  of 

the  l’ole  benefit  of  his  new  invented  Mill  or  Engine  for 
grinding  &  p^effing  Sugar-Canes,  throughout  her  Ma- 
jeflies  Dominions  in  America,  for  I4yeares.  Sealed  the 
1 6th  day  of  July,  1709.  46. 

39.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  to  Francis  Vifcount 

Rialton  Cofferer  of  the  Iioufehold,  f  .100,000.  upon 
Account,  for  the  ordinary  &  extraordinary  Expences  of 
the  Iioufehold.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  Sealed  the  27th  day  of  July,  1709.  47. 

40.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Duke 
of  Montrofe,  Keeper  of  the  Privy  Seale  of  Scotland,  the 

7  T  Salary 


6ia 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2264. 

Salary  of£. 2000.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  27th  of  July,  1709.  48. 

41.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Jofia  Kay  of  the  Office 

of  Lock-fmith  in  Ordinary  to  her  Majefty,  in  all  her 
Honors,  Lordlhips,  Manors,  Sc  Houfes  in  England  ; 
with  the  Fee  of  1 2  pence  by  the  day.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  27th  of  July 
1709.  49. 

42.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Jane  Talker  Widow,  of 

the  foie  Benefit  of  her  new  Invention  of  working 
&  making  of  Flalk-Cafes  ;  8c  covering  and  cafing  with 
Flags,  R  ufhes  &  Straw,  Flalk-Glafl'es  ;  now  ufed  in  Eng¬ 
land,  in  imitation  of  thofe  which  come  from  Florence  : 
for  14  Years.  Sealed  the  30th  of  July,  1709.  50. 

43.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  Jonathan  Andrews 

Kt.  and  others,  in  truft  ;  of  all  the  Debts,  Summes  of 
Money,  Claimes,  &  Demands  owing  to  the  Old  Eaft 
India  Company  any  where  in  Europe,  granted  to  the 
Queen  by  the  laid  Company,  in  order  to  their  recovering 
the  fame.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  8th  of  Auguft,  1709.  31. 

44.  Docquet  of  a  W arant  to  grant  the  Dignity  of  a 

Baronet  unto  Sir  John  Elwell  of  Exeter  Knight.  Sealed 
the  13th  of  Auguft,  1709.  53. 

45.  Docquet  of  a  Releafe  untoNathanielNewton  (upon 

his  Payment  of  £.  i  005.  for  Samuel  Pacey  Efq;)  of  the 
Eftate  of  the  faid  Mr.  Pacey  in  Denton,  8c  Great  Yar¬ 
mouth  in  the  County  of  Norfolk.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  1 3th  of  Auguft, 
1709.  _  54- 

46.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  David  Earl 

ol  Wemyfs  Vice-Admirall  of  Scotland,  &  Judge  of  the 
Admiralty-Court  there,  the  yearly  Salary  of  £.1000.  as 
well  for  his  own  Labour,  as  for  Salarys  to  his  Officers. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the 
13th  of  Auguft,  1709.  55. 

47.  Docquet  of  a  Lycence  to  John  Duke  of  New- 

Caftle  to  make  a  Park  in  the  Foreft  of  Sherwood,  for 
her  Majefties  Ufe  &  Service,  during  her  natural  Life, 
by  inclofeing  3000  Acres  of  his  own  Land  of  Inheritance 
there.  With  a  Grant  of  all  the  Wood  8c  Timber,  Bark, 
1-ops,  Tops,  8c  Offal-Wood  of  a  Ryding  in  Birkland 
Wood,  toward  the  Charge  of  making  the  Pale  of  the  faid 
Park.  And  of  the  Salary  ol  £.1000.  per  annum,  in  con- 
fideration  of  his  extinguilhing  the  Rents  of  fo  many  Acres 
of  his  own  Lands  for  the  faid  Park  :  and  of  finding  Hay 
8c  Failure,  oc  paying  Officers,  8c  defraying  all  other  in¬ 
cidental  Charges,  both  of  the  Park  Sc  Foreft  aforefaid. 
And  a'fo,  of  the  Office  of  Ranger  of  the  faid  Park,  with 
tile  Herbage  of  the  fame,  and  Free-Chace  8c  Free  War¬ 
ren  within  it,  during  her  Life  :  with  other  particular 
Covenants.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  13th  of  Auguft,  1709.  56. 

48.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Francis  Man¬ 
ning  Efq;  appointed  to  go  Secretary  to  the  Republick  of 
the  Grifons,  the  Sume  of  £.2.  by  the  day  for  his  ordi¬ 
nary  Entertainment ;  with  allowance  of  further  Summes 
lor  Intelligences,  8cc.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  27th  of  Auguft,  1709.  58. 

49.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  untoSpencer  Comp¬ 

ton  Fiq;  £. 50,000.  upon  Account ;  to  be  applied,  ac¬ 
cording  to  fuch  Warants  as  he  lhail  receive  from  her  Ma¬ 
jefty,  or  the  Lord  Treafurer.  Signed  by  his  Lordlhip  ; 
&  fealed  the  27th  of  Auguft,  1709.  59. 

50.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet 

unto  Sir  George  Thorold  of  Harmefton  in  the  County 
of  Lincoln  :  with  remainder  to  Samuel  Thorold  of  Lon¬ 
don  Gent,  his  younger  Brother.  Sealed  the  27th  of  Au¬ 
guft,  1709-  60. 

51.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Charles  Duke 

of  Somerfet  Mafter  of  the  Horl'e,  £.20,000.  upon  Ac¬ 
count,  toward  defraying  the  extraordinary  Expences  of 
the  Stables.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ; 
and  fealed  the  3d  day  of  September,  1709.  61. 


Num.  2264. 

52.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Jane  Warburtoft 

one  of  the  Maids  of  Honor,  the  yearly  Sum  of  £300. 
with  a  Claufe  in  favour  of  Anne  Smith,  Wife  of  Alex¬ 
ander  Grant  Efq;  figned  bv  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin;  and  fealed  the  3d  of  September,  1709.  62. 

53.  Docquet  (upon  a  Surrender)  of  a  new  Grant  to 
Thomas  Gibfon  Gent.  Jonathan  Green  Merchant,  8c 
John  Allen  Gent,  of  the  Office  of  Surveyour  of  the  Petty 
Cuftomes,  Subfidies  of  3s.  per  Tun,  8c  1 2d.  per  Pound 
in  the  Port  of  London,  See.  during  the  Lives  of  Richard 
Lumley  8c  Thomas  Lumley  Efq  rs.  younger  Sons  of  Richard 
Earle  of  Scarborough.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin,  and  fealed  the  1  cth  of  September,  1709.  63. 

54.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  James  Brydges 

Efq;  Paymafter  General  of  the  Forces  a£tingin  conjunc¬ 
tion  with  the  Allies  :£ 7 96,000.  upon  Account ;  toward 
defraying  the  Charges  of  the  Armies  under  his  pay;  and 
for  our  proportion  of  Subfidies  to  the  Allies  ;  and  other 
incidental  Charges  for  the  year  1 709.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  24th  of  Sep¬ 
tember,  x  709.  6  5. 

55.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d’Eflireto  the  Dean  &  Chap¬ 

ter  of  Chichefter,  empowering  them  to  choofe  a  Bilhop 
to  that  See.  Sealed  the  10th  of  October,  1709.  66. 

56.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  Robert* 

Hunter  Efq;  Gaptain  General  Sc  Governor  in  Chief  of 
the  Province  of  New  York,  8c  of  the  Colony  of  Connec¬ 
ticut.  Sealed  the  14th  of  Odtober,  1709.  67. 

57.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  Robert 

Hunter  Efq;  Captain  General  &  Governor  in  Chief  of 
the  Province  of  Nova  Ctefarea  or  New  Jerfey.  Sealed 
the  14th  of  October,  1709.  68. 

58.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  John  Wich  Efq; 

appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Courts’of  Holftcin 
Gottorp,  8c  Mecklenburgh, and  totheHanfe-Townsj/^oo. 
for  his  Equipage,  and  £5.  by  the  Day  for  his  ordinary 
Entertainment :  with  allowance  of  further  Summes  for 
Intelligences,  8c c.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  8c  fealed  the  22dof  October,  1709.  69. 

59.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Sir  David  Naim 
appointed  Secretary  to  the  molt  antient  8c  noble  Order 
of  the  Thiftle,  the  Salary  of  £$00.  per  annum,  from 
the  firft  day  of  May  1708.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  2  2d  of  October,  1709. 

70. 

60.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  1  homas  Earl  of  Pem¬ 

broke  Sc  Montgomery,  of  an  Annuity  of  £3000.  from 
Michaelmas  1 708.  out  of  the  Revenue  of  the  Poft  houfe; 
to  be  paid,  during  her  Majefties  Lifts.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  2 2d  df  Oc¬ 
tober,  1709.  "71. 

6 1 .  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  upon  a  Surrender,  to  William 

Hooker  8c  Robert  Carker  Efqrs.  oftheOffice  of  Receiver 
General  of  the  Rents  8c  Revenues  of  the  Duchy  of’ Corn¬ 
wall  ;  with  all  Wages,  Fees,  8cc.  thereunto  belonging. 
To  hold,  during  their  Lives,  and  the  Life  of  the  longer 
Liver  of  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin, 
and  fealed  the  22ft  of  October,  1709.  72. 

62.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  Sir  John  Thorold 

Baronet,  for  the  Summe  of  £1095.  ufually  paid  for  that 
Dignity.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
andfealed  the  22d  of  Oftober,  1709.  73. 

63.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Ufher  of 

the  Cuftom-Houfe  in  the  Port  of  London,  unto  William 
Taylour  Efq;  with  the  Fee  of  £6.  per  annum.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  &  fealed  the  2 2d 
of  October,  1709.  74. 

64.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Chief  Glafier 
of  all  her  Majefties  Buildings  in  England,  to  John  Ire¬ 
land  in  the  Room  of  William  Ireland  his  Father  ;  with 
the  Fee  of  One  Shilling  by  the  Day,  and  £1:4:0.  by 
the  year,  for  a  Livery.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  andfealed  the  2 2d  of  October,  1709.  75. 

65.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Accomptant 

& 


N'lim.  2264. 

k  Comptroller  Generali  of  the  Stamp- Office,  unto  Wil¬ 
liam  Alhurit  Efq;  (in  the  room  of  Robert  Panting  Gent, 
with  the  yearly  Salary s  of  £300.  for  himfelf, 
for  three  Clerks  under  him.  Signed  by  the  Lord  1  rea- 
furer  Godolphin;  fealed  2  2d  of  October,  1709.  76. 

66.  Docquet  of  a  Granc  (Leafe)  unto  Henry  Boyle 

Efq;  one  of  the  Principal  Secretaries  of  State,  ol  certain 
Ground  &  Edifices  near  St.  James’s  Park,  as  deferibed 
in  a  Plan  annexed  to  the  Original  War  ant.  _  To  hold  for 
o  i  Years,  at  the  annual  Rent  of  £35.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Trea furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  29th  day  ot 
October,  1709.  ,  ,77  ‘ 1 

67.  Docquet  of  a  Royal  Affent  to  the  Election  ot  Dr. 

Thomas  Manninghamtobe  Biffiop  of  Chichelter.  Scaled 
the  29th  of  Oftober,  1709.  79- 

68  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  Sir  John  Elwill  Baronet, 
the  Sum  of  £  1 09  5  •  ufually  paid  for  that  Dignity.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treasurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  1 2th 
of  November,  1709.  8o> 

69.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Thomas  Cowley  Gent. 

5c  Edward  Bridge  Citizen  of  London,  of  two  Faires,  to 
be  held  yearly  at  Donnington  in  the  County  of  Lincoln. 
Sealed  the  12  th  of  November,  1709.  Si- 

70.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles 

Daitiquouve  Efq;  Pay-mafter  of  the  Works,  £40,090. 
upon  Account  ;  for  the  Ufe  &  Service  of  her  Majefties 
Works.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and 
fealed  the  12th  of  November,  1709.  8a* 

7 1 .  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Charles  Fox  Elq; 

late  Pay-mafter  of  the  Forces  Abroad,  from .  feveral 
Summes  amounting  to  £484,1 11:4:64.  by  him  paid 
in  the  Service.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  fealed,  the  19th  of  November  1709.  13. 

72.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  difchargeJames  Bridges 

Efq;  Pay-mafter  of  the  Forces  abroad,  from  feveral 
Summes  amounting  to  £476,014  :  19  :  74-  hy  him  paid 
in  the  Service.  Signed  by  theLord  Treafurer  Godolphin; 
and  fealed  the  19th  of  November,  1709.  84. 

73.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Henry  Newton  LL.D. 

of  the  Office  of  Matter,  Keeper,  Sc  Governor  of  the 
Hofpital  or  Free  Chapell  of  St.  Catherine  near  theTower 
of  London;  and  of  all  the  Manors,  Reftories,  Chapells, 
Mefuages,  Lands,  &c.  to  the  faid  Hofpital  united,  or 
appertaining  :  to  hold,  during  his  Life.  Sealed  the  2 1  ft 
day  of  November,  1709.  S5. 

74.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  Sc  Reftitution  of  Temporal- 
ties  of  the  Bilhoprick  of  Chichefter  to  Thomas  Man- 
ningham  Biffiop  of  that  See.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  21ft  of  Novem¬ 
ber,  1709. 

75.  Docquet  oF  a  Grant  unto  John  Robinfon  D.  D. 

of  the  Deanry  of  the  Chapell  Royal  in  the  Caftell  of 
Windfor,  with  the  Deanry  of  Vv  olverhampton,  &  Re- 
giftry  of  the  Knights  of  the  Garter,  thereunto  annexed. 
Sealed  the  2 1  ft  of  November,  1709.  37  • 

76.  Docquet  of  a  I.ycence  unto  James  Earl  ofDer- 
went-water  and  Francis  RadclifFe  Efq  ;  his  Brother  ;  to 
return  into  &  abide  in  her  Majettics  Dominions.  Sealed 

the  30th  of  November,  1709.  88- 

77.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Sir  Thomas 
Littleton  Bart.  Treafurer  of  the  Navy,  £.2,000,000. 
upon  Account ;  for  the  Ufe  &  Service  of  the  Navy,  and 
the  Viftualling  thereof.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  3d  of  December,  1709.  89. 

78.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  Paul  Methuen  Efq  ; 

from  the  Ouantitys  of  5583  oz.  5  dw.  of  White  Plate,  Sc 
1 2  7  2  oz.  15  dw.  of  Gilt  Plate,  delivered  to  John  Methuen 
Efq;  his  Father,  as  Ambaflador  Extraordinary  to  the  late 
King  of  Portugal.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  5th  of  December,  1729.  90. 

79.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James 
BrydgesEfq;  Paymafter  General  of  the  Forces  abroad, 
the  Summo  of  /  .2,500,000.  upon  Account ;  toward 
defraying  the  Charge  of  the  Forces  under  his  Pay ; 


Num.  2264. 

her  Majefties  Proportion  of  Subfidies  to  the  Allies ; 
and  other  incidental  Charges.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  5th  day  of  De¬ 
cember,  1709.  _  91- 

(This,  for  the  Service  of  the  Year  1710.) 

80.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  How 

Efq ;  Receiver  Sc  Pay-mafter  General,  of  the  Guards, 
Garrifons,  Sc  other  Land-Forces  here,  £.600,000.  upon 
Account ;  for  maintaining  the  Guards  Sc  Garrifons  in 
Great  Britain,  and  Payment  of  the  Invalids  for  the 
Year  1710.  including  5000  Men  to  ferve  on  board  the 
Fleet.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and 
fealed  the  5th  of  December,  1709.  92- 

81.  Docquet  of  a  Lycence  unto  George  Earl  of  Dun¬ 

barton  ;  to  return  into,  and  abide  in  her  Majefties  Do  ¬ 
minions.  Sealed  the  1 5th  of  December,  1  709.  93-. 

82.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  unto  John  Earl  of  Stair 
appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  King  of  Poland, 
£.500.  for  his  Equipage,  and  £.5.  by  the  day  for  his 
ordinary  Entertainment:  and  further  Allowance  for 
Intelligence,  &c.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  17th  of  December,  1709.  94- 

83.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Hobfon  Efq  ;  of 
the  Office  of  Chief  Joyner  of  all  her  Majefties  Works, 

Sc  Buildings  in  England,  in  the  room  of  Sr.  Charles 
Hobfon  Kt  his  Father  ;  with  the  Fee  of£. 52 : 12:6.  per 
annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and 
fealed  the  29th  of  Hecember,  1 709.  95. 

84.  Original  Petition  ?  of  feveral  of  the  Creditors  of 

Thomas  Pitkin  late  of  London  Linnen-draper  :  praying 
that  fhe  would  be  pleafed  to  pardon  that, infamous  Villain 
1  homas  Brerewood,  for  his  Offence,  and  the  Judgment 
Sc  Sentence  palled  upon  him  for  the  fame,  and  of  all  Exe¬ 
cutions  thereupon.  96. 

83.  Original  Certificate  of  James  Waters  &  other 
Creditors  of  Thomas  Pitkin,  to  the  Lord  Privy  Seale; 
that  the  Pardon  of  Thomas  Brercwood,  now  lying  be¬ 
fore  his  Grace  to  pafs  the  Privy  Seale,  was  obtained  of 
the  Queen  by  them  Sc  other  Creditors  of  the  faid  Pit¬ 
kin.  98* 

86.  Docquet  of  a  Pardon  (at  the  humble  Suit  of 

divers  Creditors  of  Tho.  Pitkin)  unto  Thomas  Brere- 
wood  Gent,  of  certain  Offences  by  him  committed  againft 
an  Aft  of  Parliament  fubjefting  his  Eftate  to  the  Cre¬ 
ditors  of  the  faid  Pitkin,  and  of  all  Conviftions,  Paines, 
Penalties,  See.  incurred  by  reafon  thereof.  Sealed  the  29th 
day  of  December,  170Q.  99- 

87.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  allowing  feveral  Debts 
(amounting  to  £.8930: 14:74.  and  of  £.2803:11:9) 
owing  from  Colleftors  of  the  Cuftomes  who  dyed 
infolvent,  and  others.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  29th  of  December,  1709. 

IQO. 

88.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Purveyor  of 

the  Works  Sc  Buildings  in  all  her  Majefties  Honors, 
Cattles,  Houfcs,  Sf  Manors,  unto  John  Hobfon  Efq; 
with  the  Fee  of8d.  by  the  day;  in  the  room  of  Sir 
Charles  Hobfon  Kt.  his  Father.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  29th  of  December, 
1709.  102. 

89.  Docquet  of  a  Pardon,  unto  the  Earl  of  Dun¬ 

barton,  of  High  Treafon,  by  him  committed  in  bearing 
Arms  under  the  French  King,  againft  her  Majefty.  Sealed 
the  29th  of  December,  1709.  103. 

90.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Thomas 

Micklethwaite  Efq;  Receiver  Sc  Paymafter  for  Tranfports, 
£200,000.  upon  Account,  towards  defraying  the  Charge 
cf  tranfporting  Land  Forces.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  31ft  of  December, 
1709.  io4- 

91.  Original  Certificate  of  William  Clayton  Clerk  in 
the  Exchequer  under  Charles  Lord  Halifax,  that  there 
had  been  iffued-out  unto  James  Brydges  Elq;  upen  a 
Privy  Seal  for  £2,500,000.  (above  mentioned  at  79.) 

for 


ill 


! 


6  24 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2264. 

for  the  Ufe  &  Service  of  the  Armies  under  his  Pay,  the 
Sum  of  £536,160:0:0.  by  way  of  Impreft,  k  upon 
Accompt.  dat.  3 1  December,  1709.  105. 

92.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  James  Brydges 

Efq;  Pay  mailer  Generali  of  the  Forces  abroad  the  Sum 
of  £332,232:  10:84-  for  the  Service  of  the  Year  1710. 
And  that  the  Sum  by  him  received  ihall  be  deemed  as 
fo  much  ilfued  to  him  upon  account  of  the  Sum  of 
£919,092:3:6.  Granted  to  Her  Majefty  for  Maintaining 
40000  Men  to  act  in  conjundtion  with  the  Allies,  for  the 
Year  1710.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ; 
and  fealed  the  2d  of  January,  17?-’.  1 07. 

93.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Ifabella  Dan¬ 

vers,  one  of  the  Gentlewomen  of  her  Majeilies  Bed- 
Chamber  a  Penlion  of  ^500.  per  annum.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  nth  day 
ol  January,  1 70 .  109. 

04.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  George 
Lari  of  Orkney  Lieutenant  k  Governor  General  of  the 
Colony  ?•;  Dominion  of  Virginia,  in  the  room  of  Robert 
Hunter  Efq;  fealed  1  1  til  of  January,  170,4,  no. 

95.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  making  Leafes  of  all 

fuch  Teinds  in  Scotland,  as  are  or  lhall'be  in  her  Ma- 
jclhcs  hands,  at  a  Fine  or  Compofition  of  Three  Years 
^  alue  ;  to  be  paid  to  the  Receiver  of  her  Land-Rents  in 
Scotland.  Signed  by  the  I,ord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  1 1  th  of  January,  1 70-^,.  1 1 1 . 

96.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Edward  Earl 
of  Orford  A  others,  Commiflioners  of  the  Admiraltv 
£1000.  per  annum  a  piece.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  1 1  th  of  January,  1709-10. 

112. 

97.  Docquet  of  a  Difeharge  unto  Sir  Samuel  Stanier, 

kc.  Ager.ts  k  Trultecs  for  the  Recovery  of  a  certain 
Debt  due  from  the  Crown  of  Portugal  unto  feveral 
Englilh  Merchants,  &c.  for  an  unjuft  Seizure  of  their 
Ships  &  Good;,  in  the  Years  1651.  k  1652.  from  the 
Summe  of  £7,922:6:6'-.  in  fatisfaclion  of  the  Moiety 
of  £17,500.  (Charges  dedufted)  coming  to  her  Ma¬ 
jesty  purfuant  to  an  Agreement  made  between  the  faid 
Agents  k  Truftees,  &  the  late  Earl  of  Romney,  by 
whofe  means  £40,000.  part  of  the  faid  Debt,  was  re¬ 
covered.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
and  fealed  the  1 1  th  of  January,  1709-10.  1 j  3. 

98.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  Hugh  Bofcawen  F.fq; 

Warden  of  the  Stannarys,  authorizing  him  to  fummon 
a  Parliament  of  the  moll  fubftantiall  Tynners  of  Devon 
A  Cornwal ;  to  ordain  &  reform,  fuch  I.aws,  Cufloms, 
kc.  as  are  needful!  to  be  redrafted.  With  Power  to 
enter  into  fuch  Contracts  with  them,  on  her  Majeflies 
behalf  for  her  antient  Right  of  Pre-emption  ofTynn, 
on  fuch  Terms  as  are  exprefled  in  her  Articles  and  In- 
flruclions  drawn  up  for  that  purpofe.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  14  th  of  Ja¬ 
nuary,  A.  D.  1 709-10.  1x4. 

99.  Original  Certificate  of  John  Bridges  Efq;  Sol- 
licitor  of  the  Cuitoms,  to  the  Duke  of  New-Caftle, 
Lord  Privy  Seale,  flic  wing  that  William  Window  Mer¬ 
chant  (to  whom  her  Majefty  had  granted  certain  Wood¬ 
lands  in  Kent,  of  about  £70.  per  annum)  had  given  the 
required  Security  of  £150.  dat.  ^January,  1709-10. 

115. 

1 00.  Account  of  Mr.  Windows  Bonds  to  the  Queen. 

Attefted  by  Cha.  Reyncll  Clerk  of  the  Patents  to  the  At¬ 
torney  Generali.  dat.  25  January,  1709-10.  117. 

101.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Window  Mer¬ 

chant,  of  certain  Woods  k  Woodlands  in  the  County 
of  Kent,  ol  about  £70.  per  annum,  late  the  Eftate  of 
Robert  Breton ;  l'eized  into  her  Majeflies  hands  upon 
Account  of  the  faid  Robert  Bretons  Debt,  as  Collector 
of  the  Cuftomes  at  Dover  ;  in  fatisfatflion  whereof  Mr. 
Window  had  paid  £500.  A  given  Security  for  £1  -00. 
more.  Signed  by  The  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  And 
'lealed  the  iSth  day  of  January,  1709-10.  up. 


Num. 2264. 

102.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Sufannah 
Yelverton,  one  of  the  Maids  of  Honor,  the  yearly  Peri- 
lion  of  £300.  with  a  Claufe  in  favour  of  Elizabet  h  Y  laics, 
now  the  wife  of  Thomas  Coke  Efq;  figned  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  iSth  of  January 

1709-' I20:’ 

103.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  Andrew  Davy,  kc. 

upon  truft,  &  for  the  Ufe  A  Benefit  of  the  Inhabitants’ 
of  Chagford  in  the  County  of  Devon,  of  one  Weekly 
Market  to  be  held  for  ever,  in  that  Pariih.  Sealed  the  1 8th 
of  January,  170910.  I2I 

104.  Docquet  of  a  Commiilion,  conftituting  Sir  John 

Humble  Bart.  &  others.  Managers  of  the  Lottery  ap¬ 
pointed  for  raffing  the  Sum  of  £  1,500,00^.  for  the  Ser¬ 
vice  of  the  Year  1710.  Signed  by  the  I.ord  Treafurer 
Godolphin.  Sealed  the  1 8th  of  January,  1709-10.  and 
new-fealed  the  day  after.  *  l22< 

105.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Robert  Walpole  Efq; 
of  the  Office  of  Treafurer  of  the  Navy,  with  the  Salary 
of  £2000.  per  annum  for  himfelf ;  and  the  allowance 
of  1 700.  per  annum,  for  the  Pay-mafter,  C alkie r,  Ac- 
coinptant,  A  other  Officers  under  him  ;  together  with 
the  Mefluage at  Deptford,  ufually  enjoyed  with  the  faid 
Office.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer' Godolphin  ;  and 
and  fealed  the  21ft  of  January,  1709-10.  at  12  it 

106.  Docquet  of  a  Lycenfe  upon  a  Surrender  ol  the 

former  Patent,  before  mentioned  at  §.  47.)  to  John  Duke 
of  New-Caftle,  to  make  a  like  Park  of  his  owne  Lands, 
within  or  without  the  Foreft  of  Sherwood,  or  in  the  pur¬ 
lieus  thereof;  for  her  Majeflies  Ufe  and  Service,  during 
her  natural  Life.  With  Warant  for  making  a  new  Ryding 
of  80  yards  wide  through  Birkland-Wood  in  the  laid 
Foreft,  and  for  enlarging  the  Ryding  there  to  80  yards 
wide  ;  with  all  the  Wood  and  Timber  therefore  to  be 
cutt-down,  k  the  Bark,  Lopps,  Topps,  k  Offiill-Wood  : 
with  other  Claufes  as  in  the  former  Grant.  Signed  bv 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  3 1  ft  day 
of  January,  1709-10.  124 

107.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Richard  Mervin 

Clerk,  to  the  Vicarage  of  Buckland-Bruer  in  the  County 
of  Devon.  Sealed  the  8th  of  February,  1709-10.  126. 

108.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  impowering  the  Lord 

Treafurer  to  appoint  Receivers  General  of  the  Land-Tax 
granted  by  Parliament  for  the  year  1710.  Signed  by 
the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  15th  day 
of  February,  1709-10.  127. 

109.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  Richard 

Earl  Rivers  Lieutenant  of  k  in  all  the  Hamlets  of 
the  Tower  of  London.  Sealed,  the  15th  of  February, 
1709-10.  ,12g;’ 

1 10.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Coriftable 

of  the  Tower  of  London  unto  Richard  Earle  Rivers 
with  the  Fee  of  1000  Pounds  per  annum.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  Sealed  the  15th  of  Fe¬ 
bruary,  I7O9-IO.  jo  g 

111.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  the  Dignity  of  Ba¬ 
ronet,  unto  Robert  Browne  of  Edinborough  in  Scot¬ 
land  Efq;  Sealed  the  24th  of  February,  1709-10.  130. 

112.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  (upon  a  noted  Deficiency 
in  her  Majefties  l.and-Rents  &  Cafualties  in  Scotland) 
for  the  Receiver  General  A  Cafhier  of  the  Cuftomes  in 
Scotland,  to  pay  over  to  Archibald  Dowglas  Efq;  Pay- 
mafter  of  her  Eftabliihments  there,  out  of  what  Ihall 
be  paid  in  on  Compofitions  in  the  Court  of  Exchequer 
there,  or  upon  Seizures  of  un-cuftom’d  or  prohibited 
Goods,  fo  much  (upon  Account)  as  Ihall  be  Efficient  to 
fatisfie  all  Arrears  prefent  or  future.  Signed  by  the 
Lord  Tfeafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  Cth  of  March, 
1709-10. 

1 13.  Docquet  of  an  Inftrument,  w  hereby  her  Majefty 
recommends  to,  &  authorizes  all  her  Subjects,  to  lend 
to  the  Emperor  of  Germany,  on  Security  of  all  his  Lands 
&  Revenues  in  Silefia,  together  with  the  Security  of  the 
States  of  that  Province;  £100,000.  at  the  Intereft  of  S 

4  per 


Num.  2264. 

per  Cent,  per  annum  :  to  be  fent  to  Prince  Eugene  of 
Savoy,  for  the  Service  of  the  War  in  Flanders.  And  to 
conftitute  Sir  Henry  Fumefe  Bar'.  &  others  Truftees  for 
managing  the  Returns,  and  taking  the  Security.  Sealed 
the  13th  of  March,  1709-10.  133. 

1 14.  Underneath  the  la  ft  Docquet,  is  the  Opinion  of 

Mr.  Jelfop,  (hewing  that  Sir  Thomas  Powis  &  he  both 
thought  that  that  Recommendation  might  better  have 
been  left  out.  dated  12  March  1709-10.  ibid. 

115.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet, 

unto  Robert  de  Neuf-Ville  of  Frankfort  on  the  Mein  in 
Germany.  Sealed  the  17th  of  March  1709-10.  134. 

1 16.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Dignity  of  a  Baronet, 

unto  James  Abercrombie  of  Edinborough  Efq;  fealed 
the  21  ft  of  March,  1709-10.  135. 

1 1  7.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Henrietta 
Maria  Scarburgh,  one  of  the  Maids  of  Honor,  the  yearly 
Penfion  of  /300.  without  Account.  With  a  Claufe  in 
favor  of  Elizabeth  Collier,  now  the  Wife  of  Charles 
Earle  of  Dorfet.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol- 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  23d  of  March,  1709-10.  136. 

11S.  Docquet  of  a  Wara  t,  to  pay  unto  Spenfer 
Compton  Efq;  £  50,000.  upon  Accompt ;  to  be  applied 
according  to  the  Warants  of  her  Majefty,  or  of  the  Lord 
Treafurer.  Signed  by  hisLordlhip;  fealed  23  March, 
1709-10.  1 37- 

1 19.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Richmond  alias 

Webb  Lieutenant  Generali  of  her  Majefties  Forces  in 
the  Low  Countries  of  the  yearly  Penfion  of  £  1000.  out 
of  the  Revenue  of  the  Port- Office  :  to  hold  during  her 
Majefties  Lite.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol- 
phin;  and  fealed  the  28th  of  March,  1710.  158. 

120.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Farrer  Efq  ; 

of  the  Office  of  Clerk  of  the  Pipe  of  the  Exchequer,  and 
of  feveral  other  Offices  therewith  dually  granted.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  third 
day  of  April,  1710.  139. 

1 2 1.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  make  Peter- Joleph 

Migliorucci  a  free  Denizen  of  Great  Britain.  Sealed  the 
4th  day  of  April,  1710.  140. 

122.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  containing  her  Majefties 
Declaration,  that  the  Summe  of  £  150,000.  that  was  lent 
at  the  Exchequer  on  the  19th  of  April,  1710.  in  the 
Name  of  James  C.raggs  Efq;  upon  Credit  of  a  late  Aft 
of  Parliament,  at  the  Intereft  of  6  per  Cent,  per  annum, 
is  the  proper  Money  of  the  Soveraigne  Lords  of  the  laud¬ 
able  Canton  of  Berne ;  and  that  the  Name  of  the  faid 
James  Craggs,  was  only  in  truft  for  the  faid  Lords. 
Willi  Directions  that  no  Affignment,  Transference,  or 
Alienation  thereof  be  made  by  the  faid  Craggs  ;  but  by 

1  he  appointment  of  the  faid  Lords.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  21ft  of  April,  1710. 

141. 

123.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Edward  Afhe  Efq  ; 

of  the  Office  of  Keeper  of  the  Stores  of  Ordnance  within 
the  Tower  of  London,  and  elfewhere  in  England  :  with 
the  Fee  of  3  Shillings  by  the  day.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  26th  of  April, 
17x0.  e  142. 

1  24.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  George  Bell  Junr. 
M.A.  to  the  Reftory  of  Croft  in  Yorklhire;  void  by  the 
Resignation  of  George  Bell  Senr.  Sealed  the  26th  of 
April,  1710.  143. 

125.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  creating  Henry  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Kent  Duke  of  Kent.  Sealed  27th  of  April,  1710. 

144. 

126.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  Sir  Robert  Browne 

Bart,  from  the  Sum  of  ^1095.  ufually  paid  for  that 
Dignity.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ; 
and  fealed  the  3d  of  May,  1710.  1 45. 

127.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  Sir  Robert  de  Neuf- 

ville  Barf  from  the  Sum  of£  1095.  ufually  paid  for  that 
Dignity.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ; 
and  fealed  the  3d  of  May,  1 7  j  o.  146. 

Cat.  Karl.  Vcl.  II. 


Num.  2264. 

128.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  paffiiig  all  fuch  Ac- 

Compts  of  Sir  Thomas  Littleton  Bart,  late  Treafurer  of 
the  Navy,  as  are  now  unfinilhed,  notwithftanding  that 
his  Predeceflors  Acc  5.  have  not  been  declared.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  icth 
of  May,  1710.  147. 

129.  Original  Certificate  of  Mr.  Jeff-  p,  giving  his 

Opinion,  that  his  Grace  might  fafely  fett-to  the  privy 
Seale  for  paffing  the  Treafurer  of  the  Navies  Accounts, 
dated  the  10th  of  May,  1710.  148. 

130.  Docquet  of  a  new  Commiffion  for  promoting 

Trade,  &  for  improving  the  Plantations  in  America  & 
elfewhere  ;  conftituting  feveral  Great  Minifters  of  State, 
and  alfo  Thomas  Earle  of  Stamford,  William  Lord 
Dartmouth,  Sir  Philip  Meadows  Senr.  Kt.  John  Pulteney 
&  Robert  Monckton  Efqrs.  Sir  Charles  Turner  Kt.  & 
George  Baillie  Efq;  to  be  Commiffioners.  Sealed  tile 
1 2th  of  May,  1710.  150. 

1  31.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  for  making  out  a  Quietus 
eft  to  Edmund  Poley  &  Thomas  Follces  Efgrs.  Devifees 
of  the  late  Lord  Dover,  concerning  certain  pieces  of 
Ground  then  in  the  Parilh  of  St.  Martin  in  the  Fields, 
granted  by  K.  Charles  11.  unto  Baptift  May  &  Abraham 
Cowley  Efqrs.  in  truft  for  Henry  late  Earl  of  St.  Alban, 
under  the  yearly  Fee-Ferm  Rent  of  80  pounds,  at  16 
years  purchafe.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  ;  and  fealed  the  16th  of  May,  1710.  151. 

132.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  impowering  the  Lord 

Treafurer  to  appoint  Receivers  General  of  the  Rates  & 
Duties  upon  Houfes  &  Windows,  throughout  Great- 
Britain.  Signed  by  his  Lordfhip  ;  and  fealed  the  17th  of 
May,  1710.  153. 

1 33.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Michael  Lam¬ 

bert  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  Illand  of  St.Chriftopher, 
&c  Walter  Hamilton  Lieutenant-Governor  of  Nevis,  the 
Salary  of  £  200.  per  annum  to  each  ;  for  their  Support 
in  their  relpeftive  Governments,  in  lieu  of  all  prelents 
from  the  Affemblies.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  17th  of  May,  1710.  15 4. 

1 34.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Robert  Jackfon 

E'q;  appointed  Refident  at  the  Court  of  the  King  of  Swe¬ 
den,  £ 3.  by  the  day,  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  17th  of  May,  x  7 10.  155. 

135.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  continuing  k  confti- 

tuting  Sir  William  Honywood  Bart.  Thomas  Goodman, 
James  Afhburne,  Walter  Hungerford,  &  William  Lyn- 
dall  Efqrs.  Commiflioners  for  Appeals,  &  regulating  the 
Excife  ;  with  the  Salary  of £200.  per  annum  to  each  of 
them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and 
fealed  the  19th  of  May,  1710.  156. 

136.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Robert  Wal¬ 

pole  Efq  ;  Treafurer  of  the  Navy,  ^2,000,000.  upon 
Account,  for  the  Ufe  8c  Service  of  the  Navy,  and  the 
Victualling  thereof.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  &  fealed  the  19th  of  May,  1710.  J57. 

137.  The  Cafe  of  Knap  &  Garwood,  Creditors  of  the 

African  Company,  who  fued  the  faid  Company  for  Pay¬ 
ment  of  their  Bonds,  and  for  the  Intereft  due  thereon ; 
with  an  Accompt  of  the  fame.  1 38. 

138.  The  Cafe  of  the  Creditors  of  the  Royal  African 
Company  :  or  rather,  the  Cafe  of  that  Company  with 
refpeft  to  Knap  and  Garway  their  Creditors  ;  giving 
Reafons  why  they  fliould  not  be  paid,  at  that  time. 

160. 

139.  Original  Petition  of  divers  very  confiderabie 

Creditors  of  the  Royal  African  Company  (their  hands 
being  72  in  number)  in  behalf  of  themfelves  &  the  reft: 
of  the  Creditors,  whofe  Debts  amount  in  the  whole,  to 
liear  £  300,000.  againft  the  prefent  payment  of  Knapp  & 
Garway.  162. 

140.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  feverall  Iffues  or  Sums  of 
Money  amounting  to  ^892.  returned  into  the  Exchequer 
upon  the  African  Company,  for  their  not  appearing  to 

7  U  anfwer 


6  z'6 


CatalogUs  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2264, 

anfwef  Tohn  Knapp  Merchant  &  John  Garway  Mei'cer, 
unto  the  laid  Plantiffes.  Signed  bv  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  zoth  of  May,  1710.  163. 

14 1.  Docquet  of  a.Commiflion  continuing  &  eonfti- 
tuthif  William  Sttcng,  Georgd  Townefend, Philip  Riley 
Efqrs.  Sir  Marrnaduke  Wyvill  Bart.  Edward  Noell, 
’ChridoplierMouniague,  Efqrs.  Sir  William  Giff’ard,  Kt. 
K'clu /  Polls  xi  on,  and  \V hillock  Bulftrode Efqrs.  C.oni- 
miflioners  -of  the  Excife,  with  the  Salary  of  £  800.  per 
annum,  to  eaphof  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
’Godolphin’;  and  fealed  the  zoth  of  May  (and  again  the 
■  24th  of  May)  1710.  164. 

1.42.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  William  Afliburn- 
ham  Bart,  of  the  Office  of  one  of  the  Chamberlains  of 
the  Exchequer.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol¬ 
phin  and  fealed  the  .4-.11  of  May  1710.  165. 

143.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Ellis  Efq  ;  of  the 
Offices  of  Solicitor  for  the  Prcfecution  &  Defence  of  all 
Caufes  before  the  Commiffioners  of  Excife,  and  of  Ap¬ 
peals  :  and  alfo  of  Sollicker  of  the  Excife ;  with  the 
Salary  of  £ 200.  per  annum.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea¬ 
furer  Godolphin;  ant";  fealed  the  :4th  of  May,  1710.  16s 

144.  Docquet  of  a  (  ommiffion  continuing  &  confti- 

tuting  Edward  Lloyd,  Robert  Pooley,  Richard  Dyott, 
Richard  Martvn,  8c  Richard  Steele  Ffqrs.  Commiffioners 
for  levying  and  collefting  the  Duties  upon  damp’d 
Vellum,  Parchment  8c  Paper;  with  a  Salary  of  £ 300.  to 
each  of  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin; 
and  fealed  the  firlt  of  June,  1710.  167. 

:  145.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Harry  Mor¬ 
dant  Efq;  Treafurer  8c  Pay-mailer  of  the  Office  of  Ord¬ 
nance  £  ccOjOOO.  upon  Account ;  for  Land  8c  Sea  Ser¬ 
vice,  performed  8c  to  be  performed  by  the  Office  of 
Ordnance.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin;  and 
fealed  the  3d  of  June,  1710.  168. 

146.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  dating  the  Accompts 

of  James  Johndon  Efq  ;  8c  George  Douglas  Advocate ; 
and  for  certifying  what  has  been  already  paid  to  them  on 
two  Guifts  granted  by  K.  William  to  the  faid  Johndon, 
amounting  10/4000.  out  of  the  Compodtion  of  Tacks 
-of  Teinds ;  and  alfo  to  the  faid  Douglas  of  one  5th  part 
over  8c  above  the  faid  £  400c.  for  his  pains  in  recover¬ 
ing  the  Moneys  fhould  arife  thereby  :  That  they  may  be 
fatisfied  as  to  what  ffiall  remain  due  unto  them.  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin ;  and  fealed  the  3d  of 
June,  171c.  1 69. 

147.  Grant  ol  the  Office  of  Keeper  or  Clerk  of  the 

Ilanapcr,  unto  Thomas  Edwards  8c  Jofeph  Whitehead 
Efqrs.  upon  the  Surrender  of  Henry  Seymour  Efq; 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the 
7th  of  June,  171c.  170. 

148.  Docquet  of  a  Prcefentation  of  Richard  Stone 

Clerk  unto  the  Vicarage  of  Broad-worthy  al’s  Bradfordid- 
worty,  with  the  Chapell  of  St.  Pancras  in  Com.  Devon. 
Sealed  the  7th  of  June,  1710.  171. 

149.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  John  Molef- 
worthEfq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Great 
Duke  of  Tufcany,  £500.  for  his  Equipage,  and  £  5.  by  the 
day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment;  with  allowance  of  fur¬ 
ther  SummesforIntelligences,8cc.  Signed  by  theLordTrea- 
furer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  7th  of  June  1710.  172. 

1 50.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  directing  that  in  making-up 

the  Accompts  of  the  Commiffioners  of  Tranfporlation 
during  the  late  War  with  France,  Allowance  be*  made  of 
feveral  Sums  paid  for  Freight,  Provifions,  8cc.  amount¬ 
ing  t(?  jC563>7°5  2  :  7 i-  as  of  /9  ,4s  :  6  :  8.  fur 
Salaries;  and  of  £968  :  15  :  72.  for  Incidents  oi  their 
Office,  and  for  Lodes  by  Exchange  8c  Tale  of  Money  ; 
and  of  fevetal  Sums  due  to  her  Majedy  by  Balances, 
amounting  to  £9,929  :  10:5  '.  The  faid  Commiffioners 
being  to  be-  charged  with  fuch  Sums  as  have  been  by  them 
received  for  Intered  of  any  Tallys  iffued  to  them  lor 
the  Service.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ; 
aud  fealed  the  17  th  of  June,  17x0.  173. 


Num.  2264. 

15 1.  Sir  Edward  Northey’s  Opinion  (written  by  him* 
felf )  that  the  Lord  Prviy  beal  might  lawfully  8c  fafely 
affix  the  faid  Seal  to  the  Tranfportation  account,  dar. 
June  7th  (perhaps  it  ffiould  have  been  the  17th)  171®. 

‘74- 

Under  it,  is  Mr.  Jeffops  Subfcription  to  the  fame 
Opinion,  dat.  7th  of  June,  1710. 

152.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Henry  I.umley  Efq; 

I  Jett  tenant  General  of  her  Majefties  Forces,  of  the 
Office  of  Governor  8c  Captain  of  the  lile  of  J^rfey,  8c 
Cadle  of  Gurye  ats  Mont-Orgueil,  5;  Elizabeth.  Scaled 
the  17th  day  of  June  1710.  175. 

1 53.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Coll.  John  Hill,  cl  the 

yearly  Pcndon  of  £1000.  out  of  the  Revenues  of  the 
Pod-Office.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  j 
and  fealed  the  17th  of  June  1710.  176. 

1  54.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  impowering  the  Lord 
Treafurer  to  appoint  Commiffioners  or  Officers  through¬ 
out  Great  Britain,  for  furveying  the  feveral  Rates  8c 
Duties  upon  Houles,  granted  by  Aft  of  Parliament,  for 
the  Service  of  the  Year  1710.  Signed  by  his  Lordfhip  j 
and  fealed  the  8th  of  July  1710.  177. 

1 55.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  condituting  Sir  Nathaniel 

Lloyd  Kt.  8c  Dr.  of  Laws,  Advocate  Generali  for  all 
matters  Eccledadiczl,  Maritime,  8c'  Foreign,  relating 
to  the  Crown  ;  with  the  Fee  of  £20.  per  annum:  Signed 
by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed.  the  Sih 
of  July  1710.  178. 

156.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Blathwayt 

Efq;  of  an  annual  Fair  at  Lanfdowne  in  the  County  of 
Somerfet.  Sealed  the  8th  of  July  1710.  179. 

157.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  one  of  her 

Majefties  Principal  Secretaries,  to  William  Lord  Dart¬ 
mouth,  with  the  Salary  of  £  1  oc.  per  annum,  in  the 
room  of  Charles  Earl  of  Sunderland.  Signed  by  'the 
Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  8th  of  July 
1710.  180. 

158.  Docquet  of  the  Grant  of  a  Prebend  in  the  Col¬ 
legiate  Church  of  St.  Peter  in  Weftminfter,  unto 

Laurence  Brodrick  D.  D.  Sealed  the  xoth  of  July  171c. 

181. 

1  39.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Hams  Efq;  of 
two  Faires,  to  be  held  annually,  at  the  Downs,  within 
the  Manor  of  Norton-Dawney  alias  Townftall,  in  the 
County  of  Devon.  Sealed  the  10th  day  of  July  1710. 

182. 

x6o.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Creffet 
Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Elector  of 
Hanover  and  Duke  of  Brunlwick-Lunebourg  ;  £500. 
for  his  Equipage,  8c  £5.  by  the  day  for  His  ordinary 
Entertainment :  with  allowance  of  further  Summes  for 
Intelligences,  8cc.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go¬ 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  15th  of  July  1710.  183. 

161.  Original  Letter  of  Sir  Robert  Lyre  to  the  Duke 
of  New-Caltle  Lord  Privy  Seale,  dat.  15th  July  171c. 

184. 

Defiring  that  the  new  Charter  of  the  City  of  Briftol 
(of  which  he  was  then  Recorder)  might  have  a  fpeedy 
difpatch. 

162.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  Thomas  Sydney  Efq; 
of  the  Office  of  Comptroller  of  the  Excife  6c 'new  Imped, 
in  the  Room  of  Scroop  Lord  Vifcount  Howe  :  with  the 
Salaries  of  £700.  per  annum  for  his  own  paines  ;  &  of 
£620.  per  annum  for  his  Clerks.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
1  reafurer  Godolphin;  and  fealed  the  17th  of  July  1710. 

186. 

163.  Copv  of  the  Queens  Warant  for  the  '  Briftol - 
Chartre  :  lubferibed  by  Mr.  Secretary  Boyle.  1 7. 

164.  Docquet  of  the  Warant  for  a  new  Charter  to 
the  C  ity  of  Briftol ;  with  divers  new  Powers,  Regula¬ 
tions,  6c  Alterations.  Sealed  the  20th  of  July  1710.  191. 

165.  Docquet  ol  a  Warant  condituting  Thomas 
Strickland  Elq;  Con.n  ifLorucr  Chief  Officer  tfTranf- 
i cm  Office  :  v.ith  the  ) curly  allowance  of  _  ,o  o.  ier 

ms 


Bibliothecas’  Harleianse. 


627 


Niim.  2 2 64. 

f.is  own  Salary,  and  for  the  Salaries  of  his  Deputy  & 
Clerks,  and  for  the  rent  Sc  keeping  of  an  Houfe/  for 
the  faid  Office.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godol- 
phin  ;  and  lcaled  theaad  of  July  lyio.  iq2. 

1 6b.  Docquet  cf  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  William 
Lord  Dartmouth,  one  of  the  Principal  Secretaries  of 
State,  the  yearly  Salary  of  £  1850.  Signed  bv  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealedthe  29th  of  July  1710. 

193. 

167.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  the  lame 

William  Lord  Dartmouth,  £3000.  for  fecrct  Service, 
without  Account.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Go- 
dolphin  ;  and  fealed  the  29th  of  July  1710.  194. 

168.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  directing  that  in  making- 

up  the  Accounts  of  William  Hubbald  Gem.  deceafed, 
late  Paymalfer  of  the  Train  of  Artillery  A.  D.  1689. 
for  the  reducing  of  Ireland,  allowance  be  made  of  feve- 
ndl  Summes  by  him  paid  in  Ireland  ;  amounting  to 
£55:>4I8  '•  1  -  iL  and  alfo  of  £8437  :  o  :  5}.  paid  here. 
Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin  ;  and  fealed 
the  3d  of  Auguft  1710.  195. 

1 69.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  (at  the  nomination  of  the 
Lord  Chancellor  Cowper)  unto  Charles  Cocks  Efq;  and 
John  Cocks  Gent,  his  Son  ;  the  Office  of  Clerk  of  the 
Letters  Patents  in  Chancery,  To  hold  during  their 
Lives,  and  the  Life  of  the  longer  Liver  of  them.  196. 

170.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Sir  William 

Oldes  Kt.  Gentlemen  Ulher  Black  Rod ;  the  annuity  of 
£200.  in  lieu  of  certain  Perquifites  releafed  to  the 
Crowne.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Godolphin; 
and  fealed  the  7th  of  Auguft  1710.  197. 

1 7 1.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  Clement  Cottrell 

Knt.  of  the  Office  of  Mailer  of  the  Ceremonies  ;  with 
the  Fee  or  Stipend  of  £200.  per  annum  ;  with  allowance 
for  travelling  &  other  Expences.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Godolphin  :  and  fealed  the  7th  of  Auguft 
*7ID-  198. 

172.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Spencer 

Compton  Efq;  £50,000.  upon  account ;  to  be  by  him 
applied,  according  to  the  Waranls  of  her  Majefly,  or 
of  the  Lord  Treafurer.  Signed  by  his  Lordlhip  ;  and 
l'ealed  the  7th  of  Auguft  1710.  199. 

173.  Mr.  Jelfops  Opinion,  that  the  Lord  Privy  Seale 

might  fafely  pafs  the  Commiffion  conftituting  Samuel 
Atkinfon,  &c.  Commiffioners  of  the  Tranfport  Service  ; 
and  ratifying  what  they  have  already  done  therein,  pur- 
fuant  to  the  Orders  of  her  Majelly,  the  High  Treafurer, 
Admiral,  or  Commiffioners  oftheAdmiralty.dat.  12th 
of  Auguft  1710.  '  200. 

1 74.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conftituting  Samuel 

Atkinfon,  Nicholas  Roopc,  &  Thomas  Colby  Junr. 
Efqrs.  Commiffioners  of  Si  for  Tranfport  Service  ;  with 
fuch  Salaries  for  themfelves,  Subftitutes,  &  Clerks,  & 
allowances  for  incidental  Charges,  as  the  High  Treafurer 
fhall  approve  of  :  and  other  Chafes.  Signed  by  his 
Lordlhip  ;  and  fealed  the  12th  of  Auguft  1710.  501. 

175.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conftituting  the  Lord 
Archibald  Hamilton  Captain  General  &  Governor  in 
Chief  of  the  Ifland  of  Jamaica  ;  in  the  room  of  Thomas 
Handafyde  Efq;  fealed  the  12th  day  of  Auguft,  1710. 

202. 

176.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  Robert 

LowthcrElb;  Captain  General  &  Governor  in  Chief  of 
the  HL.nds  of  Barbadoes,  Sta.  Lucia,  Dominico,  St. 
Vincent,  and  others  the  Charibbee-Iflands  lying  to  the 
Wind-ward  of  Guadalupa;  in  the  room  of  Mitford 
Crowe  Efq;  fealed  the  loth  of  Auguft,  1710.  203. 

177.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  the  Lord 

Chancellor  CowpcrLicutcnantof  the  County  of  Hertford. 
Sealed  the  i.|t!i  of  Auguft,  1710.  204. 

178.  Dccquct  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  John 

Corbett  Efq;  Captain  General  Si  Governor  in  Chief  of 
the  Province  of  Mary-Land.  Sealed  the  24th  ofAuguft, 
ijio.  2  05. 


Num.  2264. 

179.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  (upon  a  Surrender)  of  the 

Office  of  Clerk,  lor  Writing  &  making-out  all  Writs  fo 
Ideots  &  Lunaticks,  &  Melius  inquirendums  thereupon, 
&  Superledeafes  upon  the  fame,  Sc  all  Letters  Patents  to 
be  fued  &  proiccuted  for  the  Cultody  of  the  Bodies  of 
all  Ideots  &  Lunatics  :  unto  'lhomas  Edwards  of  Lin¬ 
colns  Innc  Gcnr.  to  iiuid  the  fame  during  his  Life.  Sealed 
the  6th  of  September,  1710.  '  206. 

180.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Day- 

rolle  Efq;  (whom  her  Majeity  had  thought  fit  to  employ 
in  her  Affaires  at  Geneva)  £2^0.  for  his  Equipage,  and 
£2.  by  the  day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment :  with 
allowance  of  further  Summs  for  Intelligences,  &c. 
Signed  by  Earl  Poulet,  Sir  Thomas  Manlell,  Mr.  Henry 
Paget,  &  Mr.  R  Benion  ;  lour  of  the  new  Com¬ 

miffioners  of  the  Treafury  ;  and  fealed  1 1  th  of  Septem¬ 
ber,  1710.  207. 

1 8 1.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Colonell  John 

Pearne  Lieutenant  Governor  of  the  ill  and  of  Montferrat, 
the  Salary  of  £200.  per  annum  for  lus  iupport  in  the 
Aud  Employment,  and  in  lieu  of  all  Prefents  from  the 
Affemblies.  Signed  by  all  the  Commiffioners  of  the 
Treafury;  and  fealed  1  ith  of  September,  1710.  20S. 

182.  Original  Letter  of  the  Lord  Dartmouth  to  Sir 

Thomas  Frankland  &  John  Evelyn  Efq;  Polt-mafters 
Generali,  dated  1 1  September,  1710.  209. 

Signifying  her  Majefties  Pleafure  that  all  Letters  or 
Pacquets  directed  to  the  Lord  Privy  Seal,  for  her  Ser¬ 
vice,  during  his  ftay  in  the  Country,  be  feat  to  his  Grace 
free  of  Poffage. 

i  S3.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  impowering  the  Commit 
toners  of  the  Treafury  to  conilitute  Officers  to  tranfaft 
all  matters  between  her  Majelly  and  the  Tynners  of 
Cornwall  &  Devonlhire.  Signed  by  all  their  Lordfhips 
and  fealed  the  14th  of  September,  1710.  2io. 

184.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  upon  John  Richmond  Webb 

Efq;  Lieutenant  Generali  of  her  Majefties  Forces  of  the 
Offices  of  Governor  &  Captain  of  the  Ille  of  Wight,  &c. 
with  the  ufual  Fees.  &c.  Signed  by  all  the  Lords  of  the 
Treafury  except  Mr.  Benion  ;  and  fealed  the  14th  of 
September,  1710.  SI2 

185.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Henry  Duke  of  Beau¬ 
fort,  of  the  Office  of  Warden  &  Keeper  ofNewForeft 
in  the  County  of  Southampton,  and  of  the  Duckerv 
there  ;  and  alfo  of  the  Manor  8c  Park  of  Lindhurft,  and 
Hundred  of  Rudbergh.  Signed  by  the  fame  Lords  of  the 
Treafury,  and  fealed  the  14th  of  September,  1707. 

186.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  Henry 
Duke  of  Beaufort  Lieutenant  of  Hamplhire,  &  of  the 
Town  &  County  of  Southampton;  in  the  room  of 
Charles  Duke  of  Bolton.  Sealed  the  14th  Septr.  1710. 

187.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  Laurence 

Earl  of  Rochblter  Lieutenant  of  the  County  of  Cornwall 
in  the  Room  of  Sidney  Earl  of  Godolphin.  Sealed  the 
1 4t  h  of  September,  1710.  2 ,  g 

188.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  appointing  Sir  Thomas 

Parker  Knt.  Chief  Juftice  of  the  Queens  Bench,  Thomas 
Erie  Efq;  Lieutenant  General  of  the  Ordnance,  and 
leverall  others,  Commiffioners  for  putting  in  execution 
the  Aft  for  the  better  fortifying  &  fecuring  the  Har¬ 
bours  &  Docks  at  Portfmouth,  Chatham,  &  Harwich 
Signed  by  all  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury  ;  and  fealed  the 
1 8  tn  01  September,  1710.  OI~ 

189.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles 

Damquenave  Efq;  Pay-, nailer  of  the  Works,  £40,000. 
upon  Acct.  for  the  life  Sc  Service  of  the  faid  Workes 
Signed  by  the  3  lad  of  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury ;  and 
lea  led  the  iirft  of  October,  1710.  218. 

190.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  Jofeph  Roberts,  of 

the  Office  of  Serjeant  Plumber  in  all  her  Majefties  Places 
&  Works  within  England.  Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords, 
aqd  fealed  the  firft  of  October,  1 7 1  o.  219 

9  191.  Docquet 


6zS 


Catalogus  librorum  MSS. 


Num.  1264. 

10 1.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  to  Sir  James  Mountague 
Kt.  of  the  yearly  Penfion  of  £  1 000.  during  her  Ma- 
jeflies  Life.  Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords  ;  and  fealed 
the  firft  of  October,  1710.  220. 

192.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  Henry  Duke  of  Beau¬ 

fort  of  the  Office  of  Bay  lift',  of  Burley  in  New  Foreft  in 
the  County  of  Southampton,  with  the  Fee  of  £9  :  2  :  6. 
per  annum.  And  alfo,  of  the  Herbage  &  Pannage, 
Wind-fall- Wood,  Lops,  Tops,  &  Shrouds,  Pafturage, 
Swain-mote-Courts,  &c.  under  the  Rent  of  ^5:3:  9. 
per  annum.  Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords  ;  and  fealed 
the  firft  of  Oflober,  1710.  221. 

193.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Charles  Duke  of  Somer- 

fet  of  the  Offices  of  Keeper  8c  Paler  of  the  New  Park  of 
Hampton-Court,  &  of  Mower  of  the  Brakes  there  ;  with 
many  Privileges,  &  little  Fees.  To  hold,  during  his 
Life.  Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords  ;  and  fealed  the  firfl 
of  October,  1710.  222. 

1 94.  Docquet  of  a  new  Commiffion  of  Lieutenancy 
for  the  City  of  London  ;  conftituting  Sir  Samuel  Garrard 
Knight  Lord  Mayor  thereof,  &  feveral  others  Deputy- 
Lieutenants.  Sealed  the  firft  of  O&ober,  1710.  224. 

1 95.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  of  the  Office  of  one  of  the 

four  Tellers  of  the  Exchequer,  unto  Ruffel  Robarts  Efq; 
Signed  Earl  Poulet,  Mr.  Harley,  &  Mr.  Benlon ;  and 
fealed  the  2d  of  Oftober,  1710.  225. 

196.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Manley  F.fq;  of 

the  Office  of  Surveyor  General  of  all  her  Majefties  Ho¬ 
nors,  Caflles,  Lordfhips,  Manors,  Forefts,  Chafes,  Parks, 
Melluages,  Lands,  Tenements,  W oods.  Rents,  Services 
Revenues  etc.  throughout  England  &  Wales,  with  the 
annujl  Fee  of  £200.  in  the  room  of  Samuel  Travers 
Efq;  figned  by  all  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury,  and  fealed 
the  2d  of  Oclober,  1710.  226. 

197.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  one  of  the 

four  Tellers  of  the  Exchequer,  unto  John  Smith  Efq;  in 
the  room  of  James  Vernon  Efq;  figned  by  the  3  lafl 
Lords  of  the  Treafury  ;  and  fealed  the  7  th  of  Oclober, 
1710.  '  227. 

198.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Robert  Low- 

ther  Efq;  Governor  of  Barbados,  &c.  the  Allowance  of 
*£2000.  per  annum,  in  lieu  of  all  prefents  from  the 
Aflemblies.  Signed  by  Earl  Poulet,  Mr.  Plarley  &  Mr. 
Benfon  ;  8c  fealed  the  17th  of  October,  1710.  228. 

199.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  continuing  or  confti¬ 

tuting  William  Strong,  George  Townefend,  Philip  Ryley 
E!q  •.  Sir  Mannaduke  Wyvell  Bart.  Edward  Noell, 
Chriftopht,-  Montague,  Nicholas  Pollexfen,  Whitlock 
Bulltrode,  and  James  Vernon  Jun  -.  Efq1*.  Commiflioners 
of  the  Excile ;  with  the  Salary  of  £800.  per  annum  to 
each  of  them.  Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords ;  &  fealed 
the  17th  of  Otlober,  1710.  230. 

200.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d’Eflire  to  the  Dean  & 

Chapter  ofBriftol  ;  empowering  them  to  eletl  a  Biihop 
to  that  See.  Sealed  the  23d  of  Oclober,  1710.  231. 

201.  Docquet  of  a  Conge  d’Efiire,  to  the  Chanter  k 
Chapter  of  St.  David  ;  empowering  them  to  eletl  a 
Biihop  to  that  See.  Sealed  the  23d  of  Otlober,  1710. 

232. 

202.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion  conftituting  James 
Duke  of  Ormond  Lieutenant  General  &  General  Go¬ 
vernor  of  the  Kingdom  of  Ireland  ;  in  the  room  of  Tho¬ 
mas  Earl  of  Wharton.  Sealed  the  26th  of  Otlober,  1710. 

_  r  233. 

203.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  George  Dela- 

vall  Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraor. •inary  to  the  King  of 
Porrugall,  £  500.  for  his  Equipage,  and  £  5.  by  the  day 
for  his  ordinary  Entertainment.  Signed  by  Earl  Poulet, 
Mr.  Harley,  8c  Mr  Paget;  and  lealed  the  28th  of  Otlober, 
171°.  234. 

204.  Docquet  of  the  Royal  Aftent  to  the  Eletlion  of 

John  Robinfon  D.D.  &  Dean  of  Windfor,  to  the 
Bifhoprick  of  Briilol.  Sealed  the  1  ith  of  November, 
1710.  4  235. 


Num.  2264. 

205.  Docquet  of  the  Royal  Aftent  for  Philip  Bitfe 

D.D.  to  be  Bifhop  of  St. Davids.  Sealed  the  nth  of 
November,  1710.  2_3^- 

206.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Bifhop  of  Briilol, 

of  the  Reftimtion  of  the  Temporalties  belonging  to  that 
See,  to  confence  from  the  time  of  the  Death  of  Dr.John 
Hall  late  Bifhop  thereof.  Signed  by  the  Lords  of  the 
Treafury,  excepting  Mr.  Benfon  ;  and  fealed  the  23d  of 
November,  1710.  237- 

207.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Reflitution  of  Tem¬ 

poralties,  unto  Philip  Bifhop  of  Briilol ;  to  commence 
from  the  Death  of  Dr.  George  Bull,  Jate  Bifhop  of  that 
See.  Signed  by  the  fame  Lords;  and  fealed  the  23d  of 
November,  1710.  2j^- 

208.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  Thomas  Duke  of  Leeds 

of  an  annual  Penfion  of  £3500.  out  of  the  Revenues  of 
the  Poll-Office,  for  61  years,  in  cafe  her  Majeftv  &  he 
fo  long  fhould  live.  Signed  by  the  fame  Lords  ;  and 
fealed  the  29th  of  November,  1710.  239- 

209.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Laurence 

Earl  of  Rocheiler  Prefident  of  the  Privy  Councill,  the 
yearly  Summe  of  £  1500.  viz.  £  ioco.  in  lieu  of  ten 
Diffies  every  Meal ;  and  500.  as  of  her  Majefties  Bounty. 
Signed  by  the  fame  Lords ;  and  fealed  the  29th  of  No¬ 
vember,  1710.  240. 

210.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Charles  Coodere 

Gent,  of  the  Office  of  one  of  the  Serjeants  at  Armes  in 
Ordinary  :  with  the  Fees  of  3  Shillings  per  diem,  and  of 
as.  6d.  per  diem  for  Board  Wages.  Signed  by  Earl 
Poulet,  Mr..  Harley,  &  Mr.Pagett ;  and  fealed  the  29th 
of  November,  1710.  24K 

21 1.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  Simon  Harcourt 

Kn1.  Keeper  of  the  Great  Seale,  of  the  yearly  Summe  of 
£4000.  out  of  the  Generali  Poft-Office,  during  his  con¬ 
tinuance  in  the  Office  of  Keeper  of  the  faid  Great  Scale. 
Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords ;  and  fealed  the  2  9th  of 
November,  1710.  247- 

212.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Henry  St. 

John  Efq;  one  of  her  Majefties  Principal  Secretarys  of 
State,  the  yearly  Salary  of  ^185°-.  in  iicu  of  his. 
Penfions  allowed  him  in  refpett  of  the  laid  Office.  Signed 
by  the  fame  3  Lords  ;  and  lealed  the  29th  of  November, 
1710.  243* 

213.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Henry  Sr. 
John  Efq;  one  of  the  Principal  Secretarys  of  State, 

/3000.  for  fecret  Service,  without  Account.  Signed  by 
the  fame  3  Lords;  and  fealed  the  29th  of  November, 
1710.  244* 

214.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  James  Pendlebury 

Efq;  of  the  Office  of  Mailer  Gunner,  within  Great 
Britain  &  elfewhere  ;  with  the  Wages  of  2s.  by  the  day. 
Signed  by  the  4  firfl  Lords  of  the  Treafury  ;  and  ,'ealed 
the  29th  day  of  November,  17  ic.  245. 

215.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  James 

Duke  of  Hamilton  Lieutenant  of  the  County  of  Lancafter, 
in  the  room  of  James  Earl  of  Derby.  Sealed  the  29th 
of  November,  1710.  246- 

216.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  James 

Earl  of  Berkeley  Lieutenant  of  Gloucefterlhire,  and  of  the 
City  and  County  of  Briftol.  Sealed  the  29th  of  November, 
1710.  247. 

217.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  for  the  Woodward  of 

New  Foreft,  to  pay  unto  Henry  Duke  of  Beaufort  the 
Lord  Warden  there,  £  30.  per  annum  for  Repair  of  her 
Majefties  Houfe  at  Lindhurft,  and  £40.  per  annum  for 
Repair  of  the  Stables  there  :  with  fome  other  Claufes. 
Signed  by  all  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury  ;  and  fealed  the 
29th  of  November,  1710.  248- 

218.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge,  to  Henry  de  Grey 

Duke  of  Kent,  from  the  Quantity  of  1053  oz.  13  dw.  of 
White  Plate,  deliver’d  to  him  as  Chamberlain  of  the 
Houfehold.  Signed  by  Earl  Poulet,  Mr.Pagett,  &  Sir 
Thomas  Manfell ;  and  fealed  the  1 3th  of  December, 
1710.  249- 

219.  Doc- 


Bibliothecae  Harleiarias. 


61 9 


Num.  2264. 

2T9.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  to  Sir  Thomas  Manfell 
Bar',  from  the  Quantity  of  1  c  1 7  oz.  5  d\v.  deliver’d  to  him 
as  Comptroller  of  the  Houfehold.  Signed  by  Earl 
Poulet,  Mr.  Harley,  &  Mr.  Benfon.  Sealed  13  Dec. 
1710'.  .  250, 

220.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Richard  Hill  Efq;  of 
the  Offices  of  Principal  Regifler  of  the  Court  of  Dele¬ 
gates,  &  Courts  of  Appeals,  in  all  Caufes  F.cclefiaftical 
Sc  Maritime;  during  his  Life:  after  the  Determination  of 
the  Interelt  of  Richard  Crawley  Efq;  therein.  With  a 
Remainder  of  the  faid  Offices  to  Charles  Hedges  Efq; 
during  his  Life.  Sealed  the  13th  of  December,  1710. 

.  2il- 

221.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  John  Smith  Efq; 

oc  Sir  Charles  Hedges  Knt.  Admininiftrators  to  Prince 
George,  from  the  Sum  of  £  18,96 1:11:6.  paid  by  them 
ro  her  Majefty  as  her  moyety  of  the  Perfonal  Eftate  of 
Ills  late  Royal  Highnefs  :  and  alfo,  from  the  faid  Admi- 
niitration.  Signed  by  Earl  Poulet,  Mr.  Pagett,  and  Sir 
Thomas  Manfell;  and  fealed  the  13th  of  December, 
1710.  252- 

222.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles 

Whitworth  Efq;  appointed  Ambaflador  Extraordinary  to 
the  Emperor  of  Ruffia,  c£  10.  by  the  day  for  his  ordinary 
Entertainment:  with  allowance  of  further  Summes  for 
Intelligences,  &c.  Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords;  and 
fealed  the  13th  of  December,  1710.  253. 

223.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James 

Brydges  Efq;  Pay-mafter  General  of  the  Forces  abroad, 
the  Sume  of  £1, 000,000.  upon  Account;  toward  defray¬ 
ing  the  Charge  of  the  faid  Forces ;  and  of  her  Majefties 
Proportion  of  Subftdies  to  the  Allies,  for  the  Year,  1711. 
Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords ;  and  fealed  the  1 8  th  day  of 
December,  1710.  254* 

224.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  How 

Efq;  Receiver  8c  Pay-mafter  General  for  the  Guards  & 
Garrifons,  and  other  Land  Forces,  iF6o©,ooo.  upon 
Account ;  for  maintaining  the  Guards  &  Garrifons  in 
Great  Britain,  and  for  payment  of  Invalids  for  the  Year 
1711;  including  5000.  to  ferve  on  Board  the  Fleet. 
Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords;  and  fealed  the  18th  of 
December,  1710.  _  255. 

225.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Sir  Clement 

Cotterell  Knt.  iV after  of  the  Ceremonies,  (in  lieu  of 
Allowances  by  Bills  or  otherwife)  the  yearly  Summe  of 
£  100.  without  Account.  Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords  ; 
and  fealed  the  20th  of  December,  1710.  256. 

226.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  George  Dela- 
val  Efq;  appointed  Plenipotentiary,  to  treat  with  the 
King  of  Portugal,  &  the  Emperor  of  Morocco  ;  £3.  by 
the  day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment.  Signed  by  the 
fame  3  Lords;  and  fealed  the  20th  of  December,  1710. 

257. 

227.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conftituting  Sir  John 

Leake  &  Sir  George  Byng  Knts.  Sir  William  Drake  Knt. 
8c  Bart.  John  Ayflabee  Efq;  Sir  James  Wiihart  Knt.  & 
George  Clarke  Efq;  Commiffioners  for  executing  the 
Office  of  Lord  High  Admiral  of  Great  Britain  &  Ireland. 
Sealed  the  20th  of  December,  1710.  258. 

228.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  John  Dod  Gent,  of 

the  Office  of  C.onftable  of  the  Caftle  of  Chefter.  Sealed 
the  22d  day  of  December,  1710.  359. 

229.  Docquet  cf  a  Grant  unto  James  Worfeley  Efq; 

of  the  Office  of  Woodward  of  New  Foreftin  the  County 
of  Southampton,  with  the  Fee  or  Salary  of 150.  per 
annum  for  himl'elf,  and  £50.  per  annum  for  a  Deputy  to 
be  conftantly  refidentin  the  fameForeft.  Signed  by  the  3 
Lords  laft  above-mentioned ;  and  fealed  the  22d  of 
December,  3  710.  2^°- 

230.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Mathew  Snow  & 
Richard  Snow  Gent.  Sc  Clement  Bblfworth  Snow, 
fucceilively,  of  the  Office  of  Prothonotary  of  the  Chan¬ 
cery,  with  the  Fee  of  £100.  per  annum.  As  alio  of  the 
Office  for  writing  Sc  making  of  all  Pardons  for  Out- 

Cat.  Haul.  Vol.  11. 


Num.  2264; 

lawry,  Homicides  ex  Infortunio,  or  Se  Defendendc9 
Writts  of  Supplicavit  for  the  Peace  &  Good  Behaviour, 
or  Superfedeas  thereof.  Sealed  the  23d  of  December, 
1710.  ^ 

231.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  James  Jefferyes 

F.fq;  Refident  with  the  King  of  Sweden  £300.  for  his 
Equipage,  and  £3.  by  the  day  for  his  ordinary  Enter¬ 
tainment  ;  with  Allowance  of  further  Summes  for  Intel¬ 
ligences,  &c.  Signed  by  the  3  I.ofds  abovementioned  ; 
and  fealed  the  27th  of  December,  1710.  262. 

232.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Charles. 

Earl  of  Peteiborow,  appointed  to  go  to  the  Court  of 
Vienna,  £10.  by  the  day  for  his  ordinary  Entertain¬ 
ment  :  with  allowance  of  further  Summes  for  Intel¬ 
ligences,  &c.  Signed  by  all  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury, 
except,  Earl  Poulet ;  and  fealed  the  3d  of  January, 
1710-n.  .  2^3* 

233.  Docquet  of  a  Giant  unto  John  Inglis  Efq;  of 

the  Office  of  Affiftant  Mafter  of  the  Ceremonies,  with 
the  Fee  of  6s.  8d.  by  the  day.  Signed  by  the  4  firft 
Lords  of  the  Treafury  ;  and  fealed  the  10th  of  January, 
1710.  264. 

234.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Mountagu  Earl  of 

Abingdon,  of  the  Offices  of  Warden,  Chief  Juftice,  & 
Juftice  in  Eyre  of  all  her  Majefties  1'orefts,  Chaces,  8c 
Parks,  on  this  fide  Trent.  With  the  Annuities  of  £  ico. 
&  of  ico  Marks :  in  the  room  of  Thomas  now  Earl  of 
Wharton.  Signed  by  all  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury;  and 
fealed  the  10th  of  January,  1710- 1 1.  265. 

235.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  C.hriftopher  Muf- 

grave  Bart,  of  the  Office  of  one  of  the  Clerks  of  the 
Privy  Council!,  upon  the  Surrender  of  Chriftopher  Muf- 
grave  F.fq;  with  the  Fee  of  £250;  per  annum.  Signed 
by  the  3  Arft  Lords  of  the  Treafury  ;  and  fealed  the  10  th 
of  January,  17 10-ir.  2 66. 

236.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  Edward  Finch  M.A. 
of  a  Prebend  in  the  Cathedral  &  Metropolitical  Church 
of  Canterbury.  Sealed  the  17th  of  January,  1710-n. 

267. 

237.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Duke  of  Argyle, 

of  an  yearly  Penfion  of  £3000.  out  of  the  Revenues  of 
the  Poll-Office  ;  for  theterme  of  99  years,  if  her  Majefty 
fo  long  live.  Signed  by  all  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury 
except  Earl  Poulet;  and  fealed  the  22d  of  January, 
1710-11.  26S. 

238.  Docquet  of  a  Prtefentation,  of  John  Garnet  M.A. 
to  the  Rectory  of  Sigglefthorpe  ats  Siglefthorne,  in  the 
County  of  Yorke.  Sealed  the  24th  of  January,  1710-1 1. 

269. 

229.  Docquet  of  a  Praffientation  of  Fleneage  Deeringc 
Cleric,  D.D.  to  the  Deanry  of  Rippon,  in  the  County  of 
York.  Sealed  the  24th  of  January,  171 0-1 1.  270. 

240.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  the  Earl  of 
Orrery,  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  &  Plenipoten¬ 
tiary  at  the  Hague,  and  at  Bruflels ;  £ 500 .  for  his 
Equipage,  with  £5.  by  the  day  as  Envoy,  &  £3.  by  the 
day  as  Plenipotentiary,  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment. 
Signed  by  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury,  except  Earl  Poulet; 
and  fealed  the  24th  of  January,  1710-1 1.  271. 

24T.  Docquet  of  a  Licence  unto  Thomas  Vernon  Efq; 
to  inclofe  a  certain  Common  Way,  within  his  Manor  of 
Flanbury  in  the  County  of  Worcefter  :  fo,  that  another 
Way  there,  lately  enlarged  by  him-,  and  made  as  con¬ 
venient  for  Travellers,  do  for  ever  remain  a  Common 
Royall  High  Way.  Sealed  the  24th  day  of  January, 
1710-11.  272. 

242.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Brvdges 
Efq;  Pay-malter  General  of  her  Majefties  Forces  abroad, 
£ i,ooc, 00c.  upon  Account;  toward  defraying  the 
Charge  of  the  faid  Forces  ;  and  for  paying  her  Majcftic: 
Proportion  of  Subfidies  to  her  Allies;  and  all  other 
Charges  and  Expences  incident  to  them,  for  the  year, 
1711.  Signed  by  all  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury  ;  and 
fealed  the  1  ft  of  February.  1710-11.  273. 

)  r  x  » » 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


63© 


Nam.  2264. 

^43.  Docquet  of  a  Grant-,  Confirming  to  the  Com' 
pam  of  Copper  Miners  in  England,  all  their  Rights  and 
Privileges,  with  fome  additional  ones.  Sealed  the  2d  of 
February,  1710-1 1.  2^_ 

244.  Docquet  of  a  Lycence  unto  John  Devenilh  Efq; 

■who  hath  been  in  Armes  in  the  Service  of  the  French 
King,  to  return  &  abide  in  Great  Britain.  Sealed  the  2d 
of  February,  1710-1 1.  2jj. 

245.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Andrew  Agnew 

Clerk,  to  the  Re&ory  of  Fobbing  in  the  County  of  Effex. 
Sealed  the  7th  of  February,  1710-1 1 .  276. 

246.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Dignity  of  a  Ba¬ 

ronet,  unto  John  Lambert  Efq.  Sealed  the  1.3th  of  Fe¬ 
bruary,  1710-11.  ' 

Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  Samuel  Whalley 
Clerk  to  the  Vicarage  of  Broad  Hempfon  in  the 
County  ofDevon.  Sealed  the  2  ill;  of  February,  1710-11. 

278. 

248.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  James  Duke 

of  Queenfben'y  &  Dover,  one  of  the  Principal  Secretaries 
of  State,  £300.  for  her  Majelties  l'ecret  Service.  Signed 
by  the  3  firft  Lords  of  the  Treafury  ;  and  fealed  the  2  id 
day  of  February,  17 10-1 1.  '  2yg_ 

249.  Docquet  of  a  Pai'don  unto  John  Dormer  Efq; 

of  \  arnton  in  the  County  of  Oxon,  convicted  of  Man- 
flaughter,  for  the  Death  of  Sir  Richard  Kennedy  Bart. 
Sealed  the  2 1  ft  of  February,  1710-n.  2S0. 

250.  Docquet  of  a  Prefentation  of  George  Anderfon 
M.  A.  to  the  Reftory  of  Lutterworth  in  the  County  of 
Leicelter.  Sealed  the  2  ift  of  February,  1710-n.  281. 

25  .  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  William 
Chetwynri  Eiq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  die 
Republick  of  Genoa,  ,£500.  for  bis  Equipage,  and/’ij- 
by  the  day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment  :  with  Al¬ 
lowance  of  further  Summes  for  Intelligences,  &c.  Signed 
by  Earl  Poulet,  Mr.  Pagett,  &  Sir  Thomas  Manfell ;  and 
fealed  the  2 1  ft  of  February,  1710-11.  282. 

252.  Docquet  of  a  Grant,  unto  James  Everard  &  Re- 

beccah  his  V  ife,  authorizing  them  to  maintain  certain 
Light  Houles,  or  Beacons  with  Lights,  to  be  continually 
burning  in  the  Night-Seafon,  upon  the  Ground  called 
Hun  (ton  Cliffe  or  Chapell-Lands  in  the  County  of  Nor- 
folke ;  for  the  Security  of  Seafaring  Men  &  Mariners 
paffing  that  way.  With  power  to  take  8d.  from  every 
Chaldron  of  Coals,  or  20  Tunns  of  other  Goods  in 
Engliih  Veflels  ;  &  one  Penny  per  Tun  from  all  foreign 
Veffels  palling  by  die  Laid  Light  Houfes  To  hold  the 
fame,  tor  a  certain  Term  of  Years.  Subfcribed  by  Earl 
Poulet,  Mr.  Harley,  &  Mr.  Benfon;  and  fealed  the  26th 
of  February,  17  ic-i  1.  2g„ 

253.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  continuing  or  conffitut- 

ing  William  Clayton,  Richard  Shoreditch,  &  Roger 
Millart  Efqrs.  Agents  for  bringing  into  the  Exchequer 
the  Arrears  of  Taxes,  ike.  with  the  Salary  of  £200.  per 
annum,  to  each  of  them.  Signed  by  Earl  Poulet,  Mr. 
Paget,  &  Sr.  Tho.  Manfell ;  and  fealed  the  26th  of  Fe¬ 
bruary,  1 710-1 1.  2g4 

254.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  Duke 

of  Argyle,  appointed  Ambaffador  Extraordinary  &  Ple¬ 
nipotentiary  to  the  King  of  Spaine,  £1500.  for  his 
Equipage,  £ 100 .  by  the  Week  for  his  ordinary  En¬ 
tertainment  :  with  allowance  of  further  Summes  for  In¬ 
telligences,  &c.  Signed  by  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury 
except  Mr.  Harley;  and  fealed  the  27  th  of  February' 
1710-11.  l8-;’ 

Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Thomas 
Micklethwaite  rffq;  Receiver  &  Paymafter  for  Tranf- 
parts,  £200,000.  upon  Account ;  toward  defraying  the 
Charge  oi  tranfporting  Land-Forces.  Signed  by  all  tlie 
Lords  of  the  Treafury  ;  and  fealed  the  28th  of  February 

,710-,11-  f  „  286.’ 

250.  Docquet  01  a  Grant,  unto  Francis  Arundell 
F,*q,  of  the  Survey  our- ill  ip  of  the  Cufton.es  in  the  Out- 
Ports  of  England  j  with  the  yearly  Salary  of  ^366:1$:  j 


Signed  by  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury,  except  Mr.  IT.u'v  ■ 
and  fealed  the  28th  of  February,  1710-11. 

257.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Walker”  Kf.'i* 
of  the  Office  of  Recorder  to  the- Bourn  in.  h  of  Leeds  in 
the  County  of  York.  Sealed  the  28th  of  February 
T710-M. 

2jS.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  EIir-_o.br  nl 
Duchefs  of  Somerfett,  as  Groom  of  the  Stoic  A  firli 
Lady  of  the  Bed-Chamber,  a  Penfion  of  fioc  I  •  r 
annum.  Signed  by  the  Lords  of  the  Treafury,  except 
Mr.Benfon;  and  fealed  the  7th  of  March,  1710-1 1.  2  So. 

Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Francri 
vilcount  Rialton  Cofferer  of  the  Houlehold,  /100  cco. 
upon  Ace1,  for  the  ordinary  &  extraordin 
of  the  Houlehold.  Signed  by  Earl  Foulest,  Mr  r>a<a[f 
&  Sir  Thomas  Manfell ;  and  fealed  the  7th  of  March.’ 
171°’11’  29:. 

260.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  tl.c  Office  of  Ranker  of 

New  Foreit  in  the  County  of  Southampton.  wVh  th  • 
Fee  of  6  pence  by  the  day,  unto  William  Forbes  Efo- 
m  the  room  of  John  Brumfield  Efq;  figned  by  the  3  fir  ft 
Lords  of  the  Treafury ;  and  fealed  the  ;  ;h  of  March 
1710-1  1.  2  1  7 

261.  Docquet  of  a  Pardon  unto  William  Burton  FiV 

&  Walter  Hickfon  Clerk,  both  of  Cottingham  in  the 
County  of  York,  for  the  Manflaughter  of  Lancelot  Roper 
Gent.  Sealed  the  9th  of  March,  1710-11.  2g2 

262.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  empowering  the  Lords, 
of  the  Treafury  to  appoint  Receivers  General  of  rh~ 
f  axes  throughout  Great  Britain,  for  the  year  j  7 , , 
Signed  by  Earl  Poulet,  Mr.  Pagett,  &  Sir  Thermo 
Manfell;  and  fealed  the  14th  day  of  March,  1710-11. 

263.  Docquet  of  a  Lycence,  unto  George-Tobv 
Guiguer,  to  return  from  the  French  Kings  Dominions 
into  Great  Britain.  Sealed  the  21ft  of  March,  1710-11’ 

264  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  William  Broderick 
Lfq>  of  the  Office  of  Attorney  Generali  in  the  Ifland  of 
Jamaica.  Sealed  the  2d  of  April,  1711. 

2S5.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Jamc.  Cr 
Efq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  Tin"'  or 
Spain,  £500.  for  his  Equipage,  ami  £5.  by  the  day  for 
his  ordinary  Entertainment :  with  allowance  of  further 
Summes  for  Intelligences,  &c.  Signed  by  all  the  Lords 
of  *he1  Treafury,  except  Mr.  Harley ;  and  fealed  the 
third  day  of  April,  17 1 1.  2Qg 

266.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  appointing  Anthony 
Morgan  Elq;  and  feveral  other  Perfons  Commiffioners 
for  putting  m  execution  the  Act  for  better  fortifying  & 
fecunng  the  Harbours  &  Docks  at  Portfmouth  Chat 
ham  &  Harwich.  Signed  by  the  fame  Lords ;  and 
fealed  the  nth  of  April,  1711. 

267.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  configuring  Walter 

Douglas  Efq;  Captain  General  &  Governor  in  Chief 
over  the  Iflands  of  Nevis,  St.  Chrillopher,  Mount-ferratt 
Antegoa,  Barbouda,  Anguilla,  &  all  other  her  Ma* 
jefties  Leeward-Iflands.  Sealed  the  nth  of  April 
1711.  G.  * 

268.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  authoring  the  Com- 
tmfiioners  of  the  Admiralty,  to  give  Orders  for  the  Sale 
of  certain  Naval  Stores ;  and  for  paying  the  produce  of 
the  fame  unto  the  Treafurer  of  the  Navy,  upon  Ac 
count.  Signed  by  Earl  Poulet,  Mr.  Pagett, ‘and  Sir 
lhomas  Manfell;  and  fealed  the  nth  of  April!,  1711. 

269.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Robert  Harmfworth 

Gent,  of  the  Office  of  Keeper  of  the  Council  Chamber  - 
with  the  Fee  of  2s.  6d.  by  the  day.  Signed  by  the  fame 
Lords ;  and  fealed  the  1 8th  of  April,  171 1.  ‘  o0:)> 

270.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  John  Vif. 
coimt  Fitz-Harding  Treafurer  of  his  Majelties  Chamber- 

0,000.  upon  Account;  for  the  Expence  &  Service 
of  that  Cffice.  Signed  by  the  Lord*  of  the  lieafury, 

y  i-  r.-nf 


i 


Num.  226.4* 

txccpl  Mr.  Harley ;  and  fealed  the  18th  of  April 
W'1'  _  r  30,. 

271.  Docquet  of  a  Warant,  to  pay  unto  Thomas  Lord 

Raby  appointed  one  of-  the  Arnballadors  Extraordinary 
and  Plenipotentiaries  to  the  States  General  ;  f_  r  joo.  for 
his  Equipage,  and ^100.  by  the  Weeke  for  his  ordinary 
Entertainment :  with  allowance  of  further  Summesfor 
Intelligences,  &c.  Signed  by  the  fame  Lords  ;  and  fealed 
the  26th  of  April,  1711.  nQr, 

272.  Uocquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Charles  Vifcount 
down  fend,  from  the  Quantity  of  6540  oz.  3  dw.  of 
"White  Pmte,  and  644  oz.  1  dw.  of  Gilt  Plate,  deliver’d 
to  him  as  AmbafTador  Extraordinary  8t  Plenipotentiary  to 
the  States  Generali.  Signed  by  Earl  Poulet,  Mr.Pagett,  & 
Sir  Thomas  Manfell.  Sealed  the  2d  of  May,  1711.  303. 

27 ?•  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Walter 
Douglas  Efq;  Captain  General  &  Governor  of  the 
Leeward-lflands,  the  Allowance  of  £  1 200.  per  annum 
lor  his  Support  in  that  Imployment,  and  in  lieu  of  all 
Picfents  from  the  Affemblys.  Signed  by  the  fame  3 
Lords  ;  and  fealed  the  2d  of  May,  1711.  -04. 

.  274.  Docquet  of  a  Difcharge  unto  Henry  Earl  of 
Galway,  from  the  Quantity  of  1.420  oz.  1S  dw.  of  Gilt 
Plate,  A  5434  oz.  4  dw.  of  White  Plate,  deliver’d  to 
him  as  Ambaftador  Extraordinary  to  the  King  of  Por¬ 
tugal!.  Signed  by  Earl  Pouiet,  Sir  Thomas  Manfell,  A 
Mr.  Ben  Ion ;  and  fealed  the  9th  of  May,  17  n.  30^. 

275.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pafs  the  Accounts  of 

Robert  Walpole  Efq;  notwithftanding  his  Predeceflbrs 
Accounts  have  not  been  declared.  Signed  by  the  fame 
3  Lords  ;  and  fealed  the  16th  of  May,  1711.  306. 

276.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  James  Brydges 

Efq;  Pay-mafter  Generali  of  the  Forces  abroad, 
^*5674,702  18:3.  upon  Account ;  toward  the  Charges 
of  the  l'orces  under  his  Pay;  and  for  defraying  our 
proportion  of  Subfidies  to  the  Allies;  and  all  other 
Charges  incident  to  the  fame ;  for  the  year  1711. 
Signed  by  the  fame  3  Lords ;  and  fealed  the  1 1  th  of 
May,  1711.  307. 

277.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  John  Duke  ofNew- 

caltle  of  the  Offices  of  Warden  &  Chief  Juftice  in  Eyre, 
of  all  her  Majefties  Forefts,  Parks,  Chaces,  &  Warrens, 
beyond  Trent;  with  the  yearly  Salary  of £100.  To 
hold  during  his  Life.  Signed  by  all  the  Lords  of  the 
Treafury,  except  Mr.  Harley;  and  fealed  the  ttfth  of 
May,  ijii.  3o8- 

278.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  the  Treafury  &  Exche¬ 
quer  m  Scotland,  to  difcharge  all  fuch  Non-Entry 
Dutys  as  be  charged  as  due  from  any  Tenant  within  the 
Lordlhips  ofEredion.  To  pafs  no  Signature  which 
contain  a  Change  of  Holding,  or  Clauie  of  De  novo 
damus,  unlefs  figned  by  the  Queen,  &  counter-figned 

Treafury  here.  And  that  in  Taxing  funple 
Ward-Holdings  to  laxt  Ward;  and  in  Taxing  die 
Manage  where  Lands  are  held  fue  cum  Maritaeio,  they 
obferve  the  Method  in  the  faid  Warant  mentioned  ;  and 
that  they  give  luch  Commencements  to  late-renewed 
Talks  ol  leinds,  as  they  ffiall  think  will  molt  advance 
the  Queens  Revenue,  Sc  encourage  former  Tenants  to 
come  into  Renewalls.  SigneJ  by  Earl  Poulet  Mr 
Paget,  &  Mr.  Benfon  ;  and  fealed  the  2  ill  day  of  Mav’ 
1711.  1  y 

*7 9-  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  James  Scott 
Eiq;  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  the  King  of 
Poiand,  £500.  for  his  Equipage  ;  and  £5.  by  the  day 
tor  his  ordinary  Entertainment:  with  allowance  of  further 
Sumes  for  Intelligence,  Ac.  Signed  by  Earl  Poulet, 
Mr.  Paget,  &  Sir  Ihomas  Manfell.  Sealed  21ft  May, 

280  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Sir  Thomas  Frank- 
land  bart.  and  John  Evelyn  Efq;  of  the  Office  of  Poft- 
nialter  Generali,  with  the  yearly  Salary  of  /2000. 
Signed  by  the  lame  3  Lords;  and  fealed  the  21ft  of 
May,  1711. 

J  '  31 1. 


28  r.  Docquet  of  a  Charter  to  incorporate  the  Blanket. 
Weavers  of  Witney  in  the  County  of  Oxon,  &  io  miles 
round  the  fame.  Sealed  the  22d  of  May,  1711.  31- 

283.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Robert  Harley,  of  the 
Dignity  of  Baron  &  Earl  of  Great  Britain,  by  the  Name, 
hide,  Sc  Title  of  Baron  Harley  of  Wit-more  in  the 
County  of  Hereford,  Earl  of  Oxford,  &  Earl  Mortimer. 
U  ith  remainder  to  the  Heires  Males  of  the  body  of 

,r  Robert  Harley  Knight  of  the  Bath,  Grandfather 
Olathe  faid  Robert  Harley.  Sealed  the  23d  of  May, 

2S3.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Ifaac  d’ALus 
appointed  Secretary  at  the  Court  of  Hanover,  fz.  by. 
the  day  for  his  ordinary  Entertainment  ;  and  in  lieu  of 
all  Charges  &  other  PretenftonS  whatfoever.  Sinned  by 
Lari  Poulet,  Mr.Pagett;  &  Sir  Thomas  Manfell ;  and 
fealed  the  30th  of  May,  171 1.  j,4. 

284.  Docquet  of  a  Lycence  unto  Gideon  Murray  Efq; 
to  return  from  France  into  Great  Britain.  Sealed  the 
30th  day  of  May,  t7t  1. 

2S3.  Docquet  of  a  I.ycencennto  Jofeph  Arnall  Mer¬ 
chant  to  return  from  France,  into  Great  Britain.  Sealed 
the  30th  of  May,  171,.  . 

28O.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  (upon  her  Majefties  Detcr- 
mmatton  of  the  lad  Commiffion  tor  executing  the  Office 
ol  Ireafurer  ot  tile  Exchequer)  unto  Robert  Earl  of  Oo 
ord  &EarI  Mortimer  of  the  Office  of  Treafurer  of  the 
Exchequer.  Sealed  the  30th  of  May,  171 1.  '  ,,7- 

287.  Docquet  of  a  Commiffion,  conlfituting  Philip 
r  y  Ct;r?oe0rfc’C„loWner™J’  Kichard  Shoreditch,  Wil- 
ham  Walban,  Roger  Millart,  and  Juflinian  Ilham  Efqrs. 
Comnuffioners  lor  ihe  Receipt  &  Management  offeveral 
Dunes  tmpofed  upon  Hides  &  Skins,  tanned,  tawed 
or  drelfed,  and  upon  Vellum  and  Parchment,  made  in 

holdin^i  ,  m  “  conflhuting  them  Commiffioners  for  " 
holding  Intelligence  with  the  Receivers  General,  to  the 
end  that  they  duely  pay  Into  the  Exchequer  all  Moneys 
by  them  received  ;  and  for  looking  after  the  Surveyors 
for  the  Duties  onHoufes;  and  for  bringing  in  all  Arreares 
S«7M°fMMi  that  the  Accountants 
Imiih  &  pafs  their  Accounts;  and  that  all  Rents  and 
other  benehcial  Matters  referred  to  the  Crown,  upon 
any  Grants  may  (as  they  may  be  difeovered)  be  dulv 
brought  in  Charge,  with  the  yearly  Salary  of /;oo.  to 
each  of  them.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Oxford  - 
and  lealed  the  2d  June,  1711.  „jg  1 

ft^nffi0^-0^1  Gra?*  lmt0  Charles  CtsfarEfq; 
of  the  Office  of  I  reafurer  of  the  Navy  ;  with  the  Salary 
of  £2000.  per  ann.  for  liimfelfe ;  and  /i  700.  per 
annum  for  the  Paymafter,  Caffiier,  and  Accomptant,  and 
other  Officers  under  him ;  together  with  the  Mefuage  at 
Deptford,  ufually  enjoyed  with  the  fame  Office  •  her 
Majelly  having  determined  her  Grant  of  the  faid  Office 
to  Robert  Walpole  Efq.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Oxford  ;  and  lealed  the  8th  of  June,  1711.  g20 

2  S9.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Francis  Vifcount 
Kialton,  .£70,000.  upon  Account ;  for  difchartnng  the 
Arrears  due  to  the  ordinary  &  extraordinary  Seiyices  of 
her  Majefties  Houfehold.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Trea 
hirer  Oxford;  and  fealed  the  gth  of  June  tin  ,2i 
290  Docquet  of  a  Grant  unto  Edward  Phelipps  Efq- 
of  the  Office  of  Comptroller  of  the  Mints  in  the  Tower 

1  uITu°nor"d  cJfc'vhf e  in  R"Rl2nd,  in  the  room  of 
John  E  hs  Efq.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer  Oxford  • 
and  fealed  the  i  ith  Day  of  June,  xjn.  „„„  ’ 

1  DoJ‘lllel:  of  3  G™  unto  Stephen  Lilly  Eft,;  of 
the  Office  of  Receiver  Generali  of  all  the  Dutys  &  Reve. 
nues  granted  unto  her  Majelly  from  the  firtt  of  June 
17114  purfuant  to  an  Aft  lately  pallid  for  eflalslifhing  a 
General  Poft.Office  for  all  her  Majefties  Dominions,  and 
fethnga  Weekly  St-.mme  of  its  Revenues,  for  the  Service 
ot  the  War,  and  other  her  Majefties  Occafions :  with 
the  yearly  Salary  0^300.  Signed  by  the  Lord  Treafurer 
Oxford;  andfealed  tile  17th  of  June,  1711.  324. 

292.  Dot:- 


6i2 


Catalogs  Librorum  MSS. 


Nura.  2264,  2265. 

29’.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Samuel  Ma- 
fbain  Efq;  Cofferer  of  the  Iloufehold,  £100,000.  upon 
Account,  for  the  ordinary  k  extraordinary  Services  of 
the  Iloufehold.  Signed  by  the  Lord Treafurer  Oxford; 
and  fealed  :he  27th  of  June,  17 1 1.  _  325. 

29^.  Docquet  of  a  Coinmiffion  conftituting  Richard 
Edwards  Efq;  one  of  the  Principal  Officers  of  the  Navy 
at  Plymouth,  with  the  Salary  of  ^500.  per  annum  ;  in 
the  room  of  William  Wright  Efq;  figned  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Oxford  ;  and  fealed  the  30th  of  June,  17 1 1. 

32  6. 

294.  Docquet  of  a  Warant  to  pay  unto  Henry  Wat¬ 
kins  Efq;  appointed  Secretary  to  the  Ambatfadors  Ex¬ 
traordinary  &  Plenipotentiarys  to  the  States  General ; 
£30©.  for  his  Equipage,  and  £7.  by  the  Day  for  his 
ordinary  Entertainment :  with  allowance  of  further 
Surnmes  for  Intelligencies,  See.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Oxford  ;  and  fealed  the  30th  of  June,  1711. 

327- 

291;.  Docquet  of  a  Grant  of  the  Office  of  Comptroller 
of  the  Accompts  of  the  Army,  unto  Sir  Philip  Meadows 
Junr.  Knt.  with  the  Salary  of  £1500.  per  annum  for 
themfelves  ;  £300.  per  annum  for  the  Secretary  attending 
them  ;  Sc  ,6900.  per  annum  to  defray  the  Houfe-Rent, 
Incidents,  Sal  ary  s  to  Clerks,  &  c.  Signed  by  the  Lord 
Treafurer  Ox  ford;  and  fealed  the  7th  ofjuly,  1711.  328. 

N.B.  All  the  Docquets  in  thefe  3  Volumes  are  Origi¬ 
nals  ;  and  are  doubly  ftainped,  according  to  Law. 

2265. 

A  Book  in  folio,  written  moffly  in  Englifh,  and  enti¬ 
tled  “  Loci  communes  Theoiogici.”  The  Collector  feeras 
to  have  been  a  Proteflant  Divine,  who  flouriflied  in  the 
Reigns  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  &  of  King  James  1.  At  the 
beginningare  fome  loofe  or  un-digefted  I’heologicalNotes; 
but  the  Heads  that  the  Colleftor  was  more  particular 
careful  about,  are  thefe  that  follow  :  vizt. 

1 .  De  Verbo  Dei.  1 

2.  De  Anti-Chrifto.  5 

3.  De  Romano  Pontiiice.  6.  &  149.  1 66 

4.  De  Deo.  9 

5.  Veritie  of  Religion.  13.  &  15.  16 

6.  De  Ignorantia.  14. 

7.  Publicque  Meetingcs  &  Holie  Aflemblies  in  the 
Church.  A  Note. 

8.  Controverfies  in  Religion.  16 

9.  De  Cognitione,  feu  Patefaclione  Dei.  17 

1  o.  De  Operibus  Dei.  1 9 

1 1 .  De  Miraculis.  20 

12.  De  Angelis,  et  Malis  Spiritibus.  21 

13.  De  Decreto,  &  Voluntate  Dei.  22 

14.  De  Creatione  &  Creaturis.  25.  8c  27 

15.  De  Operibus  Dei  &  Miraculis.  26 

16.  Homo.  27 

17.  Honeffas.  zl 

18.  De  Humanis  Artibus.  29.  36 

19.  De  Artibus  Mechanicis.  ibic 

20.  De  Societate-humanas  Vita:.  30.  k  33.  3^ 

2 1 .  De  Matrimonio,  et  Vita  Domeflica.  31.  &  3  • 

22.  De  Imagine  Dei.  33 

23.  De  Religione.  3( 

24.  De  Confcientia.  37 

25.  De  Ufu  Temporis.  3 1 

26.  De  Mercatura.  39 

27.  De  Providentia  Dei.  40 

28.  De  Prsedeflinatione  Divina.  43 

29.  De  Peccato.  _  4 6.  &  54.  60.  6 

30.  Synne  of  Pride  in  Apparell.  *  4 

3 1 .  Synne  of  Gamdnge.  ibic 

32.  Synne  of  Mockinge.  3 

33.  Peccatum  in  Spiritum  Sandtum.  ibic 

34.  Sir.r.c  of  Murther  ;  Hypocrify  ;  Ignorance,  ibic 

33.  Leaving  of  Sinne.  3 

36.  Addons  of  Sinne.  r 


Num.  226^ 


37.  Murther. 

53- 

38.  Swearing  Sc  Perjurie. 

ibid. 

39.  De  Imkatione  Sandlorum. 

.54- 

4'.  Sinne  of  Murmuring. 

ibid. 

41.  De  Ufura. 

ibid.  Sc  8r. 

42.  De  Pcena  Peccati. 

55.  &  58. 

43.  De  Dd  Judiciis. 

57- 

4-P  Punifhment  of  Theft. 

.  59* 

43.  Hardnefs  of  Heart. 

ibid. 

Pride  ;  Lying.  6 1 . 

47.  De  Invocatione  Dei.  62. 

48.  De  liber  o  Arbi  trio.  63. 

49.  De  Leg  is  Cei  emonijs.  65. 

30.  The  Aike  oi  God.  ibid.  &  67. 

3 1 .  De  Templis  Chriltianis.  66. 

32.  Popilh  Ceremonies.  68.8:82. 

33.  De  Lege  Divina.  ibid. 

34.  De  Lege  Naturae.  69. 

33.  Invocation  of  Saints.  70. 

56.  De  Invocation^  Dei.  ibid.  Sc  72. 

37.  Dc  Lege  &  Ctiltu  Dei.  71.  &  73.  81. 

38.  Sumptuoufnes  of  Temples  &  Churches.  72. 

59.  De  Lege.  77.  &  80.  8a. 

60.  Of  Prayer.  78.  &  79. 

61.  Singinge  of  Pfalmes  in  Church.  ibid. 

62.  Sorcery  &  Witch-craft.  80. 

63.  DeDedmis.  81.  &  87. 

64.  Superftitio.  ibid. 

65.  Religion.  82. 

66.  De  Evangelio.  83.  &  87. 

67.  De  Regno  Chrifti.  84.  &  85, 

68.  De  Chrifti  Genealogia.  ibid.  &  83.  87. 

69.  DePropitiatione  Chrifti.  86. 

70.  De  Oratione  feu  Precaticjne.  ibid. 

71.  De  foedere  Divino.  87. 

72.  De  Signo  Crucis.  ibid. 

73.  De  Fide.  _  37. 

74.  De  Cultu  Dei.  99. 

73.  De  Evangelio  et  Fide.  100. 

76.  General  Councils,  or  Traditions.  ibid. 

77.  The  Name  Proteflant.  ibid. 

78.  Earneftnefs  in  Prayer.  ibid. 

79.  De  Peccatoris  luftificatione.  101. 

bo.  De  Hiftrionibus,  et  eorum  abufu  &  Vanitate. 

105. 

81.  De  Temptationibus.  110.  &  114.  126. 

82.  De  Hoftibus  Ecclefite.  nr. 

83.  De  Regeneratione.  1 13.  Sc  1 13-. 

84.  De  Meditatione  Vitae  futurae.  1 16. 

85.  Perfeverance  in  Well-doing.  ibid. 

86.  De  Militia  Chriftiana.  117. 

87.  Filij  hujus  Seculi.  ibid. 

88.  De  Martyribus.  118. 

89.  Refipifcentia.  119. 

90.  Reftitutio.  ibid.  &  12 1. 

91.  Converfion.  ibid. 

92.  De  Ecclefiai  Jurifdidtione.  122.  &  144.  169. 

93.  Mors;  Affiidtio.  124.  &  125. 

94.  De  Confolatione  fub  Cruce.  124.  b. 

95.  De  Republica  Sc  Legibus.  127. 

96.  De  Ambitionein  Magi  ft  rat  u,  ibid. 

9 7.  De  Afylis  feu  Sandluarijs.  ibid. 

98.  Judges,  &  their  Vertues.  ibid. 

99.  De  bonis  Operibus.  129. 

100.  De  Virtutibus  et  Vitijs.  131.  8c  143. 

101.  De  Rebus  Politicis  et  Bellicis.  143. 

102.  De  Ecclcfite  Miniftcrio.  144.  &  146.149,  132. 

137.  166.  17c. 

103.  Touching  Marriage.  151. 

104.  De  Vocabulo  Papa.  132. 

103.  De  Ecclefia,  feu  Regno  Chrifti.  133. 

100.  De  Sacramentis,  Signis,  &  Miiacul's.  155. 

107.  Falfe  Pic;pht:es.  158. 

5  108.  De 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


Num.  2265 — 2268. 


108.  De  Minidris,  et  eorum  Officio.  I59. 

109.  Iimrefes,  et  Hmretici.  163. 

.110.  De  Romana  Ecclefia.  165. 

Hi.  De  Jurifdi&ione  feu  Difciplina  Ecdefiadica. 

,  _  169. 

1 1 2.  Judges  &  Magidrates.  vj2.  &  182. 

113.  De  Magidratu  &  Subditis.  173.  &  183. 

1 14.  De  Beatitudine  &  Vita  Etema.  181. 

.115.  De-  Refurre&ione  Mortuorum.  185. 


2266. 

A  thin  book  in  old  Englilh,  imperfeft  at  the  be¬ 
ginning,  but  concluding  with  the  neceflary  Note  which 
follows  :  “  This  Boke  byfore  wretyn  is  callid  in  French 
Letris,  Ditz.de  Philifophius  (leg.  Philofophres  aut  Philo- 
fophes)  and  in  Englylhe,  for  to  fey,  the  Doctryne  &  the 
Wyfedome  of  the  Wyfe,  Auncyent  Philofophcrs,  asAry- 
ftotle,  Plato,  Socrates,  Tholomc,  &fuche  ojier.  Tranflated 
out  of  Laten  into  Frenche  to  Kyng  Charles  the  Syxte  ofe 
Fraunfe  by  Wyllyam  Tyngnovyle  Knyght,  late  Proved  of 
the  Cyte  ofe  Parys  :  and  fythe  now  late  tranflatyd  out  of 
Frenlhe  tung  in  to  Englylhe,  the  yere  of  our  I.orde  1450. 
to  John  Fodalfe  Knyghte  for  his  Contemplacion  &  Solas 
by  Stevyn  Scrope  Squyer,  Sonne  in  Law  to  the  feide 
Foftalle.  Deo  Gracias.” 

2267. 


A  thin  Book  in  Folio,  written  (I  believe,  in  the  reign 
of  Queen  Elizabeth)  by  fome  Roman  Catholic,  orPrie^J 
and  is  altogether  l'uperditious  &  foolifh,  as  treating 
upon  what  in  fol.  33.  is  “  called  the  Arte  of  fecrete 
Magyke.” 

Herein  I  find,  after  a  fanciful  Frontifpiece, 

1.  What  things  are  attributed  to  the  Planets.  2. 

This  tract,  at  the  end,  hath  another  Title,  vizt. 

“  De  Chara&eribus,  Sigillis,  &  Tabulis  bonorum  &  ma- 
lorum  Angelor.” 

2.  To  caufe  Loue  or  Hate ;  that  a  Thef  fhall  not 

fteale  ;  the  Dogge  not  barke,  &c.  it. 

3.  To  make  Lamens,  or  Pentacles,  to  call  goode 

Spiruts.  11.  b. 

4.  The  deuyne  Names  of  God,  per  Libros  manu- 

feriptos.  15,  b. 

5.  The  deuyne  Names  of  God,  per  Cornelium  Ag. 

(i.  e.  Agrippam)  l(5. 

6.  The  Confecratinge  of  the  Fumigacyons.  19.  b. 

7.  The  Confecratyon  of  the  Water.  ibid. 

8.  The  Confecratyon  of  the  Oyle.  17.  b. 

9.  The  Confecratyon  of  the  Fyar.  18.  b. 

10.  Confecratio  Gladij.  jp, 

a  1.  Confecratio  Libri,  fiue  Per'gamen'i,  Orationes  ix. 

19-  b. 

,  All  thefe  lad-mentioned  things,  &  divers  others 
were  found  in  a  lone  Houfe  at  Clerken-well  about 
40  years  fince  ;  and  it  was  never  publickly  known  who 
owned  them. 

12.  The  Method  or  Order  to  worke  in  this  Arte. 

26. 

13.  A  goode  common  Figure  for  any  one  Spirute, 

Baron,  or  any  other.  33- b. 

14.  The  figure  for  Sundaye,  according  to  the  four 

Seafons  of  the  year.  ^4. 

15.  Others  for  Munday.  35. 

16.  Others  for  Wedinfdaye.  36. 

17.  Others  for  Friday.  37, 

2268. 


Codex  maxima  ex  parte  chartaceus  ;  diverfis  etiam 
Regionibus  ac  Linguis  exaratus  ;  plurimis  infuper 
Tradatulis  condans  ;  hoc,  qui  fequitur  Ordine,  nunc 
fimul  compa&is,  foil. 

1.  Indiculus  Contentorum  hujufee  Codicis  manu  Jo- 
annis  Covelli  baud  ita  pridem  Colegij  Chridi,apud  Can- 
tahrigienfes,  Magidri.  1.  b. 

Cat.Harl.  Vol.  II, 


633 


Num.  2268. 

2.  Oracio  Magri  Giiafparini  Pergamenfis  de  laudibus 

Regis  Arogania;  (1.  Arragonia;.)  3. 

3.  Epidola.  edita  per  antedidum  Magrum  Guafpari- 

num,  de  laudibus  Ducis  Mediolani.  4.  b. 

4.  Epidola  edita-  per  eundem,  et  tranfmida  Gregorio 

xn.  3.  b. 

5.  Epidola  S.  Bernardi  ad  Raymundum  Militem,  de 

Cura  Rei  familiaris.  3.  b. 

6.  Novum  compofitum  per  Poetam  Bocacium,  in 

ejus  Libro  vocato  “  El  libro  de  le  cento  Novelle,”  vulgari 
tamen  Sermone  ;  et  demum  per  Dfim  I'rancifcumPe- 
trarcham,  paucis  mutatis,  Latine  verfum.  6.  b. 

Ed  Fabella  de  Waltero  Marchione  ;  &  Grifilde 
feeminarum  patientillima. 

7.  Epidola  edita  per  Dnm  Walafcum  de  Lifbona.. 
tranfmilfa  Priori  Ordinis  Cariufie  Civitatis  Bononienfis, 
electo  in  Epilcopum  a  populo  Bononienfe,  et  acceptanti. 

1  o.  b. 

8.  Epidola  Peregrini  dc  Zambecar,  tranfmida  Duo 

Bernardo  dc  Muglio,  condolendo  fe  de  morte  duorum 
amicorum  luorum ;  quorum  unus  (Azo  de  Scardois) 
alterum  (Ugolinum  Germanum)  interfecit  :  et  alter 
(i.  e.  Azo)  fuit  decapitatus  Bononie.  Datum  Bononie, 
die  19  Apfilis,  A.  D.  1381.  11.  b. 

9.  Epidola  Petri  Blexenfis,  increpans  quendam  Cle- 

ricum  mulieribus  ymitantem  (immittentem  ?)  qui  podea, 
relidlo  Ordine  Sacerdotali,  duxit  Uxorem.  13. 

10.  Epidola  Tulij  Ciceronis  ad  Octavianum  Impera- 
torem,  vituperando  eum  de  inhonedis  modis  per  eum 
retentis,  in  Occupatione  Civitatis  Romane.  14.  b. 

Init.  “  Si,  per  tuas  Legiones,  michi  licitum  fuidet.” 

11.  Epidola  Joh.  Franc.  Pogij  ad  Leonardum  Are- 
tinum,  de  morte  Jeronimy  Pragenfis,  in  Civitate  C011- 
dantienfi,  tempore  Concilij  ibidem  exidentis.  A.D.  1416. 

i5-b. 

1 2.  Prophetia  de  Ci  vitate,  &  Populo  Bononienfe.  1 8. 

13.  Nationis  Bononienfis  Laudes,  Carmine.  ibid. 

14.  De  Legibus  Bononienfibus,  Oratiuncula.  18.  b. 

_  15-  Carmen  editum  per  Dnm  Francifcum  Pctarcham 
virum  clarilfimum,  in  quo  attedatur  de  pulcris  et  bonis 
proporcionibus  Ytalie,  quas  incidenter  deferipfit  dum 
habitaret  Parmam,  tempore  DPii  Luchini  Dhi  Medio- 
lanenfis,  cui  mifit  feu  praefentavit  de  Piris  Glacialibus, 
quarundam  Arborum  &  Plantarum,  qui  &  qua;  illo 
tunc  erant ;  et  ad  pra;fens,  funt  in  horto  cujufdam  Dili 
Francifci  Archidiaconi,  cum  quibus  Piris  hanc  Metri- 
cam  Epidolam  prefentavit. 

1 6.  Carmen  ad  Jacobum  .  .  .  Ducem  drenuum. 

!9-  b. 

Init.  “  Jacobe,  milicie  decus  et  lux  una  Latine.” 

17.  Oratio  pro  Do&oratu  L.  Belmontis  Florentini 

nobilis.  20.  b. 

18.  Oracio  Gafparini  Pergameni,  in  Dottorando,  de 

laudibus  Juris  Canonici.  21.  b. 

19.  Oracio  Gafparini  Pergameni,  pro  J.  do&orante 

de  laudibus  ejus,  et  Juris  Canonici.  22. 

20.  Oratio  Gafparini  Pergamenfis,  habita  in  Gene¬ 

rali  Univerfitate,  de  Creatione  Rector  is,  et  Laudibus 
ejus*  _  ...  22<  b. 

21.  Oracio  Gafparini  Pergamenfis,  habita  in  generali 
Univerfitate,  de  Eleflione  Rectoris,  et  de  Laudibus  Dni 
Nicolai  Lucani  Civis. 

22.  Leonardi  Judiniani  Veneti,  viri  Patricij,  Oratio 

habita  in  funere  d.  v.  Caroli  Zeni.  24 

23.  Campiani  Dni  Johannis  Siculi  Noctenfis,  ad  orna- 

tum  et  fpc&atifiimum  Bononite  prsfidem,  pro  univerfi¬ 
tate  Scolarum  Juridarum,  Oratio.  27.  b. 

24.  Funebris  Oracio.  2S.  b. 

25.  Oracio  Domini  Marcide  Camtulo  de  Bononia, 

coram  cetu  Pifano,  pro  Ecclefia  Dei.  30.  t). 

26.  Oracio  habita  per  Dnm  Johannem  Nicolai  de 

Silernisde  Verona,  Militem  clariilimum,  dum  elfet  Ca- 
pitaneus  in  Florencia  ;  ad  laudes  Urbis,  et  fuo  functorum 
Officio.  32.  b. 

7  Y  27.  Francifci 


634 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2268. 

27.  Franclfc!  Barbari  Veneti  Oratio  pro  Dilo  Alberto 
de  Gundaloclis  de  Perufio  in  ejus  examine,  vel  proBaca- 
lauriatu.  ,  .  .  ..  .  34‘ . 

aS.  Anthonij  Lufci  Vincenttm  Secretarij  llluimilinu 
Ducis  Mediolani,  ad  fuum  fratrem  Aftolphum  de  Mar- 
bombis  Secretarium  magnifici  Francifci  de  Barbavaris, 
Inquificio  artis  in  Oracionibus  Ciceronis.  35.  b. 

29  Oracio  Vafelii  Jalbonenfis,  in  Vifitacione  Pape 
Martini  v.  38-  b- 

30.  Oracio  Dili  Guafparis  de  Perufio  Legum  Doc- 
toris,  pro  Rtttore  Univerfitatis  Magiftratum  aflumente. 

39.  b. 

31.  Per  fereniffimum  Regem  Caftelle,  ad  Diim 
noftrum  Martinum  Papam  v.  Oracio  Dni  Gafparis  de 
Perufio,  pro  Militibus  de  Calatrava,  ut  liceat  eos  uxorari. 

41  • 

32.  Epiftola  Gafparini  Pergameni  mlaudem  fequentis 

Orationis,  ad  Andream  Julianum.  42.  b. 

33.  Andree  Juliani  Oratio,  in  mortem  Manuelis  Chri- 

folore  Greci.  ibid. 

34.  Campiani  Johannis  Siculi  No&enfis  pro  Dno 
Loduico  Cathelano,  in  principio  repeticionis  Oratiuncula. 

46.  b. 

35.  Ejufdem  pro  eodem  metus  privato  Examine,  ibid. 

5 6.  Oracio  pro  Confirmacione  uaius  in  officio  Rec- 

thoratus.  _  ibid. 

37.  Epiftola  Dni  Alberti  Enoch  Zancarrius  ad  Rev. 

Patrem  Dnm  Cardinalem  Stas.  Crucis,  olim  Epifcopum 
Bononienfem  tranfmifla.  46-  b. 

38.  Epiftola  Fratris  Andree  de  Monte-turture,  Or- 

dinis  Minor um  Guardiani.  ibid. 

Data  fuit  ex  Monte  S.  Pauli  extra  Bononiam,  8  kal. 

Julij. 

-g.  Epiftola  Dhi  Floriani  de  Seo  Petro  utriufqne 
Juris  Do tftoris  :  fcripta  Bafilem,  25  Junij.  47, 

40.  Senno  Guafpari  de  Perufio  pro  cujufdam  Doc- 

toratu.  47-  b« 

41.  Sermo  (f.  ejufdem)  pro  ....  Doftorante. 

49.  b.  _ 

42.  Oratio  Guafparini  Pergamenfis  habita  in  Generali 
TJniverfitate  Paduanenli,  in  principio  Studij.  49.  b. 

43.  Oratio  eximia  in  principio  cujufcunque  Operis 

habita.  53- 

44.  Oratio  Gafparini  Pergamenfis,  ad  Alexandrum  v. 

Summum  Pontilicem  Romanum  ;  de  Congratulacione 
fui  Pontificatus,  et  de  l.audibus  ejus.  54. 

45.  Heliogabali  Imperatoris  Romani  Oratio  ad  Me- 

retrices  ;  a  Leonardo  Aretino  conficta.  55. 

Poll  finem  cemitur  haec  Notula.  Leonardus  de 
Arccio,  recreandi  Causll  Ingenij,  didfcavit  ;  unde  Urba- 
niores  rogat  ne  efferant  ;  leveriores,  ne  legant,  &c. 

46.  Oratio  Gafparini  Pergamenfis  ad  Podeftatem 
Paduanum  de  Laudibus  ejus  ;  euui  hortando  ne  patiatur 
Doctores  in  Studio  Paduano  exeuntes,  inde  difcedere. 

5S. 

47.  Oratio  AnthonT  Pergamenfis  de  laudibus  eloquen¬ 
tly  Ciceronis ;  habita  in  principio  R  ethoricse.  58.  b. 

4S.  Oracio  Gafparini  Pergamenfis  de  laudibus  Regis 
Cipri,  cum  a&ione  gratiarum,  et  recommillione  ejus  qui 
hanc  ipfutn  dicit.  6c. 

49.  Alia  Oratio  Gafparini  Pergamenfis,  ad  eundem, 

et  fuper  eodem,  &c.  61. 

50.  Oratio  Gafparini  Pergamenfis  de  laudibus  artis 

Philice  et  Medicine.  62. 

51.  Oratio  Gafparini  Pergamenfis  pro  Ambale  Me- 

diolanenfi,  in  fuo  generali  Conventu  5  de  laudibus  Juris 
Civilis  et  Canonici,  &c.  63. 

52.  Epiftola  amico  tranfinifla,  pro  Commendatione 

amici.  63.  b. 

Scilicet,  Epiftola,  Campiani  Johannis  Siculi  Noc- 
tenfis  ad  Laurencium  Ragui'anum,  pro  quodam  Juvene 
amico  fuo. 

5  x.  Alia  Epiftola  ad  Guidonem  virum  prreftantiffi- 
mum,  cui  commendatur  Anthonius  frugi  homo, .  &c. 


Num.  2268. 

54.  Epiftola  Johannis  Campiani  ad  Firmanum  fra- 

trem,  dc  morte  Patris  eorutn.  64. 

55.  Epiftola  ad  Militem  quendam  munificentiffimumj 

qua  petit  Scriptor  Accipitrem  quempiam.  64.  b. 

56.  Epiftola  Campiani  Johannis  Nodftenfis  de  Sicilia, 

Johanni  Gondfalvo  juveni  nobililfimo.  64.  b. 

57.  Epiftolium  ad  Petrum  quendam.  63. 

58.  Pars  prior  Epiftola:  ad  Bemardum.  ibid. 

59.  Epiftola  Gafparini  Pergamenfis  ad  amicum  in 

fcribendis  I.itteris  tardiorem.  ibid. 

60.  Epiftola  Anthonij  Pergamenfis,  ad  Petrum.  ibid. 

61.  Epiftola  Gafparini  Pergamenfis,  de  fuarum  Epif- 

tolarum  Colleftione.  65.  b. 

62.  Ciceronis  Epiftola,  qute  ab  his  verbis  incipit,  “Si 

michi  tecum  non  multe  &  jufte  caufe  amicitie  privatim 
eflent.”  63.  b. 

63.  Gafparini  Pergamenfis  Epiftola.  ibid. 

64.  Ejufdem  Epiftola  pro  familiaritate  feribendi.  66. 

65.  Ejufdem  Epiftola  captantis  Amicitiam  &  Bene- 

volentiam  cum  eo,  cum  quo  prius  Amicitiam  feu  I’ami- 
liaritatem  non  habuerat.  66.  b. 

66.  Alia  ejufdem  Epiftola.  ibid, 

67.  Alia  ejufdem  Epiftola.  67. 

68.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  captando  prius  Beni'volen-* 

ciam,  feribit  Amico,  ut  recoinmendatum  habeat  alium 
amicum.  67.  b. 

69.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  gratias  refert  amico  cui 

feripferat  Recommendationis  ihteras,  pro  Amico  qui 
effe£tum  confequutus  fuerat.  ibid. 

70  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  feribit  excufando  fc  Antho- 
nio  amico  eloouentiffimo  fuo.  68. 

7 1 .  Petri  Donati  Refponfio  ad  amicum  excufatoria. 

ibid. 

72.  Bal.  Cal.  ortatur  amicum  ut  fibi  fepe  referi- 
bat,  ne  per  Negligentiam,  Amicitia  tradatur  oblivioni. 

68.  b. 

73  l  eonardus  Aretinus  fatetur  fe  erraffe,  non  feri- 
bendo  Amico.  69. 

74.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  feribit  (Laurentio)  amico, 

excitando  ipfum  ad  feribendum.  69.  b. 

75.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  excufat  fe  amico,  fi  non 

feripfit  hoc  fibi  non  aferibi.  7  < . 

76.  Pogius  feribit  Amico  de  novis  bonis  queevene- 

runt,  poll  alias  literas  lcriptas.  ibid. 

77.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  refpondet  Amico.  71.  h. 

78.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  cuidatn  Amico.  ibid. 

79.  Petrus  Pizulpaflus  exorat  Arnicos,  ut  non 

imxnemores  amicitie,  tempus  et  ocium  captent  feri¬ 
bendi.  72. 

80.  Auguftinus  Pergamenfis  feribit  Amico,  cum 

ortando  ut  ltatuhi  fratris  Nicolai  notificare  velit  ;  cum 
Pater  &  Ipl'e  eidem  fepe  feripferit,  nec  Refponfum  dc- 
derit.  72.  b. 

81.  Auguftinus  Pergamenfis  refpondit  amico,  quo- 

modo  per  Literas  receptas,  cognofcat  maximam  Ami- 
citiam.  73. 

82.  Criftoforus  Pergamenfis  feribit  Amico,  quod  licet 

nulla  caufa  adfit  feribendi,  tamen  maxime  Amor  artat 
ad  feribendum  :  ortando  eum  ut  revertatur,  cum  id 
Pater  et  omnes  ncceflarij  pofeant.  73.  b. 

83.  Auguftinus  Pergamenfis  feribit  amico,  eum  phi- 

riraum  ortando,  ut  referibat.  ibid. 

84.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  feribit  (Nicolao)  filio  ;  quo- 

modo  paciatur  fuum  antiquum  et  Patrem  et  occupatilli- 
mum  vincere  in  Officio  feribendi.  ibid. 

85.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  feribit  filio,  ut  ilium  apud 
Bononienfes  exculet,  fi  ad  Studia  fua  non  transfert.  74. 

86.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  feribit  filio  fuo  ut  propter 

Honores  &  concurfum  quern  habet  in  legendo  Retho- 
ricam,  cactus  fit  ne  propofitum  alcioris  Sciencie,  foil. 
Canonice  pretermittat.  75* 

87.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  ortatur  filiumut  fepe  refcri- 

beret  ;  1  ecommittens  fibi  duos  Juvenes,  ul  proficifcantur 
&  inteiligant.  76. 

S8.  Gafpar 


Bibliothecae  Harleiance. 


6  3  5 


Num.  2268. 

38.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  fuper  eodem.  76.  b. 

89.  Epiftolium  Gafpari  Pergamenfis,  de  Johanne 

fsbribus  correpto.  ibid. 

90.  Gafpar  Pergamenfis  feribit  filio,  admirando  de 

ipfo  quod  jam  diu  fibi  non  feripferat ;  ex  quo,  Mater  8c 
Ipfe  plurimam  mefticiam  generantur.  ibid. 

91.  Arito  Pergamenfis  notificat  amico  Naturam 
cujufdam  Jacobi  ■,  depolcendo  ut  ilium  non  fequatur. 

„  ...  77- 

92.  Epiftola  deftinata  Romano  Pontifici,  ex  qua  plu- 

timum  captat  benivol entire.  77.  b. 

93.  Caij  Plinij  Junioris  Epiftola  prima ;  qua:  ab  his 

verbis  incipit,  Frequeniur  oratus  es.  7S. 

94.  Epiftola  C.  J.  Cefaris  Imperatoris  Cieroni.  ibid. 

Init.  “  Retie  auguraris  de  me.” 

95.  Petri  Pauli  Vugi  j  Epiftola.  ibid. 

96.  Petri  Pizolpaffi  Epiftola.  78.  b. 

97.  Propoficio  luper  acceleratione  Genc«*alis  Concilij 

Balileenfis,  pro  Reformatione  ft.  tus  Ecclefite  tarn  inCa- 
pite  quam  in  Membris  ;  facia  (ut  videtur,  Martino  Papte 
v.)  per  Abbatem  Vificampi  Ciftercienfis  Ordinis,  S.  The- 
ologie  Profeftorem,  Ambafliatorem,  cum  alij>,  Regis  An¬ 
glia;  Henrici  vi.  ibid. 

98.  Propoficio  fuper  acceleratione  Generalis  Concilij 

pro  parte  Regis  Anglie  Henrici  vi.  ad  reverendiflimos 
Dominos  Cardinales,  per  Abbatem  Vificampi  Cifterci¬ 
enfis  Ordinis  S.Theologie  Pr<  -felTorem,  fada  anno  Dni 
1427.  pro  11  eformatione  Univerfaiis  Ecclelias,  tarn  in  Ca- 
pite,  quam  in  Membris.  86.  b. 

99.  Exemplum  Epiftole  milfe  per  Dnm  Francifchum 

Pttrarcham,  Magnifico  Senefchalco  Regis  Neapolitan!  ; 
qua;  fic  incipit,  “  Jam  tandum,  Vir  clariflime,  perfidiam 
Fides.”  88.  b. 

ico.  Verfus  accerrimi  de  morte  Gregorij  Papa;  xi. 

92.  b. 

101.  Prohemium  editum  a  Colucio  Pierus  Cauzclario 

Florentinorium,  ad  Fratrem  Yeronimum  de  Uzano  Or¬ 
dinis  Cameldulenfis.  93. 

102.  Lamentatio  Caroli  Magni  Imperatoris  fuper  morte 

Rocholanci.  94. 

103.  Epiftola;  mutuse  D.  Pauli  Apoftoli  &  Seneca 

-Philofophi,  cum  Commentario.  94.  b. 

104.  Seneca  de  Remedijs  fortuitorum.  1 1 4.  b. 

105.  SchoLa  Salernitana  j  per  Johannem  de  Mediolano 

Medicum  Montis  PeiTulani.  1 1 8 . 

Init.  ec  Anglorum  Regircripfittota  ScholaSalerni.” 

106.  Liber  de  RegimineSawnatis,  compilatus  a  Magro 

Ernaldo  de  Monte  Peftulano.  139. 

107.  Epiftola  Dili  Francifci  Petrarche  Poete  Laureati 

de  Ignerancia  fui  &  aliorum.  149. 

Sequuntur  Sermoncs  quidam,  fcil. 

108.  Sermo  in  illud,  “  Ut  filijs  Lucis  ambulate.” 

Ephef.  v.  >  j  176. 

Ineip.  “  Splendor  Lucis  eterne.” 

109.  Sermo  in  illud,  “  Pacein  habete  inter  vos,”  Marc, 

ix.  >  181. 

Incip.  “  Dum  primi  parentes.’’ 

Now  follow  certain  Tracis  or  Homilies  in  old  Eng- 
lifli,  upon  various  fubjecls  ;  being, 

no.  Sermo  in  illud,  “  Sandificavit  tabernaculum 
fuura  altiffimus.  Pfalm.xLv.  185.  b. 

This  long  Sermon  was  preached  on  Paflion-Sunday, 
as  appears  in  fob  1 87.  b.  8c  1 38.  b.  and  is  written  (as  are 
thofe  that  follow)  in  that  Dialed  then  ufed  in  the  Nor¬ 
thern  Counties  of  England. 

in.  Another,  upon  “  Fides  tua  te  falvam  fecit.” 
tuc.  vi t.  1 9^* 

This  was  made  for  the  Feftival  of  S' Mary  Magdalen. 

1 12.  Some  few  Theological  Notes,  in  the  fame  Nor¬ 
thern  Dialed.  2°7 • 

1 13.  A  fermon  upon  “Da  nobis  auxilium  de  Tribu- 

latione  ;  ”  Pfalm.  lix.  208.  b. 

1 14.  Another,  upon  this  Text,  “  Sandificabitur  Al- 

tare  in  Gloria  j  Exod.  xxix.  213. 


Num.  2268 — 2270. 

Beginn.  “  per  wordys  hat  I  haue  takyn  als  pis  day 
to  preche  of,  in  pe  folempne  fed  of  hallowyng  of pe  Aw- 
tere  of  pis  Kyrke,  in  pe  Worchep  fpecyali  of  pe  glorius  8c 
gracyus  Lady  SeyntAnne,  pe  haly  modyr  of  owre  Lady 
Say  lit  Mary.” 

Deinde  fequuntur, 

1 15  Liber  qui  dicitur  “  Clymncus  fermo  exercita- 
tivus  Abbatis  Johannis  Scholaftici,  ducis  Monachorum 
exiftencium  in  Monte  Synai;  quern,  Grace  compilatum, 
mifit  Abbati  Johanni  tie  Raytu.  Dividi-ur  Sertno  iftc in 
gradibus  xxx  Scalaruin  fimilibus,  qui  ab  humilioribus  ad 
excelfiora  fedantes  furfum  ducunt  ;  propter  quod 
“  Scala”  vocatur.  2 1 7. 

116.  Oratio  proiixa  ad  Dominum  noftrum  Jefum 

Chriftum.  278.  b. 

1 17.  Quidam  Tradatus  comprehendcns  nomina  Sanc¬ 

torum  Patruni  &cc.  qui  prefuerunt  in  Ecclef.a  Sanda  Dei, 
et  iuerunt  Mor.achi.  281. 

118.  Manufcriptorum  Codicum  Cafalogus,  qui  quon¬ 
dam  confervabantur  in  Bibliotheca  cujufdarti  Ca-nobij. 

295; 

1 1 9.  Colledanea  Theologica,  e  diverforum  Scriptis, 

excerpta.  305. 

2269. 

A  paper  Book  in  folio,  written  (for  the  greateft  part)  in 

Englifh,  but  by  leveral  hands,  and  is  now  very  im- 

perfed.  However,  it  contains, 

1.  Numerous  Altrological  C.olledions,  upon  various 

Matters  or  Occafions  ;  at  the  beginning,  fail'd  y  aferibed 
to  the  learned  &  great  Philofophcr  “  Frier  Roger  Ba¬ 
con.”  1. 

And  among  thefe,  I  obferve 

2.  Some  fliort  Notes  written,  up  &  down,  by  Mr.  Sa¬ 

muel  Knott,  a  Devonlhire  Clergy-man,  and  forma* 
owner  thereof,  who  feems  to  have  putt  lbrne  value  upon 
it.  vid.  8.  30.  b. 

3.  Mention  made  of  certain  old  Aft’  ■  !  gers  now  al- 

moit  forgotten  ;  as  Doniinus  Hore,  at  fol.  29.  &  Sir 
Coche.  3 1 . 

Dodor  Blivet,  fol  91.  b.  Si  of  John  Coche  Vicar  of 
Stoclond.  ibid. 

4.  The  main  Work  L-  mis  to  have  been  compiled  at  Ox¬ 
ford  ;  as  may  h.u  feen  at  35.  8c  6 2. 

5.  Divers  Notes  are  inle.  -.cJ  by  John  Molland  ;  whofe 
name  occurs  in  fol.  74. 

6.  Pro  Furto  fecundum  Haly.  87. 

7.  De  Urinis  non  vifis,  Willelmi  Anglici  tradatulus. 

88. 

8.  De  Aegro,  quomodo  fe  habebit  per  Judicium  u 

Domorum.  90. 

9.  Canon  2dus.  deFarmacia,  i.  e.  Medicina.  91. 

10.  Divifio  Signorum  Zodiaci,  et  Planetarum.  98. 

11.  Tradatulus  alius  Altrologicus,  et  capite  8c  calce 

truncatus.  102. 

12.  Aftrologica  alia  Colledanea.  109.  8c  124. 

13.  Oratio  luperftitiofa,  dicenda  aote  calculationem 

alicujus  Spere.  127. 

2270. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  folio,  tribus  Operibus  per  tot  Anglos 
exaratis  conftans  :  fell. 

1.  Opus  afcreticum  cui  Titulis  Gefta  Romanorum, 

cum  Redudionibus  five  Moralitatibus  eorundem.  Ca- 
piti  prafigitur  Tabula  prolixior.  1 . 

2.  Didionarum  Latinum  j  partim  Latine,  partimq;  An- 

glice  explicatum.  86. 

Hunc  librum,  qui  dicitur  Medulla  Grammatics;, 
Galfrido  cuidam  Grammatico  adjudicant  Balsus  8c  Pic- 
feu?,  quern  floruifle  perhibent  D.  1490.  “  Hie  autem 
Liber  (feripfn  Samuel  Canutus.  194.  b.)  ex  vocabulis 
/'nglicis,  mihi  aliquantulo  videtur  antiquior:’’  quibus 
addc  et  ipfa  Manus  major  cm  pra  fe  fert  amiquitatem. 

Sequitur,  manu  Anglica, 

3.  Canonici  cujufdam  Regularis  Vocabularium  Bib- 

2  licum. 


636 


CLtalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2270 — 2 273. 

licunv,  alphabetico  Ordine  digeftum,  et  nonnuliis  in  locis, 
Gallic  e  explication.  1 95. 

Be  fuo  opere  fie  prafatus  eft  Au&or - “  placuit 

ciidain  Canonico  Regular!  ad  utilitatem  et  profectum 
nrnus  intelligencium,  fermone  fuccincto,  preftns  Opuf- 
culuin  compilare  :  quod  quidem  latis  congrue  voluit  Re- 
pertorium  appellari :  ea  potiflimum  racione,  quod  in  eo- 
dem,  cxpolita  Vocabula,  in  quibus  libris  Biblie  &  capi- 
fulis,  eaamin  qua  parte  Capitulorum  lcripta  fuerunt,  per 
indicia  feptein  Literarum  Alphabet!,  fine  difficultate  potu- 
erunt  repetiri.” 


Num.  2273 — 2275. 

litis,  anno  1595,  cum  alijs  fpedanlibus  ad  familiam 'Tal- 
botorum.  ,  ^ 

7.  Nomina  Decanorum  Ecclefia-  Sti.  Pauli  London,  a 

tempore  conqueftus  Normannorum.  ufqtie  ad  Johanneni 
Fekenham,  qui  electus  fuit  A.  D.  1^53.  ex  Regiftro 
Radulfi  de  Baldok  Decani  Sti.  Pauli  (leg.  Epifcopi)  Lon- 
^on‘  .  364. 

8.  De  Cifta  Rotulorum  CancellariEe  fra&a,  ct  Ro- 
tulis  extra&is  &  miflis  Regi,  et  poftmodum  reftitutis. 

466.  b. 


2271. 

A  Book  in  folio  now  impeded  ;  wherein,  neverthelefs, 
are  yet  contained, 

1.  An  Alphabetical  Table  to  the  enfuing  Trad.  1. 

2.  A  Colledion  of  Forms  or  Precedents  of  Inftruments' 
made  by  fomeDevonlhire-Lawyer  about  the  end  of  Queen 
Elizabeth’s  Reign.  Several  of  thefe  are  draw  n-up  accord¬ 
ing  to  the.  particular  Ufagc  k  Cuftome  of  the  City  of 
Exeter. 

2272. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  fob  min.  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Adnotatiunculre  de  vii.  Sacramentis ;  de  vm.  aitati- 
bus  Seculi ;  de  cura  Animarum  ;  de  Baptilmo ;  de  Can- 
dels  fignificatione,  in  folio  fecundo  reiedaneo. 

2.  Opus  didum  Regimen  Animarum 5  a  quodam  An- 
glico  Sacerdote,  ut  videtur  compilatum  A.  D.  .’343. 

De  Opere  fuo  fic  prrefatus  eft  Autor  incertus — “in 
ifto  opufculo  continentur  Pericula  &  Medicinje  que  ad 
Animas  pertinent ;  et  idco  regimen  vocatur  Animarum. 
Compil.ivi  enim  hoc  Opufculum  cx  quibufdam  Libris, 
viz.  Sutnma  Summarum  Raymundi  ;  Summa  Confef- 
forum  Veritatis  Theologie  ;  Pars  oculi  Sacerdotis  ;  et  de 
libro  veneralibis  Anfelmi  de  concordia  Prefcientie  &  Pre- 
deftinatione,  k  Gratic  Dei,  cum  libero  Arbitrio  ;  Scire 
enim  debent  Sacerdotes  Sacras  Scripturas  &  Canones 
ialtetn  Penitentiales.  Ne  aliquis  igitur  Sacerdos  Paro- 
chialis,  vd  Curatus,  de  hijs,  per  Tgnorantiam  aliqualiter 
fe  excufet,  omnia  precipua  que  per  Canones  &  Conftitu- 
tiones  Provinciates  precipiuntur  feire,  k  Parochianis  ex- 
ponere,  k  inter  ipfos  in  Ecclefia  predicare,  in  hac  mo- 
dica  Summa  per  ordinein  confcribuntur,  et  in  tres  partes 
dividuntur  :  quarum  pvima,  eft  de  Moribus  &  Scientia 
Pi  elbiterorum,  ct  aliorum  Clericorum  ;  fecunda,  de  Ex- 
hortacionibus  &:  Dodrinis  bonis,  erga  Subditos  fuos  faci- 
endis  ;  tercia,  de  feptem  Sacramentis  Ecclefie,  et  eorum 
Miniftradonibus  in  illis  fadendis.” 

3.  Quot  modis  intelb'gitur  Sacra  Scriptura.  in  folio, 
ad  finem  rejedaneo. 

4.  Qui  hint  mittendi  ad  Epifcopum  pro  Confeftione,  Sc 

Abfolutionc  optinenda.  ibid. 


Codex  chartaceus  in  fol.  minorij  ad  initium  a  muribus 
mifere  corrofus  ;  in  quo  continentur, 

t.  Collectanea  variorum  dodorum  tumultuaria  e  pub- 
licis  Recordis  in  Arce  Londinenfis  fervatis,  in  ufum  in- 
fignis  illius  Antiquarij  D.  Roberti  Cottoni  Militis  &  Ba- 
ronetti  decerpta ;  ex  ijs  fcilicet,  qua;  ad  ftemmata  Nobi- 
lium  conficienda ;  aut  Hiftoriam  Patriae  adornandam 
fumme  conducere  videbantur.  Inter  hcec  etiam  inveni- 
lintum. 

2.  Excerpta  qutedam  ex  Regiftro  Evidentiarum  Prio- 

ratus  S.Neoti.  g2 

3.  E  Regiftro  quodam  Abbatiae  Weftmonaftezienfis 

ut  videtur.  ,5-  ’ 

4.  E  quodam  Chart ulario  de  Ofeneye,  ut  1  detur. 

5.  Fluraex  Regiftro  Cartarum  Prioratus  de  Chiifel- 

worth  in  agro  Warwicenfi.  ^18 

6.  Lx  libro  Abbathie  de  Nethe  in  Com.  Glamorgan, 
jam  in  cuiiodia  Edwardi  S'tradlinge  de  Sco  Donato  j\ii- 

9 


2274. 

Codex,  maxima  ex  parte,  chartaceus,  varijfq;  manibus 
feriptus,  diverfis  r.imirum  Tradatibus  atq;  Frag¬ 
ments  jam  nunc  fimul  compnfiis  conltans,  hoc  qui  ie- 
quitur  ordine. 

1.  Breviarum  S.  Scriptura;,  verficulis  refonantibus.  1. 
Inil.  “  Verbum  a  principio  procedens  eterno, 

Ouod  cuncta  confilio  creafti  fuperno, 

Te  rogare  cupio  tibi  me  proftemo. 

Nos  purgatos  vicio  ferves  ab  inferno.’* 

2.  De  modo  dicendi  Pfalterium  gloriofe  virginis  Ma¬ 

rie  ;  quemadmodum  cuidain  devoto  &  fibi  fpecialiter  di- 
ledo  revelavit.  XI> 

3.  Officium  in  fefto  Vifitationis  beate  Marie  virginis. 

_  18. 

4.  Sequuntur  et  aha  Officia  de  eadem  beata  Virgine. 

•n-  •  22.  b. 

5.  Quot  Mi  lie  dtcende  funt  ad  liberandam  Animam 

de  horibili  pena  Purgatoiij  :  ex  libri  vi.  capitc  icmo. 
Revelacionum  beate  Brigitte.  28.  b. 

Hoc  in  Paragrapho  memoratur  Milfale  fecund um 
ufum  Sand-monialium  de  Syon  Ordinis  ejufdem  Sand® 
Birgittse,  unde  pradida  Officia  dtfumebantur.  Ilte  liber 
N  iflalis,  pulcherrime  feriptus,  circum  viginti  k  tres  an- 
nos  abhinc  reftabat.  integer;  fragmenta  etiam  ex  illo 
utrinque  mutilato  exfciifa,  Me  in  inftrudiffima  Biblio¬ 
theca  etiamnum  fuperfunt. 

6.  Fragmentum,  fex  inembranaceis  folijs  conftans. 

7.  De  arte  lacrimandi.  ^ 

This  is  an  old  Englilh  Poem,  compofed  by  a  mean 

Genius  ;  wherein,  by  Profopopafi'a,  the  bleflcd  Virgin  is 
introduced  as  Weeping,  or  as  defirous  to  Weep,  upon 
almoft  all  the  Emergencies  of  our  Sauiours  Life.  TJle 
conclufion  may,  perhaps,  be  wanting;  but  it  begins  thus 
“  Now  late,  me-thought,  1  wolde  be-gynne.”  * 
Now  follow,  in  the  Way  ofPhyfic, 

8.  A  final  Trad  upon  the  Judgement  of  Urines.  47. 

9.  Medicines  againft  the  Gout.  30.  b. 

10.  Two  Receipts  to  make  A qua-Vita.’.  31. 

1  r.  Carmen  pro  Gutta,  Verme,  et  Felone,  &c.  ibid! 

11.  Oleum  Camamille.  yt.  b. 

13.  Virtutes  Rofe  Marine. 

14.  Virtutes  Betonice.  „2’ 

15.  Virtutes  Genciane.  jj’ 

16.  Virtutes  Peretrum.  i.  e.  Pileter  Domefticuni,  in 

Englifh.  ibid. 

17.  De  Virtutibuscorreum  (Ieg.corij)  Serpentis.  ibid. 

18.  Ad  cognofcendam  Vitam,  vel  Mortem.  r-.. 

19.  Other  Englilh  Receipts,  in  Phyfic  Sc  Chirurgery. 

20.  Part  of  an  Aftrological  Treatife ;  chiefly  in  old 
Englilh. 

21.  Part  of  an  old  Englifli-Latin  Didionary.  6-! 

It  beginns  with  “  Grevows;  ”  k  ends  with  “  Rv- 

fynge-vp.” 

2275. 

An  Heraldical  Book  in  final l  folio,  written  &  tricked  by 
divers  Hands,  as  con  filling  of  particular  Tracts  or 
Fragments  now'  bound-up  together.  They  are, 

1.  A  labour’d  Pedegrceof  the  noble  Family  of  Berke¬ 
ley  ;  whether  written  k  tricked  by  Mr.  Richard  Kimbe 
the  Armes-Painter  (whofe  name  is  at  the  beginning)  r 
cannot  yet  pofitively  lay.  Jm 

2.  Armeg 


Bibliothecae  ttarleianse. 


Num.  2275—2277. 

2.  Arraes  &  Ciefts  of  many  old  &  new  Families, 
mixed. 

3*  Armes  granted  by  Edward  Bysfhe  Efq;  Garter,  to 
fundry  perfons,  A.D.  1655.  &c.  40. 

4.  An  Alphabetical  '1  able  to  the  Trad  above  men¬ 
tioned  at  n°.  2.  4, 

r  5.  Copy  of  the  Grant  of  Armes  &  Creft  unto  Henry 
Keaifley,  by  Edward  Byslhe  Garter,  dat.  2  January 
A.D.  *655.  44.  b. 

6.  Some  Drawings  of  the  Pevices  nfed  in  Colours,  in 

the  Parliament-Army,  in  their  Rebellion  againft  King 
Charles  1.  (Two  of  them  aie  cut  outj  46, 

7.  Armes  of  many  Knights  who  lived  in  the  Reign  of 

K.  Henry  via.  or  afterward.  ^6. 

8.  Armes  borne  by  the  name  of  Hall,  Branch, 
Griftyn,  Bc-ntelay,  Philips,  Lee,  with  thofe  of  many  other 
Families  intermixed  ;  as  alio  fome  fhort  Defrents.  74. 

Thefe  are  all  hafiily  put  down  by  Mr.  Nicholas 
Charles  Lancafter-Herald  as  it  feemeth. 

g.  Armes  &  Crelts  of  many  Families  mixed  ;  perhaps, 
as  they  were  granted  by  Sir  William  Dethick  Garter, 
and  others,  3^ 

2276. 

An  old  Englilh  Book,  written  upon  Parchment,  in  a 
fmall  folio  ;  wherein  is  contained, 

1.  A  Collection  of  Homilies,  upon  the  Dominical 
Golpels,  &  of  other  certeyn  grete  Feeftis,  that  ben 
comynli  rad  thoroug  out  the  zeer  in  holi  Chirche. 

2.  An  Alphabetical  Table  pointing  to  the  principal 
matters  of  the  faid  Homilies.  At  the  end. 

2277. 

A  parchment  Book  in  a  long  4to,  imperfeCt  at  the  begin- 
ing  &  cl fe where ;  which  formerly  contained  the 
Legends  of  the  ^aints,  &c.  according  to  the  Courfe 
of  the  year,  written  in  very  old  Englilh  Verfe.  Its 
Imperfection  at  the  beginning  may  have  deprived  us 
of  the  Author’s  name,  which  after  much  fearch  I 
cannot  now  retrieve ;  having  little  reafon  to  believe 
him  to  be  that  John  Goldeftone  mendoned  by  Pits 
pag.  407.  who  is  faid  to  have  compiled  “Sermones  de 
SanCtis ;’  &  to  have  flourilhed  A.D.  1320.  becaufe  it 
doth  not  appear  that  he  was  poetically  given,  or  that 
he  wrote  in  the  Englilh  tongue;  &  befides,  the  Hand¬ 
writing  of  this  MS.  feems  to  be  older  than  that  year. 
As  it  is,  I  lhall  give  a  Lift  of  the  feveral  Poems  therein 
contained,  with  their  feveral  beginnings  ;  to  the  end 
that  they  may  be  compared  with  any  other  Copy  of 
the  fame  Work,  when  it  lhall  appear. 

.1.  Beneyt.  x> 

St.  Benedict:  the  Abbats  day  being  the  2 1  of  March 
&  but  little  of  his  Legend  remaining  ;  it  feems  that  this 
Book  wants  feveral  Quatemios  at  the  beginning. 

2.  Annunciatiun.  I#  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seinte  Marie-day  in  Leynte,  amonge  alle 

of  er  dayes  gode 

Is  rizt  for  to  holde  here  ;  ho  fo  him 
vnderftode.” 

3.  Ymbur  in  Leynte.  2i 

Beginn.  «  Feftes  mouables  J>er  beof  i-cliped  flue  in 

the  zere.” 

4.  Leynte.  ibid. 

Beginn.  “  Leynte  come])  herafterward,  ])at  fix  Wike 

i-lafte]).” 

5.  Pallium  4, 

Beginn.  “  Bifore  fix  dayes  of  Efter,  a  ’Palm-fone 

eue, 

Jfie  (i.  e.  Jhefus)  com  to  Betanye,  be  to 
bileue.” 

6.  Pafcha ;  (feu  Ewangelium  in  die  Pafche,  fecundum 

Marcum.)  b. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.II. 


637 


Num.  2277. 

Beginn.  “  f  e  liizt  after  fe  Saterdai,  as  in  fe 
daynge, 

fe  Soneday  in  fe  Efter,  fe  Sonne  lizt 
gan  to  fpringe.” 

7.  Afcenfio  (This  Rubric  I  reftore)  23.  b. 

Beginn.  “  To  his  Difciples  Jtie  feide  fis  Wordes,  zfi 

mowe  i-feo 

Beof  fat  ich  habbe  wif  zou  i-fpeke, 
while  ic  habbe  wif  zou  i-beo.” 

8.  Pentecoft.  24.  b* 

Beginn.  “  Att  Undeme  a  Wit-Soneday,  as  f ’Apof- 

tles  ftode  &  fete 

In  fe  Temple  to  crie  on  God,  hit  gan  to 
fundri  grete.” 

9.  Marie  Egiptiac.  26, 

Beginn.  “  Seinte  Marie  Egiptiake  in  Egipte  was 

i.bore, 

Al.  hire  zunge  lif  heo  ladde  in  Sinne  & 
in  Hore.” 

10.  Ealfegi  Mar ti'ris.  30.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Alphe  fe  Martir  fat  god  man  was 

ynouz, 

I-bore  was  in  Engelond,  &  to  holi  lyf 
drouz.” 

11.  Georgius.  33.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  George  fe  holi  man,  as  we  fyndef 

i-write. 

In  fe  londe  of  Capadoce  i-bore  was  & 
bizute.” 

12.  Mark.  34.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Marc  fe  holi  Godfpellere  wide 

wende  a-londe, 

For  to  prechi  Criftendom,  furf  oure 
Louerdes  fende.’’ 

13.  Letanie.  ^5. 

Beginn.  “  fe  Letanie  is  a  Song,  as.  ze  mowe  ofte 

i-feo. 

To  bidde  ech  Hawe  after  ofer,  oure  help 
to  beo.” 

14.  Rouifons.  25.  b. 

Beginn.  “  fe  Fefte  of  fe  Roueifouns,  fe  lafle  Le¬ 
tanie  is. 

For,  alafle,  Man  hit  fond  j  and  in  lafle 
ftede  i-wis.” 

15.  Petri  Fratris.  ^6: 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Peres  fe  Frere  Prechour,  in  fe  Cite 

of  Veronie 

I-bore  was  of  mis-bileouede  men,  fat  were 
al  in  Herefie.” 

16.  Phelip,  Jacob.  36.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Phelip  &  Seint  Jacob  Apoftles  were 

tueye, 

f e  furfte  dai  fat  comf  in  Mai,  Def  hi 
folede  beye.” 

17.  Inuencio  Crucis.  b; 

Beginn.  “  f e  holi  Rode,  fe  fuete  Treo,  rizt  is  to 

habbe  in  munde, 

fat  haf  fram  ftronge  Defe  i-brouzt  to 
Lyue  al  man-cunde.” 

In  this  Legend  a  Leaf  hath  been  cutt-out. 

18.  Quiriac.  .  4I; 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Quiriac  fat  Bifchop  was,  prechede 

Codes  Lawe ; 

Julian  fe  lifer  Emperour  brouzte  him 
lippe  of  Dawe.” 

19.  Brendan.  b 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Brendan  fe  holi  man  was  zund  of 

Irlande  : 

Monek  he  was  of  hard  lyf,  as  I  vnder- 
ftonde.” 

20.  Donfton.  ^ lm 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Dunftan  was  of  Engelond,  i-come 

of  gode  more; 

Miracle  oure  Louerd  dude  for  him,  er  he 
were  i-bore.” 

7  2  Aldelm 


63S 


Catalogue  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2277.' 

a  1.  Aldelm.  5-P 

Bcginn.  “  Seint  Aldelm  pe  Confeflbur  was  man  of 
noble  Lyne  ; 

I- bore  he  was  in  Engelond  ;  )>e  Kvnges 
broker  Yne.” 

22.  Auftin.  55- 

Begynn.  “  Seint  Auftyn  J»at  Criftendom  brouzte  in 

to  Engelonde, 

Rizt  is  among  opere  i  wis,  pat  he  be 
vnderftonde.” 

23.  Barnabe.  56.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Barnabe  p’ Apoftle  J>at  god  was  & 

hende, 

I-majtrid  was  for  Godes  loue,  in  ftronge 
Depe  att  an  elide.” 

24.  Teoflc.  58. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Teofle  was  a  gret  Man,  and  gret 

Clerk  alfo, 

Ilezeft  Mayfter  he  was bifore  ;  al  vnder 
pe  Bifchop  i-do.” 

35.  Here  follow  fomc  Legends  of  Miracles  faid  to  be 
wrought  by  the  blefled  Virgin,  which  relate  not  to  St. 
Theophilus ;  among  which,  at  fol.  63.  is  one  of  an 
Englilh  Knight,  whofe  Son  was  fent  to  the  Univerfity  of 
Oxford,  and  died  there. 

26.  Albani.  64.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Albon  J>e  holi  man  was  here  of 

Engelonde  ; 

I-martrod  be  was  for  Godes  loue,  }>urf 
oure  Louerdes  fonde.” 

2 7.  Johannes  Baptifta.  65. 

Beginn. Seint  Johan  was  pe  belle  Bern,  pe  holi 

Baptifl 

J>at  of  womman  was  i-bore,  wiboute  Jhefu 
Crift.” 

28.  S!i.  Petri.  67.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Peter  was  wi]j  oure  Louerd,  of  alle 

his  Apollles  hext, 

Seint  Johan  p’Ewangelift  8c  He,  were  our 
Louerd  next.” 

29.  Swithini.  78. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Swippin  pe  Confeflbur  was  here  of 

Engelonde, 

Biflde  Wynchellre  He  was  i-bore,  as  ic 
vnderffonde.” 

30.  Kenelmi.  80. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Kenelm  pe  zunge  Kyng  J>at  god 

Martir  is, 

Kyng  hfe  was  in  Engelond,  of  be  March 
of  Walis.” 

31.  Margarete.  84.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seinte  Margarete  was  holi  Maide  &  god ; 

I-bore  heo  was  in  Antioche ;  i-come  of 
cunde  blod.” 

•32.  Magdalene.  88.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seinte  Marie  Magdalene,  ])at  God  forzaf 
hire  Sinne, 

Lazares  fofter  8c  Martha :  hi  come  of 
Kynges  kinne.” 

33.  Criftine.  92.  b. 

Beginne.  “  Seinte  Criftine  )>is  holi  ping,  as  zou  telle 
can, 

Holi  Lyf&clene  ladde,  &  wel  zungbigan.” 
34-  Jacobi.  ^  .  97. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Jame  pe  gode  man,  rizt  is  to  habbe 
in  mone, 

Seint  Johnes  broker  p’Ewangelift,  Godes 
aunte  fone.” 

35.  Criftofori.  IOIi  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Criftofere  was  Sarazin  in  pe  lond 
of  Canaan 

In  no  ftede  bi  his  daye,  ne  fond  me  fo 
ftrong  a  man. 

Four  &  tuenti  fet  he  was  long  ;  &  picke 
Sc  brod  y-nouz.” 


Num.  2277. 

36.  S".Marthe. 

Beginn.  “  Seinte  Martha  a  god  Womman  was,  as 
ze  hurep  al  dai  telle, 

Heo  a-fong  oure  Louerd  in  hire  hous,  as 
hit  faip  in  pe  God-fpelle.” 

The  latter  part  of  this  Legend  is  wanting,  as  alfo 
the  beginning  of  the  next  ;  whole  Rubrick  was 

37.  S  '.  Laurencij.  106. 

38.  Aflumpcio  S.  Marie.  108. 

Beginn.  “  Seinte  Marie  Godes  moder  fram  p'A- 

poftles  nas  nozt 

po  pe  holi  Golt  a  Wit-fonedai  amofig 
hem  was  i  brozt.” 

39.  Bartholomei.  ni.b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Bartholomei  p’Apoftle  com  of 

Kynges  blode  ; 

Swipe  fair  man  he  was,  and  of  glade 
mode.” 

40.  Giles.  1  rjj. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Giles  pe  Confeflbur  ne  louede 

Hoping  Synne ; 

At  Attenes  he  was  i-bore.  i-come  of 
Kynges  kynne.” 

41.  S".Crucis.  117. 

Beginn.  “  pe  holi  Rode  pat  was  i-founde,  as  ze 

wire  in  Mai, 

An-hanced  heo  was  in  Scptembre,  pe 
holi  Rode  dai.” 

42.  Matheus.  J2o. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Matheu  p'Ewangelift,  Apoftle  he 

was  i-wis, 

Ewangelift  8c  eke  Apoftle,  bope  he  was 
&  is.” 

43.  S.  Michaelis.  22. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Michel  p' Arc-angle  and  his  felawes 

alfo 

Beop  bituene  God  8c  Ous,  to  teche  what 
we  fchulle  do.” 

44.  De  puteo  Inform.  127. 

Begum.  “  pe  rizte  put  of  Helle  is  a-midde  pe  Vrpe 

wip-inne 

Oure  Louerd  patal  makede  i-wis,  queynte 
is^of  Ginne.” 

In  this  Poem,  other  Titles  are  comprehended  & 
treated  of;  as  “  Planete,  Ccli  Celorum,  Elementa,  Quo- 
modo  Homo  fit.” 

45.  Jeromie.  j.32. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Jerome  was  fwipe  god  Clerk,  8c 

wys  purf  alle  pinge  ; 

Moche  he  makede  of'  Godis  Seruife,  pat 
me  dop  in  Churche  fmge.” 

46.  Denis. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Denis  was  in  pe  olde  Lawe,  Payn 
as  opere  were. 

In  pe  Cite  of  Attenes,  per  non  opere 
nere.” 

47.  Luc.  _  13b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Luc  p’Evangelift  non  Apoftle  nas ; 

Ac  p’Apoftles  he  fuede,  and  here  Difciplc 
was.” 

48.  Undecim  millia  Virginum.  137. 

Beginn.  “  Elleue  poufend  Virgines,  pat  fair  Cum- 

paignye  was, 

I-martred  were  for  Godes  Loue  ;  ic  wole 
telle  pat  Cas.” 

49.  Symoun  8c  Jude.  139.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Simon  &  Seint  Jude  tuei  Breperen 

were, 

Marie  fones  Cleofej  as  oure  Bok  ous 
dop  lere.” 

50.  Quintin.  142. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Quintin  pe  Martir  of  the  contray 

was  of  Rome, 

For  Godes  loue  he  polede  Dep,  er  he  to 
Heuene  come.” 

er.  Omnium 


Nufn.  22774 

5J1  Omnium  San&orum.  143.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Alle  Jlalewe  day  we  fchulle  holde,  o 
tyme  in  Jie  zere. 

For  fele  Enchefoun  holi  Churcne  jiereto, 
ous  gan  lere.” 

52.  Animarum.  144.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Alle  Soulen  day  an  Urthe,  rizt  is  to  holde 

heze ; 

Alle  we  fchulle  habbe  neode  hereto,  for 
alle  we  fchulle  deye.” 

53.  Leonardi.  149.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Leonard  ]>e  Confeffour  a  londc 

zeode  her, 

After  f>at  God  an  Vr])e  com,  aboute  vyf 
hondred  zer.” 

54.  Martini.  152. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Martinus  was  i-bore  in  ]?e  lend  of 

Cabarie ; 

Wei  zung,  he  was  y-norifehed  in  pe  lond 
of  Pa  pie.” 

55.  Edmundi  Confelforis.  155. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Edmund  ]ie  Confeffour  ]nt  lip  at 

Ponteneye, 

Of  gode  men  &  true  he  cam,  pez  hi  nere 
nozt  wel  heye.” 

56.  Edmundi  Regis.  162.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Edmund  pe  holi  King,  of  wham 

we  makiep  gretFefte, 

Of  J>at  on  ende  of  Engelond,  Kyng  he 
Was  ver  biefte.” 

57.  Clement.  164- 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Clement  was  i-bore  at  Rome,  bi 

olde  dawe. 

Of  pe  hexte  men  of  Rome,  pat  were  in 
pulke  Lawe.” 

58.  Katerina.  1 7  '• 

Beginn.  "  Seint  Katerine  of  noble  cunne  com,  bi 

olde  dawe  •, 

Hire  fader  Kyng,  hire  moder  Quene ; 
bope  of  olde  Lawe.” 

59.  Andreas.  174.  b. 

Beginn.  *•  Seint  Andreu  p’ Apoftle  was  Seint  Pe teres 

broker ; 

Oure  Louerd  filf  to  Criftendom  him 
brouzte,  &  non  oper. 

Another  leaf  being  cutt-out,  here  wants  the  Con- 
clufion  of  this  Legend,  &  the  begiiiing  of  that  of  St. 

6g.  Nicholaus.  *77. 

Beginning,  now.  “  pe  furfte  day  pat  he  was  i-bore, 
pe  Child  pat  was  fo  god. 

As  it  was  in  a  Mele  i  baped  : 
alone  vprizt  hit  ftod.” 

61.  Lucie  virginis.  183. 

Beginn.  “  Seinte  Lucie  pe  holi  maide,  in  Cifille 

was  i-bore  ; 

Wel  zung  heo  gan  to  fervi  God  ;  &  bi- 
leuede  *  Synne  &  Hore.” 

*  i.  e.  left-off  Sin  &  Whore-dom. 

62.  Thomas  Apoftolus.  185. 

Beginn.  “  Seint  Thomas  pe  gode  Apoftle,  y-martrid 

was  in  Ynde ; 

Of  his  Lyf  we  mote  rede,  as  we  dop  in 
boke  fynde.” 

63.  Anaftafe.  189.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seinte  Anaftace  was  i-bore  at  Rome,  bi 

olde  dawe. 

Of  fvvipe  heze  men  i-come,  al  of  the  olde 
Lawe.” 

64.  Stephani.  191. 

Beginn,  “  Seint  Stephen  was  a  Gyw,  and  of  Gywes 

he  com. 

And  purf  prechechinge  of  p’Apoftles, 
turnde  to  Criftendom.’' 


Num.  2277,  2278. 

65.  Invencio Stephani.  i9i.b. 

Beginn.  “  An  holi  man  per  was  fippe,  pat  was  god 

Criftene  man, 

pat  louede  God  &  holi  Churche ;  his 
name  was  Lucian.” 

66.  Johannis  Ewangelifte.  1-92.  b._ 

Beginn  “Seint  Johan  p'Ewangelift,  pat  Apoftle 

alfo  is, 

Was  oure  Louerdes  Aunte  fone  ;  and 
Seint  James  broper  i-wis.” 

In  this  pie  e  another  Leaf  is  cutt-out. 

67.  Gilberti,  patris  S.  Thome  Martins.  19;.  b. 

This  is  really  the  Life  of  Si  Thomas  Beket  Arch- 

Bifhop  of  Canterbury,  begiiiing  with  that  of  his  Father. 
Beginn.  “  Gilbert  was  Thomas  fader  name,  pat  true 
w'as  Sc  god  ; 

And  louede  God  &  holi  Churche,  fippe 
he  wit  vnderftod.” 

The  Lives  of  the  Saints,  with  many  of  their  Miracles 
being  finifhed  ;  now  follow, 

68.  Vita  Jude  Cariot.  fleg.  Ifcariote.)  227. 

Beginn.  “  Judas  was  a  liper  brid,  pat  Jhefus  folde 

to  Rode, 

Somewhat  me  mai  of  him  telle,  ac  lute  of 
eni  gode.” 

69.  VitaPilati.  229. 

Beginn.  “  Pilatus  was  a  liper  nian,  Sc  com  of  liper 

more, 

Bituene  a  King  &  a  fol  womman,  in  fpous- 
breche  i-bore.” 

70.  The  Titles  of  the  feveral  Legends  formerly  con¬ 
tained  in  the  whole  Work.  pag.  nit  • 

Although  the  Name  of  our  old  Englifh  Poet  may  at 
this  time  be  difficult  to  find  out,  yet  the  thing  itfelf  is  of 
coilfiderable  value  not  only  upon  account  of  its  Rarity ; 
I  not  remembering  to  have  met  with  any  other  Exemplar 
of  it :  but  alfo  for  the  purity  of  its  Language,  its  Age 
confidered  ;  and  the  corre&nefs  of  Him  who  wrote  it. 
Yet  thefe  good  Qualifications  were  not  fufficient  to  keep 
it  from  being  mangled,  Sc  filthily  fcribbled-upon,  by  the 
Children  in  the  Family  of  Sanford  of  Comberflery  in 
Somerfetfture,  during  the  Reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth. 
Thefe  feem,  in  their  petulantly,  to  have  pretended  to 
write  in  a  fort  of  C.yfer.  fol.  55.  73. 182.  b.  190.  21S. 
where  the  Secret  is  only  to  exprefs  the  Vowfcls 


a.  e.  1.  o. 


y.  by 


thus,  you  may  read  what  is  in  the  margin  of  fol.  231. 
“  O,  pater  omnipotens,  clarique  habitator,  Olimpi,”  See. 

2278. 

A.  Velum-Book  in  large  4to,  affirmed  to  have  formerly 
been  poffeffed  by  K.  James  the  Second  ;  but  was  af- 
furedly  the  Book  of  K.  Henry  vi.  wherein  are  con¬ 
tained  divers  of  the  Poems  of  Dan  John  Lidgate  Monk 
of  Bury,  illuftrated  by  1 20  Pi&ures,  fome  bigger,  others 
lefs  ;  befides  other  embelliihments  of  Illuminated  .  Let¬ 
ters,  fo  as  to  render  this  the  fineft  Manufcript  of  our 
Language  written  in  that  Reign  ;  at  leaft,  the  fineft 
of  all  that  I  have  hitherto  feen.  Thefe  Poems  are, 

1 .  A  Defcription  of  one  of  the  Banners  feigned  by  the 
Poet  to  have  been  bom  by  St.  Edmund  King  of  the  Eaft- 
Angles,  in  his  War  againft  the  Danes:  which,. the  Bard 
prophecies,  would,  if  ufed  by  that  unfortunate  King 
Henry  vi.  make  him  always  fuccefsful.  2. 

The  Picture  reprefenting  this  Banner  gives  Adam 
and  Eve  about  the  Tree  of  Life,  as  about  to  eat  the 
forbidden  Fruit,  reached  unto  the  Woman  by  the  Ser¬ 
pent,  who  enjoys  an  human  Shape  down  to  the  middle. 
Above  is  the  Holy  Lamb  within  a  Golden  Circle,  8c  a 
Glory  about  his  Head,  with  his  right  Foot  bearing  up 
.  .  .  a  GoL 


64° 


Gatalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2278. 

5  Golden  Crofs  floree  fichee :  the  Red  Ground  within 
the  faid  Circle  being  powder’d  with  Crefcents,  &  with¬ 
out  with  Stars,  all  of  Gold,  as  is  the  Tree  itfelf :  but 
the  Figures  of  the  Woman,  Serpent,  &  Man,  the  Apples, 

6  the  Lamb,  are  all  of  Silver ;  although  the  Poet  in  line 
13.  calls  it  “  A  Lamb  of  Gold.” 

2.  Another  Banner  afcribed  to  St.  Edmund  (being 
really  the  Armes  of  the  great  Abbey  dedicated  to  him)  of 
which,  our  Poet  beginns  to  write  thus,  in  fol.  4. 

This  other  Standard  feeld  liable,  off  colour 
Ynde  *  *  i.  e.  blue. 

In  whiche  of  gold  been  notable  Crownys  thre, 
He  firfl  tokne ,  in  Cronycle  men  may  fynde 
Grauntyd  to  hym  for  Royal  Dignyte  : 

And  the  feconde  for  Virgynyte  : 

For  Martirdam  the  thrydde,  in  his  Suffring. 

To  thcfe  annexyd,  Feyth,  Hope,  and  Charyte, 
Tn  tokne  He  was  Martyr,  Mayde,  and  Kyng, 
Thefe  three  *Crownys  Kyng  Edmund  bar  certeyn. 
"Whan  he  was  lent,  be  grace  of  Goddis  hond, 

At  Geynelburuhe  for  to  lien  kyng  Sweyn  ;  &c. 
*  vid.  fol.  103.  b.  &  fol.  104. 

3.  A  fmall  Service  or  Office  to  St.  Edmund,  confid¬ 
ing  only  of  an  Antiphone,  Verficle,  Rel'ponfe,  &  Col¬ 
lect,  with  a  Rubric  prefixed,  in  thefe  Lines  ; 

To  alle  men  prefent,  or  in  abfence, 

Whiche  to  Seynt  Edmund  have  devocioun. 

With  hool  herte  and  dew  reuerence 
Seyn  this  Antephne,  and  this  Orifon, 

Two  hundred  dayes  ys  grantid  off  pardcun. 
Write  and  rgidred  afforn  his  hooly  Shryne, 
Which  for  our  Feyth  fuffrede  Paffioun, 

Blyffyd  Edmund  Kyng,  Martyr,  and  Virgyne. 

Underneath,  is  the  Picture  of  K.  Henry  vi.  repre- 
fented  as  a  young  Child,  kneeling  upon  a  Carpet,  and 
praying  before  St.  Edmunds  Shrine,  which  is  here  de¬ 
lineated,  before  the  Rules  of  Perfpective  were  known  in 
England.  On  one  fide  of  this  Shrine,  (lands  two  Monks; 
and  behind  the  King  (lands  an  Officer  holding- up  the 
Sword  of  State,  with  three  Noble-men,  all  bare-headed. 

4.  Lidgates  Prologue  to  his  Tranflation  of  the  Life 

of  St.  Edmund,  which  he  began  at  the  command  of 
William  (Curteis)  his  Abbat,  in  that  year  when  the 
young  King  Henry  vi.  kept  his  Chriftmafs  at  Burry- 
Abbey,  tarrying  there  till  Eafter,  when  he  was  made  a 
Brother  of  their  Chapitle  at  his  Departure.  6. 

Begiiui.  “  The  noble  Story  to  putte  in  remem¬ 
brance.” 

Here  this  young  &  religious  King  is  reprefented  as 
fitting  on  his  lhrone  crowned,  and  receiving  this  Book 
from  Abbat  Curteis,  who  prefents  it  kneeling ;  near 
whom  a  Monk  holds  another  great  Book.  In  the  pre¬ 
fence  (land  many  Monks,  Officers,  &  Nobles,  two  of 
whom  (perhaps  the  Kings  Unkles)  wear  Bonets  of  a 
foreign  make ;  and  an  Officer  bears-up  the  Sword  of 
State.  Within  the  initial  Letter  is  a  Shield  of  the  Royal 
Armes ;  as  the  out-fide  is  adorned  with  a  Panther  feiant ; 
which  Bead  was  one  of  his  Supporters. 

5.  Lidgates  Prayer  to  St.  Edmund  for  his  Affiftance 

in  making  the  Tranflation  of  his  Life.  9 . 

Beginn  “  O  precious  Charboncle  of  Martirs  alle.” 

Here  Dan  John  is  reprefented  as  praying  before  St. 
Edmund’s  Shrine  ;  about  which  feveral  perfons  are  at¬ 
tendant.  When  ever  his  Works  (hall  be  printed  to¬ 
gether,  this  Picture  of  him  may  be  of  ufe  ;  it  being  the 
bed  I  have  hitherto  feen. 

6.  Now  comes  the  Hidory  itfelf,  illuflrated  (as  I  ob- 

ferved  before)  with  very  many  Piftures,  compofed  after 
the  old  manner  ;  that  is,  reprefenting,  Habits,  Weapons, 
Architecture,  Utenfils,  &c.  according  to  the  Modes  & 
Faffiions  then  in  ufe,  when  &  where  the  Illuminator 
lived.  It  thus,  io.  b. 

begins.  “  In  Saxonie  whilom  ther  was  a  Kyng, 
Callid  Alkmond,  of  excellent  nobleffe.” 

9 


Num.  2278,  2279J 

As  to  the  Author  of  this  Legend,  I  take  him  to 
have  been  Abbo  Floriacenfis,  who  coming  over  from  be¬ 
yond  Sea,  to  fee  St.  Dundan  about  3  years  before  that 
Saints  death,  that  is,  A.  D.  985.  received  it  from  him. 
as  he  being  very  young,  heard  a  very  old  man  who  had 
been  Sword-bearer  to  St.  Edmund  relate  it  to  King 
iEtheldan,  who  died  A.  D.  940.  This  may  be  read 
in  my  printed  Catalogue  of  Saxon  MSS.  pag  190.  col.  1. 
where  I  am  deferibing  a  Cottonian  MS.  which  formerly 
belonged  to  this  Abbey,  and  was  notperufed  by  Lidgate. 
Abbo’s  Legend  feems  to  have  been  incorporated  in  John 
of  Tinmouth's  large  work,  from  whence  he  might  eafily 
borrow  as  many  Lives  of  Englifh  Saints  as  he  would 
have.  Lidgate  makes  his  Saint  Edmund  (fol.  14.  b. 
1 5.  b.  & c.)  to  have  been  a  mod  comely  man  ;  but 
Jofcelin  de  Brakelond  a  Monk  of  that  Abbey,  writes, 
that  when,  in  the  year  1 198.  Abbat  Sampfon  made  a 
new  Shrine  for  this  Saint  (I  fuppofe  inbalmed)  &  had 

his  Head  in  his  hands, - “  Et  procedens,  tetigit  Ocu- 

los,  et  Nafum  valde  groffum  &  valde  eminentem,”  which 
intimates  that  he  could  not  have  been  handfome,  whofe 
Features  were  irregular  &  difportionate. 

Next  follows,  another  Work  of  our  Tranflator 
Lidgate,  written  &  illuminated  by  thofe  who  did  what 
went  before  ;  with  this  Latin  Rubric  prefixed. 

7.  “  Incipit  Vita  Sandti  Fremundi,  egregij  Martiris 

F.dmundi  cariflimi  confanguinei,  qui  ejufdem  Martiris 
interfe&ores,  Domino  invitante  prodravit  graciofe  ;  una 
cum  Miraculis  Edmundi  Martiris  antedidli,  prout  in  pod 
fequentibus  clarius  elucefcit.”  69.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Who  kan  remembre  the  Myracles  me- 
rucilous, 

Whiche  Grid  Jhefu  lid  for  his  Seyntes 
(he  we.” 

The  main  Author  of  St.  Fremunds  Life  might  be 
that  Burchard  ofDorcheder  mentioned  by  Pitts  to  have 
been  an  old  Man  A.  D.  870.  Tis  extant  in  Saxon  ;  in 
Latin  it  is  taken  into  John  of  Tinmouth’s  large  Colle&ion. 
of  Saints  Lives  (and  confequently,  to  be  found  in  Cap- 
grave)  and  was  turned  into  Hexameter  Verfe  by  William 
of  Croyland.  To  this  Life,  Lidgate  hath  made  many 
Additions  of  his  own,  befides  his  Legend  of  St.  Edwards 
Miracles. 

8.  The  Tranflators  Lenvoye.  118.  b. 

Beginn.  “Go  litel  book,  be  ferful,  quaak  for 

drede 

For  t’appere  info  hyhe  prefence.” 

9.  Regi.  pag.  ult.  being  a  concluding  Stanza  to  the 
King. 

Beginn.  “  Souereyn  Lord,  plefe  to  your  goodly 
heed.” 

Underneath  are  thefe  Words  “  Audelay  baro,” 
which  feem  to  denote  a  former  noble  owner  of  this  rich 
&  valuable  Manufctipt. 

2279. 

A  parchment  Book  in  large  4to,  well  written  ;  wherein 
I  find, 

1 .  Some  Englifh  Verfes,  where  the  Book  fpeaks  (by 
a  Profopopoeia)  when  it  wasfent  as  a  new  Years  Gift  to  a 
Lord  ;  with  this  Title,  “  Liber  in  excufatione  Mittentis, 
et  Defenfione  ipfius.”  At  the  beginning. 

2.  The  Chronicle  commonly  called  Brute  of  Eng¬ 
land.  2. 

Beginn.  “  In  the  noble  lande  of  Syrrye.” 

This  Exemplar  was  never  finiffied,  but  endeth 
abruptly  in  the  14th.  year  of  K.  Edward  in. 

3.  Copy  of  an  Infcription  found  at  the  end  of  another 
Manufcript  of  this  Chronicle  ;  (hewing  that  the  fame  was 
tranflated  from  the  French,  by  “  Sir  John  Maundeuyle 
Perfpn  ofBrunham-Thorpe.”  At  the  end.  It  is  remarked 
that  that  **  Tranflation  doth  fomewhat  vary  from  this.” 


A  parch. 


Bibliothecae  t-Iarleianse. 


641 


Num.  2i8o“-228i. 

2280. 

A  parchment  Book  reduced  by  the  plough  of  a  knavifh 
Binder,  from  a  folio  to  a  4to,  containing,  Geffrey 
Chaucere  Poem  of  “  Troilus  &  Crifeida"’’  in  live 
Books. 

228j. 

A  Parchment-book  in  440,  now  forworn,  damaged  & 
imperfect  ;  formerly  containing  a  Theological  Poem, 
in  old,  but  very  good  Englilh,  the  time  confider’d 
when  it  was  compofed.  It  confifts  of  leaven  Parts, 
of  which  the  Author  gives  this  account  in  fol.  4.  ; 

tc  1.  1  he  lerlt  part  ys  to  knowe  &  haue  in  mynde, 
}ie  wrecchednefs  hat  ys  among  Man-kynde. 

2.  he  fccun.de  is  of  jie  condicioun  &  manner 
Of  )>e  vnftedefaftnfifle  of  ]?is  Worlde  her. 

3.  ]ie  Jjrydpart  of  hys  boke  Jiou  myzt  rede 
Of  J)ii  bitter  De]),  and  why  hit  ys  to  drede. 

4.  he  ferj)  part  ys  of  he  dredful  Purgatory, 
here  Soules  beji  punyfhede  for  hire  folly. 

5.  he  vifte  part  ys  of  ]>e  dredful  Dome, 

And  of  the  lokenes  hat  before  fhal  come, 

6.  he  foxt  ys  of  he  harde  pey  nes  of  Helle, 

here  dampnede  Soules  euermore  fliulle  duelle. 

7.  hs  feuenhe  part  is  of  he  joyes  of  Heuene, 

And  hus  is  })is  boke  made  into  parties  leuene. 
And  of  euery  part  a  man  here  fynde  may 
Dyuers maters,  ho  pat  wile  affay.” 

1  he  beginning  of  this  Work,  which  gives  not  the 
Authors  name,  is  in  the  Words  following  : 

“  The  myght  of  pe  Fader  of  Heuene, 
pe  wyt  of  pe  Soone,  with  ziftes  feuene. 

And  the  goodndfe  of  pe  holy  Goff, 

God  and  Lord  of  invghtes  mod, 

Be  our  helpe  and  oure  fpede, 

Now  and  eucrc  in  a!  oure  node, 

And  fpecialy  at  pis  begynnynge, 

And  bringo  vs  alle  to  good  endynge.’* 

2282. 

A  Book  in  folio,  ioofelv  written  ;  bound  in  red  Turkey, 
the  Cover  on  both  fides  being  adorned  with  the 
Royal  Amies  ;  ‘wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  A  Relation  or  Diary  of  the  Siege  of  Vienna,  from 
the  6th  of  May  1683,  foon  after  which  it  was  inverted 
by  Cara  Murtapha  the  then  Grand  Vizir  to  Sultan 
Mahomet  iv.  continued  to  the  151I1  of  September  follow¬ 
ing,  which  was  three  days  after  its  Relief.  Before  it, 
are  prefixed, 

2.  A  German  Chorographical  Print,  fhewing  the 
Difpofitionof  the  Turkifh  Camp  round  about  Vienna,  with 
the  circumjacent  CoUntrey  :  the  Letters  or  Signatures 
being  explain’d  in  Englilh  Writing. 

3.  A  larger  Topographical  Print  of  the  Fortifications 
of  Vienna,  and  of  the  Fields  adjacent. 

4.  Explication  of  the  defignatory  Figures  ufed  in  that 
Print  :  in  Englilh. 

At  the  end,  I  find, 

5.  An  Accompt  of  fuch  Things  as  (upon  the  flight  of 

the  Turks)  were  brought  &  to  be  brought,  out  of  the 
Turkilh  Camp,  into  the  Arfenal  of  Vienna  182. 

6.  An  Accompt  of  the  Ordnance  &  Mortar-pieces, 
that  at  the  Siege  of  Vienna  were  brought  out  of  the  Em¬ 
perors  Arfenall,  and  placed  upon  rhe  Bartions.  184. 

7.  Accompt  of  the  Cannon  &  Mortar-pieces  taken  out 

of  the  Emperors  Arfenall,  which  were  rendred  ufelefs  by 
the  Enemy,  dureing  the  Siege.  186. 

8.  Lift  of  Powder  &  Shott,  &  other  Stores  of  Wan-, 

deliver’d  out.  of  the  Emperors  Arfenal,  dureing  the 
Siege  ;  wherein,  things  of  lefler  moment,  as  Shovels,  &c. 
are  omitted.  ,8-^  ’ 

9.  Account  of  what  Ammunition  &  Provifions  of 
Warr,  were  brought  out  of  the  City.  Arfenal.  j  80. 

Cat.Harl.Vol.1L* 


Num.  2282 — -2284. 

10.  Account  of  Cannon-Bullets  fpent  in  the  Siege» 


190. 

1 1  •  Accompt  of  the  Granadoes.  ibid. 

12.  Accompt  of  the  Cartrages.  ibid. 

13.  Accompt  of  the  Iron  Sc  Shott  of  which  thofe  Car¬ 
trages  were  made.  j  g  t . 

14.  Bullets  that  were  afterwards  cart.  192. 

15.  Accompt  of  other  warlike  Stores.  193. 


A  Book  in  folio  not  ill  written,  wherein  are  contained, 

1.  lhe  Journall  or  Abftract  of  foe  much  as  parted  iri 

the  Lower  Howfe,  att  the  Parliaments  houlden  the  27'h 
day  of  October  in  the  43d  years  of  Queene  Elizabeth' .& 
of  our  Lord  God  1601,  which  Parliament  ended’ the  10  H 
day  of  December  following.  Collected  by  Mr.  Heyward 
Townefende,  being  a  Burgefle  in  the  faid  Parliament  f6* 
Byfhopps-Caftle  in  Shroplhire.  j . 

It  appears  that  Sir  Simonds  D’ewes  made  fome  Ufe 
ol  this  Work,  in  his  Journall  of  the  Parliaments  held  in 
that  Queens  Reign. 

2.  A  Catalogue  of  the  A£ts  read  in  this  Parliament, 
and  vpon  what  dayes  the  fame  were  reade.  124.  b. 

3\  Part  of  the  Ceremonial  of  our  Kings  Coronation, 
reciting  the  Queftions  afked  him  touching  his  preferving 
our  Conftitution  both  in  Church  and  Mate,  with  his  Pro- 
mifes  &  Oath  to  maintain  the  fame.  1 30. 

This  is  faid  to  be  found  among  the  Records  of 
the  Exchequer  ;  and  to  have  been  publilhed  in  his 
Majefties  Anfwer  to  a  Remonltrance  of  the  26th  of  May 
1642.  J 

At  the  other  end  of  the  Book,  I  find, 

4-  A  Speech  deliuered  in  Parlament  by  Sir  Benjamin 
Ruddard  ;  in  my  poor  Opinion,  asfeditious  in  itfelf,  as 
this  Copy  of  it  is  incorrectly  written. 

2284. 

A  paper  Book  in  folio,  given  to  my  noble  Lord  divers 
\ears  fmee,  by  Sir  Robert  Worfeley  Baronet :  being, 
on  the  out-fide,  thus  entiruled,  “  the  booke  of  Delyue- 
raunce  and  Difcharge  of  the  Kings  Standynge  Warde- 
robe  of  his  Robes  withy n  the  Towre  of  Londone  j 
newe.  made  anno  Regni  Regis  Henrici  vin.’’  8vo. 
Within,  at  fol.  1.  it  is  mentioned,  that  the  feveral 
Robes  andother  Stuffe,  &c.  were  deliucrde  outeof  the 
faid  Warde-robe,  by  the  Coramaundernent  of  the 
Kings  Grace,  at  dyuerfe  tynies.  bv  t’hands  of  James 
Worfley  Yoman  of  our  faide  Soueraigne  Lords 
Robes  Sc  Keeper  of  his  faide  Warde-robe,  fithen  the 
20th  day  of  December  the  8th  yere  of  our  faide  So- 
iierane  Lords  moort  noble  Reigne  :  and  it  takes  in  all 
fuch  Deliverances  of  Robes,  &c.  that  were  made  by 
that  Mr.  Worfley,  who  was  Sir  Robert’s  Anceftor  or 
Kinfman,  unto  the  14th  of  June,  anno  12  ejufdem 
Regis. 

Note,  that  every  Parcel  is  figned  by  the  Kings  own 
hand,  ami  therefore  this  is  the  authentic  Book :  which 
is  fit  to  •  e  perufed  by  the  inquilitive  &  curious  Antiquary, 
by  reafon  of  many  uncommon  &  ufeful  Notices  that 
may  be  gathered  from  it. 

The  feveral  Things  are  entred  under  the  following 
Heads :  vizt.  6 

1 .  Mantelles.  t 

2.  Gownes,  &c.  of  Clothe  of  Guide,  &  of  Velwet'e 

&c-  2.  * 

3.  Coots,  &c.  and  Jaquetts,  and  Dobletts,  &rc.  6. 

4.  Placards,  Bafes,  Trappers,  &  Bards,  &c.  10. 

5.  Gyrdells,  or  Belts,  See.  1Im 

6.  Copes  and  Veftments,  of  diuerfe  makings,  Sec.  12. 

fj.ere,  is  mention  of  a  gr  ate  boke  of  Cronycles 

in  Eif'glifhe,  couered  with  grene  Veluete  opone  Veluete. 

7-  Hangyngs  and  Chemberyngs,  &c.  13. 

8-  Furres  of  Sables,  and  of  powder'd  Ermyns,  &c. 

8  A  9.  Clothes, 


•• 


Catalogus  Librorum  MS?. 


6+2 


Mum.  2284 — 2286. 

Clothes  of  GolJe  of  dyuerfe  collours,  &c.  15. 

10.  Tylfentts  of  dyuerfe  collours.  25* 

r  1 .  Baudekyns  of  dy  uerfe  collours.  3°* 

No  parcel  is  enter'd  under  this  Head  ;  but  things 
mid.-  of  this  rich  Commodity  are  frequently  mentioned. 

1 2.  Vehvets  of  diuerfe  collours.  3 1  ■ 

13.  Sattens  of  dyuerfe  collours,  &c. 

14.  Damalks  of  diuerfe  collours,  &c.  4°- 

15.  Sarcenetts  of  dyuerfe  collours ;  laftatas,  Sec.  50. 

16.  Dyaper  &  Lynnene  clothes.  53- 

In  turning-over  this  Book,  I  found  a  Labell  like  to 

thofe  palled  thereon,  with  another  Head,  namely  Coro- 
nacion  Robes  ;  but  as  I  found  no  luch  Head  herein,  I 
fuppofe  it  may  belong  to  another  Book  of  this  kind 
which  Sir  Robert  Worfeley  fhewed  me,  but  did  not  give 
\p  my  Lord. 

2285. 

A  paper  Book  in  fol.  wherein  I  find, 
x.  The  Multer-Booke  of  the  Foure-Fotte  Companies 
of  trayned  Souldiers,  in  the  Hundreds  of  Caifhoe  &  Da- 
corum,  within  the  County  of  Hertford.  A.  D.  1640. 

2.  Two  parchment  Leaves,  wherein  is  fhewn  the 
Proportion  to  be  payed  by  the  feveral  Townlhips  within 
Dacorum-Hundred,  when  any  Summe  is  to  be  levyed 
therein  ;  with  fome  Obfervations  about  the  methods 
taken  in  levying  the  fame  :  by  Samuel  Noyes,  A.  D. 
1719.  loofe. 

2286. 

A  Book  in  folio,  not  negligently  written  ;  rather  feeming 
to  be  prepared  for  the  prefs  ;  which,  at  the  beginning, 
is  thus  entituled,  “  A  breife  Relation  of  certaine  Jour- 
nies  8c  Voyages  into  Fraunce,  Spain,  Turkey,  Sc 
Fail  India  ;  palled  &  performed  by  Peter  Mundy.” 

This  Author  or  Traveller,  who  was  of  Penem  in 
Cornwall,  firlt  went  into  France  A.  1).  1609.  Sc  the 
next  year,  ferved  in  a  Merchants  Ship  as  a  Cabbin-boy  ; 
from  which  Station,  by  degrees,  he  became  employed 
in  confiderable  bufinefs.  He  difeovers  a  good  Capacity 
joyn’d  with  Veracity  ;  and  divides  his  Narration  into 
feveral  Chapters,  the  Contents  of  which  do  follow  the 
Title  ;  of  which  1  fhull  give  the  following  Abftraa,  be- 
caufe  l  remember  not  that  I  have  feen  the  Work  itfelf 
in  print. 

1.  My  Paffagewith  my  Father  to  Roan  in  Normandie 

Anno  1609.  and,  at  my  returne,  a  Voyage  from  Lon¬ 
don  to  Conftantinople.  1. 

2.  A  Journey,  over-land,  from  Conilantinople  to 

London ;  begun  the  Oth  of  May  Anno  1620.  3. 

3.  Poll  in  Spaine,  and  other  pafiages  occurringefince 

my  arrival  from  Conilantinople,  vntil  the  Time  of  my 
Entertainment  for  Fall  India.  .  _  28. 

4.  Journal  of  a  Voyage  made  in  the  Shipp  Expedition, 

bound  for  Suratt  in  Fall  India.  30. 

5.  My  Arrival  at  Suratt  the  30th  September,  1628,  of 

my  Abydinge  there  twoe  Yeares  ;  and  Pafiages  until  my 
Departure  from  Agra,  in  November,  1630.  37. 

6.  A  Journev  from  Suratt  to  Agra  ;  in  order  to  aflift 

Mr.  Fremelen  "refiding  there,  in  the  Fafl  India  Com¬ 
panies  Affaires.  42. 

7.  A  little  Journey  from  Agra  to  Colefhawgurre,  the 

River  Ganges,  See.  beinge  difpeeded  (difpatched)  by 
Mr.  Fremlin,  about  the  Companies  Affaires.  55. 

8.  A  Journey  from  Agra  to  Puttana,  in  the  borders  of 
Bengala ;  whither  I  carried  8  Carts  laden  with  Quick- 
filvcr,  Vermillion,  &c.  for  the  Companies  Accompr,  to 
be  there  fold.  Asalloe,  to  fee  the  State  of  the  Count  rie 
what  hopes  of  bene fitt  by  trading  into  thofe  Parts.  58. 

Here,  viz.  at  fol.  82.  our  Author  Ihewes,  that  the 
fending  him  to  Puttana,  with  the  Companies  Goods, 
may  not  only  proue  to  theyre  Lofie,  but  is  alfoe  againfl 
the  Intent  and  Meanixigebf  the  Prefident  and  Counfell 
at  Surat. 


Num.  2286 — 2289. 

9.  His  Return  frum  Puttana  to  Agra.  89. 

10.  Dcfcriptionof  the  Great  Mogoll  Shaw  Jehan  hfs 

Cominge  from  Brampore,  where  he  lay  warring  againfl: 
Dccan:  unto  his  Garden  called  Darreecabaag,  neere 
Agra.  1  o  1 . 

11.  A  Journey  from  Agra  to  Suratt,  with  a  Caphila 

confifling  of  268  Camels,  and  109  Carts,  with  1439 
ffs.  of  Indico,  i2ffs.  of  Salt  Peter,  &c..  conducted  by 
me  Peter  Mundy;  hauing  with  mee  170  Peones  or 
Souldiers.  113. 

12.  Other  Notes  of  certain  pafiages,  which  happened 

in  that  Journey.  134. 

13.  The  Authors  Relation  of  what  happened  fincehis 
Arrivall  in  Suratt,  to  the  time  he  tooke  his  Pafl’age  for 
England  ;  with  Obfervations  touching  India  in  general 

147* 

14.  A  Journall  of  his  Voyage  from  Surat  to  England 

that  is,  from  14th  of  February,  1633,  to  the  2 ill  of 
September,  1634,  when  the  Ship  Royal-Mar y  anchored 
in  the  Downes.  132. 

Although  this  Book  be  but  a  Copy,  it  is  never  the- 
lefs  corrected  by  the  Author’s  hand. 

2287. 

A  very  thin  Book  imperfeft  at  both  ends,  and  feeming  to 
have  been  written  by  Sir  William  Dethick  Garter..  lr 
contains, 

A  veiy  brief  Account  of  Germany,  according  to 
its  feveral  Divifions  or  Circles,  with  the  Defcents  of  its 
chiefelt  Families,  collected  from  Peucerus,  Munfler, 
See. 

The  Account  of  the  Grifons,  and  of  their  Govern¬ 
ment,  is  mere  particular. 

2288. 

A  Book  in  folio,  all  written  by  the  hand  of  the  late 
Mr.  Hugh  Thomas  an  Armes-Painter ;  containing, 

A  Collt£lion  of  the  Pedegrees  of  Wellh  Families; 
made,  partly  from  mss.  in  this  noble  Library,  with  the 
confent  of  my  late  noble  Lord  8c  Mailer,  and  partly 
from  other  Authorities.  This  Book  was  one  of  thole 
which  the  faid  Hugh  bequeathed  to  that  noble  Lord  by 
his  la(l  Will ;  and  for  all  which,  his  Brother  was  grati¬ 
fied,  being  very  poor.  This  hath  no  Table  or  Index. 

2289. 

An  Ilcraldical  Book  in  folio,  all  written  by  the  hand 
of  the  late  Mr.  Hugh  Thomas  the  Amies  Painter  ; 
wherein  are  contained, 

1 .  A  large  Collection  of  Brecknock-lhire  Pedegrees. 

2.  Intermixed  with  them,  are  divers  Pedegrees  of 
Wellh  Families  in  other  Counties.  Moreover,  1  herein 
find, 

3.  Many  Notes  relating  to  the  antient  Family  of  Gif- 

fard,  collected  by  the  laid  Hugh  Thomas,  and  (I  fup¬ 
pofe)  iuferted  into  that  fair  Pedegree  which  he  made  ot 
this  Family,  and  {hewed  to  me.  235.  241. 

4.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Wilford,  or  Wils- 

ford.  239. 

5.  Notes  relating  to  the  Family  of  Brand  ;  with  two 

Impreflions  from  their  Seal.  245. 

6.  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Knightley.  293. 

7.  Defcent  of  the  Family  of  Lumicy.  295. 

8.  Confirmation  of  Armes,  Sc  Grant  of  aCrelttojohn 
Bolney  of  Bolney  in  Com.  Suflex,  Efquyer  ;  by  Thomas 
Hawlay  Clarencieulx.  Geuen,  10  Nov.  A.  D.  1541. 

9.  Notes  drawn  out  of  the  Wellh  Chronicles  by  Mr. 

Humphrey  Lhuyd.  298. 

I  fuppofe  he  means  Notes  drawn-out  of  Humfrey 
Lloyds  printed  Chronicle. 

jto.  Defcent  of  Bullen  Sc  Butler  from  Humfrey  Bohun 
Earle  of  Hereford.  308. 

1 1.  The  1 5  Tribes  of  North  Wales.  ,309. 

1  a.  Part  of  a  Letter  from  Edward  Lhuyd  to  Dr.  Wil- 


Bibliotheca  Harleiante. 


643 


Nurti.  2289—2294. 

ham  Nicholfon  then  Bi/hop  of  Carliol,  now  of  Lbndon- 
derry,  about  the  Signification  of  the  Britifh  Names  of 
Water?,'  Rivers,  Mountains,  Citties,  Towns,  Cadies, 
and  Villages.  310. 

1 3.  The  Pedegrees  of  feveral  Britifh  Saints,  taken  out 

of  an  old  ms.  upon  Vellum,  written  about  the  year  1250 
now  in  the  Cuftody  of  Mr.  Edward  Lhuyd  Keeper  of  the 
Afhmolean  Muleum  at  Oxford.  313. 

14.  Blazon  of  the  Annes,  at  the  end  of  the  Welfh 
Hidory  tranfcribed  by  Robert  Glover,  Somerfet.  315. 

320. 

1 5.  Notes  taken  Out  of  a  book  Wrote  by  Mr.  William 

Salufbury.  319. 

16.  Armes,  in  Blafon,  of  other  Welfli  Families  mixed 

32C- 

17.  Part  of  a  Pedegree,  fhewing  the  Alliance  of 

Middleton  with  divers  eminent  Scots  Families.  336. 

18.  The  Divifion  of  North  Wales.  338. 

19.  A  Lid  of  the  Sheriffs  of  Brecknock-fhire,  ever 

finceit  was  made  Shire-ground,  A.  U.  1539.  to  A.  D. 
1717.  inclufive.  340. 

20.  A  Lid  of  the  Baylifls,  Recorders,  &  Aldermen 

of  the  Burrough  of  Brecknock,  ever  fince  it  was  incor¬ 
porated  by  King  Philip  &  Mary,  A.  D.  1556.  to  A.  D. 
17 1 5-  inclufive.  344. 

21.  An  Affertion,  that  one  Sir  Howell  Buyell  took 

John  King  of  France  prifoner;  and  that  from  the  Mefs 
of  Vi&ualls  allowed  to  him,  occafionall  fprang  thofe  who 
were  after-ward  called  Yeoman  of  the  Crowne.  This 
is  faid  to  be  taken  from  a  Manufcript  Hidory  remaining 
in  the  Houfe  of  Sir  John  Wynne  of  Gwedir  Knight  & 
Baronet.  The  former  part  of  this  Story  is  faid  ro  lie 
upon  the  Credit  of  Jollo  Goch,  a  famous  old  Bard.  et. 
vid.  2291.  78. 

2290. 

A  Book  in  folio  fomewhat  damaged,  and  without 
in  looking  into  which,  I  foon  found  it  to  be. 

That  Libel  called  “  Leiceders  Common-wealth  ;  ” 
whofe  Author  is  generally  thought  to  have  been  Robert 
Peifons  the  Jefuite. 

2291. 

A  Book  in  folio  almoil  all  written  by  Mr.  Hugh  Tho¬ 
mas  the  Armes-Painter ;  wherein  are  contained, 

A  Collection  of  Welfh  Pedegrees,  mixed-  taken 
from  fome  MSS.  in  this  noble  Library,  and  from  other 
Authorities  1  fome  of  which  he  hath  continned  until 
very  late  years. 

2292. 

A  Book  in  folio,  cleanly  written,  wherein  I  find  no  more 
than 

The  Prince  of  Nicholas  Machiavil  Citizen  and  Secre¬ 
tary  of  Florence  :  dedicated  to  the  noble  Prince  Law¬ 
rence  Sonn  of  Peeler  de  Medicis  :  mandated  out  of 
Italian  into  Engli/h.  1 

2293. 

AfuperfHtidus  Book  in  Folio,  fairly  written  with 

fome  drawings  made  on  Velum,  by  a  Workman  ’ 

It  contains  a  Rhapfodical  and  Confufed  Difcourfe  to 
the  late  King  James  it.  for  introducing  fome  new  Reli¬ 
gion,  if  I  apprehend  the  Intent  of  it,  from  Principles  of 
Geomancy.  1  he  author  feems  to  have  been  fome  very 
ignorant  Foreigner,  perhaps  fome  whimfical  or  maddiih 
Irtih-man  ;  whole  conceits  &  flyle  are  fo  hard  and  barba¬ 
rous  that  I  cannot  fpend  more  Time  upon  them  with  any 
Patience  j  and  therefore  go  on  to  ' 

2294. 

A  thin  Book  in  folio,  incorreSIy  written ;  wherein  never, 
thelefs,  are  contained, 

Doftor  ....  Anfwer  to  the  Authorities  al. 


Num.  2294 - 2296. 

(edged  by  John  Robarts  Earl  of  Radnor,  in  defence  of 
the  Power  of  the  I.ords  Spiritual  to  give  Judgement,  to¬ 
gether with  the  Lords  Temporal,  in  Parliament,  in  capi- 
tal  Cafes.  f 

paper  e  ^ar'  ^Inor,  “  Anfweare  to  the  foregoeing 

Radnor*  Do£l°rS  re“nd  or  reply  »  the  Eariof 

4.  His  Lordihip’s  Anfweare  to  the  fecond  Paper.  19. 
2295. 

A  Book  in  foiio,  formerly  fas  I  fuppofe)  belonging  to 
lome  Mailer  of  the  Company  of  Scrivenors  of  London; 
wherein  I  find  divers  matters  relating  to  the  faid  Coin- 
pally  :  viz. 

1.  “ThePeticon.  of  the  Mailer  and -Wardens  of  ttle 
amient  Company  of  Writers  of  the  Court  Letter  of  the 
Citty  oi  London,  to  the  Lord  Maior  St  Court  of  Alder, 
men.” 

F01  their  Afiifiance  in  Collecting  the  Monr-v  charged 
upon  the  Company  ;  and  for  their  Favor  in  procuring 
the  laid  Company  to  be  incorporated  by  the  King. 

2.  The  firft  Order  of  the  Court  of  Aldermen,  dat.  i  x 

Julij,  A.  D.  1616.  2 

t  Hereby  the  penning  of  the  Patent  was  referred  to 
iv.r.  1  nomas  Jones  Common  Serjeant,  &  to  Mr.  John 
Stone. 

3-  Their  Report  in  favour  of  the  Draught  of  the  Pa¬ 
tent  offered  to  their  View.  °  jyd 

4-  The  fecond  Order  of  the  Court  of  Aldermen,  dat, 

10  Septemb.  A.  D.  1616.  £bjd 

Hereby,  Mr.  Coventry  was  added  to  the  Committee 
above-mentioned,  in  order  to  perufe  &  amend  the  faid 
Draught  or  a  Patent,  in  certain  places.  ibid, 

5- 1  he  Report  oi  all  the  Committees,  in  favour  of  the 

faid  Patent,  as  now  amended.  jjjjj 

6.  The  above-mentioned  Mafter  &  Wardens  Petition 
to  the  Kings  Majeffie. 

r\  his  was  for  granting  vnto  them  a  Corporacon.° 

7.  The  Kings  Reference  of  that  Petition  to  the  Lords 

of  the  Councell,  2  Odober,  j6i6.  ibid. 

8.  The  Reference  of  the  fame,  by  the  I.ords  to  the 

Lord  Maior  &  Recorder  of  London.  4. 

9.  I  heir  Certificate  in  favour  of  thePatent.  ibid. 

10.  The  Kings  Warrant  to  his  Attorney  or  Solicitor, 
to  draw-up  a  Bill  for  his  Majeffies  Signature.  ibid. 

11.  The  Docquet  to  the  Bill,  figiied  by  Sir  Henry 

1  elverton  the  Kings  Solicitor.  ibid. 

12.  A  Copy  of  the  King’s  Patent  for  incorporating  the 
London  Scriveners :  bearing  Telle  the  8th  of  Januarv, 
anno  Regni  14. 

.  l3-  The  Oath  of  the  firft  Maffer  &  Wardens  of  the 
faid  Company  :  27  Febr.  1616-7.  *  „o 

14.  Petition  of  the  faid  Mailer  &  Wardens,  &  of  the 

A  hi  it  mts  of  the  faid  Company,  to  the  Lord  Chancellor 
Vcrulam,  for  his  Approbation  of  their  Orders  or  By- 
Laws.  1 

15.  His  reference  of  the  fame  to  the  Chiefe  Jufticts. 

,6‘  Their  feveral  Opinions,  in  favor  of  the  fame.  ibid. 

17.  I  he  Lord  Chancellor’s  Warrant  for  Ingroffine 

them  :  21  January,  A.  D.  1618.  ibid. 

18.  Copy  of  the  faid  Ordinances  or  Orders,  as  ap- 

proved  by  the  Lord  Chancellor,  &c.  29  Januarij  anno 
16  R.  Jacobi  1.  J 

19.  Copy  of  the  faid  Companies  new  Orders,  as 

approved  by  the  Lord  Keeper  Coventrye,  &c.  dat.  the 
28th  day  of  May.  A.  D.  1635.  -Q 

,  .2 ®’  Bieife  of  the  feveral  Paflages  mentioned  in 

this  Book.  0 

„  a  59> 

2296. 

A  Book  in  folio  confiding  of  a  mifcellaneous  parcell  of 
Tracts  now  bound-up  together,  viz. 


644 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2296. 


1.  La  Refponfe  au  Libelle  Hollandois,  fai£t  pour 

deffendre  les  Procedures  injures  Sc  barbarcs  faites  contre 
]es  Angiois,  a  Amboyna  dans  les  Ind?s  Orientales,  par 
leg  Hollandois  qui  font  en  ce  Lieu  la.  Imprime  k  Lon- 
dres  Pan  1 624;  !  * 

I  fuppofe  that  this  may  be  a  Tranflation  01  that 
printed  book.  .  .  ,  r 

2.  Relation  de  la  reception  faite  a  Paris,  aux  Ambal- 

fadeurs  des  Suifl'es,  en  Pan  1664.  24- 

2.  Rernonltrance  Apologetique  fur  le  Mecontente- 
ment  que  Monfieur  le  Due  de  Beaufort  Commandant, 
ces  Mois  paffez,  les  Vailfeaux  ronds  du  Roy  cn  la 
Mediterranee,  fe  planit  d'avoir  receu  de  Mr.  le  Grand 
Maiftre  de  Malthe,  par  le  refus  de  la  Qualite  d  Altelle ; 
au  quel  il  tafehe  d’interreffer  le  Roy,  fou  le  pretexte 
fuppofe  du  mepris  de  fon  Pavilion.  _  33; 

4.  Relation  de  l’Eftat  des  Provinces  Unies  des  1  ais- 

Bas,  en  Pan  1665.  4°" 

5.  Supplication  du  Nicholas  Fouquet  Confeiller  du 

Roy  en  les  Confeils,  Miniltre  d’Eftat,  ci-devant  Maiftre 
des  Requeues,  Procureur  General  du  Roy.^  et  Sur-m- 
tendant  des  Finances,  a  Nos-Seigneurs  de  la  Chanibre  de 
Jufticc,  contre  M.  le  Chancelier.  55- 

6.  Une  autre,  du  meme  7l- 

7.  Une  autre,  du  meme.  75- 

8.  Une  autre,  du  meme,  au  Roy.  #  °0, 

9.  The  Speech  of  a  French  Lawyer,  in  a  Court  of 

Jufticc-,  in  behalf  of  his  Client,  who  was  Plaintiff,  & 
fued  for  an  tit  ate  which  had  been  polleHed  by  his  Wife's 
Father  &  Mother.  .  ?5- 

10.  Lettre  d’un  Advocat  k  un  des  fes  Amis,  fur  1  On- 

guent  pour  la  Bruflure.  ,  94* 

0  This  bears  Date  1  April,  1 664,  and  is  written  agamlt 
the  Jefuites  who  hold  the  Pope  to  be  infallible. 

1 1.  Directions  in  French,  for  Painting  in  Miniature, 

&  making  feveral  Colors.  _  .  IC0, 

12.  Quid  Crux,  et  cujufmodi  fuerit,  Ubi,  Quare, 

Ouomodo,  et  Quatenus  ufurpata  ?  io7’ 

13.  Articles  ofaTreaty,in  Latin, between  K. Charles  n. 

and  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg.  _  io9* 

14.  Pars  Comoediae  quae  exhibita  fuit  in  Caftro  Lu- 

denfi.  * 1 7; 

1 3.  A  Tratt  miferably  and  purpofely  tom,  wherein 
were  written  by  feveral  Elands,  fome  Latin  Common¬ 
place  Notes  ;  Medicinal  &  other  Receipts,  faid  to  have 
been  much  approved  ;  Poems  or  Ballads  ;  l'orms  of  In- 
ftruments  ;  Prayers  ;  and  other  Notes.  124. 

Among  thefe  I  find, 

16.  Doequet  of  a  Licence  graunted  to  John  Spilman 
her  Majefties  jeweller,  for  the  foie  gathering  for  ten 
years,  of  all  Raggs,  &c.  neceffary  for  the  making  of 
white  Writing  Paper,  dat.  17  Febr.  ann.  31  Eliz. 

124.  b: 

17.  Names  of  Recufants  in  Worcefter-fhire,  whofe 
Eftates  being  thought  to  be  forfeited,  fome  forward  Per- 

on  gave-in,  defiring  leave  to  profecute  for,  at  his  own 
Expence.  jbid. 

18.  Particulars  relating  to  Lands,  &c.  formerly  be¬ 
longing  to  the  Priory  of  Caxford  in  Com.  Norff. 

126.  &c.  133.  b. 

19.  Sum  of  a  Leafe  made  of  the  Free  C.hapel  of 

Marie  &  Magdalen  called  Stur-bridge  Chapell  in  Cam¬ 
bridge,  to  the  Corporation  there,  by  Thomas  Godric 
Bifiiop  of  Ely,  Sc  his  Dean  &  Chapter,  for  6©  years, 
the  annual  Rent  of  9I.  dat.  14  September,  A.  D. 
1544.  130.  b. 

co.  Sum  of  a  Leafe  of  the  Manors  of  Sutton,  Thurs- 
thorpe,  81  Beilbe,  8c  of  Lands  in  Hagnaby  and  Malteby, 
parcel  of  the  Poffeflion  of  the  late  Abbey  of  Hagneby  in 
Com.  Lincoln,  by  Queen  Elizabeth,  16  Julij,  anno 
Regni  1 4.  to  Thomas  Drewrie  Gentleman.  1 3 1 . 

21.  Memorandums  touching  Lands  in  Mendlefham  in 
Com.  Suff. belonging  to  Sir  Thomas  Knivette.  132. 


Num.  2296 — 2298. 

22.  Notes  touching  the  Manor  of  Stanton  in  Kent,  Sc 

of  other  Lands  elfewhete  ;  but  to  whom  belonging  I 
find  not.  132.  b, 

23.  A  Satirical  Ballad,  beginning  thus 

Goe,  Sowle  the  Bodies  guefte, 

Vpon  a  thanke-les  Errant,  See." 

The  lad  Stanza  is, 

“  Lett  C.uckoulds  be  remembred, 

I  will  not  die  their  Detter, 

Their  Heads  are  ftrongelie  armed 
To  beare  the  Brunte  the  better. 

If  They  themfelves  denie, 

Their  Wifes  doe  knowe  they  Lie.’’ 

24.  Sum  of  a  Leafe  of  a  Mefuage  called  the  ould  Pal* 
lace  fituate  in  St.  Paul’s  Church-yard  in  London  by  Ed¬ 
mund  Boner  Bifhop  of  London,  22  June.  ann.  2  &  3 
Phil.  Sc  Mar.  to  Thomas  Darbielhire,  for  6 1  yeares,  at 
the  oulde  accuftomed  yerlie  Rent  of  Seaven  Markes. 

136.  b. 

25.  A  Paraphrafe  upon  jEfops  Fable  of  the  Covetous 

Man  and  the  Envious  Man.  _  137. 

26.  Peregrinatio  Petri  Sc  Pauli,  e  Dionyfio  Corinthio- 

rum  Epifcopo  apud  Eufebmm.  142. 

27.  The  Rental  of  Donningwourth  in  Com.  Suff. 

143. 

28.  To  make  blacke  Inke  :  the  common  receipt. 

i50.b. 

Now  comes 

29.  A  Latin  Comedy  without  a  Title,  or  the  Author’s 

Name.  >  5 1  • 

30.  De  modo  incohandi  five  inftituendi  A&ionem,  in 

fuprema  Curia  Admiralitatis  Anglias.  168. 

This  feems  to  be  a  Table  of  fome  Book  containing 
the  Forms  of  Iufti  uments  ufed  in  that  Court. 

2297. 

A  Book  in  folio,  now  fomewhat  damaged  by  Ufage ; 
wherein  I  find, 

A  Colle&ion  of  Devonfhire  Pedegrces,  with  the 
Arms  in  Blafon,  fett  down  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Weftcote  of  RaddoninSherbroke,  near  Crediton  ;  who 
was  Recorder  of  Totnefs,  and  a  good  Antiquary. 


A  Book  in  folio,  wherein  are  contained  or  entered  Co¬ 
pies  of  many  Papers  or  Inftruments  relating  to  the 
Affairs  of  the  Pariih  of  St.  Dunftan  in  the  Weft, 
London,  viz. 

1.  A  Bill  of  Complaint  exhibited- by  Sir  Francis 
Pemberton,  Knt.  and  others.  Inhabitants  of  the  faid  Pa- 
rilh,  to  Thomas  Earl  of  Danby  Lord  Treafurer,  See. 
3  Novemb.  ann.  28  R.  Caroli  11.  againft  Nicholas  Over¬ 
bury,  Efq.  the  reputed  Re&or,  &  Jofeph  Thompfon  Vicar 
of  the  fame,  who  (with  others)  had  combined  together 
to  oblige  the  faid  Inhabitants  to  pay  2s.  gd.  in  the  Pound 
at  the  Rack  Rent  for  all  their  Houfes,  Shops,  Sec.  lately 
built,  or  improved  upon  waft  Ground,  See.  1. 

2.  The  Anfwer  of  Jofeph  Thompfon  Clerk,  one  of 
the  Defendants,  to  that  Bill,  27th  Jan.  ann.  28  Caroli  11. 

14” 

Denying  the  Combination  charged  upon  him. 

3.  The  Anfwer  of  Nicolas  Ofburne,  one  of  the  De¬ 
fendants,  to  the  faid  Bill;  9  Febr.  A.D.  1676.  21. 

Denying  the  Combination,  and  fhewing,  that  Over¬ 
bury  had  fued  two  of  the  Complainants  for  the  faid  2s.gd. 
in  the  Pound,  and  was  refolved  to  levy  the  iame  upon  all 
the  improved  Ground  within  his  Pariih,  notwithftand- 
ing  any  Decree  that  Ihould  be  made,  in  the  Exchequer, 
to  the  contrary. 

4.  On  Order  of  the  Court  made  6  Febr.  ann.  29  Ca¬ 

roli  11.  that  the  faid  Ofbume  fhould  bring  into  the  Court, 
all  Books  in  his  cuftody,  relating  to  the  Tithes  of  St. 
Dunftans  Pariih  aforefaid.  « 

5.  The 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


64S 


*  Num.  2298. 

5.  The  Anfwer  of  Nicholas  Overbury  Efq.  to  the 

Bill  above-mentioned.  31. 

Setting  forth,  that  he  had  conveyed  his  Redlory  of 
St.  Dunftan’s  to  one  Sarah  Jevon,  together  with  all  Tithe- 
books  relating  to  the  fame.  He  thinks  the  Vicars  never 
enjoyed  any  Glebe  there,  through  any  Compofition,  but 
only  by  Leafe,  upon  a  Rent  referved.  He  denies  like- 
wife  all  Combination,  making  of  New  Books  of  Rates, 
or  obliterating  the  old  ones  ;  but  faith  that  he  hath  none 
remaining  by  him,  he  having  delivered  them  up  to  Mrs. 
Jevon. 

6.  The  Anfweare  of  Roger  Scudamore  to  the  faid  Bill 

of  Complaint:  20  Nov.  ann.  29  Car.  n.  37. 

Shewing  that  Richard  Cox  the  former  Impropria¬ 
tor  of  St.  Dunftans,  Sc  Mr.  Thompfon  the  prefent  Vicar 
had  conveyed  the  Reftory  and  Vicarage  to  him,  in  Trull, 
for  themfclves.  And  that  afterwards,  the  Vicar  had  ear- 
neftly  entreated  him  to  affign  over  his  Interefl  in  the 
PremilTes  to  Himfelf  ;  and  that  the  Plaintiffes  Sollicitor 
had  applied  to  him,  that  he  might  draw-up  his  Anfwer  to 
the  faid  Bill :  both  whom  he  refufed. 

7.  The  Anfwear  of  Sarah  Jevon,  to  the  faid  Bill  of 

Complaint.  39- 

Affirming,  that  fhe  bought  the  Rettory  by  the  Ad¬ 
vice  of  Sir  Francis  Pemberton  who  was  her  Counfel  ; 
that  therefore  fhe  conceives  that  Ihe  hath  a  good  Title 
unto  all  the  Gleabe  and  Tithes  of  the  faid  Parilh ;  but 
faith  nothing  of  any  Tithe-books,  Rentals,  or  Terriers, 
Sec.  ibid. 

•  8.  An  Order  of  the  Court,  that  Mr.  Scudamores 
proceedings  againft  the  Plaintiffes  lhall  be  refpited  until 
Mrs. Jevon  lhall  have  putt-in  a  fufficient  &  perfect  Anfwer 
to  their  Bill  of  Complaint.  ibid. 

9.  The  further  Anfweare  of  Sarah  Jevon  Widdowe, 

to  the  faid  Bill  of  Complaint.  40. 

Moflly  like  that  of  Mr.  Overbury  ;  but  now  Ihe 
owns  that  Ihe  hath  fome  of  the  Tithe-books  Sc  Rentals, 
but  not  all,  Ihe  not  having  been  able  to  gett  fome  of 
them  out  of  his  hands.  She  denies  all  Combination, 
obliterating  or  defacing  the  old  Books,  or  making  of  new 
ones,  excepting  fome  to  colleSlby. 

10.  An  Order  of  the  Court,  whereby  Mrs.  Jevon  was 
obliged  to  deliver  in  all  her  Tithe-books,  to  be  perufed  by 
the  Plaintiffes  for  one  Month ;  which  expired,  Mr.  Scu¬ 
damore  might  proceed. 

1 1.  Record  of  the  Oath  taken  by  Mrs. Jevon,  19  Aug. 

ann.  30  R.Caroli  11.  that  Ihe  had  delivered-in  all  her  Ren- 
talls,  Terrars,  and  Books  of  Rates,  relating  to  the  Tithes 
of  St.  Dunftans  Paiilh,  without  altering  or  defacing  the 
fame.  46- 

12.  Memorandums  made  by  Samuel  Grant,  touching 

Mrs.  Jevon’s  bringing  in  the  faid  Books  ;  and  of  their 
being  confulted  at  feveral  times.  ibid. 

13.  The  Anfwere  of  John  Grant,  Clerke,  to  the  Bill 

of  Complaint  before-mentioned.  48. 

This  was  fworn-to  by  the  faid  Mr.  Grant  the  new 
Vicar,  the  6th  of  December,  1678.  who  chimes-in  di- 
reftly  with  his  Patronefs  Mrs.  Jevon  ;  and  charges  the 
Plaintiffes  with  keeping  &  concealing  feveral  of  the  Parilh 
Tithe-books  from  him,  who  ought  to  have  the  Cuftody 
of  them;  and  of  raifing  all  this  Duft  with  intent,  under 
that  pretext,  to  deteine  in  their  Handes  the  Rightes  and 
Dewes  belonging  vnto  the  faid  Church,  8c  foe  for  a  Time 
to  fufpend,  if  not  abfolutely  avoid  the  Payment  thereof 
to  either  of  them. 

'  14.  The  Replicacon.  of  Sir  Francis  Pemberton,  &c. 
Plaintiffes,  to  the  Anfwer  of  Sarah  Jevon  Widdowe,  & 
John  Grant  Clerke,  Defendants.  Term.  Mich.  ann.  30R. 
Caroli  n.  57 • 

Juftifying  the  feveral  Allegations  in  their  Bill  of 
Complaint,  againfl:  the  Defendants  Anfwers  ;  and  offer¬ 
ing  to  prove  the  fame. 

■  1 5.  An  Order  of  the  Court,  made  the  26th  of  No¬ 
vember,  1768.  for  taking  the  Depofitions  of  the  Wit¬ 
neffes  on  both  fides  :  and  for  hearing  the  Caufes  of-  the 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2298 — 2300. 

Plaintiffes  againft  the  Defendants  ;  and  that  of  Mr.  Scu¬ 
damore  againft  the  faid  Defendants,  both  together. 

58- 

16.  Interrogatories  to  be  adminiflered  to  Witneffes,  to 

be  produced  8c  examined  on  the  parte  8c  behalfe  of  Sir 
Francis  Pemberton,  &c.  Complainants,  againft  Sarah 
Jevon  8c  John  Grant  Defts.  59. 

17.  Names  of  the  Witneffes  who  were  fvvorne,  in  Ja¬ 
nuary  1678-9.  60. 

18.  Depofitions  of  the  faid  Witneffes  taken  before 

William  Mountague,  Lord  Chief  Baron  of  the  Court  of 
Exchequer,  in  this  Caufe.  61. 

Thefe  were  on  the  Side  of  the  Complainants. 

19.  Interrogatories  to  be  adminiftred  to  Witneffes  to 
be  produced,  fworne,  8c  examined,  on  the  parte  8c  be¬ 
halfe  of  Sarah  Jevon  Widdowe,  John  Grant,  Clerke, 
and  Niccolas  Overbury  Efq.  three  of  the  Defendants  to 
the  Bill  of  Complaint  of  Sir  Francis  Pemberton  &  others. 

97- 

20.  Depofitions  of  the  Defendants  Witneffes.  99. 

2 1 .  Order  of  the  Court,  made  the  26th  of  March, 

anno  30  Caroli  11.  for  the  Examination  of  the  Witneffes 
on  both  Sides,  and  for  hearing  this  Caufe  the  next 
Terme.  107. 

22.  Order  of  the  Court  upon  a  Reprefentation  for  the 

Defendants,  that  they  were  not  ready,  becaufe  the  Com¬ 
plainants  did  not  finilh  the  Examination  of  their  Witneffes 
foon  enough,  that  the  fame  Ihould  be  finifhed  within  4 
days.  dat.  24  Januar.  1678.  108.- 

23.  Order  of  the  Court,  appointing  a  day  for  the 

Trial  ;  and  that  the  Defendants  Ihould  bring-in  all  their 
Tithe-books  ;  and  about  the  Examination  of  Mr.  Robert 
Lambert,  8cc.  dat.  27  March  1678.  109. 

24.  Order  of  the  Court,  that  thefe  Caufes  be  putt-off 

untill  the  Settinge-downe  of  Caufes  after  this  Terme,  be¬ 
caufe  Mr.  Serjt.  Maynard  and  Mr.  Attorney  Generali, 
who  were  of  Counfell  with  the  Defendants,  could  not  at¬ 
tend,  being  concerned  in  a  tryall  of  the  Kings  Bench,  on 
his  Majefties  behalfe.  dat.  7  Febr.  1678.  1 10. 

25.  Order  of  the  Court  appointing  another  day  for  the 

Hearing  of  thefe  Caufes,  at  Serjeants  Inne-IIall.  dat. 
24  Febr.  1678.  1 1 1. 

26.  Crofs-lnterrogatories  to  be  adminiftred  on  the  be¬ 
halfe  of  the  Defendants,  vnto  Roger  Lambert,  a  Wit- 
neffe  for  the  Plaintiffes  in  both  their  Caufes.  4  Febr.  1 678. 

1 12. 

27.  Copies  of  all  the  Records  and  Evidences  produced 
by  the  Defendants  in  the  main  Caufe.  fol.  116.  to  the 
end. 

2299. 

A  Book  in  folio,  being  one  of  thofe  lately  belong¬ 
ing  to  Hugh  Thomas  the  Arines  Painter,  and  writ¬ 
ten  by  feveral  Hands,  among  which  his  hand  appears 
to  be  one.  It  contains, 

1 .  A  large  Colle&ion  of  Welch  Pedegrees,  efpe- 
cially  of  North  Wales;  drawn  up  chiefly  in  the  Wellh 
Tongue,  and  in  a  confufed  &  intricate  method;  to  which 
fome  Additions  have  been  made. 

Preceding  this  Collection,  I  find, 

2.  An  Explication  of  the  Letters  or  Marks  ufed  in  this 
or  fome  other  Work. 

3.  A  Table  of  the  proper  Names  of  Perfons  or  Places, 
I  fuppofe  herein  mentioned,  but  not  fo  eafy  to  be  found 
out  by  it. 

2300. 

A  Book  in  folio  lately  belonging  to  Mr.  Hugh  Thomas 
the  Armes  Painter,  written  by  feveral  Hands,  and 
now  damaged  by  thumbing,  lpittle,  8:c.  wherein  I 
find, 

j.  A  ColleflW  of  Caermarthenfhire  Pedegrees, 
improved  by  many  late  Additions. 

2.  Pedegrees  of  Welfli  and  Englifh  Families,  mixed 
with  fome  Church-Notes  &  other  Obfervations. 


A  Book 


M 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


sum.  2301 — 2305. 

2301* 

A  Book  in  folio,  thus  entituled* 
Nomenclator  Navalis  :  or,  an  exact  Collection  & 
Expofition  of  all  Words  &  Tearmes  of  Art  belonging  to 
the  Parts,  Qualities,  Conditions,  Proportions,  Rigging, 
Fitting,  Mannageing,  &  Sayling  of  Shipps ;  with  other 
Neceffaries  to  be  knowne  in  the  Practique  of  Naviga¬ 
tion. 

The  Authors  name  is  ftudioufly  concealed  ;  and  in 
this  Copy  (which  is  pretty  fairly  written)  what  is  pro- 
mifed  in  the  Title  by  thefe  words,  “  Alfo  including  fo 
much  of  the  Art  of  Gunnery,  as  concemes  the  Vfe  of 
Ordinaunre  at  Sea  by  which  I  underdand  a  particu¬ 
lar  Traci:  or  Difcourfe  upon  this  Subject,  is  wholly 
omitted. 

23°2. 

A  Book  in  folio,  confiding  of  two  Treatifes  written  by 
dilTerent  hands  ;  being, 

1.  AReplication  in  further  Meintenaunce  of  Free  Will, 
to  an  Anfvveare  of  a  Proteftant  Devyne  to  the  Treatis  in 
that  behalf  firlt  made  by  a  Romilh  Catholicke  Pried ;  by 
one  .  .  .  Burne,  another  Popifli  Pried. 

This  Copie  is  in  many  Places  corrected  and  enlarged 
perhaps  by  its  Author. 

2.  At  the  beginning,  is  “  a  Note  of  ccrtaine  Contents 
of  this  Difcourfe.” 

Next  follows, 

3.  A  Treatife  imperfect  at  both  ends,  written  in  An- 
fwer  to  fome  other  Book  againd  the  Being  orExidence 
of  Witches  :  perhaps  that  publilhed  by  Reginald  Scot. 

57 • 

23°3- 

A  Book  in  folio,  fairly  enough  written,  but  by  feveral 
hands ;  wherein  is  contained, 

A  fort  of  Ecclefiadical  Hidory  of  England,  from  be¬ 
fore  the  marriage  of  K.  Henry  vinth,  with  Anne  Bullen, 
ro  the  Execution  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  ;  by  a  zealous 
Roman  Catholick  Lawyer,  who  promifed  to  add  ano¬ 
ther  Volume  to  this  Work  ;  which  Volume  I  have  not 
yet  feen. 

At  the  end,  are  the  Contents  of  the  12  Chapters 
whereof  this  fird  part  of  the  Work  confids. 

At  the  beginning,  is  an  Epidle  Dedicatory  to  the 
late  King  James  11.  by  H.  Tichborne  who  was  not  the 
Author. 

This  Book  being  bound  in  blue  Turkey,  gilded  on 
the  Edges,  &c.  may  have  been  that  defigned  for  a  Prefent 
to  the  laid  King. 

.  23°4- 

A  thinnifli  Book  in  folio,  wherein  is  contained, 

An  Extratt  from,  or  Part  of  the  Journal  of  the  Houfe 
of  Peers,  during  the  Parliament  holden  in  anno  1  &  2 
R.  Caroli  1.  i.  e.  from  the  6th  of  February  .1625-6.  to 
1 4th  June  following. 

23°5’ 

A  Book  in  folio,  both  fairly  written  &  well  bound,  rela¬ 
ting  to  the  Parliament  which  was  holden  A.D.  1627. 

&  1628.  but  containing  alfo  fome  other  Matters  not 
concerning  the  Houfe ;  and  (like  the  Book  lad  de¬ 
fended,  omitting  many  matters  of  lefs  moment  tranf- 
afted  in  the  fame)  I  think  it  neccflary  to  give  the  fol¬ 
lowing  account  of  it. 

1 .  A  colored  Print  of  the  Effigies  of  K.  Charles  1 .  as 
he  was  about  the  time  abovementioned. 

2.  A  lable  of  the  particulars  conteyned  in  the  fird 
parte  of  this  Booke. 

3;.  The  Danger  of  the  Kingdome,  and  the  Remedie  • 
by  Sir  Robert  Cotton  Kt.  ’ 

4-  The  C.opie  of  a  Letter  written  to  the  lower  Howfe 
of  Parliament  j  by  way  of  Advifie. 

To  my  noble  Friends  in  the  Lower  Howfe  of  Parli¬ 
ament.  ,  o 


Num.  2305. 

It  beginns,  “  If  my  Countrie  had  held  me  wortfile 
to  haueferved  in  this  Parliament and  is  extant  in  other 
books. 

5.  A  Journal  (fo  called)  of  the  Proceedings  in  die 
Parliament  holden  at  Wedminder,  in  the  third  &  fourth 
yeares  of  our  Soveraigne  Lord  King  Charles.  At  the 
beginning. 

6.  Extracts  (as  I  take  them  to  be)  from  the  Journal  of 
the  fird  Sefiions  ol  that  Parliament  5  beginning  the  17th 
of  March  A.D.  1627.  and  endinge  the  26th  of  June 
A.  D.  1628.  Under  this  Title  are  comprehended, 

7.  The  Kings  Speech  in  Parliament.,  the  17th  of 
March  1627. 

8.  The  Lord  Keepers  (Sir  Thomas  Coucntrics)  Pa:a- 

phrafe,  eodem  die.  26. 

9.  Sir  Joh.  Finch  Kt.  his  Speech,  the  19th  of  March 

j  1627.  of  his  Difabilitie,  being  chofen  Speaker  of  the 
1  Commons  Houfe  of  Parliament.  31. 

10.  l'he  Lord  Keepers  Anfwerc  of  Approbation, 
j  vnto  the  Speakers  Preamble  of  Excure,  eodem  die.  32. 

j  11.  The  Speakers  Replie  vpon  this  Approbation,  eo- 
!  demdie.  32.  b. 

12.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speech  in  Sur-replie  to  the 

1  Speaker,  eodem  die.  37. 

13.  Lid  of  the  Committee  for  Returnes,  20  March, 

j  1627.  41.  b. 

t  M-  The  Petition  by  the  Lords  £c  Lower  Howfe  to  the 
j  Kinge,  for  a  Fad ;  the  2  id  of  March  1627.  43. 

15.  Mr.  Goodwines  Speech,  22d  of  March  1627. 

43-  b. 

16.  Sir  Francis  Seymours  Speech,  eodem  die.  44. 

17.  Sir  Thomas  Wentworth’s  Speech,  at  the  fame 

I  .  45- 

iS.  Sir  Benjamine  Riddiard’s  Speech,  at  the  fame 
I  tyme.  ...  46-  b. 

19.  Sir  Robert  Phillips  his  Speech,  at  the  fame  tyme. 

48.  b. 

j  20.  Sir  Thomas  Edmonds  Treafurer  of  his  Majedics 
I  Howlhold  his  Speech,  at  the  fame  tyme.  50.  b. 

2 1 .  Sir  John  Elliot  his  Speech,  at  the  fame  tyme. 

5 1. 

22.  Sir  Humfiie  May  Chancellor  of  the  Dutchie  of 

Lancader  his  Speech  at  the  fame  tyme-  ibid. 

23.  Sir  Edward  Cooke  his  Speech  the  25th  of  March, 
vpon  a  Ouedion  of  Lawe,  in  pointe  of  the  Judgement  gi- 
uen  in  the  Kings  Bench,  Mich.  3"  Caroli  Regis,  viz. 
That  a  Prifoner  deteyned  by  Committment  per  fpeciale 
Mandatum  Dili.  Regis,  without  expreffing  a  Caufe,  is  • 
not  baileable  ;  wherein  he  held  negatively.  51.  b. 

24.  The  Speech  of  Mr.  Crefwell  of  Lincolns  Inne, 

concerning  the  Subjects  Grievances,  by  the  late  Impri- 
fonment  of  their  peri'ons,  without  any  Declaration  of  the 
Caufe:  the  fame  daie.  53. 

25.  Sir  John  Cooke  his  Speech,  at  a  Conference  be* 
tweenc  the  Lords  and  Commons,  about  the  Petition  to 
the  Kinge  againlt  Reeufants,  the  28th  of  March  i6<8. 

60. 

26.  The  Propofitions  fent  by  the  King  to  the  Lower 

Howfe,  to  be  taken  into  prefent  Confidcration,  for  pre¬ 
fent  fupply  :  the  29th  of  March  1628.  62. 

27.  Several  Speeches  made  at  the  Debates  concerning 

the  Kings  Propofitions  for  Supplie  :  the  id  of  April 
1628.  62.  b. 

28.  The  Petition  of  both  Howfes  to  his  Majedie  con¬ 
cerning  Reeufants  ;  eodem  die.  65. 

29.  1  he  Kings  fudden  Anfweare  to  the  Peticon  of  both 

Howfes  againd  Reeufants  ;  eodem  die.  68. 

30.  Secretary  Cookes  Speech,  upon  the  Procccdinge 

of  the  Parliament  being  the  4th  of  April  related  to  the 
King,  by  fuch  of  his  Councellors,  as  were  of  the  Comr 
mons  Howfe.  68.  b. 

31.  The  Duke  of  Buckingham’s  Speech  to  his  Majef- 
tie,  at  the  Councell  1  able,  at  the  fame  tyme.  Related 
to  the  Howfe  of  Commons  by  Secretary  Cooke.  69. 

32.  Sir 


Bibliothecae  Harleiaria;. 


^4 7 


Num.  2305. 

$z.  Sir  John  Elliots  Speech  in  anfwere  to  Mr.  Secre- 
V.ny  Cookes  MefTage  of  Thanks  from  the  Kinge  and  the 
Unite  of  Buckingham  :  deliuered  the  5th  of  April!  1628. 

70.  b. 

33.  Sir  Dudley  Diggs  his  Introduction  or  Charge*  de¬ 

livered  at  an  Aflemblie  of  both  I  LAvfes  of  Parliament,  the 
figth  of  Aprill  1628.  72. 

34.  Mr.  Litletons  Argument  made,  by  the  Howie  of 

Commons,  oute  of  A  fits  of  Parliament,  &  Authorise  of 
Law  expounding  the  fame,  at  the  firft  Conference  witli 
the  Lords,  concerning  the  Libertie  of  the  Perfone  of  euery 
Free-man  ;  eodem  die.  74. 

35.  The  Objeftions  of  the  Kings  Colmcell  again!!  the 

Declaration  of  the  Commons  ;  and  the  Anfweres  there¬ 
unto.  85.  b. 

36.  Mr.  Litletons  Prefidents,  from  Records,  See.  91. 

37.  Mr.  Selden’s  Argument;  which,  by  Commandeof 

the  Mowfe  of  Commons,  was  made  at  theire  fir  ft  Confe¬ 
rence  with  the  Lords,  touching  the  Libertie  of  the  Perfon 
ot  euery  Freeman  :  out  of  Presidents  of  Records  and  Re- 
folucons  of  Judges  in  former  tymes.  98.  b. 

38.  A  Coppie  of  all  the  Prefidents  of  Record  men¬ 
tioned  bv  Mr.  Selden  at  that  Conference.  1 19.  b. 

39.  fair  Edward  Cookes  Argument  on  the  fame  fide, 

l3j.  b. 

4c.  The  Subftance  of  the  Objeftions  made  by  Mr.  At¬ 
torney  Generali,  before  a  Committee  of  both  Howfes,  to 
die  Arguments  that  were  made  by  the  Howfe  of  Com¬ 
mons  at  the  firft  Conference  with  the  Lords :  and  the 
Anfwers  and  Replies  then  prefentlie  made  by  the  Howfe 
of  Commons  to  thefe  Objeftions.  140.  b. 

41.  Sir  Edward  Cooke’s  Speech  at  the  end  of  the  Con¬ 
ference.  159. 

42.  His  Majefties  Anfwere  in  perticuler  to  the  Petition 

prel'eoted  vnto  him  by  both  Ilowfes  of  Parliament  con¬ 
cerning  Rccufants;  by  Secretaire  Cooke,  the  8th  of  Aprill, 
i<SiS.  159.  b. 

43.  Sir  Benjamin  Rudyard  his  Speech,  vpon  the  Re¬ 

ceipt  of  his  Majefties  Anfwere  to  the  Petition  againft  Re- 
eufaats;  9th  of  April  1628.  161.  b. 

44.  His  Majefties  Mefl'age  to  the  Lower  Houfe  of 
Parliament  by  Secretary  Cooke,  the  nth  of  Aprill  1628. 

163. 

45.  The  Nyne  Heads  given  by  the  Lower  Howfe  to 

the  Speaker  ;  12th  of  April  1628.  163.  b. 

46.  The  Speakers  Speech  vpon  the  9  Inftrudions ; 

the  14th  of  April  1628.  164.  b. 

47.  The  Commons  Petition  to  the  King,  concerning 

the  Billettinge  of  Soldiers ;  the  fame  tyme.  167. 

48.  The  Kings  Anfwere  to  the  Peticon,  the  fame 

daie.  170. 

49.  A  MefTage  from  the  King  to  the  Lower  Howfe, 
by  Secretary  Cooke  ;  the  15th  of  April  1628.  170.  b. 

50.  The  Proceedings  againft  the  Earl  ofSuffolke;  the 

Y6th  of  Aprill  1628.  1 7 1 .. 

51.  Mr.  Noye  his  Argument,  the  fame  daie.  174. 

52.  Mr.  Glanviles  Aigument,  at  the  fame  tyme. 

175- 

53.  Serjant  Afhley’s  Speech,  fecondinge  Mr.  Attorney 
on  the  bchalfe  of  hk>  Majellie,  the  19th  of  Aprill  1628. 

1 76.  b. 

54.  The  Earle  of  Warwicks  Speech,  in  the  vpper 

Howfe  of  Parliament ;  21ft  of  Aprill  1628,  1  S  1 . 

55.  The  Anfwere  of  the  Judges  for  matter  of  Fact  vp¬ 
on  the  Habeas  Corpus  ;  the  fame  day.  1 84. 

56-  Sir  Dudley  Diggs  his  Report  of  the  Lord  Keepers 
Speech,  at  a  Conference  of  both  Ilowfes  declared  con¬ 
cerning  the  Refolution  of  the  Judges,  22  April  1628. 

189. 

C7.  The  Rcporte  of  the  Arch-Bilhoppe  of  Canterbu¬ 
ries  Speech,  the  23d  of  Aprill  1628.  189.  b. 

58.  The  Arch-Bifhoppe  of  Canterburies  Speech,  at 
the  dcliueringe  of  the  Lords  Propofitions  j  the  25th  of 
Aprill  j6a8.  1 9 1 . 


Num.  2305. 

59.  The  $  Propofitions  by  the  Lords  to  the  Lower 
Howie  ;  at  the  fame  time.  191.  b. 

6c.  Sir  Dudley  Diggs  Congratulatorie  Speech,  in  be- 
halfe  of  the  Commons;  at  the  fame  tyme.  194.  b. 

61.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speech,  the  King  being  pre¬ 
fen  t ;  28th  of  Aprill  1628.  193.  b. 

62.  Sir  Bcnjamine  Ruddyards  Speech,  in  Parliament; 

the  fame  day.  1 94.  b. 

63.  Mr.  Hack  well  of  Lincolnes  Inne  his  Speech  in  the 

Lower  Howfe  of  Parliament,  touchinge  the  Libertie  of 
the  Subjed  ;  the  firft  of  May  1 628.  1 97.  b. 

64.  The  Kings  Meffage,  by  Secretarie  Cooke,  to  the 

Howfe  of  Commons,  the  fame  day.  2co.  b. 

65.  Mr.  Mafons  Speech,  the  2d  of  May.  201. 

66.  The  King’s  Meffage,  to  the  Howfe  of  Commons, 

by  Secretary  Cooke,  the  lame  day.  206. 

67.  An  Order  concerning  one  Nicholas  Clegatt  a  Vint¬ 
ner  ;  the  fame  day.  207. 

68.  A  Letter  lent  by  the  Bifhopp  of  Exeter  to  the 

Howfe  of  Commons  ;  the  fame  day-  207.  b. 

69.  Propofitions  for  Inltru&ion  to  the  Speaker,  by 
the  Howfe  of  Commons ;  the  5th  cf  May  1628.  20S.  b. 

70.  The  Speakers  Speech  to  his  Majeftie,  upon  the 

Propofitions  ;  eodem  die.  209: 

7 1 .  His  Majefties  Speech  &  Anfwere  to  the  Howfe 
of  Commons,  by  the  Lord  Keeper  ;  the  fame  day. 

210.  b. 

72.  Sir  Edward  Cookes  Speech,  at  a  Conference  in  the 

Painted  Chamber,  before  the  Petition  of  Right  was  read  ; 
the  8th  of  May  1628.  2ii.b. 

73.  The  Petition  of  Right,  of  both  Howfes  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  to  his  Majeftie,  at  the  fame  tyme.  21 2.  b. 

74.  The  King’s  Letter  to  the  vpper  Howfe  of  Parliai 

ment;  izthofMay  1628.  216. 

75.  The  Offer  of  Accommodation,  made  by  the  Bi¬ 
fhopp  of  Lincolne,  the  fame  day.  2 17.  b. 

76.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speech  at  the  Conference  of 
both  Howfes,  in  the  Painted  Chamber,  about  the  Lords 
Addition  to  the  Petition  of  Right ;  the  fame  day.  218. 

77.  The  Kings  Meffage  to  the  Lords,  by  the  Lord 

Keeper;  eodem  die.  219.  b. 

78.  Mr.  Rowle  his  Charge  againft  Dr.  Manwaringe. 

220. 

79.  Amendments  of  the  Petition  cf  Right.  223. 

80.  Articles  of  Complaint  againft  Mr.  Richard  Bur- 
geffe  Vicar  of  Whitney  in  the  Countie  ol  Oxford.  224. 

51.  Mr.  Burgeffes  Catechifme  :  or,  a  Libell  upon  him. 

226. 

5 2.  Mr.  Mafons  fecond  Speech,  concerning  the  Addi- 

tion  propounded  by  the  Lords,  to  be  added  "to  the  Peti¬ 
tion  of  Right.  230. 

8  3.  Hen.  Thompfons  &  Rob.  H<  nifworths  Submiffion 
to  the  Lord  Mayor  &  Communalty  of  York  ;  upon  an 
un-due  Election  for  that  City.  235.  fo. 

84.  Sir  Benjamin  Ruddyer’s  Speech  concerning  Mi- 

nifters;  thc22d  of  May  1628.  2  36. 

85.  A  true  &  perfeft  Copic  of  Mr.  John  Glanvill’s 

Speech,  at  a  Committee  of  both  Howfes,  the  23d  of  May 
1028.  238.  b. 

86.  Sir  Henry  Marlines  Speech  at  a  Conference 
with  the  Lords,  touching  their  Addition;  the  lame  time. 

.  255. b- 

87.  The  Kings  Speech  in  the  Higher  Howfe,  at 
the  Meeting  of  both  Howfes;  the  2d  of  June  1628.  263. 

88.  The  Lord  Keepers  Speech  in  explanation  of  the 

fame,  eodem  die.  263.  b. 

89.  The  Collection  of  Sir  John  Elliot's  Speech  in  Par¬ 
liament  ;  3  of  June  1628.  264. 

90.  Heads  of  a  Remonftrance  touching  the  King  & 

Kingdome,  to  be  prefented  to  his  Majeftie.  271. 

91.  His  Majefties  Meffage,  by  the  Speaker,  to  the 

Lower  Houfe  ;  4th  of  June  1 628.  275. 

92.  A  Report  from  the  Committee  for  Trade,  by  Sir 

Dudley  Diggs  ;  eodem  die.  275.  b. 

i  93.  The 


648 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2305. 

93.  The  Kings  Meflage  by  the  Speaker,  to  the  Howfe 

of  Commons  ;  5th  of  June.  278. 

94.  His  Majefties  Meflage,  by  the  Lord  Keeper,  to  the 

Higher  Houfe,  6th  June  1628.  ibid. 

95.  His  Majeifies  Meflage  to  the  Houfe  of  Commons, 

by  the  Speaker,  the  fame  day.  279. 

96.  1  he  Motions  of  the  Lower  Howfe  to  the  Higher, 

the  7th  of  June  1628.  297  .  b. 

97.  Sir  Thomas  Wentworth’s  Speech  in  thefe  Debates. 

280. 

98.  The  Duke  of  Buckinghams  Proclamation  to  the 

Saylors.  281. 

99.  The  Kings  Speech  in  full  Anfwere  to  the  Petition 

of  Right  ;  7th  June  1628.  ibid. 

ico.  Both  Howfes  Petition  for  the  Confirmation  of 
their  Petition  of  Right.  281.  b. 

101.  1  he  King’s  Anfwere  confirming  it.  ibid. 

_  10’-  The  King’s  Meflage  to  the  I.ower  Howfe,  by 
Sir  Iiumfrey  May,  about  printing  the  Petition  of  Right; 
the  10th  of  June,  1628.  282. 

103.  the  Commons  Complaint  &  Declaration  againft 
Dr.  Manwaring,  deliuered  by  Mr.  Pvmme.  ibid. 

10  1  he  Lord  Keepers  Speech,  before  he  pronounced 

the  Cenfure  againft  Dr.  Mainvaringe.  297. 

105.  Dr.  Man wa rings  Cenfure.  297.  b. 

106.  Dr.  Manwarings  Submiflion.  ibid. 

107.  The  Remonftrance,  by  the  Howfe  of  Commons 

to  his  Majeftie ;  concerning  many  Gricuances  in  the 
Kingdome:  the  17th  of  June,  1628.  298. 

Hereunto  is  annexed  the  ufual  Calendar  or  Sche¬ 
dule  of  the  Shippinge  which  haue  bine  taken  by  the 
Enemy,  and  loft  at  Sea,  within  the  fpace  of  Three  Years 
laft  part. 

108.  Ihe  Kings  Anfwere  to' the  Remonflrance;  the 

17th  of  June  1628.  ^06_ 

109.  'Hie  Kings  Speech  to  both  Howfes  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  at  the  end  of  the  Seflion  ;  26th  of  June,  1628. 

ibid. 

1 10.  The  Remonftrance  intended  to  be  offered  up  to 

to  the  Kinge,  conceminge  tonnage  and  poundage,  at  the 
end  of  the  Seflion  ;  26  June  1628.  “  -07. 

Now  follows,  a  Col  led  ion  of  divers  perticulers 
concurring  with  this  Parliament :  being, 

..in-  Propofitions  drawne  for  the  Defence  of  this 
Kingdome,  and  the  Annoyance  of  the  Enemyes  of  the 
fame,  by  Sea.  ^  j  K 

112.  Motiucs  to  induce  the  Knights,  Citizens.  &  Bur¬ 
ge1^’  of  the  Commons  Howfe  of  Parliament,  to  Petition 
to  his  Majeftie  for  the  reuokinge  &  abolifhinge  of  the 
Degree  of  Baronetts,  lately  ereded  by  his°  Highnes 
Letters  Patents.  3 1  °  b 

.  1 13.  Articles  wherewith  Mr.  Meluine  is  charged.  314. 

1 14.  Articles  to  be  propounded  to  the  Captaines  & 

Malters,  as  well  French  as  Englifh,  touching  ihe  Service 
in  hand  at  Rochell;  4to  Maij,  1628.  ryding  before  the 
Towne-  314.  b. 

1 15.  The  Anfwere  to  the  Articles,  propounded  by  the 

Lord  Generali  (the  Duke  of  Buckingham)  and  the  reft 
of  the  Colincell  of  Warr.  ^  1  c. 

1 16.  The  Examination  of  Andrew  le  Brune  a  French¬ 
man,  Captaine  of  the  Mary  of  Rochell ;  t.iken  before 
Abraham  Coliner,  Mayor  of  Plymouth,  the  i6th  of 

May’  1628 ■  .  .  315.  b. 

1 1 7.  A  Prime  Seal  for  the  Tranfporlalion  of  Horfe. 

1 1 8.  A  Ccmmiffion  to  the  Lords  &  others  of'tfie 

P|-iuie  Couucell,  concerninge  the  prefent  ravfinge  of 
Money,  28  Febr.  1627.  '  217 

:  New  comes  a  like  Abftrad,  o*  Journ  ,11  of  ti  e  Pro 
ceedmgsm  the  fecond  Seflion  of  Parliament  holden  at 
Weftnunfler  ill  the  fourth  yeare  of  the  Raigne  oi  K. 
Char  ts  x.  begumie  the  2oth  of  January,  1628.  ard 
ended  the  10  h  of  March  then  next  following.  ~  '-:G 

1  to.  A  Copieof  the  Apoliogie  of  tne  Lord  Vifcount 
Faulkland  Lord  Deputie  of  Ireland,  to  the  Lords  of  his 


Num.  4305,  2306. 

Majefties  privie  Counfell ;  the  8th  of  December,  162S. 

120.  Anftvers  of  Sir  Peter  Hayman,  Sir  fohn  EWotr, 
btr  Myles  Hobert,  &  Mr.  Denzil  Holliice,  to  the 
tfueitions  propounded  to  them  touching  their  feditlous 
Behaviour  in  the  Conclufion  of  the  Paiiiament  above- 
mentioned. 

2306. 

A  Book  in  folio  containing  a  Colledion  of  Authoriiies 
ktting  foith  the  Privileges  of  the  Baronage  of  England; 
collected  out  of  the  Parliament  Rolles  &  Jouniallc-s, 
l  atent  &  a°fe  Rolles,  Plea-Rolics,  Growne  Relies, 
1  roceedinges  of  the  Englilh  Courtes  att  Weftminfter, 
the  Regift: ers  of  the  Archbiftiopp  of  Canterburie,  and 
of  the  Delegates,  Yeare-Bo.okes  of  the  Common  Lav  e, 
btatuts,  and  other  good  Authorities  ;  and  in  fuch  Sorte, 
tliat  frequently  the  Wordes  of  chiefeft  Teltymonies 
aie  tranferibed,  leaft  the  freed ome  of  the  Readers 
Judgement  might  be  other  wife  prevented  by  lliorte 
Collections. 

Thefe  Privileges  concerne  our  Nobilitie,  either  as 
they  are  one  Eilate  together  in  the  Vpper  Howfe  :  or  as 
everie  of  them  is  privately  a  Angle  Baron. 

As  to  thofe  of  the  firlf  kind,  the  Compiler  reduce* 
them  into  the  following  Heads  : 

1 .  Of  Proxies  of  the  Lords  of  Parliament.  , 

2.  Pnviledges  in  Suites,  as  well  for  their  followers  aj 
for  themfclves,  during  the  Parliament. 

3.  Noe  Peere  of  the  Vpper  Howie  to  be  called  to 

anlwere  m  the  Lower  Howfe  onely.  s 

4.  The  Juril'diffion  of  the  Lords  of  Parliament,  in 

Matters  of  Offences  not  Capitall.  q 

J.  Judgements  of  Offences  not  Capitall.  ,gi 

6.  Judgements  vppon  Wiitts  of  Error  in  Parliament. 

7.  Bills  paffed,  and  Judgements  giuen,  without  afat 

of  the  Lordes  Spintuall.  ^ 

5.  Their  appoiminge  Judges  oute  of  themfelves,  ’  for 
kxamynation  of  Judgements  in  other  Courts.  62.  b. 

9.  1  heir  Tenants  of  ancient  Tenances  beinge  dif- 

charged  of  payinge  the  Chargies  of  Kniehtes  of  the 
Shire..  0  , 

Then  follow,  Priviledges,  or  fpeclalle  Rightes  that 
concerne  the  Barons  that  haue  Place  in  Parliament,  as 
they  are,  euerie  one,  Angle  in  their  owne  private  Eftates 
viz.  * 

10.  Touchinge  Oathes,  &  Proteftacon  vppon  Plonor. 

1 1 .  Their  Affertory  Othes  in  Cafes  of  Triall  by6?"’ 

or  24’  67.  b.~‘ 

12.  Barons  being  Witneffes.  6g. 

13.  Barrons  anfwering  to  Bilies,  as  Defendant’s. 

14.  Examined  as  Plaintiffs  in  Adions  of  Debt/vonon' 

Arrerages  of  Accompts.  " 

...  15’  °f,ie  Forme  vfed  in  Swearinge  of  Spiritual  & 
Temporall  Barons.  . 

16.  Triall  by  Peares.  72  b" 

J 7.  Scandala  Magnatum.  7  g2‘ 

m?c!ersaag/“ft  ,hera  “  Ensh‘*  proceed- 

mg  by  Bill  &  Anfwere.  g„  ^ 

19.  Theire  number  of  Chapleyns  qualified.  ~8  - 

20.  Theire  Retayninge  of  Strangers.  8,  |T 

21.  Clergie.  g  ” 

FoSel11*6  °f  Kjjgk 

23.  Amerciaments.  86.  b* 

2.4‘  Hoe  Proces,  in  Civill  Adions,  to  be  awarded 
agamft  the  Bodie  of  a  Baronn.  '  gg 

25-  A  Knight  to  be  reftored  vppon  euerie  Panned 
where  a  Baron  is  Partie.  Qo  * 

26.  No  Daye  of  Grace  againft  a  Baron.  gC.  b. 
to  the’mMaIdnS  DeflUtieS  plaC!S  ofTlufte  ecmniitted 
Now  comes  an  Obfervation  endeavouring  to  evince 
9  2S.  That 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


649 


Num.  2306 — 2310. 

28.  That  Bifhopps  are  only  Lords  of  Parliament,  but 
not  Peers  ;  becaul’e  they  are  not  of  Triall  by  Nobility. 

92. 

2307. 

A  damaged  Book  in  folio,  wherein  is  Contained  an  im¬ 
perfect  Copy  of 

The  Hiftory  or  Antiquities  of  Uevonfhire  by  Tho¬ 
mas  Weftcote  Efq;  Recorder  of  Totnefs  ;  who  flourilhed 
in  the  Reigns  of  K.  James  1.  &  K.  Charles  x. 

2308. 

A  Book  in  fmall  folio,  wherein  is  contained, 

1 .  An  Abftratt  of  fundry  principal  Matters  entered 
into  the  Council-book  of  King  Edward  vt.  from  the 
beginning  of  his  Reign,  to  the  6th  of  February  A.D* 
1549-50. 

To  this  is  prefixed, 

2.  The  Maner  of  Coronation  of  Kinge  Edward  the 
Sixth. 

2309. 

A  Book  in  fmall  quarto,  written  upon  Parchment,  but 
the  I,etters  now  for-worn  in  many  places  ;  imperfect 
towards  the  beginning ;  at  the  end ;  and,  perhaps, 
elfe-where.  It  contained. 

The  four  Gofpels  in  old  Englilh,  of  that,  or  one  of 
thofe  Verfions  commonly  aferibed  to  John  Wicliffe. 

2310. 

A  paper  Book  in  1 2mo,  relating  to  proceedings  in  the 
Court  of  Starre-Chamber  ;  and,  on  the  Cover,  dated 
A.D.  1638.  wherein  I  find, 

x.  Orders  made  in  Star-chamber  by  the  Lord  Keeper 
F.gerton ;  25  Maij,  anno  38  Eliz.  1. 

2.  Order  of  Reference,  touching  the  Orders  of  40 

Eliz.  1  o. 

3.  The  Certificate  of  the  Right  Honblc.  Thomas  Lord 

Coventry  Lord  Keeper,  Sir  Thomas  Richardfon  Knt. 
Lord  cheife  Juflice  of  his  Majefties  Bench,  Sir  Robert 
Heath  Kt.  Chief  Juftice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  Sr.  Hum- 
fry  Davenport  chief  Juftice  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer,  & 
Sr.  William  Jones  one  of  the  Juftices  of  the  faid  Bench  : 
upon  the  Reference  above  mentioned.  1 1 . 

4.  An  Order  for  confirming  that  Certificate,  1 4  Febr. 

anno.  7  Caroli  Regis.  17- 

5.  Orders  for  the  Reformation  of  the  dilatorie  Pro¬ 
ceedings  in  the  Caufes  preferred  &  prefented  in  her 
Majefties  moil  Honorable  Court  of  Star-chamber; 
intended  for  the  cafe  &  expedicon  of  Suitors,  and  like- 
wife,  for  F.xplanacon  of  other  former  Orders  heretofore 
taken  in  that  behalfe ;  and  for  the  Eafe  of  the  Court 
touching  divers  vn-neccflary  Mocons  wherewith  they  are 
often  troubled  at  the  Barrc.  dated  22  Decembris  anno  40 

Eliz.  .  19- 

6.  Ilis  Majefties  Declaration  concerninge  the  fwear- 

ino-e  of  I.ords  S:  other  Noble-men  in  the  Star-chamber, 
dated,  30  Novembris,  anno  5  Caroli  Regis.  35. 

7.  Prefentment  of  the  Fees  taken  in  the  Court  of  Star- 

chamber  ;  made  3  Maij  A.  D.  1598.  38. 

8.  Order  for  Defendants  not  to  referre  to  Anfwers  ; 

nor  Anfwer  to  Thinking,  Knowledge,  or  Remembrance, 
dat.  27  Odtobris,  anno  28  feu  29  Eliz.  45. 

9.  Order  for  Colts  in  the  Attornies  Caufes.  dat.  anno 

44  Elizabeths;  Regina;.  48. 

10.  Order  that  any  Man,  not  grieved,  may  fue  in  the 
Star-Chamber.  13  Febr.  anno  8  Caroli  Regis.  52. 

1 1.  An  Order  againft  the  excefiive  Number  &  Length 
of  Interrogatories :  17  die  Febr.  anno  6  Caroli  Regis. 

55; 

12.  Order  that  no  Plaintiffe,  without  fpecial  Permif- 

fion,  fhould  exhibit  any  Bill  the  Copie  whereof  fliould 
exceed  20  Sheets,  after  the  rate  of  1 5  Lines  per  fheet. 
dat.  9  die  Novembris,  anno  3  Caroli  Regis.  57. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 

I 


Num.  2310,  23 1 1. 

13.  Order  that  no  Perfon  fhould  exhibite  any  Bill* 
Anfwere,  or  Replication,  the  Copie  whereof  fhould  con- 
taine  aboue  15  Sheets,  after  the  Rate  of  15  Lines  to  the 
Sheet :  13  die  Maij,  anno  20  Elizabetha;  Regina;.  59. 

14.  A  like  Order  made  i6  die  Novembris,  anno  35 

Elizabetha;  Regina;.  6s. 

2JII. 

A  Book  in  8vo.  written  by  the  Hand  of  a  pious  Gentle¬ 
woman  Mrs.  Anne  Cromwell  ;  who  at  the  beginning 

hath  putt  her  Name  to  it,  thus,  Anna  Cromwell  1 6564 

and  lower,  thus,  now  Anna  Williams  1660; 

I  making  fome  enquiry  after  her  about  5  years  agoe, 
received  the  following  Account  from  her  HuibandsKinf- 
manHcnry  Cromwell  Efq;  who  may  bcftill  living  forought 
I  know.“  Ann  Cromwell  wastheWife  of  Henry  Cromwell 
Efq;  of  Ramfy, whowas  the  Son  of  Coll. Henry  Cromwell,the 
foil  of  SirOliuef  Cromwell,  who  were,  all  three,  Rovalilts. 
And  in  the  year  60.  Henry  Cromwell  of  Ramfy  changed 
his  Name  to  Williams,  being  a  Courtier  :  and  from  thence 
ftie  wrote  her  Name  Ann  Williams.  They  died  without 
I flue  ;  and  the  Eftate  of  Ramfy  was  fold  to  Colonell  Ti¬ 
tus.  Sir  Oliuer  was  the  Head  of  the  family  ;  Oliuer  the 
Protestor  Was  a  Nephew  to  Sr.  Oliuer  ;  Mr.  Cromwells 
father  was  a  Nephew  to  Sir  Oliuer  ;  he  (I  fuppofe  means 
himfelf)  has  feen  this  Mrs.  Ann  Williams ;  ftie  was  an 
excellent  Lady.” 

In  the  front  (he  hath  prefixed  this  Title,  “  A  Booke 
of  feuerall  Deuotions,  collected  from  good  Men,  by  the 
worft  of  Sinners  Anna  Cromwell  1656.  To  make 
prayer  fweete  unto  God,  fiue  things  belongeth,  Know¬ 
ledge  of  him,  Zeale  towards  him,  Loue  to  him,  Feare  of 
his  wrath,  and  Hope  of  his  Loue.” 

This  premired  ;  I  proceed  to  give  the  Contents 
thereof  more  particularly,  thus, 

1.  A  Prayer  to  be  fay«i,  as  ioone  as  one  comes  into  the 

Church.  1. 

2.  A  Prayer  before  one  goestoreade.  2. 

3.  A  fhorte  prayer  to  be  fayed  when  one  awaketh.  2. 

4.  A  Prayer  in  Troble.  3.- 

5.  A  Prayer  to  be  fayed  at  all  times.  ibid. 

6.  A  fhort  Morning  Prayer.  5. 

7.  A  fhorte  Prayer  for  young  folks.  6. 

8.  An  Evening-Prayer  for  a  Family.  ibid. 

9.  A  Prayer  &  Confeffion  of  Sines,  to  be  faied  at  all 

times.  1 2. 

10.  Penitencial  Verces,  made  by  a  Gentleman  in  Pri- 

fon.  25. 

1 1.  On  the  Lif?&  Death  of  Man  ;  in  Verfe.  2  6. 

1 2.  Verces  in  Honour  of  the  holy  Byblc.  27. 

13.  On  the  book  of  Common  Prayer,  a  Diftich.  29. 

14.  An  Antheiime  of  Saule  &  the  Witch  of  En- 

dor.  3  c. 

15.  Verces  upon  the  Lords  day.  3  1. 

16.  Upon  the  Tranflation  of  Upwood-feaft  or  Wake 

from  Sunday  to  another  day  by  Mr.  Henry  Cromwell, 
the  third  Sonne  to  Sir  Henry  Cromwell.  ibid. 

1 7.  Verfes  on  God  &  the  King.  32. 

18.  Venes  upon  the  Feaft  of  Chriftmafs,  &  Good 

Fridays  Faft.  33. 

19.  Verfes  on  Romes  Sacrifices.  ibid. 

20.  My  Aunt  Cromwells  Verfes,  which  fhe  made  on 
myMother& all  ous  Children  :  otherwife  entituled,  “The 
Sifters  New  Years  Gift,  from  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Cromwell, 
to  Mrs.  Mary  Price  a  happie  Mother  of  good  Children.’’ 

34. 

(Thefe  are  out  of  meafure,  but  well  meant) 

2 1 .  Epigram  on  John  Fox.  ibid. 

22.  Another  to  Mundano.  ibid. 

23*  Verces  made  by  Mrs.  Battina  Cromwell,  Wife 

to  Henry  Cromwell  Efq;  Sir  Oliuer  Cromwells  Sonne. 

36.  ' 

This  Battina  was  Daughter  to  Sir  Horatio  Palavi- 
cino,  &  Mother  in  Law  to  the  pious  Writer  of  this  Book. 

S  C  24.  Verces 


650 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2311. 

24.  Verces  made  upon  the  Death  of  the  aforenamed 

Mrs.  Battina  Cromwell.  37. 

25.  Griefes  Farwell  to  an  Inherrito  of  Joy.  38. 
This  is  an  Elegy  upon  the  Death  of  a  male  Infant. 

26.  A  Songe  upon  the  frailety  of  Man;  by  Dr.  John 

Dunne  Dean  of  St.  Pauls.  39. 

27.  A  Songe  of  Death.  40. 

28.  A  Songe  of  the  Worlds  Vanitie.  43. 

29.  Verces  upon  King  Charles  the  firft.  44. 

3'.  How  to  compare  the  Olde  Tell  anient  Sc  the  New 

together.  46. 

31.  Duties  to  be  performed  Sc  believed  neceflary  to 

Saluation,  in  every  true  Beleeuer  51. 

32.  A  DiTcription  of  the  Unity  ;  in  Trinity,  and  ol  the 
1  rinity  in  Unity;  as  it  is  reuealed  unto  us  in  holy  Scripture. 

5,5' 

33.  Of  the  Ellc&ion  of  a  Kingc,  by  Bifliop  Jewell. 75. 

34.  Pious  Mediations ;  or,  a  priuate  Lookeing-Clafs 

for  the  Gullet.  Sent  to  one  newly  recouered  out  of  a 
great  Pitt  ofSickndfe.  ”  77. 

35-  A  diuine  Fancy  on  Confeilion.  79. 

36.  Comfortable  Couricells  &  Aduife,  with  ftronge 

Hopes,  for  a  dilconfolate  afflicted  Soule.  81. 

37.  Of  the  religious  Loue  that  ought  to  be  betwixt 

Man  &  Wife.  90. 

38.  Holy  Ejaculations  Sc  Meditations.  93. 

39.  Sermon-Noates.  98. 

40.  A  Prayer  for  penitent  Sinners.  102. 

41.  Of  holy  Knowledge.  ioc. 

42.  Of  Faith.  108. 

43.  Of  the  holy  Sacrament.  109. 

44.  How  to  ufe  Gods  benifits  rightly,  to  Gods  glory, 

Sc  the  good  of  our  owne  Souls  Sc  Bodies.  1 1 1 . 

45.  A  Sermon  preached  by  Mr.  Olofernes  Hunt,  upon 

the  firft  Article  in  the  Apollles  Creed.  r  1  c. 

46.  A  Sermon  preached  by  Mr.  John  Robins,  upon 

Jeremiah  vi.  f6.  143. 

47- .  Mr.  John  Robins  his  Oppinion  &  Refolution,  upon 
his  being  called  to  take  the  Couenant.  196. 

Direftty  againft  it;  and  proving  it  undeniably,  to 
be  moll  abominably  wicked  &  linful. 

48.  My  Hulbands  Morning  Prayre.  206. 

'49.  A  flrort  Catachifme  of  feucrall  Poynts  of  Chrif- 
tian  Religion.  '  208. 

50.  A  Prayer  in  AlJIjction.  . .  244. 

5r-  Prayers  for  the  Morning;  at  firft  waking.  248. 

52.  Ejaculation,  as  riicing  out  of  Bed.  251. 

53.  Prayers  for  any  time  of  the  day. 

54.  A  Prayer  for  Hulband  Sc  Sclf% 

55.  Another. 

56.  Another,  for  Hufband. 

57.  Another,  upon  her  being  Child-lefs. 

58.  Another,  upon  the  fame  Occafion. 

59.  Another,  for  Mother  naturall. 

60.  Another,  for  Relatiues  Sc  Freinds. 

61.  Another,  for  Servants.  ,m 

O2.  Another,  for  the  Church,  the  King,  the  Royall 

Family,  &  the  Clergy.  ibid. 

63.  Another,  for  Pardon  for  wandering  thoughts. 

271. 

64.  A  Confeflion. 

65.  Ejaculations  at  rilelng-yp. 

66.  Morning  Prayer. 

67.  Ejaculations  or  Prayers,  as  goeing  to  Bed,  Jy- 

ing-downe.  Sc  being  layed.  281. 

68.  A  Sermon  preached  by  my  worthy  Friend  Mr. 
Simon  G union,  upon  Chriftmals-day  1658:  upon  Matth. 
xi.  28. 


ibid. 

259* 

262. 

263. 

264. 
266. 

?s7. 

ibid. 

268. 


273- 
2  75- 

279. 


290. 

69.  A  Prayer  of  Praife,  vpon  the  Sight  of  the  Sun. 


Num.  231  [  —  ^3  73. 

72.  A  Lamentation,  with  Confeflion  &  Prayer,  vpon 
the  fame. 

73.  The  Souls  Confli£l  from  fome  late  Relapfes’into 

Sin-  342. 

Here  follow  fome  other  Paragraphs,  upon  feveral 
Occafions,  feeming  to  have  been  colle&ed  from  Dr. 
Moflbm’s  Tripartite  ;  as  perhaps,  fome  of  thole  above 
were.  • 

74.  Some  Meditations  gathered  out  of  Dr.  MoffomV 

Tripartite,  to  be  vfed  at  the  Celebration  of  the  Sacra- 
ment.  355- 

75.  The  Prayer  of  Manafles  King  of  Judah.  360. 

76.  Prayers  Sc  Ejaculations  at  lying  downe  to  reft  • 

at  firft  awakeing  ;  at  rifeing  ;  at  lying  downe  ;  at  our 
firft  awakeing;  at  our  lying  downe.  n6$. 

77-  Declaration  of  K.  Charles  1.  at  his  receiving  the 

Sacrament,  on  Whit-idnday  A.  D . from  the 

hands  of  the  Arch-bifhop  of  Armagh  of  his  Intention  to 
eftablilh  the  Church 'of  England,  without  any  Coanivan 
to  Fopery.  36  • 

7\-  An  Explanation  of  the Frontilpiece.  to  theuorks 
or  Eixuii  fiao-^ix*  of  K.  Charles  1.  Jt 

79.  The  Explanation  of  the  Ei:. Lit  me,  belonging  .0 
the  fame.  ‘  , 

So.  Agamft  ambitious  deiirca  ol  appearing  •  r cater 
then  others  ;  &  in  praife  of  Clnuky  :  a  Note.  °  — .-k 

81.  Of  St.  Hieroms  little  book,  conliltino-  on.lv  of  four 
Leaves,  which  he  conftantly  carried  about  him. ' 

82.  His  Defcription  of  St.Paula’s  Funeral.  ^80! 

83.  St.  Ambioles  Prayer  on  the  day  of  Judgement. 

384. 

It  feems  that  this  devout  Sc  religious  Lady,  as  well 
as  her  Hufband.  was  defirous  of  Blue,  as  appears  in  the 
pages  265.  266.  &  207.  which  God  did  not  grant  unto 
them.  Who  can  fay  that  if  they  had  had  Children,  they 
would  not  have  proved  rebellious,  wicked,  Sc  great 
Aflii&ions  ?  Note,  that  all  from  page  367,  fbemeth  to 
have  been  written  by  fome  female  hand  different  from 
Mrs.  Cromwells. 


23  f  2  . 

A  Book  in  8vo.  handfomcly  bound  in  red  Turkey,  gilt 
&  adorned  with  the  Armes  of  Sir  Kcnelin  Dig’by  on 
the  Cover,  &  with  his  Cypher  on  the  back:  wherein 
I  find, 

1 .  A  Prayer  for  the  Church  Catholick.  1 . 

This  feems  to  be  written  by  a  female  hand  ;  and,  as 

I  conjecture  from  the  following  Trad,  by  the  Lady  Fran¬ 
ces  Villiers  Vice-countefs  of  Purbeck. 

2.  Sir  Kcrielme  idgbies  Treadle  upon  this  pueftiofi. 

What  Faith  5:  Religion  is  the  true  one,  to  bang  us  to 
internal!  Happineffe  ?  0  ^ 

_  'Ibis  is  the  Original  of  his  own  Hand-writing,  wnt- 
ten  in  3  days  ;  Sc  .  ited  at  Paris,  43  Jan.  :  636.  for  the 
uJe,  &  gaining  over  to  the  Church  of  Rome  of  the  Lady 
above-mentioned  ;  who  was  daughter  of  Sir  Edward 
Coke  Lord  Chief  Juftice,  Sc  Wife  of  Sir  John  Villiers 
(an  elder  Brother  to  George  Duke  of  Buckingham)  who 
was  created  Vifcount  of  Purbeck  A.  D.  1618.  In  pro¬ 
tecting  this  Difcourfe,  Sr.  Kenelm  feems  to  argue  more 
like  a  Philofopher  than  a  Divine ;  nor  doth  his  Work 
carry  fuch  a  Conviction  with  it  as  he  would  pretend. 

3.  A  fflort  Traci  written  alfo  by  Sir  Kenelm  Digby 

concerning  the  Operations  of  the  Soule.  94/ 

4.  A  Prayer  for  the  King  &  State.  ice. 

This  feems  to  have  been  written  by  a  devout  Fe¬ 
male,  of  the  Romifh  Religion,  as  appeareth  by  the  Con- 
clufion.  She,  after  lamenting  the  National  Crimes, 
prayeth  for  the  Rellauration  of  K.  Charles  11. 


70.  A  mournful!  Complaint,  for  the  importunate 

Crowd  of  vainc  Thoughts.  333. 

71.  The  Souls  Conflict,  from  the  fright  full  Sugo-ef- 

tions  of  foule  Thoughts.  234. 


2313. 

An  oblong  Book  in  8vo.  opening  like  a  Mufic-book,  and 
beginning  at  both  ends;  wherein  I  find,  “  Brief  &  cur- 
lbry  Notes  taken  in  the  Commons-houfe  of  Parliament 

the 


Bibliothecae  Harleianre. 


6§ 1 


Num.  2313—2316. 

[he  26th,  27,  &  eS  of  .March  1627,  as  I  take  it:  and 
then  beginning  again  at  3  t  Augult  1627,  carried  on 
for  a  much  longer  /pace  of  time. 

:3'4- 

A  Book  in  8vo.  formerly  belonging  to  one  Mr.  Edward 
Beaver ;  who  feems,  at  firft,  to  have  been  preferred 
“  Cambridge- fhire  ;  afterward.;,  to  have  been  Parfon 
of  Wickham  m  Hamihire  ;  with  which  Church  he 
held  a  Prebend  in  Chichefler ;  and,  keeping  both 
Tl'ele,  became  a  Steward  or  Bayly  to  the  Lord  Power- 
icomt.  Herein®;  at  various  times,  he  entered  his 
Acc.mpts,  Receipts,’  &  other  Memorandums,  con- 
tuledly  enough  ;  among  which,  I  /hall  mention  only 
thde  few  particulars  that  follow:  vizt. 

1.  Notes  taken  at  Mr.  Sherwoods  Lecture  inWeftmin- 
Rer-Abbey,  againll  Rebellion.  b. 

“•  Some  ftort  Notes  taken  at  other  Sermons. 

,  3;  Digrams  of  fome  OmRellations,  as  they  Rand  in 
the  North-Hemifpheer  of  Heaven.  '  Cj.  b. 

4.  Notes  taken  from  the  Court-Sermons  of  the  Lent- 
Preachers,  A.  D.  i6yl. 

5.  Two  Epigrams  ;  one  againll  Purgatory,  the  other 

againll  Tranfubftantiatipn.  ,0> 

6.  Particulars,  as  to  Mr.  Beavers  Receipts  &  Difburfe- 

menrs  at  Wickham,  &c.  •  30  b 

I  . ere  are  likewife  fome  other  Notes  taken  from  Dif- 
courfe,  as  well  as  from  Books. 

7.  His  Receipts  6c  Payments  in  the  Lord  Powcrfcourts 

butmefs,  from  A.  D.  1691.  yQ  b 

S.  Atthecil.tr  end  of  the  book  is  fume  "Writing  - 
but  nothing  of  moment.  0 

23I5- 

A  Book  in  8 vo.  containing  only  two  fhort  Trafls,  writ¬ 
ten  upon  44  leaves  :  vizt. 

t.  Short  Memorials  of  feme  things  to  be  cleared 
during  my  Command  in  the  Army.  ,  ’ 

This  Is  figued  at  the  Beginning  &  end  with  the 
Monogram  F;  neverthelefs,  I  cannot  from  hence  affirm 
licit  it  is  me  Original,  written  by  Sir  Thomas  Fairfaxes 
Hind.  Herein,  apologizes  for  his  Afliohs  during  his 
Command  over  tit :  whole  Parliament-Army  (denying 
fome  things  done  under  Color  of  his  Name  &  AnthoiityJ 
until!  his  Conimiiiion  was  taken  from  him.  '  J 

-■  A  fhort  Memorial  of  the  Northern  Anions  du-iim 
it'-  u  ere ;  from  the.yearc  1 642,  till  1 6jj  fb)  ,  ? 
fVi'rmeii  by  the  fame  hand)  and,  at  the  end  fob! 
fcribed  F. 

f  am  apt  enough  to  believe,  that  in  this  Relation  Sir 
l'homas  Fairfax  liath  fett  down  matters  reiatinu  to  hj3 
Father  &  to  Kimfelf,  impartially  ;  and  the  rather®  in  that 
he  writing  how  Ids  I .ady  (in  tile  fight  between  Bradford 
&  Leeds)  was  tale  :n  by  that  iliuftrtous  Hero  William 
Cavendiih  then  Ear],  afterward  Duke  of  Newcaftlc,  hath 
tliefe  words,  fit],  33.  “And  (not  many  dayes  after)  the 
Parle  of N ewcatile  fent  my  wife  back  againe,  in  his 
Coach,  with  fome  Ilorfe  to  guard  her  :  the  which  Gene¬ 
rality  gamed  more  then  any  Reputation  he  would 
haue  gott  m  detaining  a  Lady  Prifoner  vpon  fueh 
terms.” 

2316. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo.  diverfjs  manibus  ferip- 
tus;  quo  continentUfi  Legenriarim  Narrationes  cum 
ahis  '1  r  .  -  fcj)_ 

_i.  De  Milite  (  omi  is  de  Nivers,  qui  quandam  Do- 
minam  adamavir,  Dominaq;  Miiitem  x 

.  2-  De  meretrice  Vercelienli,  et  MagiRro  brdiuis  Pre- 
dicatorum. 

3.  De  Meretrice  poenitente,  ad  cujus  funus  omnis 
Civitatis  campame,  fine  bumano  fubfidio  pulfabantur. 

i.  b. 


Num.  2316.1 


4-  Mercatons  demortut  planftus,  Anglicis  Rythmis 
vetuitanbus.  contra  fraudulentum  Executorcm.  2 
5.  De  Regma  ineeftuofa,  tandem  conatu  B.  Virginis. 
ad  Peccatorum  ruorum  Confoffionem  indufta  ;  cumin- 
cnpttoms  cujufdam  fupei-  cjus  Manum  effiare,  Interprc 
tatione  Anghca.  *  b 

care  Iw",™1"  Dremoniacus  uon  valuit  palam  pradi. 

1  ecc.da  cujufdam  Armigen,  qui  Domini  fuiUvo- 
•  em  vmava-at  poll  Peccatorum  Confeffionem,  ct  re. 
captain  a  Sacerdote  Difciplinam.  ,1,1.1 

7.  De  Rege,  Subditos  ad  meliorem  vivendi  moduin 
revocame;  cum  Infcnptionis  luper  Scutum  Anglice  vers 

S.  De  muliere  I.ingonenfi,  a  morte  per  beatam  Vir- 
gmemtefufcitara,  donee  Peccata  fua  confiteretur.  ibid. 

9.  De  Madrenfi  piftore  retento  per  manum  B  Vir- 

ginis,  ne  caderet.  „  ^ 

10.  De  Milite  que  Virgin!  pepercit ;  et  poll,  in  Tor- 

neamento  occubmt.  v 

>1.  De  Ronuna  muliere  ineeftuofa.  fpurijn;  Filii  in- 
accufata,  et  poll  p/ccaSum  C?on- 
lemonem,  a  morte,  per  Virginem  liberata.  4.  b. 

Doftk  H„kI"TC'?irACe  ETana’  Prin“  Adulterij,  h 
P  Hea  Homicidij  ialfo  accufata  ;  qua  mirabiliter  a  Beats. 

Fine  tervata,  tandem  perlpefta  ejus  IimocenliJ,  Mo- 
nuchalem  vellem  mduit. 

fervat'a  ^  n“l,US  per  B"  Virginem,  a  Diabolo 

14.  De  Abbatiifa  prsegnante,  quam  Dei  Mater  ab  M- 

fauna  libcravit.  ^ 

15.  De  Virtute  Corporis  Xpi,  et  B.  Marie,  i.  e’.  De 

Jud-LoBiuincenfi,  qua  filmm  fuum,  propter  perceptionem 
Corporis  Dominici  cum  puens  Chriftianorum,  infer- 
naceni  ardentem  projecu  :  A.  D.  527.  7<  b 

1  6.  De  (  lerico  per  B.  Virginem  falvato.  ‘  § 

1 7.  De  aiio  per  earn  falvato.  jyj’ 

Scilicel  dc  Driahelmo,  de  quo  agit  Beda  in  capi'le 
1  into.  Libri  quinri  (non  pnmi,  ut  in  hoc  Codice  feri- 
b.tur)  pinion:.'  luie  Ecclefiafticre  Geutis  Anglorum 

narra^io 

De  eifdem  Amicis  etiam  extat  HiRoria  prolixior,  in 
legend ario  mo  Libro  qm  dicitur“  GeRa  Romanorum  ” 

Sprotdo  SiM  SKXeCl"0reSi 
20.  De  contriiione ;  fabella infula.  o' 

2'.  Contra  nolentes  eonfiteri.  b" 

r  haV.  ECOTplutn-Divius  qui  cognovit  Concubinam 
f  "  Paftlle,  et  pre  verecundia  eonfiteri  noluit : 
aijus  Amma  poft  mortem  cujus  horribilem,  hoi'ce  Rhvih- 
mos  locuta  eR, 

“  Weyl  a  wey  pat  i  was  boren, 

I'er  Sinne  vn-fehriuen  i  am  for-loren. 

Now  what  is  Sinne  ye  mowen  fe, 

Wei  is  him  zat  is  war  bi  me.” 

22.  De  Mifericordia,  ex  Eufcbij  Chronicis,  (feu 
pota.s,  e  T.  Livto  ;)  Lxemplum  Camilli  male  prolatum. 

23.  Spcrandum  eft  in  bonitate  S.  Spiritfis.  ibid! 

Sell,  tabula  de  duobus  Juriffis Londonienfibus. 

24.  De  nequicia  Demonis.  j  Q  ^ 

Exempla  duo;  prius,  de  chorea  Dumonum  in 

habltu  Aiborum  Monachorum  vifa  in  villa  que  Oppidum 
Re^is  vocatur,  prope  Civitatem  Colonise.  A.  D  i2cS  • 
poRenus  de  Fratre  Jordano  MagiRro  Ordinis  Predica- 
torum  Miffam  celebrante. 

25.  De  Milite,  in  Weflapie  partibus,  quomodo  audi- 

vit  Demon em,  m  arberc,  habiiu  nigea;  Monjalis,  can- 
tantem,  et  fere  deceptus  fuit.  ibjj 

26.  De  indigne  fumentibus  Gorpus-Xpi.  u] 

Init.^  In  curia  Regis  6cocie,  cuntigitin  die  Pafche, 

videnie  1' rat  re  Henrico  Scoto,  Dna  Burga  le  Vaws,  quod 
unus  Anglicus  cum  alijs  ad  Conmiunioncm  acceRit.” 

27.  Periculuin  eR  recipere  Corpus  Xpi  in  odio.  1 1 .  b 

28.  Quod 


8 


6S 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2316. 


28.  Quod  Corpus  Xpi  eft  verum  in  altari.  n  b.^ 

Init.  “  In  Hoilandia,  apud  Pincebeke  vel  Multonam. 

29.  Aliud  Exemplum,  quod  vidit  Johannes  de  Celtria 

Prater  Predicator.  .If*. 

30.  De  Religiofo  Demoniaco,  qvii  a  mahgnis  opi- 

ritibus  liberal  us  eft,  circa  A.  D.  1343.  ^  1^‘ 

31.  Quod  Judeus  portavit  Corpus  Xpi  fub  pede  fuo  ; 

tempore  Bonilacij  (leg.  Benedidi)  Pape  circa  annum  Do¬ 
mini  1340.  ■  -l2r  b* 

32.  De  C.orporeXpi,  quomodo  quidam  pofuit  in  nmo, 

et  vcrfum  eft  in  Pucrum.  _  J3' 

Init.  “  Narrat  Efopus,  quod  Dux  Peyters  duxit  uxo- 
rem  de  magna  gente.” 

33.  Ceftum,  quod  Crucifixores  Xpi  fciverunt  eum 

eile  Xpum  l4 • 

Hie  allegatur  Evangelium  Nazareorum  ;  Tractatus 
fcilicet  commentitius,  cujus  exemplar  jam  pridem  vidi 
in  Bibliotheca  Collegij  Corporis  Chrifti  apud  Cantabri- 
gienfes. 

34.  Exemplum  feu  Narratio  pro  Fefto  Corporis  Xpi, 

vel  Pafce.  ibid. 

35.  Contra  confitentes  levia,  et  retinentes  gravia. 

I4-b. 

Init.  “  Fertur  quod  inLumbardia  fuit  quidam  Dives, 
uxorem  habens.” 

36.  Contra  Ebrietatem.  15. 

Narratur  de  quodam  fanefo  Heremita,  qui  incidit 

in  Ebrietatem,  Diabolo  inftigante ;  deinde  in  lapfum 
Carnis,  et  Homicidium :  cum  Anglica  Diltichi  lui  poeni- 
tentialis  tralatione. 

37.  Nota  de  Morte.  15.  b. 

38.  Verficuli  de  Pefte,  qua;  per  totum  fere  Mundum 

ingruebatur  A.  D.  1348  &  1349;  cum  alijs  ridiculi  cu- 
jufdam  Capitis.  16. 

39.  Narratio  de  Diabolo  Epifcopum  in  fpecie  freminas 

vifitante  ;  ex  Vita  B.  Andree.  Apoitoli.  16-b. 

40.  De  vifione  Sacerdotis  in  beatam  Virgincm  Mariam 

devotionem  habenfis.  18. 

4 1 .  De  S.  Clemente  Papa  1 ,  deq  ;  fuorum  Fratrum, 

Patris  &  Matris,  auxiliante  I).  Petro  Apoftolo,  recupe- 
ratione  &  converfione.  1 9. 

42.  Legenda  de  Vita  S.  Euftachij,  qui  antea  Pla- 
cidus  vocabatur ;  qui,  cum  Uxore  &  Filijs,  fub  Hadriano 
Imperatore,  Marty rij  Coronam  accepit  21.  &  28.  b. 

43.  Old  Englifli  Verfes  upon  divers  Theological  Sub¬ 
jects.  25. 

Thefe  with  fome  other  Matters,  both  before  &  after, 
appear  to  have  been  freftdy  written  upon  Parchment 
w  hich  had  been  written-upon  before.  The  like  may  be 
feen  in  other  Books  both  Greek  &  Latin,  in  this  &  divers 
other  Libraries. 

44.  Medicina  optima  contra  omnem  Febrem.  26.  b. 

45.  De  natura  Jafpidis ;  Tf  fidoro,  Bartholomeo  de 

Naturis  Rerum,  et  Lapidario.  ibid. 

46.  Veriiculi  Gnomici  diverforum  generum.  27. 

Inter  hos  habentur  infequentes,  pro  Anglis  contra 

Gallus,  jamtum  recenter  feripti. 

“  Francia  Flos  florum,  capud  olim  nobilio- 
rum ; 

Jam  contra  mores,  I.eopardus  tollit  honores. 

Aclibus  armorum  decrefcit  Flos  quoq;  flo- 
ruin. 

Lilia  decrefcunt,  Leopardi  nunc  juvenef- 
ennt : 

Hinc  pudeant  ipfi,  quos  contra  talia  fcripfi.’’ 

47.  Legenda deS.  Xpoforo  martyre.  29. 

48.  De  eodem,  Locus  S.  Ambrofij.  31.  b. 

49.  Legenda  de.S.  Marina  Virgine.  ibid. 

50.  Verfus  gnomici.  32.  b. 

Inter  hos,  nonnulli  dantur,  dc  morte,  Anglice  feripti. 

26. 


51.  Legenda  de  B.  Maria  Magdalena.  37. 

52.  VitaS.  Alexij.  45.  b. 

33.  Legenda  de  S.  Maria  EgYptiaca.  49.  b. 


Num.  2316 — 2318. 

54.  De  S.  Eugenia  Virgine.  52 

Sequuntur  aliena  &  minutiore  manu. 

55.  Fabulse  quidam  Hefopi  Greci,  quas  de  Greco  in 

Latinum  tranftulit  Romulus  quidam,  ad  filium  fuum  Tibe- 
rium  ;  quas  excipiunt,  Narrationes  alias  fabulofa;  five  Le- 
gendaria;,  ex  alijs  Auctoribus  defumptx,  quibus  non- 
nunquam  Anglica  verba  permifta  leguntur.  53. 

56.  De  Miraculis  Beate  Virginis  Maria;.  58. 

23  T7* 

A  Book  in  Svo.  feeming  to  have  been  written  in  the  time 
of  K.  James  1.  by  fome  Popifli  Prieft,  belonging  to 
fome  of  the  noble  Family  of  Talbot ;  as  being  with 
other  MSS.  bought  out  of  the  late  Duke  of  Shrtwf- 
buries  Library.  Herein,  1  find, 
j.  Notes  of  the  fix  Ages  of  this  World.  j . 

2.  Notes  out  of  the  ould  Bible  (i.  e.  old  Teftamenr. 

&  perhaps,  according  to  the  Vulgate,  cr  Doway-Tranf- 
lation.)  2‘ 

Many  of  thefe  Notes  are  collected  as  proofs  again  ft 
i  the  Do&rine  of  the  Church  of  England  :  lbme  are  col¬ 
lected  from  St.  Auguftin,  &c.  and  in  fol.  2.  b.  is  an  Ob- 
i  fervation,  becoming  a  Popiftx  Prieft,  upon  the  Archbifliops 
i  of  Canterbury  ;  as  in  fol.  9.  b.  is  fuch  another  about  the 
j  Kings  of  England. 

3.  Like  Notes  out  of  the  New  Teftament.  19. 

Here  are  more  quotations  from  St.  Auguftin,  Am- 

I  brofe,  Hierom ;  and  fol.  24.  b.  are  the  Collectors  Notes 
whereby  to  know  the  true  Church,  i.  e.  the  Church  of 
j  Rome. 

4.  A  Note  of  Herreticks,  &  their  feuerall  Herrefies 

41. 

Among  thefe,  are  four  of  modern  times ;  of  whom 
the  Colle&or  writeth  thus,  “  Luther,  died  fuddanly  after 
j  feafting.  Swinglius,  flaine  in  the  warr  againft  the  Catho- 
liks.  Carroloftadius,  flaine  by  the  Diuell.  Caluine, 

I  eaten  with  wormes.” 

5.  Ecclefiaftical  Ordinances  appointed  by  fundry 

|  Popes.  43- 

Among  thefe,  are  mentioned  fome  others  by  S.  Jer- 
rom,  St.  Ambrofe,  &  St.  Bonaventure. 

6.  Falfifcations  of  Scripture.  45. 

Here,  the  Colle&or  laxeth  feveralEditions  orTranf- 

lations  of  the  Englilh  Bible  ;  right,  or  wrong. 

7.  That  the  Tolleration  of  the  Stewes,  is  an  allowance 

of  vnehaft  Lyfe,  or  vnlawfull.  47. 

This  is  a  Defence  of  the  Popes,  in  reference  to  the 
licenfed  Bordellos  at  Rome. 

8.  Notes  of  the  death  and  Martyrdome  of  the  Apof- 

j  ties  &  others.  49. 

9.  Hiftorical  Notes  out  of  Hooker  alias  Vowell,  a  Pro- 

teftant  Cronicler.  50. 

Then  follows  in  another  hand,  more  incorrect  than 
the  former, 

10.  A  Prayer  of  fome  young  perfon,  or  Novice  ;  for 
Grace  to  prepare  himfelfe  to  receaue  the  bleifed  Sacra¬ 
ment  worthily. 

2318. 

A  Book  in  8vo.  vvhofc  Cover  is  adorned  with  the  Badge 
ufed  bv  Queen  Anne  Boleyne  ;  and  the  Infide  written 
by  two  hands  ;  where  I  find, 

1 .  A  frughtfull  Exhortation  to  a  ficke  Perfon,  to  pre¬ 
pare  againft  his  End  :  made  by  DoHer  Willet  of  Barle, 
and  by  him  fent  to  Sir  Arthure  Capell  in  his  long  ficknes. 


1.  b. 

2.  A  Prayer  for  one  that  is  fick.  S. 

3.  Some  pious  Ejaculations  &  Prayers  to  God.  1  x 

4.  A  Morning-Prayer.  14. 

5.  A  Confeflion  of  Sins.  15.  b. 

6.  Devout  Meditations.  16.  b. 

7.  A  fhort  Catechifine.  18. 

8.  Other  Ejaculations.  22. 

9.  The  Glor^  of  a  Chriftian.  23. 

This  is  a  fhort  Paflagc  taken  from  Boltons  Works, 

4  about 


about  oppofing  the  Growth  of  Sin  ;  and  is  written  (like 
as  the  enfuing  Treatife)  in  a  finaller,  but  more  incorrett 
hand. 

10.  The  Linckes  of  breeding  Sin  :  another  Paragraph 

perhaps  from  the  fame  Author.  ibid. 

1 1 .  A  Treatife  fetting-forth  what  happened  in  the 

Council  fummoned  by  IL  Philipp  m.  of  Spain,  to  which 
Count  Gondamar  being  purpofely  recalled  from  England, 
was  to  make  a  Report  of  his  Intrigues  here.  A.  Dm 
1618.  24- 

I  hold  this  to  be  a  forgery,  and  to  have  been  minted 
by  a  Puritanical  Workman.  I  have  feen  it  elfewhere, 
both  in  Manufcript,  &  in  Print. 

23 1 9* 

A  thin  Book  in  Svo.  feeming  to  have  been  copied,  in¬ 
correctly  enough,  by  fome  Lawyers  Clerk,  toward 
the  end  of  King  Charles  the  feconds  Reign.  It  is  en- 
tituled, 

“  IVlrs.  Baby  Ions  Looking-glafs  :or  abreif  diTcription 
of  the  doings  in  Satans  Sinagoge,  otherwife  called  the 
Church  of  England,,  which  is  mounted  upon  the  Bealls, 
;Uid  a-goeing  with  fpeed  in  the  wide  way  of  Deftxu&ion  : 
and  many  clear  truths  laid  togather  worth  your  Obfer- 
vation.  Written  by  a  Servant  of  Chrift,  whofe  name  is 
written  in  the  Book  of  Life." 

The  name  of  this  un-worthy  Servant  of  Chrift  doth 
not  appear ;  but  his  filly  performance  {hews  him  to  have 
been  a  Quaker,  and  dwelling  not  far  from  Hitchin  Sc  Ec- 
clesford  :  vid.  fol.  38.  39.  43-  &  44-  The  Work,  fuch 
as  it  is,  is  all  in  doggret  Rhymes,  asfcandalous  as  wicked. 
He  endeavours  to  ridicule  the  holy  Sacrament  ofBaptifm. 
fol.  32.  Epifcopal  Vifitation.  fol.  37.  Confirmation,  fol. 
41 .  Both  Univerfities.  fol.  44.  and  our  reverend  Bilhops 
&  Clergy,  almoft  every  where.  I  could  be  more  particu¬ 
lar  in  deferibing  thefe  fcandalous  Ballads,  but  I  really 
think  they  do  not  deferve  more  Time  or  Pains. 

2320. 

A  parchment  Book  in  Svo.  much  damaged,  but  long 
fince  ;  wherein  I  find, 

1.  A11  imperfect  Latin  Calendar,  beginning  in  May  ,* 
but  yet  damaged  by  moifture.  _  *  • 

c.  An  Aftrological  Tract,  fairly  written  in  old  Englifh 
(as  the  others  are  which  follow)  feeming  (in  fol.  6.)  to 
have  been  tranflated  from  the  “  Deltnary  of  )?e  hye  fotulle 
Aftronomoure  Bartholmew.”  It  gives  prognostications, 
of  the  Perfonages,  Conditions,  Fortunes  See.  of  both  Men 
&  Women,  according  as  they  happen  to  be  born  under 
the  Dominion  of  any  of  the  12  Signs  of  the  Zodiac.  5. 

In  the  principal  Letter  is  the  Effigies  of  the  Author 
or  Tranflator,  as  praying  :  and  his  Invocation  beginns 
with  thefe  Words,  “Fader  riztful,  enformyng  rechel- 
neffe,  ech  in  on,  nedefully  acceptynge.” 

3.  An  Aftrological  Poem,  leeching  when  to  buy  & 

fell  •  to  lett  Blond  or  Surgery  ;  interpretation  of  Dreams; 
wffien  to  build  ;  go  to  Sea  ;  Childrens  Fortunes,  &c. 
all  from  the  Day  of  the  Moons  Age,  if  the  Author  or 
Tranflator  may  be  believed.  3 1 . 

In  the  principal  Letter,  he  is  reprefented  as  fitting 
at  his  Study  ;  his  Work  beginning  thus, 

“  He  pat  wol  herkyn  of  Wit 
pat  ys  witneltin  holy  Wryt, 

Lyflenyih  to  me  a  ftonde. 

Of  a  Stori  y  fchal  zow  telle  ; 

What  tyme  ys  good  to  byen  &  to  fylle, 

In  bok  as  hyt  ys  y-fownde.” 

4.  Directions  for  making  many  Sorts  of  Laces,  which 

were  in  Falhion  in  the  tymes  of  K.  Henry  vi.  and  Edward 
Iv.  fuch  as  Lace  Balcon,  Lac?  endented,  Lace  bordred 
on  hope  fydes,  yn  o  l'yde,  pykke  Lace  bordred,  Lace 
Condrak,  Lace  Dawiis,  Lace  Piol,  Lace  couert.  Lace 
conerre  doble,  Lace  compon  couerte,  Lace^  malkel, 
I, ace  cheyne  brode,  Las  C.heueron,  Lace  ounde,  Grene 
dorge,  Lace  for  Hattys,"  &c.  52, 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


In  the  principal  Letter  is  a  damaged  figure  of  a 
Woman  fitting,  &  making  of  Lace. 

5.  Two  Medicinal  Receipts  ;  but  not  faid  what  they 

are  good  for.  70.  b. 

6.  Litera  Dominicalis  ;  or,  Prognoltications  from  the 

Dominical  Letter.  72- 

7.  Two  Receipts  for  the  Mother.  72.  b. 

232I. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo.  min.  partiin  Latino,  par¬ 
tial  Anglice  feriptus  ;  quo  continentur, 

1.  Sermo  Erancifci  ’de  Maronis  de  Indulgences  :  fcil. 

in  illild,  “  Quodcunque  ligaveris  fuper  Terrain,  erit 
ligatum  et  in  Celis  ;  et  quodcunque  folveris  fuper  Ter¬ 
rain,  erit  folutum  etin  Celis."  1. 

2.  Sermo  de  Indulgences,  prefertim  de  Indulgences 

Monafterij  de  Syon.  17. 

This  long  Sermon  is  upon  the  Text  “  Tibi  dabo 
claves  regni  Celorum  Math.  xvi.  being  part  of  the 
Gofpel  for  the  feflivalof  St.  Peter  ad  Vincula,  commonly 
called  Lam-mas-day.  It  is  written  in  Englifh,  Sc  treateth 
largely  of  the  Nature  of  Pardons  Sc  Indulgences  in  gene¬ 
ral,  and  of  thofe  impetrated  at  the  Court  of  Rome, 
for  the  Brigittin  Monaflery  of  Syon  in  Midelfex,  by 
Father  Thomas  Fifsheboiulie  (f.  leg.  Fifshebourne)  in 
particular. 

3.  Hou  the  Pardon  of  Aflyfe  was  graunted  to  S.  Fraun- 

ceys,  by  the  Pope  of  Rome  Honorius  111.  62.  b. 

In  the  preceding  Difcourfe,  frequent  mention  is 
made  of  this  Pardon  ;  and  the  like  was  procured  for 
Syon  for  every  fourth  Sonday  of  Lentone,  or  Lent. 

4.  B.  Auguftini  Sentential  tres,  notatu  dignifluntc  ; 

aliena,  &  recentiori  manu.  64. 

De  Damnatione  certa  omnium  Paganorum,  Ju- 
dasorum,  Hsreticorum,  atq;  Schifmaticorum,  nec  non 
pravorum  Catholicorum. 

5.  Breviarium  tpcius  Veteris  et  Novi  Teftamenti,  per 
Menard  urn  Monachum,  ap  Jacobum  de  Yfenaco.  65. 

6.  Chronicon  breve  Pomificum'  Romanorum,  a  B. 

Petro,  ufque  ad  Conftantinum  I.  89.  &  95. 

7.  Colledtanea  brevicula  ex  Anglia;  C.hronicis.  93. 

8.  Defcriptio  Urbis  Roma;,  cum  ejuldem  mirabilibus. 


Ecclefijs,  Rehquijs,  occ.  99- 

Inter  alia,  htec  de  Gregorio  1.  Papa  occurrunt.  fol. 

1 01 .  b.  “  Et  ne  Erroris  antiqui  femen  de  cetero  pullularet 
in  ymaginibus  Demonum  :  idem  Gregorius  Capita  & 
Membra  fecit  generaliter  amputari  ;  ut,  per  hec  extir- 
panda  radice  Vanitatis,  palma  Ecclefiallice  Veritatis 
ptenius  cxaltareturi”  Huic  fnnile  quid  de  eodem  Gre¬ 
gorio  Papa,  e  Joanne  Sarifburienfi,  rtfert  infignis  ferip- 
tor  D.  Gulielmus  Cave,  Iiift.  Litt.  Vol._i.pag.  43  1  * — 
“  non  modo  Mathefm  ab  aula  recedere  juffit,  fed  (quo 
major  elfet  S.  Scriptura;  autoritas,  et  in  ea  evolvenda 
diligentia  fludiofior)  intempeflivo  nimis  et  plane  fra¬ 
grant!  zelo,  nobiliflimse  Bibliotheca;  Palatine,  in  cujus 
Archivis  recondebantur  tot  veneranda  Vetuftatis  monu* 
menta,  ignem  admoverit,  quo  incendio  perierunt. 

Scripta  Palatinus  quiecunque  tenebat  Apollo, 
g.  Iter  ab  Anglia  ad  Romam.  1 18.  b. 

10.  Iter  aliudab  Anglia  ad  Romam.  119.  b. 

1  x .  De  Efcambio,  et  Pecunia.  1 2 1 .  b. 

12.  De  Cura  paftorali.  123. 

13.  Sententia;  e  Sacra  Scriptura  colleftte.  129.  b. 

14.  DeSandlis,  et  eorum  Reliquijs.  131. 

1 5.  Defcriptio  corporis  D.  N.  Jel'u  Xpi.  e  pfeudo- 

epiflola  Lentuli.  _  131- b. 

16.  De  genere  B.  Anna;,  et  B.  V.  Maria?.  132. 

17.  Notula;  Geographies,  See.  _  i32-b- 

1 8.  Notula?  de  mirabilibus  Anglite ;  maximam  partem 

falfis.  _  '34- b; 

ig.  Notula?  Hiftorica:,  prefertim  de  rebus  Anghcis, 
nullo  Ordine  deleft x.  ’  135- 

20.  Verfus  gnomici  ;  fere  Temper  relonantes,  ac  Al- 

phabetico  ordine  difpofiti.  I+1-. 

g  E>  21.  Exhortacio 


654 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2321 — 2323. 

21.  Exhortacio  ad  Monachos,  Verfibus  Rhythmicis* 

169. 

Init.  “  Refpice  proceffum  Metricom,  Revercnde 
fequcntem ; 

Do  quia  progrefl'um  de  Rcligione  placentem.” 

22.  F.xhortacio  bona  ad  Sacerdotes.  172. 

Init.  “  Viri  venerabiles,  facerdotes  Dei, 

Precones  altiilimi.  Lucerne  diei.” 

23.  Speculum  Monachoruin  ;  tra&atus  axij>»Xo-:,  fi 
non  omnibus  in  Codice  contends  ifte  Titulus  attribui 
poteft  recti  bs. 

In  fine,  de  fe  &  opere  fuo,  fie  (more  fuo)  canit 
auftor. 

“  Explicit  ifte  liber  didus  Speculum  Monacho- 
rum, 

Regula  quo  morum  fplendefcit,  et  Ordo 
bonorum. 

Intererant  fini  Mathei  metra  Johannis, 
mc  quater,  Domini,  teret  x.idicofubannis; 
Que  dudum  gratis  precibus  Dompni  Micho- 
lai  (Nicolai  Frame  Abbatis  Glaftonenifis.) 
Fecerat  Abbatis  dans  grates  bine  Adonaij-’’ 
Et  paulo  pod,  “  Ceffit  opus  mete,  Dodor  reve- 
rende  valete  j 

Iliac,  precor,  ut  de  tc  dentur  mihi  Vina 
Metrete." 


2322. 

A  velum  Book  in  i2mo.  fairly  written  in  old  Englilh, 
&  containing  feveral  devout  Tracts  5  whereof  fome 
have  been  al'eribed  to  John  Wycliffe,  as  1  have  before 
obferved  upon  the  MS.  63.  B.  15. 

Herein  I  find, 

1 .  A  brief  Explication  of  ]?e  Pater-nofter,  with  its 

Prolog.  1 . 

Beginn.  “  Crift  Jhefu  feij>  in  pe  Gofpel.” 

2.  Another  upon  pe  Aue  Marie.  18. 

3.  Another  upon  jre  Creede.  23. 

Beginn,  “  The  ground  of  al  goodnefle  is  trewe 

Bileue.” 

4.  Another  upon  the  Ten  Comaundemenlis,  with  its 

Prolog.  37.  b- 

Beginn.  £<  A  man  axideof  Crift. ” 

5.  A  Summ  of  pe  Ten  Heflis.  8 5. 

6.  Anfweris  to  hem  fat  fein  fat  we  fchulde  not  fpeke 

of  Holy  Writt.  87. 

7.  fe  Counfeil  of  Crift.  88. 

S.  Of  Vertues  Pacience.  -  92. 

9.  Of  Temptacioun.  95.  b. 

10.  Chartre  of  Heucne.  96.  b. 

11.  Hors,  eifer  Armure  of  Heuene.  104.  b. 

12.  fe  name  of  Jhefu.  jij. 

13.  fe  Love  of  Jhefu.  ug. 

14.  01  verry  MekenelTe.  124.  b. 

15.  fe  Etied  of  Wille.  127.  b. 

16.  Adijf  I.ijf,  &  Contemplatijf  Lijf.  129.  b. 

17.  The  Mirrour  of  Chaaftitee  ;  with  its  Prolog. 

132.  b. 

Beginn.  “  I  write  fis  tretis  in  fyue  fchort  Chapitris, 
to  hem  fat  wolen  lyve  Chart.’’ 

At  the  end,  (ibl.  152,)  fis  Tretis  k  called  Conn- 
leylour  of  recchis. 


A  thinnifh  paper  Book  in  umo.  being  (as  I  take  it)  a 
Copy  of  aihorte  Treatife  compiled  by  fome  Regular  or 
ConfelTor  of  the  Roman  Religion  ;  and  by  him  en¬ 
titled  £t  Chriftian  Conliderations”  (i.  e.  Meditations) 
for  euery  day  of  the  Month  :  upon  the  Subjeds,  fol¬ 
lowing. 

l  Of  Faith.  I# 

2.  Of  the  end  of  Man. 

3.  Of  the  Contempt  of  the  World.  ? 

4.  Of  Death.  X 


Num.  2323,  2324: 


5.  Of  the  Iaft  Judgement. 

6.  Of  Hell. 


7.  Of  the  everlafting  Torments  of  Hell. 

8.  OfParadife. 

9.  Of  the  Prefence  of  God. 

1  o.  Of  the  Care  of  thy  Salvation. 

1  r .  Of  the  Deteftation  of  Sinn. 

12.  Of  Pennance. 

13.  Not  to  defer  our  Conuerfion. 

14.  Of  Worldly  Refiedions. 

1 5.  Of  Diffidence  of  ones  Selfe. 

16.  Of  the  Vfe  of  the  Grace  of  God. 

17.  Of  the  Vfe  of  Time. 

1 S.  Oi  the  Vfe  of  the  Sacraments. 

19.  Of  the  Made. 

20.  Of  Almefdeed. 

21.  Of  Exeraple. 

22.  Of  Afflidions. 

23.  Of  our  Conformity  to  the  Will  of  God. 

24.  Of  our  Truft  in  God. 

25.  Of  the  Loue  of  God. 

26.  Of  the  Loue  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift. 

27.  Of  the  Loue  of  our  Neighbor. 

28.  Of  the  Loue  of  our  Enemyes. 

29.  Of  the  Imitation  of  our  Lord. 

30.  Of  our  Deuotion  to  our  blefled  Lady. 

3r.  Of  our  Deuotion  in  the  Service  of  God. 

Then  follows  a  longer  Chapter, 

32.  Of  the  model!  Behaviour  Sc  Sincerity  of  Li 
Manners,  required  in  Chriftianity. 


J5- 

18 

2D 
22. 
2  6. 
28 
36 
33 
35* 
37* 

40. 


44* 

47- 

49. 

52* 

54- 

57- 

59* 

61. 

64. 

65. 
67. 

72. 

fe  & 
75* 


2324. 

A  vellum  Book  in  i  imo.  containing  a  Theological  Trea¬ 
dle,  written  in  old  Englilh,  and  entitled  “  A  Lanternc 
of  Litz.”  It  is  divided  into  13  Chapters,  which  bear 
the  Titles  following, 

1.  The  Prolog,  or  Introdudion.  1 .  b. 

2.  Of  Appeticioun.  4, 

3.  What  is  Anti-Crift  in  general ;  wifi  Six  Con- 

ditiouns.  r.  b. 

4.  What  is  Anti-Crift  in  fpecialj  with  hife  fire 
Parties. 

t  5-  what  is  Anti-Crift  in  fpccial  ;  with  fiue  Condi- 
ciouns.  j6. 

6.  What  is  fie  Chirch  oonli  proprid  to  God  ?  wifi  hir 

Names,  Licknelfis,  and  Condiciouns.  20.  b. 

7.  What  is  fie  material  Chirche,  with  hir  Honour- 

mends.  b. 

8.  Of  Good  Sc  Yuel  comyng  to  fiis  material  Chirche. 


9.  OrDifcrecioun,  toknowefieGood  from ]ie  Yuel.  45. 

10.  How  fie  Good  of  fie  fecounde  Chirche  acorde 

with  J»e  firfte  Chirche.  Cg.  b, 

1 1 .  Of  Joye  in  Tribulacioun.  72, 

12.  Of  J?e  Fendis  Cautels,  in  which  he  purfuefi  i 

hife  Membris  pc  Kepers  of  Goddis  Heeftis.  7 fi. 

13.  What  is  fie  Fendis  Chirche ;  with  hirPropurtee 

1 19.  to  the  end. 

The  Author  was  a  Lollard,  as  plainlv  appeareth  i 
fol.  10.  Sc  94.  b.  He  complaineth  of  the  taking  away  c 
the  Books  of  Scripture,  then  tranflated  into  Englilh,  froi 
the  Laity,  &  for  punilhing  tliofe  who  did  read  or  quo] 
the  fame.  fol.  17.  b.  Sc  93.  b.  He  bitterly  inveyeth  again 
the  Pope  as  Anti-Crift;  again!!  BifhopS,  and  Clerg 
both  Regular  &  Secular,  and  their  Officers.  As  to  th 
Author,  from  the  nature  of  the  Work  itfelf ;  the  wa 
of  handling  it ;  the  ftyle ;  Sc  the  Authors  or  Book 
cited  by  him  ;  I  am  of  opinion  that  it  might  be  Joh 
Wyclyffe  :  although  I  have  not  now  Bale  at  hand  to  cor 
fult ;  and  find  that  he  is  omitted  (as  having  been  a 
Heretic,  forfooth  ! )  by  partial  Pitts  ;  that  Lelan 
mentions  but  few  of  his  Writings  ;  and  even  Mr.  Her 
Whartons  Account  of  them  is  fometimes  dubious,  an 
(in  the  main)  imperfedL 


A  Book 


Bibliotheca:  Harleianas. 


6  5  5 


Num.  2325 — 232 7. 

2325* 

A  Book  in  umo.  eafily  known  by  its  remarkably  bad 
Hand,  to  have  been  (for  the  moll  part)  written  by 
John  I  ord  Roberts,  afterwards  Eari  of  Radnor  & 
Lord  Privy  Seal.  It  contains, 

1.  Some  loofe  Notes  relating  to  our  Parliament,  &c. 

1.  2.  b. 

2.  Qua  ratione  Galli  amil'erunt  Libertatem  fuam,  et 

Bonorum  proprietatem.  2. 

3.  Notes  colletted  from  the  Journal  of  the  Iloufe  of 

Peers,  of  aim.  3  Caroli  1.  4.  b.  5 1 .  b. 

4.  Some  Notes  from  the  Lords  Journal  of  ann. 

L  Caroli  r.  6.  11,  13.  40. 

5.  Turning  up  the  other  end  of  the  book  ;  I  find, 

6.  More  tumultuary  Notes  taken  by  the  fame  Lord 
from  Journals  of  Parliament.  •  Statutes,  &  fome  other 
Books,  for  his  own  ufe. 

2326. 

A  Book  in  umo.  fairly  written  or  tranferibed  by  fome 
Writing-mafter,  as  I  fuppofe.  It  contains, 

A  Treatife  of  the  Duty  of  a  General  or  Commander 
in  Chief ;  compiled  by  Tridrain  Tyrwhyt,  for  the  par¬ 
ticular  Ufe  &  Help  of  Robert  Dudley  Earl  of  Leicedcr, 
who  folicited  Ou.  Elizabeth  for  the  Command  of  an 
Army  in  the  Netherlands.  The  Authors  Dedication  is 
dated  the  2d  of  November  1577,  and  hath  before  it  a 
Trick  of  that  Lords  Arms.  Then  follow,  the  94th 
Pfalm  ;  the  main  Treatife  ;  1 2. 

Generali  Rules  of  Warre,  taken  out  of  Vegetius. 

38. 

Sentences,  for  his  Lordfhip  to  read,  at  his  leyfure 

43- 

Toward  the  Beginning  Sc  End,  are  fome  other 
feraps  of  Authors,  fcribbled  by  a  Schole-boy. 


A  Popi (Ii Book  in  8vo.  wherein  I  find  the  following  Trafts* 

1.  '1  he  Maner  how  to  make  our  Confeflion.  1. 

'1  his  alfo  includes  a  method  of  previous  Examination. 

2.  The  Manner  of  the  preparing  of  any  one  vnto  the 
receiuing  of  the  mod  holie  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharid. 

27.  b. 

3.  Concerning  the  holie  Office  &  Service  of  the  Made. 

36.  b. 

4.  A  forme  &  manner  of  profitable  hearing  the  Word 

of  God.  42. 

5.  Of  Praier  &  Meditation.  43.  b.  54.  b. 

6.  Of  Procedi ons.  53. 

7.  Of  the  Mideries  of  the  Rofarie.  56.  b. 

8.  A  breefe  Explication  of  ouie  LordesPrayer.  58.  b. 

9.  An  Expofition  of  the  Salutation  of  the  Angel!. 

60.  b. 

10.  Of  the  Ringing  unto  the  Salutation  of  the  Angell 

61.  b. 

1 1.  A  Forme  Sc  Maimer  of  bellowing  the  Eveninge  at 

Bed-tyme.  63. 

12.  A  Forme  Sc  Manner  of  Ryfingin  the  Morninge. 

64- 

13.  Other  Directions,  Prayers,  Sc  Meditations  for  the 

vnlearned  fort.  65.  b. 

Then  follows  what  is  here  called  “  The  fecond  Book 
of  Godly  Sc  Chriftian  Inditutions treating  of 

14.  Remedies  vnto  the  Keeping  of  the  Catholic  Sc 

Chridian  Faith.  84. 

Here  (at  fol.  SB.)  the  Author  owns  that  he  wrote 
this  Book  A.  D.  1576. 

1 5.  Remedies  againd  the  Cuflome  of  Swearing.  92.  b. 

16.  Touchinge  the  Honoure  of  our  Parents  Sc  Supe- 

rioures.  94. 

17.  Remedies  againd  the  Synne  of  Detraction. 

96. 

18.  Remedies  againd  Vayne  Gloiy.  97.  b. 

19.  Remedies  againd  Couetoufiies.  98.  b. 


Ncm.  2327 — *2330. 


20.  Remedies  againd  Luxurie.  ico.  b. 

21.  Remedies  agairid  Envy.  10 1.  b. 

22.  Remedies  againd  Wrath  &  Anger.  103. 

23.  Remedies  againd  Glotenie.  105. 

2+.  Remedies  againd  Sloth.  105.  b. 

25.  Meanes  to  gett  Humilitie  of  Hert.  107.  b. 

26.  Meanes  unto  Patiens.  108.  b. 

27.  Meanes  to  obteyne  the  true  Joye  of  Hert.  110. 
Then  follow,  in  dilferent  Hands, 

28.  A  Traft  endeavoring  to  prove  againd  the  Pro- 
tedants,  that  the  Roman  is  the  true  Church.  112. 

29.  The  Rule  of  the  Socyetye  of  the  mod  blefied 

Vyrgyn  Mary.  12 1. 

T  his  Article  contains  likewife  fome  other  matters 
relating  to  the  Society  ol  the  Rofary. 

2328. 

A  Book  in  1  into,  feeming  to  have  been  written  by  the 
hand  of  fome  Female.  It  confids  of  Scripture-padages 
ranged  under  certain  Heads  ;  perhaps  by  Order  of 
fome  Judge,  or  other  Magidrate  ;  given  to  his  Daugh¬ 
ter,  in  order  to  keep  her,  for  fome  time  ac  lead,  well 
employed.  The  faid  Heads  are, 

J.  Judex.  r. 

2.  Judicium.  21. 

3.  Jus.  67. 

4.  Jus  Regitim.  75. 

5.  Jus  Gladij.  78. 

2329. 

A  thin  Book  in  i2mo.  wherein  are  contained,  many 
Paffages  collected  out  of  the  printed  Works  of  K* 
James  I.  vizt. 

t.  Out  of  the  Epidleto  the  Church. 

2.  Out  of  a  Meditation. 

3.  Out  of  the  Epidle  to  his  Sonne.  3. 

4.  Out  of  the  Epidle  to  the  Reader.  4. 

5.  Out  of  the  B xm\  ixou  Awj>oi<. 

6.  Out  of  the  true  Law  of  Free  Monarchies. 

7.  Out  of  the  Difcovery  of  the  Powder-Treafon.  1 6. 

8.  Out  of  the  Free  Princes  Sc  States.  1 8 

9.  Out  of  the-  Defence  of  the  Right  of  Kings.  2c 

10.  Out  of  a  Speach  in  Parliament.  22 

11.  Out  of  a  Speach  at  White  Hall.  24 

12.  Out  of  a  Speach  in  Starre- Chamber.  3c 

13.  Out  of  the  Paterne  for  a  King’s  Inauguration. 

36. 

14.  Out  of  his  Meditation  on  the  Lords  Prayer.  43. 

15.  Out  of  the  Peace-maker.  51. 

1 6.  Out  of  his  lad  Speech  in  Parliament. 

2330. 

A  parchment  Book  in  umo.  written  fas  I  fuppofe)  bv 
one  of  thofe  people,  who  were  formerly  called  Lol¬ 
lards.  In  it  are  contained  the  following  TraCts, 

1.  A  Tretijs  pat  Scynt  Audin  made  an  Eerl  clepid 

Julian,  confiding  of  17.  Chapters.  1. 

Beginn.  “  A !  my  dere  bropir,  if  pou  coucitid  to 
wife  (pouz  I  wite  not)  how  mood  parfijt  Sc  fulled 
Riztwifnes  is  for  to  love  God.’’ 

1  find  not  this  Treatife  in  the  Lid  of  St.Audins 
works  given  by  Dr.  Cave,  who  indeed  mentions  that  he 
wrote  againd  Julian  the  Pelagian,  being  different  from 
this. 

2.  pe  book  of  Seynt  Audin  of  Cridin  Lijf,  to  his 

Sidir  a  Wvdowe.  66.  b. 

Beginn  “  pat  I  Synner,  &  pe  lade,  &  vnwifer  pan 
opere,  &  moore  vnlerned  pan  alle.”  66.  b. 

This  Trad  is  noted  in  the  MSS.  to  be  extant  in  the 
ninth  Tome  of  St.  Audins  Works,  at  col.  888.  of  the 
Bafil  Edition,  as  I  fuppofe.  But  Dr.  Cave,  feems  upon 
the  Authority  of  Lucas  Holdenius,  to  aferibe  it  rather  to 
Fadidiusa  Britan. 

3.  A  Serinoun  of  Audin  ;  how  Man*  is  maad  to  the 
Ymage  &  Likeneffe  of  Cod  his  maker,  of  nouzt.  976. 

1  o  Beginn. 


656 


Catalogue  Librorura  MSS. 


Num.  233°— 2333- 

Beginn.  “  How  greet  is  \>e  dignyte  of  Mann  us 
making  !” 

This  is  alfo  noted  to  be  extant  in  the  9th  Tome  of 
St.  Auguftins  Works,  at  col.  1178. 

4.  The  XII  Abufiouns  or  Mif-ufis,  as  reherfij)  Seint 
Auftyn.  to0-  b- 

Beginn.  “  Jie  firlte  Abufioun  is  a  Wife  Man  with¬ 
out  gode  Werkis.” 

Some  alcribe  this  Treatife  to  St.  Cyprian,  as  well  as 
to  St.  Auguftin  ;  and  it  is  printed  by  Sr.  James  Ware  un¬ 
der  the  Name  of  St.  Patrick  of  Ireland. 

23  3 1  • 

A  thin  Book  in  1 21110.  beginning  at  either  end  ;  wherein 
are  entered. 

Particular  Phrafes  or  Lxpreffions  obferved  in  read¬ 
ing  the  Works  of  Corn.  Tacitus  the  Roman  Hiltorian 
explained  in  Englifli. 

It  is  not  unlikely  but  that  this  Reading  of  Tacitus 
might  have  been  made  to  the  great  William  Caveudilh 
Duke  of  Neivcaftle  in  his  younger  Years,  by  fo me  one 
of  his  Governors  or  Tutors. 

2332- 

A  vellum  Book  in  1 2mo.  by  its  former  Owner  the  late 
Dr.  John  Coveil,  called  an  Almanack;  and  by  him 
thought  to  have  been  written  in  the  beginning  of  King 
Henry  the  n  th’s  Reign.  It  contains. 

1.  A  Calendar,  with  a  Table  for  Ecclefiaflical  Com¬ 

putation  throughout  the  Year  ;  with  very  rude  Pictures 
(hewing  the  Works  or  Exercifes  proper  to  each  Month  ; 
the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  peculiar  to  each  ;  with  the  Eefti- 
val  Days.  1.  b. 

2.  Another  Table,  wherein  the  Dominical  Letter  is 

exprefled  by  A.  1 3.  b 

3.  Tables  of  the  Solar  Eclipfes,  which  (I  fuppofe) 

were  to  happen  %  beginning  with  A.  D.  141 1.  14.  b. 

Here  the  Names  of  the  Munths  are  not  written  but 
exprefled  by  rude  Symbols. 

4.  Like  Tables  of  the  Lunar  Ecclipfes;  beginning 

with  the  year  1406.  15.  b. 

5.  Part  of  an  Agronomical  Diagram  ;  where  the  Zo¬ 

diacal  Signs,  S:  Months,  are  exprefled  by  the  Authors, 
or  Workmans  rude  Symbols.  1 7.  b. 

6.  A  rude  Sketch  of  a  naked  Man  Handing,  and  af¬ 

fected  in  the  proper  parts  by  the  feveral  Signs  of  the'/.o- 
diac,  exprefled  by  Symbolical  figures.  18. 

7.  labula  ad  feiendum  in  quo  Signo  fuerit  Luna  omni 

die.  18  b. 

This  is  exprefled  in  like  Symbols. 

8.  Another,  perhaps,  hinting  at  the  Labors  of  the 
Year,  £c  the  lucky  or  unlucky  Days  for  them.  19.  b. 

9.  Rude  Heads  of  our  Kings  from  the  Conqueror  to 

Richard  11.  both  included,  with  the  number  of  years  that 
each  of  them  reigned.  2 1 . 

10.  A  Table,  as  it  feemeth  to  me,  for  calculation  of 

the  Prices  of  Bread,  or  of  Bread-Corn,  2  1 .  b. 

Then  followeth,  in  a  newer  hand, 
ti.  TheStatwete  of  Wenchefler,  touching  the  Syfe  of 
Bred,  of  what  Gravn  of  C’.orne  fo  euer  that  it  be.  22. 

Laltlv,  cometh,  by  the  iirft.  hand, 

|  2.  A  !  ram  for  calculating  the  Moons  Motion,  as 
I  take  it.  23.  b. 

=333- 

A  paper  Book  in  121110.  written  as  1  fuppofe,  by  one  of 
thofe  Friers  who,  in  times  of  Popery,  uled  to  invei¬ 
gle  people  to  faunter,  A  lquander  away  their  time  & 
money  in  wmcceflury  Voiages  to  Jerufalem  ;  leaving 
thefe  Thieves  behind  with  the  Government  of  their 
Wives,  Families,  A  Eftates ;  to  their  great  Lofs,  if  not 
DeflruCtion.  It  contains  the  following  Tracts, 
r .  Of  that  moll  blefied  Viage  to  the  hooli  Citee  of 
Hierufalem.  1. 


Num.  2333,  2334. 

2.  Peregrinacions  ofth-eholi  Cite  of  Hierufalem.  10.  b. 

3.  Peregrinacions  of  Bethleem.  2 1 .  b. 

4.  Peregrinacions  that  beth  in  the  Montayns  of  Jude. 

23.  b. 

5.  Peregrinacions  of  Hume  Jordan.  24.  b. 

6.  Other  blefied  Peregrinagis  within  the  Holi  Lande, 

and  there-about.  26.  b.  &  7.  b. 

7.  Peregrinaciones  in  F.cclefla  S.  Marie  Bethleem  ; 

i.  c.  Ordo  Precum  inibi  recitandaram.  37.  b. 

8.  Preces,  &c.  recitandte  in  facratiflimo  Monte  Syon, 

et  in  circuitu  Hierufalem.  40.  b.  A  65.  b. 

9.  Proceflio  Pregrinorum  in  Ecclefia  S.  Sepuicri  Dili 

nri  Jelu  Crifti,  cum  precibus.  .-,9. 

10.  Preces,  Hymni,  Stc.  recitandi  ad  divetfas  Pere- 
grinationes  in Flierofolymis,  Paladtina,  &  Syria.  62.  b. 

Then  follows,  in  Englifli, 

ti.  Of  the  Building  &  Defttudion  of  Jerufalem,  the 
Riches  of  the  firft  Temple,  and  Miracles  wrought  by  the 
Crofs  of  our  Savior,  brought  thither  by  the  Emperor 
Heraclius.  79. 

This  is  imperfect  at  the  end  ;  but  Mr  Knott  (or 
Canutus,  as  he  calls  himfelf)  writes  that  it  is  extant  in 
Paratu  Sermonum  de  Sandis,  in  fefto  Exalt.  S,  Cruris, 
paucis  mutaiis. 

2334; 

A  Book  in  iGto.  confifting  of  Mifcellaneous  Collections  ; 

to  which,  a  Table  was  prefixed  in  the  year  1662.  The 

Subjects  of  thefe  Collections  may  be  gathered  from 

the  Titles  following ; 


1 .  Off  the  Sages  :  i.  e.  of  the  7  Wife  Men 

of  Greece, 

&  of  their  Sayings. 

1. 

2.  Of  the  Mufes. 

3. 

3.  Off  the  Sybills. 

7-  b. 

4.  Of  the  Seauen  Wonders  of  the  World. 

14. 

5.  Off  the  Twelue  Moneths ;  and  how 

they  were 

reprefented. 

16.  b. 

6.  Off  the  Syrens. 

18. 

7.  Off  the  Virgins  Veflalls. 

19. 

S.  Off  the  Ilefperides. 

2 1 .  b. 

9.  Off  the  Pleiades  or  Hyades. 

23. 

10.  Off  the  Graces. 

24.  h. 

1  t.  Off  the  Houres. 

26.  b. 

12.  Off  the  Daughters  of  Apollo. 

28. 

13.  Off  the  7  Hills  on  which  Rome  ffandcih.  28.  b. 

14.  Off  the  particular  Orders  ofFryars; 

A  of  the 

Beginning  &  Encreafe  of  Monaflicall  Life. 

3X* 

15.  Off  the  cheife  Orders  of  Knighthood 

,  in  many 

Kingdotnes  &  Countreys. 

33.  b. 

16.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  Spaine. 

40. 

17.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  France. 

41.  b. 

1 8.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  England. 

43- 

19.  Off  the  Principaiitie  of  Wales. 

45.  b. 

20.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  Scotland. 

46.  b. 

2t.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  Ireland. 

47- 

22.  Off  Italy. 

48.  b. 

23.  OffBelgia,  or  the  Netherlands. 

57- 

24.  Off  Germanic. 

60  b. 

25.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  Danemarke. 

68. 

26.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  Norwey. 

69. 

27.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  Swethland. 

69.  b- 

2 S’.  Oft"  the  Kingdome  of  Poland. 

70.  b. 

29.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  Hungary. 

72. 

30.  Off  the  Kingdome  of  Mufcovie. 

73- 

31.  Off  Daria. 

ibid. 

32.  Off  Sclauor.ia. 

73-  b. 

33.  011  Greece. 

74- 

34.  Off  the  Cretan  Ifles. 

76.  b. 

35.  Oil"  the  Ionian  lies. 

ibid. 

36.  Off  the  Adriatique  Ifles. 

77-> 

37.  Off  the  Mediterranean  Ifles. 

38.  Off  rhe  Britifh  Iflands. 

ibid. 

79,  b. 

39.  Off  the  Northern  Iflands. 

81. 

40.  Off  the  Grekifh  Seas, 

81.  b. 
41.  Off 

Bibliothec  e  Harleiaftas. 


6  57 


36. 


Off  Alia. 

83. 

Off  AffVica. 

85. 

Off  America. 

86.  b. 

Off  the  American  Iflands. 

88. 

Num.  2336 — 2338. 


I  fuppr.fL.  (hat  mull  of  the  Geographical  part  of  this 
bools,  was  raken  front  Dr.  Peter  Heylyn's  Geography. 

2  335* 

A  parchment  Book  in  1  Sto.  from  the  beginning  of  the 
rrologue  commonly  called  “  lhe  Poor  Caitif,  and 
by  Mr.  Henry  Wharton,  under  the  Title  of  Pauper 
Rijticus ,  is  aferibed  to  John  Wyclyffe.  The  Tracis 
herein  contained  are  not  altogether  in  the  fame  Older 
with  thofe  deferibed  in  the  M.  S.  No.  2322.  which 
wanteth  the  Prologue  (in  like  manner  as  feveral  other 
Copies  do)  which  in  this  Manufcript  doth  thus 
beginn,  “  This  Tretis  compilid  of  a  Pore  Caitif,- ft 
nedi  of  goodly  Help  of  all  Chriften  Pepele.  I  he 
Work  is  here  diitri bated  into  the  following  Trafts, 
vizt. 

1.  An  Explication  of  the  Bileue.  I-  r'a 

Beginn.  “  The  Ground  of  al  Goodneffe  is  Itedfalt 

feiji  opur  Bileeue.” 

2.  A  Comment  on  Je  ten  Hedis.  1 V 

Beginn.  ‘  A  man  afkide  of  Crid  what  he  lh ulde 

do,  for  to  haue  J»e  Lijf  fat  euere  dial  lade. 

3.  Another  on  fe  Pater  nolter.  5°: 

Beginn.  “  Crid  feij>,  who  fat  louef  him  dial  kepe 

his  Commaundementis.” 

4.  The  Councel  off  Crid.  63.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Crid  not  compellynge,  but  freli  coun- 

celynge  ech  man  to  perfit  Lijf-” 

5.  Of  vertuous  Pacience. 

Beginn.  “  But  who  fat  is  verily  fed  with  fat  Breed 
fat  cam  doun  fro  Heuene.” 

6.  Of  Tcmptacioun. 

Beginn.  “  Whanne  f  ou  art  temptid  ef  er  troublid. 

7.  fe  Chartir  of  Heuene.  ^9- 

Beginn.  “  Everi  Wife  man  fat  cleymef  his 

Eritage.” 

8.  Armer  of  Heuene.  t  74- 

Beginn.  “  Almyzti  God  feif  bi  hooli  Job.” 

9.  fe  Name  oflhefu.  So.  b. 

Beginn.  «  Whofo  euere  fou  be  fat.  arawft  fee  for 

to  loue  God.” 

10.  OffMekeneffe.  .  °7; 

Beginn.  “  To  ony  Degree  of  verri  Love  of  Jhelu, 

mni  no  Soule  atteyne,  but  if  he  be  verili  Meke. 

ji.  OfMannes  Wil.  p9- 

Beginn.  “  Everi  dedc  perifable  efer  repreuable  of 
Mannes  "Will.” 

12.  Of  actijf  Lijf.  .  9°- 

Beginn.  “  Crid  louede  moche  Marie  8c  Martha  hir 

Sider.”  °  This  treateth  all'o  of  contemplatif  Lijf. 

13.  Of  Chadite.  ,  .  92*b* 

Beginn  Prolog.  <c  I  write  fis  Tretis  in  fine  lhort 

Chapitris,  to  hem  fat  wolen  lyue  Chaaft.” 

Beginning  of  the  Tr.ift.  “  This  Myrrour  of  Maid¬ 
ens  lokeye  ferinne,  as  follower  of  the  meked  Maide.” 

In  this  Tract  are  3  or  4  Legendary  Stories  related  ; 
the  author  (as  it  plainly  appeareth)  living  in  a  drift 
Communion  with  the  Roman  Church,  when  he  wrote 
it-  This,  however,  did  not  hinder  Mr.  Wharton  from 
branding  what  he  meant  well,  with  the  following  Cen- 
i'ure,  “  Speculum  Caditatis ;  quod  putidiflimus  fabulis 
repletum,  Wicfefo  cum  primis  indignum  videtur.” 

2336- 

A  parchment  Book  in  i6to.  containing  another  Copie  of 
“  The  Pore  Catif wherein  fome  of  the  Traft s  do  not 
fdfiow  in  the  fame  Order  as  in  the  preceding  Copy, 
ana  fome  have  not  the  fame  1  itles.  v.  gr. 

1 .  The  4th  Traft  above,  hath  here  the  Title  off 
Perfit  Lijf.” 

Cat.  Harl.  Vox..  II. 


2.  The  c th  is  here  entituled  (perhaps  erroneoufly) 

“  Off  Temptacioun.”  8a. 

3.  The  7th  is  here  called  “  fe  Chartre  of  oure  heuenli 

Eritage.”  86. 

4/ The  8th  is  here  dvled  “  Off  goodli  Batel.”  93. 

5.  The  9th  is  here  laid  “  To  loue  God,  or  Jhefu.” 
102.  b.  and  the  10th  is  as  a  part  of  it. 

6.  The  Title  of  the  12th  is  only  of  “Contemplatif 

Lijf.”  >6. 

7.  At  the  end  is  a  remarkable  Note  or  Infcriprion, 
which  I  (hall  not  grudge  to  putt  down  here,  although 
iuch  matters  are  not  the  bufinefs  of  this  Catalogue:  “  This 
book  was  maad  of  fe  goodis  of  John  Gamalin  for  a 
comyn  profite  ;  fat  fat  perfoone  fat  haf  fis  book  com¬ 
mittal  to  him,  of  fe  perfoone  fat  haf  power  to  committe 
it,  haue  the  ufs  fereof  fe  terme  of  his  Lijf ;  preiynge  for 
fe  foule  of  fe  fame  John.  And  fat  he  fat  haf  fis  fordid 
ufs  of  commiflioun,  whan  he  occupief  if  not ;  ieene  he 
it  for  a  tyme  to  fum  ofer  perfoone.  Alfo  fat  fat  per¬ 
foone  to  whom  it  was  committid  for  fe  teerme  of  lijf ; 
vndir  fe  forfeid  condiciouns  deliuere  he  to  anofer,  fe 
teerme  of  his  lijf.  And  fo  be  it  deiyuered  &  committid 
fro  perfoone  to  perfoone,  man  or  womman  as  longe  as 
f e  book  endurif.” 

8.  I  mud  not  conceal  another  Note  which  I  find  in 
a  fpare  Page  at  the  beginning,  “  Dixit  Epifcopus  Cicef- 
trenfis  quod  Frater  Minor  compilavit  hunc  librum  in 
fuo  Defenforio.”  I  doubt  not  but  that  this  Bilhop  of 
Chicheder  was  Reginald  Pecok;  who  was  thought  to 
favor  the  Lollards,  and  was  openly  perfecuted  ft  deprived, 
as  guilty  of  Herefy. 

2337- 

A  Book  in  2omo.  defigned  for  the  Pocket ;  wherein 
are  noted-down, 

1 .  Many  excellent  Rules  &  Obfervations  neceffary  to 
be  putt  in  Praftice  by  him  who  would  endeav  our  to  be 
come  eminent  or  excellent  in  the  bufinels  of  a  Pourtrait 
Painter;  indigeded  as  to  methodical  Order,  and  fo 
incorreftly,  as  that  I  doubt  whether  it  were  n  >t  a  C  ;  y 
too  hadily  tranferibed  by  fome  Face-Painter’s  Ap¬ 
prentice. 

Herein,  Vandyck,  Dobfon,  Wilfon,  Watfon,  Ful¬ 
ler,  &  the  Authors  Mader  are  mentioned  ;  ft:  moltly 
with  applaufe.  The  Author  repeats  many  of  his  Maders 
I.effons;  whom  alfo,  in  fome  refpefts,  he  compares 
with  Titian  ;  and  indeed,  feems  to  have  taken  almod  the 
whole  from  his  Indruftions.  Among  other  things,  he 
relates  how  judly  his  mader  found  fault  with  Old  Fait- 
horns Print  of  Mr.  Stanley  prefixed  to_  his  Lives  of  the 
l’hilofophers,  which  came  out  (if  I  midake  not)  A.  D. 

,  C5-.  By  this  and  by  the  Flemifh  terms  of  Stett  and 
Stetting,  I  am  apt  to  conjefture  that  Sir  Peter  Lely  was 
the  Mader,  ft  Mr.  Ryley  the  Difciplc  ;  and  the  Hand¬ 
writing,  a  running  Secretary,  was  in  common  ufe  in  the 
Reign  of  K. Charles  11. 

2.  A  Medicine  to  draw  Milke  out  of  a  Womans 
Breads,  that  is  newly  brought  to  Bed. 

At  the  other  end,  I  lind 

3.  -  Some  few  Aphorifms,  in  Morality,  ft  Painting. 

4.  A  Sketch,  with  a  Pen,  of  a  Man’s  Head ;  perhaps 
from  that  of  Sir  William  Dugdale  before  his  Warwick- 
fliire. 

233s- 

A  parchment  Book  in  i6to.  rudely  illuminated,  wherein 
is  contained, 

1.  An  Old  Englifh  Poem  upon  our  Bleffed  Savi  rs 
celebrating  the  Paffover  with  his  Difciples,  his  P.  flion, 
Death,  Burial,  &  Refurreftion.  . 

Beginn.  “  Cum  effet  plenitudo  temporis,  mifit  Deus 
Filiumfuum  faftum. 

Comyng  he  gret  fyme  of  Mercy, 

Whan  he  Fadir  fent  his  Sone  from  on  hyz 

Y  8  E  Off 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2338,  2339. 


Off  a  Mayden  he  wolde  be  born. 

To  faue  Man-kynde  pat  was  for-lorn." 

2.  Prophetia  Regis  Anglie.  pag.  ult. 

I  his  is  filly  and  imperfect,  beginning  thus, 

“  Whanne  m.ccccc.  togidir  be  knet 
And  xxx.  &  vi.  with  hem  are  met. 

As  Merlyn  fayth  in  pe  (lory  of  Britayn, 

Of  Kyng  Hary  of  Ynglond  certayn.” 

At  the  end  of  the  main  Poem,  (pag.  penult.)  is  the 
following  Note  written  by  a  later  hand,  “  Finis  Paflionis 
Chrifli,  auctore  Thoma  Breus,  1422.”  which  fecms  to 
be  a  midake,  and  perhaps  a  wilful  one.  For  the  Name 
Ihomas  Breus  which  appears  in  the  fiid  Page,  written 
in  large  Text-Letters  of  Red  and  Black  Ink,  is  of  the 
very  fame  Inks  that  the  whole  book  is  written  with,  and 
that  (as  we  fee  above)  maketh  mention  of  the  year  1536  : 
lo  that  ’tis  much  more  likely  that  this  Breus  was  only 
the  poflelTor  of  it. 

2339* 

A  parchment  Book  in  201110.  not  ill  written;  and  con¬ 
fiding  altogether  of  i  heological  matters,  divers  where¬ 
of  are  Tranflations  from  the  Latin.  They  are  here 
putt-down  in  the  following  Order, 

1 .  1  he  later  part  of  a  Prayer  to  our  bleded  Saviour 

Jcfus  Chrid.  r> 

This  wants  the  fird  Leaf,  which  (without  doubt) 
was  torne-out  for  the  fake  of  the  Illumination. 

2.  An  Orifoun  (or  Prayer,  from  •*  Oratio”)  in  mynd 

(i.  e.  Memory)  of  Jhefu  Cridis  Paffioun.  2. 

3.  An  Orifoun  made  by  Seynt  Audyn  Jie  Doftour, 
(1.  e.  Bp.  of  Hippo.) 

Beginn.  “  Domine  Jtiu  Xpe  qui  huuc  Munduin.” 

&c. 

4-  An  Orifoun  to  be  feid  to  oure  Ladi,  and  to  Seint 
Joon  pe  Euangelid. 

Begin.  “  O  intemerata,  &  in  eternum &c. 

5.  A  precious  Orifoun  for  him  pat  lovep  bis  nam 

Jhesu.  g 

Beginn.  “  O  bone  Jhefu,"  See. 

6.  pe  Rule  of  our  Ladies  I.ijf ;  according  as  die 

reveled  it  to  a  devout  Woman  Seruaunt  of  God,  Seynt 
Elizabeth,  Joon  Baptids  Modir.  ,o. 

Beginn.  «  Aboute  )>e  glorious  Maiden  of  whom 
oure  Lord  Jhefu  Grid  took  Fleifch  &  Blood.” 

7;  f>e  Writyrige  of  Seynt  Jerom,  about  the  Life  of 
the  bleffed  Virgin.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Seynt  Jerom  writip  of  Hir  Liif  on  bis 
wife.  1  r 

Then  follow  certain  Paragraphs,  whofe  Rubrics  are, 

3.  How  euery  Man  may  lerne  to  make  him  redy  to’ 
God  euery  day.  f_ 

9.  pe  Malice  of  Synners.  jg 

10.  Thatwemoun  lerne  how  we  fchulden  wakepe 

Flours  of  oure  Soule  fro  vndirmynynge  of  the  Feende  bi 
Synne ;  &  to  be  redi  whateuer  tyme  we  ben  callid  for 
to  anfwere  for  oure  good  Deedis  and  yuek  22. 

11.  Of Emperour  &  Kingis  Office;  and  of  her  Mi- 

nutris.  2g 

12.  Of  vnjud  Sleinge,  &  vnjud  Wrappe.  o  ,  ‘ 

*3-  fliat  no  Man  fchulde  deme  hiuifilf  jud.  23 
14*  Of  jud  Wedding,  &  vnjud.  18 

14.  How  Grid  fchal  appere  at  Domefday.  38.%. 

16.  Hou  we  fchulen  go  with  oure  Enemye  ;  and  how 

,We  fchulden  zeue  &  lene  (i.  e.  lend)  and  ho»  Men  raoun 
Liwcfully  be chaflifid  for  Synne.  g 

Yuei'  °f  (i'£'  Virt"°us)  Xirginlte :  and'  of 

I  am  apt  to  conjeaure  thatthefe  feveral  Pariraoh, 
make  but  one  Tra£h  °  ^ 

18:  A  profitable  Mirrour  for  fynful  Men  &  Wymen 
to  biholde  ynne.  ’ 

Beginn.  «  For  pat  we  ben  in  pe  weye  of  pis  fai'l- 
ynge  Lijf.  ’ 


Num.  2339—2341. 

At  the  end,  this  Trad  is  called  pe  Myrrour  of 
Synners  ;  and,  perhaps  may  be  that  which  Dr.  Gave  (or 
rather  Mr.  Wharton)  aferibes  to  John  Wyclyffe,  Hid 
Lift.  pag.  54.  App. 

19.  A  I  retis  of  pre  Arowis  pat  fchulcn  be  fchot  on 
Domefday  to  hem  pat  pere  fchulen  be  dampned.  62.  b. 

Beginn .  Whol'o  wole  have  in  mynde  pe  dredful 

Day  of  Doom.” 

This  Trad  is  alfo  aferibed  to  John  Wvclvffe,  in  the 
place  above  cited. 

20.  Flow  ech  Man  &  Woman  may  leme  to  love  & 

lerve  God,  cqh  in  his  Degree  ;  takynge  enlaumple  bi 
pe  Foulis.  ^ 

2r.  peSwetnes  of  pe  Lone  of  Jhefu.  '  78. 

Beginn.  “  Jhefu  pi  Swetneffe  who  myzte  it  f'e, 

And  pereof  to  haue  a  cleer  knowinge  ; 

A1  erpeli  Loue  bitter  fchulde  be, 

But  pin  aloone  w'ipnut  Lefvnge.” 

22.  pe  Complaynt  of  God,  of  euery  i'vnful  Man  & 
Woman,  m  verfe likewife.  '  gj.  5 

Beginn.  “  Oure  gracious  God,  ful  of  Pite, 

Whos  Myzt  &  Goodnes  neuer  bigan.” 

.  ,  j’.e  >re  Argumentis  pat  pe  Deuel  wil  puttc  to  Man, 

mhjsDijnge.  IO0.b. 

Begmn.  ct  The  fird  Argument  pat  he  wole  make- 
is  pis.  ’ 

24.  A  litil  Lretys  azens  pe  Opynyoun  of  Cum  Men 

patfeyn  pat  no  man  hap  power  for  tochaunge  pe  Kaboth 
fro  )>e  Sarirday  to  J>e  Sonday.  And  here  is  plevnlv 
proued  >e  contrarie,  by  Holi  Wrilt,  &  Doft.mis  Sen'- 
tencc  accordynge  perwip.  j  04  b. 

Beginn.  “  Sum  Men  douten,  fip  no  man  hap  lee uc 
for  to  chaunge  the  ten  Commaundementis  of  God.” 

25.  pe  x  Comaundementls  of  God  ;  in  Verfe,  as  are 

all  that  follow.  1 1 0  h 

26.  pe  vii.  deedly  Synnes.  ri6.  b 

27.  pe  vii  Vertues  azens  pe  vn  deedly  Synnes. 

28.  pe  vii  Werkis  of  Merci  bodilv,  1  iS.  b 

29.  pe  vii  Werkis  of  Merci  godly.  ,’i<,. 

30.  pe  feuenc  Sacramentis.  1  119.  b. 

3  r .  pe  five  bodily  Wittis.  1  2 , . 

32.  pefyueWitiis  goodly.  i2i~b. 

33.  Gracis  to  fore  Mete.  ibid.* 

34.  Gracis  aftir  Mete.  I22’ 

35.  Gracis  afore  Soper.  122.  b! 

36.  Gracis  aftir  Soper.  Ibid/ 

,  2340. 

A  parchment  Book  m  2omo.  relating  to  Hawks,  d  Ve- 
nerie  ;  containing  the  following  particulars, 
i-  The  maner  to  kepe  Gos-haukes  &  Sper-haukes.  1. 

2.  Medicynes  for  the  Frounce,  Ree,  d  Cray. 

3.  TheTermys  of  Haukynge.  '  q 

4.  Other  Medicines  againd  Difeafes  in  Hawks.  7.  b. 

5.  Of  Mewing  Hawks.  Iu  ^ 

At  the  end  of  this  Article,  I  obferve  the  following 

Rubrie.  “  Here  endith  the  booke  of  Hawkynge  af>  ;r 
Prince  Edwarde  Kvnge  ofEnglande.” 

C.  OLher  Medicines  for  Hawks.  1- 

7.  A  filly  Charm  againd  the  Tooth-ach,  &e.  written 
by  a  newer  hand. 

8.  More  Medicines  for  Hawks.  ,  - 

9.  For  to  cliefe  an  Hawke. 

10.  lermys  how  zour  Flawke  deythe.  40.  b. 

x  1.  Other  Terms  ufed  in  Hawking. 

1 2.  Termys  of  Venery.  ibid. 

Then  follow  written  by  newer  Hands, 

13.  Receipts  to  make  a  Pultus;  Salve  to  heal  a  Cotte, 
or  a  bore  ;  Eie-falve  ;  and  to  temper  Bird-lime.  -7. 

14.  F or  the  Pine  in  a  Haukes  fote.  r*  b, 

2341.  * 

Codex  paroe  molis,  fed  membranaceus  ;  in  quo  coati- 
nebatur  Manuale  Precum  in  uium  cujufdam  privari, 

inanu 


Bibliotheca;  HarJeianse. 


659 


Num.  2341,  2342. 

traii'u  Anglica  defcriptum.  Verum  plurimis  ex  eo 
iolijs  jamdudura  exfciilis,  nunc  foluin  re  ft  ant, 

1 .  Calendarium.  , 

Here,  in  pag.  5.  are  fome  old  Englilh  Rhymes, 
(hewing  the  Number  of  Days  in  each  Month  of  the 
Year. 

- ■  Orntio  ad  D.N.  Jefum  Xpum  verfibus  refonaiiti- 
bus  &  malcfidis. 

.r  Selecfi  aliquot  Pfalmi  e  Pf.ilterio  Hieronymiano, 
qui  decantati  opem  ferunr  ijsqui  in  Infirmiratibus  jacent, 
aut  qui  Operibus  occupantur ;  aut  Iter  aguiit  longin- 
quum  ;  feu  qui  Naufragio  navigant;  et  (leg.  aut)  qui 
Bella  commifluri  lunt  contra  Holies  feu  Inimicos,  feu 
contra  Invidiam  Diabolorum,  qui  contra  Xpianorum  Ani¬ 
mas  vifitant.  2q. 

4.  Pfalmi  de  Paftione  Domini. 

Sequitur  Collettio  Precum,  Antiphonarum,  & c.  In¬ 
ter  eas  eminent, 

5-  Quindecim  Orationes  ad  Jefum  Chriftum,  quai 
omnes  incipiunt  a  littera  O  ;  Anglice  dicta;,  The  Fifteen 

^es"  •  1  °3- 

6.  Oratio  venerabilis  ....  ad  Virginem  gloriofam. 

12  9. 

7.  Alia  Oratio  de  S.  Maria.  1  jp. 

8.  Letania  de  S.  Maria.  r4y. 

9.  Orationes  dure  cum  Rubricis  Anglicis,  de  Elee- 

mofynis  pauperibus  erogandis .  !  6  ^ . 

10.  Oratio  ad  Dominum  Jefum  Chriftum.  167. 

1 1.  Oratio  qua:  debet  bis  dici  per  (leg.  contra)  Mor¬ 
tem  fubitaneam. 

12.  Oratio  de  S.  Spiritu.  igi. 

13.  Oratio  de  S.  Cruce.  182. 

14.  Oratio  ad  proprium  Angelum.  187. 

15.  DeS.  Thomas  Marti're,  Orationes  de  indultria 

deletm.  ,qo. 

16.  DeS.  Maria.  IC)I- 

17.  De  S,  Anna.  Jq8. 

18.  Orationes  ad  beatam  virginem  Mariam.  201- 

19.  De  S.  Albano.  204.  b. 

20.  De  S.  Juliano.  20 

21.  De  S.  Barbara.  2cy 

22.  De  S.  Appolonia.  zog 

23.  Oratio  de  pluribus  Santtis.  210! 

24.  Oratio  pro  bono  amico  infirmo.  212. 

25.  Oratio  ad  S.  Michaelem.  2I - 

26.  Oratio  ad  S-  Gabrielem.  ibid. 

27.  Oratio  ad  S.  Raphaelem.  ibid. 

28.  Alia  bona  Oratio  ad  eofdem  Angelos.  214" 

29.  Oratio  ad  S.  Johannem  Baptiftam.  2  1  5. 

2342. 

A  velum  Book  of  a  fmall  but  thickifh  fize,  being  the 
Manual  of  Devotions  of  fome  Englilh  Proteftant  of 
Quality,  who  was  calt  into  Pril'on  wrongfully,  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  own  Opinion.  It  was  illuminated  by  fome 
foreigner,  but  hath  ftnee  been  abufed,  &  is  now  jm_ 
perfect  in  two  places.  It  contains, 

1 .  A  Prayer  for  Patience  in  Tribulation,  as  Chrift  was 

patient.  j 

2 .  A  Prayer  conferninge  theLove  of  myNeighbour.  3.' 

3.  A  Prayer  for  forgivenefs  of  Sins  ;  wherein  Gloteny 

is  added  to  Lechery.  „  ; 

4.  A  Prayer  for  our  Enemyfe.  1 

5.  For  Pacveus  in  Tribulation.  1  b. 

b.  For  true  WilUoin.  ,5 

7.  A  Confeflion  ot  bins  to  God  ;  feeming  to  want  the 

beginning.  jg 

Here,  among  other  bins,  the  Penitent  chargeth  him- 
feli  with  Adulterie  &  Theft. 

8.  A  Praier  to  our  Lorde  Jhefu  Chrift.  21.  b. 
Here  (fol.  24.  b.)  he  defircs  Grace  pacyently  to 

Sufffe.  % 

9.  The  Praier  of  quene  Efter,  for  help  agaynft  her 

Enymyc-s.  27.  b. 


N 


urn.  2342. 


10.  The  Praer  of  Sara  the  doughter  of  Raguell, 

whan  file  was  flaundred.  2S.  b.  * 

1 1.  The  Praier  of  Judith  for  the  Viftorie  of  Olvf- 

femeS* ...  20. 

1 2.  i  he  Praier  of  Jeflus  the  fonne  of  Sirake.  29.  b. 

13.  The  Praier  of  the  3  Children  that  were  delyuered 

from  the  hote  burnying  Fire.  '  o  2 

14.  The  Praier  of  Manafteth  King  of  Juda.  35.  b! 

15.  A  Prayer  for  Grace  to  believe  &  truft  in  Jefiis 

Chrift.  g 

16.  A  Prayer  for  Afliftance  againft  many  of  the  Au¬ 
thors  Infirmities.  ' 

Among!!  others,  he  mentions  Pollinge  of  poore 
people  ;  &  Crabbednes  agaynft  thole  that  were  with  him 
in  Howfeholde. 

17.  A  Prayer  to  the  blefled  Trenyte.  42.  b. 

r  1n‘, A  ?ayer  t0  Gocl  *or  E>elyuerance  from  the  power 
ol  all  his  Enemyes,  and  frome  all  theym  that  confented 
to  his  Deftru&yon  and  Pardieone.  44. 

19-  A  Prayer  againft  the  Temptations  of  the  Flefshe, 
the  Worlde,  &  the  Deuylle.  45.  b 

„  AcP“yfon  ?r„Pi'“yer  for  (*•  «•  all  the 

E\ylles  of  Paynes  &  Pumfhments.  4s.  b. 

Here  the  Author  fays,  “  Kcpe  vs  from  thv  mofte 
greuous  Strokes,  the  Peftylence,  FrenchePockes/Fallinir 
Sikenes,  &  fuche  other  Deleafes  for  in  thofe  days  it 
was  believed  that  the  Pox  might  be  communicated  to  a 
man  by  breathing ;  as  witnefs,  the  Articles  againft  Car¬ 
dinal  Wolfey. 

21.  A  deuoute  Prayer  to  Crifte  the  feconde  Perfon  in 
Irynyte,  ouronely  Redemer,  God  &  Man.  49.  b. 

Here,  at  57.  he  defires  forgivenefs  for  particu¬ 
lar  Sms. 

22.  A  Peticion  &  Praier  to  oure  Lorde.  59.  b. 
This  is  for  Delyuerance  from  his  Enemyes. 

23 •  Ejaculations  colleded  from  the  Pfalnis,  &  other 
Scriptures,  befeeching  the  divine  Afliftance,  in  the  Au¬ 
thors  extreme  Mil'ery.  q2 

24.  The  Songe  of  Aufteyn  &  Ambrofe.  74.  b! 

25.  Saynt  Jeroms  Deuocion  oute  of  Dauyds  Saulter. 

Here,  fome  Verfes  feem  to  intimate  as  if  the  Author 
had  met  with  the  Deliverance  he  fo  much  prayed  for. 

26.  A  Praier  to  the  Fai her.  '  io6 

27.  A  Praier  to  the  holy  Gofte.  io7’ 

28.  A  Praier  to  the  Trenyte.  iot  b! 

29.  A  Prayer  to  Jefu  Cbrifle.  i0s.  b." 

30.  The  Lords  Prayer,  followed  by  many  holv  Eja¬ 
culations.  ,  k 

Thel'e  are  fuitable  to  the  Condition  of  a  Perlon  in 
Tribulation  :  yet  fome  of  them  do  feem  to  import  a  De¬ 
liverance. 

Now  follow,  by  another  hand, 

31.  A  Prayer  in  Trobil. 

32.  A  Prayer  for  the  lyghtenyng  of  the  holye  Ghofte. 

33.  A  Prayer  in  Aduerfitte  &  greuous  Didrefle. 

34.  A  Prayer  for  drengthe  of  mvnde  to  beare  the 
Crofle. 

Here,  the  Petitioner  feemeth  to  defpair  of  human 

Help. 

35.  A  Prayer  of  the  faythful  perfon  in  Adverfite. 

I  will  not  affirm  that  this  Manual  was  writtenbv 
the  Direction  of  Edward  Seymour  Duke  of  Somerfet  & 
Protettor  of  England,  upon  his  firll  Committment  to  the 
Tower  of  London,  and  that  the  laft  five  Prayers  were 
added  after  his  lecond  Committment,  which  ended  in 
his  Execution..  But  if  this  were  fo,  ’tis  eafy  to  appre¬ 
hend  how  it  might  come  into  the  hands  of  that  noble  but 
unfortunate  Lady,  the  Lady  Jane  Grey :  whofe  Mar¬ 
riage  with  the  Lord  Guilford  Dudley,  fourth  fon  to  the 
ambitious  Duke  of  Northumberland  coft  them  all  their 
Lives.  But  that  this  Book  was  in  the  Lady  Janes  hands 


66o 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


x.um.2342,  23+3. 

pnliciiion,  and  avas  alfo  looked  into  by  her  Hufbnnd, 
appears  by  the  3  following  Notes,  written  in  the  lower 
Margins. 

36.  “  Your  Ipuyng  and  obedyent  fon  wifchethe  vnto 

your  Grace  long  lyfe  in  this  world,  with  as  mtlche  joy 
&  comforte,  as  euer  I  wyfhte  to  my  lelle ;  and  in  the 
world  to  come  joy  euerlafting.  "i  our  molt  humble  Ion 
tel  his  Dethe  G.  Duddeley.”  59-b- 

37.  “  Forafmuche  as  you  have  de  fired'  fo  fimple  a  wo¬ 
man  to  wrighte  in  fo  worthy  a  booke,  gode  Mayfter 
Lieuftenante,  therefore,  1  lhalle,  as  a  frende  defy  re  you, 
and  as  a  Chriftian  require  you,  to  call  vpyon  God,  to 
encline  youre  harte  to  his  lav.  es,  to  quicken  you  in  his 
wave,  and  not  to  take  the  worde  oftrewethe  vtterlyeoute 
of  youre  inouthe.  I.yue  iiyll  to  dye,  that  by  deatheyou 
mav  purchale  eternall  life’;  and  remembre  howe  the 
eud'e  of  Mathufael,  whoe  as  we  reade  in  the  fcripturcs, 
was  the  longefte  liner  that  was  of  a  manne,  died  at  the  1 
lade.  For,  as  the  Precher  fayethe,  there  is  a  tyme  to  , 
be  borne,  and  a  tyme  to  dye  ;  and  the  daye  of  Deathe  is  | 
better  than  the  daye  of  oure  birthe.  Youres  as  the 
Lorde  knowethe as  a  frende.  Jane  Duddeley.”  74-  b. 

The  Gentleman  this  was  written  for,  feems  to  have 
been  Sir  John  Gage  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower  of  London, 
when  file  was  prifoner  therein. 

2 ft.  The  Lorde  comforte  your  Grace,  and  that  in  his 
worde  whearein  alle  creatures  onlyeare  to  be  comforted. 
And  thoughe  it  hath  pleafed  God  to  lake  awaye  2  of 
your  children :  yet  thincke  not,  I  moll  humblye  befeche 
voure  Grace,  that  you  haue  lofte  them ;  but  trufte  that 
we  bv  leafinge  this  mortall  life,  haue  wunne  an  immortal 
Life  .  And  I,  for  my  parte,  as  T  haue  honoured  youre  Grace 
in  this  life,  wyll  praye  for  you  in  another  Life.  Your 
Gracys  humble  daughter  Jane  Duddeley.” 

None  of  thefe  3  Notes  or  Epiflles  are  mentioned  by 
any  of  our  Hiftorians,  that  I  now  remember. 


-343* 


A  parchment  Book  in  a  very  fmall  Volume,  feeming  to 
have  been  compiled  by  ferae  perfon  enclined  to  Lol- 
Iardifm  ;  but  whether  by  John  Wyclyffe  or  not,  I  am 
not  fatisfied  at  prefent.  In  it  I  find, 

1.  The  Lords  Prayer.  1  • 

2.  The  Ave  Marie.  ibid. 

3.  The  Apoflles  Creed  ;  with  Scripture-proofs  decla¬ 
ring  Sc  expounding  every  Article  of  it.  1.  b. 

4.  The  Ten  Comaundcmentis  of  God,  pe  which  ben 
written  in  Exodi  he  20  Cap.  pat  ech  man  fchulde  kepe  & 
knowe  if  pei  wolen  befaued,&  come  to  peblis  of  Heuene 
with  an  Explication  of  the  fame,  &  a  Prolog.  11. 

Here  the  Compiler  inveigheth  much  againft  the  wor- 
fhip  of  Images. 

3.  pe  Charge  of  the  Ten  Comaundcmentis  of  God. 

7  a* 

6.  pe  Ten  Venjaunces  of  Egipt,  for  brekeinge  of  pe 
Ten  Comaundementis.  77-  b- 

7.  Of  the  feven  deedli  Synnes.  79. 

S.  Of  the  7  Vertues  pat  ben  Remedies  azens  the  7 
deedli  Synnes.  79' 

9.  Of  the  5  bodili  Wittis.  7 9- 

10.  Of  pe  5  gooftli  Wittis.  80.  b. 

n.  Of  pe  7  werks  of  bodili  Merck  82. 

12.  Of  pe  7  werkis  of  gooftli  Merci.  84. 

13.  Of  pe  7  principal  Vertues.  84.  b. 

t  4.  Of  pe  8  bit  flings  of  oure  Lord  Jhcfu  Crift.  85.  b. 
15.  Of  pe  16  Condiciouns  of  Charite,  pat  Seint  Pou’l 


techip.  86.  b. 

1 6.  Of  pe  4  tokenes  of  Saluacioun.  8  8.  b. 

17.  Of  the  5  Wondris  of  Seint  Auftyn.  89. 

18.  Then  cometh  a  fort  of  a  Conclufion  to  the  fore¬ 
going  Paragraphs.  89.  b. 

19  Four  nedeful  pingis  toeche  man.  93.  b. 

20.  The  Magnificat.  94.  b. 


21.  The  Verfe  “  Pacem  fequimini  &  Sandimoniam 


Num.  2343—23+5. 

cum  omnibus ;  fine  qua,  nemo  videbit  Deum:”  in  Latin 
&  Englilh.  95-  b. 

2344- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  rain,  manu  Anglica  de 
feriptus ;  in  quo  continentur, 

1 .  Adnotatio  temporum,  quibus  priftinus  Codicis  pof- 

feflbr,  ut  videtur,  Verbum  Dei  propalavic  ad  Crucein 
tunc  in  cajmiterio  Ecclefi®  Paulin®  ftantem,  ab  A.D. 
1493.  vfq;  ad  A.D.  1505.  1.  b. 

2.  Tradatus  cujus  Audor  totus  eft  in  Mo¬ 

urns  atq;  Adnotatis  Theologis,  qUie  in  Capita  feu  Sedi- 
ones  250  dillir.guehantur;  e  quibus  priores  67  jam  nunc 
exfeifla,  de  induitria,  defiderantur.  2. 

3.  Tabula  Materiarum  in  ijfdem  Sedionibus  conten- 

tarum.  144. 

4.  Verficuli  tres  pro  Johanne  Chapman  demortuo. 

I57\ 

Quifnam  fuerit  illius  Tractates  (utrobique  truncati) 
Audor,  haud  plane  fcio  ;  veruin  eum  Anglum  fuiffe  ex 
to  conftet  quod  plurae  Voces  Anglic®  atq;  Phrafes  hiuc 
inde  reperiuntur,  qui  ab  alienigenis  iftius  Seculi  Theolo¬ 
gis  vix  pronunciari  feu  deferibi  puterint :  verbi  gratia,  ij 
quos  invenire  licet  in  foliis  120.  b.  I2i.i3i.b.  123.  b. 
acceditet  hoc  Excmplum,  in  folio  124.  lin.  penult.  “SI 
enim  duo  homines  tranlirent  Londonias  in  via  lubrica,  et 
unus  cadendo  cito  furgeret,  et  fic  pluries  cito  furgeret, 
ipfe  aliquando  Londonias  veniret:  et  ii  alius  cadendo  non 
furgeret,  ipfe  nunquam  Londonias  veniret.” 

Ultima  in  Codicis  pagina,  cernitur  htec  adnotatio, 
“  Ifte  liber  conftat  Magiftro  Joanni  Chapman  in  facra 
Theologia  Profeifori,  et  Redori  in  Honylane  ;**  fcilicet, 
in  Civitate  fupra-memorata. 

2345- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  cujus  nunc  plura  defide¬ 
rantur  folia  :  quo  tamen  continebantur  diverfa  cujuf- 
dam  Monachi,  uti  videtur,  Winchelcumbenfis  opuf- 


cula,  infequente  Ordine  deferipta,  vizt. 

Sermones  breviufculi  de  Tempore  ; 

quorum  Ru- 

ric®  funt. 

1.  Dominica  prima  in  Adventu. 

1. 

2.  Dominica  fecunda  in  Adventu. 

ibid. 

3.  Dominica  tertia  in  Adventu. 

ibid. 

4.  Dominica  quarta  in  Adventu. 

1.  b. 

5.  Dominica  infra  Natale  Domini. 

2. 

6.  In  Odavis  Epiphanie. 

ibid. 

7.  Dominica  fecunda. 

2.  b. 

8.  Dominica  tertia. 

3- 

9.  Dominica  quarta. 

ibid. 

10.  Dominica  Septuagefiine. 

3.  b. 

1 1 .  Dominica  Sexagefime. 

4- 

1 2.  Dominica  Quinquagefnne, 

ibid. 

13.  Dominica  prima  Ouadragefime. 

5- 

14.  Dominica  fecunda  Quadragefime. 

ibid. 

15.  Dominica  tertia  Ouadrageiime. 

5.  b. 

16.  Dominica  quarta  Quadiagcfime. 

C. 

17.  Dominica  in  Paflione. 

7- 

18.  In  Ramis  Palmarum. 

7.  b. 

19.  In  fefto  Pafche  Refurredionis. 

8. 

20.  In  Odabis  Pafche. 

ibid. 

2  1 .  Dominica  fecunda. 

S.  b. 

22.  Dominica  tertia. 

9- 

23.  Dominica  quarta. 

9.  b. 

24.  Dominica  quinta. 

10. 

25.  Dominica  fexta. 

10. 

26.  In  die  Pcntecoftes. 

ibid. 

27.  In  die  Sande  Triuitatis. 

1 1. 

28.  Dominica  prima  poll  fellum  Sande  Trinitatis. 

29.  Dominica  fecunda. 

ibid. 

30.  Dominica  tertia. 

.  12. 

31.  Dominica  quarta. 

12.  b. 

32.  Dominica  quinta. 

»3*. 

33.  Domi- 

*5 

Bibliothecas  Harleianae. 


1561 


IS'um.  234.5, 


33..  Dominica  fextn. 

13.  b. 

34.  Dominica  feptima. 

35.  Dominica  odtava. 

14.  b. 

3.6.  Dominica  nona. 

37.  Dominica  decima. 

16. 

38.  Dominica  undecima. 

16.  b 

39.  Dominica  duodecima. 

l7’ 
17.  b. 

4c.  Dominica  deciina-tcrtia. 

41.  Dominica  dedma-quarta. 

1 8. 

42.  Dominica  dccima-quinta. 

ibid. 

43.  Dominica  decima-fexta. 

18.  b. 

44-  Dominica  decima- feptima. 

19. 

45.  Dominica  dccima-oftava. 

19.  b. 

46.  Dominica  decima  nona. 

20. 

47-  Dominica  vicefima. 

20-  b. 

48.  Dominica  vicefima-prima. 

2 1  • 

4.9-  1  lominica  vicefima-fecunda. 

ai.b. 

50-  Dom  nica  vicefima-tertia. 

ibid- 

5 1  Dominica  vicefima-quarta. 

22. 

5%’  Dominica  vicefima-qiu'nfa. 

22.  b. 

Sequuntur  ejufdem  Compilatorit 

quifquis  ille  fuerit. 

me  lYIonachi  five  Sacerdotis  fecularis,  Sermones  de 
Sanctis  :  fcilicet, 

53-  Infefto  S.  Johannis  Evangelifte. 

54.  In  die  Epiphanit. 

55.  De  Circumdfione. 

56.  In  die  Cinerum. 

57.  Dominica  prima  Quadragefime. 

58.  I11  die  Palraarum. 

59.  In  die  Cene  Domini, 
to.  De  Afcenlione  Domini. 

61.  In  Rogationibus. 

6c.  Nati vitas  S.  Johannis  Baptifte. 

63.  Sandte  Marie. 

(14.  De  Actibus  Apoftolorum. 

65.  De  Apoftolis. 

66.  In  fefto  S.  Andree. 

67.  In  fefto  S.  Johannis  Evangelifte. 

6.8.  Dc  S.Thoma  Apoftolo. 

69.  In  fefto  S.Mathei  Evangelifte. 

70.  In  lefto  S.  Bartholomei  Apoftoli. 

7  1 .  S.  Jacobi  Apoftoli. 

72.  S.  Barnabe  Apoftoli. 

73.  SS.  Svmonis  &  Jude. 

74.  In  fefto  S.  Philippi  Apoftoli. 

75-  S.  Jacobi  Apoftoli. 

76.  S.  Mathei  Apoftoli. 

77.  Infefto  S. Nicliolai  Epjfcopi  A  Confeftoris.  40.  b. 

78.  In  die  Natalis  Domini.  41.  b. 

79.  In  fefto  S.Stephani  protho-martyris.  4-. 

3o.  Sanctorum  Innocentiuin.  ibid. 

81.  In  Circumcifione.  4-’.  b. 

8 .2.  In  die  Epjphanie.  ibid. 

8.3.  S.  Vincentij  Martyris.  ^ 

84.  In  Converfione  S.  Pauli  Apoftoli.  44.  b. 

85.  In  lefto  Purificationis  Bcate  Marie  Virginis.  (Ini- 

pe'f-J  44.' 

86.  In  fefto  S.  Blafij  Epifcopi.  (Imperf.)  43.  b. 

87.  In  felto  S.  Agathe.  ibid. 

88.  S.  Petri  ad  Cathedram.  4b. 

89.  In  fefto  S.  Gregorij  Pape.  46.  b. 

90.  In  fefto  S.  Cuthberii  Epifcopi  &  Confefloris.  ibid. 

91.  I11  lefto  S.  Benedict!  Abbatis  8c  Confeiforis'.  47. 
Init.  “Ilia  die  habetis  feftum  S.  Benedict. Confef- 

fqria,  qui  ordinem  quos  nos  Albos  Monachos  vocamus, 
inftiiuit.”  Hie  magnus  patet  Error;  Benedictus  enim 
ordinem  inftituit  Nigrorum  Monachorum  ;  Stephanus 
autem  Hardingus  Anglus  incepit  Ordinem  Alborum  Mo- 
liachorpm  five  Ciftercienftum,  A.D.  ieo8. 

„  ,  T„  \ _  •  ■  r.  .  ...  . 


92.  In  A nnunciatjone  S.  Marie  Virginis.  47.  b. 
93-  In  fefto  S.  Marci  Evangelifte.  48. 

94.  In  Inyentione  Sandte  Crucis  Domini  noftri.  ibid. 
95 •  bl  fefto  S.  Johannis  Evangelifte.  48.  b. 

96.  In  fefto  S.  Dunftam.  '  ibfj. 

CUT.  IIarl.  Vol.  II, 


23* 
23.  b. 
24. 
24. 

25.  b. 

26. 

26.  b. 

27. 

27.  b. 

28. 
ibid. 

29. 
29.  b: 
32.  b. 

33-  b* 

34-  b. 
3C- 
37- 

37-  b. 
38. 

38.  b. 

39.  b. 
ibid. 


Num.  2  343. 

97.  In  fefto  S.  Auguftini  Confeiforis  :  fell,  Anglorum 

Apoftoli.  0 

98.  Ip  fefto  S.  Albani  Martyris.  40.  b. 

99;  bi  fefto  S.  Johannis  Baptifte.  ibid. 

Hie  dicitur  Auctor,  “  Dico  ejus  Nativitatem  cum  o-au- 

dio  ;  non  illo  taincn  gaudio  quo  Stulti  vani,  &  prophani 
amatorcs  mundi  hujus,  accenlis  Ignibus  per  plateas  (Ah- 
giice  Bone-fires')  turpibus  &  illicifis  Ludis,  Commefla- 
tiombus,  &  Ebi  ietatibus,  Cubilibus,  &  Imp itdiciriis  inten- 
dentes,  earn  celebrare  folent.” 

xoc.  Item,  de  eodeni.  ibid1". 

Init.  “  Dicamus  de  tripudijs  que  in  Vigilia  S.  Jo- 
hanms  fieri  folent ;  quorum  tria  genera.  In  Vigilia  enim 
beati  Johannis  colligunt  pueri,  in  quibufdam  regionibus, 
oha  &  quedam  aha  itnmunda,  &  in  finnul  cremant,  et  ex- 
inde  producitur  lumus  in  aere.  Cremant  ?  etiam  Bran- 
das  (leu  Eafces)  et  circuiunt  arva  cum  Brandis.  Tertiutn, 
c  e  Rota  quani  faciunt  volvi.  Ouod  cum  immunda  cre- 
mant,  hoc  habent  ex  Gentilibus.” 

1 01  De  S.  Kenelmo  Rege  &  Martyre,  50.  b. 

Hie  agirur  de  portatione  Corporis  ejus  ad  Winchil- 
cumbe,  et  de  Miraculis  fuis. 

102.  De  S.  Maria  Magdalene. 

103.  S.  Ofwaldi  Martyris. 

104.  In  fefto  decollation^  S.  Johannis; 

105.  S.  Egidij  Confeiforis. 

106.  De  Nativitate  beate  Marie  Virginis. 

1 07.  ^  S.  Egwini  Confeiforis.  tuiu 

Init.  “•  Santtus  Egwinus  natus  fuit  in  Wallia  ad 

Bergavem.  Venit  in  Angliam  regnantibus  in  bine 
mere  he  uel  cude  Humbre  ad  mare  aultrale  Kynercd  & 
Ejielred.  Et  quia  bonus  Clericus  erat,  eorum  filios  do- 
cmt.” 

1  jS.  In  fefto  E.valtationis  Sancte  Crucis. 

109.  DeS.Lando. 
no.  S.  Michaelis  in  Monte  Tumba. 
hi.  De  S.  Romano  Epifcopo  et  Cor.felTore. 

11..  S.  Fidis  Virginis  et  Martyiis. 

1 13.  S.  Dionifij  Epilcopi  et  Martyris, 

1 14.  S.  Luce  Evangelifte. 

1 15.  S.  Quintini  Martyris. 

116.  S.  Bonefacij. 

1 17.  Dc  S.  Martino. 

118.  In  fefto  S.  Eadmundi  Regis, 

1 1 9.  S.  Katerine  Virginis. 

1 20.  S.  Ofwaldi  Archiepifcopi. 

131.  S.  Adulphi  Confeiforis. 

122.  S.  Godwaldi  (.’oufeilbris. 

12,’.  Sermo  in  illud,  “  Nifi  manducaveritis  carnein 

Filij  Hominis,  et  biberitis  ejus  fanguinem,”  Ac.  56.  b. 

Sequitur,  ejufdem  Compilatoris  Opufculum,  *  ciii 
hunc  Tit iilum  prjemifit,  “  Inltitutiones  Sandtorum  ;  quo- 
niodo  venerandi  funtSandti.”  ^>id 

Initium  Prolog i  (cujus  pars  maxima  deeft)  fic  fe  ha- 
bet,  “  Feftivitates  Sandtorum  Apoftolorum  feu  Martirum 
amiqm  Pitres  in  Venerationis  minifterio  celebrari  fanx- 
eiunt.  In  ip.o  Iradlatu  de  hifee  diebus  arntur. 

124.  De  Ad  vent  11  Domini.  ° 

1 25.  In  fefto  S.  1  home  Archiepifcopi  Cantuarienfis/  et 
Martins, 

126.  De  S.  Silveftro  Papa&  Confeifore. 

127.  S.  Sebaftini  Martiris. 

128.  In  fefto  S.  Agnctis  Virginis  &  Martiris. 

1 29.  S.  Petri  ad  Cathedram. 

1 3  -  •  S-  Gregorij  Pape  8c  ConfeiToris.  1DIU. 

131.  In  Fefto  Pa rafeeue,  et  de  continuatione  trium  dl 

erum-  60.  b. 

132.  De  Pafcha.  QIm 

l33'  feito  S.  Ambrofij  Epifcopi  &  Confeiforis, 

ibid. 

I34*  S.  AlphcgiEpifcopi  &  Martiris.  (Imperf)  61.  b. 

1 3 i  •  In  fefto  b.  Georgij  Martiris,  Sermo  in  fine  man. 
cus-  ^  62.  b. 

o.  Do  Sancta  Margareta,  Serrqo,  «x=p«;As,'.  63. 

81'  1  2  7 .  T  n 


51* 

5i-b. 

ibid. 

5=- 

ibid. 

ibid: 


52.  b. 

53- 

ibid. 

ibid. 

53- .b- 
ibid. 

54. 

ibid. 

54-  fi. 
ibid. 

55' 
55’  b- 
. 5 6- 
ibid, 
ibid. 


58. 
5».  b. 

59- 
59.  b: 
ibid. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


66 1 


Num.  2345,  2346. 

i  ^7-  In  fefto  S.  Sampfonis  F.pifcopi  <k  Confeflbris.  63. 
ijg.  In  Ad  Vincula  S. Petri.  63.  b. 

j-9.  In  Inventione  S.  Stephani  protho-martiris.  ibid. 
J40.  De  S-  Laurentio  Martire.  ibid. 

141.  SS.  Felicis  Sc  Audadi.  64. 

142.  S.  Fridefwide  Virginis  Oxonienfis.  ibid. 

143.  In  fefto  Omnium  Sandorum.  65. 

144.  In  commemoratione  omnium  Fidelium.  66. 

14^.  S.  Briccij  Epifcopi  et  Confeflbris.  67. 

146.  S.  Cecilij  Virginis  Sc  Martiris.  67.  b. 

147.  In  fefto  S.  dementis  Pape  &  Martiris.  68. 

148.  In  fefto  S.  Lucie  Virginis  Sc  Martiris.  68.  b. 

149.  Vitas  Patrum.  69. 

Scilicet  Excerpta  qutcdam  ex  Opere  I.egendario  fic 

vu'go  dido,  quod  e  fcrinijs  Joannis  Cafliani,  S.  Hiero- 
nymi,  Gregorij  1.  Heraclidifq;  Cyprij  compilavit  quidam 
Fraterculus  memoratu  indignus. 

Sequuntur,  Monitaqmudam. 

150.  De  Corpore  Crifti,  in  Sacramento  Euchariftite. 

78. 

151.  De  Prelatis  Ecclefie.  7S.  b. 

152.  De  annis  Jhefu  Crifti.  ibid. 

153.  De  Penitcncia  ;  etde  Pfalmis  dicendis.  79. 

154.  Forma  Reclufos,  five  Anachoritas,  initiandi. 

(Imperf.)  79.  b. 

Deinde,  alienis  manibus,  leguntur, 

15-4  Trad  at  us  imperfedus,  in  ufum  Concionantium 
compofitus.  80. 

156.  Locus  e  B.  Auguftini  libro  de  Anima.  86.  b. 

157.  A  Ihort  Explication  of  theDecaloguc,  in  oklEng- 

lifli.  ibid. 

The  greateft  part  of  this  hath  been  induftrioufly 
erafed,  to  make  room  for  the  preceding  Sentence. 

138.  Short  Notes,  in  old  Englilh;  againft  Pride,  Envy, 
Anger,  &  Gluttony.  87. 

159.  Adnotata  de  Chrifti  Paflione.  87.  b. 

2346. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  410.  minore  ;  partim  Latine, 
partim  Anglicb  defcriptus  ;  verum  ex  diverfis  trada- 
tibus  Theologicis  nunc  funul  compadis  conftans :  in 
quo  licet  reperiere  hofce  qui  fequuntur, 

1.  Tradatus  cIy.:<?xa<&  de  tribus  Giadibus  Coniem- 

pl  adonis.  1. 

2.  Tradatus  mutilus,  multas  Narrationes  legenda- 

rias,  cum  Sententijs  varij  Argumenti  Sc  Sermonibus  in- 
termiftis.  12. 

Ex  his,  Sermones  funt, 

3.  In  Afcenfione  Domini.  17. 

4.  In  illud,  “  Sicut  enim  nullus  fplendor  Lunenifi  a 
Sole  ■,  fic  Corpori  nulla  eft  gratia,  nifi  a  Corde.”  18. 

5.  Sermo  die  Pafche,  ad  primam  Miflam.  18.  b. 

6.  Alius  Sermo  in  die  Pafche,  ad  fee  undam  Miflam. 

19.  b. 

7.  Sermo  in  Capite  Jejunij.  28.  b. 

8.  Sermo  in  Rogacionibus.  29. 

9.  Sermo  in  Afcenfione  Domini.  30. 

10.  Alius  Sermo  de  Afcenfione  Domini.  31. 

1 1.  Sermo  in  Nadvitate  S.  Johannis  Baptifte.  32. 

12.  Sermo  quando  volueris.  32.  b. 

13.  Sequitur  Tradatus  Anglicc  defcriptus,  cujus  Ru- 
brica eft  ‘-Mandata  Dei”  i.e.  Explica tio DecalogL  fol.34. 
Initium  Prologi.  “  Alle  maner  of  men  Ihulden  hold 
Goddys  Byddyngs ;  for  v.  yjj  outen  holdynge  of  hem, 
no  man  may  be  faued  ” 

14.  Sentendolm  de  Mandatis  Decalogi.  47.  b. 

1 5-  Applicatio  plagarum  iEgypti  ad  Dccalogum.  49. 

1 6.  An  old  Englilh  Poem  upon  the  Love  of  our  bleded 
Savior  to  Mankind,  &  his  Sufferings  for  us  :  wherein 
tv  a  Pro  V  popoeta,  he  is  made  to  be  the  Speaker.  5 1 . 
Beg!  n.  “  Ihefu  Kyng  of  Heuene  Sc  Helle, 

Man  &  Womman  Y  wol  zow  telle, 
What  I.oue  I  haue  do  to  )>e, 

Loke  what  )>u  haft  do  for  me.” 


Num.  2346— 234.8. 

17.  Speculum  Saccrdotum,  verfibus  refonamibus. 

SS-  b- 

Init.  “Ecclefie  fande  regimen  qui  ducerefande 

Vis  hec  metra  lege,  de  iacracondita  Lege.” 

2347‘ 

A  parchment  Book  in  4to.  confifting  of  divers  Trads 
Medicinal  Sc  Chirurgical,  with  Receipts  formerly  of 
great  value. 

They  are, 

1.  Kalendare  Herbarium,  vel  Simplicium.  1. 

Part  of  this  being  induftrioufly  deltroyed,  Sc  moft 

of  the  reft  (as  it  feernsl  unfinifhed,  no  more  of  it  appears 
than  a  few  Lines  in  the  1.  3.  Sc  4th  pages. 

2.  Receipts  Medicinal  &  Chirurgical,  in  Latine, 
Englilh,  or  French  ;  of  the  goodnefs  of  which  I  pafs 
not  my  Judgment,  ibid.  The  Writer  of  this  Trad,  in 
fol.  2.  b.  Sc  elfewhere,  ufes  a  Cyfer  for  Secreevs  fake, 
which  he  thought  no  Stranger  could  find  out.  His  Rule 
was  to  put  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.  fer  a  e  i  o  u  ;  and  now  &  then 
a  Confonant  for  the  letter  placed  in  the  Alphabet  next 
tott.  v.  g.  bq5e  t2  bark55ofeI  take  to  be  ‘  aquevocate 
Barkvore.’ 

3.  Medicine  Galieni  Regis  Medicorum.  15. 

This  is  written  by  an  Englifti  hand,  in  French  or 

Latin,  with  a  mixture  of  fome  Englifti  Words. 

4.  Another  Colledion  of  Medicinal  Sc  Chirurgical 
Receipts  ;  partly  in  Latin  Sc  partly  in  Englilh.  27. 

Sequitur  manu  longe  vetuftiore,  litteris  tamen  pene 
fugientibus. 

5.  Fragmentum  Medicum  ;  ubi  tradatur  de  Impe- 

tigine,  Gutta  rofea.  Morphea,  Lepra,  Leonina,  Tyria, 
Alopecia,  Puftuli:.  in  Leprofis,  Veneno,  Morfu  Serpen- 
tis,  Sc  Morfu  Canis.  4 4. 

Marginibus  cernuntur  quaedain  alia  medicamenta, 
manibus  recentioribus. 

6.  Medicine  libri  Magiflri  Johannis  Lane  :  unico  folio. 

52. 

7.  Ouedam  Confedionum,  Eleduariorum,  Attradi- 

varuni,  Syruporum,  Collyriorum,  Totionum,  Clyf- 
teriorum.  Pillularum,  Suppofitoriorum,  ac  aliarum 
Medicinarum,  receptata  ?  fecund um  Ylaack,  &  alios 
hujus  Artis  dodores  Sc  compilacores.  53. 

8.  Medidnal  Sc  Chirurgical  Receipts,  in  Latin  or 
Englilh,  feeming  to  have  belonged  to  No.  2.  above  men¬ 
tioned  :  as  alfo  might  the  J.eaf  deferibed  at  No.  6. 

2348. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  min.  manu  Gallica  de¬ 
fcriptus  ;  in  quo  continetur  Colledio  Sermonum  Do- 
minicalium  Audoris  cujufdam  incerti,  hoc  (qui  fe- 
quitur)  ordine, 

1.  Dominica  prima  in  Adventu  ;  in  illud  Rom.  xm. 

“Abjiciamus  opera  tenebrarum.”  1. 

2.  Item,  eodem  die  ;  in  illud  Matth.  xxi.  “  Ecce 

Rex  tuus  venit.”  3*  b* 

3.  Dominica  fecunda  in  Adventu  ;  in  illud  Rom.  xv. 

“  Sufcipite  invicem  ficut  et  Criftus  fufeepit  vos,  in  hono- 
remDei.”  7*b* 

4.  Item,  eodem  die.  1 1- 

In  illud  Lucte  xxi.  “  Refpicite  Sc  levate  capita  veftra, 

ecce  appropinquat  Redemptio  veftra 

Sicut  Gallice  dicitur,  “  Miuz  vaut  amis  en  voi  ke 
tener  en  coroie.” 

3.  Item,  eodem  die,  ut  videtur.  *4. 

In  illud  Coloff.  1.  “  Ambuletis  digne  Deo,  per  om¬ 
nia  placentes.” 

6.  Item,  alius  Sermo,  in  illud  Luce  xxi.  tc  Tunc 
videbunt  Filium  Hominis  venientem  in  Nubibus.”  17. 

7.  Dominica  tertia  in  Adventu.  20. 

In  illud  1  Corinth,  iv.  “  Sic  vos  exiftimet  homo,  ut 

Miniftros  Dei.” 

8.  Item,  eodem  die.  22. 

In  illud,  “  Ecce  Ego  mitto  Angela  n  meum  arte 

q  facian 


Bibliothecae  Harleians. 


663 


Num.  2348. 

faciem  tuam  ;  qui  preparabit  viamante  te.”  Exod.  xxiii. 

2-l 

9.  Dominica  quarta  Adventfts  25. 

In  illud  Philipp,  iv.  “  Dominus  prope  eft.” 

10.  Item,  eodem  die.  27.  b. 

In  illud  Joan.  t.  “  Ego  Vox  clarnantis  in  Deierto.” 

11.  Dominica  infra  Nativitatem.  30.  b. 

In  illud  “  Atubi  venit  plenitudoternporis  mifit  Deus 

Filium  fuum.”  Gal.  iv.  4. 

12.  Item,  eodem  die.  33.  b. 

In  illud  Luce  11.  “  Puer  crefcebat,  et  confortaba- 

tur.” 

13.  Dominica  infra  Oftabas  Epiphanie.  36. 

In  illud  Rom.  xii.  “  Unum  corpus  fumus  in  Crifto.” 

14.  Item,  eodem  die.  38.  b. 

In  illud  Luce  11.  “  Dolentes  querebamus  te.” 

15.  Dominica  prima  poft  O&avas  Epiphanie.  42. 
In  illud  Rom.  xii.  “  Spiritu  ferventes,  Domino 

fervientes.” 

16.  Item,  eodem  die.  45.  b. 

In  illud  Joann.  11.  “  Vinum  non  habent.” 

1 7.  Dominica  fecunda  poft  O&abas  Epiphanie.  49. 

In  illud  Rom.  xm.  “  Nemini  quicquam  debeatis, 

nifi  ut  invicem  diligatis.” 

18.  Item,  eodem  die.  52. 

In  illud  Matth.  vm.  “  Extendit  Ihefus  manum  fuam 

&  tetigit  Leprofum,  dicens  Volo  te  mundare.” 

19.  Dominica  tertia  poft  Otftavas  Epiphanis.  56. 

In  illud  Rom.  xii.  “  Nolite  elfe  prudentes  apud  vof- 

met-ipfos.  ” 

20.  Item,  eodem  die.  58.  b. 

In  illud  Matth.  vm.  ££  Domine  falva,  Nos  peri- 

tnus.” 

21.  Dominica  Septuagefime.  61. 

In  illud  1  Corinth,  ix.  “  Omnis  qui  in  agone  con¬ 
tends,  ab  omnibus  fe  abftinet.” 

22.  Item,  eodem  die.  63. 

In  illud  Matth.  xx.  “  Voca  operarios,  et  redde  illis 

mercedem  fuam.” 

23.  Dominica  Sexagefirae.  65.  b. 

In  illud  2.  Corinth,  xi.  “  Hebrei  funt?  et  Ego.  Mi- 

niftri  Crifti  funt?  et  Ego.” 

24.  Item,  eodem  die.  67.  b. 

In  illud  Luce  vm.  “  Turba  plurima  conveniebat 

ad  Ihefum,  &  de  Civitatibus  properabat  ad  eum.” 

25.  Dominica  Quinquagefime.  69. 

In  illud.  Corinth,  xm.  “  Major  horum  eft  Cari- 

tas.” 

26.  Item,  eodem  die.  72; 

In  illud  Luce  xvm.  “  Cecus  vidit,  et  fequebatur 

eum.” 

27.  In  Capite  Jejunij.  75. 

In  illud  Joelis  11.  **  Convertimini  ad  me,  &  falvi 

eritis.” 

28.  Item,  eodem  die.  78: 

In  illud  Matth.  v.  “  Tu  autem,  cum  jejunas,  unge 

Capud  tuum  Cleo,  &  Faciem  tuam  lava.” 

29.  In  principio  Quadragefime  ;  i.  e.  feria  6ta.  83. 
In  illud  Ifaice  lviii.  1.  “  Clama,  ne  ceffes;” 

30.  Item,  eodem  die.  84.  b. 

In  iilud  Matth.  v.  “  Sit  Eleemosina  tua  in  abfcon- 

dito.” 

31.  Dominica  prima  Quadragefime.  85.  b. 

In  illud  2  Corinth,  vi.  “  Ecce  nunc  tempus  accep- 

tabile.” 

32.  Item,  eodem  die.  89. 

In  illud  Matth.  iv.  “  Non  in  folo  pane  vivit  Homo, 

fed  in  omni  Verbo  quod  procedit  ab  ore  Dei.’’ 

33.  Feria  fecunda.  91.  b. 

In  ilia  verba  Ezechielis,  Cap.  xxxiv.  “  Ecce  Ego 

ipfe  requiram  oves  meas  ;  et  vilitabo  eas ;  et  liberabo 
eas  ;  et  reducam  eas  de  Populis  ;  et  congregabo  eas  de 
tc  rris  ;  et  inducam  eas  ad  terram  fuam  $  &  pafcam  eas 
in  montibus  Ifrael. 


Num.  2348. 

34.  Item,  eodem  die.  92.  b. 

In  illud  Matth.  xxv.  £c  Venite,  benedi&i,  Patris  mei 
percipite  Regnum  quod  vobis  paratum  eft  ab  originc 
Mundi” 

■  35.  Feria  quarta.  94. 

In  illud  Exodi  xiv.  “  Afcendead  me  ad  Montem.” 

36.  Item,  eodem  die.  96. 

In  illud  Matth.  xxii.  ct  Magifter,  volumus  a  te  Sig- 

num  vidtre.” 

37.  Item,  alius  Sermo.  97.  b. 

In  illud  Theff.  v.  “  Deus  pads  fan&ificet  vos  per 

omnia.” 

38.  Item,  eodem  die.  100. 

In  illud  Matth.  xvn.  C£  Levantes  oculos  neminem 

viderunf  nil!  folum  Ihefum.” 

39.  Dominica  fecunda  Quadragefime.  102. 

In  illud  1  Thelf.  iv.  “  Hec  eft  voluntas  Dei,  Sanc- 

tificatio  veftra.” 

40.  Item,  eodem  die.  107.  b. 

In  illud.  Matth.  xv.  “  Ecce  nvulierCananea  afinibus 

illis  egrefla,  clamavit  dicens,  Miferere  michi  Due  fili 
David.” 

41.  Dominica  tertia  Quadragefime.  1x0.  b. 

In  illud  Ephef.  v.  “  Ambulate  in  diledione.” 

42.  Item,  eodem  die. 

In  illud  Lucs  xi.  “  Cum  ejeciffet  Demonium,  lo- 
cutus  eft  mutus.” 

43.  Dominica  quarta  Quadragefime.  1 5.  b. 

In  illud  Galat  iv.  “  Eice  Ancillam,  et  Filium  ejus.” 

44.  Item,  Dominica  quarta  Quadragefime.  1 1 8. 
InilludLuc.  vi.  “  SequebatureumMultitudomagna.” 

45.  Dominica  in  Paflione.  120.  b. 

In  illudHebr.  ix. £i Per  propriumSanguinemintroivit 

femel  in  Sanda,  eterna  Redemptione  redempta.” 

46.  Item,  Dominica  in  Paflione.  124.  b. 

In  illud  Joann.vm.  “  Tulerunt  lapides  Judei,  ut 

jacerent  in  Ihefum.” 

47.  Dominica  in  Ramis  Palmarum.  127. 

In  illud  Philipp.  11.  £‘  Hoc  fentitein  vobis,  quod  et  in 

Crifto  Ihefu.” 

48.  Item.  Dominica  Palmarum.  130. 

In  illud  Matth.  xxi.  “  Ecce  Rex  tuus  venit/’ 

49.  In  die  Pafche.  T33-b. 

In  illud  1  Corinth,  v. ££  Pafcha  noftrum  immolatus  eft 

Criftus ;  itaque  epulemur  in  Domino.” 

50.  Item,  in  die  Pafche.  J3S-b. 

In  illud  Matth.  ult.  ctIhefum  queritis  Nazarenum.” 

51.  Dominica  in  Oiftavis  Pafche.  137. 

In  illud  Joann,  v.  “  Omne  quod  natum  eft  ex  Deo, 

vincit  mundum.” 

52.  Item,  eodem  die. 

In  illud  Joannis  ult.  ££  Pax  vobis.” 

53.  Dominica  fecunda  poft  Pafcha.  142.  b. 

In  illud  1.  Petr.11.  “  Eratis  enim  ficut  Oves  errantes; 

nunc  autem  converfi  eftis  ad  Paftorem  &  Epifcopum 
Animar.” 

54.  Item,  eodem  die.  145. 

In  illud  Joann,  x.  “  Lupus  rapit  et  difpergit  Oves.” 

55.  Dominica  tertia  poft  Pafcha.  148. 

In  illud,  1  Petr.  11.  “  Converfationem  veftram  inter 

Gentes  habentes  bonain.” 

56.  Item,  eodem  die.  150.  b. 

In  illud  Joann,  x.  ££  Plorabitis  et  flebitis  Vos,  Mun- 

dus  autem  gaudebit.” 

57.  Dominica  quarta  poft  Pafcha.  1 53.  b. 

In  illud  Jacobi  1.  “  Abicientes  omnem  immundi- 

ciam  &  habundantiam  malitis  cum  manfuet  udine,”  &c. 
5S.  Item,  eodem  die.  157. 

In  illud  Joan.  xvi.  8.  “  Cum  venerit  Paracliti  s, 
ille  ai-guet  mundum  de  peccato,  &  de  jufticia,  &  de  ju- 
dicio.” 

59.  Dominica  quinta  poft  Pafcha.  159. 

In  illud  Jacobi  1.  “  Eftote  faftores  Verbi,  et  non 
Auditores.” 


60.  Item, 


6  64 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nums  2348,  2349. 

60;  Item,  eodem  die.  i'6i.b. 

In  illud  Joannis  xvi.  “  Petite  ft  accipictis.” 

61.  Dpminica  prima  poll  AfeenJioneiu.  165. 
In  illud  1  Pet.  iv.  “  Finis  omnium  appropinquavit : 

eftote  prudentes,  &  vigilate  in  oratiombus.1’ 

62.  Item,  eodem  die.  i6y.  b. 

In  illud  Joan.  xv.  “  Cum  venerit  Paracli'tus  quern 

F.go  mittam  vObis,  Spiritum  Veritatis,  qui  a  Patre  pro- 
cedit,”  &c. 

63.  Die  Pentecofles.  iyi.b. 

In  illud  Aft.  1 . c-  Repleti  funt  omnes  Spiritu  Sanfto  ; 

ft  ceperunt  loqui  varijs  linguis,  prout  Spiritus  Sanftus 
dabat  eloqui  iilis.” 

64.  Item,  eodem  die.  176.  b. 

In  Illud  Joan.  xiv.  ‘£  Paraclitus  atttem  Sprhus  Sanftus 

quern  mittet  Pater  in  nomine  meo,”  & c. 

65.  Feria  fecunda  Pentecofles.  178. 

In  illud  Aft.  x.  “  Cecidit  Spiritus  Sanftus  fuper 

omnes  qui  audiebant  Verbum  Dei.” 

66.  Item,  eodem  die.  jg-. 

In  illud  1  Joann.  Hi.  “  Sie  Deus  dilexit  Mundunl, 

ut  Filium  fuum  unigenitum,”  &c. 

67.  Feria  ter lia  Pentecofles.  187. 

In  illud  Aft.  vni.  “  Oraverunt  pro  ipfis,  ut  accipe- 

rent  Spiritum  Sanftum.” 

68.  Item,  eodem  die.  igi.b. 

In  illud  Joan,  x,  “  Fur  non  venit  nifi  ut  furetur,  et 

perdat,  et  maftat.” 

69.  Item  alius  Sermo  &tTriy{xpo«%  193. 

In  illud  1  Reg.  vn.  “  Preparate  corda  veftra  Do¬ 
mino.” 

70.  Tabula  Contentorum  Codicis,  nonnullis  in  locis 

malefida.  j  ^6. 

71.  Denique,  in  fine,  legitur  Adnotatio  Robert!  Bur- 
fcougli  jampridem  Archidiaconi  Totneienfi,  qui  hos 
Sermones  cuidain  Downhamo,  vel  Guilhelmo  Maulio 
Anglis,  acceplos  referendos  exiftimavit ;  cum  autem 
Sententiolse  Gallicru  per  totum  opus  fcateant  j  ego  potius 
eofdem  homini  Gallo  adjudicandos  cenfeo. 

2349- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo.  ad  Jus  Canonic  um 
prout  in  Anglia  jam  olim  oblinebat,  fpeftans  j  in  quo 
continentur. 

i-  Conftitutiones  Oxonie  ;  traftatus  a-M-paXo-;.  r. 

.  2-  Conftitutiones  Dni  Ottobonis  fuper  Decimis  &  Nu- 
trimentis  animalium.  22.  b. 

3; •Conftitutiones  Dni  Ottobonis,  miferatione  Divina, 
Sanfti  Adriani  Diaconi  Cardinalis,  Apoftolice  Sedis  Le- 
gati ;  ad  perpetuam  Rei  inemonam.  23. 

4-  Conftitutiones  Dili  Bon-.-facij  Cantuarienfis  Ar¬ 
chiepifcopi,  fafte  in  Concilio  apud  Weftmonaftcrium  ce- 
lebrato.  ‘ 

5.  Conftitutiones  Epifcoporum  tocius  Anglie,  condite 

ue  Decimis.  1  ^ 

6.  Conftitutiones  in  Concilio  apud  Redinge  Celebrato 

de  Inftitutionibus  &  Dcftitutionibus.  64. 

T,  ' ' .  Conftitutiones  Dili  Archiepifcopi  Cantuarienfis 

ratns  Johannis  de  Pechara.  7 1 

8.  Conftitutiones  Diii  Symonis  Mepham  Cantuarienfis 
Archiepifcopi.  ^ 

9-  Conftitutio  Henrici  Lincolnienfis  Epifcopi,  De 
lntr.tato  ;  quod  Sequeftraior  faciac  officium  fuum,  et 
pottmodum  propinquiores  parentes  defunfti  ab  ipfo  Se- 
queltratore  admittaut  Adminiftrationem.  04. 

Dat.  apud  Buckedene,  quarto  Idus  Aprilis,  A  I) 
>334.  _  * 

1  o.  Mandatum  Officialis  Oxonienfis  Decano  de  Wode- 
itoke  pro  publication  ejufdcm  Conftitutionis  :  imperf. 

„  .  .  98.  b. 

it.  1  onliitutiones  Dni  Johannis  Stretford  Cantua- 
rieniis  Atvhapticopi,  ct  Apoftolice  Sedis,  in  Anelia 


Num.2349-—  2354. 


j  f*.  Mandatum  Officialis  Curie  CantuandifiS  Diib 
j  Ricardo  Reftori  Ecclefie  S.  Petri  in  Villa  Qxon,  Offi- 
ciah.s  Dpi  Archidiaconi  Oxonienfis  CommifTario,  in 
Caufa  Ricardi  Ovef6  de  Iflep,  contra  Dnm  Johannem  de 
Iddeburi  &  Johannem  de  Hemmynburgh.  dat  8  ?dus 
Augufti,  A.  I).  134!.  '  iia.b. 

1 3;  Eormula  Scripti,  qua  qii'redam  M.— in  Caufli 
Fornicationis  a  Judice  ordinario  appcllaVit  ad  audifincianl 
Dili  Officialis  Curie  Cantuarienfis.  j  i*.  b. 

r4;  Statutum  five  Decretam  fuper  Deciitfis  de  ntitri. 
inenti  s  Animalium,  ut  de  Agnis,  I.ana,  Cafeo,  &c. 


15.  Decretum  Revcfendi  Patris  Dni  Johannis  de  Pe- 

cham,  Cantuarienfis  Archiepifcopi  nuper  in  Vifitatione 
fua  :  fuper  ijs  qua:  vel  ad  Reftores  Eccleliarum,  ve!  ad 
Parochianife  pertinerent.  : : 

16.  Grade  expediendfc  apud  Sedefti  Apoftolfcath. 


17.  Difpenfationes  a  Sede  Apoftolica. 


1 1 4.  b» 
Imperf. 


1 1  j.  b. 


23-5°* 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minori,  utrinque  rrmnci.s, 
quo  tamen  conrinetur. 

Pars  maxima  Libri  Ritualis,  in  ufum  ctijufdaift  Fc- 
clcfie  Divis  Petri  A  Pauli  forte  dedicate,  qua;  jam  olim 
circa  fines  Gallise,  Belgium  v’erlus,  conltruebutuf-. 


235r* 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minori,  mr.nu  Gailica  tid- 
feriptus ;  quo  continetur, 

I-  SS.  Biblia  vulgata,  cum  Pr'ologish'ujufnlodi  Co» 
dicibus  addi  folitis. 

Defideratur  fere  torus  liber  Pfalmorum,  cut  Titulus 
fuit  Liber  Soliloquiorum  prophete  David  de  Crifto. 

2.  Imain  margine  prioris  iolij  Epiftola;  ad  Romahrtf. 
cernuntur  Verficuli  aliquot  Paulinarum  Epiftolarum  or* 
dinem  comnionftrantcs. 

3.  Verficuli  comprehendentcs  cpnfi  Summarium  F.vaft. 
gcliorum. 

4.  Interpret  atio  nominum  propriorum  Biblicofilm,  S. 
Remigio  vulgo  tribuiorum. 

5.  Tabula  Leftionum  in  diebus  Feftivalibus  recitan* 
darum. 

6.  Tabula  F.piftolafum  ac  Evangeliorum  in  diebtls 
Dotninicis  recitari  folitarum. 


2352- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto  minori ;  quo  contL 
tientur, 

1.  Wilhelmi  Lyndewodi  Mcncvenfis  F.pifcopi  Conftr- 
tutionum  Provincialium  Archiepifcoporum  Cantuaiien* 
fium,  Libri  quinque. 

2.  Prrecedentis  Opufculi  Capitula. 


2SJ3- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  per  totum  fere  male  habi¬ 
tus  ;  utpote  cui  detritus  Textus  nunc  fere  evanefcit, 
Principcs  Literre  pene  omnes  propter  earum  venufta- 
tem,  a  puerulis  (una  cum  folfjs  quibufdam  integ'ris) 
exfcinditntur.  In  illo  jam  pridem  continebantur, 

1.  Biblia  Sacra  Editionis  Vulgata;,  cum  ProIoglS 
Hieronymianis. 

2.  Interpretatio  Nominum  Propriorum  S.  Remigio 
ftepiiis  adjudicata. 


2354- 

Codex  chartaceus  in  8vo.  quo  continentur, 

1.  Prtecepta  qua;dam  Grammaticalia,  ]>ro  Ieftione  li* 
brorum  Hibemicorum  adipifeenda ;  Hibercffi  c. 

2.  Ex  Johannis  Claij  Hertzbergenfis  Grammatica  lirK 
gux  Germanics:,  Excerpta  quaedam  ad  ilkm  lingua® 
culiimanti  neceflaria. 

Codex 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas, 


Num.  2355,  2356. 


Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  min.  diverfis  manibus  exa- 
ratus ;  Italorum,  fcilicet,  Gallorum,  atque  Anglo- 
rum  :  in  quo  continentur, 

1.  Tradatus  Ulpiani  Jurifconfulti  Romani  de  ed- 
endis  Adionibus  ;  cum  Notis  quibufdam  marginalibus. 

1. 

а.  Homilhe  Scptem  ;  quarum  priores  quitique  funt 

fuper  Canticum  Canticorum.  10. 

3.  Adnotatio  de  Oleo  effufo,  i.  e.  de  nomine  Ihefu. 

20. 

4.  Quedam  defcriptiones,  feu  Explanationes  Vocabu- 

lorum  Juridicalium,  Juri  confone.  20. 

5;  Explicatio  multorum  Nominum  Propriorum,  in 

S.  Biblijs  Vulgata;  Editionis  occurrentium.  28. 

б.  Homilice,  Super  varijs  Argumentis,numero  Septem. 

29. 

7.  Tradatatus  de  Incarnatione  Verbi.  34. 

Initiuin  Prologi,  “  Si  uno  fub  Magiftro  Crifto,  omnes 

Criftiani  cenfemur.” 

Init.  Trad.  "  Fama  eft,  et  quorundam  non  contem- 
nenda  Cognominis  relatione,  ferpens  antiquus  perfidie 
nove  venena  diffundat,  et  Catliolicam  fuper  Nativitate 
Salvatoris  Fidem.” 

8.  Liber  qui  intitulatur  Formula  Vite  honefte.  40. 
Init.  Prol.  “  Gloriofiflimo  atque  tranquilliftimo  Regi 

Suevorum  Mironi,  Martinus  Bracarenfis  Epifcopus  hu- 
milis.” 

9.  Quidam  Sermo  de  Prelatis.  42. 

Init.  “  Tanta  debet  efie  difcretio  Sacerdot  uni  a; 

Dodorum.” 

10.  Colledio  Homiliarum  breviorum,  per  annl  Cur- 

fum.  44. 

Sequuntur, 

11.  Compilacio  Fratris  Jordani  de  Saxonia  capitalis 
Prioris  Ordinis  Fralrura  Predicatorum,  De  Superbia. 

60. 

Hoc  in  Tradatulo  agitur  etiam  de  Accidia  Sc  Ava- 

ritia. 

12.  Adnotationes  qutedam  exigui  momenti.  70. 

13.  Interpretatio  Vocuin  Latinarum }  fronte  mutila.  a 
folio  72,  ufquead  finem  Codicis. 

2356. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo.  Liturgicus  Sc  Diurnalis> 
in  quo  quippe  continentur, 

1.  Calendarium.  1. 

Hie  fiunt  Commemorationes  Sandi  Petri  Martyris 

de  Ordine  Fratris  Predicatorum,  Tranfladonis  Beati 
Dominici,  Sandi  Hugonis  Lincolnienfis  Epifcopi,  &c. 
prima  manu. 

2.  Imago,  uti  videtur,  Henrici  111.  Regis  Anglorum 

dormientis  prope  F.cclefiam,  cujus  collapfas  duas  Pyra- 
mides  l'uftinent  tot  Fratres  Predicatores.  8.  b. 

3.  Pfalterium  D.  Hieronymi  quod  dicitur  Gallica- 

num.  9. 

Heic  confpiciuntur,  in  principibus  Literis,  Infignia 
quaedam  Gentilitia,  ftrenui  fcilicet  Militis  Hugonis  de 
Wakegui  regnantib  us  Henrico  in.  Sc  Edwardo  1.  Anglo- 
rum  Regibus  claruerit.  fol.  33:  nec  non  Dni  Bryani  de 
Stapyltone  ad  Carletone,  ad  1 16. 

Sequuntur  Cantica  Sacra,  fcil. 

4.  Canticum  Ifaise  }  “  Confitebor.”  (Ifaias  xn.  1.) 

»73- 

5.  Canticum  Ezechiae  j  “  Ego  dixi.”  Ifaite  xxxvm. 

10.  i73.b. 

6.  Canticum  Anna ;  “Exultavit.”  (1  Regum  n.  1.) 

174.  b. 

7.  Canticum  Moyfis;  “  Cantemus.”  Exodi  xv.  1. 

175.  b. 

8.  Canticum  Abacuc}  “  Domine  audivi.”  Abac. in.  2. 

177. 

9.  Canticum  Moyfis  ;  “Audite  coeli.”  Deut.xxxii.  i. 

178.  b. 

Cat.  Haul.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2356 — 2358. 

10.  Canticum  SS:  Ambrofij  &Auguftini;  tC  Te Deum 
laudamus  ”  i  82.  h 

n.  Canticum Zachariae ;  “  Benedidus.”  Luc.  1.  68. 

185. 

12.  Canticum  Mariae;  “Magnificat.”  Luc.  1.  46. 

186: 


29 


13.  Canticum  Symeonis ;  “  Nunc  dimittis.”  Luc.  11 

•86.  b. 


I  ou.  u. 

1 4.  Confeflio  F idei,  vulgo  S.  Athanafio  tributa.  “  Qui- 

cunque  vult.”  ibid. 

Deinde,  ut  in  alijs  quibufdam  exemplaribus,  ha- 
bentur. 

15.  Litania;  in  qua  precatur  ad  varios  Sandos  An¬ 
glos.  189. 

1 6.  Preces  Sc  Colledas,  Litanijs  conjungi  folittc.  1 94. 

17.  Some  Englifli  Rules  relating  to  Eccl'efiaftical  Com¬ 

putation  ;  inferted  by  a  newer  Hand  :  perhaps,  by  a  Se¬ 
cular  Prieft,  who  might  have  been  the  Owner  of  this 
Book  long  before  Sir  Henry  Spelman  became  the  Maftcr 
of «.  ,96. 

Now  come-up, 

18.  I.es  Houres  de  la  Trimte.  (“  Domine  labia  mca 

aperies.”)  197. 

The  Prayers,  &c.  are  in  Latin  the  Original  Lan¬ 
guage}  but  the  Rubrics  are  in  French,  the  Court  Lan¬ 
guage,  underitood  by  mod  Perfons  of  Quality,  who  if 
they  repeated  the  Latin  Prayers  (which  they  underitood 
not)  in  decent  manner,  thought  they  had  performed  their 
Duty. 

Deus  in  adjutorium  meum 
199.  b. 


202.  b. 

203.  b. 

205. 

206. 

207. 


19.  A  les  Laudes. 
intende.” 

20.  A  Prime. 

21.  A  'Fierce; 

22.  A  Midi. 

23.  A  Noune. 

24.  Ad  Vefperas; 

23.  A  Complie. 

Deinde, 

26.  Oificium  in  agenda  Mortuorum  Memoria.  209. 

27.  Verficuli  rythmici  ad  B.  V.  Mariam.  216.  b. 

Denique,  alienaac  recentiore  manu. 

28.  Colledas  nonnullte  pro  Benefadore  Ecclefiae. 

ibid# 

2357- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  min.  manu  Gallica  deferip- 
tus,  in  quo  continetur, 

1.  Exemplar  haud  omnibus  numeris  abfolu turn  Trac¬ 
tates  Audoris  incerti  “  De  feptem  Donis  Spiritus  Sandi.” 
De  Opere  fuo,  fic  in  Prologo  prefatus  eft  innominatus  Ac¬ 
tor,  “  Collegimus  autem  hoc  quam  breviter  potuimus 
non  attendentes  omnino  Verba  fed  Senfum,  et  de  Biblia 
et  de  Libris  Yftorialibus,  aliqua  de  Hyftoria  Scholaftica 
Ecclefiaftica  Tripartita,  Tranfraarina,  &  de  Vitis  Sando- 
rum,  &  de  Paffionibus  Sc  Miraculis  eorum,  de  Vitis  Pa- 
trum  &  pidis  eorum,  fimiliter  Sc  de  Collationibus  Pa- 
trum,  de  Dialogo  Gregorij  Sc  Omelijs  ejufdem,  de  libro 
Petri  Cluniacenfis,  et  de  Exemplis  Magiftri  Jacobi  de  Vi. 
triaco  quondam  Romane  Ecclefie  Sabinenfis  Epifcopi 
Cardinalis,  et  de  aiijs  libris,  Sc  de  hijs  que  audivimus  a 
diverfis  Dodoribus  Sc  Predicatoribus,  et  alijs  bonis 
viris.” 

Hunc  Tradatum  Bonaventure  Cardinali  tribuendum 
cenfeo. 

In  fine  Codicis  habetur. 

2.  Tabula  Contentorum  precedents  Opufculi. 

2358. 

A  paper  Heraldical  book  in  fmall  Quarto,  wherein  the 
following  matters  are  contained. 

1.  The  Ordering  Sc  Placing  of  all  Eftates,  accordinge 

to  their  Degrees.  1 . 

2.  The  placing  of  all  Eftates  of  Menn,  accordinge  to 

their  Degrees.  u. 

8  G  3.  Tie. 


If, 


666 


Catalogus  Lihrorum  MSS. 


Num.  2358,  2359. 

3.  Theplacinge  of  all  Eftate3  of  Women,  accordinge 

to  their  Degrees.  12. 

4.  Eilates  of  the  Bloode  Royall.  1 3. 

5.  Placinge  of  Strangers.  13.  b. 

6.  The  Proceeding  to  the  Parlement  at  Weftniinfter, 

from  the  Pallace  there  ;  callyd  Whyte  Hall.  14. 

7.  The  Placinge  of  Great  Officers,  accordinge  to  the 

Acte  of  Parlement,  made  anno  3  1  H.  8.  1 7. 

8.  The  Nobilitye  placed  according  to  their  Degrees, 
and  after  the  Auncientyeof  their  Creations,  A.D.  1577. 

18. 

9.  The  Ordinances,  Statuts,  &  Rules,  made  by  John 
Lord  Tiptofte,  Earle  of  Worcefter,  Conftable  of  Eng¬ 
land,  bye  the  Kings  commaundement,  at  Windfore  the 
29  of  Maye,  6  E.  4.  to  be  obferued  &  kept  in  all  maner 
of  Julies  Royall,  within  this  Realme  of  England.  20. 

1  o.  The  manner  how  Attaynts,  &  Breaking  or  Dif- 
miffing  of  Staues  are  obferuid  Sc  marked.  22. 

it.  Of  the  Tornay.  ibid. 

12.  The  Syfe  of  Banners,  Standardcs,  Pennons, 

Guydhomes,  Pencels,  &  Streamers.  23. 

13.  Of  the  making  of  a  Knight  Banneret  in  the  feild. 

26.  b. 

14.  Of  the  different  wearing  of  Ermine  in  the  Englifh 

Ladies  Bonets,  Sleeves,  ik  Gownes.  27.  b. 

15.  Four  Pictures  of  Englifh  Peers  in  their  Plabits  ;  3 
of  them  with  their  Swords  &  Belts  about  their  Necks. 

31.  b. 

16.  Certain  Obfervations  about  the  Habits  of  our  an- 

tient  Nobility.  33.  b. 

17.  The  Order  of  Proceading  to  the  Funerall  of  a 

greate  Eftate.  34.  b. 

18.  Things  requifite  for  the  Funerals  of  our  antient 

Nobility  ;  with  fome  account  of  Fees  thereby  due ;  and  a 
Sort  of  Ceremonial  touching  the  Offering.  37.  b. 

19.  The  Difcommodities  that  may  happen  to  an  Army 

for  lack  of  Ei  fignes  ;  as  Banners,  -Standards,  Pennons, 
Sc  Guydons ;  which,  of  Neceflitie,  mull  be  hade  in  Bat- 
tell.  46.  b. 

20.  De  Gubernatore  ac  principali  Capitaneo  Exer- 

citus.  48.  b. 

21.  The  Office  &  Aufthoritie  of  a  King  of  Amies  in 

his  Province.  49.  b. 

22.  The  Order  of  Proceedinge  to  the  Funerall  of  a 

Knight,  in  London.  52.  b. 

23.  The  pryces  of  the  Hatchmentes  prepared  by  the 

Paynter.  54.  b. 

24.  Fees  due  to  the  Officers  of  Armes  giving  their 
Attendaunce  at  the  Funeralls  of  great  F.flates.  55  b. 

23.  De  divifione  Foedorum  inte  Reges  Armorum, 
fleraldos,  atq;  Profecutores.  56.  b. 

26.  Allowances  of  Servantes  &  Blackes,  at  the  Fune- 

ralles  of  Mary  Oueene  of  Sccttes,  at  Peterborough  j  on 
Tuefday  the  firft  of  Auguft  1587.  57.  b. 

27.  Of  Officers  which  may  attend  upon  the  Nobility. 

58.  b. 

Here  are  alfo  a  few  other  Notes  relating  to  Ladies  ; 
&  to  the  Banners  of  Knights  of  the  Garter. 

28.  The  definicon  of  an  Efquire,  and  the  feuerall  Sorts 
of  them,  accordinge  to  the  Cuftome  Sc  Vfageof  England. 

60. 

It  feemeth  that  Sir  Richard  St.  George  made  ufe 
of  this  Book,  by  fome  Notes  of  his  Hand-writing  which 
appeal-  therein. 

2359. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  min.  quo  continentur, 

1.  Conftitutiones  Provinciales  Arcffeprcoporum  Can- 
tuarenfium,  ex  recognitione  Wilhelmi  Lyndewodi  Juris 
Canoiuci  Do&oris,  &  poflea  Menevenfis  Epifcopi,  Li- 
bris  v. 

Init.  “  Ignorancia  Sacerdotum.” 

2.  Tabula  Rubricarum  precedents  Opufculi,  cum 
Exordio  cuiuflibet  Capituli,  five  Conftituti  nis.  Hie  liber 
Lyndwcdianus  a  i^lgo  dicitur  “  Provincial. ” 


Num.  2360. 

2360. 

Codex  ntembranaceus  &  Theologicus  in  4to.  min.  quo 
continentur, 

1.  Pars  Tabular  Contentorum,  five  Rubricarum,Trac- 

tatus  mox  infequentis.  j. 

2.  Locus  Ezechielis  Prophetm,  “  Ve  paftoribus  Ifrael 

qui  pafeebant  femetipfos.”  3. 

3.  Locus  Yfaie  Prophet je,  “Pro  eo  quod  elevate  funt 

filie  Syon,  et  ambulaverunt  extento  Collo.'’  ibid. 

Sequitur  Traftatus  in  quo  de  plurimis  argumentis 
Theologicis  agitur ;  vizt. 

4.  De  modo  confitendi  Peccata.  ^.b. 

5.  De  vii.  vitjis  Capitalibus.  ibid. 

6.  Quod  bona  Crifli  debemus  ad  Memoriam  reducere. 

4- 

7.  Quod  Dominus  non  quantum,  fed  ex  quanto,  quid 
it,  conTn' 


8.  Si  jufti  in  prefenti  affliguntur,  quanta  erit  Pena  re- 

proborum  in  futuro.  ij.b. 

9.  Contra  Odium.  6.  b. 

10.  Contra  Iram.  7. 

ii:  De  dupplici  Continentia.  7.  b. 

12.  De  expeftatione  Premij  etemi.  8. 

13.  Quod  bonus  proficit  de  pena  Malorum.  8.  b. 

14.  De  amaritudine  Vite  Malorum.  g. 

i5-.QU0C1  Diabolus  contemptus  gravius  flagellat. 

1  o. 

16.  Quod  Jufti  foris  funt  defpe&i,  intus  autem  fpe- 

dofi.  u. 

1 7.  De  Solitudine.  1 1 .  b. 

18.  De  collatione  Profperitatis  et  Adverfitatis.  13. 

19.  De  Manfuetudine.  14. 

20.  De  mala  Societate.  ibid. 

21.  Quod  omnia  Temporalia  fugienda  funt.  14.  b. 

22.  Contra  exceffum  Veftium.  16.  b. 

23.  Quod  Prelati  modicos  &  humiles  fe  reputare  de¬ 
bent.  ibid. 

24.  De  Hofpitalitate.  17. 

25.  Contra  Sapientes  Mundi.  17.  b. 

26.  Contra  falfam  et  fidtam  Religionem.  ibid. 

27.  Quod  Dominus  pie  expe&at  nos.  18.  b. 

28.  De  primis  Modbus.  22. 

29.  Quod  non  eft  confidendum  in  Homine.  23. 

30.  De  Superbia.  23. 

31.  De  Humilitate-  2  6. 

32.  Contra  Gulam.  27.  b. 

33.  De  Fornicatione.  28.  b. 

34.  De  Caritate. 

35.  Quod  Vita  bona  &  Scienda  Prelato  funt  necefiiuia. 

30.  b. 

36.  Quod  curam  debent  Prelati  de  Subdids.  31. 

37.  Ad  Prelatos.  32. 

38.  Contra  Divites.  33. 

39.  De  vindi&a  Peccatorum.  34. 

40.  De  Tribuladone.  ibid. 

41.  Contra  Adulatores.  36. 

42.  Quod  Dominus  lugentes  pie  confolatur.  37.  b. 

43.  Quod  etiam  occafio  Fornicandi  fugienda  eft. 

44.  De  Fide.  39. 

45.  De  Cognitione  Peccati.  39.  b. 

46.  Contra  Detra&ores.  40. 

47.  De  Spe.  41. 

48.  De  Incertitudine  Mortis.  42.  b. 

49.  De  Patienda.  43. 

50.  De  Avaritia.  44.  b. 

5 1  •  Contra  Prelatos  cupidos.  45. 

52.  De  Perfe&ione.  46. 

53.  De  Oradone.  46.  b. 

54.  Contra  Clauftrales.  47. 

55.  De  Hylaritate  in  Pcenitemia.  48. 

56.  Quod  cito  placatur  Dominus  per  Penitentiam. 

49. 

C7.  De  Lafcivia.  49-  b. 

<8.  De 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


66 7 


Num.  2360* 

3:8.  De  Humilitate.  49.  bi 

5 9-  Contra  eos  qui  Minora  obfervant,  &  Majora 
Omittunt.  ^o. 

60.  Quod  Alimenta  font  parce  fumenda.  '50.  b. 

61.  Quod  Caro,  per  Macerationem,  fubdenda  fit  Spi- 

fitui.  3 , . 

62.  Quod  Mali  Bonos  derident.  52. 

63.  Ouod  nemo  alij  quam  Sibi  doceat.  ibid. 

64.  Quod  non  folum  Peccata,  fed  etiam  circumftantie 

Peccati  relinquende  funt.  52.  b. 

65.  Quod  Sapientia  fit  dolere  pro  Peccatis. 

66.  Quod  illicita  magis  appetantur.  53  b. 

67.  Quod  de  Salute  aliorum  folliciti  efle  debeinus. 

ibid. 

68.  Contra  Defenfionem  Peccati.  54. 

69.  De  veloci  tranfitu  Mundanorum.  54.  b. 

70.  Contra  pigros-  55.  b. 

71.  Quod  debemus  Preceptis  fuperaddere.  56. 

72.  Confolario  contra  Mundi  preffixras.  ibid. 

73.  Quod  falubris  eft  memoria  Dominice  Paflionis. 

-p.  ...  ..  57* 

74.  De  Vita  etema.  57.  b. 

73.  Contra  Ingratitudinem  noftram  deBeneficiis  Dei. 

58* 

76.  Quod  Sacerdos  fe  debet  difcutere,  et  poftea  alios 

cum  Modeftia  corripere.  58.  b. 

77.  Contra  eos  qui  murmurant  deoperibus  Dei.  59. 

78.  De  Cruce  fufcipienda.  59.  b. 

79.  Quod  non  licet  intueri,  quod  non  licet  concupifci. 

60. 

80.  Quod  Sacerdos  debet  habere  Dodrinam  &  Vitam. 

60.  b. 

81.  Quod  feftinandum  fit  ad  Penitentiam.  6i.b. 

82.  Quod  necefiaria  fit  frequens  Meditatio  Scripture. 

62. 

83.  Quod  Scriptura  facra  facit  nosproficere  &  ftabiles 

efle.  63.  b. 

84.  Contra  eos  qui  Dominum  invocant  inadverfis,  et 

oblivifcuntur  in  profperis.  ibid. 

85.  De  Inftrudione  Filiorum  ab  Infantia.  64. 

86.  Exhortatio  ad  vigilandum.  64.  b. 

87.  De  Oblatione.  C3. 

88.  De  Decimis.  67.  b. 

Sg.  Quod  futurum  Judicium  prevenire  debemus.  68. 
90.  Quod  omnia  facienda  fit  tantum  Dei  caufa,  non 

caufa  temporalis  Lucri.  ibid, 

gx.  Deexemplo  Juftorum.  68- b. 

92.  Contra  eos  qui  fuftinent  Correptionem.  ibid. 

93.  Quod  dePatientiaMalorum  furgit  maximaMerces. 

69. 

94.  Amaritudo  fequetur  juftorum  Perfecutores.  69. b. 

95.  Non  fufficit  tantum  bona  audire,  fed  etiam  facere. 

ibid. 

96.  Que  &  quanta  Criftus  fuftinuit,  anima  recole. 

70. 

97.  Deperfonarum  Acception#.  71.  b. 

98.  Quod  dampnum  Spirituale  non  intenditur.  72. 

99.  Contra  Negociatores.  72.  b. 

100.  Contra  Mulierem  malam.  73. 

101.  Quod  Dominus  pauperes  adjuvat.  ibid. 

102.  De  Confolatione.  ibid. 

103.  De  bono  Confilio.  73.  b. 

104.  De  Sobrietate.  y 4. 

105.  De  bona  Meditatione.  74.  b. 

10 6.  De  Mundi  Vanitate.  y ^ 

107.  De  bono  Exemplo.  73.  b. 

108.  De  Miferia  noflre  Conditionis.  76. 

109.  De  diledione  Dei  &  Proximi.  76.  b. 

1 10.  De  Redoribus.  77- b. 

hi.  De  Prepofitis.  78.  b. 

1x2.  DeSubditis.  79. 

j  1 3.  De  Prelatis.  ibid. 

114.  De  Judicijs.  79,  b. 

1x5.  De  Virginitate.  ibid] 


85.  b. 

86.  b. 
91.  b. 

93* 

ibid* 

93.  b.  &  94.  b. 

94.&9+.  b. 
94.b. 

91- 
ibid. 


Num.  2360,  2361. 

Sequunfur,  et  alia  Colledanea,  maxime  e  S.  Scrip* 
tura,  fub  his  Rubricis, 

1 16:  Verba  et  Audoritates  de  Adventil  Domini* 

8°.  b.  ’ 

ii’7-  Verba  &  Audoritates  de  Nativitate  Domini. 

Si.  bi 

118.  Dc  Apparitione ;  feu  Epiphania  Domini. 

83.  bi 

119.  De  Qitadragefima. 

120.  De  Pafiione  Domini. 

121.  De  R  efurredione  Dorainii 

122.  De  Afcenfione  Domini. 

123.  De  Spiritu  Sando. 

1 24.  De  beata  Virgine. 

125.  De  Sandis. 

126.  De  Apoftolis. 

127.  De  Virginibus. 

128.  De  Dedicatione. 

129.  De  Sacerdotibus,  et  eorum  Predicationibus. 

96. 

130.  Verba  communia.  fol.  100.  (fcil.  fuper  variis 
rebus.) 

131.  Communia  de  contemptu  Mundi.  117. 

Agmen  denique  claudit  Colledio  Sermonlim  ;  fcil. 

X32.  Sermo  de  Adventu  Domini}  vel,  de  Afluinp- 
tione  beate  Virginis.  117  b. 

133.  Sermo  de  Nativitate.  1 18.  b. 

134.  Sermo  de  Adventu.  119.  b. 

135.  Sermo  de  Nativitate.  120. 

136.  Sermo  de  Pafiione.  120.  b. 

137.  Item,  de  Pafiione.  121. 

138  Sermo  de  Refurredione.  121b. 

139.  Sermo  de  Spiritu  Sando.  122.  b. 

140.  Sermo  de  omnibus  Sandis.  123. 

1 41.  Item,  Sermo  de  omnibus  Sandis.  imperf. 

124.  b. 

2361. 

Codex  Theologicus  &  membranaceus  in  8vo.  diverfis 
temporibus,  diverforum  manibus  exaratus  ;  in  quo, 
pra:ter  innumeras  fere,  tam  ftrido  Sermone  quam 
foluto,  Notulas  parvi  vel  nullius  momenti }  continen- 
tur. 

1.  Verfus  Dili  R  Johnfone  quondam  poffefforis  hu- 
jufce  Libri,  e  dono  Magri  Johannis  Odlyne,  A.D.  1503. 
fuper  his  verbis,  “  Moribus  efto  bonis.”  In  interiore  teg- 
minis  facie. 

2.  Ordo  Librorum  Biblicorum,  5  Verfibus.  1. 

3.  Quod  Maria  Nautica  Stella,  five  Stella  Maris 

interpretetur.  lt  b. 

4.  De  brevitate  Vite  hujus.  2.  b. 

5.  Utrum  Dus  nofter  Ihefus  Criftus  pafliis  eft  mortem 

jufte  vel  injufte?  4. 

6.  Adnotata  qutedam  ex  libro  Berlaam.  4.  11.  137. 
Hanc  piam  Fabulam  Romanenfem  de  Converfatione 

SS.  Barlaami  &  Joafaphati,  fcripfit  S.  Joannes  Damaf- 
cenus.  Exftat  ejufdem  exemplar  Grtecum  MS.  in  in- 
ftrudiflima  hac  Bibliotheca. 

7.  Orationis  Dominies  Explanatio  fingularis.  5. 

8.  Verfus  refonantes,  ubi  Chriftus  et  beata  Virgo  fefe 

alloqui  finguntur.  5,  b. 

Init.  “  Te  quern  de  limo,  formavi  Cordis  in  imo.’* 

9.  Qualia  funt  Tria  que  vere  faciunt  Scriptorem  fepe 

dolere.  ym 

1  o.  Narratio  legendaria  de  Rege  quodam  Anglie,  qui 
habuit  plures  Milites  fub  fe,  inter  quos  erat  unus  queni 
prs  ceteris  adamavit,  fed  fuit  Luxuriofus.  7. 

1 1.  De  feptem  proprietatibus  Galli.  7.  b. 

12.  Quod  Ecclefia  fit  quadruplex.  ibid. 

13.  De  Juramento.  8.  et  87.  140.  b. 

Init.  “  Contra  eos  qui  accipiunt  Nomen  Dei  in 

vanum.” 

14.  De  obfervatione  Kalendarum.  10. 

Init.  “  Kalendarum  obfervacione  gere,  non  licet. 

Non  licet  in  aliqua  regione  obfervaciones  agere  Kalsnda- 
9  rum. 


668- 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2361. 

rum,  et  ocijs  vacare  ;  neque  Lauro,  neque  vii'iditatfe  Ar- 
borum  cingere  domos  :  otnnis  enim  hec,  Obfervacio  Pa- 
ganorum.” 

15.  Quod  in  infirmitatibus  hominum,  Incantatoies  ni¬ 
hil  remedij  preRcnt.  10. 

1 6.  Item,  de  Diebus  iEgypliacisj  et  Kalendis  Januarij, 

e  S.  Auguflino  10.  b. 

17.  Quod  nullus  in  Ecclefia  fabulari  debeat.  ibid. 

18.  Decalogi  brevis  Explicatio.  ii.b. 

19.  Quod  tria  fmt  toca,  Celum,  Terra,  &Infernus; 

et  habent  fingula  Habitatores  fuos.  1 3.  b. 

Sequitur  manu  longe  vetufliore,  minutioribufq;  lit- 

teris, 

20.  Fragmentum  de  Virtutibus  et  Vitijs.  14. 

Prima  Rubrica  elt  De  Superbia ;  deinde  agitur  de 

inani  Gloria. 

21.  De  Anima,  &c.  24. 

Init.  “  Tres  funt  fpiraciones  Anime  antequam  exeat 

de  Corpore.” 

22.  Elucidarium  ;  five  Dialogus  inter  Difcipulum  & 

Magiflrum.  25. 

Init.  “  Sepius  a  Condifcipulis  rogatus.” 

Tra&atus  hie  vulgd,  fed  falf6,  S.  Anfelmo  tribuni- 
tur ;  ut  pote  qui  potius  Honorio  Auguflodunenfi  de- 
betur. 

23.  Expofitio  Orationis  Dominice,  fecundum  Ricar- 

dum  heremitam  de  Hampole  59.  b. 

24.  Brevis  enarratio  Symbol!  Apoflolici,  ejufdem  Ri- 

chardi  Hampole,  ut  videtur.  61. 

25.  Excerpta  qusedam  deLedfione,  de  Compundlione, 

deq;  Oratione.  69. 

26.  Fragmentum  libri  S.  Ifidori  Hifpalenfis  Epifcopi, 

de  Numero.  71. 

Vide  hujufce  Bibliotheca:  Codicem,  qui  infcribitur 
40  B  i. 

27.  De  duodecim  articulis  Fidei.  81. 

28.  Contra  Clericos  Negociatores,  &c.  8  1.  b. 

29.  Liber  Penitenciarij  ;  five  de  hijs  aue  necelTaria 

funt  ad  Confeflionem :  cum  Scholijs.  *  82 

Init.  “  Peniteas  cito  precor,  eumfit  Miferator  Judex.” 

30.  Planclus  de  adulacione  Mundi,  Rythmis.  84. 

Init.  “  Ecce  Mundus  moritur,  vicijs  fepultus  ; 

Qrdo  rerum  vertitur,  ceflat  Crilti  cultus; 
Exulat  JuRitia,  Sapiens  fit  Stultus ; 

In  omni  Provincia  fuboritur  Tumultus." 

3 1 .  Quod  Grex  fidelis  triplici  Cibo  fuftentetur. 

84.  b. 

32.  Vifio  dicla  Altercatio  Camis  Sc  Spiritus.  85. 

Init.  “  Noclis  fub  filencio,  tempore  brumali, 

Deditus  quodammodo  Sompno  fpiritali 
Corpus  carens  video  fpiritu  Vitali, 

Cujus  mihi  Vifio  fit  fub  forma  tali.” 

33.  Adnotationes  Theologies,  deOracione.de  bonis 
Operibus,  de  Septem  Sigillis,  de  contemptu  vane  Glorie, 
de  Johanne  BaptiRa  e  Bernardo,  de  B.  AuguRino  c  libro 
de  beate  Vita,  de  dignitate  Hominis,  HexaRicon,  &c. 

87.  b. 

34.  Antememorati  R .  Johnfoni  adnotatio  de  Satisfac- 


tione,  ac  Camis  maceratione. 


96.  b. 


35.  Orationis  Dominica:  Explanatio.  fol.  97  ;  et  vid. 
paginam  prmcedentem. 

36.  Traftatulus  compofitus  ad  refellendam  eorum 

perfidiam,  qui  dicunt  obfervacionem  Mandatorum  Deca- 
logi  fore  impoffibile  Crifiianis.  JQ,. 

37.  Tradlatulus  de  Officio  Sacerdotis.  105. 

38.  Nota  de Sex aetatibus  Mundi.  ii2.b. 

39.  Meditationes  B.  Bernardi  Abbatis.  1 13. 

Init.  *•  Multi  multafciunt,  ctfeipfos  nefeiunt :  alios 

inltruunt,  et  feipfos  deferunt.’’ 

A  quibufdam,  adjudicantur  Hugoni  de  S.  Viftore. 

1 33. 

.  4‘*  Bellum  Ferracuti  Gigantis  et  Rotholandi :  e  lur- 
Pino-  _ 

4-.  Dexv  Signis  ante  diem  Judicij.  J39.  b. 


Num.  2362,  2363. 

2362. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo.  feu  potihs  in  forma  I2ma. 
manu  Belgica  deferiptus,  in  ufum  cujufdam  Sacerdotis 
Seciilaris,  ut  videtur;  quo  continetur,  Ordo  bapti- 
zandi  utriufque  fexfis  Infantes  una  cum  Ordine  inun- 
gendi  Infirmum  ;  fub  his,  qua:  fequuntur  Rubricis, 
vizt. 

1.  Exorcifnius  fuper  Masculum.  Init.  “Exiab  eo 
Sathana.”  j  _ 

2.  Orationes  tres.  2. 

3.  Bencdiftio  Salis.  4. 

4.  Impofitio  Salis  ori  Infantis.  5.  b. 

5.  Orationes  quatuor.  ibid. 

6.  Fxorcifmus  Spiritus  immundi.  9. 

7.  Oratio,  cujus  initium,  “  Eternam  ac  jufiifiimam 

pietatefn.”  io.  b. 

8.  Sequentia  S.  Evangelij  fecundum  Matheum.  11. 

9.  Oratio,  cujus  init.  Nec  te  latent  Sathana.”  12.  b. 

10.  Quid  recitandum,  quando  tangit,  cum  Sputo, 

aures  &  nares  Infantis.  ,4. 

it.  Reliqiim  Preces  ac  Ceremoniaj  ;  fdlicet,  in  in- 
trando  Eccldiam  ;  ad  Fontem  ;  quando  linictur  Infans 
Oleo  farro,  in  peclore,  &  inter  Scapulas  ;  cum  ter  fun- 
dat  aquam  fuper  capo:  Infantis;  cum  Crifmate  faciat 
Crucem  in  vertice;  cum  veftiatur  in  fans  Vitta;  deturq; 
infanti  Candela  ardens. 

Sequitur, 

12.  Exurcjfmus  fuper  feminam,  cum  ter  fufflet  in 

faciem  Infantis.  18  b 

I  it.  Exi  ab  ea  Sathana. 

13.  Orationes  tres.  jp. 

14.  Benedictio  Salis.  2i.b. 

1 5-  Quid  recitandum,  cum  imponatur  ori  infantis  mo¬ 
dicum  Salis.  2 , 

1 6.  Orationes,  et  maledidfi  Diaboli  Exorcifmi  varij. 

ibid. 

Sequitur, 

17.  Ordo  inungendi  Infirmum.  29.  b. 

2363. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  1  :mo.  manu  Scotica  deferiptus  ;  in 
quo  habentur, 

1.  Adnotationes  de  state  (i.  e.  de  tempore  Funda- 
tionis)  quartindam  Domorum  Ordinis  CiRercienfis.  1 . 

2.  De  Incepcione  quorundam  Ordinum.  2. 

3.  Litterte  Donaldi  de  Cupro  et  Gualteri  Vallis  Lucis 

Abbatum,  CiRercienfis  Ordinis,  ac  Capituli  Generalis 
ejufdem  Commiffariorum  fpecialiter  deputatorum,  An¬ 
drea:,  Abbatide  Melrofe,  nidi  Ordinis.  dat.  apud  Edin- 
burgum,  die  prima  Oclobris,  A.D.  1534.  3. 

Quibus,  ei  fi  b  pena  Depoficionis  a  dignitate  fua 
Abbaciali  flricte  precipiunt,  quatenus  Charte  Vifitationis 
ac  Reformationis  Abbatis  Karoli-loci  fibi  et  MonaRerio 
Melroflenfi  relicte,  obediat  et  efficaciter  adimpleri  faciat. 
In  ipfa  autem  Charta  Vifitationis  aflertum  fuerat,  quod 
idem  Abbas  Melroflenfi?  cum  faniore  parte  Domus  lute, 
ab  anno  elapfo,  Monachos  luos  Porciones,  Penfiones,  ac 
Hortos  particulars,  contra  dicte  Charte  tenorem,  habere 
permiferant. 

4.  Refponfio  praedictorum  Donaldi  de  Cupro  &  Gual¬ 

teri  Vallis  Lucis  Abbatum,  circa  Difpenfationem  quam 
petunt  Monachi  de  Melrofs,  Newbotill,  Sc  Balmerino, 
vizt.  quod  particulars  Hortos  habeant ;  Portionum  fua- 
ruin  reliquias,  prout  eis  expedire  videbitur,  diRribuant ; 
et  finguli,  pro  VeRibus  &  alijs  neceflarijs  emendis,  a 
Burfario  (per  Conventum  eligendo,  et  ad  nutum  ejufdem 
mutando)  predpiant.  3.  b. 

5.  Ordo  Confeflionis  quotidiane,  apud  CiRcrcium,  &c. 

8.  b. 

6  Replicatio  Monachorum,  rd  fupra-memoratam 
Rel'ponfionem.  dat.  apud  Edinburgh.  ic. 

7.  Praxiiclorum  Abbatum  Allegationes,  contra  Re- 
plicationem  Monachorum ;  i.  e.  Pro  garte  negativa. 

15.  b. 

8.  Par 


7 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


669 


Num.  2363 — 2366. 

8.  Parliamentum  excellentiffimi  Principis,  &  pomini 

noftri,  Dili  Jacobi  v.  Dei  gracia  Scotoruni  Regis  illuf- 
triflimi,  tentum  &  inchoatum  apud  Edinburgh,  13  die 
menfis  Maij,  A.D.  1 532.  Nona  Seflio.  18. 

This  is  in  the  Scotch  Dialed!  ;  and  founds  or  eredts 
a  Court  for  the  better  Adminiilration  of  Jufiice  in  Civil 
Caufes.  This  (if  it  be  not  two  Acts,  and  I  now  have  not 
the  Scots  Laws  by  me)  is  imperfect ;  and  fol.40.  is  tranf- 
pofed. 

9.  Chronologia  brevis,  masimam  partem,  de  Rebus 

Scoticis  ;  ab  Adamo  ufq;  ad  A.D.  1 556.  _  _  44- 

10.  Adnotatio  de  Morte  vui  integerrimi  Johannis 

Smyth  Monachi  a  Kynlofs,  qui  hunc  librura  'paucis  ex- 
ceptis)  feripfit.  Obijt  die  17  Decembris  A.D.  i557> 
setatis  fua:  anno  6  j.  60.  b. 

11.  De  Paffione  Chrifli,  &c.  verficuli  refonantes. 

61. 

Init.  cc  O  quicunque  velis  Miffam  cantare  fidelis.”. 

T2.  Abfolutionis  formula,  peccata  Confeffo  pronunci- 
anda.  _  62.  b. 

Forma  confitendi  peccata,  omnipotenti  Deo,  et 
beate  Marie,  et  omnibus  Sandtis.  63. 

14.  Forma  in  Miffa  privata  fervanda  64-  b. 

1  5.  Preparatio  ante  Miffam,  quando  quis  Novitius  fien- 
dus,  exuitur.  7°* 

Ilac  fecundum  Ritumin  Ciilercio  ufitatum. 


2364. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  1 2111a.  forma,  manu  Belgica  deferip- 
tus  ;  in  quo  reperiuntur, 

1.  Boetij,  de  Confolationc  Philolophiae,  Libri  tres 
priores,  cum  Libri  quarti  parte-  1. 

Sequuntur  Sermones  quidam  Synodales,  vizt. 

1 .  Collatio  fadta  per  Magruin  Michaelem  de  Dalen,  in 
Sinodo.  .  49- 

Init.  “  Transferunt  Principes  inde  termmos  quos  po- 
fuerunt  Patres  eorum.” 

Alia  Collatio  ejufdem,  in  Sinodo.  6 1. 

°  “  Init.  Tempus  eft  ut  Juditium  a  domo  Dei  inci- 

Alia  Collatio  ejufdem,  in  Sinodo..  71. 

Init.  “  Sacerdos,  fi  peccaverit,  quis  pro  eo  orabit  ?” 

5.  Alia  Collatio  in  Synodo  fadta.  80.  b. 

Init.  “  Gratia  data  eft  vobis  in  Crifto.” 

6.  Alia  Collatio,  in  Synodo.  93-  b. 

Init.  “  Vocati  eftis,  ut  benedictionem  Hereditate  pof- 

fideatis.” 

7.  Collatio  alia,  in  Synodo  ;  fine  mutila.  .  104.. 

Init.  “  Sacerdotus  qui  accedunt  ad  Dominum  fandti- 

ficentur,  ne  percutiat  eos. 

2365. 

Codex -mcmbraiiaceus  in  1 21:1a  ierma;  quo  continetur, 
Dialogus  Theologicus  inter  Difeipulum  &  Magif- 
trum,  qtvi  dicitur  Elucidariu.m,  hie  autem,  Lucida- 
riu:-  ;  cuiu;  Prologus  ab  his  verbis 
Incipit.  “  depius  rogatus  a  Con-difcipulis  quafdamquef- 
tiunculas  enodare.'’  •  . 

Hoc  opus  vulgo  S.  Anfelmo  tnbuitur,  et  inter 
Opera  ejufdem  impreffa  locum  obtinet ;  qui  tamen  in 
illo  pkn  ies  hmUtur.  Trit’  .mius  id  (uti  refert  dodtifli- 
mus  Cavreus,  Hift.  Lilt.  pag.  G:3.)  Honorio  Augufto- 
duncnfi ;  alij,  Gulielmo  Conventiienfi  Carmelitano ; 
Codices  ’  denique  nonauili  Guiberlo  Novigentino  Abbati 


piat. 

4- 


vindicant. 

2366. 

A  paper  Book  In  121*0.  much  worn,  &  tom  ;  on  whofe 
out-fide.  its  late  owner  Dr.  John  Covel  hath  written 
the" Title  following,  “  Aimanach  1627.  with  feveral 
Rules  for  Aimanach  making,  Surveying,  See.”  But 
this  account  being  too  general  tor  the  purpofe  of  the 
prefem  Catalogue,  I  mult  fett-down  what  1  find  therein 
more  particularly,  vizt. 

Cat.Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2366, 

x.  Some  Ob fervations  about  meafuring  of  Land  by  the 
Pole  ;  added  to  the  book,  by  a  later  hand  in  the  infide 
of  the  Cover. 

2.  A  Calendar  or  Aimanach  now  damaged;  {hewing 

divers  ufeful  matters,  and  among  the  reft,  the  Days 
when  many  great  Fairs  are  held  ;  among  which  particu¬ 
lar  regard  is  had  to  thofe  in  the  Counties  of  Norfolk, 
Suffolk,  Cambridge,  and  Effex.  I  ■ 

The  Author  or  Writer  of  this  Calendar  was  of  the 
Church  of  England. 

3.  A  Table  fhewing  the  Golden  Number,  Epadt,  In¬ 

dication,  &c.  from  A.D.  1586,  to  A.D.  1617,  both  in¬ 
cluded.  7* 

4.  To  know  the  Termes,  with  there  Returnes.  7«b. 

Here  under,  is  a  Note  fhewing  the  time  when  the 

Exchequer  openeth. 

5.  Tabula  pro  inventione  Pafchte,  imperpetuum.  8. 

6.  Regula;  pro  Aureo  Numero,  Epadta,  Indictione, 

numeroq;  Cycli  Solaris,  inveniendis.  ibid. 

7.  .ZEtatem  Luna;  cognofcere.  8.  b. 

8.  Scire  in  quo  Signo  Luna  erit  fingulis  diebus. 

ibid. 

9.  Tabula  oftendens  Luna:  ortum  &  occafum,  cum 

horis  nodturnis.  ibid. 

1  o.  Horam  ufualem  nodte,  ex  radijs  Lunaribus  cognof¬ 
cere.  9. 

1  r.  Computatio  annorum  Domini  et  Regum  Anglic  ; 

fcil.  ab  A.D.  1066,  ufque  ad  A.D.  11:27,  inclufive. 

9.  b. 

Herein  the  Compiler  hath  inferted  the  Foundations 
of  the  feveral  Cambridge  Colleges  and  Halls,  to  that  of 
Gonvile  and  Caius.  After  that  he  is  more  follicitous 
about  noting-down  the  Births  &  Burials  of  thofe  of  his 
own  Family.  At  the  23  of  March  1564,  he  writes  natus 
Ego  R.  L. 

12.  Vera  Tabula  Planetarum  commonftrans  in  qua 

parte  Hominis  dominantur.  15.  b. 

13.  Tabula  ad  inveniendum  Dignitates  Planetarum 

in  Signis.  16. 

14.  Si  vis  feire  in  quo  qigno  fit  Luna.  ibid. 

15.  Floras  Planetarum  ...  (arlgionitos  ?)  16.  b. 

16.  Diftantiam  Locorum  invenire.  17. 


17.  Tabula  demonllrans  Latitudinem  ac 

Longitudi- 

nem  unius  A  era;  terra;. 

18.  b. 

18.  Terrarum  menfura. 

19. 

19.  Tabula  Computationis. 

19.  b. 

20.  Tabula  Decennulium  live  Majorum  Numerorum. 

21.  b. 

21.  Tabula  monftrans  Diverfa  Acrm  pretia,  cum  par- 

tibus  ejufdem. 

ibid. 

22.  Extradtio  Radicis  quadrate. 

22. 

23.  De  Fradtionibus. 

22.  b. 

24.  Regula  aurea,  five  Trium. 

23* 

25.  Regula  everfa. 

ibid. 

26.  Tabula  Radicum. 

23.  b. 

27.  Tables  for  meafuring  Tymber. 

24.  b. 

28.  Menfura:  afferum  Vitri,  Tabula:,  &c. 

25- 

29.  Ab  habendum  Longitudinem  unqiarum  Pedis 

quadrati,  in  Trunco,  Lapide,  &c.  Latitudine  tantunr 
cognita.  _  25.  b. 

30.  De  proportionibus  Arithmeticis,  &c.  26. 

3 1 .  De  Fradtionibus  Allronomicis,  feu  Phi'ficalibus. 

3° 

32.  Regula  Falfi.  3'* 

33.  De  Numeris  Diametralibus.  32. 

34.  Ad  inftituendas  Acies  pro  Quadratura  terrena. 

32.  b. 

35.  Inftruere  Acies  pro  Quadratura  Hominum.  ibid. 

36.  Inftruere  Acies  pro  Quadratura  unius  et  T,  vulgo 

vo cat 32  “  A  Hearfs-Battayle.”  _  '“id 

37.  Inftruere  Acies  pro  Quadratura  unius  et  i.  ibid. 

38.  Calendarium  Ufitatum,  i.  e.  Ecclefue  Anglicante, 
cum  Romano,  i.  e.  Gregorij  Pape  xnx.  conjundtum. 

33-  b* 

8  H  39* 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


670 


Num.  2 366,  2367, 

59*  explorandum  Numerum  abfconditum.  35. 
40.  Ad  fciendum  quo  tempore  teduat  Oceanus,  loco 
quocunque.  35-  b. 

2367. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  1 2mo.  tarn  a  pueris,  quam  ab 
alijs,  mirum  in  modum  male  habitus  atq;  mutilatus- 
A  eruntamen,  in  illo  jam  nunc  reliant, 

1.  Calendarium,  in  quo  notantur  Dies  Nataliiij,  &c. 
quorundam  e  familia  de  Harewode,  pridem  idius 
Dominorum ;  '  creteris  Adnotationibus  ad  Harewodos 
fpedamibus.  per  Samuelem  Canutum  live  Knott  Rec- 
reni  de  Coinbe-Raleigh  in  agro  Devonienli,  confulto 
abfeiflis. 

Ad  diem  10  Odobris  legitur  haic  Notula,  “  Dedi- 


catio  Ecclefie  de  South-Moktone.” 

2.  Reliquiae  Horarum  B.  V.  Marias.  7. 

3.  Fragmenta  Luanise,  cum  precibus.  31. 

4.  In  Vigilijs  Mortuorum,  Orationes.  36. 

5.  Pro  Corpore  prefenti,  Orationes.  38. 

6.  In  Laudibus  ;  par  Hymnorum.  52. 

7.  In  Anniverlariis ;  Fragmentum.  55. 

8.  Commendatio  Animarum.  56. 


9.  Oracio  Sci  Augudini,  quam  quicunque  dixerit,  vel 

Secum  portaverit,  nullus  Inirnicus  ei  nocere  poted  ;  nec 
in  Aqua  peribit,  nec  in  Igne,  nec  Veneno,  nec  in  aliqua 
Morte  fubitanea  :  et  quicquid  fuerit,  a  Deo  impetrabit, 
donee  Anima  ejus  egredietur  de  corpore;  in  Infernum 
non  intrabit.  68. 

Init.  “  Deus  propicius  edo  mihi  Peccatori.” 

10.  Precatio  cum  hujufmodi  Rubrica,  lermonevulgari, 
ct  Who  fo  ever  feye  this  Orifon  yn  good  Deuocion,  and  in 
good  Entent,  fchall  have  Remiflion  off  alle  his  Synnes  ; 
and  he  fchalle  never  die  yn  fodeyn  Dethe.  And  let  doe 
fynge  thryes  a  Made  off  owre  Lady  ouer  this  Oryfon  yn 
good  Entent :  and  this  is  the  Made,  fc.  Vultum  tuum 
depr.  And  when  this  Maffe  is  fonge  ouer  this  Orifon, 
then  bere  this  Orifon  apon  zow;  and  yff  ze  come  by  for 
Prynces,  Dukes,  Ereles,  Barones,  or  any  other  men  off 
Woifchip  :  ze  fchalle  fynde  worfchip  to  yow,  Loue  & 
Grace  &  Plefyng.  And  yff  ye  be  traualing  in  the  See,  or 
in  any  other  Storme  or  Temped  :  take  a  Difche  full  off 
the  fame  Water,  &  feye  this  Orifon  ouer  hit  with  good 
Devotion,  and  caff  hit  azen  ynto  Jje  See,  or  yn  the  Kyne 
the  fayd  Water  ;  and  anon  the  Temped:  fchalle  afei'e. 
And  if  ye  goe  to  Batayle,  bere  this  his  Orifon  apon  vow, 
&  ye  fchalle  not  be  llayn,  nether  difeomfortid.  And 
tho  that  haue  the  Blodi  Flyxe,  tak  Mede  of  Whete,  & 
fey  this  Orifon  ther-apon  with  good  Deuotion,  &  yeue 
that  to  hym,  or  to  her,  Sc  lete  hem  ete  there-off  Sc  thei 
fchalle  be  hole.  And  when  thei  goe  to  any  maner  Viage, 
fay  this  Orifon  with  good  Deuocion,  yn  worfchip  of 
God,  and  no  bodi  fchalle  haue  power  to  grieue  the,  ne 
neteyow  efte  yower  Jornay  ne  Viage.  And  iff  a  Woman 
travaylle  off  a  Childe,  tak  Water  of  a  Well,  &  faye  this 
Orifon  ouer  the  Water;  &  zefe  the  Woman  to  drynke 
in  nam  oft  the  Trinite ;  and  anone  after,  fche  fchalle  haue 
Childe,  &  afeape  alle  maner  perelle.  And  no  man 
knoweth  the  Vertu  of  this  Orifon  but  only  God  :  For 
Seynt  Peter  made  this  Orifon  bi  teching  of  the  Iioli 
Code  ;  and  he  grauntid  to  eche  man  that  l’ayth  this  Ori¬ 
fon  a  zere  of  Pardon ;  and  he  grauntide  that  he  that 
leith  this  Orifon,  he  inude  fey  ferde  thefe  Pfalmes,  Deus 
in  nomine  tuo ;  Deus  mifereatur  nodri;  Sc  De  profundis. 

69. 

Init.  “  Domine  Deus  Omnipotens.” 

By  the  preceding  long  Rubric,  it  may  be  eafily  feen, 
that  the  Secular  Clergy  alfo  condefcmucd  to  ufe  little 
Trnks  &  petty  Rogueries,  whereby  to  milk  the  well- 
meaning  people  of  the  Laity,  of  the  r  Money. 

10.  Oratio  pro  Muliere  in  Tribulatione.  71.  b- 

Init.  “Libera  me  Due  Ihefu  Cride,  fili  Dei  vivi,  qui 

in  Cruce  pro  me  Peccatrice  fufpenfus  fudli.” 

11.  Forma  Crucis  facre  figure,  &  pietate  Domini, 


Num.  2  3  67 — 2369. 

mambus  Angelicis,  formata ;  qum  beatiftimo  Gregorio 
a  locuta  ed,  et  femper  penes  fe  retinuit  in  vera  Mcmoria 
dims  lacrauftime  apparitionis,  qua  Redemptor  noder 
quondam  in  Miffa  fibi  apparere  dignatus  ed  Rome,  in 
Capella  dicta  Jerufalem,  que  ed  infra  Ecclefiam  Sande 
Crucis  Ordinis  Cartufienfis :  ob  cujus  Compaffionis  Me- 
moriam,  Devocionifque  fervorem,  omnibus  vere  peniten- 
tibus  Sc  confeftis  devote  dicentibus  infra-feriptas Col  ledns 
breves,  cum  quinque  vicibus  Pater  noder  or  Ave  Maria, 
totidem,  flexis  genibus,  coram  fimili  Ymagine,  conceflit 
de  vera  Jndulgencia  14  milia  annorum.  Multi  alij  eciam 
Summi  Pontifices  plures  Indulgences  graciofe  addi- 
derunt,  20  milia  Sc  24  annorum,  cum  diebus  2-5  lndul- 
gentie.  .  7^. 

Init.  “  O  Due  Ihefu  Xpe,  adoro  te  in  Cruce  pen- 
den  tern.” 

2368. 

A  thin  velum  Book  in  fmall  4to.  fairly  written,  wherein 
is  contained  a  Tract  thus  entituled, 

1.  Archeion;  or,  of  the  high  Courtes  of  Judice  in 
Lnglande;  and  efpeciallie  of  the  Chauncerye-Courtc,  and 
of  the  Lord  Chauncelor  that  judgeth  there. 

C.onfidering  the  writing  Sc  binding  of  this  Book  it 
leems  likely  that  it  was  the  Authors  Prefent-book.  The 
Authors  Name  is  omitted,  but  the  Perfon  was  Mr.  Wil- 
liam  Lambard,  fome  time  (as  I  think,  Recorder  of  Lon¬ 
don)  and  Keeper  of  the  Records  in  the  Tower.  At  the 
end  of  the  Treatife,  is  a  neat  Flouriih  done  by  com¬ 
mand  of  Hand,  wherein  are  the  Letters  r.  b.  which 
(hews  that  this  Copie  was  written  by  the  hand  of  Peter 
Beales  the  then  famous  Writing- Matter  of  London. 

2.  In  the  lpare  Leaves  at  beginning  &  end,  "fome 
paltry  Verfes  are  fcribled-in,  by  a  later  &  worfe  Hand. 


2369. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  forma  i6ta.  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Calendarium  fronte  mutilum  ;  cum  Tabulis  Adro- 
nomis  ad  Computum  Ecclefiadicum  fpeclantibus  :  fcilicet 
Cyclorum  3.  ab  A.D.  1444.  ufque  ad  A.D.  1500; 
Tabula  ad  fciendum  Gradum  Lune,  omni  die,  See.  1 . 

2.  Kanon  Kalendarij  hujus;  five  Explanatio  Tabularum 
fupra-memoratarum.  Imperf. 

3.  Tabula  pro  Eclipfibus  Solis  &  Lune.  15.  b. 

Sequuntur  Adrologica. 

4.  Significationes  Planetarum  :  feu  Traclatus  parvus 

de  Affencionibus  Septem  Planetarum.  1 6. 

5.  Nomina  4  Elementorum,  Temporum  Anni,  See. 


6.  Verficuh  de  4  Hominis  Complexionibus  ;  Sangui- 
nea  fcilicet,  Cholerica,  Phlegmatica,  &  Melanchoiica. 

.  23-  b* 

7.  Compotus  Manualis  ;  nempe  Verfus,  cum  eorun- 
dem  enucleationibus. 

Init.  “  Filius  edoDei,  Celum  bonus,  accipe  grates.” 

8.  Si  funt  tres  homines,  quorum  unus  habet  Aurum, 
alius  Argentum,  &  alius  Cuprum,  vel  alias  tres  res, 
quaxunque  fuerint,  dummodo  Tu  illas  res  cognoveris  ; 
et  volueris  feire  quam  rem  quilibet  eorum  habet.  44.  ’ 

Init.  “  Salve  Stella  maris  nantis  rextrix  via  vite  ” 

9.  Experimenta  de  Combudione  vel  Pulverizacione 

corij  Serpentis,  extrafta  de  libro  Alcam,  qui  Salus  Vite 
vccatur,  per  Johannem  Pallin.  4g. 

1  o.  De  Signis  Zodiaci,  paucula.  r0‘. 

11.  Experimenta  varia.  b. 

Init.  “  Si  vis  ut  aliquis  ploret.” 

12.  Vocabularium  Adjedivorum,  Verborum,  Adver- 

biorum,  See.  2 

1 3*  Proverbia  nonnulla  e  S.  Biblijs  defumpta.  70.  b. 

14.  Verfus  aliquot,  forte  ad  Computum  anni  lpedan- 

,eS'  ^  .  71.  b. 

15.  Tradatus  de  Sphxra,  4  Capitulis.  Imperf.  72. 


9 


Codex 


Num. 2370*  2371. 

1370. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  forma  20ma.  quo  continentur, 

1 .  Libellus  de  arte  Moriendi ;  autore,  uti  recentiorum 

manibus  perhibetur,  Alberto  Caftellano.  .  1. 

Init. Cum  de  prasfentis  Exilij  miferia.” 

2.  An  Exhortation  wreten  by  Lady  Jane  Dudley,  to 
her  Sifter  Katharine,  the  Night  before  fhe  fuffred.  39.  b. 

3.  Chronicon  breve,  prafortim  de  Rebus  Britannicis 

atq;  Anglicis  ;  ab  Adamo,  ufq;  ad  A.D.  1427.  41. 

Init.  “  Adam  fait  quindecim  annorum  quando 
genuit  Caym,  &  Sororem  ejus  Calmanam  ’’ 

4.  Numerus  Ecclefiarum,  Villarum,  Feodorum,  & 
Comitatuum  Anglic 

5.  Verficuli  technici  ad  Computum  Ecclefiafticum 

(feu  de  diebus  Feftivalibus .  fpe&antes.  .  132. 

6.  Verficuli  de  progenie  Anna;,  inatris  B.V.  Maria;. 

*33-  b- 

7.  Oratio  ad  Crucem,  in  tempore  Peftilentim.  134. 
Init.  “  O  alma  Crux  Xpi,  falva  nos  a  prefenti  an- 

guftia  Peftilencie,  que  Salvatrix  noftra  es,  per  Ihefum 
Xpm  Dmm  nrm.  Amen.  Per  fignum  Thau  1  a  pefte 
Epidemie,  libera  nos  Ihefu,  &c.” 


2371. 

A  paper  Book  in  4to  written  in  Englifli ;  but  now  im¬ 
perfect.  It  contained  a  Sett  of  Homilies,  compofed 
for  the  feveral  Sundays  &  Holydays  throughout  the 
year,  by  foine  fecular  Prieft  in  England :  befides 
which,  are  fome  few  other  Matters,  which  (God  willing) 
Ihail  be  mentioned  in  their  Order. 

1.  An  Homily  for  the  laft  Sunday  after  Epiphany  ; 

imperfect  at  the  beginning.  *• 

2.  Another  for  Septuagefima  Sunday-  Imperfect. 

1.  b. 

It  may  be  noted,  that  in  this  Book,  are  no  Rubrics. 

3.  For  Sexagdima  Sunday.  5* 

4.  For  the  Sonday  in  Quinquagefyme.  8. 

5.  For  the  fecunde  Sonnedaye  in  cleene  Lentone. 

12. 

6.  For  the  thridde  Sonne-daye  of  Lentone.  13 
Herein,  the  Legend  of  Saynt  Vinfryde  is  cited. 

7  For  the  fourth  Sonne-daye  in  cleene  Lentone. 

'  16.  b. 


8.  For  the  Sonne-daye  in  Paflione-week.  1 9.  b. 

9.  For  Palme-Sonneday.  22- 

10.  For  the  3  days  before  Eafter.  ImperfeCt.  23.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Yee  fhalle  welle  knowe  that  holy  Chirche 

vfithe  theife  three  daies  to  lay  Seruice  in  the  Evene 
Tyde,  intheDerkneffe;  wherefore  it  is  callid  withe  you, 
the  Tenebris,  that  is,  Dcrkneffe.” 

Herein,  (at  fol-  25.)  Alexander  Neckham,  if  I  mif- 
take  not,  is  cited.  . 

11.  For  Shyre-Thurfdaye  j  1.  e.  Thurfday  before 

Eafter.  25-  b- 


12.  For  Good  Fry daye.  29. 

1  3  For  Godds  Sonday,  or  Paflinge-day,  or  Ealter- 
day  3x-b- 

14.  For  theMondaye,  Twyfdaye,  &  Weddynefdaye 

in  Eafter-week.  .33- b* 

Here  Lincolniens  (i.  e.  Bilhop  Grofthead)  is  cited. 

15.  For  Holy  Thurfday.  35- 

16.  Before  Whitfonne-Evyn.  37-  b- 

17.  For  Witt.Sondaye.  .  39- b* 

18.  For  the  Feefte  of  the  holy  Trinitee.  42-  b- 
Herein,  is  a  legendary  Story  about  Saynt  Edmunde 

of  Pountenaye. 

ig.  For  the  Feeft  of  Corporis  Xpi.  45- 

Flerein,  the  Lyf  of  Odo  Archebysfhoppe  of  Caun- 


tyrburye  is  quoted. 

20.  Before  Saynt  Andreus  daye.  5°- 

21.  Before  Saynt  Nicholas  daye.  .  54- 

2  Before  the  daye  of  the  Concepcione  ofoure  Ladye 

57- b* 


Nuiri.  2371. 

Here  is  the  Story  of  our  Kinge  William  Conquer- 
our’s  fending  th'Abbot  of  Ramfaye  to  the  King  ol  Den- 
marke. 

23.  Before  Saynt  Thomas  daye  that  was  Cry  its 

Apoftille.  bo* 

24.  For  Chrift-mafs-day.  62.  b. 

2  c.  Before  the  liighe  Feeft  of  Saynt  Stephan  the 
Martir. 

26.  Before  the  highe  Feeft  of  Saynt  Johan  the  Evan- 

gelift.  6ij-  b- 

27.  For  the  Innocents  daye.  7 1 .  b. 

28.  For  Saint  Thomas  Becket’s  daye.  73.  b. 

This  is  almoft  wholly  cutt-out ;  as  that  for  St.  Syl» 

vefters  day  is  quite  gone. 

29.  For  Nwe  Yeeris  daye.  7 4* 

30.  For  the  Twelfhte  Day,  or  Epiphanye  76. 

3 1 .  Before  the  Feeft  of  Saynte  Poule.  79. 

32.  Before  Candil-meffe-daye.  _  81.  b. 

Flere,  the  Lyf  of  Saynt  Dunftan  is  cited. 

33.  Before  Saynt  Matheues  daye.  85. 

24.  Before  the  High  Feeft  of  the  Annunciacione. 

J  86.  b. 

35.  Before  Saynt  Georges  day  the  holy  Martir.  89. 

36.  Before  Saynt  Marcus  daye.  9r- 

37.  Before  the  Feeft  of  Saynt  Phillippe  and  Jacob. 

92.  b. 

38.  Before  the  Feeft  of  the  Inuencione  of  the  holy 

Crofle,  that  God  died  on.  94-  b. 

39.  Before  Saynt  Johans  daye  at  the  Porte  Latyne. 

97.  b. 

40.  Before  the  liighe  daye  callid  Saynt  Johans  day  the 

Baptift.  99- 

41.  Before  the  Feeft  of  Saynt  Peter  and  Paule; 

1 01.  b. 

Here  the  Author  faith,  fol.104.  “  Thanne  aftirwarde, 
whanne  Cryftcndome  coome  in  to  this  Londe  \  in  the 
worfhippe  of  Saynte  Paule,  King  Ethelbert  made  a  grete 
Chirche  in  Londone,  and  an  othir  at  Weftmynfter  in 
worfhippe  of  Saynt  Petir,  &c.” 

42.  Before  the  Tranflacione  of  Saynt  Thomas  Beket 

the  Martir.  .  lo4*  b- 

Moft  of  this  is  gone  ;  as  is  alfo  the  beginning  of  the 
next,  which  was 

43.  For  Saint  Margaretes  daye.  105. 

44.  Before  Mary  Magdalens  daye.  106.  b. 

45.  Before  Saynt  Jatnys  daye  th’  Apoftille  of  God. 

108.  b. 

46.  Before  the  Feeft  of  Saynt  Anne  oure  Ladies 

Mo  dir.  XXI*  b; 

47.  Before  the  Feeft  of  Saynt  Laurence,  Goddis  holy 

Martir.  '  .  XI3* 

48.  Before  the  daye  of  th’  Aflumpcione  of  oure  Lady. 

1 16. 

49.  Before  the  Feeft  of  Saynt  Barthilmewe.  119. 

Herein,  is  cited  the  Lyf  of  Saynt  Cutlake  (leg. 

Guthlake)  that  firlt  inhabit.  Crowlande  inLyncoln-fhyre, 
in  the  Fennvs. 

50.  Before  the  Natiuiree  of  oure  Lady  Saynt  Marye. 

122.  b. 

51.  Before  Holy  Roode-daye.  125.  b. 

52.  Before  the  Embir-daies,  that  bene  Weddynefdaye, 

Frydaye,  and  Satirdaye.  1 27- 

53.  Before  Saynt  Mathewys  daye  th’ Apoftille.  127.  b. 

54.  Before  Saynt  Michaells  daye  th’Arch-angelle. 

129.  b. 

Herein  is  mention  made  of  a  faire  Chirche  that  is 
callid  Saynt  Michaelis  Mownte  in  Cornwaile. 

tc.  Before  Saynt  Lucas  daye  th’  Euangehft. 

1 3 1  *  b- 

56.  Before  the  Feeft  of  Symone  and  Jude,  the  holy 
Apoftelis.  132.  b. 

c7.  Before  Alle  Ilalowene  daye.  *34- 

58.  Before  All  Soulyn  day  that  been  in  Purgatory, 
abidyng  ther  the  Mercy  of  God.  ^  Before 


ii 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


672 


Num.  2371,  2372. 

59.  Before  Saynt  Martynes  daye.  l3&- 

60.  Before  Saynt  Kateryns  daye,  the  Virgyne  k  Mar¬ 
tin  '  I39b- 

61.  Before  the  Chirche  Holy  daye.  141.  b. 

The  later  part  of  this  is  cutt  or  torn-out,  as  Popifh; 

&  the  beginning  defaced. 

The  Writer  of  this  Sett  of  Homilies  wrote  good 
F.nglifh,  coniidering  the  time  wherein  he  lived  ;  he  quotes 
Bede  feveral  times ;  and  mentions  the  quondam  Vicare  of 
(or  befyde)  Albrigge  in  Deuenfhyre  fol.  49.  b.  as  then 
living;  k  in  feveral  places  explains  fome  old  Cuftomesof 
our  Anceftors,  which  have  been  long  fince  difufed. 

Then  follows  a  fhort  Theological  Traci,  whofe 
beginning  (I  fuppofe)  went  with  the  end  of  the  laft 
Homily.  It  contains  Advices  upon  thefe  feverall  Sub- 
jefls : 

62.  Chaftitee. 

63.  Cotidian  Praicre. 

64.  Fading e. 

65.  Drinke. 

66.  Lookinge  on  Women. 

67.  Felalhippe  of  Womenne. 

68.  Trauille  ;  i.  e.  Laboure. 

69.  Redinge. 

70.  MeeknefTe. 

7  r .  Sadnelle  of  Mynde. 

72.  Pacience. 

73.  Peas. 

74.  Compaffione. 

75.  Defpylinge  of  Prayfmge. 

76.  Folowinge  of  Goodneffe. 

77.  Honed  Corn  terfacione. 

78.  Good  Felalhippe. 

79.  Keepinge  of  thyne  Earis. 

So.  Keeping  of  thy  Mouthe. 

81.  Syirnes  of  Bac-by  tinge. 

82.  Ayens  the  Synne  of  Lyinge. 

83.  Ayend  Swerynge. 

84.  A  Vow  made. 

85.  To  God  all  thing?  is  open. 

86.  Good  Confcience. 

87.  Hydinge  of  Vertue. 

88.  Conftffione. 

89.  Though te  afore. 

90.  Wyfdome. 

91.  Techinge. 

92.  Curiofitee. 

93.  Obedience. 

94.  Sufferaunce. 

95.  Defpyte  of  the  Worde. 

Ladly  follow, 

96.  A  legendary  Story  of  a  Monke,  that  vfid  to  his 
Lemmanne,  whanne  his  Felowes  went  to  Seruife  of  God. 

1 48.  b. 

97.  Verfus  de  Sandta  Maria.  149. 


A  thin  Parchment  Book  in  410.  imperfeft  at  both  ends 
containing, 

1.  Good  Advice  to  Reclus  of  either  Sex.  As  to  their 
various  Sorts,  the  Author  writes  thus  in  his  Preface. 

“  Now,  wheyr  as  it  ys  drawen  &  gadrid  out  of  the 
Lyues  k  Stories  of  Seyntes,  of  hem  that  chefen  this  Lyfe 
of  Reclus ;  four-fold  may  be  pe  Gaufes,  Motif,  &. 
Sterynge,  or  Entencione  principal : 

The  firde,  mai  be  Caufe  &  Entencione  of  Lyuynge 
at  her  owen  Wyll,  withoute  Labour. 

The  fecunde,  ys  Wil  of  gret  &  feruent  R'epen- 
taunce. 

The  thride,  ys  Purpos  to  efehewe  the  oportunite  of 
Synnynge,  in  comune  Defautes  or  Blames. 

The  ferthe,  ys  Defyr  of  on-tendynge  the  more  frely 
to  dyuyn  C.ontemplacion,  and  only  to  the  Worfchip  & 
Prey  bilge  of  oure  Lord  God.” 


Num.  2372 — 2374. 

In  the  fpare  Leaf  at  the  beginning,  I  find,  written 
by  other  hands, 

2.  A  good  Medefene  for  the  Gowtte. 

As  alfo  the  .  .  .  Note  following, 

3.  “  Fhys  ys  a  good  Boke  ffor  Holy  Men  orWemen  $ 
the  whyche  Boke  bylongeth  to  the  Almes-houfe  of 
Wyllyam  Browne  in  Stawnforde  in  the  Dyoeeffe  of 
Lyncolne,  by  the  Gyft  of  Sir  Johne  Trus  Chapleyne  to 
the  feyd  Wyllyam  Browne  fum  tyme,  and  Pivd  in  the 
feyd  vere  Howfe.  Orate,  quefo,  legentes,  pro  anima 
difti  Dili  Johannis.” 

2373\  ' 

A  parchment  Book  in  4to.  containing  divers  Theological 
Tradls,  all  (as  it  feemeth  to  me)  written  by  the  fame 
Author,  They  are, 

1.  A  Pidylle  of  Difcrecione  in  Stirringes.  1. 

Beginn.  “  Godely  frend  in  Cnd  Ihefu  ;  hat  fame 

Grace  &  Joy  pat  I  wylle  to  my  felf,  wylle  I  to  be  at 
Godes  wylle.” 

2.  A  Pydylle  of  Difcrecione  in  knowenge  of  Spirites 

Beginn.  “For  pi  pat  par  bene  dyuerfe  kyndes  of 
Spirites :  parfore  is  nedefulle  to  vs  diferete  knowynge 
of  thaim.” 

3.  A  Pidylle  of  Prayer.  8.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Godely  frende  in  Ci7d  Ihefu!  As  touch- 

ynge  pin  afkynge  of  me  how  pou  fchalle  rewle  pin  Hyerte 
in  pe  tyme  of  pi  Prayer.” 

4.  How  Mans  Soule  is  made  to  pe  Ymage  &  pe 

I.yknes  of  pe  holi  Trinite.  1 2.  b. 

This  is  a  fort  of  Homily  upon  the  Text cc  Nolite  con- 
formari  huic  Seculo.”  Rom.  xii. 

5.  A  Tretyfe  of  the  dudye  of  Wyfdome,  pat  men 

clepen  Benjamin.  13.  b. 

Beginn.  “  A  gret  Clerk  pat  men  clepen  Richard  of 
Santte  Victor,  in  a  Book  pat  he  makep  of  pe  Study  of 
Wifdome,  wytnes  &  faip,  pat  two  Myztes  bene  in  a 
mans  Soule,  zeuene  of  pe  Fadir  of  Heuene.” 

Richard  de  S.  Victore  wrote  two  Treatifes ;  one 
called  Benjamin  Major,  the  other  Benjamin  Minor. 

6.  Oratio.  i.  e.  a  Collect  dill  retained  at  the  beginning 

of  our  Communion-Service  in  the  Church.  23. 

Beginn.  “  God,  to  whome  alle  Hertes  bene  opene  ; 
&  vnto  whome  alle  Wylle  fpekep;  vnto  whome  no 
prim:  ping  is  hyd.”  ibid. 

7.  A  Boke  of  Contemplacion,  pe  whyche  is  cleped  pe 

Cloude  of  Vnknowing.  ibid- 

In  the  Appendix  to  the  printed  Catalogue  of  the 
MSS.  in  he  Oxford-Colleges,  pag.  87.  col.  1.  the  now 
Doctor  Thomas  Tanner  writes  that  this  Treatife  is 
aferibed  to  William  Exmeufe,  or  to  Maurice  Chawney. 
Whether  thefe,  or  either  of  them  were  Carthufians,  as 
Walter  Hilton  certainly  was,  I  know  not. 

8.  A  Tretyfe  of  priue  Counfeile.  63. 

Beginn.  “  Godely  frende  in  Crid  Ihefu  ;  as  touch- 

ynge  pin  inwarde  Occupacione.” 

Here,  in  fol.  70.  b.  where  the  Author  treateth  of 
Mekenes,  is  this  marginal  Note:  “  In  veteri  Libro  hujus 
Domus,vizt.  Montis  Grade;  de  quatuor  gradibus  IJumi- 
litatis.  nulla  fitmentio.” 

This  Mount-Grace  was  a  Carthufian  Monadery  in 
Yorklhire. 

23-4. 

A  Book  in  4to.  confiding  of  divers  Medicinal  &  Chirur- 
gical  Trails  and  Obfervations,  partly  in  Latin  &  partly 
in  Englifli ;  written  by  feveral  Perfons  upon  Paper  or 
Parchment;  and  now  bound-up  together :  vizt. 

1 .  Mcdicamenta  varia ;  five  Fragmentum  cujufdam 

Medicinalis  fecundum  praxim.  chart.  •  1. 

2.  Herbale;  i.e.  Nomina  Herbarum,  Latine  &  Anglice. 

chart.  5. 

3.  Quidam  traftatus  Medicinarum  aggregatus,  et  per 
diverfos  homines  in  Philofophia  expertos  in  Anglicis 

2  verbis 


142. 

ibid. 

ibid. 

142.  b. 
ibid, 
ibid, 
ibid. 

143. 
ibid. 

143.  b. 
ibid. 

144. 

ibid, 
ibid. 
1 44*  b. 
ibid, 
ibid.  Sc  147. 
145* 
ibid. 

145.  b. 
ibid, 
ibid. 

146. 

ibid. 

ibid. 

146.  b. 

ibid. 

ibid. 

}47- 

ibid. 

ibid. 

147.  b. 
ibid. 

148. 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


673 


Num.  2374—2376. 

verbis  approbatus,  per  naturam  &  operacionem  rerum, 
chart.  1 1  *  b. 

This  is  a  Colledion  of  Receipts  in  Phyfic  &  Chi- 
rurgery,  in  old  Englifli,  &  feems  worthy  of  perufal. 

Then  follow  upon  Parchment, 

4.  A  Stanza,  feeming  to  be  taken  from  a  Poem  made 

in  praife  of  fome  Man  of  merit  ;  written  in  a  more  mo¬ 
dern  hand,  by  one  Fludd.  _  29. 

5.  A  tranilation  of  “  Nicholai  Antidotarium,”  or 

Pradica  Medicinal,  in  very  old  Englifli  ;  but  imperfed 
at  both  ends.  perg.  31* 

6.  In  the  vacant  page,  30.  b.  is  a  note  written  (as  I 
fuppofe)  by  the  Prielt  of  Roderham,  touching  the 
Number  of  Chriftenings,  Weddings,  &c.had  in  hisParifh, 
A.  D.  1472  ;  with  an  account  of  l'ome  of  his  Expences 
that  year. 

=  375- 

A  Medicinal  Book  in  4to.  written  upon  paper,  but  not 
all  by  the  fame  hand  ;  imperfed  at  the  beginning, 
and  much  damaged  by  Moillure.  Herein  are  con¬ 
tained, 

1 .  A  Medicinal  Treatife  in  old  Englifh  ;  imperfed,  as 

I  faidjuft  now.  x* 

Here  the  Author  declares  the  Difeafes  m]>e  Ligthys, 

I.yuer,  Splene,  Renys  &  Kydnerys,  Bladdere,  Modyr, 
Vryne.  . 

2.  In  the  vacant  Pages  that  follow,  are  fome  Medicinal 
fk  other  Receipts,  vizt.  17.  b.  34- b.  55.  b.  87.  b. 

.88.  75. 

3.  A  fragment  giving  Receipts  to  make  diflilled  Waters; 

mofUy  in  Englifh.  .  33* 

4.  Quoddam  Compendium  de  concordia  Elemen- 

toruin,  Tcmporum,  Humorum,  Horarum,  Etatum,  et 
Parcium.  3^’ 

5.  VirtutesquarundamHerbarum,  fecundumMacrunv, 

profaice.  48-  b. 

6.  Outedam  de  virtutibus  aliarura  Herbarum ;  maxi- 

mam  partem,  Latine.  .  54* 

7.  Beda?  de  Stuphis,  calidis  et  humidis.  55. 

8.  De  quinque  Clifleribus  laxativis.  55-  b. 

9.  Medicamenta  varia.  5^* 

10.  Tabula  Salcrni.  69. 

1 1.  (^uare  Medicine  compofite  invente  erant ;  5  ver- 

fibus.  .  70,  b* 

12.  Verfus  Egidij  laudabiles,  de  Confervatione  Me- 

dicinarum  &  Specierum.  71; 

n.  Some  Receipts  in  the  Confedionary-way ;  old 
Englifli.  .75* 

14.  Libellus  Johannis  de  Sando  Projedo,  de  virtute 

Simplicis  Medicine.  76- 

1 5.  Ad  literas  Aureas  vel  Argenteas  fcribendas.  83. 

iC.  Colledio  Medicamentorum,  per  quendam  An- 

gimn.  J83'b- 

17.  Tractatus  Aflronomie  fub  compendio,  depiog- 
noflicatione  Simormn  Sc  F.grotorum,  per  Signa  Cdellia. 

fol.  89.  ufque  ad  finem  Codicis. 

Init.  “  Qui  fuerit  Medicus  &  optimus  Magifler, 
perfeCtus  Medicus  non  eft  qui  Aftronomiam  ignorat.” 


2376- 

A  Book  in  4to.  written  upon  parchment,  wherein  is 
contained,  a  good  Copy  of 

1.  pe  boke  of  Pyris  Plowman.  1  ■ 

Beginn.  “  In  a  Somer  feyfone,  whan  fofte  was  pe 

Sonnet  ^  end>  .g  this  Note)  «  h;c  cxplicit  Vifio  Wil- 
elmi  de  Petro  Plowman.”  Now  among  the  feveral  perfons 
to  whom  the  Poems  of  Piers  Plowman  have  been  aienbed, 
1  remember  not  any  William  ;  fo  that  if  Geffrey  Chaucer 
was  the  man,  he  difguifed  his  name  for  fear  of  the  Clergy, 
who  are  bitterly  inveighed  againft  in  these  Poems.  And 
to  fhew  that  the  preceding  Note,  and  another  that  will 
Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2376 — 2378. 
foon  follow  are  of  fome  moment,  I  produce  thefe  Verfes, 
extant  in  fob  7.  b. 

“  A  louely  Lady  of  lore,  in  Lynen  y  eloped, 
Come  a-don  fro  pat  Caftel,  &  cleped  me  by 
Name, 

And  fayd  William,  flepes’pu  ?  feyft  pu  pys 
Peple,”  &c. 

2.  Vifio  predidi  Willelmi  de  Do  wel;  pafiibus  7.  54. 
Beginn.  “Thus robed  in  Ruffet,  Y  romede  aboute.” 

3.  Vifio  ejufdem.  de  Do  bet  ;  pafiibus  3.  88.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Here  is  none  l'uche  y-fayede,  pat  font 

tyme  ne  borowep.” 

4.  Vifio  ejufdem,  deDobeft;  pafiibus  2.  13. 

Beginn.  “  pus  Y  a-wakede,  and  wrot  what  Y  bad 

y-dremed.” 

It  concludeth  thus,  “  And  fende  me  happe  &  hele 
tyl  Y  have  Peres  Plouz-man, 

And  fyppe  he  gradade  aftere  Grace,  till  Y  ganne 
a-wake.” 


2377- 

A  parchment  Book  in  4to.  imperfed  at  both  ends  ; 
many  alfo  of  whofe  Leaves  are  tranfpofed  through  the 
Ignorance  of  its  former  owner.  It  contained  a  Theo. 
logical  Poem,  divided  into  Seven  parts,  the  Authors 
matter  being  collected  from  fundry  books  of  Scripture, 
Fathers,  &c.  Who  he  was  I  know  not ;  but  he 
quotes  Bartholommus  de  Proprietatibus  Rerum,  in 
foil.  1.  &  44.  which'  writer  flourifhed,  A.  D.  1360. 
that  is,  not  long  before  this  Copie  was  writt. 

What  remaineth,  beginns  towards  the  Conclufion 
of  the 

1 .  Second  Part,  which  treated  of  the  Worldes  Vn- 

ftabulnes.  &c.  1  • 

2.  pe  pridde  part  of  this  Boke,  pat  fpckep  of  Dep.  2. 
Beginn.  “  pe  Dope  is  mod  dredful  ping  pat  es.” 

3.  pe  ferpe  part,  pat  fpekep  alof  Purgatorye.  16. 
Beginn.  “  Firft  whan  God  woldeinake  alle  pinge.” 

4.  pe  fyft  part  ;  pat  is,  of  pe  day  of  Dome,  and  of 

pe  Tokenes  pat  byfore  Ihul  come.  34.  b. 

Beginn.  “  pe  fyft  part  is  of  the  Day  of  Dome.” 

Here,  the  Leaves  being  tranfpofed,  the  Reader  muft 
turn-over  to  fol.  67. 

5.  pe  fexp  part  ;  pat  is  of  pe  peynes  of  Helle.  99.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Many  man  here  fpeketh  of  Helle.” 

Here,  when  the  Reader  is  gotten  to  the  end,  he 

muft  turn  back  to  fol.  35. 

6.  pe  feuenth  party  of  the  blys  of  Heuene.  43.^ 
Beginn.  “  Many  men  pe  blys  of  Heuene  coueytes.  * 
Thus  this  imperfect  Work  endeth  after  fol.  66.  and 

by  another  imperfed  Copy  here,  as  well  as  by  Mr. 
Wharton’s  Appendix  to  Dr.  Cave,  Pitts,  &c.  appears  to 
be  Richard  Hampoles  Prikke  of  Confcience. 

2378. 

A  Pharmaceutical  Book  in  4to.  written  by  various  hands 
upon  parchment ;  partly  in  old  Englifli,  and  partly 
in  Latin  ;  of  which,  fince  the  multitude  of  Receipts 
therein  is  great :  I  ihall  give  only  the  following  Ac- 
count, 

1.  A  fort  of  Table  to  the  enfuing  Collection,  made 
by  the  late  Dr.  John  Covel  Mafter  of  Chrifls  College 
(its  laft  owner)  who  ftudied  Phyfic,  before  he  entered 
into  Holy  Orders.  In  two  paper-leaves,  now  bound 
with  the  reft. 

2.  HE  fhort  account  of  the  Contents  ot  this  Mb.  on 
the  firft  parchment-Leaf. 

3.  Entrances  of  the  Births  of  feveral  Perfons  ot  the 
Family  of  Goodrick,  iogether  with  the  names  of  the 
Godfibs  who  promifed  at  their  Baptifms  ;  being,  for  the 
moft  part,  of  the  Suffolk-Gentry.  In  the  next  page; 
&  in  fol.  i .  &  1  •  b. 

I  now  proceed  to  the  old  Work,  whereof  the  firft 
Article  is  a  large  Colledion  of  Medicinal  &  Chirurgical 
3  1  Receipts, 


674 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Receipts,  &c.  among  which,  I  (hall  mention  only  thefe 
that  will  here-under  follow,  vizt. 

4.  A  Refeyte  for  dying  of  blac  Threde ;  fecundum 

Nicholaum  Spaldynge.  1  ■ 

5.  Unguentem  Alabauftri,  Nardi,  Piftici  preciofi, 

quod  Romani  de  Jerufalem  deportabant,  eo  tempore 
quo  Dominus  nofler  Ihefus  Xpus  crucilixus  fuit  &  vinCtus, 
&c.  5- 

6  pe  bookeof  Ypocras.  In  J>Is  book  he  techyt  for  to 
know  be  Planete,  SeknefTe,  Lyf  &  Deth,  and  )>e  times 
Jjereof.  5- 

7.  De  Solfequio,  et  alijs  quibufdam  herbis.  15. 

8.  A  Note  touching  the  great  Plague  which  almofi: 

deftroyed  Europe  A.  D.  1348-  (or  7!  of  which  Bocaccio 
hath  given  a  large  Account  in  the  Preface  or  Introduction 
to  his  Decameron.  This  Ihews  how  much  miftaken  Dr. 
Covel,  when  he  gelled  (perhaps  above  40  years  agoe) 
hat  this  book  as  it  is,  written  at  various  times,  &  by 
different  Hands  was  then  at  lead  400  years  old-  21. 

9.  For  the  Fyereof  Helle.  37. 

This  ieems  to  have  been  foine  Cutaneous  Diftemper; 

perhaps,  what  is  now  called  St.  Anthonies  Fire. 

10.  A  good  Entret,  that  is  callide  Gracia  Dei.  41. 

11.  Unguentum  viride.  43- 

12.  For  Man  or  Womman  that  is  blifted  withe  wik- 

kede  Spirits  ;  to  do  away  the  Ache,  &  abate  the 
Swellyng.  4^- 

13.  For  the  Elf-C.ake.  47.  &  57. 

14.  For  the  Fallyng  Yuel.  49- 

This  is  an  Idle  Charme,  yet  defaced  by  fomebody 

who  thought  it  might  be  efficacious  through  the  Devils 
power.  DoCtor  Covel,  in  a  Note  at  the  top,  hath  en¬ 
deavoured  to  give  fome  Light  into  it. 

1 5.  For  to  maken  a  Drynke  that  men  calle  Dwale  ; 

to  make  a  man  flepen  whylis  men  kerve  hym.  55. 

16.  For  a  man  that  fpekethe  in  his  Sleepe.  70. 

17.  Unguentem  album.  87. 

18.  To  make  Grcne  Entrere.  94. 

19.  For  man  or  wommane  J>at  hathe  J>e  periloufe 

Coughe.  .  95- 

20.  For  pe  Coughe  fat  is  called  fa  Kynke.  ibid. 

21.  For  a  Woraane  ]>at  lefeth  hire  Barne-tem,  for 
defaute  of  Man,  and  t.  keihe  euele  fare-thurghe.  104. 

I  doubt  not  but  that  in  this  TraCt  there  may  be  many 
excellent  Recipes  which  I  underhand  not.  At  the  end 
is  the  Authors  name  fpecified  in  the  following  Note, 

*•  Secundum  Dompnum  Nicholaum  de  Spaldynge,  quod 

S.  D.  C.” 

22.  Some  other  Medicinal  Receipts,  written  in  Eng¬ 
lilh,  or  in  Latin,  by  various  hands.  112. 

23.  Antidotarius  Nicholai.  115. 

Init.  “  Ego  Nicholaus  rogatus  a  quibufdam  in  Prac- 

tica  Medicine  ftudere  volentibus.” 

24.  Diafcoridis  Quid  pro  Quo.  208. 

Init.  “  Diafcoridis  nofeitur  feciffe  hunc  Librum, 

quern  mifit  avunculo  fuo.” 

2 5.  Nomina  Herbarum,  alphabetico  Ordine  difpofita  ; 

Latine  &  AnglicC.  213. 

26.  Medicinal  Sc  Diitillatory  Receipts,  written 
by  various  Hands,  fome  in  Latin,  others  in  Englilh. 

221 . 

Among  thefe  are, 

27.  Modus  conficiendi  Aquam  Vite  perfeCtiffimam. 

ibid. 

28.  Orifon,  pur  Sane  eflranger.  223. 

29.  Pulvis  WalterL  282. 

Then  follows, 

30.  A  Collection  of  Medicyns  J»at  good  Lechis  haue 
made  &  drawn-out  of  hir  Bokys,  Galien,  Afclepius  & 
Ipocras  ;  for  al  maner  Sorys  and  Woundys,  Cancrys, 
Gowtys,  Feftrys,  Felouns,  and  for  fodeyn  Sorys,  and 
al  maner  Ivelys  in  the  Body,  within  &  withoute,  229. 

This  TraCt  ieems  to"  want  a  Leaf  or  two,  at  the 
end  j  but  in  fome  vacant  fpaces  in  pag.  258.  &c. 


Num.  237P,  2379. 

fome  other  Receipts  are  inferred  :  as  alfo  the  following 
Notes, 

“  Qui  feripfit  carmen  fit  benediftus  :  Amen, 
quod  Litlingtone. 

Ilte  liber  confiat  Nicholao  Spaldinge.” 

31.  Receipts  to  make  Sweet-meats,  &c.  according  to 

the  Art  of  Confectioners.  &  Apothecaries.  297. 

32.  Secreta  Fratris  Alberti  de  Colonia,  Ordinis  Fra- 


truin  Predicatorum. 


325 


33.  Experimenta  de  Corio  Serpentis,  rranllata  a 
Johanne  Paulino,  extraCta  de  libro  Alcain,  qui  Salus 
Vite  vocatur. 

34.  Ludi  Nature  Regis  Salomonis,  quos  mifit  Regine. 

352. 

Flic  legitur  modus  conficiendi  Pulverem  Boinbardi- 
cum  j  quern  nos  Anglice  dicimus  Gun-powder. 

35.  TraCtatulus  de  diflinCtione  nonnullorum  librorum 

Affronomicorum,  &c.  a  Nigroinanticis.  353. 

2379- 

Codex  Theologicus  in  4to,  totus  (paucis  tantuin  folijs, 
finem  verfCis,  exceptis)  chartaceus  ;  in  quo  conti- 
nentur, 

1 .  Sententiola:  e  SS.  Patrum  Latinorum  feriptis  de- 

cerptEe.  j 

2.  Explanatio  Decalogi. 

3.  Vifio  queedam  de  Ira.  fol.  2 1 .  de Accidia.  fol.  2m  b. 

de  Avaricia.  fol.  23.  b  de  Gula.  fol.  26.  b.  de  Luxuria. 
fol.  29.  de  Latronibus,  Raptoribus,  falfis  Judicibus,  Ju- 
lulatoribus,  Hereticis,  Ti'rannis,  Homicidis,  Simoniacis. 
ufurarijs  Prelatis,  impijs  Sacerdotibus,  &c.  31.  b. 

4.  De  Poenitentia  &  Confeffione.  33. 

5.  De  Correptione.  43. 

6.  De  Paciencia.  43.  b. 

7.  DeTribulacione.  44. 

8.  De  Oractone.  48. 

9.  DeElemosina.  50. 

10.  De  Perfeverancia.  52. 

11.  De  Confilio.  55. 

1 2.  De  Fide  Catholica,  uti  dicitur  in  Simbolo  Anaf- 

tafij,  “  Quicunque  vult  lalvus  effe,  &c.”  57. 

13.  Alia  ColleCtanea  Theologica.  59. 

14.  De  feptem  Peccatis  mortalibus  ;  cum  verfibus 

quibufdam  Anglice  feriptis.  62.  b. 

15.  De  decern  Mandatis  Dei  ;  cum  fententiolis  An- 

glicis.  65.  b. 

16.  De  Vita  D.  N.  Jefu  Crifii.  70.  b. 

17.  Liber  de  Spiritu  Guidonis.  73. 

Scilicet,  Narratio  Legendaria  de  confabulatione 

habita  inter  Animam  praxli&i  Guidonis  Civis  de  Alefley 
feu  Ayfeftey  (qua:  difiat  ab  Avenion  21  miliarijs)  Qui 
quidem  Guido  obijt  16  kalendas  Decembris  A.  D.  1323  : 
et  Priorem  Fratrum  Praxlicatorum  in  eadem  Civitate 
commorantium. 

18.  TraCtatus  qui  dicitur  Speculum  Sacerdotis.  80.  b. 
Init.  “SanCtus  Edwardus  Rex  ScCcnfeffor  in  extre- 

mitate  Vite  pofitus.” 

Hie  TraCtatus  vulgo,  fedperperam,  tribuitur  eidem 
Rcgi. 

19.  TraCtatus  fuper  Confiitutionem  Clementis  Papas 

v.  qua:  ab  his  verbis  incipit,  “  Cum  Ecclefise  quibus  pre- 
ficiuntur  minus  ydonee  Perfone  Sciencia,  Moribus,  ve! 
Etate,  gravia  Detrimenta  in  temporalibus  Sc  fpiritualibus 
paciantur”.  92.  b. 

Then  follows  in  Englilh, 

20.  A  Collection  of  the  Curfes  denounced  again!!  all 

Men  and  Women,  particularly  thofe  within  the  Province 
of  Canterbury,  qwiche  ben  gylty  in  any  of  the  Artyclis 
fat  amc  folouwynge,  to  fa  tytne  thei  comyn  to 
Amendement.  10$. 

Beginn.  “  Thoroughe  J?e  autorvte  of  cureLorde 
God  all  myzty. 

'I  hde  Articles  arc  chiefly  grounded  upon  the  pro¬ 
vincial  Confiitutions. 

7  21.  Adno- 


Num.  2379- 

21.  Adnotationes  pauculas  Theologies:  fecundum 

Henricum  de  Gandavo,  &c.  j  10  j, 

22.  Enucleatio  Libri  Decretorum.  j , ,  ’ 

23.  Dieta  Salutis  ;  Bonaventura  Cardinale  (feu,  ut 

alij  volunt,  Guillone  Aquitanico)  autore.  120 

24.  Ejufdem  Traftatus  Epitome  ;  five,  Tabula  prinia 

1  201.  b. 

25.  labula  in  eundem,  Alphabetico  ordine  difpofira. 

211. 

2380. 

A  Book  in  4to.  written  by  various  hands ;  both  upon 
Paper  &  Parchment;  partly  in  old  Northerly  lingliih 
&  partly  in  Latin  ;  wherein  1  find, 

1.  A  Table  of  Contents  to  the  enfuing  Treatife  1. 

2.  A  large  Colleaion  of  Medicinal  A  Chirurgicai  Re¬ 

ceipts  ;  among  which,  many  ridiculous  Charms  are  in¬ 
termingled.  Imperfect.  j 

Then  follow, 

3.  Some  old  Songs,  or  Ditties,  badly  enough  writ¬ 
ten,  and  the  Poetry  as  indifferent ;  upon  pious  Subjects. 

150. 

2381. 

A  Book  in  4to.  written  in  Englifh,  for  the  far  greatefl; 
part ;  &  by  feveral  hands ;  and  befides,  by  ill  ufate, 
not  a  little  damaged ;  as  is  that  lafl  deferibed:  wherein 
neverthelefs,  do  yet  remain, 

1.  Calendarium ;  cum  notitia  ciclorum  quorundam 

Aftronomicorum.  j  ^ 

2.  Series  Annorum,  ab  A.  D.  1463  ufque  ad  a'.  D. 

1569  mclufive  ;  una  cum  Curfu  Lune,  Biflexto,  Ter- 
mino  Pafchali,  &c.  j  „  ^ 

3.  Medicinal  &  Chirurgicai  Receipts,  not  without 
Charms  or  other  Reliques  of  Superftition.  15b  31 

4.  An  Imperfect  alphabetical  Table  to  the  enfuintr 

Treatife.  j  5 

5.  A  Colleftion  of  89  Medicines.  3?  b 

Of  thefe  I  find  prefently  but  21  ;  and  fuppofe  that 

the  reft  may  be  jumbled  &  mixed  with  what  follows. 

0.  The  Antidotarie  of  Surgery  of  Petij  Lanfranke. 

This  is  faid  to  end  at  fol.  47  ;  but  the  Leaves^e 
fo  tranfpofed  &  confounded,  and  this  not  lately  :  that 
it  will  not  prove  an  eafy  task  to  putt  them  rightly  in  Ol¬ 
der,  even  with  the  help  of  Lanfranks  own  work. 

2382. 

A  paper  Book  in  4to.  wherein  are  contained  feveral  The- 
ological  Poems,  compofed  by  Dan.  John  Lydgate 
Monk  of  Bury,  Geffery  Chaucer,  &  others  ;  in  the 
following  Order,  vizt. 

.  1  •  Lidgates  life  of  [he  blelTcd  virgin  Mary,  in  4  books 
imperfect  at  the  beginning. 

At  the  end  is  this  Note  “  Explicit  quartos  liber  de 
Santta  Maria. 

2.  De  AJTumpcione  Santte  Marie.  »- 

Beginn.  “  A  merry  Tale  y  telle  yow  may 

Of  Seint  Marie  that  fwete  May. 

Alle  the  tale  of  this  Lelfone 
Ys  of  here  Alfumptione.’’ 

At  the  end  is  this  Note,  «  Explicit  Sextus  Liber 
San£te  Marie’J  :  which  fhews  that  two  other  books  were 
added  to  the  Work  of  Lidgate,  which  was  divided  into 
only  four;  and  written  to  IC.  Henry  v.  all  in  Stanzas. 

3.  Oracio  ad  Sanftam  Mariam.  86.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Mary  moder,  welle  thu  be ; 

Mary  mayden,  thenk  on  me, 

Maiden  &  Moder  was  neuer  none 
Togeder,  Lady,  faue  thu  allone.'’ 

4-  The  Teftament  of  Dan  Johan  Lydgarde  i.  e.  Lyd¬ 
gate)  .  £7.  b.  108.  128.  b. 

Beginn.  t£  O  how  glad  &  holfom  is  the  memorie 
Of  Crift  Ihefu,  furmountinge  all  fwet- 
neffe.” 


5.  Fabula  Monialis  de  fancta  Maria.  97. 

This  is  the  Priorefes  Tale,  in  Chaucer. 

Beginn.  «  Lord,  oure  Lord  Ihefu  thi  Name  hovr 

,  mervelous 

Ts  in  this  large  World  y-fpred  !  quod. 
She. 

6.  Vita  Sancte  Cecilie.  Ior> 

T  his  is  t'  fecond  Nonnes  Tale  in  Chaucer. 
Beginh.  The  miniftre  of  the  norice  vnto  Vices, 

Which  pit  men  clepeth  in  Englifh  Y- 
delnes.” 

7.  De  Sancto  Erafmo  Martirei  IOn 

Beginn.  “  Alie  Criften  peple,  lifieneth  ye,  &  here 

Of  an  boli  Bifshop  &  a  Martere.” 

8.  Tefiamentum  Crifti.  ,  j 

Beginn.  “  Who  fo  will  ouer  rede  thisboke, 

And  with  goftly  Eyen  thereon  loke  ; 

To  othc ;  Scole  dare  he  not  wende, 

To  faue  his  Soule  fro  Jie  Fende.” 

9.  The  Childe  of  Briflow.  j  x3;  {j, 

Beginn.  “  He  that  made  bothe  Heuene  &  Helle 

Man  &  Womman  in  days  Six.” 

This  is  a  legendary  Tale  of  a  Squier  who  had 
amafled  a  great  deal  of  Wealth  by  Opprcflion  and  frau¬ 
dulent  dealings ;  who  had  but  an  only  Child,  whom  (at 
his  own  requeft)  he  putt  Apprentice  to  a  Merchant  in 
Bril  to  1.  The  Squier  lying  upon  his  Death-bed,  fends  for 
his  Son,  who  conjures  him  to  appear  unto  him  a  fourt- 
night  after  his  Deceafe,  &  certifie  him  of  the  Condition 
his  Soul  would  then  be  in:  which  proving  to  be  horribly 
bad,  the  young  Man  fells  all  his  Fathers  Effedh;  his 
own  Clothes,  even  to  Nakednefs ;  and  his  Body  to  be 
his  mafters  Bond-man  for  ever.  With  the  Sums  thus 
railed,  he  farisfies  all  whom  his  Father  had  injured;  and 
delivers  his  Soul  from  the  Tonn.-nts  of  Purgatory  to 
heavenly  Blifs.  This  being,  at  length,  made  known  to 
the  Mafter;  he  makes  the  young  Man  his  Partner  ;  and 
dying,  in  procefs  of  time  ;  left  him  his  whole  Eftate, 
which  was  not  only  lawfully  acquired,  but  much  larger 
than  that  fo  wickedly  raked-up  by  the  Squier. 

2383- 

Codex  Theologicus  &  chartaceus  in  4to.  partim  Latinc 

partim  Anglice  deferiptus  ;  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Speculum  Edwardi;  i.  e.  Speculum  Sacerdotis, 

Regi  Eadwardo  Confeflori  haud  raro  adjudicatum  :  initio 
mancum.  r> 

Hunc  tra&atum,  una  cum  ahjs  qui  fequuntur,  col- 
legifle  videtur  quidain  Johannes  Mydwynter  ;  atq;  in 
ufum  deferipfifle  cujufdam  Simonis  Smyht ;  i.  e.  Smythe. 

2.  Liber  Bonitatis,  in  ufum  Sacerdotum  compilatus* 

1 4.  b 

Init.  “  Sacerdos  dicit  Due  labia.  Deus  in  adjutorium; 
in  fignum,  quon  non  poteft  os  fuum  aperire,  aliquod 
bonum  facere,  fine  adjutorio  omnipotentis  Dei.” 

3.  The  Prelles  Exhortation,  in  order  to  comfort  a 

Man  or  Woman  yn  here  laft  ende.  2^. 

4.  A  bald  Poem,  upon  the  Joyes  of  Heaven,  &c. 

25.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Man  !  in  Heuyn  hyt  ys  mery  to  dwell; 

Fyrfte  the  Wey,  &  fethe  the  Jove  y 
woolle  the  Telle.” 

5.  Adnotatio  de  Sacerdotis  Officio;  manu  aliena.  30. 

6.  Traftatus  in  ufum  Sacerdotum  compilatus.  30.  b. 

Init.  “  Hec  funt  Sacramenta  precepta  Re&oribus  Ec- 

clefiarum  a  Dno  Papa  tranfmifla.”  ^o.  b. 

7.  Cujuflibet  generis  Pceniteniiae  Peccatoribus  poe- 

nitentibus  injungendae.  4J. 

8.  Notulte  de  Impenfis  cujufdam  Paedagogi.  4 ». 

9.  Adnotationes  de  lndulgentijs  cuidam  Ecclefiae  com. 
ceffis,  per  Bonifacium  Papam  ix?  per  Willelraum  Curt, 
ney  Archiepifcopum  Cantuarienfem  ;  Robertum  (Hallam) 
Sar.  Epifcopum  ;  San&um  Petrum  ;  homam  Spofforde 
Epifcopum  Hereforde  ;  Jacobum  Epifcopum  Banchoren- 

fem 


6j6 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2383. 

fent  •  ......  Archiepifcopum  Tuamenfem  ;  Johannem 

Epifcopum  Elphinenfem ;  Richardura Epifcopum  Dunen- 
fem;  et  Johannem  Papam  xxii.  .  44.  b. 

11.  Dc  decern  preceptis  Decalogi.  ibid. 

1 1  Of  Tythes,  according  to  the  Conftitutions  of  P<  'pe 
Boneface  &  hys  Cardinally,  as  explained  by  Jhon  Strat- 
forde  Arch -by  (hope  of  Canturbery.  43* 

12.  The  Rite  of  Baptil'm  ufed  by  our  Anceftors  be¬ 
fore  the  Reformation.  43*  b. 

13.  A  treatife  concerning  thofe  who  lay  under  Cen- 

fures  Ecclefiaftical,  or  the  public  Curie.  46- 

Beginn.  “  Frendys,  Hyt  ys  ordeyn  bi  the  faders 
of  holy  Cherche,  }>at  euery  Curate  flrnld  (hew  amonge 
hys  Perfshons  4  tymys  in  the  yere,  the  Articulis  that  by th 
wrytene  in  the  generalle  Sentence  ;  that  is  tor  to  fay  the 
Poyntys  pat  longith  to  he  grett  Curs:  viz.  lhe  firlt 
Soneday  of  Aduente  ;  the  firlt  Sonneday  of  Lente  ;  the 
next  Sonneday  after  Wit-fonneday  ;  &c  the  next  Sonday 
after  the  Alfumpcione  of  owre  Lady.” 

14.  DeJejunio  &  Abftinencia.  54* 

15.  Of  Excommunication,  &  Legiflative  Power  Ec¬ 
clefiaftical.  54-  b. 

16.  De  Abfolucione  imponenda.  .  5^- 

1 7.  A  form  of  Confeilion  of  Sins  to  the  Pried.  57. 

a  8.  The  Priefts  Exhortation  to  the  Penitent.  59.  b. 
19.  Abl'olutionis  formula.  °i. 

so.  A  (horf  Precede,  wherein  are  explained  he  1 2 

Artyculys  of  he  Fey  the  ;  the  10  Commaundements  of 
God  ;  the  2  Beheftys  of  the  Gofpelle  of  God ;  the 
werks  of  Mercy,  the  7  dedely  Synnys  with  here  Braun- 
ches  j  the  4  pryncypalle  Vcrtuys  ;  &  the  7  Sacraments. 

61. 

21.  Orationis  Dominica  explicatio.  63.  b. 

22.  A  fliort  Tra<ft,  whole  Scope  is  fufficiently  fett 

forth  by  the  following  words  of  the  Proeme.  65. 

«  Fyrft  to  fchew  yow  he  condicions  of  he  7  Dedely 
Synnys ;  and  by  Figure  &  Enfampylle  yn  generalle  :  and 
afterwards,  to  rtherfe  hem  by  proceffe,&  byOrdcre,  what 
braunches  gothe  out  of  hem. 

23.  De  tiibus  Spiritualibus  Hoftibus,  quorum  Temp- 

taciones  funt  diverfimode.  _  78.  b. 

24.  Dominica  in  i.xx;  an  Englifh  Homily.  79-  b. 
Beginn.  “  Now  Frendis,  this  day  ys  he  beginninge 

of  Septuageline,  yn  po  wyche  day  Men  fchuld  drawe 
hem  felfe  to  holy  Levynge.”  79- b. 

25.  Dominica  in  quinquagefima  ;  an  Englylh  Ho¬ 

mily  upon  this  Text,  “  Cum  effem  parvulus  loquebar  ut 
porvulus  ad  Corinth,  xm.  81.  b. 

Begynn.  “  Thys  bythe  he  wordis  of  Scynt  Paule, 
and  bythe  y-wryte  yn  he  Pydylle  of  pis  day.” 

Here  is  a  legendary  Tale  "how  the  Devil  fell  from  a 
Church- Window  whereon  he  fat,  by  taking  too  much 
rains  in  ftretching-out  a  piece  of  Parchment,  which  he 
had  tilled  with  the  idle  Chat  of  two  Women,  who  prated 
together  therein  during  the  time  Divine  Service. 

°2 6.  An  Homily  on  Alh-WednefJay,  upon  the  words 
■**  Memento  homo,”  See.  *>£•  b- 

Beginn.  “  Now  good  frendys,  pat  r.e  fchalle  cum 
to  Churche,  &c.  for  hit  ys  pe  [led  &  pe  Begynninge  of 
alle  pis  holy  Faftynge  of  Lentt.” 

27.  Dominica  quarta  Quadragefime  ;  another  Homily 

upon  the  Text  “  Fade  funt  gutte  ejus  ficut  gutte  Sangui¬ 
nis.”  88.  b. 

Beginn.  “  This  was  to  vnlofe  perbv  pe  knottys  of 
Syne  y-knytt  with  curfyde  Wordys.’ 

28.  The  beginning  only  of  an  Homily  in  Quadrage- 

fima.  .  9°- 

29.  In  Oratione  Dominica,  adnotatio.  92. 

30.  Cur  preces,  “  Deus,  qui  tain  excellenti,”  &c. 
ufque  ad  illam  “  Deus  per  quem  mulier,”  non  dicantur  in 
fecundis  Nupcijs ;  e  Pupilla  Oculi  Johannis  de  Burch. 

92.  b. 


Num.  2384,  2385. 


2384. 

Codex  chartaceus  in  4to.  manu  Anglica  deferiptus  ; 
cujus  Argumentum,  Titulum,  et  Aufiorem  fatis 
oftendit  Notula  qua;  fequitur,  in  fine  adpofita, 

Explicit  libellus  de  nomine  Virginis  Marie,  qui  voca* 
tur  “  Euprep'ia  puerpera  editus  a  Monede,  propter  amo- 
remMatris  mee  :  et  miifus  Fratri  Ricardo  de  Walpol  de 
Ordine  Predicatorum  ;  ut  in  Juventute,  amorem  Vir¬ 
ginis  gloriofe  importaret,  et  orane  vanum  cxpelleret. 
Amen. 

Init.  “  Maria  Mater  Dei  appellatur.  Iftud  nomen 
fibi  congrue  appelebat ;  primo,  racione  compoficionis 
Sillabarum  &  Literaruin,  fecund 6,  racione  Interpreta- 
cionis,  tertib,  racione  Effect  us  &  Virtutis.” 


238;. 

A  Book  in  4to.  confiding  of  divers  theological  Frag¬ 
ments  now  bound-up  together.  They  are,  for  the 
greater  part,  written  upon  parchment ;  but  by  different 
hands,  and  at  different  times,  having  been  much  a- 
bufed  by  ignorant  or  prejudiced  Perfons.  They  yet 
contain. 

1.  J.-hn  WyclyPs  Notes  upon  the  Pater-nofter,  or 

Lords  Prayer.  1  - 

Beginn.  “  We  fhal  bileue  pat  pis  Pater-nofter  pat 
Crifl  hym-ftlf  techip  t.»  alle  Criften  men,  paffip  opere. 
Preyerisin  pcs  fie  pingis,  in  Autorite,  &  Sutilte,  A  Pro¬ 
fit  of  pe  Chirche.*1 

At  the  _nd,  this  hath  the  Name  Wyclyf  written  by 
the  firft  Hand.  .  . 

2.  His  (hort  Difcourfe  concerning  the  fpnngmg-up  of 

Herefies.  ** 

Berinn.  *'  For  falfe  men  multi^lien  Bokis  of  pe 
Chirche  now  reeildynge  Bileue,  and  now  clomyng  He¬ 
refies.” 

Here,  the  leaf  where  he  impugnesTraniubltantia- 
tion  is  alnioft  wholly  reni-off :  yet  his  name  W yclif  is 
putt  to  the  end  of  the  Tra£L 

3.  His  explication  of  the  Aue  Maria.  3- 

Beginn.  “  Men  gre  en  comunely  oure  Lady  God- 

dis  Modir  ;  and  we  fuppofen  pat  pis  Gretyng  fauep  many 
men.”  . 

This  alfo  is  fubfcrlbed  Wyclif. 

4.  A  Difcourfe  upon  the  Text  “  Diliges  Dominum 

Deum  tuum  ex  toto  corde  luo.”  3-b- 

Here  the  name  Wyclif  being  omitted,  at  the  end, 
it  is  written  above. 

5.  A  Difcourfe  upon  the  Text  “  Cum  ergo  accepiikr 
Ihcfus  acetrnn,  dixit  confummatum  eft,”  Ac.  4.  b. 

This  is  imperfe£t  at  the  end. 

6.  Fragmentum  de  Juramenlis.  _  7- 

7.  Homiliarum  fragmentum  ;  fcil.  “  In  Capite  Jejunij, 
Dominica  prima  in  Quadragefima,  Dominica  in  Ramis 
Pahnarum,”  &c. 

8=  1  abula  commonftrans  Epiftolas  &  Evangelia,  tain 
de  Tempore  qnam  de  Sanctis  per  totum  anni  cuifutn. 


9.  Sermo  Fratris  Johannis  Englys  in  illud,  “  Si  vis 
ad  vitarn  ingredi,  ferva  Mandatari'  Matth.  xix.  12. 
ro.  Ejufdem,  ut  videtur  Sermo  in  illud,  “  Dicit  Scrip- 

tura,  Eice.”  _ 

1 1.  Ejufdem  notula  de  Exemphs  7  Peccatorum  mor- 
talium,  qua  in  S.  Scripturis  reperiuntur.  17.  b. 

Sermo  in  illud,  Ave,  gracia  plena.”  Luca  1- 


1 1.  Sermo  in  illud,  f*  In  plenitudine  Sanfiorum  De- 
4  20.  b. 

tencto  mea.  ,  . 

Sequuntur,  manu  vetuftiore.  Homilia  quadam,  qua- 

xum  Rubrica  funt, 

14.  In  die  Pafche.  24- 

nr.  In  craftino  Pafche  f  . 

li  In  illud,  “  Ecce  Ego  miito  vos  ficut  Oves  in 

medio  Lupormn."  ^  Sermo 


Bibliotheca}  Harlerinse. 


Num.  2385, 

17.  Sermo  de  MartyribuS. 

1 8.  Sermo  de  Purificacione. 

19.  In  die  Afcentionis. 

20.  In  die  Pentecoltes. 

ax.  In  die  Nativitatis  Sancli  Johannis. 


26. 

26.  b. 

27. 

27.  b. 

28. 


22.  In  die  Affumptionis.  ibid. 

23.  In  die  Omnium  San&orum  28.  b. 

24.  Dominica  quarta.  29. 

Deinde  fequuntur,  varijs  manibus, 

25.  Tradacio  Fratris  Ivonis  de  Caritatc,  ad  Severinum 

Suppriorem  S.  Dioni'fij.  30. 

Init.  “  Cogit  me  inftanciaGaritatis  tue,  Monachorum 
mihiamantiffime  Severine.” 

Hie  tradatus  minime  recenfetura  Gulielmo  Cavteo, 
inter  opera  Ivonis  Carnotenfis. 

26.  Dida  optima Philolophi  nomine  Secundi  (Imperf.) 

34.  b. 

Ea  excipit  farrago  Iegendariarum  Narrationum, 
diverfis  in  locis  mutilata,  fiib  his  Rubricis, 

27.  De  S.  Stephano  protho-martyre.  _  36. 

28.  De  S.  Johanne  Apoftolo.  ibid. 

29.  De  S.  Sebaftiano.  3^-  b. 

30.  De  S.  Agnete  Virgine.  ibid. 

31.  De  Purificatione  B.  Virginis.  ibid. 

32.  De  Annunciatione  B.  Marie  Virginis.  37.  b. 

33.  De  S.  Marclio  Evangelifta.  37-  b- 

34.  De  S.  Maria  Magdalena.  3^- 

35.  De  S.  Jacobo  Apoftolo.  39-  b- 

36.  De  S.  Laurentio  Martyre.  41  • 

37.  De  Aflumptione  B.  Marias.  41-  b. 

38.  De  S.  Dominico  Confeffore.  42. 

39.  DeS.  Petro.  _  42-b. 

40  De  S-  Stephano  Protho-martire.  ibid. 

41.  Item,  de  S.  Petro-  ibid. 

42-  De  S.  Bernardo  Confeffore.  43. 

43-  De  S.  Auguftino  Epifcopo.  43-.b. 

44.  De  S.  Bartholomeo  Apoltolo.  ibid. 

45.  De  S.  Nicholao  Epifcopo,  _et  Confeffore.  44. 

46-  De  S-  Johanne  Elemosinario.  45-  b. 

47.  De  S.  Juliano  Confeff  re.  46. 

48.  De  tranflatione  beati Thome  Martyris.  47-  b- 

49.  DeS  Theodora.  48-  b- 

50.  De  S-  Margareta-  5°- 

5 . .  De  SS.  Gervafio  &  Prothafio.  50.  b. 

52.  De  SS-  Cofina  Sc  Damiano.  _  .  _  ibid. 
53  De  Cor.cept'ione  beate  Marie  Virginis.  51- 

54.  De  Nativitate  beate  Marie  Virginis.  ibid. 

55.  De  Purificatione  beate  Virginis;  qualiter  in- 

venta  eft.  .  .  ibid- 

56*  Miraculofum  auxilium  beate  Virginis ;  A.  I). 
1223  ibid. 

57.  Dc  Virgine  ceca.  5*-  b- 

58.  Dc  quodam  a  Demone  liberato,  per  gloriolam 

.Virginem.  jbid. 

59.  De  Latrone  fado  in  Monachum-  ibid. 

60.  De  Conftantino  Imperatore-  .  52. 

61.  De  quodam  mortuo  in  Tempeftate.  ibid. 

62.  De  quadam  Sar.dimoniali  l'erviente  beatam  Vir¬ 
ginem.  52-  b- 

63.  De  Clerico  cclante  peccatum,  ufque  ad  Mortem- 

ibid. 

64.  De  puella  Mufa.  jbid. 

65.  De  paupere  Mendicante.  .  .  jbid. 

66.  De  Cereis  accenfis in  templo  beate  Virginis.  ibid, 

67.  De  quadam  Abbatiffa  pregnante.  53; 

68.  De  periclitante  in  Mari,  et  falvato  per  Mariam  Vir¬ 
ginem.  ’bid. 

69.  De  Theophilo  Archidiacono.  ibid. 

70.  De  fraude  Jude!  ad  Criftianum.  53*  b- 

71.  De  S.  Maria  Egi'ptiaca.  _  54- 

72.  De  Puero  cum  Matre  commifcente.  .  54-  b. 

73.  De  Clerico  homagium  Dyabolo  faciente.  ibid.. 

74.  De  quadam  Sandimoniali  naufragium  pudoris 

faciente.  55- 

Cat.  Haul.  Voi..  II. 


Num.  2385. 

75.  De  quodam  languente  in  uno  Pede.  55.  b. 

76.  De  quodam  Wilielmo,  Domino  fuo  accufato. 

ibid. 

77.  De  Exaltatione  fande  Crucis;  .  5^* 

78.  De  S.  Egidio  Abbate.  jbid. 

79.  De  quodam  jadante  Panem  ad  Pauperem.  ibid. 

80.  De  S.  Germano  Epifcopo.  jbid. 

8 1 .  De  Clerico  exercente  Scolas.  ibid. 

82.  De  quodam  dudo  videre  penas  Infemi;  56.  b. 

83.  De  puella  violata  a  fratre.  jbid. 

84.  De  Fratre Predicatore  percuffo  a  Demone.  ibid. 

85.  De  quodam  dicente  maledida  fit  hora.  See.  57- 

86.  De  quodam  volente  abnegare  beatam  Mariam. 

ibid- 

87.  De  Monacho  ferviente  beatam  Mariam.  58.  b. 

88-  De  Miraculo  fande  Crucis  fignacionis.  ibid. 

89-  De  feftivitate  Omnium  Sandorum;  qualiter  in- 

venta  fuiti  _  ibid. 

90-  De  fortilega  faciente  Cantaciones-  58- 

9 1  •  De  Magiftro  concupifcente  mulierculam.  ibid. 

92-  De  S.  Edmundo  Archiepifcopo.  ibid. 

93-  De  Virtute  Evangelij  In  Principio,  & c-  5?-.b- 

94.  De  quodam  Ruftico  inclufo  in  Terra.  ibid. 

95.  De  quodam  Juvene  qui  non  gufiavit  Eukarifliam- 

ibid; 

96.  De  1 1000  Virgimim  ibid. 

97.  De  quodam  mortuo  fufeitato.  59* 

98.  De  S.  Lucia  virgine.  jbid. 

99.  De  S.  Thoma  Apoftolo  baptizflnte.  ibid. 

100.  De  S.  Johanne  Apoftolo  &  Evangelifta.  ibid. 

101.  De  S.  Petro  Apoftolo.  59- 

102.  De  S.  Paulo  Apoftolo.  ibid. 

103.  De  SS.  Simone  &  Jud2.  60. 

104.  De  S.  Analtafia  virgine.  ibid, 

ioq.  Item,  de  S.  Thoma  Apoftolo,  etMiraculis  ej'us. 

60.  b. 

106.  De  S.  Silveftro.  ibid. 

107.  De  quodam  non  edente  in  Sacramento.  Go.b. 

108.  De  Paulo  difcipulo  beati  Antonij.  ibid. 

109.  De  Epifcopo  vidente  Maculas  Subditorum.  61. 

1 10.  De  quadam  virgine  fimulantefe  Stultam.  ibid. 

111.  Re  S.  Remigio  Confeffore.  6i..b. 

112.  I<e  quodam  fomicatore,  See.  .  _  ibid. 

113.  De  quodam  Armigero  adulteritim  faciente.  Im¬ 
perf.  ibid. 

114.  De  quodam  Milite  temptato  a  Diabolo.  _  62. 

1 1 5.  De  duobus  Militibus  qui  fueiunt  difeordes.  ibid. 

1 16.  De  quodam  Lazaro.  62.  b. 

117.  De  puella  apparante  Clerico  poll  mortem,  ibid. 

118.  De  quodam  Milite  mortuo.  Imperf.  63. 

1 1 9.  Legendre  mutilatre  deed  Rubrita.  ibid. 

120.  Rurfus.  63.  b. 

121.  De  peccatrice  audiente  Sermonem  Fratris.  ibid. 

122.  De  quodam  fompniante  fe  vidiffe  Angelum. 

ibid. 

123.  De  Sacerdote  non  literato.  64. 

124.  De  quodam  Patre,  faniila:  refufeitato.  Imperf. 

ibid. 

125.  AliaLegenda  cum  Rubrica  manca.  64.  b. 

126.  De  quodam  Latrone  falvato  per  Confelfionem. 

ibid. 

127.  De  quodam  inveniente  Panem  durum  k  afpe- 

rum.  ibid. 

122.  De  quodam  locante  Terram  ad  certum  termi- 
num.  65- 

129.  De  opere  in  die  Dominicali.  ibid. 

130.  De  viro  corruente  in  Rupe.  ibid. 

131.  De  quodam  Filio  fequente  precepta  Patris.  Cj.b. 

132.  De  vifione  ultimi  Judicij.  ibid. 

1  33.  De  quodam  Latrone  decepto  a  Dyabolo.  Im¬ 
perf.  ^6. 

134.  De  quadam  peccatrice  polluta  a  Patre  fuo.  Sc 
Fratre.  Imperf.  ibid- 

12  c.  De  Epifcopo  Tholofie.  Imperf.  ibid. 

8K  1 36.  De 


6-jS 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  238 2386. 


136.  De  quodam  Caftellano.  Imperf.  66.  b. 

137.  De  Perjurio  facto  in  Diocefi  Nonvici.  ibid. 

138.  De  fordida  Cogitacione  Fratris.  67. 

1 39.  Quomodo  Angelus  vifitavie  Fratrem  egrotum, 

Imperf.  67.  b. 


2386. 

Codex  chavtaceus  in  4to.  divcrfis  manibus,  partim  La- 

tin&,  partim  Anglice  defcriptus,  quo  continentur, 

1.  Cronica  dc  Regibus  Britonum  Sc  Anglorum,  ufque 

ad  perfecutionem  gentis  Anglicm  a  Danis  et  alijs  alieni- 
genis.  1 . 

Init.  “  Noe  genuit  tres  filios,  Sem,  Cam,  Sc  Japhet.” 

2.  Adnotatio  de  Monarchis  Anglie.  5. 

3.  Chronicon  breve  de  Coronationibus  &  Rebus  geftis 

Reguin  Anglorum,  ab  Alfredo,  ufq ;  ad  R.  Henricum 
iv.  inclufive.  ibid. 

4.  Adnotatio  de  ftatu  Regni  Orientalium  Anglorum, 

pofi;  Martirium  S.  Eadmundi.  1  o. 

5.  Notata  de  alijs  Regnis  Anglo-Saxonum  Heptarchise. 

ibid. 

6.  Nota  de  Computatione  Granorum  Frumenti,  per 

64  puncta  Scaccarij.  10.  b. 

7.  De  computatione  Granorum  Frumenti  in  Menfuris 

Anglia;  contentorum.  ibid. 

8.  Adnotatio  de  Creatione  Mundi.  1 1. 

9.  De  Genealogia  Ducum  Britonum,  a  Rege  Hen¬ 
rico  hi.  ibid. 

10.  Notula  de  raptione  Comitifle  de  Lancaftre  per 

Johannem  Comitemde  Warenna.  ibid. 

1 1.  Gefla  Romanorum  Pontificum  &  B.  Petro  ufque 

ad  S.  Sylvellrum.  1 1 .  b. 

12.  Succeflio  Romanorum  Pontificum  ab  Honorio  m, 

ufque  ad  Gregoriuin  x,  inclufive.  16. 

13.  De  etatibus  Mundi,  et  alijs  Notabilibus.  17.  b. 

14.  De  Regnis  Sc  Civitatibus  j  et  de  Britannia  ;  et  de 

antiquis  Urbibus.  24.  b.  &  57.  b. 

15.  De  dilatacione  fidei  Crifliane,  et  ortu  Religionum. 

2  6. 

1 6.  De  quibufdam  Perfonis  famofis,  et  de  Prelijs  An. 

glorum.  27. 

17.  De  Prelijs  tardi  temporis.  28. 

18.  Genealogia  Comitum  Leyceftrie ;  cum  particione 

Hereditatis.  30. 

19.  Genealogica  Comitum  Lancaftrie.  31. 

20.  Del  gendrure  de  Efmon  Conte  de  Lancaftre  ;  fe- 

cundum  Triuet.  ^2. 

21.  De  I Itereditate  Comitum  Ceftrke.  32.  b. 

22.  Del  engendrui  e  de  les  Fillez  de  Roy  Edward 

fitiz  de  le  Roy  Henry  tierce.  33. 

23.  Liber  de  Bruto,  et  de  Geftis  Anglorum,  metri- 

ficatus.  33. 

Init.  “  Anglorum  Regum,  cum  geftis,  Nomina 
fcire 

Qui  cupit  hos  Verfus  legat,  et  poterit  re- 
perire.” 

Subinde,  dantur  nota;  profaice  fcriptm,  cjufdem 
forte  Auttoris,  quce  definunt  cum  Morte  Regis  Richardi 
Secundi.  lpfius  Cognomen  videtur  fuifie  Peckward,  ut 
in  Conclufione  fcriptum  legitur. 

24.  Cognomina  Magnatum  Angliam  intrancium  cum 

Willelmo  C.onqueftore.  33.  b. 

Init.  “  Vous  qui  defierez  a  faucir.” 

25.  De  antiquis  Urbibus  Sc  Civitatibus  Anglie  fiue 

Britannie.  37.  b. 

Hie  etiam  in  fine,  apparet  Noinen  ejufdem  Peck- 
wardi  miniatis  literis  deferiptum. 

26.  De  Ncrwico ;  e  libro  qui  dicitur  Domifday. 

5 8.  b. 

27.  Nota  dc  antiquitate  Fatrurn  Fleremitarum  Ordinis 

S.  Auguftini.  g0. 

28.  Nota  de  Regibus  in  Criftianitate  pofnis.  60.  b. 

29.  De  etatibus  Seculi,  e  J3eda,  fecur.dum  Etraicam 

veriiatem.  • 


Num.  2386 — 2388. 

30.  Rurfus,  de  etatibus  Mundi.  61. 

31.  De  annis  Solis,  Lunari,  Bifextili,  et  Communi. 

ibid. 

32.  De  quatuor  Temporibus  anni  ;  fecundum  Peke- 

ard-  61.  b. 

33.  Declaratio  de  origine  Sc  Inftitutione,  Titulo  Sc  Con- 

firmacione  Ordinis  S.  Auguftini.  62. 

34.  De  Origine  Gigantum  in  infula  Albion  olim 
habitancium  ;  et  nomine  infule  que  nunc  Anglia  dicitur. 

65.  b. 

35.  Adnotatio  de  Fundatione  atq;  Indctatione  Domus 
Fratrum  Heremitarum  Ordinis  S.  Auguftini  in  Civi- 
tate  Norwici,  per  Rogerum  Mynyot ;  circa  A.  D.  1291. 

67. 

36.  Series  Regum  OcriJentalium  Saxonum,  et  An¬ 
glorum  ufque  ad  R.  Henricum  iv.  cum  alijs  notabilibus. 

67.  b. 

Now  follow  in  Englilh,  by  other  hands, 

37.  Some  Account  of  a  family-expencc,  by  a  Servant 

or  Butler  named  Wyllyam  Creffet.  70.  &  138.  b. 

38.  A  Drynk  for  the  Stone.  71.  b. 

39.  A  Playfter  for  the  Stone ;  with  the  fevd  Drvnke  to 

be  vfyde.  '  '  ibid,  • 

40.  For  the  Tothe-ake.  72: 

4 1 .  The  Boke  of  John  Maundevyle  Knyght,  of  Waves 
to  Jeruralem  ;  and  of  Merveyles  of  Yende,  and  other 
Contres. 

42.  The  dull  Fable  of  the  two  Knightly  brothers,  in  as 

dull  &  ill-written  Verfe.  131. 

Their  names  are  laid  to  have  been  Amys  &  Ame- 
lyon.  Here  are  likewile  the  Adventures  of  the  Duke  of 
Lombardys  fair  Daughter  Sc  Heir,  Belelant ;  but  not  per¬ 
fect,  one  or  more  Leaves  being  wanting  toward  the  end  ; 
which  is  abrupt  in  this  exemplar,  as  having  not  been 
completed. 

=387- 

An  illuminated  Book  in  4to.  wherein  is  contained, 

Jie  boke  ]>at  is  i-clepyde  “  Scala  Perfection^  j”  &  it  ha]) 
twey  partyes. 

_  Beginn.  “  Goftly  broker  in  Ihefu  Crift,  I  praye  ]>e 
J)at  in  pe  callynge  whicheoure  Lorde  hap  callide  pe  to  his 
Seruyfe,  pou  holde  pe  payed.” 

The  Author  of  this  Work  (whofe  firft  part  confifts 
of  93  Chapters,  as  the  fecond  does  of  46)  does  appear  to 
be  Walter  Hilton  the  devout  Canon  of  Thurganon  in  No- 
tinghamfliire ;  and  it  hath  been  divers  times  printed. 
Among  the  MSS.  of  it  (as  may  eafily  be  perceived  in 
looking  into  thofe  extant  in  this  noble  Library)  are  vaft 
differences  in  the  Readings,  as  there  is  abb  in  the  Title  ; 
efpecially  if  the  Scala  Perfectionis, Liber  Contemplacionis, 
De  Vita  Contemplativa,  Sc  De  Arte  bene  vivendi,  which 
are  all  aferibed  to  this  Author,  fhculd  prove  to  be  the 
fame  book.  (It  is  alfo  called  the  Reforming  of  Mamivs 
Soule.)  vid.  too.  C.  27. 

j388. 

A  paper  Book  in  4to.  written  by  various  hands,  but  wil¬ 
fully  torn  and  mangled  at  both  ends ;  wherein,  ne- 

verthelefs,  do  yet  remain, 

1.  Part  of  an  old  Difcourfe  upon  the  I.aft  Judgement, 

as  it  feemeth  unto  me.  j. 

2.  A  Sentence,  (or  Difcourfe)  pe  wvche  ys  a  Mirrour 

for  Maydenes  pat  wolden  be  Criftis  Spoufe,  Sc  forfake  to 
be  weddede  to  mannis  Flesfhe  ;  which  dial  roote  (i.  e. 
rot)  in  fhort  tyme.  And  it  fpekith  mole  of  Pride  of 
Clothis ;  for  pe  Fend  hath  maui  Colours  to  excufe  yt. 
Imperf.  4. 

3.  A  Prologue  of  a  ful  nobyl  Tretyfepat  tellithe  nfpe 

5  Wylis  pat  King  Pharao  dede  ro  the  Childrine  of  Ifrael, 
to  kepe  hem  in  his  Lond.  By  wyche,  ys  wyrtly  vndir- 
ftondenepe  Wilis  of  the  Fende.  7.  b. 

Beginning  of  the  Tract  it  felf.  “  Hyt  ys  nedful  to 
vndirilo.ide.  Low  pe  Fende  ddcyuyp  many  mene,.  ix  Hum 
5  hen^ 


hein  vndir  his  Gouernale,  whanne  J)ey  wenene  J)at  Jjc y 
were  oute  of  j)is  thraldome. 

4.  A  Tretis  of  Adam  &  Eue,  J>at  telle])  what  Peyne 

J»ey  fuffride  for  here  Sinne.  2Qm 

Beginn.  “  Now  takith  hede,  f»at  wanne  owre  Lorde 
God  hadde  madde  Heuene  &  alle  pc  Ornamentis  of  heme. 
1  ms  alio  telly])  how  Caym  ilouz  Abel,  Sc  of  be  Veniauns 
J>at  God  toke  of  Caym.” 

5.  A  ihort  Tretis  of  4  Errours  ])at  lettib  Man  to  haue 

trewe  Vndirttondinge  ot  Holy  Scripture.  36. 

Beginn.  “  If  eny  man  feme])  ony  part  of  Goddis 
Taw  herde,  or  heuy  to  him  to  vndirftondc.” 

6.  A  Sentence  of  Seym  Bcmarde  ;  how  a  Man  Amide 

knowe  himfelfe.  ^  ^ 

7.  Te  Deum  laudamus,  in  old  Englifh.  37.  b. 

8.  Speculum  Sacerdotis.  38 

Init.  “  Sand  us  Edwardus  Rex  Sc  ConfefTor  in  ex- 

tremitate  Vite  pofitus.” 

9.  An  Orifon.  to  the  Sayers  of  which  for  alle  Cryften 
Sauls,  or  for  others  in  particular  ;  for  euere  Saulle  40 
days  &  7  Lentons  oil  Pardone  were  grauntyd  by  be 
Pope  Innocent  pe  fourth. 

10.  Pro  illis  qui  volunt  ire  ad  Celum.  ibid. 

11.  Pro  illis  qui  volunt  ire  ad  Bellum.  ibid.’ 

12.  Litera  de  Vita  et  Morte,  frequenter  legenda.  50.  b. 

1 3 .  Contra  eos  qui  habent  Excoinmunicatum  five  Pec- 

catorem,  graviter  in  Societate.  2i. 

14.  Adnotaiiones  aliquot  Theologies:.  51.  b.  Sc  c2  b 
&  55.  b.  58.  b.  65.  b.  68.  71.  b. 

15.  Sermo  in  illud,  “  Attendite,  popule  meus,  Lesrem 
mean). 

16.  Pars  alius  Sermonis.  g,’ 

1 7.  Sermo  incitanris  Doctorem  Cathedralem,  in  aliqua 

Academia,  ad  publicam  Difputationem  de  Virtutibus  de 
Deo,  &c‘  44  b 

18.  Mores  Mundiales.  ^5' 

"  Auguftinus  in  Regula  :  Magis  innocentes 
nqn  this,  li  fratres  veftros  quos  indicando  corrigere  po- 
teitis,  tacendo  perire  permittitis.” 

This  is  an  Enghfh  Poem  fluffed  with  Latin  Quota¬ 
tions  ;  and  hath  this 

Beginning,  “  1  pmy  you  alle  my  frendes  dere, 

Sumwhat  ot  ttte  B  ke  of  Wyfdam  here." 

19.  Adnotatio  contra  Obilinatos.  58.  b 

ac.  A11  Ethical  Trad  in  the  Northern  Englifh  Dialed 

which  thus 

Beginns.  “  In  oure  Lord  Jhefu  Cryfle  was  grett  Pa- 
cyens,  in  pat  pat  he  did  abfent  hym  fro  pe  cruelle  Jues  ■ 
and  in  pat  hus  gude  ini'anpyle  pat  we  fuid  not  gyffe 
vs  to  Stryuys  ne  Debatys,  bot  pat  we  fuid  withilonde 
at  alle  tymes  Stryuys  &  Debatys.  For-qwy,  Invy  renys 
off-tymys  m  pe  Kvrk,  in  pe  Cloftere,  in  pe  Frater,  &  fpe. 
cialy  in  pe  Chapel,  in  ib  myche  Invy  brekys  pe  Peys  pe 
qwych  ys  betwyxt  Man  &  Voman,  and  alfo  betwyx  God 
&  Man.”  1 

At  the  end  is  the  following  note,  which  (in  my  poor 
Opinion)  declares  the  Authors  name, 

"  Robertus  f  ExPlicit  hoc  Opus,  Xpo  reddan- 
Selby  Mo-  J  r,  tur  h°norf’. 
nachus.  |  Et  ™ambus  ,otls> tu  qui  legis,  ac- 
V  cipe  mores.” 

Sequitur  colleclio  Sermonum,  fcil. 

21.  In  illud  Tfaie  lviii.  “  Frange  efurienti  Panem 

tuum.”  o. 

22.  In  illud  Proverb,  xiii.  <c  Do&rina  bona  dabit 

gratiam.”  66> 

23.  In  illud  Luc.  v.  Cf  In  verbo  tuo  laxabo  rethe.” 

67. 

24.  In  illud  S.  Pauli,  tf  Fratres  renovamini  fpirim 

Mentis  veftre.”  6S  b 

-n  I.n.li,lud  S,Paul,’»  “  Eftotc  imitatores  mei,  ficut  et 
Ego  Criih.  ’  ’  g  ^ 

26.  Dominica  prima  Ouadrngefime.  7Q 

In  illud  Matt  hid  iv.  “  I!fi  -  i:  l.  rv'e;,” 


Num.  2388,  2389; 

37.  In  illud  Eyangditts.  «  Catelli  edunt  de  micis." 

aS;  TorfiDomWra  de  Advcntu  Domini.  y,7w 
In  illud  §.  I  .lull,  “  Fratres,  fie  nos  eiiftimet  homo 
fit  nnmfiros  Del,  et  difpematores  Mifterlorum  Dei  -  &c 

29.  In dlud  Evangeliilm,  “  Eftote  prudentes.”  ’ 

30.  Pro  dedicacione  F.edefie,  antithema.  N 

31.  In  illud  1  Corinth,  ix.  “  Unus  accipit  bi-avium!" 

32.  In  illud,  “  Ecce  nunc  tempus  acceptabile.  8a ' 

33.  Dominica  quarta  Advcntus  Domini.  8u  b 

lnDomlScmp^.'iad  ' “  ^^gatdctc 

3+.  Dominica  cda.  pod  OanvasEphepW”  8  f 
In  illud  Evangeliltar,  “  Nupcie  fafte  font." 

35*  Dominica  tertia  Quadragefima:. 

cariflimi!"“d  ldEPhcflos-  CaP-  nr.  “  Eftote  fiiij 

36.  Dominica  quinta  Quadragefime.  gs 

feient^notom1 ““  emUndab!t  C“"* 

fi:f^S.onabW“:i- 

Exordium  alicujus  Sermonis. 

tei."  1,1  m“d  AP°calIPfeos-  “  «di  fanflam  Civita- 

40.  In  illud  thema,  “  Obi, ms  eft  quails  fait.- 

41.  In  ;  ud  Matthuj,  “  Querite  &  invenietis.”  ,ub. 

42.  In  illud  S.  Jacobi,  “Eftote  fiaoies  Verb!  Dd  et 

non  Auditores  tantum.”  C1’ et 

43-  In  die  Afcenfionis  Crifti. 

In  illud,  “  Aftendifti  in  altum,  captivam  duxlt  Cai>. 

tivitatem,  dedit  dona  hominibus.”  ^ 

44*  in  die  Marie  Magdalene  q 

Inillud.  Salus  huic Domui faftaeft.” 

4°;  “  tefto  Omnium  Sanftorum.  Tf,n  t-, 

In  illud  Matthaii  v.  “  Docebat  eos,’* 

4 7-  Sermo  pro  diebus  Rogacionum.  ,nt 

font.""  lllUd'  PfiUmi  C3!XI'  “  RoSate  *1  pacern 

48.  Dominica  tertia  Quadragefime.  ... 

virun^deWabtaV'-  “  ”  Mpfamdi. 

49.  Dominica  quarta  Quadragefima:.  I0,  b 

In  illud,  “  Diftribuit  diftribnentibus." 

jo.  In^  illud  ad  Ebreos  lx.  “  Per  proprium  Santmi. 
nem  mtroivit  in  Sanfta.  1  s 

51.  Dominica  tertia  Ouadragefime.  I0C 

In  illud  Luca:  xi.  «  Locutus  eft  mutus.”  5' 

52.  Dominica  xxii.  poft  feftum  Trinitatis.  I06 
Li  illud  Evangelifta,  «  Simile  eft  regnum  Celorum 

homim  Regi,  qui  voluit  rationem  ponere  cumServis  fuis  ’ 
S3-  Dominica  quarta  Quadragefime-  jo7‘ 

perf./11  lHUd  S‘ PaUli  3d  Galathas’  “  Erumpe.”  (Im- 

LvttnnXS™  S£rm°n,'S  Pr°  DOminica  «»» 

In  illud  Evangelifta:, 
fils,  ec  vidiffet  multos.” 

tusSDom;nfUlllm  Serm°m’S  P1'°  Dominica  P'™3  Ad™‘ 

;37:d,Pau,i,“HoraeftjamnosdeSom- 

DominiPaniCUla  Serm°niS  Pr°  Dom,*nica  «•  Advcntus 


A  paper  Book  in  440.  written  by  different  hands  ;  where¬ 
in  may  eafily  be  found, 

Rece'ptsnUmer°US  Colle<aion  iMedicinaI  &  Ghirurgical 

•  .  A  pTd?  thef<;  are  fcattered»  hcre  &  there,  other  Re¬ 
ceipts  of  different  kinds  ;  as. 


1 09. 

Cum  fublevaffet  oculos  Ihe- 


i  ! 


6'8o 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.2389,  2390. 

2.  To  caufe  a  barclle  of  Wyne  which  ys  foure,  to  turtle 
agayne  to  his  naturalle  perfection.  7-b. 

'3.  To  wryght  with  on  Penne  &  one  thinge,  Lettres 
of  Gold,  Siluer,  Braffe,  Pewter,  or  what  Metall  ye  wyll. 

1 1.  b. 

4.  To  fave  you  from  Theves  ;  a  C.hartn.  26- 

5.  To  know  if  Mife  be  in  a  Ryke.  ibid- 

6-  To  (launch  Blode.  -29’> 

y  To  make  ons  Breath  fwete.  3^'  ^ 

8.  To  make  one  Slepe.  37’^- 

9  For  the  Falling  Evill  a  Charm-  42. 

io-  For  him  that  has  lolt  hisSpeche.  ibid. 

1 1.  For  one  that  fpcakyth  in  his  Slepe.  ibid. 

12.  To  caufe  ons  Hens  to  lay.  44- 

1  3.  To  take  Spottes  owt  of  Linen,  or  Wollen  Clothe. 

44  b. 

14.  To  drivc-away  Spiders  or  Flyes  oute  of  your 

Chamber.  _  |bid. 

15.  To  kepe  Gnats  from  you,  in  the  Night.  ibid. 

16.  To  make  Vinegre.  46.  b. 

17.  To  kype  Flyes  from  blowynge  on  y< 


Meate. 
ibid, 
ibid, 
ibid. 

To  kepiTyour  Poultrye  from  the  Foxe,  See.  ibid. 
Divers  Confe&ionary  Receipts,  49.  b.  &  63.^ 


18.  To  kyll  Fleys. 

19.  For  ftyngynge  of  Wafpe  or  Bee, 


&LC. 


22.  For  the  Crampe  ;  a  Charm.  .  S^b- 

23.  Some  good  Moral  Advices,  couched  in  Doggrel 

Rhymes.  57  •  b- 

24.  To  make  Mufcadel.  64.  b. 

Then  follow, 

25.  De  Interrogationibns  in  articulo  Mortis.  72.  b. 
This  I  fuppofe  to  have  been  written  .by  the  Prieit 

who  wrote  molt  of  the  Charms  abovementioned. 

26.  Some  Receipts  relating  to  Filhing  or  Anglmg. 

7 3- 

This  Book  formerly  belonged  to  the  Family  ofSuf- 
field  of  Han  ley. 

2390. 

A  paper  Book  in  410.  imperfect  at  both  ends,  more  efpe- 
dally  at  the  beginning ;  written  by  leveral  hands, 
partly  in  Latin  &  partly  in  Englifh  ;  and  confiding  of  a 
Colledion  of  Medicinal,  Chirurgical,  &  other  Receipts 

&  Trafts  ;  which,  by  many  marginal  Notes,  8cc.  ap¬ 
pear  to  nave  been  much  elteemed  formerly.  Of  all 
which  1  Ihall  give  the  following  more  particular  ac¬ 
count  :  vizt. 

1.  Pars  Difpenfatorij,  cujus  initium  defideratur.  1. 

2!  Trattatus  regimine  Sanitatis,  fecundum  Pyiich.  31. 
Init.  “  Libellum  quern  roganti  tibi  promili,  omni 
Cura  adhibita  deferiptum  mifi  ordinatiflimum  tue  Salutis 
cuftodem.  .  , 

3.  Regula  de  Menfibus  ;  five  Regimen  1 2  Menfium. 

4.  Speculum  Medicine.  . .  49- 

r ■  Dc  conferentibus  atq;  nocentibus  Capiti,  8cc. 
3'  102. 

6.  De  Virtutibus  Feniculi,  &c.  1 }  2- 

Inibi  habentur  Benediftiones  Herbarum  plurium, 

cum  alijs  Orationibus. 

7.  Nomina  Salium  diverforum,  Gumnu,  &c.  117. 

8.  Receipts  for  making  various  Playlters.  1 18. 

9.  Alia  Medicamenta,  8cc.  tarn  Anglicti  quam  Latinc. 

119, 154.. 

10.  Notae  generales  de  Simplicibus,  8c  eorum  Virtuti- 


Anglic?. 

127. 

i .  Alia  Medicamenta,  Latin?. 

U3»  *54» 

2.  For  to  makyn  Vemyfche. 

151,  217. 

3.  De  Mcdicorum  ponderibus, 

Verfus  refonantes. 

ibid. 

Ad  faciendum  Incauflum  ; 

i.  e.  Atramcntum. 

152,  160. 

Num,  2390,  2391. 

1  ?.  Ouceflioncs  Grammaticales,  Anglicti  &  Labnc. 

152,  160. 

16.  Carmen,  five  Incantatio  contra  Spafmum. 

166.  (vid.  pag.  200,  20 6.) 

17.  De  C.reacione  Adam  primi  hominis.  201. 

iS.  Other  Receipts  in  Englilh.  202. 

19.  De  bona  deliberacione  Medici.  207. 

In  line  dicitur  hie  traclatulus  Antidota  contra  mor- 
tale  Venenum. 

co.  Another  Medicinal  Traft,  partly  in  Englilh,  & 
partly  in  Latin.  211. 

Herein  are  inferted  matters  Aftrological ;  idle  enough 
in  mine  humble  Opinion. 

21.  Judicia  Urinarum.  23.5. 

22.  Oualitates  aliquot  Simplicium;  partim  Angk'cc, 

partim  Latino.  24°- 

23.  Receipts  for  making  certain  Salves,  Ointments, 

and  other  things  in  the  way  of  Chirurgery.  248. 

24.  Of  the  Gouernauns  off  Helthe,  in  8  Chappeteris. 

25.  De  fex  rebus  non  Naturalibus.  285. 

26.  De  alijs  ad  Thcoriam  Medicinte  fpeflantibus. 

289. 

27.  A  Book  of  Medicines,  in  Englifh.  £<77. 

28.  Some  other  Receipts ;  imperfect.  315. 

2391- 

A  paper  Book  in  4to.  much  damaged  by  Moiflure  a 
tearing ;  wherein  were  contained  the  following  Ihco- 
logical  Treatifes,  vizt. 

1.  Prognoflica  ex  die  Natalis  Douiin.  1. 

Then  follows  a  Collection  of  Homiles  for  the  whole 

Courfe  of  the  Year;  written,  a,  it  fee  met  h,  for  the  UJ'* 
of  feme  Secular  Pried.  They  moll  ly  want  Titles ;  and 
therefore,  I  Ihall  content  my lelf  with  letting  down  their 
beginnings,  which  generally  fliew  the  days  they  belonged 
to,  as, 

2.  Thys  day  is  callyd  the  furfte  Sonday  in  Aduent.z. 

3.  Thys  day  is  callyd  in  holy  Kyrke . 

Sonday  lx x*.  ,  7-b* 

4.  Thys  day  is  callyd  pe  Sonday  in  i.x\  7-b. 

5.  Thys  day  is  callyd  in  holy  Kyrke,  pe  Sonday  in 

Quinquagefyma.  ,c- 

6.  1  hys  day  is  callyd  in  holy  Kyrke,  pe  fyrllc  Sonday 

I  ill  XL".  1  2‘ 

7.  Thys  day  is  pe  fecund  Sonday  in  dene  Lentyne. 

8.  Gud  Men  &  Women,  pis  is  pe  3  Sonday  of 

Lentyne.  .  . 

9.  Afc  zc  knaw  wylle,  pis  is  pe  4  Sonday  in  den 

Lentyne.  *9* 

10.  Thys  day  is  callyd  in  holy  Kyrke,  pe  Sonday  in 

Paffion  Weke.  "  ,  a  1 .  b. 

11.  Ze  fchalle  knaw  fat  holy  Kyrke  vfys  pis  3  days  to 

fayn  Seruis  in  pe  Euyn-tyd.m  peDerktnys;  wtrtore  h.t 
is  callyd  with  zowTenebris;  but  holy  Kyrke  callys  it 
Tenebras.  24- 

12.  Many  men  wyll  afke  dyuerfe  queftyons  of  thyngs 
fat  touchys  pe  Seruis  of  pis  day  (i.  e.  01  Schyre-ihori- 

j  day,  See.) 

13.  Gud  Men  and  Womene,  pis  day  is  callyd  Gud 

j  Frvday.  .  .  . 

'14.  Ze  fchalle  knaw  weylle  pat  pis  day  is  callyd,  in 
fom  places,  Gods  Sonday.  3 »*  b*. 

1 5.  Gud  Mene  &  Women,  pes  3  days  foloyng  (pat  15 
to  fay)  Monday,  Twfday,  8c  Wenfday,  ze  fchall  faff,  & 
come  to  holy  Kyrke;  Hufband,  Wyte,  ScSeruand.  33. 

1 6.  Gud  Men,  pis  day  is  a  hy  Fede  in  holy  Kyrke  : 
for  pis  day  as  Fayth  &  Beleue  techys  us,  verav  God  & 

Man  lived  vp  into  Heuyne.  a4 * 6 7 8 9 10" 

17  Syrrys,  zc  fchalle  haue  on  Saturday  'as  zeknaw 
welle)  Whevtfon-Evyn;  wych  ze  fchalle  allefaft,  and 

com  to  pe  Kyrke,  to  here  pe  Servys  pat  is  iayd. 


S 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


6St 


Num.  2391, 

l8.,  Gud  Men,  ze  knawe  weylle,  pat  }>is  day  is  callyd 
Wyt-Sonday.  .  37-  fr¬ 

ig.  Gud  Men,  2e  fchalle  knaw  wylle,  pat  pis  day  is  a 
hy  Fell  in  holy  Kyrke;  6c  is  callyd  pe  Fed  of  Corperis 
Cridi.  "  42.  b. 

20.  Such  a  day  ze  ialle  hdue  pe  Kyrlce  Holy-day. 

46.  b. 

21.  Gud  Men,  ze  fchalle  haue,  fuch  a  day,  in  holy 
Kyrke,  Saijt  Andrewys  day,  6:  fad  pe  F.vyne.  49. 

22.  Suche  a  daye,  ze  fchalle  haue  Sant  Nycolas  day. 

52.  b. 

23.  Such  a  daye,  ze  fchalle  haue  pe  Confepcyone  of 

oure  Lady.  5  6- 

24.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Sant  Thomas  day  pat 
was  Cridys  Apodylle  ;  &  ze  fchall  fad  hys  Evyn.  58. 

2  i.  Gud  Men  &  Women,  as  ze  feyne  &  herynge  ;  as 
pis  day,  holy  Kyrke  makes  Melody  &  Myrth  in  mynd 
of  pe  blydfulle  Berth  of  our  Lord  Ihefu  Crid,  very  God 
&  Man.  ^  60. 

26.  Syrs,  ze  fchalle  haue,  fych  a  day,  a  hyy  Fell  in 

holy  Kyrke,  ofSaynt  Steuyne  pe  Merter.  63.  b. 

27.  Syrrys,  ze  fchalle  haue  a  hye  Fed,  iych  a  day,  in 
holy  Kyrke  ;  pe  duy  of  Saynt  Johan  pe  Euaungelide. 

65.  b. 

28.  Syrrys,  ]ais  day  is  callyd,  in  Holy  Kyrke,  Inno¬ 
cents  day  ;  pat  is  in  Yngglys,  C.hyldermes  day.  68.  b. 

29.  Thys  day  is  Sant  Thomas  day,  pit  was  fclayne 

for  pc  reght  ot  holy  Kyrke,  and  for  pe  reght  of  pe  Reme 
of  Yngland.  7°- 

30.  Syrrys,  pis  day  is  callyd  New-Zers-day  ;  as  end- 

yne  of  pc  zefe  fat  is  gon,  in  the  begynyng  of  pe  zere  j^at 
is  comyqg.  _  73- b- 

31.  Thys  day  is  callyd  pe  12  day,  bot  alle  onmyfe; 

Tor  it  es  Jie  13  day  of  Cridys  berth.  73- 

32.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  pe  Led  of  Sant 
Faulle;  pat  is  to  fay,  pe  Turnyng  of  Sant  Pmlle. 

77.  b. 

33.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Candyl-mefe-day. 

80. 

34.  Such  a  dav,  ze  fchalle  haue  Sant  Mathuvs  day,  pat 
is  Gods  Apodylle;  pe  wych  lias  none  F.vyne  let  in  fer- 
tayne  :  bot  Clarkys  fayne,  pat  be  Law  ych  man  ought  to 
fad,  pof  it  be  not  lett  Vygille  in  the  Calander;  83. 

35.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  a  hye  Fed  in  holy 
Kyrke,  pat  is  callyd  pe  Annunciacyone:  pe  Euyne  of 
wyche,  wo-fome-euer  has  a-V(  \vyd,.he  mud  fade.  85. 

36.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Saynt  Georgia  day  pe 

holy  Merter.  87.  b. 

37.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Sant  Marcus  day. 

89. 

3S.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  pe  Fed  of  Sant  Philype 
&  Jacob.  90. b. 

39.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Saynt  Johans  day  at 

pe  Port  Latyne.  9 5* 

40.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  a  hye  day  &  a  holy, 

in  holy  Kyrke,  pat  is  callyd  Saynt  Johanys  day  pe  Bab- 
tyde.  93*  b. 

41.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  pe  Fed  of  Sant  Pctere 
&  Paulle;  were-fore,  ze  fchalle  fad  pe  Euyne.  _  98.  b. 

This  is  imperfect  at'  the  end;  as  that  which  next 
occurs  is  at  the  beginning  :  being 

42.  For  the  day  of  St.  Mary  Magdalene.  1  o  t . 

43.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Saynt  Jamys  day  pe 
Apodylle  of  God ;  &  ze  fchalle  fad  pe  Evyne.  1 03.  b. 

44.  Gud  Men  &  Women,  ze  fchall  haue  pe  Felt  of 

Sant  Anne  oure  LadyS  Moder  fuch  a  day,  pen  fchall  ze 
come  to  God  &  holy  Kyrke,  &  pray  to  God  St  Sant  Anne 
forgudfped.  IC|6- 

45.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchai  haue  pe  fed  of  Saynte  Lau- 

renfe,  Gods  holy  Merter.  107.  b. 

46.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  pe  Affuracione  of  oure 

Lady.  xio.b. 

47.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  pe  feyd  of  Saynt  Ber- 

tholomcu  Gods  own  Apodylle.  114* 

Cat.  Harl.  Ycl.  II. 


Num.  7391. 

48.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  pe  Nativite  of  oure 

Lady  Saynt  Mary.  11 7- 

49.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Holy  Roode-day ; 

pe  wych  dav  ze  fchalle  come  to  pe  Kyrke.  1 20. 

50.  This  W eke,  ze  fchai  haue  Ymber  days,  par  be 

Wedynfday,  Fryday,  &  Saturday.  1 2 1 .  b. 

51.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Saynt  Mychaelles 

day  pe  Archangelle,  pat  day  holy  Kyrke  makys  men- 
cyone  of  alle  Angellys.  1  23 • 

52.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Saynt  Lukes  day  pe 

Euangelide.  123-b- 

53.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchulle  haue  pe  fede  of  Symone 

St  Jude;  8t  ze  fchalle  fad  pe  Euyne.  125. 

54.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Alle  Halowyne-day  ; 

&  ze  fchai  fad  pe  Euyne.  1  i6.  b. 

55.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  have  Alle  Solyne  day  pat 
bene  in  Purgatory,  abydyng  pere  pe  mercy  of  God. 

c6.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  haue  Saynt  Martyns 
day;  1 29 

57.  Such  a  day,  ze  fchalle  have  Saynt  Kateryns  day. 

Vyrgyne  St  Merter.  1 3 1  • 

Now  follow, 

58.  A  legendary  Story  of  our  Saviors  advice  to  a  gud 

man  St  a  holy.  :33* 

59.  Decern  Mandata.  1 34* 

60.  Septem  capitalia  Peccata.  ibid. 

61.  Bona  Confeflio  pro  falute  huraani  generis,  ibid. 

This  is  a  form  of  exhorting  6c  examinyng  the  Pe¬ 
nitent  ;  as  well  as  of  the  Confeflion  itfelf. 

62.  An  Homily  upon  Ci  Sanaanimam  meam,  quia  pec-> 

cavi  tibi.”  Pfalmo  48".  138.  b. 

63.  Another, beginning  thus,  “  I  redin  a  boke  pat  cs 

callyde  Vitas  l’atrum.”  _  H3- b- 

64.  Another;  from  Vincencius  in  Spectdo  Hidoriaii. 

1 44.  b. 

65.  Another,  from  Geda  Romanorum.  14  ..  b-_ 

66.  Another,  with  this  Title,  “  De  fedo  Naiivitatis 

Domini.”  ’■  46.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Wyrfchipfulle  Scrs?  ze  fchalle  haue  pis 
Weke  diuerfe  Holy-dais.” 

67.  Another,  De  Santta  Margareta.  M9- 

Beginn.  “  Wyrfehvpfulle  Sirs!  If  any  man  haue  any 

Devocion  to  Sant  Margaret  holy  Vergyne  St  Merter.' 

68.  Another,  De  San&o  Gregorio  Papa.  150. 

Beginn.  “  Werfchypfulle  Sers !  If  any  man  haue 

Devocion  to  Saynt  Gregorepe  holy  Pope.’’ 

69.  De  fedo  Annunciacionis  beate  Marie.  152. 

Beginn.  “  I  red  in  pe  Myracles  of  oure  Lady.” 

70.  Another  Homily  upon  this  Text,  “  Ne  in  vacuum 
gniciam  Dei  recipiatis.”  £  ad  Corinth,  vi.  capitulo. 

1  S3* 

Beginn.  “  Dere  frends,  alle  myghty  God  feyng 
man  kynd  thrugh  frelte  of  pam  fslfe.” 

Next,  comes  a  Sett  of  legendary  Tales  in  Verfe ; 
but  in  a  Dialed!  more  Northern  than  the  preceding  Ho¬ 
milies.  They  aopear  to  have  been  pronounced  to  the 
people  by  the  Pried,  on  particular  days;  namely,  on  thefe 
now  to  be  annumerated. 

71.  On  a  Fedival  of  the  bleffed  virgin  Mary.  1 56.  b. 

7 1.  In  die  Natalis  Domini.  1 58.  b. 

73.  Dominica  infra  Octauas  Natalis  Domini.  160. 

74.  Dominica  prima  pod  Epiphaniam.  164. 

75.  Dominica  tertia  pod  Epiphaniam.  166. 

76.  Dominica  quarta  pod  Epiphaniam.  1 67. 

77.  Dominica  quinta.  168.  b. 

78.  Dominica  in  Septuagefima.  »7°- 

79.  Dominica  in  ^exagefima.  17c.  b. 

80.  Dominica  in  Quinquagefima.  1 73- 

81.  Dominica  in  Quadragefima-  174* 

82.  In  annunciacionis  Dominica.  J7&.b. 

83.  Dominica  tercia  in  Quadragefima.  178. 

84.  Dominica  quarta  in  yea  liageuma,  179. 

83.  Dominica  in  Paffione  Domini.  1 83.  b. 

8  L  86.  Dominica 


682 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nuni.  2391 — 2393. 

86.  Dominica  in  Ramis  Palmarum.  1  8*  b. 

87.  In  die  Pafche.  jj}. 

8S.  Dominica fecunda  pod  Pafche.  iS^  b 

89.  Domina  tertia  poll  Pafche.  i$'q‘  b' 

90.  Dominica  quinta  poll  Pafche.  ,qi<‘ 

91.  In  Afccnfione  Domini.  101  b' 

92.  Dominica  infra  Oclavas  Afcenfionis.  i  Q2.b'. 

93-  In  die  Pentecoften.  io^  b 

94-  Feria  fecunda.  ,  '  ' 

9.S.  In  die  Sancte  Trinitatis.  lq- 

96.  Dominica  fecunda  poll  Mum  Trinitatis.  19c  b. 

97.  Dominica  tertia.  ,  q6 

98.  Dominica  quarta.  ,1  * 

59.  Dominica  undecima.  jgg 

100.  Dominica  decima  tertia.  2oi  ". 

Joi.  Dominica  decima  quarta.  2o8.  b. 

1 02.  Dominica  decima  quinta.  2 1 2. 

1 03 .  Dominica  decima  lexta.  2 1 4.  b' 

»o4.  Dominica  decima  i'eptima.  2'i6. 

105-  Dominica  decima  oftava.  221. 

106.  Dominica  decima  nona.  222. 

107.  Dominica  vicefima  prima.  222.  b. 

»o8.  Dominica  vicefima  fecunda.  224. 

109.  Dominica  vicefima  tertia.  224.  b! 

1 10.  Dominica  vicefima  quinta.  228. 

Sequuntur  legendarim  quaidam  Narrationes  ;  fcil. 

111.  Dcdevotione  illiierati  cujufdam  Monachi  Cifter- 

cienlis  Ordinis,  erga  B.  V.  Mariam.  2,, 

1 1  2.  Exemplum  de  MilTa.  ' 

1 13.  Exemption  de  I.uxuria.  221.  b'. 

114.  Exemplum  de  illis  qui  differunt  Confeflionem. 

115.  Exemplum  de  /Waro.  2^  b" 

n 6.  Exemplum  de  Peregrine.  2  ' 

1 1  ?.  Nota  de  Confeffione,  tribus  modis.  2*4  b 

1 18.  Miraculum  de  Sanfta  Maria. 

^ePtetn  Peccatis  tnortalibus.  2  3  c.  b. 
Hus  is  in  Engl i Ih,  and  very  imperfect. 

23.92. 

A  Book  m  4to.  written  partly  upon  Parchment,  but  modlv 
upon  Paper;  whfetein  is  contained,  Geffrey  Chaucers 
Poem  of  Iroilus  &  Crefleida. 

2393* 

A  paper  Book  in  4to.  confifting  of  two  Treatifes  only: 

V’Zt. 

!.  ...  OemHi’llorical,  Political,  &  Moral;  imperfea 

at  the  etKl,  as  wanting  aliaitcr  ,l,c  35=  Stanza.  Its  main 

Vr,  1  Sf  “’for1tUMte  R«gn  of  King  Edward  u. 
whole  Ghoft  is  introduced  as  relating  his  Adtions  &  Dif- 
alters.  It  is  written  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  as  plainly  ap¬ 
pears  m  feveral  places,  particularly  by  thefe  Stanzas,  q 
242,  243,  &  305,  where  flie  is  named. 

The  Work  feemeth  to  bear  the  Title  of  Edward  the 
occoiul;  and  beginneth  thus, 

Whie  fliould  a  waited  Spirit  fpent  in  Woe 
Difcloze  the  Woundes  receyv’d  within  his  Breil  ? 

Is’t  not  yrowgh  that  Fortune  proves  his  Foe, 

I11  whole  fad  Erownes  is  foullded  his  Un-reft  ? 

Is’t  not  ynough  to  knowe  himfelfe  difireft  ? 

Oh  noe  !  .furchargcd  Danes  mail  needs  com- 
playn ; 

Some  Kaz  it  is,  though  final!,  to  tell  our 
P?yn.” 

2.  I  he  fame  Poem  revifed  &  corrected  bv  many  Alte¬ 
rations, 'Additions,  &  Omifiions;  being  now  fitted-up  for 
t  he  perufal  oi  King  Janies  as  may  appear  by  the 
i.ianzas,  6,  259,  260,  326,  &c.  and,  in  the  whole,  con- 
filis  of  581  Stanzas,  as  dees  another  Copie  of  it  in  this 
noble  I.ibrary,  now  inferibed  40  1).  8.  1  he  Author  at 

,  he  end,  calls  himfelf  Infortunio ;  and,  perhaps,  might 
gave  been  Mr.Eumund  Spenfer,  who  is  liiid  to  have  lived 


Num.  2393—1395. 

long,  &  to  have  died  in  very  low  drcumflances,  This 
reviled  Copie  beginns, 

“  I  hnge  thy  fad  Difaftcr,  (fatal  King 

Camarvan-Edward)  fecond  of  that  Name : 

Thy  Mynions  Pryde  ;  thy  States  ill  mannageing : 

1  hie  Peeres  Revolt ;  the  Sequell  of  the  fame. 
lhy  ^ife,  ‘by  DeathJ  1  hng;  thy  Sinne,  thy  Shame: 
And  how  thou  wert  deprived  of  thy  Crowne 
In  higheft  Fortunes  call,  by  Fortune,  clowne.” 

2394- 

A  paper  Book  in  4to.  (not  altogether  deftitute  of  parch¬ 
ment-leaves)  much  corroded  at  the  beginning,  by  Mice 
or  Rats ;  wherein  is  contained, 

-tv  t  £n  ,l  heolofiical  Poem  in  the  Northern  Englifli 
Dialect,  divided  into  7  parts  ;  imperfect  at  the  beginning; 
and  renewed  at  the  end,  by  a  later  &  modern  hand. 

,  1  his  I  take  to  be  Richard  Rolle  the  Hermit  of  Dam- 
pole  s  ‘‘ Stimulus  Confcientiic,”  or  “  Prvkke  of  Con- 
fcience  of  which  there  are  other  Copies,  with  his  Name 
to  them,  m  the  Libraries  of  both  our  Univerfities  ;  noi 
to  mention  here  what  is  faid  of  it  by  Mr.  Wharton, 
Pitts,  &  others. 

Toward  the  end  of  the  Prologue  are  thefe  Lines, 

“  It  pryks  here  Confciens  within, 

And  of  ]>at  may  a  I.uf  begyn.” 

2395- 

An 1  imperfca  paper  Bock  in  4to.  wrilten  bv  feveral 
Hand,  as  being  an  Original.  It  contains  part  of  the 
f  anlh-Regiftre  of  Steventone  ;  but  in  what  Countv 
that  1  arilli  is  fituate,  for  want  of  proper  helps,  1  now 
cannot  tell.  I  believe  it  is  not  the  Town  of  that  Name 
m  Hampfhire.  rlhe  Method  obferved  in  this  Regiflre 
may  be  eafily  feen  by  the  following  Account  of  its 
Contents, 

ChriRenings,  Marriages,  &  Burials,  ann.  i 
Philippi  Regis  &  Maria;  Reginat. 

.  -■  Ann.  Philippi  R.  &  Marie  Regine  feenndo  &ter- 
cto  :  Chriltenings,  Burials,  (the  Marriages  being  torn- 
out,  or  tlfe  omitted.)  2  ^ 

3.  Chriftenings  k  Burials,  ann.  3  Sc  4  Philippi  & 

Marias.  rr 

4.  Anno  1558.  Chriftenings,  Burials ;  5.  b. 

,  S.  b.  &  9. 

5.  Anno  Dm  1559.  Chriftenings.  0. 

6.  Anno  Dili  1561.  Chriflenings.  10." 

7.  Anno  Dni  1562.  Chriflenings. 

8.  Anno  Dili  1563.  Chriftenings. 

9.  Anno  Dm  1564.  Chriflenings. 

10.  Anno  Dili  1565.  Chriftenings. 

11.  Anno  Dili  1566.  Chriflenings. 

12.  Anno  Dni  1567.  Chriftenings. 

13.  Anno  Dni  1568.  Chriflenings.  1  7.  b. 

14.  Anno  Dfii  1569.  Chriftenings.  18.  b. 


12.  b. 

13.  b. 

I5- 
1 6. 


16.  Anno  Dni  1571.  Chriftenings. 

19. 
19.  b. 

17-  Anno  Dni  1572.  Chriftenings. 

20.  b. 

18.  Anno  Dni  1573.  Chriftenings. 

2i.  b. 

19.  Anno  Dni  1574.  Chriftenings. 

20.  Anno  Dni  1  575.  Chriftenings. 

22. b. 

21.  Anno  Dni  1576.  Chriftenings. 

23.  b. 

24- 

22.  1577.  Chriftenings, 

~3'  *578-  Chriftenings. 

25.  b. 

24.  1579.  Chriftenings. 

ibid. 

2 5-  158o.  Chriflenings. 

c  6. 

26.  1581.  Chriftenings. 

Hie  incipit  Ricardus  Kirfoot  Yicarius. 

ibid. 

27.  1582.  Chriftenings. 

26.  b. 

28.  1583.  Chriftenings. 

27. 

29.  Anno  Dili  1584.  Chriflenings. 

27.  b. 

30.  Anno  Dni  1586.  Chriftenings. 

2.  .  b. 

3  1 .'  Anno  1  Si  1 5 87.  Chi iftenirgs. 

~9‘  b- 
32.  Anno 

Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


683 


Num,  2395. 

37-  Anno  Domini  1-588.  Chriflenings. 

3'-  Anno  Domini  1589.  Chriflenings. 

34-  Anno  Domini  1  ^90.  Chriflenings, 

35  Anno  Domini  1591.  Chriflenings. 

36.  Anno  Domini  1592.  Chriflenings. 

37.  Anno  Domini  1593.  Chriflenings. 

38.  Anno  Domini  1594.  Chriflenings. 

39.  Anno  Domini  j  595.  Chriflenings. 

40.  Anno  Domini  1596.  Chriflenings. 

41.  Anno  Domini  1597.  Chriflenings. 

42-  Anno  Domini  1598.  Chriflenings.  *>. 

Next  follows,  in  this  damaged  book,  part  of  the 
Kegillre  of  Marriages,  in  the  Order  followin 
43.  Anno  Dili  1559.  One  Marriage. 

44-  Anno  Dni  it 60.  Marriages. 

45-  Anno  Dili  1561.  O.ie  Marriage. 

46.  Anno  Dili  1562.  Marriages. 

Quod  Hyjle ;  hie  incipit  anno  pr 

lequenti,  quojnodo  flet. 

47.  Anno  Dni  1  ^63.  Marriages. 

48.  Anno  Dni  1 564.  Blank. 

49-  Anno  Dni  1565.  Marriages.' 

50.  Anno  Dili  r  566.  Marriages. 

51.  Anno  Dni  1567.  Marriages. 

52.  Anno  Dni  15^8.  One  Marriage. 

53.  Anno  Dili  1569.  One  Marriage. 

54.  Anno  Diii  1570.  Marriages. 

55.  Anno  Dni  1571.  Marriages. 

56.  Anno  Dm  1572.  One  Marriage. 

57.  Anno  Dili  1573.  One  Marriage. 

58.  Anno  Dni  1574.  Marriages. 

59.  Anno  Diii  1575.  Marriages. 

60.  Anno  Dili  1576.  Marriages- 
61  •  Anno  Dni  1577.  One  Marriage. 

Anno  Diii  1578.  Marriages- 
63-  Anno  Dhi  1579.  Blank- 
64'  Anno  Dni  1580-  Marriages- 

Hie  incepit  Ricardus  Kirfoo:  Vicarius- 
65,  Anno  Dili  15  '!-  Marriages- 
6b.  Anno  Dni  15S2.  Marriages.' 

67.  An  no  Dni  1583.  Marriages. 

68-  AnnoDni  1591.  OneMarriage-  4:-  ct  vid  45- b- 
69*  Anno  Dni  1^92-  Marriages.  ibid. 

70-  Anno  Domini  1593-  Marriages-  ibid ' 

7 1-  Anno  Domini  1 594.  Marriages*  ibid' 

72.  Anno  Domini  1595.  Marriages.  ibid- 

73-  Anno  Domini  1596.  OneMarriage-  42  b 

74-  Anno  Domini  1597.  Marriages-  ibid*. 

75-  Anno  Domini  1 598.  Marriages.  ibid." 

76-  Anno  Domini  1584.  Marriages-  43 

77-  Anno  Domini  1585.  Marriages-  ibid 

7S.  Anno  Domini  1586.  Marriages.  ibid' 

79.  Anno  Domini  1587.  Marriages.  ibid  * 

80.  Anno  Domini  1588.  Marriages.  43.  b. 

81.  Anno  Domini  1589.  OneMarriage-  ibid. 

82-  Anno  Domini  1590-  Marriages.  ibid. 

Now  come  on  the  Burials;  in  this  Order  of  Time- 

83.  Anno  Domini  1559.  Burials.  44 

84.  Anno  Domini  1560.  Burials.  44  b 

85.  Anno  Domini  1561.  Burials-  ibid 

86.  Anno  Domini  1562.  Burials.  45' 

87.  Anno  Domini  1 563.  Burials.  46] 

88.  Anno  Domini  1564.  Burials.  46.  b" 

89.  Anno  Domini  1565-  Burials.  47. 

90.  Anno  Domini  1566.  Burials-  47- b. 

91.  Anno  Domini  1567.  Burials.  48. 

92.  Anno  Domini  1568.  Burials.  48  b- 

93-  Anno  Domini  1569.  Burials.  ibid. 

94-  Anno  Domini  15-0-  Burials.  49. 

95.  Anno  Domini  1571-  Burials.  49.  b. 

96.  Anno  Domini  1572.  Burials.  50. 

y-.  Anno  Domini  1573.  Burials.  50- b- 

98.  Anno  Domini  1574.  Burials.  ^ 

99.  Anno  Domini  1575.  Burials.  ibid. 


3°' 

3°.  b. 

.  3 ' 

ibic 
31-  b 
3* 
32.  b 

.33 
ibid 
34 
3  4.  b 


36. 
ibid. 

36.  b. 

iL  id. 

iximo  commune 


37 •  b- 
.3.8- 
ibid. 

38.  b. 

ibid. 

.39- 

ibid. 

ibid. 

39-  !>■ 
ibid, 
ibid. 

40. 
ibid. 

40-  b* 
ibid, 
ibid. 

41. 


ibid- 


Num.  2395,  2396. 


s1* b- 
52. 
ibid. 
52.  b. 
.  33* 
ibid- 

5.3;  b 
ibid- 
ibid< 

54* 

ibid- 

53- b. 

54.  b. 

55- 

ibid. 

ibid. 

55.  b. 

ibid* 
56. 
ibid, 
ibid. 
56.  b. 
ibid. 


>co.  Anno  Domini  1576.  Burials. 

101.  Anno  Domini  1577.  Burials. 

102.  Anno  Domini  157S.  Burials. 

103.  Anno  Domini  1579.  Burials. 

104.  Ailno  Domini  1580.  Burials. 

105.  Anno  Domini  1581.  Burials. 

106.  Anno  Domini  1582.  Burials, 
io;-  Anno  Domini  1583-  Burials. 
m3.  Anno  Domini  1584.  Burials. 

109.  Anno  Domini  1585.  Burials, 
no.  Anno  Domini  1586.  Burials. 

111.  Anno  Domini  1587.  Burials. 

1 1 2.  Anno  Domini  1588.  Burials. 

1 13.  Anno  Domini  1 5  S9.  Burials. 

1 14  Anno  Domini  1 590.  Burials. 
n5-  Anno  Domini  1591.  Burials. 

116.  Anno  Domini  1592.  Burials. 

Anno  Domini  1 593.  is  omitted. 

1 17.  Anno  Domini  1594.  Burials. 

1 1 8.  Anno  Domini  1,05.  Burials.  - 

ng.  Anno  Domini  1596.  Burials. 

120.  Anno  Domini  1397.  Burials. 

121.  Anno  Domini  1598.  Burials. 

izz.  Anno  Domini  1599.  One  Burial. 

The  laft  Matter  entred  into  this  Regiflre  is 
123.  An  account  of  the  flrange  Miuiflers  who  preach¬ 
ed  in  the  Church  of  Stevington  from  A.  D  ,  -  —  m 
A.D.  .578,  both  inclulive.  57'-’7 

Thefe  Preachers  were  Mr.  John  Rythe,  Humfrwe 
Robarts  theParfon  of  Baldon,  Mr.  Dean  of  Weftmvnfter 
(Gabriel  Goodman)  Mr.  Cooke  V.ccar  of  Sparlolde, 
Mr.  Douor  James,  Mr.  Aflone,  Mr.  Holland  Mr 
I-Iobarde,  Mr.  Pryne,  the  Vicar  of  Weft  HcS  Mr 
Philipps,  &  Mr.  Chamberlene  of  Oxforde.  ’ 

2396. 

A  Book  of  parchment  in  4to.  whofe  iirft.  Leaf  at  leaft 
ieemeth  to  have  been  induftrioufly  cult  out ;  perhan. 

,rJ“J  “llconceaJ  Authors  name  I,  contains’ 
certain  I  oitiils  or  Sermons  do  Tempore.  put, -down 
in  1  he  following  method. 

'■  as  I  take  it,  defigned  for  the  Friday 

after  the  fecond  Sonday  m  Advent-  ' 

The  Conclufion  of  this,  and  of  all  the  reft  f if  T 
have  obferved  rightly)  is  i„  this  form  of  words  God 
naue  mercy  on  vs.  Ainen.  ’ 

.  ■  >e  Gofpcl  of  Luk,  ^  i  Capltnlo.  2  b. 

r  -n  B?'nn'-“  .GdPd  tdlit>  derkly  a  Profecye  of 
Cull;  hou  tt  fchal  be  in-pis  Chirche  before  pe  day  of 

In  this  Sermon  (fob  4.  b.)  the  Author  writes,  and 
Jms  fad  Btleue  in  [us  pndde  Aduent,  fchulde  Hire  men 
fro  Synne,  and  drawe  hem  to  Vertues. 

3.  pe  Wenfday  Gofpel  of  Mathieu,  n  Cap" 

Begirm.  pis  Ion  Baptill  toolde  of  Criftis  fomlnge." 

4.  Fryday,  pe  GoJpel  ol  Ion  ;  pe  i  Cap”.  7  j, 
Beginn.  “  Ion  Evangelift  tellip  heere,  hou  pat  Bap. 

tifl  bar  witnefle  of  Crift."  ¥  * 

5.  ]>e  Piftil  on  pe  pridde  Sonday.  i  Corinpis  3  Cap°. 

Begin,,  “pis  Piftil  „f  Poul  hou  Pa/men 

fchulden  mekely  flee  worldly  Stryves.” 

6.  pe  Gofpel  of  Matheu.  n  Cap0.  r  , 

Beg  inn.  “  pis  Gofpel  tellip  a  Storye  of  Ion  Baptifl 

pat  touch, p  alle  pre  Aduentis  of  Grift;  but,  fbccialy  pe’ 
pridde  ;  to  whom,  pe  tweyne  before  feruen  ”  ’ 

7-  Wenfday  ;  Ymbir  Gofpel,  of  Luk.  ,  Cap",  r b. 
t  1  hr°mn'  U  ^'S  tellty,  pat  fro  pe  tvmepat  oure 

Lady  Marye  was  grett  pus  of  pe  Aungel,  khe  was  not 
Kill,  bull  goilly  flu  id  as  God  mouede  hir.” 

8.  Saterday;  pe  Gofpeiof  Luk,  pe  pridde  Cap*.  17. 
Beginn.  “  pus  Luk  tellij.  in  pis  Golpel,  what  tvme 
Ion  bigan  to  preche.” 

9-  pe  4th  Sonday;  pe  Piflil  Fijipencysj  4  Cap".  iS.b.  * 

Beginn. 


684 


Catalogus  Libroriim  MSS. 


Num.  2396; 

Bcginn.  “  J?is  Piftil  of  Poul  tellip  fiyue  manned  pat 
men  lchulden  hiue  wip  pre  Vertues  of  God.” 

jo.  Wenfday  ;  Gofpel  of  Luk.  7  Cap  .  2 2.  b. 

Beginn.  “  As  Ion  cam  bifore  Crift  in  Lyif :  fo  he  cam 
before  him  in  Prachynge.” 

1 1.  Fryday  ;  ]>e  Gofpel  of  Mark,  8  Cap°.  24.  b. 
Beginn.  “  pis  Gofpel  tellip  how  men  lchulden  fie  al 

I  pcrifie. 

12.  pisSarmoun  maybefeydonCriftmaffe-day.  27-b. 
Beginn.  “  Afiir  pe  Joye  pat  Foul  tdlip,  we  moun 

feye  on  Criftmaffe-daye,  ]?at  a  litil  Child  is  borim  to 
vs.” 

13.  The  6th  day  fro  pe  Nateuete.  Piftil,  Galathies, 

4  Cap0.  3°- 

Beginn. “  /\nd  Poul  tcllij)  in  pis  Piftil,  what  Fre- 
dom  men  fliulden  vie.” 

14.  pe  Sonday  in  Vtas  cf  12th  day.  I  faye  pe  fifty 

Cap0.  .  34- 

Beginn  “  pus  men  expownen  comynly  pis  Profe- 
cie  of  cure  Lord  Ihefu  Crift.”, 

1  4.  Sonday  ;  Gofpel  of  Ion,  1  Cap”-  3^- 

‘  Beginn-  “  ]>is  Gofpel  tellip  a  Witneffe  ;  hou  Bap- 
tift  witntftide  of  Crifl.'* 

1 6-  pc  Gofpel  in  Vtas  of  Twelfpft  day.  Matheu..  3  Cap°. 
Beginn.  “  pis  Gofpel  tellip  hou  Crift  tauzte  Baptift, 
bopc  bi  Wordc  A  bi  Myracle,  hou  he  fchoulde  be 
meke-” 

17.  Firfte  Sonday  after  Vtas  of  12th  day-  Piftil,  Ro- 

mayns.  12th  Cap1*.  46- 

Beginn.  “  pus  Poul  tellip  heere  to  Gentil  folk  (i.  e. 
to  the  Gentiles-)” 

18.  pe  Gofpel  cf  Luk.  pc  fecunde  Cap°.  48- b. 
Beginn.  “  pis  Gofpel  telleth  a  Lore  of  Crift,  whanne 

he  was  twelue  zeer  old.” 

19.  Wednefday.  Gofpel,  Matheu  pe  4th  Cap*.  51*  b. 
Beginn.  “  pis  Gofpel  tellep  whanne  Sc  hou  oure 

Lord  Ihefu  began  to  preche.” 

20.  Friday  Golpel  of  Luk,  4  Cap.  52.  b. 

Beginn.  “  pis  Gofpel  tellip  hou  Crift  prechid.” 

21.  pe  2  Sonday  aftir  Vtas.  I'iftil  Romayns-  54- 
Beginn.  “  pus  Poule,  in  pis  Piftl,  tellip  to  Romayns, 

hou  Spiritual  Preftis  fchulden  pafle  Seculeris.” 

22.  Sonday-  Gofpel,  John  pe  2  Cap".  57- 

Beginn.  “pis  Gofpel  tellip  of  pe  firfte  Meracle  pat 

Crift  di,1--  in  prefence  of  his  Difciplis.” 

23.  Wenfday.  Gofpel,  Matheu  13  Cap-.  _  _  59‘ 

Beginn.  “  pis  Gofpel  tellip  hou  Crift  dide,  in  pro- 

fitynge  to  his  Chirche.” 

24-  Friday-  Gofpel,  Luk  4  Cap".  _  59’  b 

Beginn.  “  J’is  Gofpel  tellip  more  of  Crift  j  heu  he 
trauelide  in  his  Chirche.” 

ce.  3  Sonday  afiir  Vtas.  Piftil,  Romaynes  12  Cap". 

J  5  60.  b. 

Beginn-  “  pus  Poul  tellip  in  pis  Piftil,  hou  pat 
Comyntees  &  alle  men  fchulden  fchape  weyes  for  Charite 
&  Oon-heede  heere.” 

26.  Sonday.  Gofpel,  Matheu  eyztpe  Cap0.  62. 
Beginn.  “  pis  Gofpel  tellip  of  twey  Meraclis  pat 

Crift  dide.” 

27.  Wcnefdav.  Gofpel,  Mark  3  Cap.  04-  b- 

Beginn.  “  pis  Gofpel  tellip,  how  pat  Crift  repreuede 

pe  Faryfees  &  Men  of  pe  I.awe  of  Aunte-crift.** 

2S-  Friday.  Gofpel  of  Matheu,  4  Cap".  65'  b- 

Beginn'  “  pis  Gofpel  tellip  of  lhcfus  prechynge, 
hou  bilyly  he  tauzte  pe  Chirche.'’ 

29.  pe  4th  Sonday.  Piftil,  Romayns,  13  Cap.  66.  b. 
Berinn.  “  pus  Poul  tellep  heere  to  Romaynes  ;  Sc 

fo  to  alle  Criften  men.” 

30.  Sunday.  Gofpel  of  Matheu,  8  Cap”.  _  69. 
Beginn. pis  Gofpel  tellip  a  Myracle  pat  Crift  dide 

in  the  Watir.” 

31  Wenfday  Gofpel  Luk,  9  Cap*. . 73. 

Beginn-  “  pis  Gorpel  tellip  hou  Criftis Difciplis  mo- 
ten  have  hem  in  Lyvynge-” 


Num.  2396 — 2398. 

j2-  Friday.  Gofpel  of  Mark,  10  Cap*.  75-. 

Beginn.  “pis  Gofpel  tellip  hou  Iliu  louede  litil 
Children,  bopein  Kynde  &.  in  Fygure.” 

33.  pe  4th  Sonday  in  Advent,  bifor  Criftmaffe-  pe 
Gofpel  of  Jon,  1  Cap"- 

Beginn  “  pis  Gofpel  tellip  of  pe  God-heede  &T*Ian- 
heede  of  Crift.” 

This  ihould  haue  been  inferted  after  n°  9-  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  old  Rubric  in  23-  b. 

As  to  the  Author  of  this  fmall  Colledion :  his 
Style  ;  his  frequent  &  bitter  inveighing  againft  the  whole 
Clergy  then  in  being,  of  all  forts  Sc  conditions,  with¬ 
out  exception  ;  &  his  mentioning  pe  Scole  of  Oxenforde l. 
iuduce  me  to  believe  it  might  have  been  John  Wycliffe. 

2397- 

A  theological  Book  in  4to.  not  ill  written  upon  Velum 
wherein  are  contained, 

1.  Certain  fragments  of  an  old  liturgical  MS.  treating 
De  Commendatione  Animarum,  &  de  Sepultura  Moituo- 
rum.  At  the  beginning,  &  end. 

2.  pe  fecunde  part  of  pe  Reformyng  of  Manny  8  Soule ; 

drawyn  of  Maifter  W atir  Lliltone  Hermyte.  1 . 

Beginn.  “  For  as  moche  as  pou  coueytift  gretly,  Sc 
alkift  it  for  Charite.” 

This  is  no  other  than  his  Scala  Perfedionis  (I 
mean  the  fecond  part  of  that  work)  notwithftanding  the 
difference  of  the  Title.  See  above,  what  I  have  faid 
of  100.  C.  1 7. 

3.  This  Tretis  pat  fewip  was  maad  by  Maiftir  Watir 
lliltone  ;  &  herinne  is  tauzt  hou  men  fchuld  rule  hem. 

It  is  clepid  Medlid  Lijf.  73- 

Beginn.  “  Broper  &  Suftir,  bodili  &  goftli !  twey 
maner  Statis  per  be  in  holy  Cherche,  by  pe  whic  C-riftene 
Soulis  plefe  God,  &  geten  hem  the  Bliffe  of  Hevene : 
that  oonis  bodili,  pat  oper,  is  goftli.” 

This  Trad;  confifteth  of  ten  Chapters. 

4.  A  Comment  upon  the  91ft  Plalm,  according  to 

the  Vulgate:  “  Bonum  eft  confiteri  Domino,  etpfallere 
nomini  tuo,  Altiffime.  It  is  good  to  fchry  ve  to  pc  Lord  ; 
cc  fynge  to  pi  name  pou  alper  hieft.”  85.  b. 

Beginn.  “  No  man  may  leue  in  pis  Lijf,  pat  he  nc 
fchal  fynne  fum  tyme  :  &  perfore  it  is  good  to  ech  man  to 
fchryve  him  to  our  Lord  ;  Sc  fynge  to  his  Name.” 

By  a  Note  in  fol.  94.  b.  it  appears  that  this  book 
belonged  to  Dame  Elyzabethe  Ilorwode  Abbas  of  the 
Menoreffes  off  London,  &  given  by  her  to  pe  Syfters  of 
pe  fayde  Place,  upon  a  certain  Condition. 

2398. 

A  parchment  Book  in  8vo.  wherein  are  contained  the 
Theological  Tra&s  following. 

1.  Memoriale  credencium.  r. 

Beginn.  “  Man,  &  Woman,  pat  wylnep  to  fle  Synne 
&  lede  clene  Lyf ;  takep  hede  to  pys  lvtel  Tretyfe  pat  ys 
y-wryte  yn  Englyfche  Tunge,  for  lewede  Men  patconnep 
nouzt  vnderftonde  Latyn  ne  Frenfche  :  and  ys  y-drawe 
out  of  Holy  Wryt  by  techynge  of  holy  Dodours  pat 
hauep  y-ben  byfore  pis  time.” 

At  the  end  is  this  Note,  “  Explicit  tradatus  vocatus 
Memoriale  Credencium,  auro  preciofior.’’ 

2-  The  15  O’s  (as  they  are  frequently  called  in  the 
Primers)  being  fo  many  Prayers  to  our  bleffed  Savior ; 
which  having  no  Rubric  in  this  Copie,  I  tranferibe  one 
from  another  here.  “  Oracio  S,c.  Brigide  de  15  Oracio- 
nibus  fequentibus  ;  videlicet,  inter  vnamquamque  Ora- 
cionem  dicitur  Oracio  Dominica  cum  Salutacione  An¬ 
gelica  ;  et  continet  nuinerum  Vulnerum  Crifti,  per  fpa- 
cium  unius  anni.”  To  the  prefent  Copie,  is  prefixed  a 
Legendary  Story,  which  thus  fat  69-  b.) 

Beginns.  “  A  Woman  Reclufe  Sc  Solitarye,  cou- 
eitynge  to  knowen  pe  numbre  of  pe  Woundes  cf  oure 
Lord  Ihefu  Crift.” 

3.  A  Trad,  at  the  end,  thus  entituled  “  Bonus  trac- 
tatus  de  decern  Mandatis-”  73* 

Beginn. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


683 


Kum.  2398. 

Beginn- “  Alle  manner  Men  fcholde  holde  Godes 
.Byddynges  ;  for  \vi]>oute  holdyng  of  hem,  may  no  man 
be  i’aucd.” 

4.  Another,  at  the  end,  thus  entituled.  “  Bonus  Trac* 

tatus  de  quinque  Senfibus-”  106.  b. 

Beginn. tC  As  it  is  byforfe  feyd,  fo  muche Diligence, 
ne  fo  gret  Byfynefie  dyde  oure  Lord  God  nevere,  for  no 
Creature,  as  for  Mannes  Soule.” 

5.  A  fhort  Tract  without  a  Title,  or  any  Authors 

Name.  128. 

Beginn-  “  It  byhoue]>  fpecially  to  euery  man  pat  de- 
fyrej>  to  loue  our  Lord  Ihefu  Crift,  inwardly  in  Herte, 
fyue])ynges.” 

•  6.  Sermo  Magiftri  Thome  Wymyldone,  apud  Crucera 
in  cimiterio  Sanfti  Pauli  London.  140. 

In  illud  Luca;  i6nio.  “  Redde  racionem  villicaci- 
onis  tue.” 

Beginn.  “  My  dere  frendes  !  he  fchulle])  vnder- 
ftonde,  ])at  Crift  Ihefu  auflor  &  doctor  of  l'reil^e’  in 
his  boke  of  Golpel,  lyknynge  pe  kyngdome  of  Heuene 
to  an  Hous-holder,  fey])-  ’ 

7.  he  Expoficioun  of  J>c  Pater  nofter.  153. 

Beginn.  “■  Eche  Criflcn  man  owe])  to  knowe  whiche 

bethe  ])e  feuen  Ax>nges  of  ])e  hordes  preyer,  J)at  dop 
awey  alle  Yuetes,  Sc  procure])  alle  Goedes.” 

Ai  the  End,  is  this  Note,  “  Here  ende])  |>e  Expofi¬ 
cioun  of  J»e  Pater  nofter,  as  Seynt  Edmund  expounythe 
in  his  Speculum.” 

This  was  St-  Edmund  of  Pounteney  Archbilhop  of 
Canterbury  ;  and  one  of  the  Traits  called  “  Speculum 
Ecclefirc,”  is  aferibed  to  him. 

8.  How  men  }>at  be])  in  hele,  fcholde  vifite  fyke 

men.  15^- 

Beginn.  “  My  dere  Sone  or  Douztcr,  in  God  !  It 
feme])  ])at  ]iou  hyeft  J)e  falte  in  \>e  weye  fro  ])is  Lyf  to 
God-ward.  ])er  Jjou  fchalt  y-fee  alle  j)y  forun  Padres, 
ApofUes,  Mariires,  ConfelToris,  Virgynes,  and  alle  Men 
&  Wommen])at  be])  y-fauyd.” 

At  the  end,  this  fhort  Trait  is  called  “  Vifitacio 
Tnfirmorum.” 

g.  Of  Wedded  men,  Sc  Wyues,  &  here  Childrene 
alfo.  ido.b. 

Beginn. cc  Ourc  Lord  Ihefu  Crift,  God  alnivzty, 
fpeke])  in  his  Law,  of  tweye  Matrimonyes  of  Wedlokc.” 

1  o.  A  Difcourfe  upon  the  Lords  Prayer.  1 66.  b. 
Beginn. e-  Sy])j>e  J)e  Pater  nofter  is  ]>e  befte  Prayer 
pat  is.” 

n.  A  fliort  Trait,  whofe  Argument  is  fummed  up  in 
thefe  words,  “  ]>at  weye  of  Synne,  feme  it  neuer  fo  lully  : 
zit  it  is  wonder  hard  &  bitter.  174. 

Beginn.  “  As  witneffe])  Holy  Writ  8c  holy  Doitours 
]icr  be])  two  weyes  contrarious,  ])ac  lede])  to  two  con- 
irarious  endes.” 

12.  Sermo  in  die  Pafchc,  ad  Populum.  175.  b. 

In  illud  Matthad  ult.  “  A  in  Evangelio  hodierno, 

Ihefum  queritis  Nazarenum  cruclfixum.” 

Beginn.  “  Criftene  children  in  God !  as  ye  wyte 
wel,  on  j)is  day  ze  be])  at  ])e  Fefte  &  ])e  Maungere  of  ])e 
Kyng  of  Heuene,  Lord  of  alle  Lordes.” 

13.  A  Memorandum  of  the  deceafe  of  Thomas  Sar- 

jeant  25  Auguft  1558,  by  John  Sarjeant.  1S5. 

Then  follow,  in  the  firit  hand, 

14.  A  fliort  Difcourfe  upon  thele  words,  in  Matth. 

vi.  “  Cum  autem  oraveris,”  See.  186. 

Beginn.  “  Whan  lie  jiou  fchapeft  pe  to  praye,  or  to 
haue'env  Deuocione  ;  fonde  J>e  to  be  in  a  priuy  place, 
frain  al  nianer  Noyfe  £e  tyme  of  Rcfte,  wi]>  oute  eny 
littvnge.  Sytte  })er,  or  kncle,  as  is  ])y  molt  Efe.  ])anne 
be  ])ou  Lord,  be  ]>ou  Lady,”  Sec. 

At  the  end,  this  is  entituled  “  Excitatio  optima  ad 
Oraodura.” 

15.  A  fchort  Reule  of  Lyfe  for  everyche  Man,  in 
general ;  and  for  Preftes,  &  Lordes,  Sc  Laborers  in 
fpecia! :  how  cchefchal  be  fam'd  in  his  Degre.  188.  b. 

Cat.  Ha.-.l,  You.  II. 


Num.  2398,  2399; 

Beginn.  “  Fir  ft,  whan  pou  ryfeft,  or  fully  waked? 
])enke  on  pe  Goedneffe  of  })y  God.” 

At  the  end,  this  fmall  tract  is  called  “  Regula 
Criftiana.” 

2399. 

A  mifcellaneous  Book  in  4m.  written  by  different  hands* 
at  different  times,  and  upon  different  fubjedts ;  partly 
in  Latin,  &  partly  in  Enghfli ;  wherein  the  following 
Fragments,  now  bound-up  together,  are  contained* 

1 .  Fraginentum  Commentariorum  Macrobij  in  Som- 

nium  Scipionis  :  manu  fatis  antiqua  membr.  _  *• 

2.  Frdgmentum  (partim  membranaceum,  partim  char- 

taceum)  D.  Ambrofij,  de  bono  Mortis.  .  9- 

3.  Speculum  Regis  Edwardi  in.  compilatum  pet 

Symonen  Yflep  C.antuarienfem  Archiepifcopumj  quorum 
animabus  propicictur  Deus.  Amen.  {  r3v 

Apographuin  chartaceum,  in  ufum  (uti  videtur) 
Wilhelmi  Laude  Bathonienfis  ac  Wellenfis  Epifcopi, 
(cujus  Nomen  in  fuperiore  margine  vifitur)  deferip- 
tuni.  I3- 

4.  Collects;  nonnulla;  de  Sandtis  Katarina,  Margareta,- 

ac  Maria  Magdalena  ;  una  cum  Aniiphona,  cujus  Exor¬ 
dium  eft  “Ave  verum  corpus  natum.”  4°- 

Tothis  Antiphone  is  added,  “  Whofoeuyr  atSacryng 
tyme  fayth  this  Prayour,  hatlit  300  dayes  of  Pardon.’ 

5.  Kalendarium  ;  in  meinbranis.  40.  b. 

6.  Tho  make  a  Salue  to  rote  Sc  draw.  4^-  b- 

7.  Ad  Menfium  immoderatum  profluvium  ;  et  iangui-* 

nem  indebite  fluentem  fiftandum.  AnglicA  ibid. 

This  is  followed  by  another  Receipt  for  Women. 

Next  follows  an  imperfect  8c  damaged  paper-frag¬ 
ment,  wherein  I  find 

8.  The  conclufion  of  a  dull  Englifh  Poem  to  Jefus 

Chrift  ;  with  the  following  Infcription  at  the  End,  “  Ex¬ 
plicit  Contemplacionem  bonam.  Quod  Dns  Johannes 
Arcuarius  Canonicus  Bodmine.  Deo  gracias.”  Mr. Knott 
was  of  opinion  that  the  Englilh  name  of  this  Arcuarius 
was  Bowyer  :  yet,  if  inftead  of  that,  he  had  putt-down. 
Archer,  I  ftiould  not  have  withflood  him.  4 7- 

g.  Part  of  a  Runic  Alphabet,  fett  dowa  by  foroe 
ignorant  Perfon.  _  _  ibid. 

10.  De  pueritia  Domini  noftri  Ihefu  Crifti  j  a  Poem 
in  olde  Englifh  Dogrel.  47-  “• 

Beginn.  “  Alle  myzthty  God  yn  Trynyte 
]>at  bowth  Man  on  Rode  dere. 

He  yefe  ows  welle  to  ])e 
A  lytyl  wyle  Jnt  ye  wille  me  hyre.” 

Upon  the  Margin  of  fol.  48.  ftill  remain  thefe 
Letters,  “  I.  Bow  .  .  ferip  .  .  hoc  ue  .  .  rfum”  (according 
to  his  Latin  ;)  and  here  Mr.  Knott  calls  him  Bower  or 
Bowier.  But  at  the  end,  is  this  Rubric  “  Qod  Diis 
Johannes  Architenens,  Canonicus  Bodminie,  et  natus  in 
ilia  Deo  gracias.” 

In  the  Margin  of  fol.  58.  are  fome  counterfeit 
Runic  Letters  ;  for  the  Cornifh  ufed  them  not.  In  the 
margins  of  fol.  38.  b.  are  fome  Heraldical  Marks  & 
Armes  :  the  latter,  for  want  of  proper  colors,  being  be¬ 
come  as  unintelligible  as  they  are  rudely  delineated. 

This  idle  Poem  is  merely  legendary,  and 
grounded  upon  the  Proto-euangelion  falfely  aferibed  to 
the  Apoftle  St.  James  the  lefs. 

1 1. "  “  Videte  quomodo  homo  Sapiens  dicit  ;  ”  an  im¬ 
perfect  Poem,  wherein  a  Father  is  introduced  as  inftilling 
prudential  Maxims  into  his  Son,  then  about  15  years  of 
A  ge. 

Beginn.  “  Lordyngs  alle,  &  ze  wylle  here 
How  a  wys  man  tawgh  hys  Sone, 

Takes  good  hede  to  }>ys  matere, 

And  fonde  to  lerne  to  ])at  ze  cone.  ’ 

1 2.  Si  vis  sire  de  negofio  tuo  j  ft  expedies,  aut  non  i 

with  other  non-fenfical  Receipts-  64. 

1  -  A  ryming  Fpiftle,  weft  meant,  from  one  brother 
io  another.'  *  «4-lJ 

8  M  14-  An 


6s6 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2399—2403 


14*  An  imperfca  parchment  Fragment  ;  wliofe  Ru- 

nc’  In  ra,t.’  ls?  tk's  :  “  Generates  articuli  inajoris  F.x- 
commumcationis,  in  Lingua  matema.”  6  c. 

]’eor,n";  “  Gode  Men  &  Wymmen  !  hit  is  ordeyned 
|he  Gonfeil  of  alle-holy  Chiirche,  furd  of  oure  holy 
Kither  the  1  ope  of  Rome,  &  his  Cardinally,  &  alle  his 
Confeile.  ’ 

15.  Giofe  Afforifmorum  Ypocratis  ;  fragmentum 
untco  toho  contemum  ;  manuq;  veteri  Italica  defcriptum. 

'6  Wo  in  illud  Cantici  rv.  13.  «  Emiffiones^e 
paradt  us  Malorum  Punicoruin  cum  Pomorum  fruc- 
tibus.  M 

Llic  differitur  de  vi  modis  fanandi  infirmos. 

,!  7:  Sejltentiol.e  e  S.  Bernardo,  et  a  facris  Scripturis 
coHefts.  _  .  7'.b. 

1 8.  Collectanea  Theologica,  e  diverfis  Aurdribus  de- 
rumptl-_  .  73-  81.  b.  93. 

1 9-  Sermo  in  iecunda  Dominica  Adventus.  yg. 

In  illud,  “  Quecunque  fcripta  hint,  ad  nodram 
JJoetrmam  lunt  fcripta  ” 

20.  Sermo  in  die  Nativitatis  Domini  80.  b. 

21.  I  hema  in  Dominica  Medic  Quadragefime.  9 1.  b. 

22.  Sermo  de  Pahione  Domini.  io2. 

_  In  illud,  “  Recordare paupertatis  mec,  et  trantrref- 
lionis  Ablcinthij  &  Kellis.” 

Hoc  in  Sermone,  occurrit  Diftichon  Anglicc  fcrip- 


An  imperfect  and  damaged  paper  Book  in  410  wherein 
1  find, 

1.  A  great  part  of  the  Pfalter  ;  imperfect  both  at  the 

beginning,  &  in  the  midle.  I# 

2.  The  Prayers  of  the  Byble.  30. 

Ihefeare  not  the  Cantica  Sacra  which  ufually  fol¬ 
low  the  Latin  Pialters  :  but  another  Collection  made  for 
the  ufe  of  thofe,  who  afterward  were  called  Puritans.  At 
the  end  are  thcle  words,  “  hynysj  “God  laue  Kynee  Ed* 
wardc  vi.  fo  be  it.” 

3-  A  Treatyle  of  Confyrmacyon,  couienly  called 
By  Ishoppynge  or  Chyldren  ;  made  by  pe  godlye  learned 
’ iai1  }”hn  Calvyne  ;  now  J'yrde  tranflated  out  of  Laten 
into  Englyih,  by  Wyllyam  Boys,  Anno  Domini  154S. 

35.  b. 

Vr  the  end,  is  this  Note,  "  Imprinted  at  Ipilwych 
hv  me  John  Ofvven,  menfe  Julij  mdxi.viii,  cum  privi. 
iegio  ad  imprimendum  lolum.”  This  Ofwin  printed  alfo 
at  Woicefter,  i-hrewibury,  See. 

2403. 

(  membranaceus  in  4:0.  manu  Anglica  deferiptus  • 
quo  continental', 

i.  Summa  Libri  Decretorum.  I# 

Tabula  in  eadsm  Dccreta ;  alphabetico  Ordine 
digelta.  Imperf,  ^ 

24O2. 

A  Book  in  410.  written  upon  paper  :  partly  in  Latin  Sc 
partly  in  old  Englifh  :  wherein  is  contained, 

A  Grammatical  Treatife,  now  imperfect,  about  the 
;  rious  Significations  of  many  Latin  words.  It  feems  to 
i;  ive  been  compiled  by  foine  old  Schotemafter  of  ex¬ 
perience  ;  and  may  now  be  of  good1  Ule. 

2+°3* 

A  parchment  Bonk  in  4to.  compiled  by  forae  fecular 
Pried  for  the  In  ft  ruction  of  his  Parilhioners,  out  of  the 
Golden  Legend,  and  other  Treatifes.  He  calls  it 
“Liber  KefHyalis;”  although  his  Collection  of  Homilies, 
herein  contained,  be  t,/m  dc  Tempore  quam  de  Sanctis. 
Thofe  Homilies,  of  which  (I  think)  here  are  other 
Copie •;  in  this  noble  Library,  arc  fett  down  in  the 
order  following, 

1.  Without  a  Rubric.  j. 


Num.  2403. 

Beginn.  “  Good  Men  Sc  Women  !  pis  day,  as  yg 
knowe  welle,  is  callyd  pe  fur/te  Sonday  in  Aduent.” 

2.  Sanctus  Andreas,  ^ 

Beginn.  “  Good  Men  Sc  Wommen  !  fuche  a  day. 

N.  ye  fchulle  haue  Seynt  Andrewis  day.” 

3.  Sanctus  Nicholaus.  g 

Beginn.  “  Good  Men  Sc  Women  !  fuche  a  day  ye 

fchulle  haue  Seynt  Nycholas-day.” 

4.  Concepcio  beate  Marie.  IO 

Beginn.  “  Good  Men  k  Women  !  fuche  a  day 

N-  )'.e  rdMllc  ourc  I.ady-day,  J,at  is  called  be  Con- 
cepciohe  of  hure.” 

5.  Seint  Thomas  of  Inde. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  k  Womene  !  fuch  a  dav. 
N.  ye  fchal  haue  Seynt  Thomas-day  of  Ynde.” 

6.  De  Nativitate  Domini.  *  I4 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  Sc  Womene  !  as  ye  feene 

S:  herene  this  day,  allc  holy  C.hurche  fyngethe  &  redethe, 
&  makethe  Melodyc,  in  mynde  of  pe  fwete  Burthc  of 
oureLorde  Jhefu  Cryfte,  verry  God  k  Man.” 
i  7.  De  Sancto  Stephano.  jg 

I  Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Womene  pat  bene  bis 

j  day  come  to  Holy  Churche  in  Worfchipe  of  God  Sc  of 
J  his  holy  Martyr  Seint  Stephene.” 

8.  Johannes  Evangelifta.  .  2I 

;  Beginn.  “  Code  Mene  Sc  Women !  pat  become 
J'is  day  to  Holy  Churche  in  Worfchippe  of  God.  &  of 

I  oure  Lady,  &  Seynt  Johne  pe  Evaungelifte.” 

I  9-  De  Ifmocentibus.  2 

Beginn.  "  Goode  Mi  ne  &  Womene  !  pat  bene  pis 
day  come  to  Churche,  in  Worfchipe  of  God  Sc  of  pe 
Chyldrene  pat  we  ilayne  for  Goddis  Sake.” 

10.  Sanctus  Thomas  Cantuarienfis.  26. 

“  Goode  Men  &  Womene  !  pat  be  comcne  pis  day 

to  Holy  Churche,  in  Worfcbiype  of  Gcd,  &  his  holy 
Munir  Seynt  Thomas.’’ 

1 1 .  New  Yeres  day.  .,0_  ^ 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  Sc  Womene  !  as  ye  know 

welle,  pis  day  is  callede  New  Yeres  dav  ;  as  endyng  of 
pe  \  ere  pat  is  gone.  Sc  begynnyng  of  pc  Yere  pat  is 
commyng.” 

12.  Epiphania  Domini.  32.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Women !  as  ye  know 

welle,  pis  day  ye  calle  12th  day  ;  but  alle  amyfle,  for 
hit  is  pe  13th  day  of  Cry  Remade.” 

13*  Copuerfio  Sancti  Pauli. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  k  Womene!  fuche  a  day. 
N.  ic  lchulle  have  an  hie  Feed  in  holy  Churche  pat  is 
callede  pe  Converfione  of  Seville  Poule.” 

14.  Purificacio  beate  Marie.  ^ 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  &  Women  !  pat  loue  to 

ferve  oure  Lady,  k  fade  her  Evens,  Brede  Sc  Watur 
in  hye  mode  to  yow.” 

15.  Dominica  in  Septuagefima.  42.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  !\  Womene  !  Ye  fchal 

know  wel  pat  this  day  is  callede  in  holy  Churche  Sonday 
in  Septuageline  ”  1 

16.  Dominica  Sexagefime. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  &  Womene  !  pis  dayc  is 
callede  in  holy  Churche  Sondaye  in  Sexagefme.” 

17.  Dominica  in  Quinquagefima.  50.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  k  Women  !  pis  day  is 

callede,  in  holy  Churche,  Sonday  in  Quinquaeefmc  ” 

18.  Seint  Mathey.  53.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Women  !  ye  fchul  haue, 

fuche  a  day,  N.  Seynte  Mathyis  day.” 


19.  Dominica  prinia  Quadragefime. 


Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Womene  !  pis  day  is 
callede,  in  holy  Chirche,  pe  furde  Sonday  of  Quadra- 
geline.” 

20.  Dominica  fecunda  Quadragefime.  58. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Wjmene  !  }is  is  pe  fe- 
conde  Sonday  in  dene  Lente.” 

2  ; .  Domini)  a  tertia  Quadra gefime.  (So. 

Beginn. 


Num.  2403. 


Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Wymene  !  this  is  J>e 
thride  Sunday  in  Lentun.” 

22.  Dominica  quarta  Quadragefime.  63.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women  !  pis  is  pe  4th 

Sonday  of  Lentone.” 

23.  Annunciacio  beate  Marie.  66. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  8c  Womene  !  pat  lovethe 

to  ferve  oure  Lady  ;  fuche  a  day.  N.  yefchulle  haue  an 
holy  Feed  in  holy  Churche,  pat  is  callede  pe  Annuncia- 
cioneofour  Lorde  Ihefu  Cryfte.'* 

24.  Dominica  in  Paffione.  6g.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  8:  Womene  !  jus  bay  is 

callede  in  holy  Churche,  Sonday  in-  pe  Padrone.” 

25.  Dominica  in  Ramis  Palmarum.  72. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  8c  Wvmenc  !  as  ve  knowe 

welle  alle,  J>is  day  is  called  Palme-Sondav." 

26.  Tenebris.  73.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  Sc  Women  !  as  ye  fee, 

holy  Churche  vfepe  pele  3  dayes  to  fey  Seruyce  in  J>e 
F.ven-tyde  in  Derkcneffe.” 

27.  In  die  Parafeuen.  7;.  b. 

Beginn  “  Goode  Men  8c  Wymmene!  for  pat 

Crilte,  pis  day,  fchede  his  Herte-blode  for  vs.” 

28.  Upon  fcher-Thurfdav.  78. 

Beginn.  “  Furlle,  yf  me  alkethe,  why  Scher- 

Thurfday  is  called  fo  ?  Scy  pat  in  holy  Churche,  it  is 
clepede  oure  Lordes  Soper-day.” 

29.  In  die  Pafce.  82. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  &  Women  !  as  ye  knowen 

alle  welle,  pis  Day  is  callede,  in  fome  place,  Adur-day  ; 
and  in  fome  place,  Palche-day  ;  and,  in  fumme  place, 
Godeis  Sonday.’ ‘ 

35.  Sanclus  Georgius.  84. 

Begi  in.  “  G  >ode  Mene  8c  Wommen!  fuche  a  day. 
N.  ye  fchul  haue  pe  le  t  of  Scynte  George.” 

31.  In  die  S.  Marcij-  86. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  8c  Womene!  fuch  a  day. 

N.  ye  fchul  haue  Seint  Marcus-day.” 

32.  Philipp  8c  Jacob.-  88. 

Beginn.  “  G  .>ue  Men  8c  Wymmen  !  fuche  a  day. 

N.  ye  fchul  haue  an  hye  fede  in  holy  Churche,  Seyiue 
Philipus-day,  Sc  S'.ynte  Jacob.” 

33.  In  die  Sanfte  Crucis.  90.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Wymmen  !  fuche  a  day. 

N.  ye  fchul  haue  pe  holy  Rode-day.” 

34.  Johannes  ante  Portatn  Latinam.  93. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Womm-.n  !  fuche  a  day. 

N.  ye  fchal  haue  Seyntc  Johannis  day  at  pe  Porte  Latyne.’’ 

35.  DiesProceflionum.  94.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  8c  Womene  !  pefe  3  dayeslew- 

vnge,  pat  is  Monday,  Tewfday,  8c  Wendday,  ye  fchul 
fade,  Sc  come  toChurche,  I  lulbande,  ‘Wife,  8:  Seruaunt.” 

36.  De  Afcencione.  96. 

Beginn.  Goode  Men  Sc  Women  !  pis  day  is  an 

hie  day,  8c  an  holy  Feed  in  alle  holy  Churche.” 

37.  In  vigilia  Pentec-ften.  99. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Womene  !  a  Sctyrday 

pat  next  cornepe,  ye  know  u  el  is  Wytfone-Eve.” 

38.  In  die  Pentecoden.  10 1. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mon  Sc  Women  !  ye  know  wel 

alle,  pat  pis  is  callede  Wyt-Sonday.’* 

39.  In  die  Santte  Tfinitatis.  104. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women  !  as  ye  alle  know 

wel,  pis  day  is  callede  Trinitc-Sonday.” 

40.  De  Corpore  Cridi.  107. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Women  !  ye  fchal  knowe 

pat  pis  day  is  an  hit  .'cede  8c  a  lolempne,  in  alle  holy 
Churche  ;  8c  it  is  cal;  1  pc  Fcede  of  Corpus  Cridi.” 

41.  De  Sancto  Barna!  t.  112. 

“  Goode  Men  Sc  Women  !  fuche  a  day.  N.  is  pe 

Feed  of  Soy  at  Barnabe.” 

42.  De  Sanfta  Wenefreda.  1 13. 

Begem.  “  Goode  Mene  8c  Women  !  fuch  a  day.  N. 

ye  fchulle  haue  Scynte  Wenefredeisday.” 


H<33- 


43.  De  Sancto  Johanne  Baptida.  116; 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Meri  &  "'omen !  fuch  a  daye.  N. 

ye  fchul  haue  Seynte  Johannis  day  peBaptid. 

44.  De  Sanfto  Petro  8c  Paulo.  xig.b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women  !  fuch  a  day.  N. 

ye  fchulle  haue  an  hie  Feede  8c  an  holy,  in  holy  Churche 
pat  is,  pe  Feede  of  PetUr  8c  Poule.” 

45.  De  SantdoThoma  Cantuarienci.  125.  b. 

Beginn.  **  Goode  Mene  &  Women  !  fuche  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fchulle  haue  Seym  Thomas  day  of  Caunturbury.” 

46.  De  Sanfta  Margareta.  127.  b. 

Beginn;  “  Goode  Men'Sc  Women  !  fuche  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fchulle  haue  Seynt  Margareteis  day.” 

47.  De  Sancta  Maria  Magdalena.  130. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8;  Women  !  fuch  a  daye. 

N.  yc  fchul  haue  pe  Feede  of  Seynte  Mary  Magdalene.  ' 

48.  De  SanCto  Jacobo.  133.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  Sc  Women  !  fuche  a  day. 

N.  ye  fchulle  haue  Seynt  James  daye.” 


49.  De  Sancta  Anna. 


r37- 


Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  &  Women!  fuche  a  day.  N. 
ye  fchulle  haue  Seynte  Afmes  daye.” 

50.  De  Sanfto  l,aurencio.  *  jgg. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women  !  fuch  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fchulle  haue  Seynte  Laurens  daye.” 

51.  De  Alfumpcione  beate  Marie.  142. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mene  8c  Women!  fnch  a  daye. 

N.  yefchulle  haue  an  hie  Fede,  in  holy  Churche,  pat  is 
called  pe  Alfumpcione  of  our  Ladye.” 

52.  De  beata  Maria.  147; 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Women  !  pis  day  is  an 

holye  Fede  in  holve  Churche,  pat  is  pe  heyefte  Fede 
that  is  of  oure  Lady.” 

53.  De  Sandto  Bartholomeo.  132. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Women!  fuche  a  day. 

N.  ye  fchulle  haue  Seynte  Bartholotncwis  day.” 

154.  De  Nativitate  beate  Marie.  155.  b. 

Beginn.  Goode  Men  8c  Women  !  fuche  a  daye; 
N.  ye  fchul  haue  an  hye  Feede  in  holy  Churche,  pat  is 
callede  pe  Natyuyte  of  oure  Lady  Seynte  Maria.” 

55.  f  xaltacio  Sandte  Crucis.  15S.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women  !  fuche  a  day. 
N.  ye  fchul  haue  holy  Rode-day.*’ 

5'.'.  Ymbrey-days.  .  160.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Women !  ye  fchul  haue^ 
pis  Woke,  pe  Ymbre-dayes.” 

57.  Seint  Mathew.  161.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women  !  fuche  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fchul  haue  Seynte  Mathewis  daye.” 

58.  I11  die  Santti  Michaelis.  163. 

Beginn.  Goode  Men  8c  Women !  fuche  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fchulle  haue  Seynte Myghelleis  daye.” 

59.  Seint  Luke.  165. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women!  fucheadave. 

N.  ye  fchul  have  Seynte  Lukeis  daye.” 

60.  Seint  Symond  and  Jude.  166.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Women  !  fuche  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fchul  haue  Seyntc  Symondeis  day  8c  Seynte  Jude.” 

61.  In  die  Omnium  Sanctorum.  168. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  Sc  Women !  fuche  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fchul  haue  a  Solempne  Felte  in  holy  Churche, 
pat  is,  pe  Feefte  of  al  Halowen.” 

62.  In  die  Animaruin. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women! 

yc  know  wel,  is  al  Sowlene-daye 

63.  In  die  San£li  Martini.  172. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Mtn  Sc  Women!  fuche  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fchulle  haue  Seynte  Martyneis  daye.” 

64.  In  die  Sancte  Katerine.  173.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women !  fuch  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fcal  haue  Seyntc  Kateryneis  daye.” 

65.  In  die  Dedications.  175.  b. 

Beginn.  •*  Good  Men  8c  Women !  fuche  a  daye. 

N.  ye  fchul  haue  youre  Clnirche-Halyday.’’ 


170. 
to  morow,  at 


I 


1 • 


1 


I 


66-  Upon 


6SS 


Catalogus  Librofum  MSS. 


Kum.  240: — 2405. 

66.  Upon  Mariages.  178. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women  !  as  ye  alle  fe, 

here  a  Man  &  a  Woman  bene  weddede  togedur  as  fe 
Lawe  of  holy  Chtirehe  techefe." 

67.  In  die  Sepulture.  iSt. 

Beginn.  “  Goode  Men  8c  Women  !  as  ye  alle  fe, 

here  is  a  Myrrour  to  you  alle  ;  f»ut  this  Cors  is  brouzt 
to  Cburche.” 

This  is  followed  by  fome, 

68.  Advice  to  the  Secular  Clergy.  183.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Now,  Sir  Prefix-,  take  goode  hede  in 

}>y  Buryynge,  lelt  fou  do  enye  Errour,  as  hit  is  ofte 
fey  lie." 

This  containeth  only  the  Exordium ;  all  the  reft 
being  wanting. 

69.  On  this  Occafion,  I  take  leave  to  mention  an  im¬ 
perfect  Sermon,  which  may  be  found  at  fol.  80.  and  as 
appears  by  another  Copy  of  it  in  this  noble  Library,  was 
thus  entituled, 

“  luformatio  bona  Sc  neceflaria  Capellanis  ;  fed  non 
eft  predicanda  Parochianis." 

70.  A  fhort  Explication  of  the  Lords  Prayer.  184. 

This  alfo  is  imperfect  at  the  beginning. 

71.  More  Advice  to  the  fecular  Clergy.  1S8.  b. 
Beginn.  “  Techefye  Paryfl'che  next  aftur  Code,  to 

ferve  oure  Lady  devouteleye.” 

With  this,  endeth  the  Feftivale. 

Laftly  followeth, 

72.  A  Ihort  Explanadon  of  the  Apoftles  Creed. 

1 9 1 .  b. 

2404. 

Co.’ex,  maximam  partem,  chartaceus  ;  caetera  niem- 
branaceus,  in  4to.  manu  Anglica  deferiptus  :  in  quo 
continent ur  Traftatus  infequentes  Geomantici,  fcil. 
t  .  Indices  Geomancie  Indeane.  1 . 

Init.  “  Hsec  eft  Geomancia  Itideana,  que  vocatur 
Eilia  Aftronomie;  quam  fecit  vnus  Sapientum  Indie  ;  et 
eft  fa<8ta  per  7  Planetas." 

2.  Geomancia Indeana.  19. 

3.  Tranflacio  Magiftri  Barnardi  de  Gordonio  Parhicij; 
regnante  Bonefacio  Papa ;  et  Radulpho  eledo  Imperatore 
et  Philippo  Rege  Francie,  filio  quondam  Phillippi  Regis 
Francie  ;  et  Jacobo  Rege  Majoricarum  ;  &  Beringario 
Epifcopo  Magdalenci  ?  ct  Edwardo  Rege  Anglorum. 
Anno  domini  1295“.  in  monte  Peflulano.  fol.  43.  ufq; 
ad  finem  Codicis. 

Pluribus  in  locis,  confpiciuntur  Notte  erudita  viri 
Samuelis  Knott. 

2405. 

A  Book  in  410.  at  the  beginning,  entitled  “  an  Anfwer  to 
Altare  Criftianum  being  the  papers  written  by  Mr. 
Thomas  Lydyat  upon  that  fubject;  whereof,  fome 
feem  to  be  draughts,  others  Copies,  8c  fome,  perhaps, 
of  his  own  hand  writing  ;  all  now  bound-up  together 
in  the  prefent  volume. 

t.  The  federal  Places  handled  in  thefe  three  An- 
fwcarcs.  *•  5* 

1.  Anfwear  to  altare  Criftianum. 

2.  Anfwear  to  the  Name  Altar. 

3.  Anfwear  to  the  Defence  of  the  C.oale. 

2.  Two  litle  Tretifes :  the  one  touching  fetdng-up 
Altars  in  Crillian  Churches  and  bowing  in  Reuerence  to 
them,  01  Communion-Tables.  The  other,  touchingbowing 
the  Knee,  or  vneouering  the  Heade,  at  the  Name  or 
Naming  of  Jefus:  occafionallie  made  A.  D.  1633,  by 
Mr.  1  h.  I..  Alfo,  a  few  Annotations  vpon  the  2  8c  3 
Chapters  of  the  Booke  entituled  “  Altare  Criftianum," 
late  lie  let  forth  A.  D.  1637.  concerning  the  Antiquitie 
r,f  Altars  i:i  C.hriftian  Churches,  &  bowing  in  Reverence 
to  them. 

Merc,  vpen  al  the  principal  Pafages  or  Places  of 


Num.  2405,  2405. 

the  book  entituled :t  the  Name  Altar  or  ©vria.-vpiev,  anci- 
entliegiuen  to  the  Holy  Table  let  forth  fince  the  other 
of  the  fame  Argument.  Yet  more,  of  the  fame  Argu¬ 
ment,  upon  the  5  8c  6  Chapters  of  the  Defence  of  the 
Booke  entituled  “  a  Coale  from  the  Altar  j”  fent  me 
fince  both  the  other.  3. 

3.  Our  Authors  Dedication  of  his  Work  to  Archbilhop 
Laude,  whom  he  acknowledged  to  have  been  a  meanes 
of  procuring  his  Libertie  out  of  Prifon  :  fubferibing  him- 
felf  an  vnworthie  Minifter  of  the  iitle  Parilh-Church  of 
Alkerton  in  the  Countie  &  Diocefe  of  Oxford  ;  June 

,638-  .  .  ...  4- 

4.  Touchinge  fetting-up  Altars  in  Chriftian  Churches; 

and  bowing  in  Reverence  to  them,  or  Communion- 
Tables.  7. 

This  is  dated  from  the  Kings  Bench-Prifon ;  Mun- 
day  the  2 2d  oi  Julie,  1633. 

5.  Touching  bowing  the  Knee  at  the  Name  of  Jefus. 

9.  0. 

This  bears  the  fame  date  with  the  former ;  8c  hath 
a  long  Poftfcript. 

6.  A  few  Annotations  vpon  fome  Places  or  Paftages 

of  the  2  8c  3  Chapters  of  the  Booke  entituled  “Altare 
Chriftianum  concerning  the  autiquitie  of  Altars  in 
Chriftian  Churches,  and  bowing  in  Reuerence  to 
them.  16. 

This  is  dated  at  Alkerton,  22  Julie,  1637. 

7.  More  Annotations  vpon  al  the  principal  Places  or 

Paftages  of  the  Booke  entituled  “  The  Name  Altar  or 
0vo-ta(npiov  ancientlie  giuen  to  the  Iloly  Table."  27. 

This  is  dated  at  Alkerton  4  November  1637. 

8.  Anfwear  to  the  Defence  of  “  The  Coale:”  or,  yet 

more  Annotations  of  the  fame  Argument,  vpon  the  5  fie  6 
Chapiters  of  the  Defence  of  the  Booke  entituled  ••  A  c.oale 
from  the  Altar.”  59. 

This  is  dated  at  Alkerton,  24Februaiie,  1637.  97. 

9.  Touching  bowing  the  Knee  at  the  Nmie  of  Jefus. 

07.  b.  in  3  pages. 

10.  Draughts  &  Copies  of  the  preceding  Difcourjes 

(fome  imperfect)  the  'lilies  whereof  need  not  to  be 
repeated  here.  99* 

24C6. 

A  Theological  Book  in  4to.  written  by  various  hands, 

partly  upon  Parchment,  the  reft  upon  Paper;  wherein 

are  contained, 

1.  The  Pater  noflcr,  Ave  Maria,  Crede,  8c  Ten  Com¬ 
mandments  (thefe  laft  with  fome  little  Explication)  all  in 


old  Englifh.  i. 

2.  Of  fe  7  dedely  Synnes.  3. 

3.  Of  )>e  7  Werkis  of  Mercy  bodily.  3.  b. 

4.  Of  fe  7  Werkis  of  Mercy  gooftly.  4. 

5.  Of  fe  7  blifled  Vertues  fat  Criftes  Spoufe  Manny s 

Soule  fholde  be  honourid  with.  4.  b. 

6.  Of  fe  7  Yeftes  of  pe  Holy  Goft.  5. 


7.  A  Declaration  of  fie  12  Aiticulys  of  the  Feyth. 

s-b- 

Part  of  this  is  faid  to  be  writen  in  fe  Myrrour  of 


Seynt  Edmonde  of  Pounteney- 

8.  fe  v.  Wittis  bodily.  6.  b. 

9.  fe  v.  Wittis  goftly.  7. 

10.  Of  the  xii  Maners  or  Weyes,  whereby  Svnne  is 

foryeuyn.  7.  b. 

11.  A  fiiort  Prayer  in  Metre.  8.  b. 

Beginn.  “  Almighty  God,  Fadir  of  Ileuene.” 

1 2.  The  ten  Commaundments  of  God,  abridged,  ibid. 

13.  The  vii.  dedly  Synnys.  o. 

14.  '1  he  vii.  bodyly  Dedys  of  Mercy.  ibid. 

15.  The  vii.  goftly  Dedes  of  Mercy.  ibid. 

16.  fe  vii.  principal  Vertues.  ibid. 

17.  fe  v.  bodyly  Wyttes.  ibid. 

18.  Verfus  relonantes  l-’i  uncorum,  contra  Angligenas. 

9-h- 

19.  Refponcio  Angli;.  iduL. 

■f  20.  Ver.i  o 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


ibid. 


ibid. 


Num.  2406,  2407. 

20.  Verfus  de  Corpore  Crifli. 

c  1 .  Verfus  qui  feribitur  fuper  Agnum  Dei.  i 

22.  Hoc  inodo  conficitur  Agnus  Dei ;  a  Papa  tantum. 

23.  Verfus  de  die  Judicij.  ibid! 

24.  Sentencim  e  Sanclo  Auguflino.  ibid. 

25.  Decern  Mandata  Domini.  10,  b. 

26.  Septem  Peccata  mortalia.  ibid. 

27.  Septem  opera  Mi.ericordie.  ibid.' 

28.  Quinque  Senfus  Corporis.  ibid. 

29.  Articuli  Fidei.  ibid. 

30.  Quinque  niodis  potefl  Homo  peccare  cum  fua 

Uxore.  ibid. 

31.  De  Circumflancijs  Peccatorum. 

32.  Condiciones  ConfelToris. 

33.  Cafus  Epifcopales. 

Omnia  a  nura".  18.  feribuntur  Metrics. 

Oiue  lequuntur,  profaice, 

34.  Orationis  Dominicse  Explicatio,  fecundum  Ricar- 

dum  de  Hampole,  ut  videtur.  !  2 

35.  Explanatio  Articulorum  Fidei,  per  Ricardum  de 

Hampul  Heremitam.  r 

Init.  “  Decimo  die  poft  Afcenfionem  Domini.” 

36.  Quedam  brevis  Expofitio  Orationis  Dominice, 
ptout  continetur  4ta.  parte  Tractatiis  qui  dicitur  Pupilla, 
capite  9.  vbi  agitur  de  morali  Expofiflione  Milfe,  &c! 

31.  b. 

Tradatus  cui  Tiiulus  “  Pupilla  Oculi,”  compilatus 
fuit  per  Johannem  de  Burgo,  Academia:  Cantabrigicnfis 
Cancellarium. 

37.  Tabula  numerorum  progrefliva,  literis  Latino- 

barbaris,  Turcicilq;  Cifris  expreifa.  34. 

38.  Benedicciones  ante  Prandium,  et  port  Prandium, 

per  totuin  annum.  34-  b. 

39.  A  devout  Treatife,  feeming  to  have  been  drawn  up 

for  the  Ufe  of  Nuns.  36. 

Begins.  “  Tary  yu  noucht  for  to  turne  to  God’e,  & 
delay  noth  fro  day  to  day ;  for  jte  vnmerciful  raueched 
fudeynly  Wreches.” 

40.  An  Expofition  of  one  of  Walter  Hilton's  Tra&s  ; 

which  feems  to  have  begun  with  thefe  Words,  “  Noviter 
militanti,  nova  congruit  Milicia.”  ^3. 

Begins.  “  Mi  dere  frende,  it  is  tolde  me,  J>at  yhe 
defire  pat  I  l'chulde  expone  to  yhu  ]>e  Letter  of  my  wor- 
fchipfulle  Faciir  Water  Hilton,  pat  he  fende  to  yhure 
Informacione.” 

41.  \c  Abbay  of  Jie  Holy  Goft.  6x. 

Begins.  “  My  dere  Brother  &  Siller !  I  fee  welle 

that  many  man  wold  be  in  Religion,  but  pei  mow  nozt 
for  Pouert ;  or  for  awe,  or  for  dredc  of  Kyn  ;  or  for  pc 
bond  of  Wedlok  :  jrerfor  I  make  here  a  bok  of  Religion 
of  £e  Hert  ;  pat  is  of  )>e  Abbay  of  >e  Holy  Goft.” 

The  Author  of  this  Treatife  was  John  Alcock 
Bifiiop  of  Ely,  &  Founder  of  Jefus  College  in  Cambridge! 
Mr.  Wharton  blames  John  Bale  for  omitting  John  de 
Burgo  before-mentioned  at  n°.  36.  Yet  himfelf  hath 
omitted  this  great  Prelate  ;  although  there  is  an  account 
of  him  and  his  Works,  in  the  book  of  Bale’s  fhadow 
Pits. 

42.  Orationis  Dominica:  Explicatio  brevicula.  83. 


2407. 


A11  Alchemical  book  in  4to.  written  moltly  upon  Paper, 
in  Engliih  ;  the  relt  upon  Parchment,  in  Latin 
wherein  I  find. 


1.  Nomina  Herbarum  fmgulis  Planetis  dicatarum. 

x.  b. 

2.  Part  of  the  Contents  of  this  Book.  ibid.  1. 

3.  Prognoflica  ex  apparitionc  Lunte,  fecundum  lingu- 

los  hebdomads:  dies.  , 


4.  To  make  Multard  to  bere  pe  p  .  .  .  .  e.  ibid. 


5.  Idle  Verfes  about  Wives,  &c. 

6.  Eor  a  Flyxe. 

7.  Another  Receipt  without  a  Title. 
Cat.  Harc.  Vol.  II. 


2.  b. 


3- 

ibid. 


Num.  2407. 

8.  A  Letter,  difcovering  the  Philofophers  Stone.  vb. 
Begins.  “To  my  frend,  I  fende  gretynge  wyth  alle 

my  hert.’’ 

9.  Of  the  Herb  Moon- wort.  5.  b. 

Begins,  “  I  fchal  you  tel  of  an  Erbe  pat  men  cal 

Lunane.  He  ijs  clepit  Aflerion ;  wych  ys  an  Erbe  bat 
men  callith  Lunarie.” 

10.  lo  make  fyne  Gold  ofSatorne.  6. 

11.  An  Alchemical  Poem.  7. 

Beginn.  “Her  ys  an  Erbe  men  call  Lunayrie; 

I-bleffet  mowte  hys  maker  bee. 

Aflerion  he  ys  i-callet  alle  fo. 

And  other  Namys,  many  &  mo.” 

12.  Another  Alchemical  Traft,  all  written  with  red 

Mk.  8. 

*3-  A  Ditty  upon  the  3  Kings  of  Cullen,  applied  to 
the  Alchemical  Art.  jy. 

.  This  is  alfo  written  with  red  Ink ;  &  hath  an  Alche¬ 
mical  Drawing  prefixed. 

Here  begins  the  labour  of  Mr.  Caflev. 

14.  Arnold  de  nova  villa,  his  Account  cf  the  Philo- 
fopher  s  Stone,  fol.  1 8.  It  ends  in  verfe,  from  f.  29.  b.  xv. 

15.  For  to  make  Sol  watur.  ^2. 

16.  To  make  Watur  of  Mercurii.  ibid.  &  65.  b! 
17*  Jo  make  Sol  W4rkis.  With  a  Drawing  at  the 

End.  0  ,2 

18.  To  make  the  whyt  elexure.  35. 

19.  Defcriptio  lapidis  lJhilofophorum,metrica  :  cum 
verfione  Anglicana.  Iucipit : 

“  Gemma  falutaris,  qui  nafeitur  orbicularis.  ” 
Super  membranam.  Verfus  Latini  rubrica  feripti  funt, 
Anglici  atramento.  ^6. 

20.  Alia  ejufdem  defcriptio.  «  Defiderabile  defide- 

num.’  Literis  rubris,  et  in  membranL  49.b. 

21.  Speculum  Alkamie.  Atramento.  b. 

22.  Chemicae  praeparationcs.  “  Saturnus  ex  fulphure 
et  Mercurio  fit.” 

23.  Alia  lapidis  Philofophorum  defcriptio.  “  Omnis 

alteraiio  ad  perfedlionem.”  5 1  •  b. 

24.  To  make  a  medycyn  for  mannys  body.  52.  b. 

25.  To  make  4  red  medycen  for  fatorn.  53.  b. 

26.  De  virtutibus  Planetarum.  “  Aries,  Leo,"  Sagit¬ 
tarius  funt  calida  &  ficca.”  ^ 

27.  De  Iapide  Philofophorum.  “  Lapis  Philofopho¬ 
rum  ell  trinus  et  unus.”  Literis  rubris.  - 

Etght  Englifh  Verfes  are  prefixed,  written  in  red. 

The  whole  is  reprefented  in  circles,  with  Names 
written  within  them.  At  the  end,  a  fketch  for  an  Al¬ 
chemical  Drawing,  of  a  Glals  Receiver  with  Figures 
in  it.  6 

28.  About  the  Philofophers  Stone.  “In  the  name 

of  the  Fader.”  Written  on  Paper.  -g 

29.  To  rektifi  quick  filvir.  64.  b! 

30.  “To  make  water  of  y‘ to  thv  medicyne.”  65.  b! 

31.  To  make  the  grete  elexer  of  alcaini.  C6m 

Followed  by  Two  alchemical  Drawings,  &  before 

the  fecond,  eleven  Latin  Verfes. 

32.  Two  Speeches  between  a  Student  &  a  Mafler. 

33*  Joannis  Dee  Teflamentum,  ad  Jo.  Gwynn  tranf 

milium,  a°  1368.  metro  Anglicano.  gg> 

,  .  xvr. 

34.  iwo  other  preparations  of  the  Philofopher’s 

s,oiie-  69.  b. 


35.  Verfes  of  the  virtue  of  the  Planets  &  thePhifofo- 

phers  Stone.  In  red  Ink.  j. 

36.  A  Poem,  comparing  Matrimony  to  a  Bird  in  a 
Cage:  tranflated  out  of  French  into  Engliih.  It  wants  the 
firll  Leaf;  &  lome  others.  Illuflrated  by  Drawings.  76. 

37.  Verfes  beginning, 

“  '1  her  ys  a  bodi  of  a  bodi 
and  a  foule  &  a  fpryte 
With  ij  bodies  1110ft  be  knete.”  80.  b. 

8  N  '3S.  Verfe 


6po 


Catalogus  Librorura  MSS. 


Num.  2407 — 2413, 

3S.  Verfes  about  the  Philofopher’s  Stone.  91. 

39.  Another  Treatife  of  the  Philofopher's  Stone. 

93.  b. 

40.  Alchemical  Terms  in  red  Ink,  followed  by  Draw¬ 
ings  illuftrative  of  them.  106. 

41.  A  few  Lines,  beginning,  “  Albertus  Commendat,” 
with  two  unfinished  Drawings.  In  all  1 1 1  Leaves. 

2408. 

[j Quarto.'] 

1 .  A  fliort  Chronicle  from  the  Death  of  Chrift  to  the 
year  1559.  1.  xvi. 

r.  A  medecyne  for  the  knitting  of  a  Bone,  ftrength- 
ning  of  a  ftrayne,  or  flopping  of  a  vayne  within  one.  8. 

3.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Popes  of  Rome  in  Latin;  ga¬ 

thered  by  John  Bale  out  of  108  Authors.  To  the  year 
IJ55.  i  S.b. 

4.  Abbeys  vifited,  &  diffolv’d  for  their  ivickednes  A° 

'«*■  ,  32, 

5.  Epitome  of  King  James’s  Bclo-iamou  Suoov.  At  the 

end, the  date,  July  13,  1603  :  With  thefe  Words,“God 
J'ave  James  our  godlie  King.'’  32.  b. 

6.  A  brief  Chronicle  of  Scotland,  from  its  firft  Inha¬ 
bitants  down  to  the  year  1603.  36.  b. 

7.  Alio  of  Ireland,  to  the  year  1546.  41.  b. 

8.  A  Chronicle  of  England,  from  Noah  to  the  year 

1573.  48—131. 

A  paper  Book  containing  13 1  Leaves- 

2409. 

An  old  Englifh  MS.  of  the  fifteenth  Century,  or  perhaps 
14th.  On  Vellum. 

1.  A  Treatife  on  the  Love  of  God,  with  a  Table  of 
Contents  prefixed,  which  is  thus  introduced. 

“  This  fchort  piflil  Jj'  foliwith  is  diuided  in  fundri 
matieres  ech  mat1  be  hymfelf  i  litlis  as  Jiis  Kalender 
fchcwiji.  And  J>1  Jj"  mow  fone  fynde  what  matere  ]>e 
plefith  Jiefe  titles  bene  hiere  a  in  J>e  piflil,  marked  w‘  di- 
verfe  lettres  in  manere  of  a  table.” 

The  Treatife  begins,  tc  In  J>e  beginninge  a  ending 
of  al  Gode  Werkis.” 

2.  A  deuoute  matier  be  lie  drawyng  of  M.  Waltere 

Hylton.  52. 

3.  “  IIow  Jie  holy  mayden  Kateryne  of  Seen  firft  be¬ 
gan  to  fette  hyr  hert  fully  to  Godvvarde.”  70. 

4.  Verfes  upon  nine  points  ofVertuc.  “  Here  ere 

neghen  poyntes  of  gret  vertu.”  75.  b. — 77. 

In  all  78  leaves 

2410. 

A  paper  Book,  containing  fliort  hiftorical  Notes  on  vari¬ 
ous  Parifhes  8c  Places  in  Devon  hire.  In  all  75  writ¬ 
ten  pages.  xvn. 

241  I. 

Georg ii  Ripleii  Experimenta  varia.  Collectanea,  Ex- 
pofitionefq;  aliquot  in  Hermetem,  Ariftotelem,  Gui- 
donem,  et  Raymondum,”  See.  On  the  external  Leaf  is 
written,  “  G.  Ripley,  his  bofom  Book.”  At  the  end, 
many  alchemical  Receipts  in  Englifh.  A  paper  Book 
of  106  Leaves.  xvi. 

2412. 

Ricardus  tertius,  in  tres  actiones,  five  dramata,  divifus. 
Audlore  Henrico  Lacy,  ut  conftat  ad  num.  6926. 

Carmine  Latino  Iambico.  Adlio  prima  feripta  fuifle 
dicitur  Anno  1588.  Liber  chartaceus,  bene  feriptus,  et 
fervatus,  folia  habens  9 1 . 

241 3; 

A  Bock  of  Heraldry,  containing  78  written  leaves, 

1 .  '1  he  orderinge  &  placing  of  Eftates  according  to 
their  Degrees.  1.  xvi. 


Num.  2413 — 2416. 

2.  The  Nobilitie  placed  accordinge  to  theire  Degrees 
and  after  the  Auncientie  of  theire  Creations,  A*  1 577. 

3.  Ordinances,  made  by  John  Lord  Tiptofte,  Erie  of 

Worcefter,  Conitable  of  England,  6  E.  4.  to  be  ob- 
ferved  in  all  manner  of  Julies.  14. 

4.  The  manner  how  attaintes  8c  breakinge  or  difmif- 

fing  of  Staves  are  obferved.  16. 

5.  The  fyle  of  Banners,  Standerdes,  Pennons,  Guy- 

dons,  Pencils,  &  Streamers.  17. 

6.  The  makinge  of  a  Knight  Banneret  in  the  feilde. 
With  Figures  of  the  Dreffes  of  various  Nobility.  20. 

7.  The  Proceadinge  to  the  Funeral  of  greate  Eftates. 

27.  b. 

8.  Lyueriee  for  noble  Women  at  the  Entertainment  of 
any  great  Eftate,  37.  Fees  due  to  certain  of  the  Kings 
Servantes  of  every  new  dubb’d  Bacheler  Knight.  39. 

9.  The  difeommodities  that  may  happen  to  ane  Army 

for  lacke  of  Enfignes;  as  Banners,  Standardes,  Pennons, 
8eGuydons.  39.  b. 

10.  De  poteftate  Gubernatoris  ac  principalis  Capita- 

nei  exercitus.  41. 

1 1 .  The  Office  and  Authorise  of  a  Kinge  of  Armes  in 

his  Province.  42. 

12.  The  Proceedinges  to  the  Funerall  of  a  Knighte  in 

London.  44.  b. 

13.  The  Offeringe.  Firft  the  cheef  Mourner  to  offer 
alone,  being  attend  one  by  the  other  foure  Mourners. 

14.  The  Prices  of  the  Hatchementes  prepared  by  the 

Painter.  46.  b. 

15.  Fees  due  to  the  Officers  of  Armes  giving  theire 
attendance  at  the  Funerals  of  great  Eftates.  47.  b. 

16.  Allowances  of  Servantes  8c  Blackes  at  the  Fune¬ 

ral  of  Mary  Queene  of  Scottes  at  Peterborough  one  tuef- 
day  the  firft  of  Auguft,  1587.  49.  b. 

17.  The  definitione  of  ane  Efquyer,  and  the  generall 

Sortes  of  them,  accordinge  to  the  cuftome  and  ufage  of 
Englande.  51. 

18.  Series  Ordinuin  omnium  Anglise,  tarn  virorum 
quam  faeminaruin,  pofita  8c  diftindta  per  Jafperum  Du- 
cem  Bedfoith,  8cc.  appundluatione  R.  Henrici.  53. 

19.  Ordinances  for  the  Office  of  Armes,  made  A.D. 

1566.  ...  55- 

20.  The  incorporation  of  the  Kinges,  Heralds,  &  Pur- 

fevants  at  Armes :  i°8c  30  Phil.  8c  Mar.  63. 

21.  An  Exemplification  of  Letters  Patents  granted  to 

the  Heralds  at  Arms,  concerning  their  Privileges,  1 8 
Eliz.  68. 

22.  The  Duty  of  the  Office  of  Armes.  75 — 78. 

2414. 

A  paper  4'0,  imperfedl,  containing, 

1.  Pedigrees  of  fome  Welfh  Families,  in  the  Welfh 

Language.  6.  xvi. 

2.  A  Chronicle  of  England  from  Samothes  Son  of 

Noah,  to  William  the  Conqueror.  Contains  33  written 
Leaves.  78. 

241  5- 

Cardinal  Bonavcnture,  his  Stimulus  divini  amoris,  in 
Englifh.  On  Vellum,  4'0.  xv. 

At  the  beginning  is  written,  in  a  much  more  mo¬ 
dem  Hand, 

“  Stimulus  Bonaventurse,  ut  in  fine  libri,  nifi  fit 
Stimulus  Amoris  Anfelmi,  de  quo  Meminit  Balaeus,  for- 
fan  Anfelmo  falfo  tributus.” 

But  the  Colophon  is  diftindb  “  Explicit  tradlatus 
qui  intitulatur  Stimulus,  fecundum  dom  bonaventurum,'’ 
See. 

It  contains  134  leaves. 

2416. 

A  brief  Information  concerning  the  affairs  of  the  Palati¬ 
nate,  when  K-  Frederic  accepted  the  Crown  of  Bohe- 
*7  hernia. 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


Num.  2417—2427. 

hernia.  Neatly  written  on  46  Leaves  of  Paper.  In 
pencil  on  the  firft  leaf  is  marked,  “  Given  by  Coll. 
Worfeley.”  xvii; 


24I7i 

Sermons  on  various  Subjects.  Some  leaves  wanting,  in 
the  beginning.  On  the  firft  now  remaining,  “  De 
Oratione  Dominica.”  “  Sermo  bonus  ad  parochianos.” 
The  Sermons  are  in  Englilh.  On  Vellum.  See 
N°  2420. 

2418. 

Sermoncs  varii  de  candore  fandlitatis,  et  de  fponfa  Chrifti ; 

ccx'tpaXot  xzi  aUfaroi.  XVT. 

Septem  priores  diverfit  manu  fcripti.  Codex  mem- 
branaceus. 

2419. 

In  Dutch,  neatly  written  on  Vellum,  the  Poems  of  John 
Baptifta  Houwaert,  dedicated  to  Alexander  Prince  of 
Parma.  The  Title,  or  rather  Infcription,  is  this  : 

“  Den  hoogh-gheboren  Doorluchtigen  Ende  vic- 
torieufe  Alexar  Prince  van  Parma  etc.  Kidder  vander 
Oorden  van  Guide  vliefe,  Stad-houder,  Gouuerneur  eh 
Capiteyn  general  van  de  nederlanden,  Jehan  Baptifta 
Houwaert.” 

2420. 

Sermons  for  feveral  Sundays  &  Feftivals,  on  Vellum. 
This  Book  is  evidently  the  former  part  of  N°  2417. 

xv. 

2421. 

Torq.  Sever.  Boetius  :  his  5  Books  of  the  comfort  of 
Philofophy.  Tranflated  into  Engilh.  On  vellum, 
152  Leaves.  xv. 

2422. 

Nigelli  Wireker  Speculum  Stuhorum.  Carmine  Latino 
Elegiaco.  xm. 

Argumentum  hoc  manu  recentiore,  fed  veteri,  prje- 
ponitur.  “  Nigelli  Wireken  Speculum  Stultorum :  ut 
omnes  forte  fua  contenti  fmt,  monachi  praefertim.  Dein 
in  improbos  monachos,  Pontifices,  paftores,  invehitur.” 

Codex  membranaceus,  folia  habens  8  1 .  Deefle  vi- 
detur  nonnihil  in  fine. 

24.23. 

Vincentii  Burgundi,  Praefulis  Belluacenfis,  Tradlatus 
confolatorius,  de  morte  amici,  ad  Ludovicum  Regem 
Francorum.  Codex  membranaceo  papyraceus,  folia 
habens  38.  xv. 

2424. 

Didtionarium  geographicum,  hiftoricum,  claflicum  :  in 
quo  Audtores  laudantur  ;  juxta  formam  Didtionarii 
N.  Lloydii.  Liber  chartaceus.  xvn. 

2425. 

**  Francifci  Mataratii  Perufini,  Oratio  fuper  Coenotaphi- 
um  clariflimi  theologi  Leonardi  Perufini,  Magiftri  ge- 
neralis  facri  ordinis  Dominicorum.”  Codex  membra¬ 
naceus,  in  8vo. 

2426. 

Poemata  facra,  literis  quadratis,  ad  imitationem  typogra¬ 
phy,  eleganter  fcripta,  in  charta.  Praefigitur  tabula 
Crudfixionis,  fumma  arte  exculpta,  aTheodoro  Galle, 
cum  hoc  Difticho  : 

“  Fixus  Adam  novus  eft,  vetus  ut  fit  liber  Adamus 
Hinc  novus  ut  fixo  liber  eat  vetere.” 

Folia  habet  35.  Liber  olim  Hundred.  Wanley. 

2427. 

Pfalterium  Hebraicum,  Graecum,  Latinum  &  Anglicum. 
Item  Proverbia  Solomonis.  Liber  chartaceus,  Pagg.  ha- 


<091 


Num.  2427 — 2436. 

bens^id.  Secundum  indiculum  in  prima  pagina  fcrip- 
tum,  defunt  capita  viginti  priora  Proverbiorutn  ;  quai 
lcihcet,  a  pag.  314.  ufque  ad  377  fuerant  fcripta, 
qus  paginte  nunc  prorfus  abfunt.  Codex  charta- 
ceus-  xvi. 

2428. 

i.  A  compendious  way  of  Short-hand  writing,  with 
engraved  Tables,  &  the  following  Title;  “  An  explana¬ 
tion  of  the  inoft  exadl  and  compendious  way  of  Short 
Writing  ;  and  an  Example  given  by  way  of  Queftions, 
and  refolves  upon  each  fignificant  Point,  proving  how 
&  why  it  Hands  for  fuch  &fuch  a  Letter  in  order  alpha¬ 
betically  placed  in  every  page.” 

.  -•  The  Marquis  of  Worcefter’s  Century  of  Inventions, 
with  an  unpublilhed  Conclufion,  which  makes  it  proba¬ 
ble  that  the  former  part  of  the  Book  was  his  alfo.  Dated 
from  Aug.  29  to  Sept.  21,1 639.  An  oblong  Folio  open¬ 
ing  at  the  Ihort  end.  XVIi; 

2429. 

Vocabularium  Germanico-curlandicum.  Vel  “  Lellipfes 
Worter-Buchlein.”  xvi. 

2430. 

A  Book  of  Prayers  in  old  German,  48  Leaves,  xvi. 


243  r. 

Liturgia  ecclefia  Roman®  :  cum  Calendario,  et  notig 
Muficis.  Codex  membranaceus.  xv. 

2432. 

1.  Adami  &  Evae  vitae.  “  Fadtum  eft  cum  expulfi.” 

xv. 

2.  Qualiterfadtus  eft  homo  ad  imaginem  Dei,  fecun- 

dum  Auguftinum.  12_ 

i-  Riehardi  Horton  Tradlatus,  de  fpirituali  milite. 

13.'. 

4.  Poema;  incipiens, 

“  Peniteat  cito  pcccator  cum  fit  miferator.”  28. 

5.  Confeffio  peccatoris  :  per  Ric.  Horton.  31.17. 

6.  S.  Bernardi  liber,  de  diligendo  Deo.  44.  b. 

7-  Hugonis  de  S.  Vidtorc,  de  operibus  6  dicrum, 

liber.  ^ 

8.  Rhetorica.  “  Tria  funt  circa  que.”  141. 

9.  Colledianea  ex  didlis  orthodoxorum.  £C  Ilunc  mo¬ 
dicum  operis  noftri  libellum  de  multorum  didlis.”  232. 

Liber  membranaceus. 


2433* 

f  In  Ottavo — 2437] 

Liturgia  latina  :  cum  Calendario  &  titulis  precum  in  lin¬ 
gua  Belgica.  Codex  membranaceus,  eleganter  illu- 
minatus.  Xv 


2434. 

On  Vellum,  a  Dutch  Liturgy,  illuminated,  xv. 

2435- 

Sermones,  five  diftindliones  fuper  varia  vocabula  :  foil. 
Vir,  filius,  diledtio,  juftus,  fandlus,  &c.  Codex  mem¬ 
branaceus,  folia  habens  1 5 1 .  Xv. 

2436. 

Codex  membranaceus,  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Folia  16,  imperfedta,  partim  membranacea,  par- 
tim  chartacea,  continentia  fragmentum  Sermonis  de 
Epifcopo  quodam,  et  alia. 

2.  Sermones  de  Sandlis.  Foliis  membranaceis  169. 

Audtorem  Francogallum  fuifle  autumat  vir  quidam  doc- 
tus,  in  folio  ultimo  ;  feu  potius  Anglum,  quia  habentur 
enarrationes  de  ScoThoma  Cantuarienfi.  xiv. 

Theodore 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


6  9z 


Num.  2437 — 2445. 

24-37* 

Theodore  Beza’s  Paraphrafe  on  the  Pfalter3  tranfiated 
into  Low  Dutch.  On  Paper.  xvii. 

2438- 

[Duodecimo.'] 

Pfalrerium,  cum  Calendario.  .xm* 

Codex  meinbranaceus,  deauratus,  et  illummatus. 

2439- 

,  Libellus  de  emendatione  vite :  five,  de  regula 

•‘vendi  XIV' 

U'a”  Liber  de  giadibus  virtutum,  a  S  Auguftino  ordi- 

natus.  .  •  •  r 

„  Monita  Yfodori,  de  confideratione  tui  lplius.  43/ 

4!  Narratiunculae  de  -alomone;  ex  Auguftino,  Hie- 
ronymo,  ScJudaeis.  Manu  multo  feriore.  5°- 

Codex  meinbranaceus,  folia  habens  50. 

2440. 

Epitome  religionis  et  difciplina:  Chriftianae^  5  libris. 

*  “  Ne  quis  per  ignoranciam  fe  excufet.  xv. 

Codex  meinbranaceus,  folia  habens  155* 

2441. 

On  Vellum  ;  a  Book  of  Devotions  in  Dutch  ;  with  illu¬ 
minations,  which  have  been  good,  b.:t  are  much  ob¬ 
literated.  Fol.  27.  is  a  coloured  Print.  In  all  130 
.  XVI. 

leaves. 

2442- 

Codex  meinbranaceus,  continens  Biblia  Latina,  aDeu- 
teronomio,  fere  ad  finem  Epiftolarum  in  Novo  Tefta- 
mento.  Literis  Gothicis.  XIV* 

2443. 

Manuale  devotionis,  imperfedum  initio  &  fine.  _  Liber 
membranaceus,  cum  literis  deauratis  et  pictis. 

2444* 

A  Book  of  Devotion  in  Dutch,  with  fome  Mufic.  On 
Vellum. 

2445* 

Codex  membranaceus,  initio  mutilus,  continens  preces 
varias  Latinas. 

,  Oratio,  quam  qui  devote  dixerit,  7  annos  indul¬ 
gence  &  4  karemias  confequetur  :  Et  hoc  confirmatum 
eft  a  papa  Bonifacio,  f.  5-  k-  _.  ..  r 

2.  Domimis  papa  Joh  conceffit  omnibus  fequen- 
tem  orationem  dicentibus  300  dies  mdulgenne.  7. 

3.  Altera  oratio  ;  cui  3  anrn  mdulgetflle  concedun- 

tur.  Ab  Innocentio  papa.  .  8*  b’ 

4.  Altera;  cui  7,  et  altera,  cui  iooanm  concedun- 

tur.  Ab  Innocentio  papa.  .  .  .  ,9" 

j.  Salutatio  Jefu  Chrilli ;  ab  ipfo  (ut  dicitur)  oudam 

rlenco  didata.  ... 

6  Oratio  quam  dicentibus  duo  nulla  annorum  con- 
ceduntur  per  papam  Bonifacium,  ad  fnppltcationemPhi- 

PVe$rado“T'aUae  ad  Chriltum  plures,  metric*. 
'  13.  b. 

8  Oratio,  quam  compofuit  Ric.  de  Hampul.  20.  b. 

'  mures  Orationes  ad  Chriftum,  beatam  virginem, 

t  fandos.  .  .  c  2,4’  94' 

I3.  Oratio  de  S.  Maria,  quam  compofuit  b.  Bemar- 

dai'l  Prayers  in  Englilh.  81,  135-140.  Among  them 
prayers  for  variousDiforders.  Written  m  different  Hands. 
140  leaves. 


Num.  2446 — 2453. 

2446. 

Breviarium,  Latinum.  Codex  membranaceus.  xv. 

2447. 

Horae  B.  Mariae :  imperfedze ;  cum  Calendario.  xv. 

In  membrana,  cum  illuminationibus. 

2448. 

1.  Calendarium. 

2.  Officium  S.  M arize  Virginis. 

3.  Officium  mortuovum. 

4.  Officium  Sacratiffimze  Paffionis  Domini  noftri  Jefu 
Chrifti. 

5.  Officium  fanda:  crucis. 

6.  Septem  pfahni  penitentiales. 

7.  Canticum  graduum. 

Codex  meinbranaceus,  cum  piduris  non  melegan- 

tibus. 

2449. 

Orationes  in  vigiliis  Sandorum  :  cum  Calendario.  xiv. 
Codex  membranaceus,  eximie  pidus. 

2450. 

[ Quarto .  2450 — 24 71-] 

Breviarium:  cum  Calendario,  Ledionibus,  Pfalmis,  &c. 
Codex  membranaceus.  ExBiblioth.  Nic.  Jos.l'oucault. 

XVI. 

2451. 

Codex  chartaceus,  elegans. 

«  Nonii  Marcelli  Peripatetic!  Tiburcienfis,  Com- 
pendiofse  Dodrinze  cundorum  vocabulorum  colledorum 
per  Literas,  ad  filium.  Liber.”  Cum  gloffis  margina- 
libus.  Codex  folia  habet  271.  XIV* 

2452- 

Codex  membranaceus,  ex  diverforum  Codicum  frag¬ 
ments  conflatus. 

1.  Gulielmi  Gemeticenfis,  de  epiftolaribus  modis  trac- 
tatus.  f.  1 .  .  .  x“r* 

a.  Fragmentum  Grammatici  cujufdam,  De  calibus 
Participiorum;”  “  De  temporibus  Participiorum  “De 
figuris  pronominum.”  _  ®- 

3.  Fragmentum  multo  majus,  incipiens  “  Pronomen 

eft  pars  orationis  qua  pro  nomine  proprio  unicuique  ac- 
cipitur.’’  .  Ic?* 

4.  Aliud,  incipiens,  “  Adivum  m-rus,  paffivum  In¬ 
dus.”  f.  27.  Eft  vero  commentarium  vetus  in  Donati 
•Grammatica  primze  et  fecundze  Editionis.  Commenta- 
lium  in  fccundam  Editionem  incipit  ad  fol.  29,  et  im- 
perfedum  relinquitur.  Codex  folia  habet  36. 

2453- 

Codex  chartaceus,  Scripta  Anno  1433.  Confine  t  Tra- 
gedias  ^enecze,  cum  mulcisnotis,  et  gloffis  interlinean- 
bus:  Scilicet, 

1.  Herculem  Furentem.  T- 

2.  Thyeften.  22.  b 

3.  Thebaida.  41.  b 

4.  Hippolytum. 

5.  CEdipum. 

6.  Troada. 

7.  Medeam. 

8.  Agamemnona. 

9.  Odaviam. 

10.  Herculum  Oetzeum. 


54 

79 

99 

I20.b 

139 
>57 
175.  b 


Subiiciuntur,  f.  1 1 1 ,  Not*  five  argumenta  in  va- 
i--  !•  r.i  ...  V.IAnl,  rlprtirarnria.  nnflp  fub- 


rias  Tragcedias;  et  fol.  1 1  2,  Epiftola  dedicatoria,  quae 
feribitur,  “  Edita  a  magiftro  phirzo.” 

Codex  folia  feripta  habet  1 12. 


Codex 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


#93 


Num.  2454—2457. 

2454. 

Ccdex  chartaceus,  continens  commentaries  ve  teres  in 
Plauti  comcedias  o&o.  Scilicet,  xv. 

1.  Amphitryonem,  1. 

2.  Afinariam,  23. 

3.  CaptivoS,  33. 

4.  Aululariam,  42.  b. 

5.  Cafinam,  153. 

6.  Ciftcllariam,  £>3. 

7.  Epidicum,  68. 

8.  Curculionem.  75.  b. 

Subfcriptio  Libri  his  verbis  concipitur, 

“  Librum  hunc  Canonicis  regularibus  Later.men- 
fibus,  in  monafterio  diui  Joannis  baplilte  de  Viridaria 
Padue  agentibus,  vir  uenerabilis  ac  deuotus  Chrifti  facer- 
dos,  < U  bonarum  artium  cultor,  Grece,  Latine,  Hebraice, 
cque  peritiflmms,  D.  Petrus  Montagnana,  optima  fide, 
pietatis  fludio,  proq;  falute  adferipfit  atq ;  donavit : 
quern  quifq  ;  legens  proficiat  primum,  dcinde  fit  gratus. 
1478."  Codex  folia  habet  85.  xv. 

Scholiaftqs  in  initio  Commentarii  in  Caplivos,  &  in 
A'-J',  iiitryone  Dominuni  Guarinum  nominat,  unde  astas 
cjus  conjici  pofiet. 


i- 

245;. 

Codex  chartaceus,  in  quo  habentur, 
Vita  Terentii  a  Donato. 

2. 

Andria,  cum  paucis  Scholiis. 

1. 

3- 

l’.unuchus. 

16. 

4- 

Heautontimoroumenos, 

32.  b. 

$• 

Adelphi, 

48. 

u. 

Heeyra. 

6r. 

7- 

Phormio. 

73* 

a. 

Hexametri,  incipientes  ; 

‘  Dumque  dolet,  fummo  veftem  deduxit  ab  ore 
Nudaque  marmoreis  percufiit  pe<5lora  palmis.”  89. 
9.  Alii,  incipientes. 

*£  Quam  taftus,  qqam  pompa  levis,  quam  gloria 
mundi 

Sit  brevis  et  fragiiis,  humana  potentia  quid  fit, 
Collige  ab  exemplo.”  90.  b. 

*o.  Epigromma,  incipiens, 

M  Qui  vici  innumeros  populos,  tot  regna,  tot  urbes 
Solus,  et  immenfi  quitimor  orbiseram.” 
Subfcribitur,  “Epigrammamagni teurci (fic) 9 1 , 
1 1 .  Fragmentum  incipiens, 

*-■  Ut  lea  feva  fitim  multa  compefcuit  unda.” 

93.  et  uliimum. 

2456. 

Codex  part-'m  chartaceus  partim  membranaceus,  in  quo 

k.  ibuntur  Tercntii  Comccdim,  fine  verfuum  difiinc- 

tione.  Scilicet,  Audi ia,  f.  1 .  Eunuchus,  f.  26.1-Ieauton- 
timoroumenos,  f.53.  Adelphi,  f.  79.  Hecyra,  f.  103.  b. 
Piiormio,  f.  126.  b.  xiv. 

Folium  oQavummutilum  eft  ;  fol.  1 19.  b.  et  120.3. 
vacua  funt. 

34-57* 

Codex  membranaceus,  in  quo  habentur  partes  varite 
operum  Yirgilii.  Scilicet,  xv. 

l.  ASneia  a  libro  V.  ver.  1 55. 

ti  Centaurulq.  locum  tendunt  fuperarepriorem,” 
yfque,  ad  Jib.  XII.  ver.  915. 

“  Vertunlur  varii.  Rutulos  afpeftat  et  urbem.” 

2.  Bucolica,  f,  68.  ab  Ecloga  1.  ver.  16. 

“  Sxpe  malum  hoc  nobis,  fi  mens  non  la?va  fuiftet,” 
Ad  finem. 

3.  Georgica,  f.  79.  a  libro  I.  ver.  117. 

«  Unde  cava;  tepido  fudant  humore  lacun  te’ 

Ad  librum  IV.  ver.  525. 

*•  Volveret  Euridicen.” 

Pa  film  autem  occurrunt  hiatus  magni,  et  folia  non- 
jmlla,  ( ut  32  et  33)  mifere  mutila. 

Codex  folia  habet  99,  five  integra,  five  lacera. 

Cat.  Harl,  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2458 — 2462, 

2458. 

Codex  partim  chartaceus  partim  membranaceus,  in  qud 
krvauir  Commentarius  in  totam  Lucani  Pharfaliam. 
Incipit  i 

“  Dignum  putas,  ut  antiquorum  dodus  laboribus  ” 

xv. 

Scriptus  eft  Codex  a  Goro  de  Aretio,  A0 1466  : 
qui  htec  habet  in  principio  : 

“  Difcere  ne  cedes  :  cura  fapientia  crefcit. 

Sepe  datur  longo  prudentia  temporis  ufu. 

Commoda  multa  feres :  fin  autem  fpreveris  illud, 
Non  me  feriptorem,  fed  te  neglexeris  ipfe." 

Ad  finem  feriptum  eft  hoc  Epigramma  femibarbarum. 
“  Ponimus  hie  metam,  ne  vituperate  poetani 
Si  finem  pofuit  hie  ubi  non  decuit. 

Qui  quia  Neronem  monftraverat  efie  lenonem 
Ulius  gladium  fenfit  ad  exitium.” 

Codex  folia  habet  186,  et  non  ineleganter  feriptus 
eft,  una  nianu. 

2459. 

C.  Julii  Ctefaris,  Commentariorum  Belli  Gallic!  Libri  7: 

Ab  exemplari  Gafparis  Garimberthi  tranferipti. 

Folia  no.  Codex  chartaceus,  elegans.  xv, 

2460. 

Codex  chartaceus,  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Cyroptedia,  cum  hoc  titulo: 

"  Ciripedia  Xenpphontis,  a  Poggio,  five  fquod 
maximo  credo)  a  Francifco  Philelpho,  e  Greco  in  Lati- 
num  traduda.”  Similibus  fere  verbis  in  rubrica  deferi- 
bitur. 

2.  Xenophontis  Tyrannus.  h.  3 

3.  Ifocratis  Oratio  de  regno,  ad  Nicoclem.  h.  1 2 

4.  C.  Crifp.  Saluftii,  Confpirationis  Catilinarias  hif, 

toria.  j,  7. 

5.  Bellum  Jugurthinum.  k.  12. 

Liber  fuir  Bibliothecae  S.  Martini  Lovanienfis. 
Subfcriptio  hai-c  in  fine  libri  legitur.  “  Cum  in 

falluftio  reftituendo  laborarem,  ufus  fum  hoc  manu- 
feripto  libro  quem  mihi  commodavit  *  *  *  *  (deeft  no. 
men)  turn  humanus  turn  religiofus.” 

“  Cyprianus  a  popm«  phryfius.” 

Liber  in  plagulas  foliorum  duodecim  divifus  eft,  et 
procedit  ufque  adNuni  8. 

2461. 

L.  An.  Senecae  Tragoediae,  decern,  fcilicet, 

1.  Hercules  Furens.  c.  Thyeftes.  3.  Thebais.  4. 
Hippolytus.  5.  Jocafta,  five  CEdipus-  6.  l'roas.  7. 
Medea.  8-  Agamemnon.  9.  Odavia-  io-  Hercules  Oe« 
taeus,  cum  paucis  notulis.  xv. 

2-  - Vita  brevior-  213. 

3-  - Epiftolae  ad  S-  Paulum,  &  Pauli  ad 

eum  fpuriaz.  ibid. 

4.  - Pro  defundo.  2i6-b. 

5.  - Litera  tranfitus*  217. 

In  fine  Tragoediarum  fic  feribitur:  “Senece  Cordu- 

benfis  Tragediar .  liber  explicit  per  me  Niccolaum  Berti  de 
gentilucis  de  fco  geminiano,  Notarium  Florentin.  Scrip¬ 
tus  dum  eftem  cum  pott.  S.  Calfiani ;  inceptus  die  e;a 
menfis  decemb.  1416,  et  finitus  die  2  Febr.  didi  anni.” 

Codex  chartaceus,  folia  habeas  217,  in  calce  dextro 
foliorum  notata. 

2462. 

Codex  membranaceus  elegans,  in  quo  habentur, 

1 .  Argumenta  Latina  in  nonnullas  Demolthenes 
Orationes. 

2.  Leonardi  Aretini  Prtefatio  in  Orationes  Demof- 

thenis,  ad  NicolaumMedicem.  4- 

8  0  3.  Deroof*- 


694  Catalogus  Libroruiii  MSS. 


Num.  24.63 — 2468. 


3.  Demofthenis  Oratio  Olynthiaca  Primn,  Latine 


verfa. 

„ 

8. 

>3- 

2  b. 

7-  ~ 

_ 

- De  C.herlonnefo. 

29.  b. 

8.  iFfchinis  Oratio  in  Ctefiphontem,  cum  nomine 

Aretini  ad  finem  fubfcripto.  42. 

9.  Demofthenis,  Pro  Corona.  95- 

10.  Epiftola  iEfchinis  Atromiri.  150. 

11.  — - Philippi  ad  Senatum  Athenienfem.  152. 

12.  Oratio  incerta  incipiens,  tc  Semper  ejufdem  men¬ 
tis  fum,  O  cives.”  1 56. 

13.  Catilinae  Oratio  ad  conjuratos.  16 1  - 

14.  - F.pillola  ad  Q.  Catulum.  162. 

15.  C.Jul.  Caefaris  Oratio  ad  Senatum  habita. 

162.  b. 

16.  M.  Port.  Catonis  Oratio  ad  Senatum.  165- b. 

17.  Catilinje  Oiatio  ad  Milites.  168. 

18.  P.  Scipionis  Afr.  Epiftola  ad  Micipfam.  169. 

1 9.  Micipfae  verba  ad  Jugurtham  &  filios.  169.  b. 

20.  Adherbalis  Oratio  ad  Senatum  Romanum.  170.  b. 

21.  - —Epiftola  ad  eundem.  273. 

22.  C.  Memmii  Oratio  adpopulum  Rom.  173.  b. 

23.  C.  Marii  Oratio  ad  populum  Rom.  176. 

24.  Syllae  Oratio  ad  regem  Bocchutn.  179. 

24.  Bocchi  Oratio  ad  Syllam.  180. 

26.  Formulie  inferiptionum  Epiftolarum  ad  magnates 

miflarum.  18 1. 

Cudex  folia  habet  188. 

2463. 

Sure.  Papinii  Statii,  Thebaidos  libri  12,  cum  notis  exiguis 
marginalibus.  Codex  membranaceus.  xiv. 

2464. 

Grammatica-  Incipit :  “  Ut  ad  fapientiam  pergrammati- 
cam  venire  pofliinus.”  Codex  membranaceus.  xiv. 

2465. 

1.  M.  Tul.  Ciceronis,  d_e  natura  Deorum,  libri  3. 

xiv. 

2.  - Timaeus,  five  de  univerfo 

fragmentum,  ( Ed.  Erneft,  vol.  vii.  p.  1 105.)  Hie  appclla- 
tus  “  De  Mundi  Elfentia.”  Ern.  '1'.  1,  p.  203.  Folia  ex¬ 
terna,  membranacea,  inftrumentum  exhibentPadumfcrip- 
tum,  A.  D.  1418. 

Codex  membrana  et  papyro  compofitus  ;  et  ferip- 
tur&  valde  diverla  exaratus. 

2466 . 

1 .  M.  T.  Ciceronis  Epiftolarum  ad  Brutum  liber. 

2.  - ad  O.  fratrem,  libri  3. 

3.  - - - ad  Odavium  Epift. 

4.  - ad  T.  Pomp.Atticum, 

libri.  16.  Codex  inembraceus  elegans,  fic  fuperferiptus, 
“  Coll.  Agen.  Socie.  Jcfu.  Catal.  Infcript.”  Infra,  feriore 
manu;  “  Jacobi  Raftael.  Corbinelli  liber  eft,  calamo  feli- 
citer  exaratus,  quern  a  Sebaftiano  Salvcftri  filio,  adole- 
feente  bono,  dono  recepif,  in  oppido  Florent.  Sextili 

.  Menfe  1558.’’  Folia  habet  257. 

2467. 


1 .  M.  T.  Ciceronis  Epiftolarum  ad  Q.  fratrem,  Epift. 

prima,  libri  primi,  i.  1 .  xv. 

2.  - - - ad  O&avium,  una.  9. 

3.  Liverfa  manu,  Somnium  Scipionis.  12. 

4.  A.  Macrobii  in  Sonin.  Scip.  Libri  2.  16.  b. 

2468. 


1.  M.  Tul.  Ciceronis  Tufculanarum  quseftionum 

libri  5  xv. 

2.  - -  Paradoxa  Stoicorum  fex.78. 

Scriptus  fuit  hie  Codex  incaftro  Mutine,  1422. 

Codex  eft  membranaceus,  elegans ;  folia  habens  85. 


Num.  2469 — 2475. 

2469. 

1.  M.  Tul.  Ciceronis,  de  amicilia  dialogus.  xv. 

2- - - — . .  Paradoxa.  n. 

3.  L.  An.  Senecae,  de  inftitutione  morum,  liber. 

15.  b. 

4.  M.  Tul.  Ciceronis,  Cato  major,  feu  de  fenechite' 

liber.  18. 

5- - Timasus,  feu,  de  univerfo, 

fragmentum.  26.  b. 

b- - -  de  Officiis,  libri  3.  31. 

7.  L.  Annan  Senecae,  de  dementia,  ad  Neronem. 

78. 

8.  L.  Ann.  Senecae,  de  vita  beata,  ad  Gallionem  fra¬ 
trem,  liber,  f.  76.  “  Liber  erat  fratrum  heremitarum  S- 
Auguftini  Lombardie,  S.  Marie  C.oronatae.” 

Codex  chartaceus,  foliorum  83.  Cum  multis 
notis,  et  fragmentis  exiguis  ad  finem. 


24.7O. 

M.  Tul.  Ciceronis,  Epiftolarum  ad  familiares,  libri  13. 
In  fine,  “  Sum  Cartufianorum  Papienfium.” 
Codex  chartaceus,  elegans.  xv. 

2471. 

1.  C.  Plinii  fee.  Veron.  de  viris  illuftribus,  liber. 

xiv. 

2.  Sexti  Rufi,  annumeratio  de  Romanorum  hiftoria, 
liber. 

3.  Lentuli  Epiftola  (fpuria)  ad  Senatum  Romanorum, 

de  forma  &  operibus  Jefu  Chrifti.  35.  b. 

4.  Auguftalis  liber,  fcil.  brevis  deferiptio  omnium  Au- 

guftorum,  a  primo  Caefnre  ufq;  ad  ultimum  :  Scriptus 
A0  1385.  ad  illuftrem  Nicolaum  Marchionein  Eften- 
fem.  4 , . 

5.  Catalogus  Regum  &  Imperatorum  in  orbe,  ufq; 
ad  Carolum  quartum. 

Codex  membranaceus,  folia  habens.  63. 

Liber  olim  erat  Thome  Wynterburn :  et  poftea 
Willielmi  Warham  Cant.  Archiepifcopi  1504,  ex  dono 
Roberti  Mcnevenlis  Epifcopi,  turn  Gulielmi  Cecill :  et 
poftea  1687,  Ambrofii  Bonvici.  Ad  fol.  15.  b.  k  alibi 
reliquiae  apparent  codicis  vetuftioris. 

2472. 

£Fa//o.  2472 — 2508.] 

Codex  membranaceus,  folia  habens  141.  Continet  Vir- 
gilii  iEneida,  cum  argumentis  metricis.  Locus  inci¬ 
piens  “  Jamque  adeo,"  &c-  feiiore  manu  fuppletus  eft, 
in  margine-  vide  fol.  19.  b-  <xv. 

2473- 

Codex  chartaceus  ;  in  quo  habentur  ; 

1  •  Genealogist  Deorum-  j  _ 

i'  Nomina  Ventorum-  4.  b- 

3-  Virgili i  jEneidos  Libri  12,  cum  multis  notis  in 
pritno  Libro,  et  introdu&ione  profaicii.  Locus  ille  in 
Libro  fccundo,  “  Jamque  adeo,”  &c.  in  textu  exftat. 
Folia  funt  177.  xv. 

2474. 

Codex  chartaceus,  elegans;  in  quo  Ieguntur  Statii  The" 
baidos  libri  12-  Folia  funt  164.  xv. 

2475- 

Cod  ex  chartaceus,  in  quo  leguntur.  xm. 

1 .  Pub-  Terentii  Afri  Vita,  initio  carens  :  et  Comcedice 

fex,  fine  verfuum  diftinOione  fcriptje-  1 . 

2.  Salluftii  Bellum  Catilinarium.  121. 

3.  - Jugurthinum.  150. 

4.  M.Tul. Ciceronis  Oratio  pro  M.  Marcello.  ig6.b. 

5.  - pro  Q.  Ligario.  202. 

6.  - - - pro  Rege  Deiotaro.2o8.b. 

1  7.  FI.  Ve- 


Bibliotheca;  Harieianas. 


C9S 


Num.  2475' — -2484. 

7.  FI.  Vegetii,  Inftitutorum  rei  militaris,  libri  4-  Serip- 
tus  eft  hie  Vegetjus  Parifiis,  a  Petro  de  Pafs,  A"  1297. 
Codex  folia  habet  262. 

2+76. 

M.  Acc.  Plauti  Comoediae  8,  Scil.  1.  Amphitrio,  f.  i- 

2.  Afinaria,  21. —  3.  Adularia,  37. — 4.  Captivi,  51. — 
5.  Curculio,  66.  b. — 6.  Cafma,  7S. — 7.  Ciftellaria, 
92. b. — 8-  EpidicuS,  100.  xiv. 

Codex  chartaceus.  Folia  no.  Subjiciuntur,  ad 
finem,  Verfus  Nigidii  de  Poctis  comicis. 

2477. 

M-  Ann.  Lucani,  de  bello  civili,  libri  10:  cum  Commen- 
tario  locupleti,  et  gloffis  multis,  xiv. 

Codex  membranaceus,  folia  habens  132.  Liber 
olim  Petri  Dupuy. 

Codex  omnino  executiendus  pro  nova  Lucani  Edi- 
tione  :  Iseculo  forfan  decimo  quarto  antiquior. 

2478. 

M.  Ann.  Lucani,  de  bello  civili,  libri  10.  xiv- 

Codex  prtecipue  chartaceus,  membrana  intermixta. 

2479. 

Zoni  Florentini  Expofitio  in  Lucanum,  de  bello  civili. 
Commentarius  plcniffimus,  et  ut  videtur  ineditus. 
Codex  elegans,  chartaceus,  folia  habens  306.  xv- 

2480. 

1.  C.Plinii  fee.  Oratio  panegyrica  Trajano  dida.  xv. 

2.  Latini  Pacati  Drepani  Oratio  panegyrica  Theodofio 
dida. 

3  Mamert'mi  gratiarura  adio  de  cor.fulatu  fuo,  Ju- 
liano  Imperatore.  . 

4.  Nazarii  Panegyricus  Conflantino  didus. 

5.  Panegyrid  diverforum  feptem,  auctore  Mamertino. 
Liber  chartaceus: 

2481. 

L.  Ann.  Seneac  Tragoediae  Scriptae  A0  1401,  aNicolao 
quodam.  xv. 

Codex  chartaceus,  notulis  et  gloflis  interlinearibus 
fcatens.  Tetrafticon  in  fine  nomen  feriptoris,  et  anni 
nuinerum,  indicat. 

2482. 

Aliud  exemplar,  cum  notis  quibufdam.  Codex  chartaceo- 
memb.  elegans.  Ad  finem  “  Jo.  Lud.  Avilii  Codex 
olim  V.  C.  Dan.  Cajetani,  Pneceptoris  fui.” 

2483. 

L.  Ann.  Senecae  Tragoediae.  Cum  notis  nonnullis,  in 
"initio.  Codex  chartaceus,  Uteris  Gothicis  feriptus, 
principio  minutis,  poftea  grandioribus.  Liber  certe 
prioribus  antiquior :  forfan  fteculi  14.  xtv. 

2484* 

Ejufdem  Seneca;  Tragoediae.  Codex  membranaceus,.  ve- 
nerabilis,  at  mutilus,  cum  multis  notis.  Folia  priora 
igne,  ut  videtur,  plus  minus  exefa.  Tragoediae 
fie  appellantur,  1 .  Herculus  furens,  2. .  Thieftea,  3. 
Edipa,  4.  Ypolita,  5.  Tebais,  et  Thebais,  6.  Troas, 
7.  Medea,  8.  Agamemnonia,  9.  Odavia,  10.  Her¬ 
cules  Oetheus ;  cujus  ultimi  non  nifi  folia  priora  qua- 
tuor  fervantur. 

Codex  folia  habet  126,  numeris  antiquis  notata. 
Notx  per  totum  codicem  extenduntur,  quod  rarum.  A£tas 
forte  fasculum  13.  xm* 


Num.  2485 — 249I. 

2485. 

Aliud  exemplar:  cui  deed  primum  folium:  xv. 
In  fine  haec  habentur:  “Finis  Tragediarum  Luc>* 
Anei  Senece  Cordubenfis,  feriptarum  manu  propria 
“  mci  Jonannis  Gunthorp  de  Anglia,  tunc  ftudentis  po- 
etice  in  inclita  civitate  Ferrarie,  legente  tunc  eas 
“  Guarino  Veronenfi  oratore  preftantiflimo.  Completus 
“  eft  ifte  liber  tertio  nonas  Augufti,anno  Domini  1460; 
“  Pio  fecundo  Senenfi  pontificante.”  Cum  notis  paflim 
fparfis.  .  Codex  chartaceus. 

2486. 

1.  Aliud  exemplar:  cui  deflint  4  prima  folia.  Infe- 

runtur  note  paucae.  Codex  chartaceus.  xv. 

2.  1  home  Came rtini  ad  Mathiam  Gramaticum  invi- 
tatio,  ad  mutuos  ufus  ineunde  caritatis,  Poema.  Sub- 
feribitur : 

“  Ex  Pcrufia  16  Kal.  Julias,  1428, 

Thomas  Seneca  tuus  die  ilagitans.” 

3.  Aliud  poema,  incipiens, 

“  Si  quis  ad  exceliam  mediis  remearet  ab  euris." 

2487. 

M.  Jun.  Juftini,  Epitome  hiftoriarum  Trogi  Pompeii. 
Liber  chartaceus,  manu  non  ineleganti  feriptus.  xv. 

2488. 

Codex  chartaceus,  medio  Saeculo  decimo  quinto  certe 
antiquior,  quoniam  emptus  per  Joh.Heck,  M.D.  Anno 
1441,  ut  ?d  finem  num'  1.  notatur.  Crederem  Scrip- 
turn  fi-eculo  14. 

1.  C.Valerii  Maximi,  fadorum  &  didorum  memora- 

bilum  colledanea,  9  libris.  xiv. 

2.  Definitiones  Magiftratuum  Romanorum,  et  alio- 
rum  vocabulorum. 

3.  De  Legibus  et  inftitutis  Romanorum  dilfertatiuncula. 

4.  Verfus  Latini  Rhythmici,  et  prascepta  Platonica. 
Sequuntur  nonnulla,  ab  einptore  fupra  nominato,  ut  vi- 
delur,  feripta. 

5.  Signa  urinac.  “Urina  retinet  habitudinem.” 

6.  Bragmannorum  regis  epiftola  ad  Alexandrum  M. 
de  vit3  et  confuetudine  ipforum. 

7.  Aliae  de  Alexandra  fabulae. 

2489. 

1.  Pub. Ovid ii  Nafonis  Metamorphofeun  libri  15:  cum 
Commentario,  locuplete  primo,  poftea  breviore. 

2.  - - - Faftorum  libri  6 :  cum  notis  et 

calendario.  205. 

Ad  finem  Metamorphofewy  fic  feribitur  : 

“  Bis  fex  millenos  verfus  in  codicc  feriptos, 

Sed  ter  quinq;  minus  continet  Ovidius. 

Sis,  ledor,  certus  quod  dextera  Bartholomew 
Fufci  me  fcripfit;  prefbiter  ifq;  fuit.” 

Codex  elegans,  chartaceus,  folia  habens  2S8. 
Plaguhe  fcilicet  duodenarise  24. 

2490. 

M.Tul.  Ciceronis,  Tufculanarum  difpuiationum  libri  5. 

Codex  chartaceus.  xiv. 

2491. 

Codex  membranaceus,  elegantiftimus ;  in  quo  haben¬ 
tur  Libri  multi  Epiftolarum  Ciceroni*.  Scilicet, 

1.  Liber  ad  Brutum,  fingularis;  perperam  in  Codice 
didus  fecundus. 

2.  - ad  O.  Fratrem,  liber  primus.  13.  b.  Per¬ 

peram  tertius,  in  Cod.  Secundus.  25.  b.  Tertius.  33. 

3.  - adOdavianum,  Epiftola  fingularis.  41. 

4.  - ad  Atticum  Libri  iG.  42.  b. 

Voces  et  Sententite  Grtecm,  quod  rariufculum,  ru- 

brica  clariffime  inferuntur.  Folia  214.  xy. 

Liber 


Catalogus  Libroruitt  MSS, 


69f> 


Num.  2192 — -495- 
24.92. 

Liber  chartaceus,  in  quo  habentur: 

1,  M.  'l'ul.  Cifceronis,  De  lnventione  rhctorica,  li¬ 
bri  2.  xv- 

1.  - - - Rhetoricofum  ad  Heren- 

niura,  lib.  4.  57* 

3.  Aeueae  Sylvii  Pii  Epiftola  de  fitu  Tabor,  &  de 

communione  fub  utraqj  fpecie.  11  2  • 

4.  - Verba,  in  occurfu  capitis  B. 

Andrce  liabita  die  xn  Aprilis  1462.  121. 

5.  - Epiftolie&Orationes.  12  i.b. 

(>. - de  Curialium  miferiis,  Trac- 

tatus.  178.  b. 

7.  .Cafparini  Pergamenfis  Epiftolarum  libellus.  In  fine 

Regiftrum.  1 89. 

8.  - - Exordia  circa  Rhetoricam 

Ciceronis.  Einiunt  vm  Kal.  Sept.  A"  1469. 

9.  Difceptaiio,  an  toleranda  aut  pulfanda  fit  pauper- 

tas.  Cum  notulis  quibufdam  marginalibus.  137. 

1  c.  Maphei  Vegij  Laudenfis,  de  felicitate  et  mileria, 
dialogus.  142.  b. 

1 1 .  De  rationibus  contrahendi  vel  dilferendi  matri¬ 
monii,  dialogus.  153. 

12.  Poggii  et  aliorum  Epiftolae  160.  etiam  207,  &c. 

13.  Mariiiii  Patavini,  de  tranllatione  imperii  traclatus. 

19c. 

14.  Grifeldis,  paticntiftimte  mulieris,  Hiftoria  ;  edita  a 

Fr.  Petrarcha.  196.fi. 

1  5.  De  ruina  Conftantinopoleos,  Traftatus.  “  Cupis  a 

me.”  201.  b. 

16.  Oratio  per  Oratores  regis  Arragonite  expofita 

coratn  Eugenio  papa,  A.  D.  1438.  .  2n. 

1 7.  Oratio  Leon.  Aretini,  in  laudem  Urbis  FlotenfiEe. 

2I2.  b. 

18.  Petri  Luder,  Oratio  Erfordie  recitata.  226.  b. 

19.  Iterum  Epiftola  vafirc.  231. 

20.  Plutarchi  de  Educatione  libevorum  traflatus,  k 

Guarino  Veronenfi  redditus  ;  cum  Epiftola  ejus,  ad  An- 
gelum  Corbinellum,  dcdicatoria.  243. 

21.  Poggii  de  Fortuna  libellus.  252.  b. 

22.  -  de  moribus  Indorum.  256.  b. 

23.  - -  Epiftolae  fol.  265.  eliam  Guarini,  et  alio¬ 

rum. 

2  4.  Bernhardi  Epiftola  ad  Raymundum  militem,  de 

regimine  familie.  302.  b. 

25.  Difputationes  nonnullae.  308.  b. 

26.  Gafper,  Oratio  pro  Funere  Jacobi  Foruvi  Perga- 

nenfis.  312.  b. 

27.  Colucii  Pierii  Declamationes.  314. 

28.  Avogarii  Vicentini  Declamationes.  31S. 

29.  Fr.  Petrarchce  Epiftola  ad  podagricum,  &  aliae, 

322. 

30.  Mafei  Vegii  Dialogus  inter  veritatem  et  philari- 

tein.  _  _  33®' 

Codex  folia  habet  feripta,  336. 

2493- 

d^i  Livii  Pat.  Iliftoriarum  ab  urbe  condita  quae  extant. 
Defunt  2  primi  libri  cum  dimidio  tertii :  et  in  fine 
pars  38  libri,  &  fequentes,  defiderantur.  xm. 

Codex  meinbranaceus,  magni  pretii,  literis  gothicis, 
jnitio  minoribus,  exaratus.  Olim  Collegii  Agcnenfts. 

2494. 

Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  Metamorphofeu,>  libri  13,  xv. 

Johannes  Schalck  de  Egmonda  feripfit  A.  D.  (4j6. 
In  libro  primo  notulte  qumdam  interlineares  adjiciuntur. 
Codex  chartaceus. 


2495- 

Auli  Gellii  Noftium  Atticarum  libri  20.  xv. 

Adjiciuntur  ad  ealeem  Capita  libri  Oflavi,  qui 
non  extat.  Codex  meinbranaceus,  elegans,  olim  Col¬ 
legii  Agtnenfis, 


Num.  2496 — 2505; 

2496. 

P.  Terentii  Afri  Comoediae.  xv. 

Cum  notulis  plurimis  marginalibus,  prcecipue  irl 
Andrian  etEunuchuin.  Cod.  Chart.  An.  1464  feriptus. 

2497. 

1.  C.Plinii  fee.  Epiftolarum  libri  8. 

2.  Fratris  Alberti  Sarceanenfis,  Ordinis  Minorum,  ad 

Poggium,  Laudatio.  Liber  chartaceus.  xv. 


Pap.  Sure.  Statii  Thebaidos  libri  12.  cum  gloflis  inter 
lineas.  Script!  A0  1462,  per  Jacobum  filium  Saraceni 
de  Sancto  Johanne,  cive  Vincentie.  xv. 

Codex  prtecipua  parte  meinbranaceus. 


2490. 

1.  C.Crifp.Saluftii,  Confpirationis  Catilinariae  hiftoria. 

2.  An.  Manl.  Torq.  Boetii,  de  confoiatione  Philofo* 
phiae  libri  5.  cum  praTatione  &  notis  marginalibus  in 
LL.  1.  2.  &  3, 

3.  Sapphus  poetriaeEpiflola  ad  Phaonem,  fubjeclis  ver- 
fibus  elegiacis3o  recentioribus. 

4.  S.  Thomte  de  Aquino,  fuper  libris  Boetii  de  con¬ 
foiatione  Philofophire  Commentum.  Codex  chartaceus. 

xv. 


25OO. 

1 .  Lucii  Florii,  rerum  Romanarum  libri  4.  Sine  ad  • 

ditamentis  P.  Diaceni.  j 

2.  Pauli  Orofii,  hiftoriarum  dc  hormeftJ  mundi,  adv. 

paganos  liber  feptim9.  2g. 

3.  Liber  hiftoriarum  cum  cronicis  &  catalogo  omnium 
regum  et  fummorum  pontificum,  58.  P  radix  a  tabull 
ad  5t. 

4.  Poggii  Florentini,  de  infelicitate  principum,  liber. 

1 20. 

5- - de  acerbitate  fortune,  liber. 

J33.  b. 

6.  Turpini  Rhemenfis  Archiep.  Tra&atus  de  bello 
Hifpanico,  a  Carolo  magno  confecto.  143, 

Liber  chartaceus,  folia  habens  16:.  xv. 


2501. 

Pub.  Virgilii  Maronis,  Aeneidos  libri  1 2  :  feripti  A* 
1466,  per  Gabrielem  Gnuardum  de  Afula.  Codex 
chartaceus,  cum  notis  in  initio.  Defunt  “  111c  ego,”  &c. 

xv. 


2  502. 

1.  Pub.  Virgilii  Maronis  Eclogae.  xv. 

2.  - Georgicorum  libri  4.  feripti 

per  Anton  de  Salvanezio,  1465. 

3.  - ; - - - Fiagmenta  ex  Aeneidos  libris 

prioribus,  item  ex  Pindari  (ui  dicitur)  Epitome  Iliados 
ad  fol.  evil  1.  interfperfis  frag  mentis  ex  aEneide  ufque 
ad  finem. 

Codex  chartaceus. 


2S°3- 

1.  Pub.  Virgilii  Maronis  Bucolica  cum  gloflisr.  .xvl. 

2.  - —  Georgicorum  lib.  4, 

3.  - - - Aeneidos  libri  12.  cum  expo- 

fitione.  Liber  chartaceus,  cumgloftis  interlinearibus  in- 
numeris. 


. 25°4- 

Valerii  Maximi  de  dictis  &  fadlis  Romanorum  libri  9. 
cum  Commentario  perpetuo, chara&ere  minore.  Codex 
chartaceus. 

25°5-_ 

x.  M.  lul.  Ciceronis,  Epiftolarum  ad  famiiiares 
libri  1 6.  xv. 

2.  Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  ut  dicitur,  de  Pulice  carmen. 

3.  Carmina  duo  Ducis  cujufdam  Mediolani.  Codex 
chartaceus. 


Codex 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


69; 


Num.  2506—2510* 

2506. 

Codex  membranaceus,  in  quo  habentUr,  x. 

1.  C.  Jul.  Hygini  ad  M.  labium  Poeticoh  Aftronomi- 
cum.  Pnumittuntur  et  fubjiciuntur  Anonymi  cujnfdam 
Verficuli. 

2.  Anonymi  Opufculum  Aftronomicum.  **  Studiofis 

Aftrologia?  primo  fciendum  eft,”  &c.  31.  b. 

3.  - de  duodecim  Zodiaci,  aliifque 

quibufdain  Signis.  "  ^  ^  1  ~ 

Trinitas,’’  &c. 


c  Domine  Deus  Omnipotens  Sanfta 


34. 

4.  Anonymi  Poema,  figna  Stellarum  defcribens,  cum 

Imaginibus,  et  enumeratione  ftellarum  in  unoquoque 
Signo.  Subjiciuntur  Carmina  de  planetis,  &c.  38. 

5.  Anonymi  Opufculum  cui  titulus,  de  Concordia 


folaris  Curfus  ct  Lunaris. 


5‘- 


68. 
70.  b. 
72. 
77- 
87.  b. 


6.  Macrobius  de  Menfura  et  Magnitudine  Terra?,  et 
Circuli  per  qUem  foils  iter  eft. 

7.  Idem  de  Menfura  et  Magnitudine  Solis.  53. 

8.  Capella,  de  Menfura  Lunae — de  Magnitudine 

terras — de  vn  Planetis  ;  earum  intervallis,  Apfidibus, 
Curfu.  Dimenlio  Coeleftium  Spatiorum.  54. 

9.  De  mundano  Anno,  Fragmentum  fc.  ex  Macrobio 

in  Somnium  Scipionis  Lib*  11.  Cap.  n.  56.  b. 

10.  Liber  prognofticorum,  ab  Arato  et  aliis.  57.  b. 

1 1 .  Tranfitus  horarum  Solis  et  Luna. 

12.  De  Solis  Eclipfi  et  Luna 

13.  Tabula  Solares  et  Lunares. 

14.  Mart,  Capella  Liber  vm.  de  Aftrologia. 

15.  Anonymi  Traftatus  de  Abaco. 

1 6.  Anonymi  Commentarius  in  M.  Capella  Lib.  de 

Aftrologia  ;  in  fine  mutilus.  Folia  funt  97.  89. 

2S°7- 

M.  Ann.  Lucani,  de  Bello  Civili,  libri  10.  xv. 

“  Hunc  librum  donavit  Johannes  Marchianova  M. 
D.  de  Venetiis,  Canonicis  regularibus  S.  Auguftini,  ita 
tamen  ut  fit  ad  ufum  Canonicorum  S.  Joannis  in  viri- 
dario  Pad.  A".  1467.”  Liber  elegans,  chartaceus. 

2508. 

1.  Nicol.  Sanutae  Oratio,  ut  mulieribus  ornamenta 

reftituantur.  xv. 

2.  Ifotae  Nogurolae  Oratio,  de  laudibus  literarum. 

3.  Georgii  Trapezuntii,  contra  Graecos,  de  procef- 
fione  Spiritus  Sancbi,  opufculum  :  Latine,  per  Cand. 
Bolanuin. 

4.  Candiani  Bolani  Tra&atus  fuper  canticum  B. 
Mariae. 

5.  F.utropii  Epitome  Romanae  hiftoriae. 

6.  M.  Vitruvii  Poll,  de  Archite£tura,  libri  10. 

7.  Lyfiae  Oraiiones  2.  Latine,  per  Fran.  Philelphum. 

8.  Homeri  Vita  :  in  Latinum  traduda  perPeregrinum 
Allium. 

9.  De  origine  urbis  Roma;  utile  compendium,  ad 
O&avianum  Cefarem,ad  inferos.  “  Cum  frequenter  me.” 

10.  Claud  Aeliani,  de  inftruendis  aciebus,  liber ;  ex 
tranflatione  Theodori  Graeci  Thelfalonicenfis. 

1 1.  Joannis  de  Columbinis  Vita;  per  Epifcopum Fer- 
rarienlem.  Codex  chartaceus. 

2509. 

[ Quarto .] 

M.  Tul.  Ciceronis,  Epiltolaruin  ad  familiares  lib.  16. 
Deeft  Epiltola  prima  et  pars  fecunda:  in  primo  l.ibro, 
et  folium  in  fecundo  ;  et  folium  in  initio  perperam  po- 
fituin  eft.  Codex  chartaceus.  xiv. 

2510. 

j .  M.  Tul.  Ciceronis  deinventionerhetorica,  libria.  x. 

2. - Rhetoricorum,  ad  Herennium, 

libri  4. 

In  hujus  Codicis  membranti,  alius  de  vita  Mauritii 
Liber  ohm  erat  exaratus ;  et  poftea  magna  ex  parte 
delctus,  ut  hie  inferiberetur. 

Car.  Haul.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2510—2523. 

3.  De  uni verfi),  liber.  “  Mundusigiturconftat.”  xiv. 

4.  Traflatiunculus  de  Scicntiis  occultis,  cui  initium, 
tc  Quidam  qui  volunt  hunc  libellum  effe  Artem.” 

5.  An.  Manl.  Tor.  Sev.  Boethii,  Arithmeficae  Liber. 
Codex  membranaceus,  diverfistemporibus  exaratus.  xm. 

25H. 

1.  M.  Tul.  Ciceronis,  de  natura  Deorum,  libri  3- 

xv. 

2- - de  divinatione,  libri  2.  quo¬ 

rum  fecundus  perperam  inferibitur  de  Fato. 

3* - — ■  Tiinaeus,  feu  de  univerfo. 

Codex  membranaceus  elegans.  Folia  168,  feorfim  ad 
fingulos  libros  numerantur. 

251  2. 

M.  Tul.  Ciceronis  Epiftolarum  ad  familiares,  libri  16. 

Codex  membranaceus.  xiv. 

25I3- 

Grammatica,  metrice:  cum  commentario :  ctU^tirJo;. 
“  Quoniam  ignorantie.'’  Cum  glollis  interlinearibus, 
et  commentario  in  margine.  Codex  memb.  maenr. 

parte  mutilus.  xin. 

2514. 

Grammiitrca.  tc  A  me  karifiimi  ex  arte  grammatica,” 
Codex  membranaceus.  xiv. 

25I5- 

1.  Grammatica.  “  Brevefit  quodcunq;  laboras.”  xnr. 

2.  Commentarius  in  incerti  cujufdam  Grammaticain 

etxjp.  x.  6t1«X. 

3.  Eberhardi  Gnecifmus,  verfibus  Latinis,  cum  com¬ 
mentario  :  incipiens, 

“  Eft  proprie  metha  trans  grece,  formatio  plafma.” 
Codex  membranaceus. 

2516. 

An.  Man.  Tor.  Sev.  Boethii,  de  Confolatione  Philofo- 
phiae,  libri  5.  Cum  glofiis  interlinearibus.  Liber  mem¬ 
branaceus.  xiv. 

Idem  Liber :  feriptus  a  Francifco  Felice.  Codex  mem¬ 
branaceus,  elegans.  xiv 

251  8. 

Aliud  exemplar.  Cod.  membranaceus.  xiv. 

2519. 

Aliud  exemplar :  cum  praefatione  &  Indice  locuplete. 

Codex  membranaceus.  xv. 

2  5  20. 

C.  C.rifp.  Salluftii  Confpiratio  Catilinaria,  etBellumJugur. 
thinum.  Defunt  duo  folia  in  fine,  et  unum  in  fine  Ca- 
tilinarii  Belli.  Codex  mixtus  charta  et  membrana.  xiv. 

252  J. 

Aliud  exemplar  :  Codex  membranaceus  xiv. 

2522. 

Marii  Philclphi,  Laurentias  carmen,  de  fatis  ortuque 
Laurentii  de  Medicis,  Libris  octo.  Ad  finem  argu- 
menta,  elegiaco  carmine,  propria  Philelphi  manu 
feripta.  Carmen  ipfum  alia  manu  ;  fed  ab  auiftore,  ut 
videtur,  caftigatum.  Subfcriptio  base  eft  “  Marius 
Phil,  manu  propria,  idibus Novembris  r  4°  7”  40.” 
Codex  membranaceus,  elegans,  amilfo  tantum  uno 
folio,  in  initio,  quod  illuminatum  fuerat.  xv. 

2523- 

Jannotii  Manetti,  dedignitateik  excellentiahomim’s,  libri  4. 
ad  Alphonfum  Aragonmn  regein  inferipti.  Codex 

membranaceus. 


I 


698 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Mum.  2524. — 2534. 

2524. 

Pub.  Terentii  Afri  Comoediae,  &  vita. 

Codex  membranaceus.  aciti. 

2525. 

P.  Terentii  Comcedia  fex,  cum  notis  inter  Jineas  et  in 
margine.  Pramittitur  Vita  Terentii,  et  fubjicitur  ad 
calcem,  “  Fr.  Petrarcha  Exaratio  quisTerentius  ifte 
fuerit.’’ 

Codex  olim  Collegii  Agenenfis,  membranaceus 
elegans,  folia  habens  97.  xiv. 

2526. 

Terentii  Comcedia.  Pramittitur  vita  alia  quam  qua  in 
Codd.  reperiri  folet.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus.  “  Exfcripfit  Paganus  Rau- 
denfis.  1456.” 

2527. 

Terentius,  fine  verfuum  diftin&ione.  Tranfcriptus  per 
Johannem  Danglefola.  A°.  1471-  xv. 

Ad  finem  verfus  barbari  in  Codd.  ufitati  ;  at  aliA 
ct  recentiore  manu.  Codex  membranaceus,  elegans. 

2528. 

1.  Valerii  Probi,  de  notis  antiquarum  iiterarum, 

liber.  .  .  *v\ 

2.  Fabii  Vi&oris,  de  14  urbis  regiombus  et  vetuftati- 
bus  opufculum.  Codex  membranaceus,  elegantiflimus. 

2529- 

Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  Amorum  libri  3.  cum  epiraphio 
ejufdem,  ex  libro  de  Triltibus,  Epigrammate  de  Thrace 
puero,  et  regulis  metri  Iambici.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2530. 

Liber  dictus,  “  Flores  Rhethorice,”  abrupte  definit,  et 
in  margine  fcriptu  m  eft,  “  Non  reperitur  amplius.”xv. 
Codex  chartaceus.  Abundat  Exemplis  metricis  et 
profaicis. 

2531; 

M.  An.  Lucani,  de  Bello  Civili,  libri  10.  xi\. 

Cum  gloflis  et  notulis  marginalibus.  Codex  mem¬ 
branaceus. 


Num.  2534 — 25+2. 

7.  Incerti  Auftoris,  “  Vir  erat  et  blando.”  127. 

8.  Moretum.  127.  b. 

9.  Incerti,  “  Quid  hoc  novi  eft.”  Forfan  “  Quid 
hoc  negoti  eft”  quod  inter  Priapeia  invenitur.  128.  b. 

10.  Culicis  pars  ;  fcilicet  verfus  93.  129. 

Librum  hunc  mifere  a  bibliopego  confufum  in 
ordinem  tandem  reftituimus.  Continet  folia  129. 


2535- 

Commentariiin  2  pofteriores  librosGrammaticaePrifciani, 
“  Cum  humana  fcientia  fit  corrupta.”  Codex  mem¬ 
branaceus,  contractiunibus  verborum  abundans.  xiv. 

2536-  ■ 


1 .  Ludovici  Laffere,  regalis  collegii  Navarre  proviforis, 

de  laudibus  philol'ophiae  oratio.  xvi. 

2.  _ de  anime  immortalitate  oratio. 

3.  _ delaudibus  theologonlm  Pari- 

fienfium.  t  ,  . 

, _ de  laudibus  juris  canomci,  ora- 


Inferuntur  hinc  inde  ejufdem Laffere  Epiftola  multa. 


ad  varios. 

Infcribuntur  ad  Vedaftum  Brioys,  S.  Martini 
Turonenfis  Uecanum,  A.  D.  1511 ;  cujus  infignia  genti- 
litia  pulchre  et  lscpe  depi&a  funt. 

Codex  membranaceus  elegans,  ornamentis  auri  et 
colorum  infignis. 

2537- 


[Offavo."] 

1.  Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  de  arte  amandi,  libri  3.  xiv. 

_ _ _  de  remedio  amoris,  libri  a. 

- - - -  amorum,  libri  3. 

Liber  chartaceus. 


2538. 

1.  Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis  Faftorum  libri  5.  priores.  Deeft 
primum  folium,  &  3  ultima. 

2.  _ inlbin.  liber. 

7  _ _ _ denuce,  libellus.  Codex  chartaceus. 

2539- 

C.  Crifpi  Salludii,  confpirationis  Catilinariae  hiftoria. 
Libellus  chartaceus  cumNo.  2543  compaftus.  xiv. 


253  2; 

M.  An.  Lucani,  libri  5  priores.  xiv. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2533- 

I.  Pub.  Virgilii  Maronis,  Bucolica.  ^  xm. 

2‘ _ Georgicorum  libri  4.  cum  notulis 

quibufdwn  et  figuris.  Collegii  Agen.  Codex  membranaceus. 

253+- 

Codex  membranaceus,  cum  mulcis  notis,  argunientis 
&c.  continens  opera  Virgilii.  In  Libro  fecundo  fEnei- 
dos  nulla  verfuum  “  Jamque  adeo,  &c.”  veftigium.  In 
primo  vero  folio  fcribuntur,  manu  ferione,  cum  hAc 
Epigraphe.  lfti  Verfus  fuerunt  abjati  per  Tuccam^  et 
Varronem,  de  fecundo  libro  ALneidos,  poft  ilium  V  er- 
fum,  “  Ad  terram  mifere,  &c.” 

Codex  magni  preti,  olim  Collegii  Agenenfis  Soc.  Jef. 

xm. 

1.  Bucolica. 

2.  Georgica. 

3.  JEneis. 

Poemata  minora  5  faucet. 

4.  Copa.  .  ,  _ 

5.  Incerti  Au&oris  vulgo  inter  Cata.etta, 

non,  cun&i,”  &c.  .  , 

6 _ _ _ “  Vir  bonus  et  fapiens. 


32- 

26.  b. 

■  Eft  et 


254O. 

1.  C.  Crifpi  Salluftii  Confpirationis  Catilinariae  hift. 

2i _ de  bello  Jugurthino,  liber,  xiv. 

Codex  chartaceus. 

2  541  • 

.  C  Crifpi  Salluftii  Confpirationis  Catilinariae  hift. 
*  '  r  xv. 

2  _ _ _ de  bello  Jugurthino,  liber. 

/  Artaxerxis  ad  Paetiun  Epiftola.  Pati  Refponfio. 
Artaxerxes  ad  Hyftanum,  aliorumque  Epiftola,  omnes 
de  Hippocrate. 

4.  F.  Petrarchae  Epiftola.  “  Scnpfifti  imhi,  quo  letius 

dC  f  Leonardi  Aretinl  epiftola  ad  Petrarchum.  “  Fervet 
animus.”  Scriptus  erat  Codex.  A".  1^9- 
Liber  chartaceus. 


2542. 

Liber  chartaceus,  in  quo  habentur, 

,  C.  Salluftii  Coni.  Calilinaiue  hift. 

Leon  Aretiui  Epiftola  ad  Petrarcham,  eadcm  qua: 
.(jf  c.  “  Fcrvet  Animus,”  &c. 

5.  M.T.  Ciceronis  Epiftola  quadam  famihares,  ex  5 
jribus  libris  fele&a. 

M.  T. 


Num.  2  5+3—2554- 


M.T;  Ciceronis  de  Officijs,  libri  3.  fed  maxima  pars  ultimi 
defideratur. 

Codex  chartaceus,  cum  num1'.  2539.  compatTus. 

2544- 

M-  1 .  Ciceronis  de  oflicijs,  lib.  3.  cum  notulis  ad  primum. 

Codex  chartaceus.  xv. 

2545. 

1.  M.  T. Ciceronis  oratio  pro  Marcello.  xv. 

2-  - - operum  ejus  catalogus.  12. 

3-  - - - oratio  pro  Sexto  Rofcio.  15. 

4-  - - pro  Pompeio.  70. 

Codex  chartaceus,  notulis  paftim  interlinearibus  et 

marginalibus  fcatens.  Scriptus,  ut  videtur  A°.  1400. 
(vid.  fol.  1 1.  b.) — Folia  fcripta  93. 

.  2546- 

M.  Tul.  Ciceronis,  Tufculanarum  difputationum  libri  5. 

Liber  chartaceus.  xv. 

Nomen  uifcriptum  “  Banci  deCafa  vechia.’’ 

5  547- 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  Tufcularum  difput.  lib  5.  xv. 

Codex  chartaceus. 

2548. 

1.  M.  T.  Ciceronis  Rhetoricorum,  ad  Herennium, 

libri  4.  .  xv. 

2.  Synonyma  Ciceronis,  ex  operibus  ejus  collecta,  et 
Florentine  per  Collucium  nefcio  quern  reperta.  Libro  ipfo 
certe  multo  antiquiora.  Vide  ad  No.  2561.  20. 

3.  Epitaphi'um  S.  Bernardi. 

Codex  chartaceus,  feriptus  A°.  1470. 

2  549* 

Guatini  Commentarius  in  Ciceronem,  de  Sene&ute,  de 
Paradoxis,  et  de  Amicitia.  Codex  chartaceus.  xv. 

2550. 

Sext.  Aur.  Propertii  Opera,  4  libri'S.  xv. 

Cum  notulis.  Cod.  chartaceus. 

255T- 

Codex  membranaceus,  cui  tiiulus  hie  fuperferiptus. 
“  Euftropii  flavii  Vegecii  Renati  illuftris  comitis  con- 
ftantinopolitan  valentino  augufto  confuli  epitomia  inlti- 
tutionum  rei  militaris  de  cotnmentariis  traiani  et 
adriani  fortuni  (fic)  augufti  incipit  liber.” 

Libri  funt  quatuor,  cum  fynopfi  capitulorum  uni- 
cuique  prrefixa.  Literal  inuiales  coloribus  et  auro  iijfig- 
fiita;.  Codex  pulcher. 

2552. 

Codex  Lucani,  feriptus  Anno  1444,  cum  multis  notulis, 
in  nonnullis  libris,  inter  lineas  et  in  margine.  Conftat 
membranaet  charta,  varie  intermixtis  ;  et  folia  habet 
fcripta  199,  in  margine  dextro  inferiore  notata.  Scriba 
notatn  temporis  his  Verficulis  fubjunxit,  cum  aliis. 

“  Mille  quater  centum,  cum  denis  quatuor,  anni, 
Bis  duo  fijungas  numerum  compleveris  apte. 

Ter  quinos  adjunge  dies  mentis  Februarj.” 

2553- 

Virgilii  Alneis,  cum  expofitione  locupleti  ad  9  priores 
libro',  et  notulis  per  o nines.  Ad  linem  Epitaphium, 

.  verfus  Octaviani,  et  lubfcriptio  feribte. 

Codex  chartaceus,  feriptus  1442,  forfan  eadem 
raanu  qua  Lucanus,  N  2552. 

2554- 

Tit.  Lucretij  Cari,  de  Rerum  Natura,  libri  6.  xvi. 

Liber  chartaceus  line  notis.  Signatus  nomine  et 
inlignibus  Baronis  Pandulphi  de  Ricafolis. 


2  5  5  5  • 

1.  D.  Jun.  Juvenalis  Satirae. 

2.  Auli.  Perfij  Flacci  Satirae. 

3.  Ovidii  Epiltola  Sapphus  adPhaonem. 

4.  Pub.  Virgilii  Mar.  Bucolica 

5-  - - - - - Georgicorum  libri 

paffim  ndjiciuntur. 

Codex  chartaceus,  folia  habeas  1491. 

2  5  56. 

Q.  Horatii  Flacci,  odarum  lib.  3.  et  Vita.  xv. 

Codex  chartaceus;  adjiciuntur  Cominentarii  in  odas 
multas. 

2557- 

i.  L.  Flori,  utdicuntur,  epitomse  in  fingulos  libros 
T.  Livij.  xv. 

3.  Alexii  Scintillarium  poeticum. 

4.  Grammatica  anonyma  incipiens,  “  Omni  te  fuinmae 
nobilitalis  fplendore.” 

Codex  membranaceus. 

*558. 

1 .  Names  of  Herbs,  Latin  &  Englilh.  1 . 

2*  A  Fragment  containing  chirurgical  Prefcriptions  in 
old  French  Verfe.  7> 

3.  De  curis  fa&is  per  Th.  Fayrefor  in  diverfis 
locis. 

4.  Catalogus  Morborum,  et  nomina  herbarum  qui- 

bus  fanantur.  2 

5.  labula  in  Praxin  medicinalem  &  chirurgicam 

Th.  Fayrefor  d.  I2. 

6.  De  Saporibus  et  gradibus.  12.  b. 

7.  Nomina  herbarum  Alphabetice,  et  de  earum 

virtutibus.  ^ 

8.  Modus  medendi  mri  Ponte  deSctoAegidio.  65. 

9.  Praxis  Thomas  Fayreford,  72.  b. 

10.  Egidii  Judicia  fuper  urinas.  . 

11.  De  fmgularum  iEgritudinum  figms  per  urinas. 

1 62. 

1 2.  De  Conceptione  et  formatione  Embryii.  167.  Chi- 
roman  the  Schema;  etOratiopro  dolore  renum.  167.  b. 

13.  Varia  de  urinis. 

14.  De  Morte  et  Vita.  17  vb. 

1 5.  Medical  Prefcriptions  in  old  Englilh.  '  174. 

16.  Receipts  in  old  French.  ,  ^ 

17.  Epiltola  (blafphematoria)  a  Deo  de  ccelo  tranf- 

milfa  de  obfervatione  diei  Dominici.  ,3-. 

18.  1  ractatus  de  Anatomia.  186. 

19.  Remedia  varia. 

20.  De  aquis  Phyficalibus.  iSq" 

21.  Prognoses  a  die  nativ.  Dom.  a  Luna  et  Somniis 
Petita. 

22.  Anftotel.s  Epiliola  ad  Regent  Alexandrum  de 
Sanitate  Yite  per  annum. 

23.  Preces  contra  febrem  &  dolorcm  dentium  t  gf 

24.  Macri  poems  de  Viribus  herbarum  ,  praanmitur 
tabula. 

25.  De  duodecim  Signis. 

20.  Petri  Hifpani  Regimen  falutis  per  omnes  Menfes. 

27.  Modus  conficiendi pillulas.  22c' b" 

28.  De  Viribus  lapidum  Poema.  ^26 

.  ,  ,0n  VfUr ;  ™n,ai"'"g  227  leaves  j  numbered 
rightly  on  the  lower  margin. 

2  5  59- 

An.  Man-Tor.  Boetij,  tleConfolationePhilofophis,  libri  e. 

cum  notis.  Cod.  memb.  Xin. 

256°. 

1.  Homeri  Iliados  Epitome,  Carmine  heroico,  turn 

notis.  Aut bore  quodam  Pindaro.  ’  xv 

2.  Pap.  Sure.  Statii,  AchiLeidos libri  3.  cum  notis.  24 

3.  Guarini  Veronen,  Hypothefla,  five  sdmbniiio 
compendioia  ad  filium. 

4-  S.  Hie- 


700 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2560,  2561. 

4.  S.  Hieronymi  laudes.  “  Poll  facinora  candidatorum 

martirum.”  57.  b. 

5.  Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  de  remedio  amoris,  liber. 

6.  Prifciani  Gram.  Periegefis,  i.  e.  defcriptio  orbis  ter- 

rarum  &  mans  fecundunx  Dionyfium.  74. 

Codex  chartaceus. 

2561. 

Codex  chartaceus,  in  quo  res  diverfiffima;  congregantur 
fcilicet,  xv. 

1.  “  Fabula  Philofophi  per  Alphabetum;”  nempe 
fententise  morales  ex  Ariflotele. 

2.  Biblia  Pauperum,  per  Alphabetum  ordinata  ;  in 

quibus  de  vitiis  et  virtutibus  agitur.  Cum  tabula  ad 
finem.  6. 

3.  Tradatus  varii,  fcil.  de  Superbia,  Avaritia,  In- 

vidia,  Ira,  Luxuria,  Accidia,  (fic)  et  de  peccati  quid- 
ditate.  45. 

4.  Laurentii  Vallenfis  Fabula;,  e  Gra:co.  60. 

5.  “  Quredam  noviter  ordinate  de  viciis  et  virtutibus." 

64. 

6.  Tradatus  varii,  fcil.  de  naturis  animalium,  de  ho- 

mine,  peccato,  &c.  67. 

7.  “  Originalia,  de  Beatx  Maria;  laudibus.”  75. 

8.  Epiftola;  multa;,  S.  Auguflini  et  aliorum.  87.  b. 

9.  Excerpta  de  operibus  S.  Auguftini.  117. 

1  o.  Orationes  nonnulla;,  See.  Leon.  Aretini,  et  aliorum. 

1 1.  Liber  nxoralis,  ex  audoribus  variis,  tarn  profanis 
quam  facris  excerptus,  in  capita  triginti  quinque  divifus, 
cum  indice  prefixo.  155. 

x 2.  Inter  Senecam  et  Paulum  Apoftolum  Epiftola; 
fpuiice,  cum  prologo  S.  Hieronymi.  168.  b. 

13.  Senecse  Confolatio  ad  Marciam.  1 70.  b. 

14.  J.  Mathei  de  Aretio,  ad  Petrarcham  Epiftola, 

utrum  fit  civisAretinus,  cum  refponfo.  171. 

15.  Bernardi  ad  Raymundum  Ep.  de  cura  rei  famili- 

aris.  172- 

16.  Hymnus  Italico  Sermone  de  annunciatione  B. 
Virginis  Maria;. 

“  Salutete  devotamente 
L’alta  virgine  beata.”  173.  b. 

17.  Ladantius,  Hieronymus,  &c.  de  laudibus  Cice- 

ronis.  175* 

18.  Definitio  Gratis  Dei,  cum  aliis  Theologicis  qua;f- 
lionibus,  et  Hymno  rhythinico  de  contemptu  Mundi. 

■  75.  b. 

19.  Liber  didus  ad  finem,  “  Sybillae  Erithree  liber,” 
at  initio  hoc  argumento,  fatis  barbaro,  deferiptus. 

“  Extrada  de  libro  qui  dicitur  uafylogi  id  eft,  iin- 
perialis  feriptura,  quern  Erithea  babillona  ad  pectitionem 
(petitionem)  gra;corum,  tempore  priami  (fic)  regis  edi- 
dit,  quern  de  ealdeo  fermone  dodo  pater  peritiflimus 
in  grfccumtranftulit.  Tandem  de  a;rario  emanuelis  impe- 
ratoris  edudurn  Eugenii  regis  ficilio  adiniratus  de  grreco 
tranftulit  in  Latinum.”  Inci]>it  autem  “  Exquiritis  a  me, 
o  illuftriffima  turba  danaumj”  et  notulas  multas  habet  in 
margine  et  inter  lineas.  177. 

20.  Sententixe  pia;.  290. 

21.  Synonyma  Ciceronis,  191.  vide  N".  2548.  2.  et 
infra  25. 

22.  Excerpta  ex  audoi'ibus  variis.  208.  b. 

23.  Epitaphia  Jodoci  et  Juliani  Romanorum.  210. 

24.  Ludovici  Carboni  Ferraricnfis  Oratio  habita  in 

funere  Guarini  Verinenfis.  21 1. 

25.  Fragmentuin  Synonymorum  Ciceronis.  v.  fup. 

N°.  21.  22i. 

26.  Oratio  de  Francifeo  Zambecaio,  et  Mariano  Fal- 

donenfi.  222. b. 

27.  Epiftola:  Mariani  Falchonis,  cum  verfibus  et  Epif- 

tolis  aliis,  ejufdem  temporis.  225. 

28.  Oratio  difertiflimi  Viri  Ant.  Campeni,  Epifcopi 

Theramani,  de  ortu  et  curfu  hominis.  229. 

29.  Oratio  funebris  in  ducein  quendam.  239. 


Num.  2561 — 2568. 

30.  Epiftola;  bina:,  1*.  “Ad  revocandam  Amicitiam,'' 
et  altera  “  de  vita  fervanda  in  agricultura;  ocio."  241 .  b. 

31.  Oratio  Funebris  Leon.  Aretini.  242. 

32.  Vaticinium  Sybillae.  “  Sybillae  genei'aliter  omnes 

femina;."  Ad  finem,  verfus  Latini.  244. 

33.  Carmen  Italicum  (fonnet)  Fauftini  Terdodii,  de 

Vita:  mortalium  miferia.  249.  b. 

34.  Johannis  Fornafini  ad  Raphaelem  aquilanum  Epifi 

tola,  de  laudibus  Scientia;,  See.  _  251. 

35.  Ad  Magiftrum  Francifcum  Civitellenfem  Epiftola 

anonymi.  ....  254- 

36.  Excerpta  ex  Plinii  Iiiftoria  Naturali  de  miferia 

hominis,  &c.  256.. 

37.  Excerpta  e  feptein  libris  Inftitutionum  Ladantii. 

257.  et  ad  finem. 

38.  Interpofitum  autem  eft,  (ad  fol.  295,  6.)  Car¬ 
men  Mathei  trifurnatis,  ad  Virginem.  Folia  omnino  299. 

2562. 

Pub.Tei-entij  Afri  Vita  &  Comcedia: ;  Andria,  Eunuchus, 
Heautontimoroumenos,  Hecyra,  Phormio,  Adelphi. 
Cum  notulis  paffim  fparfis,  atiine  verfuum  diftindione. 
Defunt  quEcdam  in  fine.  Codex  chartaceus.  xiv. 

2563- 

Codex  Terentii  chartaceus,  cum  piduris  in  primo  folio. 
Cum  verfuum  diftindione.  xv. 

2564. 

1.  Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  Faftorum  libri  6.  cum  Calen¬ 

dars.  Scriplit  Lucas  Stephani  de  Pifcia,  Not.  Rome, 
1468.  xv. 

2.  Ad  finem.  Carmen  de  Nativitate  Chrifti,  Idiomate 
Italico,  et 

3.  Carmina  feptem  fapientum  &  mufarum :  unica  pa- 
gina.  Codex  chartaceus. 

2565- 

Pub.  Ovidij  Nafonis  Epiftolarum  liber.  .  xv. 

- de  remedio  amoris,  libri  2. 


Ovidio  adferipta  :  fcil.  de  pulice,  carmen  j 

. - dephilomela. 

_ de  nuce.  Codex  membranaceus. 

2566. 

1.  Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis  Metamorphofeui/  libri  15.  xv. 

а.  Eidem  adferiptum,  de  fomno,  poema. 

Codex  chartaceus. 

2567. 

1.  M.  Tullii  Ciceronis,  de  Amicitia,  liber.  xv. 

2.  _ de  Senedute,  liber.  Hi  duo  char- 

tacei. 

-  de  Officijs,  libri  fecundi  duo  pof- 

trema  folia  ;  et  liber  tertius,  nifi  quod  delit  folium  ulti- 
mum.  Super  membranam.  xm. 

4. - medij  fecundi  libri  de  officijs,  3  fo¬ 
lia.  Codex  membr.  forma.-  minoris.  xi. 

2  568. 

Codex  chartaceus,  in  quo  habentur, 

1 .  Afconij  Pediani  Commentarii  in  Ciceronis  orationes, 

qui  extant  fere  omnes.  _  xv. 

2.  Bruti  epiftolarum  colledio,  per  Lampum  Biragum. 

Ad  Alphonf.  Arragon.  Principein.  91* 

3.  Epiftola  Phalaridis  Athenienfibus.  lo(':r 

4.  Pii  2,  papa:,  ad  Philippum  Burgundiae  ducem  epif¬ 

tola,  ut  in  propria  perfona  helium  contra  I  ureas  gerat. 
A°  1464.  J°9- 

5.  Epigramma,  incipiens,  “  Quem  timuere  ciiix." 

1 1 3.  b.  alia  1 14.  b. 

б.  C.  Crifpi  Salluftii,  in  Ciceronem,  ut  fertur,  oratio : 

cum  refponfo.  1  *  5* 

•5  7.  Catilina 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas, 


701 


Num,  2569 — 2574. 

7.  Catilince  in  Cic.  oratio.  128.  b. 

8.  Ciceronis  in  Catilinam  fecunda,  imperfefta.  x  34.  b. 

9.  Tertia  etiam, imperfe&a.  jgg, 

2569. 

Codex  chartaceus,  in  quo  leguntur  ; 

1 .  Plata,  chi  apoph  hegmata,  ex  verfione  Fr.  Philelphi, 
cum  prEeiati'ine  ad  Philippuni  Mariam  Angelum,  Medi- 
olenlium  Ducem.  Defunt  nonnulla  in  fine. 

2.  Ejufdem,  “  de  differentia  veri  Amici  et  Adulatoris,” 
per  Guarinum  Veronenfem  ;  cum  prsefatione. 

3.  J.  Soling  de  iitu  orbis,  et  mirabilibus  Mundi, 
Ijber- 

2570. 

Codex  charraceus  in  quo  habentur, 

Flmii  JmiiorisEpiftoIarum  libri  tres  priores :  quar- 
tus  incipit,  fed  in  medio  Epiftote  quintas  definit. 

2.  “l'raiiafei  Petrarchs  Laureti  flofculi,  excerpti  ex 
Kemediis  utnfque  Fortune.” 

3.  Platoms  Epiftolas,  ex  verfione  Leonardi  Aretini, 
cum  praefatione  ad  Cofmam  Medicem. 

4-  Plularchi  de  I.iberis  Educandis  I.iber,  interprete 
11a  ino  Veronen B,  st  imperfeflus  j  cum  Epiitola  ejufdem 
a.i  Angelum,  forte  Politianum. 

5.  Agrippa;  Concio  adJudasos,  ut  eos  a  bello  dehor- 
l;  \tur,  ex  Jolephi  Bello  Judaico,  Lib.  II.  Cap.  4. — Im¬ 
perfecta.  1 

f'-  Oratio  Iaudatoria  in  “  gallantorum  Societatem,  et 
prefen rem  eorum  regem  et  futurum,”  incipiens,  “  Cum 
vxdeam  m  hac.  mca  tenerriiml  astate.” 

7.  Guarini  Epiitola  ad  Lcon.Jufticianum  “  Dicere  non 
poflum.” 

d.  Poggii  ad  Guarinum,  “  Dii  malefaciant.” 

9;  Amonii  Becarias,  Antonio  Nogarolenfi,  «  Coei- 
tan.ii  inihi,  Antoni  frater.”  h 

1  o.  Guarinus  Karolo  Brugnolo ;  “  Etfi  inihi  dubiutn 
non  erat. 

1 1.  Excerpta  varia  ex  libro  primo  Livii. 

12.  Poggii  ad  Philelphum  Invectiva  prima. 

13.  Sententiae,  ex  auftoribusLatinis,  varias. 

14-  ‘‘  Funebris  Oratio,  habita  per  Tribrachum  Muti- 
nenfem  in  Bunere  illuftiifiimas  Uominte Paulas Gonzafiai." 
oubjicitur  epitaphiurn  in  eandem.  xv> 

257I- 

Poggii  Florentini,  de  nobilitate,  liber:  ad  Gerardum 
Cardmalem  Cumanum,  A"  1440.  j 

•2.  Epiitola  ad  Greg.  Corparium,  vel  Corrarium.  29. 

3.  Carol!  Aretini  Verfus  in  laude  Opens.  33. 
Alia  manu, 

4-  Guarini  Veron.  Ifagogicum  ad  moralitatem.  “Flic 

libellus  inferibitur  Leonardo'  Aretino,  in  tertio  volumine 
operum  Ariftotelis,  ex  editione  Veneta,  1562."  35. b. 

5.  Guarini  Veron.  dt^affiaitgmris  &;  amici  differentia 

liber,  ex  Plutarcho.  -  . 

6.  De  virginibus  clans,  Tractalus.  “  Quoniam  m- 
td  lexi  m  Commentariis  adverfarii.” 

7.  Infcriptiones  quaedam. 

Codex  ex  charta  et  membrana  compofitus,  folia 
habens  84.  xv 

2572, 

Pub.  Terentii  Afri  Opera.  xv. 

Liber  chartaceus,  fine  verfuum.  diltindione  feriptus. 

.  2  573- 

Albn  Tibulli  operum  libri  3.  ^ 

Liber  chartaceus,  olim  Collegi  Agenenfis,  cum 
notulis  in  fol  is  prim  is* 

2574- 

1.  Albii  Tibulli  operum  libri  3.  xv# 

2.  Sext.  Aur.  Propertii  operum  libri  4. 

3.  Q.  Val.  Catulli  opera. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vox..  II. 


Num.  2574 — 2580. 


.  4:  Epigrammata  &  Poemata  varia,  Maffei  Vegii,  Jo- 
vtam  Pontani,  et  aliorum,  Codex  chartaceus,  elegans. 

257  S- 

1.  Omniboni  Leoniceni  Ars  metrica.  xv. 

2.  Donati  majoris  Ars  de  barbarifmo. 

3.  Prifciani.  Grammatici,  de  Accentibus,  Liber. 

4*  Coilutini  ratio  pundandi. 

5.  Gram.natica.  Circa  naturam  Pundorum. 

.  f '  Pe  ponderibus  &  menfuris,  Tractatus :  e  Graeco 
m  Latinum  per  fratrem  Ambrofium. 

7.  Nomina  quas  feribuntur  per  y. 

8.  Luc.  Apuleii,  de  omni  afpirationis  nota,  liber. 
Liber  chartaceus. 

2576. 

Jun.  Juvenalis  Satirae  xvi.  Codes  chartaceus.  xv. 

2577- 

1.  Georgii  Trapezuntii  de  quatuor  declinability 
oratioms  pambus,  compendium;  ex  Prifciani)  i 

AendIofSSSSmadci-  Pani,i0neS  raboru”  « 

3.  Donati  Grammatici,  de  Barbarifmis,  Tractius. 

deVilki?-1?".1'  Grammatrces,  per  Alex.  Doienfem'foe 
de  \  ilia  Dei  fol.  133.  vide  Numerum  3404. 

Codex  chartaceus. 

xv. 

2578. 

r.  Hefiodi  Opera  &  dies  :  Verfibus  heroicis  Intcr- 
piete  Nicolao  de  Valle.  Cum  indice alphabetico. 

‘ 1  :  qaaram  viget  inclita  cantu.”  xv. 

2.  U  1  it i  Calphurnn  Carmen  bucolicon.  o-, 

utrfufqAUre  U  ^emefiani  ^arm.  bucolicon  :  cum  Indice 

4-  Fran.  Petrarchae  Bucolicon.  1 

5.  Lh^criti  Eclogae  Septem  priores  Latine, 

Theocnu  Vna  per  M.  Phileticum.  Index  ad 

6.  Pub.  Virgilii  Maronis  Bucolic,  :  cum  indice.  127. 

Priapeia.  Carmen  Pi  iapeium,  vel  potius 

„  J,'  ■  Auf?n“  B"deS-  Vragmenta,  qua:  exfanr, 

operum :  cum  indice. 

9.  Probae  Falconie  Centones.  2’8 

liber  ^ 73— 29™  Tifemi’  EPigramniatum  &  Epifiola'r. 

I'olia  in  margine  inferiorenotataveteri  manu.  Gloffuk> 
margmales  paflim  adjiciuntur.  Codex  chartaceus,  elegans. 

257  9* 

1.  Poema  ethicum. 

“J VIo^us  &  vit,a  qul^quis  vult  effe  facetus.”  xv 

f '  Map'  Pr?ma,-defferbarunl  quarui>dam  viituribu's. 
j.  M.  Por.  Catonis.  de  re  ruftica,  liber  :  defunt  Oid  . 
xi.  poftenora.  Liber  elegans,  chartaceus. 

2580. 

1.  Cornelii  Nepotis  Vita  Pomponii  Attici.  fol  2 
prsecedit  tituJus  pro  JEm.  Probo,  et  pauca  de  Eumene 

2.  Catonis  Vita  ex  ^Emilio  Probo. 

3.  Verba  Cornelias  Matris  Gracchorum,  ex  Corn 

Nepote,  et  aliunde.  ^orn, 

4.  iEmilius  Probus  de  Excellemibus  ducibus  extfra'- 
mino S“,Ulrn'  L,l,er,mPerfe£l“.  definens  in  ViiaEpa- 

funSebrfsndl£a:  JUBaIl!  “  M:uluelem  Chryfoloram  oratio 

6'  ?“ari"i  Vcronenfis.  &  nlionim  Epiftolee.  6,.^.' 

7.  S.  Baffin  Sermo  de  parentum  honore,  Latine 
redditus  per  Guarinum,  cum  epiftola  ejus  ad  filium. 

^  Q  8.  Guarini 


ycz  Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2580 — 2587. 

S.  Guarlni  Veron.  pro  M.  Leonello,  oratio  funebris. 

. 103.  b. 

9. - Epuhalamium  in  Trift.  Sforciam 

&  Beatr.  Eflenfem.  1 10. 

I0.  - - - Oratio  pro  felrci  fludio  Ferrarie 

inchoando.  j 13. 

1 1  •  - - - In  Rhetoricam  Ciceronis  prtefatio. 

118.  b. 

12. - Epiflola  ad  Leonellum.  120. 

*3- - - - ad  JoannemPratenfeni.  123.  b. 

14.  Controverfia  de  nobilitate.  Cum  Orationibus  P. 

Corn.  Scipionis  et  C.  Flaminii.  135. 

15.  De  Imperatoribus  Turcarumab  Ottumano  primo. 

Declt  prtefationis  initium.  138. 

Liber  chartaceus,  folia  habens  169. 

2581. 

J.  O.  Iloratii  Flacci,  de  arte  poetica,  liber. 

2.  - Satirarum,  libri  2. 

3.  - - —  Epiltolarum,  libri  2. 

Liber  chartaceus  :  Ad  finem,  “  S.  Jacobi  Lucas 
t  lim  Jacobi  de  meliorellis  not9.” 

2  582. 

Pindar*  (ut  dicitur)  Epitome  lliados  Homeri,  hexame- 
tris  La-'inis.  Liber  membranaceus,  folia  habens  18. 
Exhibet  pagina  ultima  fragment um  tractatus  de  diffe- 
rentiis  vocn.ni  Latinarum.  xv. 

2583- 

Jul.  Solini,  de  fitil  orbis  &  mundi  mirabilibus,  liber. 
Prasmittitur  tabultf  capitum.  Liber  chartaceus.  xvj. 

^584. 

1 .  Jul.  Solini  de  fitu  orbis  2e  mundi  mirabilibus, 

liber.  xiv. 

2.  Ariflotelis  Problemata,  Latine,  ex  verfione  anti- 
qua  Theod.  Gaza:. 

3.  - ,  de  fecretis  fecretorum,  five,  de  regi- 

inine  principum  liber,  lnterprete  ex  Arabico  Philippo 
Tripolitano,  Clerico,  ut  patet  ex  Epiflola  nuncupatoria 
ad  Guidonem  de  Valentia  Civitatis  Tripolis  Pontificem. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

3585. 

L.  An.Senecae,  declamationum,  adfilios,  libri  9.  xv. 
Liber  chartaceus. 

2586. 

1 .  M.  Gaulfridi  Anglic!,  Poetriae,  liber.  xv. 

2.  Antonii  Aftenfis,  ad  Francifcum  Picininum  duca- 
lemfcribam,  carminum  variorum  libri  duo. 

3.  Epiflola:  tree.  “  Tandem  tuas  accepi  literas,  fili 
dilecte  Hyeronymt.” 

Alia.  “  Plures  &  quidem  longiores,  nuper  date  tuam 
ad  excellentiam.” 

Alia.  “  Cum  permulta  fint,  Tobia  carifTime,”  Auc- 
toris  incerti. 

4.  S.  Bernardi  ad  Raimundum  Epiflola.  “  Gratiofo 
militiet.”  Serioremanu. 

5.  Oratoriae  artis  liber.  “  Credimus  iamdudum  ple- 
rifq;  viris.:* 

6.  Varia  imperfecta.  Codex  chartaceus. 

2587. 

Liber  chartaceus,  in  quo  habentur, 

1.  Fefli  Pompeii  de  Verborum  fignificatione  Liber. 

Titulus  fic  l'e  nabet,  “  Fefli  Pompeii,  fludiis  Romanis 
affatiin  eruditi,  tarn  Scrmenum  abditorum,  quam  etiam 
quarundam  Caufarum  origines  aperientis  opus,  feliciter 
incipit.”  Subjicitur  Epillola  Pauli  cujui’dam,  ad  Caroluin 
regem.  xv. 

2.  P.  Candidi  Grammatici,  de  verborum  proprietate, 
Libri  5.  Titulus  primi  Libri,  "  P.  Candidi  Grammatici 


Num.  2587 — 2596. 

Liber  de  amiquitate  ufus  feribendi,  ad  Guarneriun 
Cajiriomm  [inter  lineasj  infignem  utriufque  Juris  doc- 
torem  ducalemque  Confiliarum:  incipit.’’  In  libro  quinto 
vita;  funt  auctorum  nonnullorum  antiquorum. 

3.  Excerpta  ex  Nonio  Marcello.  Ad  finem,  “  De 
reliquis  vocabulis  qua;  funt  in  fecunda  parte  Nonii  penes 
alphabetum,  ell  quierere  in  fuperiore  volumine  quod 
inferibitur  Candidus  Grammaticus.” 

2588. 

Auli  Perfii  Flacci  Satirae.  Libellus  membranaceus.  xvi. 

2589. 

1.  Rhetoricorum,  ad  Herennium,  libri  4.  feripti 
A.  D.  1468.  Vide  finem. 

2.  Ciceronis  de  feneftute  libri  folia  7  prima. 

Codex  chartaceus.  xv. 

2590. 

1.  Rhetoricorum,  ad  Elerennium,  libri  4. 

2.  Ciceronis  Oratio  de  harufpicum  refponfis,  in 
fenatu. 

3-  - de  province's  confularibus, 

4-  - de  lege  agraria,  ad  popuhim, 

contra  P.  S.  Rullum,  oratio  tertia. 

S' - de  L-  Agr.  contra  Rullum  Oratio 

prima. 

6.  Crifpi  Salluflii,  in  Ciceronem,  oratio. 

7.  In  Salluflium,  Oratio,  qua;  Ciceroni  falfo  tribuitur. 
S.  9.  Orationes  dua;  fub  perfon A  Catilina:, fe  in  Senatu 

defendentis.  Ipfa;  forfan,  qua:  in  Ed.  Bafil.  Anni  1 564. 
(tefle  Fabricio  in  Bibl.  Lat.)  extant. 

In  extrema  pagina,  alia  manu,  verfio  htec  Epigr. 
Gra:ci,  Turrzpa  umv,  &c. 

“  Quatuor  infignis  certamina  conficit  Hellas, 

Hcec  duoiimt  hominum,  funt  fuperofq;  duos. 
Harhemori,  (fic)  Jovis,  &  febi,  atq;  Palaemonis,  ifU 
Pinus,  olivafter,  prtemia,  poma,  apum.” 

In  verfu  fecundo  reponendum  “  Superumq;  duo  in 
quarto,  pro  apum,  “apium.”  EflEpigramma  Jo.  Bapt.Pii. 

259I- 

[  S$uarto.~\ 

M.  Tub  Ciceronis  Epiftolarum  ad  familiares  libri  16. 
Codex  membranaceus.  Deefl  pars  folii  primi,  et 
folium  forfan  unum  in  fine.  xi. 

2592. 

1.  M-  Tul.  Ciceronis  de  oratore,  ad  Q.  fratrem, 

libri  3.  Deefl  primum  folium.  xv. 

2.  - Orator,  ad  Brutum :  five,  de  per- 

fetto  oratore,  fiber. 

Codex  chartaceus.  Afiifii  A°  1465.  exaratus. 

2593- 

Jannotii  Manetii,  de  dignitate  &  excellentia  hominis, 
libri  4.  Scripti  per  Gherardum  Johannis  Cerafii,  civem 
et  Notarium  Florentinum,  A".  1454.  xv. 

Codex  elegans,  membranaceus. 

2  394- 

1.  Gafparini  Barzizii  Parmenfis,  Praecepta :  Scripta 

A0.  1455.  xv. 

2.  - Kpiflolae  ad  exercitationem 

accommodatae. 

3.  M-  Tullii  Ciceronis,  Paradoxa  Stoicorum  fex. 
Codex  chartaceus,  olitn  Monafterii  Wibiingenfis. 

2595- 

Jun.  Juvenalis  Satirae.  Scriptae  per  Jac.  de  Balbis,  A* 
1471.  Codex  chartaceus.  xv* 

2596. 

Jun.  Juvenalis  Satirae.  Deefl  ultimum  folium.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus. 


1.  Crifpi 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse, 


Num.  2597 — 2607. 

2597* 

1-  Crifpi  Salluftil,  Confpirationis  Catilinariae  hiftoria. 

xv. 

2-  - de  bello  Jugurthino,  liber. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2598. 

Aliud  exemplar,  etiam  membranaceum.  xiv. 

2599- 

1.  M-  Tullii  Ciceronis,  de  officiis,  libri  3.  Script!  per 

Stephanum  de  Novo  monte,  Verone,  1471.  xv. 

2.  Falconiae  Probae,  Centones  Virgiliani  de  veteri  & 
novo  Teftamento. 

3.  Dec.  Magni  Aufonii,  Verfus. 

4.  Aur.  Prudentiide  Fide  Carmen. 

5 ■ - de  Natura  Animas,  Carmen. 

6.  Dec.  Magn.  Aufonii,  Verlus  Pafcales. 

7-  - - Verfus  ad  Cen.  Magn. 

Aufonium  Nepotem  fuum. 

8.  Aur.  Prudentii  Clementis  Sicnomachia  (Pfycho- 
machia)  five  de  Virtutum  et  Vitiorum  Pugna. 

9.  Anonytni  Carmen  Eroticum. 

10.  Sapphus  Epiflola  adPhaonem,  Latine. 

Codex  chartaceus. 

2600. 

Rhetoricorum,  ad  Herennium,  libri  4.  xiv. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2601. 

Cornclii  Nepotis,  de  excellentibus  Grascias  et  exterarum 
Gentium  Ducibus.  Codex  chartaceus.  xv. 

2602. 

M.An.  Lucani,  de  bello  civili,  libri  10.  Paflim  inter 
lineas  et  ad  Marginem  Scholia.  xv. 

Codex  chartaceus. 

2603. 

Scholae  Weftmonafterienfis  Carminain  obitum  Gulielmi 
Gloceftriae  Ducis.  Pulcherrime  defcripfit.  Tempore 
Gulielmi  3.  Parreus,  de  Collegio  Jefu,  Oxonii.  Vid. 
6911.  Liber  chartaceus,  elegantiffimus,  comparandus 
omnino  cum  Num-  6135.  xvm. 

2604. — 

Jul.  Solini,  de  fitu  orbis,  Sc  mundi  mirabilibus,  liber. 
Codex  chartaceus.  xv- 

2605. 

Jo.  Marii  Philelphi,  Poematum  liber,  cum  ComcediA 
LaptA.  Tiguri  fcriptus  A°  J45S.  xv. 

Codex  elcgans,  membranaceus* 

2606. 

1.  Zanoti  Maneti  Vocabularium  alphabeticum.  xv. 
Titulus,  “  Hie  eft  pulcherrimus  vocabulorum  ordo, 

inflitutus  a  clariHimo  atq.  dodiflimo  Viro  duo  Zanoto 
Maneto,  cive  florentino,  qui  Servii,  Nonii  Pomp,  et  Pa- 
pim  vocabula  inferuit,  per  vocales  et  confonantes,  primo 
ponens  verba,  fecundo  nomina,  qui  ordo  ell  ita  praeftan- 
ti ill m us  ut  nunquam  in  lingua  nfa  fimilis  vifus  fuerit.” 

2.  Donati  Grammatici,  Vocabula  in  Terentiuni  inlti- 
tuia,  per  quendam  virum  doaiflimum.  Ordine  alpha-  ' 
betico.  Codex  chartaceus,  non  inelegans. 

2607. 

Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  de  ponto,  libri  4.  Script!  A°.  1472. 
Codex  chai'taceus.  xv 


Num.  2608 — 26194 

2608. 

Pap.  Sure.  Statii,  Thebiados  libri  12.  Cum  Scholiis 
Codex  chartaceus,  olim  Collegii  Agenenfis*  xiit. 

2609. 

Q.  I Ioratii  Flacci,  Carminum  libri  4,  &  Vita.  Defunt 
duo  folia  in  fine.  XUI. 

Codex  membraceus,  olim  collegii  Agenenfis. 

2610* 

2  •  Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  Metamofphofeai'  libri  3 
priores.  IX_ 

2.  Papiae  rocabularii  fragmentum,  3  foliorum.  Scil. 

Literse  S.  pars.  xjv> 

3.  Chalcidii,  verfionis  &  commentarii  in  Timaeum 

Platonis,  liber  primus,  &  dimidium  fecundi.  x. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

261  Ii 

1.  D.  Jun.  Juvenalis,  Satyrarum  Liber.  xv. 

2.  Aul.  Perfii  Flacci  Satyrae.  Liber  chartaceus. 
Super  folium  exterius  membranaceum,  nonnulla  ex 
audoribus  antiquis,  de  fatyris  animalibus,  et  poe- 
matibus. 

2612. 

T.  Lucretii  Cari,  de  Rerum  Natura,  libri  6.  Maxima 
pars  libri  fexti  defideratur.  Codex  chartaceus.  xv. 

2613. 

D.  Aufonii  Burdigalenfis.  Verfus  pafchales,  Epifiolae,  S 
Paulini,  Symmachi  &c.  Epiftolfe  ad  Aufonium,  Ludus 
7  Sapientum,  Periocha  Homerica,  Catalogus  urbium 
nobilium,  &c.  Liber  chartaceus  ;  margo  inferior  hu- 
more  corruptus.  XY. 

2614. 

Pub.Terentii  Afri  Vita  Sc  Opera.  xv. 

Angelus  Fraflinenfis  feripfit.  Codex  chartaceus, 
fine  verfum  difiindlione  fcriptus. 

2615. 

M.  Johannis  de  Volaterranis,  Notabilia  Grammaticalia* 
capitibus  2 1 .  xv. 

Liber  chartaceus,  quondam  Conventus  Silve  Lacu^ 
Folia  habet  150. 

2616. 

An  Italian  tranfiation  of  “  Seneca  de  Beneficiis.”  At  the 
end,  an  earneft  Exhortation  to  the  reader  to  pra&ife 
the  Precepts  of  the  Book.  Xv. 

Neatly  written  on  Paper,  with  a  few  marginal 
notes. 

2617. 

Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  Epiltolarum  liber.  Defunt  poftre- 
mae  duae.  Gloflulte  inferuntur  inter  lineas.  Ad  finem 
dilputatio  brevis  de  Scientiis.  Codex  chartaceus. 

xv. 

261  P. 

1. M.  Tul.  Ciceronis,  de  inventione  rhetorica,  li¬ 
bri  2.  XVm 

2.  Au&oris  incerti,  Rhetoricorum  ad  Herennium 
libri  4. 


3- - Synonyma,  alphabetice  per  Col uc- 

cium  Salutatum.  Et  de  differentiis  Ciceronis. 

Liber  chartaceus. 

2619, 

r.  Au&oris  incerti  Rhetoricorum  ad  Herennium, 
libri  4.  Codex  membranaceus.  xiv. 

2.  Ciceronis  de  oratore,  ad  Q.  fratrem,  libri  3.  xv. 

3- - Orator,  ad  M.  Brutum.  Defunt 

piuca,  in  fine.  2  &  3  partim  chartacci,  partim  membra- 
nacei. 


Lucii 


7  °4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2620 — 2630. 

2620. 

[OclavoJ] 

Lucii  Fieri  Rerum  Romanarum  Libri  iv.  Adjiciuntur 
Argumenta  I.ibrorum  8  priorum  Titi  Livil.  x. 
Liber  membranaceus,  olim  Llofpitalis  S.  Nicolai 
.prope  Cul'aia. 

2621. 

Q.  Horatii  Flacci,  de  Arte  Poetica,  liber.  xm. 

- - - Epiftolarum  libri  2. 

Canticum  ad  B.  Mariam,  cum  notis  Muficis. 
Carmen. ft  Me  faciemlaudaffefuam  Corvinia  dixit.” 

5.  EpitaphiumHermaphroditi.  “  Dum  mea  me  mater.” 

6.  Qb  Horatii  FI.  Satyrae  8  primae. 

Palfim  inter  lineas  Gloffie,  et  ad  Marginem  Scholia* 
Liber  membranaceus,  in  fine  mancus. 

2622. 

1.  M.  Tul.  Ciceronis  Paradoxa  Stoicorum  fex.  vnr. 

__  2*  - -  — ~ - de  natura  Deorum,  liber  primus; 

uifi  quod  ultimum  folium  defideretur. 

Codex  membranaceus. 


1.  M.T.  Ciceronis  deinventione  rhetorica,  libri  2.  x. 

2.  Aufloris  incerti  Rhetoricorum  ad  Herennium 
libri  4.  Codex  membranaceus. 

2624. 

1.  M.T.  Ciceronis  de  inventione  rhetorica,  libri  2.  xi. 

2.  Incerti  Rhetoricorum  libri  4.  Codex  membra¬ 
naceus.  In  prime  folio,  literis  grandioribus  “  Hunc 
librum  facit  ligari  dompnus  Hugo,  legat  monachus 
fanctus  ****.” 

2625. 

FI.  T.  Ciceronis  Epiftolarum  ad  familiares,  libri  16.  xv. 
Deeft  ultimum  folium,  feriore  manu  fuppletum.  Co¬ 
dex  membranaceus. 

2626. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  Tufculanarum  Difputationum,  libri  5, 
Codex  membranacus,  elegans.  xv. 

2627. 

M.T.  Ciceronis  de  amicitia, liber.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2628. 

1.  M.  T.  Ciceronis  de  officiis,  libri  3.  xr 

Ad  finem  fic  feribitur  :  "  M.  T.  C.  de  OlT.  tertius 

k  ultimus  liber  felieiter  explicit,  Mediolani,  manu  mei 
Blafn  de  Axereto,  ducalis  familiaris,  k  partium  Iacus 
£umar;  .C0,nn\ilTfii’  ac  indite  urbis  Janue  cancellarii. 
bedleljcius,  quia  hac  die  2  (  Aprilis,  i433,novum  fancle 
pacis  conclufe  cum  Venetis  k  Florentines  ad  gloriofum 
pnncipem  eft  delatum.  Deo  laudes.” 

2.  M.  Tul.  Ciceronis,  de  Seneclutc,  lib. 

3- - de  Amicitia,  lib. 

A  — - de  Somno  Scipionis,  lib. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2629. 

Incerti  Aucloris  Rhetoricorum  ad  Herenm'um  libri 

Codex  membranaceus,  elegans.  xv.  * 

2630. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  de  Amicitia,  liber.  xv 

'  (''af0  major  ;  feu,  de  fenectute. 


libei 

3 


Num.  2631 — 2640. 

2631. 

:  ■  T.  Ciceronis  de  fenefture  liber.  Scriptus  per 
Albertum  Ficcardum  Viccntiiium,  1427.  xv. 

2l - - - 7-7*  Paradoxa  Stoicorum  fex. 

3*  Leonardi  Aretini  Inveetiva  in  hypocritas. 

4-  -  Vita  M.T.  Ciceronis,  ex  Plutar- 

cho  tranflata,  cum  prologo. 

5;  ^rita  Demofthenis,  ex  Plutarcho 

verfa. 

6.  Demofthenis  de  Cherfonefo  Oratio  I  at. 

7.  M.  T.  Ciceronis,  Somnium  Scipionis. 

8-  - de  amicitia,  liber,  ad  Atticum. 

1430.  Codex  mixtus,  charta  et  ir.embranA. 
g.  Carmen  Italicum.  In  pagina  ultima  hi  verficuli ; 
“  Dum  mea  burfa  fonat,  hofpes  mihi  fercula  donar, 
Dum  vacuata  jacet,  cum  loquor  ipfc  facet.” 
Subjiciuntur  citationes  ex  auctoribus  variis. 

2632. 

1.  Q.  Horatii  Flacci  Caraliuum,  five  Odantm,  libri  4  : 
cum  vita  ejufdem. 

,  2‘  ~Z  - Fpodon  liber,  &  carmen  fecu- 

lare.  Cum  notis,  et  gloilis  inter  lineas.  x-  v. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2^33* 

Macrobn  Amb.  Theod.  de  l'omno  Scipionis,  lib.  2.  cum 
notulis.  Codex  membranaceus.  xn. 

2634. 

M.  Ac  .Plant!  ComoediaeS.  Scilicet,  r.  Ampbytrio  - 
*•  CaP™-  4-  Curculio.— Vcaftna. 

6.  Ciftellaria —  7.  Epidicus.—  8.  Aulularia. 

V-odex  perelegans,  membranaceus.  xv. 


2635. 

M.  Afconii  Fcdiani  Comm,  in  Ciceronis  orationcs. 

Pars  pofterior  defideratur,  Xv 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2636. 

Pap.  Sure.  Statii  Thebaidos  libri  ,a.  Cum  notulis  mar- 
ginaiibus  m  3  pnores  Libros.  Codex  membranaceus. 

XIII. 

2637. 

.  '■  M.  Aurelii  Caffiodorii  Secuiarium  Lifterarttm  I  ib=r, 
inquocommemurTrartatus.  I.  De  Grammatics  -  De 
Rhetorica.  3-  De  Dialeffica.  4.  Dc  Arithmetics. 

De  Mufica.  6  Dc  Gcometna.  7.  De  Aitronomia 
cum  figuns  depidis,  rudibus. 

2‘  ad  Chri^um  5  cum  notis  muficis. 

nemkFo  U-  CTrdTm  Epia0la  aJ  NidibriumNarbo- 
cmendis  ™  archlcP'rcoPum>  Je  antiphonis  in  eedefia 

4.  Grammatica,  De  verbis  Aftivis,  Neutris,  Dero- 
nentibus,  &c.  Turn  de  aliis  orationis  partibus. 

Codex  membranaceus. 


Codex  membranaceus. 


Paradoxa  Stoicorum  fex. 
Somnium  Scipionis. 


2  63  8. 

1 .  Jun.  Juvenalis  Satyrae. 

2.  A  Perfii  Flacci  Satyrae. 

Codex  elegans,  membranaceus.  Xv 

2639. 

«<=*„%  UbT*  Tran9'  de  Cla''iS  Khe- 

c.  C.  Corn.  Taeiti  Dialogus  de  oratoribns  Claris  :  Ad 
finem,  4A.  1462.  Codex  membranaceus. 

2640. 

r.  Georgii  Laailii,  ad  Jac.  An.  Marcellmn  Patricium. 
Panegyncum.  1463.  .  * 

2.  Calendarium. 


3.  Boccatii 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


705 


Num.  2640 — 2651. 

3.  Boccatii  fabula  de  amoribus  Guifcardi  et  Sigifmun- 
dce,  Tancredi  Filial,  Interprete  Leon.  Aretino. 

4.  Carmina  nonnulla  Priapeia. 

Codex  elegans,  chartaceus. 

2641. 

1 .  Bafilii  Magni,  quo  patto  Gentiliutn  libros  legere 
Chriftianos  oporteat.  Liber  :  ex  verfione  Leonardi 
Aretini. 

2.  De  Lucretia,  Aftio. 

3.  Epitaphium  Johannis,  ex  ftirpe  Vice-comitum, 
Ducis  Mediol.  1354,  hexametris  Latinis. 

4.  Guarini  Veron.  Lib.  de  liberis  educandis,  ex  Plu- 
tarcho. 

5.  Demofthenis  Oratio  ad  Alexandrum,  Latine. 

6.  L.  An.  Senecae,  de  remediis  fortuitorum,  liber, 
ut  dicitur. 

7- - de  liberalibus  ftudiis,  lib. 

Codex  mixtus. 

2642. 

Q.  Horatii  Flacci,  Carminum  feu  Odarum  Libri  4.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus,  elegans.  In  primo  folio 
infignia  Pandulphi  Baronis. 

*643. 

1.  C.  Crifpi  Salluftii,  hiftoria  Confpirationis  Catili- 

nariae.  xii. 

2.  .  .  Belli  Jugurthini  liber,  in  fine 

mancus.  Codex  membranaceus. 

2644. 

1.  Fabularum  liber.  De  Acheloo,  Libero,  Titio  et 

Latone,  &c.  x. 

2.  Pub.  Virgilii  Maronis  Bucolica. 

3- - Georgicorum  libri  3 :  et 

quarti  pars,  a  fcriptore  abrupte  relitta. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2645. 

Julii  Solini,  de  mirabilibus  mundi,  liber  otl&crjo;.  xi. 
Codex  membranaceus. 

2646. 

1 .  M.T.  Ciceronis,  de  Senectute,  liber.  Deell  primum 

folium.  xv, 

2.  - Paradoxa. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2647. 

L.  An.  Seneca;  Tragoedis  3.— Thyefles,  Ottavia,  & 
Hercules  Oetarns.  Paffim  inter  lineas  Glofls,  ct  ad 
marginem  Scholia.  Codex  membranaceus.  xv. 

2648. 

Jun.  Juvenalis  Satyrae  :  ScriptaeA0.  1410.  xv. 

Codex  eximid  elegans.  In  fronte  Pandulphi  infignia, 
ut  in  2642. 

2649. 

1.  Jun.  Juvenalis  Satyrae.  xv> 

2.  Aul.  I’erfii  FI.  Satyrae. 

Codex  elegans,  membranaceus. 

2650. 

1.  Martiani  Capellae,  Aftronomiae  liber,  a.xltpa.Xo<;. 

2.  Anonymi  Carmen  Geographicum. 

3.  De  Conftrutiione  Tabula;  Cofmographics. 

4.  Ainuleta  quredam  ad  omnes  febres,  kc. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

265T. 

Macri,  de  viribus  herbarum,  Poema.  Geptius  de  Lucig- 
nano  (cripfit.  1448.  XVt 

Codex  membranaceus,  elegans. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2652 — 2659: 

2652. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  Somnium  Scipionis,  cum  Commen* 
tario  Macrobii.  Defunt  nonnulla  in  fine.  xii. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2653. 

Grammatica,  Donato  perperam  adferipta.  Liber  mem¬ 
branaceus.  xiv. 

2654. 

P.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  Faftorum  libri  6.  Paflim  notulte  in 
marginibus.  Codex  membranaceus.  xm. 

2655. 

Aliud  exemplar  :  cum  Calendario.  xii. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2656. 

Pub.  Terentii  Afri  Vita  &  Comcediae  fex,  fine  verfuum 
diftin&ione  feriptse.  Codex  membranaceus.  xii. 

2657. 

[4'0.]  1.  Crifpi  Salluftii,  de  bello  Catilinario,  liber,  xv. 

2.  - de  bello  Jugurthino,  liber. 

3.  M.  Jun.  Juftini,  Epitome  hiftoriarum  Trogi 
Pompeii,  Libri  xliiii.  A.  D.  1442. 

4.  L.  An.  Flori,  Epitome  in  libros  T.  Livii. 

Codex  elegans,  membranaceus. 

2658. 

Hiftoriae  AuguftaeScriptores.  fcilicet,  xv. 

1.  Aelii  Spartiani,  Vita;  Hadriani,  Aelii  Veri,  Didii 
Juliani,  Severi,  Pefccnnii  Nigri,  C.aracalhe,  &  Gets. 

2.  Julii  Capitolini  Vita;  Antonini  Pii,  M.Aurelii, 
Commodi,  Lucii  Veri,  Pertinacis,  Macrini,  Clodii  Al- 
bini,  duorum  Maximinorum,  trium  Gordianorum, 
Pupieni,  Balbini,  Valeriani  utriufque,  Galieni  utriufque, 
&  triginta  Tyrannorum. 

3.  Aelii  Lampridii  Vita;  Commodi,  Heliogabali,  Dia- 
dumeniani,  &  Alex.  Severi. 

4.  Vulcatii  Gallicani  Vita  Av.  Cafiii. 

5.  Trebellii  Pollionis  Vita  Claudii. 

_  6.  Flavii  Vopifci  Vits  Aureliani,Taciti,  Floriani,  Probi, 
Firmi,  Saturnini,  Proculi,  Bonofi,  Cari,  Carini,  et 
Numeniani.  Codex  membranaceus,  ornatiffimus. 

2659. 

r.  L.  An.  Senecae,  Proverbia.  xn. 

2.  - - - de  remediis  fortuitorum,  liber. 

3.  - - Epiftolaead  S.  Paulum,  &  Pauli 

ad  eum,  fuppofititis  :  cum  Hieronymi  prsfatione. 

4- - Epiftolarum  ad  Lucilium,  libri 

20.  Codex  membranaceus,  bene  fervatus.  De  ipio 
codice,  manu  eleganti,  et  multo  recentiore,  feripta 
funt  hsc,  in  folio  exteriore. 

“  Nonnulla  eorum,  qua;  certiflime  defunt  in  hoc 
Manufcripto,  vertendoadEpiftolau^t,  39,  et  40, intelligi 
poffunt.” 

Infra,  eAdem  manu,  de  F.piftolis  Pauli  et  Seneca. 
“  Epiftols  Senecs  ad  Paulum,  ct  Pauli  ad  Senecam, 
non  a  Viris  do£tiffimis  qui  in  veteribus  feriptis  ftudiofe 
multumque  volutati  funt,  habentur  genuins ;  quia  ftilus 
illarum  Senecs  attributarum  barbarus  eft,  et  idiomatum 
plenus,  qua;  ad  Latinam  linguam  non  attinent.  Ills 
Paulo  aferipts  ne  minimam  illius  Apoftoli  gravitatein 
exprimunt,  et  blandimenta  potius,  quam  inftitutiones 
elTe  videntur.  Plures  proferuntur  in  eandem  fententiam 
rationes,  fedimprsfeniiarum  prsdids  fufticient.”  Re£le 
fane. 

In  primo  folio  Wanlcius  annotavit,  “Hunc  Codicem 
e  Caftro  Bramtonienfi  fecum  advexit  Doininus  meus, 
menfe  Augufti  A.  D.  1722.’’ 

8  R  Ifidcr 


Catalogus  Libroruni  MSS. 


706 


Num.  2660 — 2670; 

2660. 

Ifidori  Ilifpalenfis  epi,  Originum  five  etymologiarum 
Iibri  20.  Codex  membranaceus,  fcriptus  A.  D. 
1 1  36.  xii. 

2661. 

Dionyfii  de  Burgo  Sanfti  Sepulchri,  Expofitio  in  Vale- 
rium  Maximum.  xjv. 

Codex  membranaceus.  Ad  finetn,  dedicatio  ad 
Johannem  de  Columpna  Sanifti  Angeli  Diaconum  Car- 
dinalem  ;  et  indices  Capitum,  et  rerum. 

2662. 

M.  Fabii  Quintiliani,  Inflit  utionum  oratoriarum,  ad  Victo- 
rinum  Marceilum  Iibri  10.  Scrjpti  per  Gafparem  Cyrri, 
nationis  Lufatix,  A.D.  1434.  Codex  membranaceus, 
elegans.  xv. 

2663. 

T.  Livii  Hiftoriarum  Decas  prima.  Codex  membranaceus* 
cum  folio  primo  ornatifli mo.  xv. 

2664. 

M.  Fabii  Quintiliani,  Inftitutionum  oratoriar.  lib.  10. 
Codex  membranaceus,  venerabilis.  ix. 

2665. 

P.  Sure.  Statii,  Thebaidos  Iibri  12.  Codex  membra¬ 
naceus  cum  glolfis  inter  lineas  &  in  margine.  xm. 

2666. 

Julii  Frontini,  StratagemaW,  Iibri  4.  Codex  membrana¬ 
ceus,  bene  fervatus.  vm. 

2667. 

1.  FI.  Vegetii  Epitome  rei  militaris,  4  libris.  xi  v. 

2.  Vincentii  Bellovacenfis  de  eruditione  puerorum 
liber. 

3.  Epiflola  Belzebub  principis  demonum  ;  Auftore 
Petro  Monacho  Claravallenfi. 

4.  Epiflola  Jefu  Chrilli  ad  Innocentium  vi  feripta,  et 
in  Capita  Centum  divifa,  Auttore  eodem  Petro  Clarava- 
lenfi. 

5.  Ejufdem  Petri  de  Claravalle  fuper  deffamatione  et 
contra  invidos  liber. 

6.  - de  exaltatione  S.Crucis,  8cc. 

libellus. 

7.  - — -  diverfar  Epiftola:  plerumque 

ad  Symonem,  et  Symonis  ad  Petrum. 

8.  Johannis  Prefbyteri  Epiflola  ad  Emanuel  Imp». 

g.  Hifloria  S.  Marie  Sc  Jofeph.  “  Erat  vir  in  Ifrael.” 

10.  Gefta  Chrifli :  five  Evangelium  Nicodemi. 

1 1 .  De  arte  fidei  catholice,  liber ;  a  magiflro  Alano 
•compofitus.  Liber  erat  S.  Martini  Lovanienfis. 

Codex  membranaceus,  manu  obfeura  exaratus. 

2658. 

1.  P.  Virgilii  Maronis  Bucolica.  xii. 

2.  - Georgicorum  Iibri  4. 

3.  - Aeneidos  Iibri  3  priores,  et 

quartus  ad  verfum  678.  Defunt  omnino  verfus  “  Jamque 
adeo  &c.”  in  Libro  20.  Scilicet,  a  verfu  567  ad  588,  fine 
ulla  hiatus  noti.  Codex  membranaceus,  folia  habens  24. 

2669. 

L.  An.  Senecae  Tragoediae  10.  Cum  Gloffis  et  notulis. 
Codex  membranaceus,  elegans.  xv. 

2670. 

Pu''.  Terentii  Afri  Comcediae  6.  fine  verfum  diflindlione 
feriptae.  Codex  membranaceus,  in  ufum  Collegii  Bufli- 


Num.  2671 — 2679. 

2671. 

Titi  Livii  Hiftoriarum  Decas  quarta  :  fcil.  lib.  31 — 40. 
nifi  quod  defit  primum  folium,  &  totus  liber  33.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus. 


267  2. 


Libri 


T.  Livii  Hiftoriarum  libri  8  primi. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2673. 

Pub.  Ovidii  Nafonis  Metamorphofewi-  libri  15. 
decimi  quinti  dimidium  fere  defideratur. 

Liber  olim  erat  Monafterii  S.  Epiphanii  membrana¬ 
ceus,  omatus,  literis  Gothicis  fcriptus.  xiv. 

2674. 

Prifciani  Grammatices  libri  18.  Liber  quondam  S.  Ni- 
cholai  prope  Cufam.  Codex  membranaceus,  in  fine 
mutilus.  ix. 

2675. 

1.  C.  Crifpi  Salluftii,  de  confpiratione  Catilinaria,  lib. 


-  de  bello  Jugurthino,  liber. 


“  Iftum  librum  emit  magifter  Joannes  de  vius  de  babuco 
pro  fc  fuifq;  ab  uxore  D.  Bartholi  de  Catonio  pro  pretio 
quinq;  librar.  pccunie,  1469,”  in  fine  feribitur.  Et  infe- 
rius  feribitur,  “  Antonii  Seripandi  &  amicorum.” 

Codex  membranaceus,  elegans,  cum  notulis  paucis 
in  margine. 

2676. 

C.  Plinii  fecundi  fen.  Hiftoriae  naturalis  libri  37.  Codex 
membranaceus,  ex  elegantioribus,  et  ornatioribus  j 
forma;  maxima:  in  folio.  xv. 

2677. 

Idem  liber,  membranaceus ;  etiam  prascedente  major  et 
ornatior  ;  cum  pi&ura,  et  infignibus  in  folio  primo.  xv. 

2678. 

1.  S  Bafilii,  de  inflitutis  juvenum  liber,  ex  verfione  & 

cum  prxfatione  Leonardi  Aretini.  xv. 

2.  Petri  Pauli  Vergerii,  de  ingenuis  moribus  &  libera- 
libus  ftudiis  adolefcentie,  liber. 

3.  Plutarchi  Chaer.  deliberis  educandis,  ex  verfione 
&  cum  prxfatione  Guarini  Veronenfis. 

4.  Hieroclis  Commentarius  in  I'ythagora;  aurea  car- 
mina. 

5.  Dionis,  Syracufarum  principis,  de  regno,  libri  4 

6.  Ifocratis,  de  inftitulione  principis  oratio,  ad  Nico- 
clem,  Lat. 

7.  Demofthenis  oratio  ad  Alexandrum  M.  Latine,  per 
Leonard.  Aretinum. 

8.  Francifci  Barbari  Veneti,  de  re  uxoria,  liber 

aVsipaAof. 

9.  Xenophontis  hifloria  vitae  Cyri,  imperfedla  ;  La- 
tine  per  Poggium  Florent. 

ic.  Petrarchae  Epiflola,  de  hifloria  Gryfildis. 

1 1.  - hifloria  de  Arono  &  Marina. 

12.  M.  T.  Ciceronis,  de  fato,  fiber  :  cum  Commcntario 
&  prmfatione  Georgii  Vallae.  uliXis-Q3. 

13.  - - - - de  Seneclute,  liber.  Et  Paradoxa: 

cum  Commentario.  Libri  de  Senedute  initium  defide¬ 
ratur. 

14.  On  p.6V6(T  OZtOZTTrXoVXlOX  pro  hoc,  or  I  fiOKOf  J  £T5?A- 
7r?.ou(no;,  redditur  enim,  “  Quod  folus  fapiens  dives  fit.” 
Imperfect  us.  C.odex  membranaceus,  fornix  maxima;,  et 
literis  grandioribus  exaratus. 

2679. 

M.  Fabii  Vi&orini  Commentarius  in  Ciceronis 


libros  2  de  inventione  rhetorica. 

4 


xv. 

2.  Anonymi 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


7°7 


Num.  2679 — -2681. 

2.  Anonymi  Commcntarius  in  Tullii  de  amicitia  & 
feue&ute  libros.  “  Circa  hunc  autorem  feptem  funt  con- 
Gderanda.” 

3.  Georgii  Trapezuntii  Epiflolae  2  contra  Poggium 
Florentinum  :  cum  Poggii  refponfo. 

Codex  chartaceus,  grandis. 

2680. 

M.  Servii  Commcntarius  in  Virgilii  opera. 

Ad  finem  fcriptuin  eft,  “  Hunc  librum  donavit  Pe¬ 
trus  de  Montagnana  congregationi  canonicorum  Lateran. 
S.  Auguftini;  itaut  fit  tantum  ad  ufumdi&or.  Canonkor. 
in  monafterio  S.  Johannis  in  viridario  Padue  coramoran- 
tium.  1478.’’  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus,  bene  fcriptus, 

2681. 

1.  M.T.  Ciceronis,  pro  lege  Manilla,  oratio.  “  Quan- 
quam  mihi  Temper."  xv. 

- - pro  T.  Annio  Milone-  “  Etfi  ve- 

reor.”  9. 

3- - pro  Cn.  Plantio.  “  Cum  propter 


egregiam." 
4.  — 


ntates.’ 
9.  ■ 


multa.’ 

11.. 

tate.” 


-  pro  P.  Sylla.  “  Maxime  vellem.” 

37- 

5.  - dearufpicumrefponfis.  “Hefterno 

49- 

6.  - - - proL.Murena.“Quedeprecatus." 

5.9- 

7- - pro  Sex  Rofcio. <c  Credo  ego  vos.” 

.  73- 

-  pro  L.  Cornelio  Balbo.  “  Si  auto- 
100. 

-  pro  P.  Sextio.  “  Si  quis  antea.” 
109. 

-  pro  domo  fua,  ad  Pont.  “  Cum 
.  I25-. 

-  pro  P.  Quintio.  “  Que  res  in  civi- 
*44-' 

-  pro  L.  Flacco.  “  Cum  in  maxi- 
155- 

-  pro  A  Cluentio  habita.  “  Ani- 
169. 

-  pro  M.  Fonteio.  “  Hoc  pretore 
205. 

-  pro  A  Cecinna.  “  Si  quantum  in 
210. 

-  pro  C  Rabirio  Pofthumo.  “  Si  quis 
222. 

-  pro  Rabirio  perduellione.  “Etfi 

228. 

-  de  lege  agraria,  contra  Rullum, 
238- 

-  inPilonem.  “Jamne  fends, belua." 
256. 

-  in  Cr.  Salluftium,  &  Salluftii  in 
270. 

-  pro  A.  Licinio  Archio,  poeta.  “  Si 
273- 

-  in  Vatinium  teftem.  “  Si  tua  tan- 
277. 


madvcrti  Jud.” 

14. - 

opreflam.” 

agro.” 

,6. - 

eft  judices.” 

•7; - 

Ouirites." 

~i8. - 

Orationes  3. 

19. - 


eum.  “  Graviter.” 


quid  eft." 

22. - 

tummodo.’ 
2? 


- ad  equeftres  Romanos  pridie  quam 

iret  in  exilium.  “  Si  quando.”  283. 

24.  - qua  populo  gratias  agit  de  reditu 

fuo.  “  Quod  precatus.’’  286. 

25.  - ■  quaSenatui  gratias  agit  de  reditu 

fuo.  “  Si,  P.  C.  pro.”  300. 

26.  - pro  Ctelio.  “  Si  quis,  judices." 

3°6- 

27.  - de  provinciis  Confularibus.  “Si 

quis  veftrum.”  316. 

28.  - - - —  -  pro  rege  Deiotaro,  ad  Caefarem. 

“Cumin.”  322. 

29.  - - - pro  M.  Marcello.  “Diutumi  filen- 

tii.”  327. 


33c- 


Num.  2681 — >2685. 

30.  M.  1 .  Ciceronis,  pro  O.Ligario,  ad  Casfarem. 
c  Novum  crimen." 

Codex  membranaceus,  elegans. 

In  fine  feriptum  eft. 

“  Flic  liber  eftjull'u  noftro  perferiptus  et  a:re, 

Ut  fervet  marci  dicta  fonora  diu. 

Ipfe  velim  Cartas  membrauis  Temper  arari 
Qiias  magna  autores  arte  tulere  boni, 

Castera  tu  fragili  depone  volumina  libro. 

In  quorum  altridet  (fic)  trifte  fophifina  labris. 

1483.  iiii  Augufti." 


2682. 

T.  Ciceronis  Epiftolarum  ad  familiares,  libri  8 


1.  M. 
pofteriores. 


3-  — 

4.  — 

5*  — 
6.  — 
rum  libri  1 

7-  - 


- Epiftola  ad  Oftavianum. 

- de  pedtione  confulatus,  liber. 

- de  amicitia,  liber. 

- de  fene&ute,  liber. 

- in  M.  Antonium,  Philippica- 

- in  Salluftium,  &  Salluftii  in 

eum,  oratio. 

8-  - - - in  Catilinam,  orationes  4. 

9* - - - Paradoxa,  ad  M.  Brutum. 

10. - pro  M.  Marcello,  oratio. 

1 1  ■  - - - - - pro  Q.  Ligario. 

1 2.  - - - pro  rege  Deiotaro. 

13.  Fabii  Planciadis  Fulgentii  expofiuo  fermonum 
andquorum. 

14.  M.T.Ciceronis,  pro  M.  Marcello,  oratio. 

J5- - pro  Q.Ligario,ad  Caefarem. 

*6.  - -pro  rege  Deiotaro,  ad  Caefarem. 

17- - pro  T.  Annio  Milone. 

1 8.  - - - pro  lege  Manilla,  ad  populum  Ro- 

manum. 

19.  Anonymi  fragmentum  de  Caufa  miloniana.  “  P. 
Clodius  Senator  Sedidofus  erat." 

20.  - accufadonis  in  Verrem  Libri  4'1 

fragmentum. 

21.  - —  deoffidis, liber  iu,,&  mediapars  2di. 

22.  Alexandri  M.  ad  Ariftotelem,  egiftolae:  una  cum 
illius  hiftoria. 

23.  Inferuntur  in  pagina  vacante  fub  initium,  Verfus 
luforii,  “  de  Sum  &  non  fum,  de  non  fum  &  fui,  de  efle 
&  non  efle,  deidem  &  non  idem,"  &c.  Codex  membra¬ 
naceus. 

2683. 

C.  Julii  Claris.  xv. 

1 .  De  Bello  Gallico.  Libri  7  cum  A.  Herdi  Lib°.  8vo. 

2.  De  Bello  Civili  Liber  3. 

3.  Liber  de  Bello  Alexandrino. 

4.  - ; - Africano. 

5.  - - - Flifpanico. 

Codex  membranaceus,  eleganter  ornatus.  In  ipfo 
corpore  litene  prima;  feriptum  eft  Uteris  aureis,  “  Orbem 
terrarum,noftris  armis,noftravirtute  perdomitumadunam 
tandem  rededimus  (fic)  monarchiam."  Scilicet  Ctefar, 
qui  intra  literam  in  curru  depidus  eft. 

2684. 

Titi  Livii  Hiftoriarum  decas  3“.  Codex  membranaceus 
elegans.  xv. 

2685. 

1 .  An.  Torq.  Sev.  Boetii,  de  confolatione  philofophiae, 

libri  5.  x. 

2.  Fab.  Fulgentii  Plan.  Mythologiarum  libri  3. 

3.  - -  expofitio  Virgilianae  condnen- 

tiae,  feu  allegoria  librorum  Virgilii,  1  libro. 

4.  Mar.  Min.  Fel.  Capellae,  de  nuptiis  philologiae,  et 
de  feptem  artibus  liberalibus,  libri  9.  Codex  membra- 


Ifidori 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS, 


Num.  2686 — 2695. 

2686. 

Midori  Hifp.  epifcopi,  Originum,  five  etymologiarum 
libri  20.  Codex  membranaceus.  ix. 

2687. 

M.T.  Ciceronis,  in  Verrem  Libri  7.  &  in  M.  Antonium, 
orationes.  Codex  membranaceus,  elegans.  xv. 

2688. 

1.  Luitprandi  Crem.  epi.  Rerum  per  Europam  gefta- 

rum  libri  3  priores,  et  pars  quarti.  xi. 

2.  Tabula  Ventorura. 

3.  Hymnus  in  dedicatione  S.  Michaelis,  cum  notis 

muficis.  ix. 

4.  Vocabularii  Graeco-latini  pars. 

5.  Q.  Horatii  FI.  Epodai',  9  poftremae :  cum  expofi- 
tione. 

6.  - Carmen  feculare. 

7.  - - Epiitolarum  libri  duo,  et  fatira;  pri- 

ms  initium. 

8.  Prifciani  Grammaticae,  libri  quarti  pars  pofterior, 
et  quinti  prior. 

9.  M.  An.  Sev.  Boetii.  De  mufica,  libri  2  priores. 
«e  Omnium  quidem  perceptio  fenfuum  ita  fponte  ac  na- 
turaliter  quibufdam  viventibus  adeft.” 

Codex  membranaceus,  ex  diveriis  codd.,  setate 
diveriis,  compofitus.  x. 

2689. 

["2689 - 2714.  Duodecimo^] 

Pub.  Terentii  Afri  Comoediae.  xiv. 

Codex  membranaceus,  elegans,  fine  verfuum  dif- 
tin&ione  fcriptus  ;  forma  minoris. 

2690. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  de  amicitia,  liber.  xv. 

Libellus  membranaceus,  elegantior. 

•2691. 

1.  M.  T.  Ciceronis,  de  amicitia,  liber.  xv. 

2.  Plutarchi,  de  liberis  educandis  liber,  Guarino  Ve- 
ronenfi  Interprete.  Codex  membranaceus. 

2692. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  de  officiis,  libri  3.  Romae,  1498.  Co¬ 
dex  folito  elegantior,  membranaceus.  xv. 

2693. 

1.  Excerpta  ex  Lactanuo  Placidio  fuper  Statii  The- 

baida-  Xv. 

2.  Excerpta  ex  incognito  Expofitore  Statii  Thebaidos. 

3.  Excerpta  ex  C.  Firmiani  Lattantii  lnftitutionibus 
contra  Gentes. 

4.  Thome  de  Walfingham  Expofitio  in  Virgilii  Ae- 
neida,  Bucolica,  &  Georgica  ;  in  Perfium,  Prudentium, 
Statium,  See.  Codex  chartaceus. 

2694. 

Tid  Lucretii  Cari,  de  rerum  natura,  libri  6.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus,  elegantior.  Formse  minoris. 

2695. 

1.  P.  Virgilii  Maronis,  Bucolicorum,  liber.  xv. 

2.  - Aeneidos,  liber  fextus  cum  Glollls. 

3.  Moretum  Virgilii. 

4.  Ovidii  Sapphus  ad  Phaonem  epiflola. 

5.  Venant.  Hen.  Clem.  Fortunati,  Cannen  de  refur- 
re&ioneDomini  “Salve  felle  dies.’’  Dubium  an  Fortunati. 

6.  Lafrantii  Poema  de  Phcenice. 

**  Eft  locus  in  primo  felix  oriente  remotus.” 

7.  Homeri  Batrachomyomachia ;  ex  verfione  Aretini 
metrica. 

8.  Grammatica.  “  Partes  Grammatice  funt  qua: uor.” 

9.  Ovidii  Faftoriun  libri  quinti  pais. 

jo.  Sentential  morales,  verfibus  elegiacis.  “  Ver- 
borum  levitas,”  cec.  Libellus  chartaceus. 


Num.  2696 — 2707. 

2  696. 

Rhetoricorum  ad  C.  Herennium,  libri  4.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus. 

2697. 

Tid  Livii  Librorum  Epitomte-  Codex  membranaceus. 
Ad  finem,  folia  fex  poftrema  Compendii  Hilforici,  a 
Jo.  Boccado,  typis  leripta.  xv. 

2698. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  de  officiis,  libri  3  :  imperfe&i  in  imdo, 
et  alibi.  _  Ad  finem_“  Ego  Paris  Vomano  feripfi  hunc 
totum  librum  paucis  quidem  diebus,  et  complevi 
vigilia  fanai  Marci  1423.  fexto  Kal.maias.  Candide 
dum  celebrarentur  Vefpi.” 

Pracedunt  folia  quatuor  ex  Codice  vetuftiore,  de 
philofophia  moralL  Codex  membranaceus. 

2699. 

1.  P.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  de  trillibus,  libri  5.  xin. 

2.  O.  Horatii  Flacci,  de  arte  poetic  liber. 

3-  Sermonum  five  Satyrarum  Khri  2. 

Omnes  cum  gloffis.  Codex  membranaceus. 

2700. 

M.  Val.  Martialis  Epigrammatum  Lib'  14.  Xjv. 

Codex  membranaceus. 


2701. 

1.  P.  Virgilii  Mar.  Bucolica. 

2- - Georgicorum  libri  4. 

3*  - - Aeneidos  libri  1 2. 

4.  Vita. 

5.  P.  Virgilii  Mar.  Moretum. 

6.  ■ - — - - -  Priapeia. 

7-  - -  de  Culice,  ad  Oftavium,  liber. 

8-  - Ell  &  Non. 

9-  - de  inftitutione  boni  virL 

Codex  membranaceus  fcriptus  A".  1447.  &fuitolim 
A.  Manud. 


2702. 

M.  T.  Varronis,  de  reruftica,  libri  3.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus,  elegans,  picWis  exiiniis  ox- 
natus. 


1.  P.  Ovidii  Naf.  Faftorum  libri  6. 

_  - de  remedio  amoris,  Jibe; 

diver  In.  Codex  membranaceus. 


xm. 

net  mi 


..27°4*. 

1.  C.  Crifpi  Salluftii,  Hiftoria  confpirationis  CadJi- 
narire- 

2-  - - -  de  bello  Jugurthino,  liber. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

27°5- 

M.  Jun.  Juftini,  Epitome  hiftoriar.  Trogi  Porupcli :  Jj- 
bii  44;  cum  notis  ad  finem  additis.  Scriptus  erat 
Codex  per  Chriftophorum  Schioppum  Veronenfem, 
Pilauri,  1452.  x  v_ 

Codex  membranaceus.  Not  a:  feriore  manu,  furcr 
chartam. 

2706. 

1  -  P.  Virgilii  Mar.  Epitaphia,  a  diverfis  feripta. 

2‘  “  Bucolica  ^  cum  Gloffis 

3* - Aeneidos  libri  12.3  &c  notulij. 

4- - - - Verfus  defeipfo. 

5.  Oaaviani  Imperatoris  Verfus  tie  Virgiiio. 

Codex  raembrmaceus,  elegans. 

2707. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  F.piftolarum  ad  familiares,  lib.  16.  xv. 
Camilli  capilupi  codex,  membranaceus. 

6 


Con-ini 


.a « 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas, 


709 


Num.  2708 — 2720. 

2708. 

Corvini  MefTalae  Epitome  Romanae  hiftoriae,  de  Od. 
Augufti  progenie,  primoq;  urbis  Romae  regimine. 
Codex  membranaceus,  elegans,  cum  Num. 333 2.  com- 
padus. 

2709. 

P.  Ovidii  Nafonis  Epiftolarum  heroidum  liber.  xii. 

Maxima  ultimas  Epiftola:  pars  defideratur. 

Codex  membranaceus. 

2710. 

x.  Q.  Horatii  Flacci  Carminum  libri  4.  Libro  imo. 
notulas  adjiciuntur.  xv. 

2.  - Epodwi/  libellus. 

3.  - -  -—-Carmen  feculare. 

Codex,  fcriptus  per  Angelum  Ariminenfem,  Ro¬ 
mae,  1443,  elegans,  membranaceus. 

2711. 

1.  C.  Cr.  Salluftii,  de  confpiratione  Catilinaria,  liber* 

xv. 

2.  - de  bello  Jugurthino,  liber. 

3.  Poggii  invettiva  in  Fr.  Philelphum,  &  epiftola  ad 
Leonard um  Aretinum.  Codex  membranaceus,  elegans. 

2712. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  Orator,  ad  Brutum.  xv. 

Liber  dim  Conventus  Cafe  Dei,  1477,  membra¬ 
naceus. 


27x3- 

1.  Ifidori  Hifpalenfis  Etyraologiarum  Liber  primus, 

fc.  de  Grammatica  xx. 

2.  Commentarius  in  incerti  cujufdam  Grammaticam 

tcy.i<px\®>.  XII. 

3.  A.  Man.  T.  Boetii,  in  Porphyrii  Ifgagogen.  liber, 
imperfedus.  Codex  membranaceus. 

2714. 

Jun.  Juvenalis  Satirse.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus,  manu  elegantiffimS  fcriptus. 

2715- 

[Quarts.'} 

M.  Macrobii  Theod.  Saturnalium  libri  7.  xv. 

2716. 

j.  M.  T.  Ciceronis,  in  Catilinam  orationes.  4.  xx. 

2.  C.  Ci'ifp.  Salluftii,  in  Ciceronem  oratioj  cum  illius 
refponfo. 

3.  M.  T.  Ciceronis  pro  M.  Marcello,  oratio,  ctftAfro?. 

4.  - de  officiis,  libri  3  :  nifi  quod  1 1 

capita  defiderantur  in  principio. 

5.  - pro  M.  Marcello,  orationis  finis, 

&  initium  illius  pro  Q.  Ligario. 

Inter  4  &  5,  pagina  continens  finem  Ciceronis  de 
Senedute  libelli.  xx. 

6.  Fragmentum  ex  Cicerone  de  Senedute. 

2717. 

P.  Terentii  Afri  Comoediae  6.  xv. 

2718. 

M.  Jun.  Juftini,  Epitome  hiftoriarum  Trogi  Pompeii, 

ecriActrlof.  XV. 

27x9- 

Noni  Marcelli  de proprietate  fermonum.  Liber,  ix. 
2720. 

P.  Sur.  Statii,  Thebaidos,  libri  12.  xii. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  2721 — 2736. 

272  J. 

P.  Terentii  Afri,  Comoediae  6.  xr. 
2722. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  de  legibus,  libri  3.  xv- 

2723; 

1.  M.  T.  Ciceronis,  de  amicitia,  liber.  XV. 

2* - —  de  fenedute,  liber. 

3*  - - - - Paradoxa  Stoicorum  6. 

2724. 

1.  Q.  Horatii  FI.  Carminum,  libri  4;  cum  Scholiis 

XIII. 

2* - de  arte  poetica,  liber :  cum  Scholiis. 


3‘ - -  Epodcon  liber  :  cum  Scholiis. 

4* - Carmen  feculare,  cum  Scholiis. 

5* - Epiftolarum  libri  2.  cum  Schol. 

6*  * - Sermo&um  libri  2.  cum  Scholiis. 

7* - Vita. 

2725. 

1.  Q,  Horatii  FI.  Carminum  libri  4. 

2.  - de  arte  poetica,  liber. 

3* - Epodon  liber. 

4- - Carmen  feculare. 

5. - Epiftolar.  libri  2.  T 

6* - Sermonum  liber  prior  :  cum  Scho¬ 


liis  in  omnes. 


2726. 

P.  Virgilii  M.  Aeneidos  libri  1 2  :  fcripti  per  Franc,  de 

Camuciis,  1463.  xv. 

2727. 

Q.  Curtii,  de  rebus  geftis  Alexandri  M.  libri  12.  xv. 

2728. 

M.  An.  Lucani,  de  Bello  Civili,  libri  10.  cum  Scholiis. 

XI. 


2729. 

1.  Sext.  Jul.  Frontini,  Stratagematic«n  libri  4. 

axtpaXof.  x, 

2.  Eutropii,  Epitome  Romanae  hiftoriae,  10  libris. 

2730. 

D.  Jun.  Juvenalis  Satyrae.  xv. 

2  73r- 

j.  L.  Flori,  Epitome  in  fingulos  libros  T.  Livii.  xv. 
2. - Rerum  Romanorum  libri  4. 

2732. 

Scholiaftes  in  Horatium.  XIII,' 

2  733* 

1  M.  T.  Ciceronis,  Orator,  ad  Brutum.  xv. 

- - de  Claris  oratoribus,  liber,  quidi- 

citur  Brutus. 


27J4- 

Q.  Horatii  Flacci  Opera.  xv. 

2  73  5- 

Glolfae,  antiquorum  audoritate  roboratae,  et  ftudio  eru- 
ditorum  colledae.  Eft  enim  Pap'ue  Elementarium 
dodrinse,  five  Vocabulariuxn.  x. 

2736. 

1.  M.  T.  Ciceronis,  de  oratore,  libri  3.  ix. 

2.  Verfus  excerpti  de  libro  Fortunati  Pbri. 

1.  P.  Ovidii 
8  S 


Catalogus  Librcrum  MSS. 


710 


Num.  2737—2753. 

_  2737- 

f.  P.  Ovidii  Nafonis  Metamorphofewy  libri  12.  x. 

2. - Fafloram  libri  6 ;  cum  Calendario. 

Nonnunquam  inter  lineas  Gloffa:,  et  notulas  in  mar¬ 
gined 

2738. 

P.  Ovidii  Nafonis,  Faftorum  libri  6 :  cum  gloffa.  xni. 

273  9* 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  Rhetoricorum,  ad  Herennium,  libri  4: 

cum  glofi'a.  xv. 

2740. 

M.  Jun.  Juflini  Epitome  hiftoriarum  Philippicarum  Trogi 
Pompeii,  1451.  xv. 

2741. 

Aliud  Exemplar.  xv. 


Num.  2753—2765. 

4.  Cl.  Claudiani  in  Nuptias  Honorii  Augufti  et  i\L- 
ria:  Fefcenina,  Alcaicum. 

5.  - in  eafdem  Nuptias  Carmen. 

6.  - de  tertio  et  quarto  Confulatu  IIo- 

norii  Augufti,  Panegyris. 

7.  - de  Confulatu  Mallii  Theodori,  Pa¬ 

negyris. 

8.  - de  Laudibus  Stiliconis,  Libri  tres. 

9.  - de  fexto  Honorii  Confulatu,  Pane¬ 

gyris. 

10.  - - - de  Bello  Getico,  liber. 

11.  - - - Idyllia,Epigrammata, etEpiftola:, 

ordine  promifcuo. 

12.  - Laus  Serenas  Regina?,  Uxoris 

Stiliconis. 

13.  - Epithalamium  Palladii  et  Cele- 

rinte. 

14.  - - Gigantomachia. 

15.  - de  raptu  Proierpincc.  Libri  3  finis 

defideratur. 


2742. 

P.  Ovidii  Naf.  Metamorphofewy  libri  12.  cum  Gloffis  et 
notulis,  Libror.  1.  2.  3.  &4.  non  minima:  partes  de- 
fiderantur.  xm. 

2743- 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  Epiftolarum  ad  familiares,  libri  16. 

finis  defideratur.  xv. 

2744. 

1.  P.  Virgilii  M.  Bucolics,  Georgica,  Sc  Aeneis.  xv. 

1.  Probae  Falconiae  Centones  ex  Virgilio,  ad  teftimo- 
nium  V.  &  N.  Teftamenti. 

3.  P.  S.  Statii,  Achilleidcs  libri  duo,  finis  defideratur. 

2745* 

1 .  Flores  Senecae,  Virgilii,  Ovidii,  &c.  xv. 

2.  iEfopi  fabulae,  metrice. 

Paffim  ad  marginem  fcholia. 

27+6. 

1 .  Libellus  qui  in  Colophone  Prfcianus  Minor  nun- 

cupatur.  Efi  enim  Prifciani  de  ordinatione  partium  Ora- 
tionis  Liber  primus  et  fecundi  pars  fere  media.  xm. 

2.  Ejufdem  de  Accentibus  l.iber. 

3.  Aelii  Donati  Artis  fecundte  pars  pofterior.  Sc.  de 
Barbarifmo,  Soloecifmo,  &c. 

2747. 

M.  Jun.  Juflini  Epitome  hiftoriar.  Trogi  Pompeii,  xv. 

274s. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  Rhetoricorum,  ad  Herennium,  libri  4. 

xv. 

2749. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis,  Epiftolarum  ad  familiares  libri  16.  xv. 
275°. 

P.  Terentii  Afri  Vita  4-  opera.  Paflim  inter  lineas  Gloffa: 

et  ad  Marginem  Scholia.  x. 

27  51; 

P.  Terentii  Afri  Opera.  xv. 

2752. 

L.  Ann.  Senecae  Epillola  ad  Lucilium ;  prxm'ttuntur 
ejufdem  et  Pauli  Eniftolre  rputuce  '-iupuofithia;.  xv. 

2753- 

1.  Cl.  Claudiani  in  Ruffinum  Libri  2.  xv. 

2.  - - -  de  Be'lc  Gildcr.ico  Liber. 

3.  - - - - -  in  Eutropium  Libri  duo. 


2754- 

P.  Virgilii  M.  Opera.  xv. 

27  5  f* 

P.  Virgilii  M.  Opera :  feripta  per  Auguftinum  de 
Tervigio.  xv. 

Z756. 

Auli  Gellii  Noftium  feu  Vigiliar.  Atticar.  libri  20.  xv. 

2757- 

Quinti  Curtii,  de  rebus  geftis  Alexandri  M.  libri  10.  duo 
priores  defiderantur.  xv. 

2758. 

P  Ovidii  Naf.  Heroidum  Epiftolae.  Vigefima:  prima: 
Epiftolae  12  priores  tantum  verficuli  hie  reperiuntur. 

xiv. 

2759- 

Valerii  Maximi,  dictorum  &  factor mr\  Rcmanorum 
colleftanea;  9  libris  :  cum  gloffa.  xv. 

276c. 

M.  Vitruvii  Pollionis,  de  architeftura,  libri  10.  xv. 

2761. 

P.  Virgilii  M.  Bucolica,  Georgica,  &  Aeneis.  xv. 

2762. 

1.  M.  Jun.  Juflini  Epitome  hiftoriarum  Trogi  Pom¬ 

peii.  Libri  44.  xv 

2.  Leodl.  Aretini  Comentarius  de  primo  bello  Punico. 

2763. 

Prifciani,  de  Arte  Grammatica  libri  16  priores.  xi. 

2764. 

Cornelii  Taciti,  Aftorum  diurnalium  Auguftae  hiftoriae 
liber  11— 21.  Annalium  fcilicet  Libri  6  pofteriores, 
et  Hiftoriarum  Libri  5.  I11  fine  ait  Scriptor  :  £i  In  ex- 
emplari  tantum  erat :  Si  quifpiam  hinc  deferipferit 
novum,  feiat  me  quantum  reperi  fideliter  ab  exemplari 
tranfcripftffe.” 

2765- 

1.  Pauli  Orofii,  hiftoriarum  libri  7.  xv. 

2.  Lucii  Flori,  faftorum  memorabilium  ab  urbe  coii- 
dita  ufq;  ad  tempora  C.  Augufti,  libri  4. 

>  3-  Epitome  in  fingulos  libros  Tit.  Livii.  quam  con- 
didiffe  dicitur  Florus,  licet  non  credatur. 

4.  C.  Julii  Caefaris  Epiftolae  3  ad  Oppium,  Corne* 
lium  &  Ciceronem. 

Adriani  Imp.  Verfus. 


C.  Zenobii 


Bibliothecas  Harleianas. 


7U 


Num.4765 — 2778. 

0rat,'°  “  IaUrai:°ne  f“a’  ad 

2766. 

Julii  Firmici  Materni,  Mathefeos,  five  Aftronomicorfim 
libiorum  pars.  In  cujus  fine,  “  Nil  deficit  fecundum 
exemplar  montifcafinen.”  xv 

2767. 

M.  Vjtruvii  Pol.  do  architeftura,  dibri  10.  ix. 

2768. 

Auli  Gelli,  Noftium  Atticarum,  libri  20.  xv. 

2769. 

P.  0vidn  Naf.  Metamorphofea.  libri  i  Xv 
Paflmi  notula  ad  margincm  et  inter  lineas. 

2770. 

1  ■  Virgilii  Mar.  Aeneidos  libri  t  a .  XII. 

2771. 

'■  M-  T-  Ciceronis,  Orator,  ad  Brutum  xv 

didiuTsTumaT —  dc  ckris  oratoribus’ liber- 

2772. 

,  '•  P-  Virgilii  M.  Aeneidos  liber  j»  nifi  „uod 

11-  UnUm  a“  al,erumi  «  fiagmema  V. 
Sa‘yrarUm  P“rS 

3j  9vSed;“i-  ®Peris  PafchaHs  libri  a  priores  ■  nifi 
quod  defunt  folia  priora  tria  quatuorve  3P 

•  *■  ,Ambi  “»«>«  Th-  *  fornnio  Scipionis,  lib.  a 

axsipx\o  1  xxt  xltKeroi. 

j.Fragmentum  lCfolior.InterpretisinJuvenalisSalyras. 

„  .  277  3- 

1.  Servu  Grammatici,  VocabulariumLatino-graeeum. 

2.  Diomedis  Grammatica. 

libri  i1'  T'  Epiftolarum  ad  familiares  8 

libu  priores.  Libia  oflavi  finis  defideratur 

tantm.“ra  “  Johannem  PaP™-  “  Qui  cupitis  fal- 

XIII. 

__  ,  ..  2774- 

Valero  Maximi,  ditftorum  &  fadorum  Romanoram  col- 
lectanea,  9  libris. 

Codex  membranaceus  elegans  j  folia  habens  95. 

2775. 

Pnfciani  Grammatices  libri  1 8.  dVxcroi.  xu. 

2776. 

M.  Accii  Plauti.  Comoediae  8.  Videlicet.  xv. 

1.  Amphitrio.  2.  Afinaria.  3.  Aulularia.  4.  Captivi. 

5.  Curcuho.  6.  Cafina.  7.  Ciftellaria.  8.  Epidicus. 

2777. 

r-  P- Vtrgilii  Maronis  Aeneis,  libris  12.  xiii. 

gilii*  °aaviani  Caefaris  &  Ovidii  verfus  in  laudem  Vir- 

3-  Nomina  &  Ofticia  Mufarum  :  metrics. 
de+uxore.‘°  P'aS‘S  E^p,‘  verfus  9uin<li  Et  problems 

2778. 

1 .  Sext.  Aurelii  Propertii,  libri  4. 
liber'.  ^  Val'  CatUli‘  Ver°n'  ad  Co™lium  Nepotem, 


Num. 


2779 — 2790. 


2779. 

Valerii  Maximi,  diaorum  &  faclorum  Romauorunl  eol. 

lettanea,  9  libris.  XYj 

2780. 

t  1  *P’  ^ec.  J*un-  Epiftolarum  libri  8. 

Jacobus  Macarius  Venetus  fcripfu  in  civitate  Senar.  1461. 
Initio  pauca  defiderantur.  Xv~ 

2  781. 

Tm  Lu-u  Patavini,  de  fecundo  bello  Punico,  libri  ro 
icil.  a  21  ad  30.  Script!  A.  D.  1461.  xv 

2782. 

Servii  expofitio  Operum  Virgilii.  lx 

„  2783. 

M.  An.  Lucam  Pharfalim  libri  10.  14SS.  xv. 

2784. 

i.  M.  T.  Ciceronis,  de  Officijs,  lib.  3.  „„ 

Paradoxa  Stoicor.  fex. 
de  Amici tia,  liber. 

O  ,  7.  .  ,  „  de  Seneflute,  liber. 

5-  S.  Auguftim,  de  Vero  Cultu  libri  2 

6.  L.  An.  Senecae,  de  formula  honefiae  vitae  liber. 

27  8j. 

CFp™g3ra“f1 6  in"r“m  £ccMae  Samm:  Volume 

XIV. 

2786. 

Bibhafacra  Vulgata  cum  capitulis,  prologis,  &  internreta 
tione  nominum  Hebraicorum  ^  ®  nterpreta- 

6  priora  Capita  Libri  Genefeos  defiderantur.  X‘V' 

2787. 

Mmalein  ufum  D.  Pauli,  Londini. 

Littera;  deauratae  plerumque  excifte. 

2  788. 

Evangelia  4,  Latine,  aureis  literis,  capifalibus,  ut  dicunt 
pulchernme  fcripta.  VIII  ’ 

Inlunt  autem  fequentia. 

vum  Adl?amar>:u"'PaPa'»EpilloIa  S.  Hieronymi.  « No- 
"  EInres  fuilfe  qui  Evan. 

dem  Aie^LCs--P!anUm  EpM°'a "  “  Amraoni“ 

4.  S.  Hieronymi  ad  Damafuin  iterum,  «  Sciendum 
etiam  ne  quis. 

5.  Argumentum  Evangelii  fecundum  Matthaeum. 

6.  Brevianum  ejufdem,  in  28  capitulis. 

7.  Eufebu  Canones  in  Evangeliftas. 

W^tthaei  P;aura.  a  aliorum  Evangeliftarum 
ad  imtium  Evangeliorum  propriorum  :  una  cum  animali- 
bus  quae  fecundumEzechielem  Evangeliftas  reprefemant. 
Evan^s  C“ra’  Brevlar,a  Pracfiguntur  fingulis 

10.  Capitulare  Evangeliorum,  de  circuloanni. 

2789. 

Bibliomm  volumen  fecundum  :  verfio  Latina  :  incipicns 
fcilicet  a  proverbus  Salomonis.  Cum  prologis  B  PHie. 
ronymi.  r  6 

xv. 

279°. 

Quatuor  Evangelia  Latine:  cnm  Hieronymi  ad  Dama- 
ium  cpiftola,  Argumentis,  &  Prologis,  &c.  ut  fupra 
braicor  ’  Ct  Ctiam  ^nterPretat‘one  nominum  He- 

Hie  codex  venerandus  ad  S.  Ciricii  Nivemcnfis 
Eccleliam  ohm  pertinebat,  ut  ex  fequentibus  patet. 

9  Me 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


712, 


Num.  279c* — 2799. 


«  Me  quicunq;  legis,  Herimanni  fis  memor,  oro  : 
Cujus  me  lludio  poffidet  iile  locus, 

Obtulit  Ecclefiae  fibi  commifiae  memorandus 
Praeful  me,  fateor,  pro  bonitatis  ope : 

Me  Sando  Ciricio  tali  fub  conditione, 

En,  dedit,  ut  pereat,  qui  cupit  abltrahere.” 
Inferitur  etiam  Catalogus  Librorum  &  Veflimento- 
rum,  Scc.S.Cyricii.  Et  alio  loco, Nomina  Sandorum  loci 
illius,  ut  videtur :  inter  quos  ell  Herimannus  donator 
hujus  Codicis.  Et  in  prima  pagina  occurrit  Cenfura 
Hugonis,  Nivemenfis  epifcopi,  his  verbis  : 

“  Notum  fieri  volumus  omnibus  Sande  Dei  Ecclefie 
filiis,  qd.  ego  Hugo  Nivemenfis  eps  Rotgerium  Prio- 
rem  Abbatie  Ice  Marie  &  fci  Stephani,  cum  duobus  mo- 
nachis  Anulpho  fcil.  Sc  Adalardo  Theutonico,  propter 
inobedientiam  quam  Deo  &  michi  fecerunt,  feci  venire 
nudis  pedibus  ufq;  ad  altare  fci  Cirici  ante  prefentiam 
meam  Sc  totius  ecclefie,  ad  fatisfaciendum  Deo  &  michi, 
in  ipfa  felliviiate  fci  Stephani  poll  natale  Dili.” 

2791  • 

r4to.l  S.  Matthcei  &  Marci  Evangelia  Latine  :  cum 
glofl'a.  xiii. 

Liber  olim  erat  Monallerii  B.  Marie  de  Stodeley. 

2792. 

Ezechielis  Prophetia  Latine :  cum  prologo  S.  Hieronymi, 
et  glolfa.  xii. 

2793* 

Pfalterium  Latine  :  cum  epillola  S.  Hieronymi  de  Pfalte- 
rio  ;  quae  de  70  interpretum  editione  corrupta  fint. 

VIII. 

2794. 

Ezrae  liber  Latine  :  cum  glolTa.  xm. 

2795- 

Evangelia  4,  Latine  rubro  liquore  fcripta.  .  xi. . 

Praefiguntur  Prologus  4  Evangelior.  Hieronymi 
epillola  ad  Damafum,  Eufebii  Canones  cum  Argumento 
h  Epillola  de  eifdem,  Sc  Argumenta  &  Breviaria  fingulis 
Evangeliis.  Accedit  Capitulare  Evangeliorum  pro  toto 
anno. 

2796. 

Pfalterium  Latine  :  cum  prologo  S.  Hieronymi ;  8c  etiam 
Juliani  de  Vitorio,  t.  t.  Damafi  prefbyteri.  xv. 


2797* 

Evangelia  4.  Latine  literis  aureis  cxarata  :  cum  Eufebii 
Canonibus,  Hieronymi  ad  Damafum  epiftola,  prologo 
4  Evangelior.  Arguments  Sc  Breviariis  fmgulor.  Sc 
capitulari  pro  toto  anno  Scripta.  vjn. 

2798.  Sc  2799. 

[Folio.]  Biblia  Vulgata  :  quibus  etiam  inferuntur, 

1.  Prsefatio  Bibliothece  exametris  verfibus.  xii. 

2.  S.  Hieronymi  Epillola  ad  Paulinum,  de  omnibus 
divine  hiflorie  libris. 


3.  . - • - -  Prologus  in  Pentateuchum. 

4.  Prefatio  in  Jofuam. 

5.  S.  Hieronymi  Prefatio  in  Regum  4  libros. 

6.  - — -  in  Efaiam  Sc  Jeremiam. 

7.  Jeremiae  Oratio,  et  epillola. 

8.  Prefatio  in  Ezechielem. 

9.  S.  Hieronymi  Prologus  inDanielemj  Sc  12  pro- 
phetas  j  quibus  tamen  fingulis  ell  etiam  fuus  prologus. 

10.  - - in  librum  Job  &  Pfalmorum. 

1 1 .  Pfalmorum  verfioGallica,  Romana,  8c  Hebraea. 

1 2.  Hieronymi  prologus  in  proverbia  Salomonis. 

1 3.  Prologi  in  libros  Sapientiae.  Jefu  filii  Syrac. 

1 4.  Hieronymi  Prologus  in  libros  Paralipomenon  cum 
alia  prefatione. 

j  3.  Prologus  in  librum  Ezrc. 


Num.  2799 — 2802. 

16.  S.  Hieronymi  Prologis  in  librum  Tobie. 

17.  Prologi  in  lib.  Judith,  Eller,  &  Maccabaeorum. 

18.  S.  Hieronymi  pra:fatio  4  Evangelior.  ad  Dama¬ 
fum:  8c  alia. 

19.  S.  Eufebii  Canones,  cum  prologo  &  argumento. 

20.  Praefationes  in  fingula  Evangelia  &  Adus  Apof- 
tolicos. 

21.  S.  Hieronymi  Prologus,  ut  dicitur,  Epiflolarum 
Canonicarum. 

22.  Prefatio  in  Pauli  epiltolas,  &  argumentum  &  pre¬ 
fatio  in  Epillolam  ad  Romano's,  cc  argumenta  ad  lingu¬ 
las. 

23.  Prefatio  in  Apocalypfin. 

24.  Sunt  etiam  Capitula  fingulis  libris,  &  Summaria 
fingular.  paginar. 

In  ultima  pagina  primi  Tomi  fic  feribitur  : 

“  Liber  fande "Marie  fancliq;  Nycolai  in  Arindein  : 
quern  fi  quis  abllulerit,  morte  moriatv.r,  in  lartagine 
coquatur,  caducus  morbus  inflet  eum  &  febres,  et  rote- 
tur  &  fufpendatur.  Amen.” 

280O.  2801.  flf  2802. 

Paflionale  :  feu,  Gella  Sanctorum,  per  totum  annum  ; 
cum  Calendario.  xm.  Inlunt  autem  Vitae,  1.  S.  Bafilii 
Cefarienfis  epi.  fol.  1 .  1.  Fulgcntii.  3.  Martini.  4.  Mauri, 
Abbatis.  4.  C.oncordii.  6.  Eufrofine.  7.  Genovefe. 

8.  Petri  Balfami.  9.  Theagenis.  ic.  Symeonis,  Monachi. 
ii.Luciani.  12.  Juliani,  Bafiliffe  Sc  Celfi.  13.  Pauli 
heremite.  14.  Hylarii.  i5.-Felicis,  per  Bedam.  16.  Furfei. 
17.  Pontiani.  18.  Diodori  8c  Mariniani.  19.  Seballiani. 
2o.Agnetis.  21.  Fruduofi,  Auguris,  Sc  Eulogi.  22.  Vin- 
centii.  23.  Anallafii.  24.  Trium  fratrum.  25.  Babille. 
26.  Pclycarpi.  27.  Tirii  Sc  Galieni.  28.  Brigide.  29. 
Blafii.  30.  Antonini.  3  1.  Agathe.  32.Vodafti.  33.  Amantii. 
34.  Valentini.  35.  Fauftiui  &  Jovite.  36.  Juliane.  37. 
Sereni.  38.  Albini.  39.  Perpetue  Sc  Felicitatis.  40.  Oua- 
draginta  Martyrum.  .41.  Gregorii  pape.  42.  Alexandra. 
43.  Heriberti.  44.  Johannis.  45.  Theodoriti.  46.  Pigmenii. 
47.  Achaici.  48.  Ludgeri.  49.  Walerici.  50.  Theodofie. 
51.  Marie  Egyptiace.  52.  Arabrofii.  53.  Herenei.  54. 
Frontonei.  55.  Hyppopodii.  56.  Georgii.  57.  Alexan¬ 
dra  58.  Marci.  59.  Vidorini.  60.  Severini.  61.  Richarii. 
62.  Ananie  Sc  Petri.  63.  Jacobi.  64.  Philippi.  65.  Wal- 
burgis.  66.  De  inver.tione  Re  Crucis.  67.  Vite  Alexandri, 
Eventii,  &  Theodoli.  62.  Quiriaci.  69.  Floriani.  70. 
Vidoris.  71.  Nichofai.  72.  Gordiani  &  Epimachi.  73. 
Beati.  74.  Simplicii,  Faullini  8c  Antimi.  75.  Pancratii. 
76.  Nerei  Sc  Achillei.  77.  Domitille.  78.  Servatii.  79. 
Gengulfi.  80.  Vidoris  &  Corone.  81.  Orientis.  82.  Petri. 
Andree,  Pauli,  &  Dionifie.  83.  Peregrini.  84.  Urbani. 
85.Germani.  86.  Maxiinini.  87.  Symeonis  Monachi. 
88.-  Marcellini  &  Petri.  89.  48  Martyrum.  9o.Herafmi. 
91.  Bonifacii  martyris,  et  epifcopi.  92.  Gemmor.  93. 
Dorothee.  94.  Celfi.  95.  Adelheidis.  96.  Suiberri.  97. 
Matthias  98.  Gerdrudis.  99.  Verene.  100.  Burgundo- 
fore.  101.  Katerine.  102.  Euphaxie.  103.  Marie  Mag¬ 
dalene.  104.  Ruberti.  105.  Potiti.  106.  Faufte.  107.  Ma- 
charii  &  Eugenii.  108.  35  Martyrum.  109.  Philie.  1 10. 
Eulalie.  iii.Montani  Sc  Gemelli.  1 12.  Neftoris.  113. 
Foce.  114.  Filemonis.  115.  Athali.  1 1 6.  Pionii.  117. 
Cuthberti.  118.  Marie  fororis  S.  Tecle.  119.  Lupi.  120. 
Eleutherii.  121.  Torpetis.  1  22.  Mar iani  &  Jacobi.  123. 
Vidoris.  124.  Sifinnii  Sc  Alexandri.  125.  Potentiane. 
126.  Canti,  Cantiani,  Sc  Cantanille.  127.  Donatiani  Sc 
Rogatiani.  128.  Sperati  Sc  fociorum. 

In  fecundo  Tomo.  129.  Medardi.  130.  Primi  Sc 
Felidani.  13 1.  Bafilidis,  Trophidis,  Sc  Mandalis.  132. 
Barnabe.  133.  Martine.  134.  Gervafii  &  Prothafii.  135. 
Albani.  136.  Euflafii.  137.  Paulini.  138.  Mulliole,  See, 
139.  Johannis  Sc  Pauli.  140.  7  dormientium.  141.  Petri 
Sc  Pauli,  cum  pidura.  142.  Jacobi.  143.  Martialis.  144. 
Fidei,  Spei  &  Charitatis.  145.  Careleli.  146.  Proceffi  & 
Martiniani.  147.  Vodalrici.  148-  Goaris.  149.  Kyliani 
8c  Sociorum.  150.  Cirilli.  151.  Anatolie.  152.  Patemiani. 


Bibliothecas  Harleiance. 


7r3 


Num.  2803 — 2806. 

153.  Rufine  8tSecunde.  154.  Hermagore.  155.  Eugenii. 
156.  Margarete.  157.  Ouirici  &  Julitte.  158.  Agilolfi. 
159.  Alexis.  160.  Praxedis.  161.  Marie  Magdalene. 
162.  Apollinaris.  163.  Chriftine.  164.  Jacobi.  165. 
Chriflofori.  166.  Glodefinde.  167.  Pantaleonis.  168. 
Felicis.  169.  Simplicii,  Fauftini,  &  Beatricis.  170.  Lupi. 
17 1.  Seraphie.  172.  Abdon  &  Sennen.  173.  Flore  & 
Lucille.  174.  Felicis.  175.  Germani.  176.  Stephanorum. 
177.  Memmei.  178.  Sixti  &  focior.  179. Jufti  &  Paftoris. 
iSo.Donati  &  Plilarini.  18  r.  Afre  &  focior.  182.  Juftini. 
i83.Ciriaci  &foc.  184.  Laurentii.  185.  Gaugerici.  186. 
Suianne.  187.  Eufi.  188.  Gratiliani.  189.  Radegundi. 
190.  Ypoliti  &  foe.  igi.Eufebii.  192.  Marie  virg.  193. 
Arnulfi.  194.  Agapiti.  195.  Filiberti.  196.  Privati.  197. 
Simphoriani.  198.  Timotbei  &  Apollinaris.  199.  Bar¬ 
tholomew  aoo.  Audoini.  201.  Genefii.  202.  Auguftini. 
203.  Bibiani.  204.  Juliani.  205.  S.  Johannis  Bapt.  206. 
Sabine.  207.  Savine.  208.  Felicis  &  Aufte.  209.  Paulini. 
210.  Egidii.  21  x.  Jufti.  212.  Antonini.  213.  Marcelli. 
214.  Evorcii.  215.  Marie  Virg.  216.  Adriani.  217.  Gor- 
gonii  &  Dorothei.  218.  Corbiniani.  219.  Exaltatio 
Crucis.  220.  De  paffione  imaginis  Dili.  221.  Paflio.  S. 
Cornelii.  222.  Cypriani.  223.  Eufemie.  224.  Lucie  &; 
Geminiani.  225.  Lamberti.  226.  Ferreoli.  227.  Januarii. 
228.  Mathei.  229.  Mauricii  &  foe.  230.  Sollempnii.  231. 
Tecle.  232.  Firmini.  233.  Opufculum  geftor.  Ludovici, 
Comitis  Arinftein,  fundatoris  noftri,  ut  dicitur  :  Unde 
coftigere  eft,  hunc  Codicem  quoq;  hujus  loci  fuifle  ; 
ut  &  precedens. 

In  tertio  Tomo,  234.  Paflio  S.  Juftine  &  Cipriani. 
235.  Cofme  et  Damiani.  236.  Wenzlai.  236.  Sermo  in 
dedicatione  S.  Michaelis  Ecclefiae.  237.  Vita  S.  Hiero- 
nymi.  238.Remigii.  239.  Leodegarii.  240.  Capracii  & 
Fidei.  241.  Sergii  &  Bachi.  241.  Philippi.  242.  Pelagie. 
243.  Dionifii  &  foe.  244.  Gereonis  &  f.  245.  Tarafi  & 

i.  246.  Lubentii.  247.  Kalixti.  248.  Eliphii.  249.  Galli. 
250.  Luce.  251.  Hylarionis.  252.  SeverL  253.  Severini 
254.  1 1000  virginum.  255.  Venantii.  256.  Crifpini. 
257.  Fronti.  258.  Manetis.  259.  Simonis  &  Jude.  260. 
Quintini.  26i.Cefarii.  262.  Benigni.  263.  Euftachi.  264. 
Periminii.  263.  Leonardi.  266.  Willibrordi.  267.  4  Coro- 
nator.  268.  Theodori.  269.  Martini.  270.  Johannis  epi. 
271.  Joh.  Patriarche.  272.  Menne.  273.  Cuniberti.  274. 
Paterni.  275.  Briccii.  276.  Felicis.  277.  Magni.  278. 
Aniani.  279.  Florini.  280.  Romani,  &c.  281.  Simplicii, 
282.  Columbani.  283.  Cecilie.  284.  Longini.  285. 
Clementis  pape.  286.  Petri  epi.  287.  Saturnini.  288. 
Crifanti  &  Darie.  289.  Fereoli  et  Ferucionis.  290.  Pelagii. 
291.  Ferucii.  292.  Andree  Ap.  293.  Amfani  &  Maxime. 
294.  Barbare.  295.  Nicolai  epi.  296.  Eucharii,  & c.  297. 
Fufciani  &  Vidorici.  298.  Lucie.  299.  Odilie.  300. 
Ignatii.  301.  Gregorii  Spoletani.  302.  Thome  Ap.  303. 
Vidorie  304.  Anaftafie.  305.  Eugenie.  306.  Johis  Apli. 
307.  Silveftri  pape.  308.  Columbe.  309.  Liobe.  310. 
Sabini.  31 1.  Livini.  312.  Edmundi  regis.  313.  Thome 
Cantuarienfis  epi. 

Liber  erat  S.  Marie  virginis  &  S.  Nicolai  in  Arin- 
fteyn  1464. 

2803.  &c  2804. 

Biblia  Vulgata  :  cum  Prologis,  Eufebii  Canonc,  &c. 

ufitatis.  xiii. 

Defunt  Epiftolce  Catholicae  &  Apocalypfis. 

Erat  Liber  B.  Marie  in  fuburbio  Wormatienfi. 

2805. 

Bibliorum,  vulgatce  verfionis,  pars  prior  ufque  ad  li- 
brum  Pfalmorum.  Codex  membranaceus,  in  fofio  ma- 
jori :  Ad  initium  et  in  fine  voluminis  habentur  folia 
quoedain  chartacea,  et  manu  recentiore  exarata.  ix. 

2806. 


Biblia  Vulgata  :  cum  prologis,  et  interpretatione  nomi- 
num  IJebraeorum.  Codex  membranaceus  in  8°. 

XIV. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.II. 


Num.  2807 — 2818. 

2807. 

Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  :  quee  Gulielmus  Petyt  ha* 
buit,  A'1  1665.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4'0.  xiv. 

2808. 

1.  Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  Tabula  Canonum  Evangelio* 
rum,  interpretatione  nominum  Hebraicorum,  &  capitu- 
lari  Ledionum  de  toto  amio.  Prasfiguntur  notte  quaidam 
tamde  audoribus  et  tranflationibus  lacrarum  feripturarum 
quam  ad  intelledum  epiftolte  S.  Hieronymi.  xiv. 

2.  Thome  de  Aquina,  Sermo  ad  informationem  totius 
divine  Scripture.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4'°. 

2809. 

Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis.  xiv. 

Praefigitur  Sermo  de  corpore  Chrifti.  xvi. 

Ad  finem  inferitur  manu  aliena,  modus  inveniendi 
numerum  aurum  &  literam  dominicalem  in  perpetuanu 
Codex  membranaceus  in  410. 

2810. 

Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  &  interpretatione  nomi¬ 
num  Hebraicorum.  xiv. 

Deficit  in  Epiftola  Pauli  ad  Thefialonicenfes.  Codex 
membranaceus  in  4'°. 

2811. 

Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis.  Initio  pauca  defideran- 
tur.  Ad  finem  feribitur  :  “  Explicit  Biblioteca.”  Sub- 
jeda  vocum  Hebraicarum  Interpretatio.  Codex  mem¬ 
branaceus  in  410  minore.  xiv. 

2812. 

Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  &  interpretatione  nomi¬ 
num  Hebraicor.  Codex  membranaceus,  in  8°.  xiv. 

2813. 

Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  et  Interpretatione  nomi¬ 
num  Hebraicor.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4*"  mi¬ 
nore.  xiv. 

2814. 

Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  et  interpretatione  nominum 
Hebraicor.  xiv. 

Inferuntur  Benedidiones  dicendae  per  totum  annum, 
et  Calendarium  imperfedum.  Codex  membranaceus 
in  8°. 

2815. 

1.  Biblia  Vulgata:  in  quibus  Evangelium  eft  unicum 

ex  quatuor  conflatum.  Defiderantur  Genefis,  Exod»s, 
&  Leviticus.  xiv. 

2.  Expofitio  Canonis  Mifle.  xiv. 

3.  Interpretatio  nominum  Hebraicorum  alphabetica. 

xiv. 

4.  Liber  diftindionum.  “Abel  dicitur  principium  Ec- 

clefie.”  Codex  membranaceus  in  120.  xiv. 

2816. 

Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  et  interpretatione  nomi¬ 
num  Hebraicor.  Subjicitur  Commentariolus  in  Apo- 
calypfin,  manu  recentiore.  Codex  membranaceus  in 
120  cum  literis  initialibus  pulcherrime  depidis.  xiv. 

2817. 

1.  Liber  Job  Verfio  Vulgata,  cum  Hieronymi  prefa- 

tionibus.  xi. 

2.  Grammatica.  “  Quia  in  hoc  opere  tota  gramma- 

tica  continetur.”  XI1* 

3.  Warnerii,  Poetae  Bafilienfis  Sinodius,  ale\trei* 

“  Jam  calor  eftivus  fervente  leone  nocivus.”  xiii. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  1 20. 

2818. 

Biblia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  et  interpretatione  nomi¬ 
num  Hebraicorum.  Liters  initiales  nitide  depidx. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minore. 

8  T 


xiv. 

Biblia 


7i4 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nam.  28 1 c — 2826. 

2819. 

Bibiia  Vulgata :  cum  interpretatione  nominum  Sc  con- 
cordantia  Evangelior.  xiv. 

Deed  Geuefis,  &  pars  Exodi.  Codex  membrana- 
ceusin  ia°. 

282C. 

Codex  membrailaceuS  in  40,  continens  Evangelia  quatuor 
Vulgata:  verfionis.  Quibus  accedunt, 
t.  Eufebii  Canones  Evangeliorum.  x. 

а.  Hieronymi  in  Evangeliitas,  ad  Damafum  papain, 
prrefatio. 

3.  Prologus  in  Matiheuin. 

4.  l’ictura:  Evangeliltarum,  Sc  Hieronymi ;  cum  ver- 
fibus  in  eorum  laudes  literis  aureis  in  foliis  purpureis 
exaratis. 

4.  Argument!  Evangelior.  Marci  &  Johannis. 

б.  Capitula  Evangelior.  de  anui  circulo. 

7.  In  operculo  elt  effigies  Chrifti  in  cruce  penden- 
tis,  in  ebore  infculpta ;  una  cum  4  animalibus,  quae  fe- 
cundum  Ezechielem  Evangeliitas  reprefentant;  &  manu 
ad  Cbriftum  fupernc  porredta.  Liber  pulcherrimus  Sc 
pretiofiflimus. 

282T. 

Codex  membfanaceus  optime  fervatus,  in  4°,  continens 
Evangelia  quatuor  Vulgatie  verfionis.  Quibus  acce- 
dunt,  x. 

1 .  Picturae  variae  in  foliis  purpureis. 

2.  Elieronymi  in  Evangeliitas  ad  Damafum  praefatio. 

3.  Argumentum  8c  praefatio in  Mattheum. 

4.  Eufebii  Car.rnes,  Sc  epiftola  de  iildem. 

5.  Hieronymi  prologus  in  Matiheum. 

6.  Argumcnta  8t  C-apiiula  in  fingula  Evang. 

7.  Capitula  Evangeliorum  de  anni  circulo.  Liber  per- 
clegans  &  pretioliffimus. 

2822. 

E.iblia  Vulgata  cum  prologis.  Huic  Codici  abeft  ver- 
fus  1  Joh.v.  7.  Meinbranaceus  in  4°.  Hie  liber  per- 
tinebat  Huinfredo  VVanley.  Xin. 


Evangelia  quatuor  Vulgata:  verfionis.  Quibus  acce¬ 
dunt. 

1.  S.  Hieronymi  ad  Damafum  epiftola.,  et  argument¬ 
um.  VIII. 

2.  Eufebii  Canones  Evangelior.  Sc  epiftola  de  iifdem. 

3.  Prologus  in  Matthaeum. 

4.  Argumenta  feu  praefationes  &  Capitularia  in  fin¬ 
gula  Evangelia. 

5.  Capitula  Evangeliorum  de  circulo  anni. 

I11  fine  Evangelii  S1. Johannis  manu  300  annorum, 
dicitur  Liber  fuitfe  fratris  Johannis  de  Aneto,  de  con- 
ventu  Carnotenfi,  ordinis  fratrum  predicatorum.  Co¬ 
dex  membranaceuSj  in  4". 

2  8  24. 

Bibiia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  et  interpretatione  nomi- 
num  Hebraicor.  Codex  meinbranaceus  in  40"  xiv. 

2825. 

Aliud  exemplar,  membranaceum,  in  40.  xiv. 

2826. 

Evangelia  quatuor  Vulgata:  veifionis.  Quibus  acce 
dunt, 

1.  Prologus  4  Evangeliorum.  vm. 

2.  Hieronymi  ad  Damafum  epiftola  pofterior.  Prior 
hie  obliteratin'. 

3.  Eufebii  Cancnes  Evangeliorum. 

4.  Argument!  Sc  Capitula  in  fingula  Evangelia. 


Num  2826 — ■  2 S3 5 . 

5.  Capitulare  Evangeliorum  de  anni  circulo. 

In  hoc  Codice,  in  ultimo  capite  Johannis,  legitur  *. 

“  Si  fie  eum  volo  manere  donee  veniam  Et  iterum  “  ft 
eum  volo  manere  cum pleriq;  Codices  habent  “fic  eum 
volo  manere”  in  utrifq;  locis.  Habet  e'iam  Codex  NJ 
2788.  a  prima  manu  “  ft  eum  volo  mauere  in  utrifq; 
locis."  Et  N"  2834.  Meinbranaceus  in  4. 

2827. 

1.  Bibiia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  et  interpretatione 

nominum  Hebraicor.  xiv. 

2.  Accedunt,  Capitulare  in  Epiftolas  Sc  Evangelia  pro 
anni  circulo. 

3.  Tra&atus  de  Adventu  Domini,  in  fine  truncatus. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  40. 

Ad  initium  feriptum  eft : 

“  Liber  fratrum  fanfte  crucis  conventus  Leodien- 
fis,  quem  legavit  eis  Henricus  Cellis  civis  oppidi  Sanc- 
titrudonis  et  Burgiinagilter  ibidem,  Anno  Dili  1483." 
Codex  membranaceus  in  40. 

2828. 

Bibiia  Vulgata,  cum  prologis  et  interpretatione  nomi¬ 
num  Hebraicor :  literis  initialibus  pulchre  depictis. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4°.  xiv. 

2829. 

S.  Pauli  Epiftolae,  Vulgata:  verfionis.  xi- 

Liber  quondam,  ut  videtur,  Conradi  Peutinger  ; 
cujus  infignia  gentilitia  ligno  infculpta,  A.  I).  1516,  ad 
initium  confervantur.  Codex  membranaceus  in  40. 

2830. 

Evangelia  quatuor  Vulgatte  verfionis.  Quibus  acce-*’ 
dunt, 

1.  S  Elieronymi  inEvangeliftas  ad  Damafum  praefatio. 

2.  Praefatio  4  Evangeliorum.  x. 

3.  Prologi  in  fingula  Evangelia. 

Liber  quondam  erat  S.  Martini  Lovanienfis.  Mem¬ 
branaceus  in  4“. 

Ad  finem  codicis,  in  folio  pridem  vacuo  nitide  depin- 
guntur,  manu  lecentiore,  figura;  vel  fymbolae  quatuor 
Evangeliftarum. 

2831. 

Evangelia  quatuor  Vulgata:  verfionis:  cum  praefationi- 
bus.  Codex  membranaceus,  in  8°.  xi. 

2832. 

Bibiia  Vulgata,  cum  interpretatione  nominum  Hebraico- 
rum  :  minimis  literis  nitide  feripta.  xiy. 
Abeft  Verfus  1  Joh.  5.  7.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4*. 

-833,  2834. 

x.  Bibiia  Vulgata  cum  Prologo  Secundo  &  prEefationi- 
bus  S. Hieronymi,  Capitulis,  Canonibus  in  Evangelia, 
8tc.  ufitatis.  xiii. 

2.  Accedit  Pauli  epiftola  ad  Laodicenfes. 

Andegavenfis  Ecclefiae  cathedralis  Codex  fuiffe 
dicitur. 

Codices  membranacei  nitidiflime  exarati,  folio  ma- 
jori,  et  quibufdam  illuminationibus  ornati.  Ad  finem 
lomi  primi  notee  quasdam  habentur  in  textum  refurrec- 
tionis  infignem,  et  alia  notatu  digna  in  hiftoria  Job. 

283s- 

Mifiale  :  cum  ledtionibus,  epiftolis  &  evangeliis  pro  toto 
anno,  et  etiam  Calendario.  xv. 

In  fronte  feribitur  :  “  Liber  gloriofe  virginis  Marie 
in  Lacu:  quem  contulit  monafteno  noftro  honorabilis 
facerdos  Lodovicus  Backhuys  de  Coverna  ad  petitionem 
germani  fui  f.  Joannis  monachi  Lacenfis :  pro  quo 
menjor  fit  ejus  mifericors  Dcus,” 

10  -Ad 


Bibliothecae:  Harleianae. 


Num.  2835 — 2846. 

Ad  finem  jii  verfus  habentur: 

“  Leftorem  moneo  fi  forte  voluminis  hujus 
Scriptorem  adfcifcat,  Leonardos  nomine  conftab 
liochou'  ipi'e  fatus,  fed  frater  deinde  Lacenfis. 
Confcripfit  Marie,  pfibufque  pcatibus,  anno 
Sefqui  millcno  ofteilis  luflrifque  peraftis. 

De  Remagc  Petrus  dum  preftantiflimus  Abbas 
Picfidet,  exemplar  virtutis,  bonos  fpecitnenque 
Eternas  tibi  nate  Dei  hinc  grates  refonamus 
Quo  labor  evadat  preftantior,  ethereafque ; 

Wens  eat  ad  arces,  pictor  fua  prtcmia  tollat 
tjui  Auguflinus  erat  Machius  Prior  ipfe  Lacenfis,” 
Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  majori,  cum  illumi- 
tlauomlms  et  Uteris  initialibus  pulchre  fednon  perite  de. 
pictis.  Defideraritur  in  Calendario  2  menfes  priores. 

2836,  2837. 

Liblia  Vulgata  1  cum  prologis  ufitatis  et  Pauli  epidola  ad 
Laodicenfes.  Non  tamen  infunt  Evangelia.  xv. 
Liber  quondam  erat  fratrum  Carthufienfium.  Co¬ 
dices  membranacei  in  folio  majori. 

2838. 

Speculum  bumanae  falvaiionis:  cum  picTturis  elegantibus 
111  lmgulis  paginis.  Codex  membranaccus  in  folio 
majori.  xy 

2830,  2840. 

iilblia  Vulgata  :  cum  prologis.  Codices  membranacei 
in  folio  majori  cum  literis  initialibus  pulchcrrime  de- 

284T. 

Harm  R.  Virginia,  ali.xque  Precationes,  et  Pfalmi  Poeni- 
tentrales,  Semione Teutonico,  cum  Calendario,  etillu- 
imnatiohibiis.  Codex  membranaceus  in  1 2". 

2842. 

1.  Pfalterium,  Cum  canticis  quibufdam. 

2.  Septem  Pfalmi  penitenliales-  Xv_ 

3.  Pfalmi  pro  defunctis  ad  fepulturam.  Xv_ 

4.  Vigilie  defuiktoru  fecundum  modu  Ordinis  Cifter- 

cieniis.  Codex  membranaceus  in  1 20.  xv. 

2843. 

1.  Officiu  B.  Marie  fecundum  confuetudinem  Ro- 

mane  Lcclefie  :  cum  Calendario.  Xv 

2.  Septem  Pfalmi  poenitentiales. 

3.  Officium  S"*  Crucis. 

4.  Officium  Mortuorum.  Codex  membranaceus  in 
1:  .  1  enp tore  Italico  pulchre  cxaratuSj  &  literis  initialibus 
depi&is  ornatus. 

2844. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  1 2"  et  in  Anglia,  ut  videtur, 
exaratu's,  continens, 

1.  Calendarium.  XII> 

2.  Verficuli  et  orationes  de  SS.  Joachim  &  Anna.  xiv. 

3.  Veilus  S.Bernardi. 

4-  Pfalterium  cum  canticis  variis,  Te  Deum,  Magnifi¬ 
cat,  Nunc  dimittis,  Symbclo  Athanafii,  Litaniis,  et  ora- 
ticmbus. .  xiv< 

5.  Vigil ite  mortuorum. 

6.  Commendationes  animarum. 

2845. 

Hugonis  de  S.  Victore,  Speculum  Ecclefiae.  Codex 
membranaceus  in  1 2".  Xin. 

2846. 

1.  Horae  B.  Mariae,  fecundum  ufumAngliae:  cum 
-alendario,  &  orationibus  ad  varias  Sanctorum  pidu- 


Num,  2846 — 2851. 

2.  Vigilie  Mortuorum. 

3.  Pfalterium  S'Jeronimi. 

Codex  mtidiflime  feriptus  in  membrana  et  optimi 
lervatus,  cum  multis  illuminationibus  perpulchiis.  inter 
quas  habetur  ca;des  Thoms  Cantuarienfis,  in  12'’.  xv. 

2847. 

ablioruu,  pars  prior  Vulgate  verfionis;  deficit  in  pro- 
g  priore  &  in  Lib.  Job.  Codex  membranaceus  in 


1.  Orationes  1  s  S.  Brigitte.  Xy 

2.  Hors  B-Virginis,  &c. 

char'ta°™'TS;2”.C0deX  Pan''“  ™mbranaceus,  partim 

2849. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  ia",  feculo  xv  feriptus,  in  quo 
_  _  continentur. 

1.  Hor*  B.Virginis. 

2.  Vigiliae  mortuorum,  cum  notis  inulids, 

3.  Litanue. 

4.  Pfalmi  1 1  g  &  1  jp. 

5.  Orationes. 

2850. 

Horae  B.  Marie.  Belgice,  cum  piflurls  rudibus.  Codex 
membranaceus  in  1 20;  Xv 

2851. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  12°,  fee.  xiv  feriptus,  quo  cor- 
tinentur, 

Kn!gma,ici'  “  Si  bibit  «  fedem 

2.  Medici  cujufdam  prseferipta. 

3.  Verfus  de  cornice  &  meretrice. 

4.  Verfus  de  Cruce. 

i'.  “Traftatus  metricus  de  Sufanna,”  per  fratrem 
Alan  11  m  monachum  de  Melfa  de  Beverlaco. 

6.  De  tribus  domibus  hominis.  Metric^. 

7.  De  tribus  ordinibus  falvandoruin 

tric^'  DC  qUatU°‘  EvanSeliltis  et  eorum  formis. '  Me- 
0.  De  certamine  Salomonis  &  Marcolfi.  Metrice 
varia  Gu  eardl»  fciliceL  Walter!  de  Mapes,  carmina 

1  r.  Legenda  fanaorum,quibus  adjiciuntur  narrationes 
qusddam  e  “  promptuario  exemplorum  difeipuii,”  ut  vi. 
detur,  excerptse. 

ia.  Be  quibufdam  Apoflolis  Chrifti  cbnfanguineis  ex 
parte  matris.  ° 

13.  Poema  cui  titulus,  “  Difputatio  inter  corpus  & 
animam  alicujus  reprobati  et  dampnati Waltero  de 
Mapes  adkriptum. 

14.  Verfus  cm  titulus,  “  quidam  alius  loquitur  de  ine- 
vilabihtate  moms.” 

Metrics'  S‘Ella  q“'b“S  eg'U!  n°r,::tur  e,re  nioriturus.” 
id.  “  Verfus  de  clerico &  moniali.” 

17.  Verfus  de  clerico  Sc  uxore  militis.  Confere  cum 
fabula  feu  narratione  Johannis  de  la  Fontaine  cui  titulus 
A  femme  avare  galant  efcroc.” 

1 3.  “  De  Privilegiis  diei  Veneris.” 

19.  Fabula;  quidam  de  nequitiis  quarundam  mulic- 
rum,  ex  Petro  Alfonfo  et  aliis. 

20.  Compendium  fuper  nequitiis  mulierum.  Metrice. 
2K  Narrationes  jocales  e  “  directorio  humane  vita;,'’ 

1  etro  Alfonfo,. &c.  excerpfse. 

22.  Oratio  ad  Sanctum  Ceddam. 

23.  “  De  mirabilibus  Britannie.” 

24.  “  De  arte  cognofcendi  qualitates  hominum.” 

25.  “  Verfus  phificales.”  Mcirice. 

26.  «  De 


7I( 


italogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  285  1 — 2861. 

26.  “  De  precio  &  dominio  nummi.”  Metric^.  “  In 
tcna  i'ummis  rex  eft  hoc  tempore  nummus.” 

27.  “  PaffioJufticiariorumAnglie,”  cum  verfibus  fati- 
ricis  de  eifdem. 

28.  MiiTa  Gulonis  -,  in  monachos  ebriofos,  utvidetur, 
fatyra. 

29.  De  herba  Bafilifca  feu  Gentiana. 

30.  Parabola  quaidam. 

3 1 .  S<  ptem  claves  fapientie. 

32.  Verb  s  contra  malas  mulieres. 

33.  Traclatus  brevis  incerti  auctoris  de  confeffione. 

34.  Precationis  varise  ad  Virginem  Mariam  et  alios 
fancVos. 

35.  Fabulae  qutedam  iEfopiccc. 

2852. 

Breviarium,  fecundumufum  Curie  Romane.  Cum  Ca- 
lendario  ufque  ad  menfem  Augufti.  Defunt  nonnulla 
in  fine.  Codex  membranaceus  in  120.  xv# 

2853. 

Officium  B.  Marie  fccundum  ufum  Romano:  Curia:  cum 
aliis  ofliciis,  Calendario  &  Pfalterio  S.Hieronyrm.  Co¬ 
dex  membranaceus  in  1 2".  cum  picturis  nitidis,  xv. 

2854. 

Horae  B.Marie  quas  compofuit  Johannes  Papa  x  xn  : 
cum  variis  orationibus ;  ctiam  de  virtutibus  1 2  Signo- 
rum,  in  Calendario.  Codex  membranaceus  in  1  2", 
in  Flandria  exaratus,  cum  nitidis  illuminatiombus  ; 
inter  quas  precipue  enitet  effigies  milius  cujufdam  & 
polTefforis  hujus  libri,  in  genua  procumbentis  ad  Salva- 
torem  mundi. 

2855. 

Diuvnale  Ordinis  Carthufiani:  cum  pifluris  nitidis  k 
Calendario.  Prefiguntur  Pfalmi  quidam  &  Syinbolum 
fidei.  Sequitur  Hymnarius.  Codex  membranaceus 
in  120.  XV‘ 

2856. 

1.  Pfalterium,  cum  Canticis,  Symbolo  Athanafu,  k 

Calendario.  .  ,  r‘ 

2.  Breviarium  fecundu  ufum  Cantuanenfis  Ecclelise. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  1 2 °.  cui  defunt  plurima  o  ia. 

2857- 

Officium  B.  Marie,  Mortuorum,  8t  S.  Crueis,  fecundum 
confuetudinem  Romane  Curie:  cum  Calendario.  Co¬ 
dex  m.mbranaceus  in  I  a",  feriptore  Italico  mttdlffime 
exaratus,  a  quo  picture  plurinuc  abfcilla:.  xv. 

2858. 

Horae  S.  Crum,  S.  Spiritus,  B.Marie,  fecundum  ufum 
Romanic  Curiae,  &  Calendarium.  Codex  membra- 
naceus  in  12"  cum  piauris,  fed  tempom  mjuna  de- 
tritis. 

2859. 

Calendarium,  officium  S.  Crude,  Hone  Beam  Maris,  fee. 
in  Romans:  Curis,  Miflae,  &  Vig.ke  Mortuary 
cum  literis  inilialibus  depictis.  Codex  membrana- 
ceus  et  minutiffimus. 

28G0. 

no:  iumS.Trinitatis;  officium  in  inventione  S.  Cruets; 
ordo  baptizandi;  ordo  ad  defponfandam  vtro  uxo- 
l-em;  fecrela,  ct  alia:  orattones.  Codex  membrana- 
ceus  &  minutiffimus.  x'' 

2861. 

Hors  B.  Maris,  cum  Calendario,  I-itania,  Stc.  Deed 
finis.  Codix  membranaceus  &  nunutilhmus.  xv. 

9 


Num.  2862 — 2869. 

2862. 

Aliud  exemplar.  Accedunt  Vigilise  Mortuorum  et  verfus 
quidam  Anglici,  “  Ihu  Crifte  in  this  liknelfe.”  Codex 
membranaceus  &  minutiffimus.  xv. 

2863. 

IJorae  B.  Mariae  aliaque  officia  :  cum  Calendario.  Pla- 
gulae  nonnulla;  palfim  defiderantur.  Codex  mem¬ 
branaceus  in  120.  opiime  fervatus  et  plurimis  Ulumina- 
tionibus  nitidis  adornatus.  In  marginibus  libii  ingenio- 
fiffime  depinguntur  inftrumenta  paffionis  Dominica;. 

xv. 

2864. 

Le&ionarium  k  Breviarium.  Sequuntur. 

1.  Commune  Sanctorum. 

2.  Officium  B.  Maria  Virginis. 

3.  Ordo  ad  benedicendam  menfam  convenientibus 
clericis  ad  prandium,  &c.  Codex  pulcher^  membrana¬ 
ceus,  in  fsec.  xv.  exaratus,  cum  literis  inilialibus  depidlis. 

2865. 

Hore  B.  Maris,  aliaque  officia  cum  Calendario.  Defunt 
queedam  poll  Calendarium.  Codex  membranaceus  in 
1 20  optime  fervatus,  cum  nitidis  illuminationibus,  & 
figuris  quibufdam  monftrofis  (vulgo  grotefques)  in 
marginibus.  Prefigitur,  manu  aliena,  oratio  ad  beatiffi- 
mum  Jofeph  virutn  Mariae.  xv. 

2866. 

1.  Recapitulations  V.  &  N.  Teftamenti.  Metrice.  xv. 

2.  Ordo  quo  modo  morachus  premonftracenfis  vel 

Canonicus  regularis  ordinctur  in  Abbatem. 

3.  Ordo  ad  monachu  nigrti  vel  Ciftercien.  faciendu 

Abbatem.  „ 

4.  Ordo  qualiter  Monialis  ordmetur  m  Abbatiflam 

cum  notis  muficis.  .  .  . 

c.  Qualiter  facri  ordines  aguntur,  cum  notis  muiicis. 

0.  Confecratio  altaris,  manu  recentiore  fertpta. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8%  olim  Cartuuanorum 
Lovanii. 

2867. 

Officium  Beats  Maris,  Pfalmi  Poenitentiales,  Litania, 
les  heuresde  la  Croix,  Vigilis  Mortuorum,  &c  cum, 
piauris  et  Calendario  Gallico.  Codex  membrana- 
ceus  in  1 2°. 

2868. 

1 .  Confeffion  de  PechSs.  e  „  ... 

2.  Cantica  &  Colleftae,  de  S.  Barbara,  k  S.  Egidio. 

3.  Evangelium  poft  Baptifmum  dicendu,  ad  fugan- 
dum  morbum  caducum,  &  fpintus  malignos. 

4.  Officia  Beata;  Mariae  et  ahorum,  cum  Calendario. 
Nonnulla  paffim  defiderantur. 

5.  A  Medicine  for  the  Plague.  Codex  membrana¬ 
ceus  in  1 2"  cum  literis  inilialibus  depi&is. 

2869. 

Hors  B.  Virginis,  cum  precibus  yards  &  Calendario. 

Codex  membranaceus  inis.  .  *’• 

Many  of  the  Rubrics  in  thefe  hours  are  inEnghft, 
feme  of  them  in  Verfe,  and  of  no  fmall  Cnnoftty.  Ihe 
following  mayferveas  a  Specimen: 

«  He  that  devoutely  this  orilowne, 

Eche  day  feth  wyth  good  devocyowne, 
Remiffiowne  of  Synne  hym  grantyd  is 
And  fro  fodeyne  doth  to  be  fare  wtthoutyn  mys. 
And  zif  any  jorney he  hath  tofpede. 

To  fey  this  oryfowne  take  godd  hede. 

And  lie  his  nedis  goodly  fchal  befpede, 
Withoutyn  diilurbiuns  or  any  drede.  ^ 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


7*7 


Num.  2869 — 2879. 

And  zif  a  woman  be  in  travelyng. 

Take  clene  water  that  ys  rennyng. 

Or  out  of  a  welle  in  a  veffel, 

And  fey  thisorifoune  w'  hertly  wyll, 

And  zif  it  the  woman  in  drynkvnge, 

And  fche  fchal  be  dily verd  withoute  pchyng. 

2870. 

Sequenthrius  vel  Profarius.  Codex  membranaceus 
in  1 2V  xv. 

2871. 

Pfalterium  &  cantica  varia  cum  calendario.  Accedunt 
horas  beatas  Virginis,  aliaque  officia.  xiv. 

Codex  membranaceus,  in  12°.  literis  inilialibus 
figuratis. 

2872. 

x .  Pfalterium,  cum  hymnis  per  anni  circulum  fecundu 
ufum  Curie  Romane,  &  Calendario.  xv. 

2.  Breviarium  fecundu  ordinem  Romane  Ecclefie,  & 
fecundum  rnoreni  ordinis  S.  Auguftini. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  12".  formas  craflioris. 


2873. 

r.  Preccs  &  Laudes  quotidie  dicendae.  xvii. 

2.  Meditationes  in  Orationem  Dominicam.  68. 

2.  Exercitium  Laudis  et  gratiarum  actionis.  108. 

4.  Articuli  vita:  Chrifli,  amplam  meditandi  materiam 

fubminiftrantes.  145. 

5.  Precuke  pite.  161. 

6.  Endologia:  ad  Jefum.  163. 

7.  Sex  pfalmi.  235. 

8.  Pr zeceptiuncula:  13,  ad  vitze  perfedtionem  ducentes. 

247. 


g.  Hymnus  SS.  Ambrofii  &  Auguftini,  fcil.Te  Deum. 

2  54- 

Codex.  chartaceus  in  1 2°. 

2874. 

Breviarium  imperfeftum.  Codex  membranaceus  in  1 20 

xiv. 

2875. 

MifTade  beata  Maria  Virgine  ;  paging  prima,  manu  qud- 
dam  Italica,  eleganter  depict;!  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus,  foliorum  xin-  tantum, 
in  12°. 

2876. 

Horae  B.  Mariae,  aliaque  officia  :  cum  Calendario, 
&  pidturis  rudibus.  Juxta  finem  videtur  effigies  militis 
cujufdam,  quondam  poffefforis  libri,  in  genua  procum- 
bentis  ad  S-  Barbaram.  Codex  membranaceus  in  1 20. 

xv- 

2877. 

Horae  B.  Mariae,  aliaque  officia:  cum  Calendario  & 
ColledUs.  xvi. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  120.  pidluris  elegantiffimis 
ornatus.  Defunt  nonnulla  in  fine. 

2878. 

Breviarum:  cum  Calendario.  Codex  chartaceus  in  12*. 

xvi. 

2879. 

Pfalterium  ufque  ad  pfalmum  147,  cum  cantico  B.Marise. 
Code*  membranaceus  in  1  z".  quondam  DominiNicolai 
Jofephi  Foucault.  xvi. 


Num.  2880 — 2887. 

2880. 

Invitatoria  in  die  facramenti,  in  vifitatione  B.  Manse,  in 
fefto  Maria:  Magdalena:,  in  fefto  Anns,  in  decollationc 
Johannis  Baptifta:,  in  fefto  11000  virginum,  cum 
hymnis  variis.  Codex  membranaceus  in  1 20.  xv. 

2881. 

Breviarium  cum  Litania,  &  Calendario.  xv. 

In  fine  adjicitur  manu  recentiore,  Magnificat,  cum 
notis  muficis.  Codex  membranaceus  in  120  forime 
craffioris. 

2882. 

Liber  orationum  ad  Sar.&os,  metricar.  &  folutar.  Do- 
mine,  &  tu  Maria  mater  ejus,  &  vos  vultis,  et  equum 
eft.”  Codex  membranaceus  in  12 °.  xn. 

2883. 

1 .  Pfalterium  :  cum  Calendario,  &  canticis,  fecundum 

forinam  ordinis  fratrum  humiliatorum.  xv. 

2.  De  modo  8c  forma  abfolvendi  excommunicatum. 

3.  De  noviiiis  recipiendis. 

4.  Breviarium  officii  ordinis  fratrum  humiliatorum 
fecundum  nodurnalem  curfum  per  totum  anni  circuium. 

5.  Ouotidianum  officium  defun&orum. 

Ad  ealeem  libri  “  Opus  iftius  Breviarii  ad  laudem 
&  honorem  Domini  omnipotentis  gloriofeque  virginis 
Marie  &  omnium  famftorum  feriptum  totum  eft  &  com- 
pletum  per  me  fratrem  Clementem  de  Praia  de  Caravazio 
fandti  Johannis  Evangelifte  ordinis  humiliatorum  de 
Aplano  prepofitum,  Anno  1471,  die  18.  hora  16. 
A . ” 

Codex  membranaceus,  in  120.  cum  literis  inilialibus 
eleganter  figuratis. 

2884. 

Horae  B.  Mariae  fecundum  confuetudinem  Romans  Ec. 
clefia:,  aliaque  officia  et  precationes :  cum  Calendario 
Codex  membranaceus  in  1 20.  cum  multis  illuminal 
tionibus  inartificialiter  depidtis-  xv. 

2885. 

Pars  Breviarii,  cum  calendario.  Codex  membranaceus 
in  1 2*.  xv. 

2886. 

“  Incipit  de  militate  penitentie  quomodo  credendum  fit 
remiilione  peccatorum  per  penitentiam,  cum  prefatione 
operis  fubfequentis.”  Libri  tres,  ex  conciliis  extra&i. 
“  Excepto  baptifmatis  munere  quod  contra  peccatum 
originale  donatum  eft.”  ix. 

Codex  membianaceus  in  folio  minore,  cui  deeft 
finis.  Circa  medium  codicis  occurrit  imago  Jefu  Chrifti, 
ut  in  nummis  Johannis  Zimifcis  et  aliorum  Imperatorum 
Conftantinopolitanorum. 

2887. 

1.  Obitus  quorundam  regum  8c  nobilium. 

2.  A  prayer  in  Englifh,  “  Oh  Maker  of  heven  & 
earthe.”  Thefe  two  articles  are  in  different  and  later  hands 
than  that  of  the  manufeript. 

3.  Orationes  de  S.  Trinitate. 

4.  “  Oratio  beati  Henrici  Rex  (fic)  Anglie.” 

5.  Hymni  de  S.Trinitate. 

6.  Oratio  de  beato  Henrico. 

7.  Oraiio  ad  proprium  angelum. 

8.  Oratio  de  nomine  Jefu. 

9.  “  O&o  verfus  beati  Bernard!. ’’ 

10.  “  Oratio  devota  de  fantta  Maria  de  7  gaudjis.” 

1 1 .  Oratio  de  Samfto  Thoma. 

12.  Oratio  Sanfti  Bernardi. 

8  U 


Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


13.  Invo' 


7 1 8 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  2887 — 2896. 

13.  Invocatio  ad  reges  Jafper,  Melchior,  &  Balthafar, 
fcil.  3  magos  ab  oriente. 

14.  A  prayer  inEnglifh,  “  O  gloryus  Jefu,”  in  a  later 
hand. 

15.  Calendarium. 

16.  Horse  Virginis  Maria;,  cum  vigiliis  mortuorum  Sc 
pfalterio  S.  Hieronymi. 

17.  “  Duodecim  abufiones  hujus  feculi.  S.  Auguflini.’’ 
Manu  aliena  feript.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  mi- 
nore,  fee  xv.  optime  fervatus.  Sc  plurimis  piduris  fplen- 
dide,  fed  inartifidaliter,  illuminatus  ;  inter  quas  przecipue 
nitent  figurce  quaedam  admodum  fingulares  S.  Trinitatis. 
Sub  harum  una  occurrunt  infignia  Butleriorum,  unde 
conjicere  licet  hunc  codicem  in  ufum  hujus  familfe  fac¬ 
tum  fuifl'e,  utet  ille  bibliotheca:  Regfe,  2  B.  xv. 

2888. 

Pfalterium,  cum  canticis  variis,  antlphonariis  Sc  notis  mu- 
ficis.  In  medio  pfalmi  1 18  (fecundum  vulgatam  ver- 
fionem)  occurrit  fymbolum  S.  Athanafii. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  feculi  xv. 
exaratus,cum  literis  initialibus  figuratis. 

28S9. 

Ledionarium  :  five,  Lediones  in  Ecclefia  per  annum  di- 
cendae.  Cum  aliquot  notis  muficis.  xi. 

In  operculo  duae  figuntur  imagines  ex  ebore 
fculptae,  quarum  una,  Salvatoris  ut  videtur,  tenet  in 
manu  librum  quo  inciditur  VOCA  OPERARIOS 
ET  REDE  ILL.  MERCEDE.  Codex  membranaceus  & 
prseftantiflimus,  in  folio  minore,  cum  pi&uris  SS.  Petri, 
Pauli,  Jacobi,  Johannis,  &  Ifafe  prophetse  ;  Literis  ini¬ 
tialibus  eleganter  depidis. 

2890. 

Pfalterium,  et  cantici,  ad  ufum  Ecclefiae  Auguflanae : 
Habet  Calendarium,  Symbola,  Litaniam,  &c.  xii. 

2891. 

1.  Gulielmi  Parifienfis  Epifcopi  Confiiiu  de  myfterio 

&  negligentia  Altaris.  xv. 

2.  MilTalemajus  :  cum  precibus  Sc  Calendario. 

Codex  membranaceus  pulcherrimus  in  folio  minore, 

cum  2  illuminationibus  forma:  majoris,  &  literis  initiali¬ 
bus  eleganter  figuratis. 

2892. 

Liber  Precum,  Benedi&ionum  &  Exorcifmorum.  “  Exor- 
cizo  te  inmundiflime  et  refuge  Spiritus.”  x. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

2893. 

Evangelia,  Orationes,  et  alia  ad  officium  Eccl.  fpec- 
tnutia,  ad  ufum  Ecclefiae  Moifliacenfis,  cum  Calen¬ 
dario.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore  cum  li- 
teris  initialibus  depidis.  Liber  olim  Domini  Nicolai 
Jofephi  Foucault.  xii. 

2894. 

Manuale  Precum  Johannis  Wynchecombe  Prioris  de 
Hayles,  quarum  aliqure  verfibus  rhythmicis.  Codex 
membranaceus  in  folio  minore.  xv. 

2895. 

Pfalterium  mutilatum,  cum  Litania,  Calendario,  &:  diebus 
Egyptiacis.  Liters  inidales  qua;  fuperfunt,  nam 
multse  manu  barbarica  excife  fuerunt,  fumma  arte  et 
elegantia  depitta:  funt.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio 
minore.  xm. 

2896. 

Miffale:  cum  Indice,  &  pidura  Chrifti  in  cruce  penden- 
tis.  Codex  in  folio  minore.  xvi. 


Num.  2897 — 2902. 

2897. 

Pfalterium  et  Hymni  cum  Antiphonis.  Accedunt  Lec- 
tiones  et  prsemittitur  Calendarium.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  in  Gallia 
exaratus  et  optima  fervatus,  cum  multis  illuminationibus 
praclane  &  infignis  elegantia’.  Defunt  nonnulla  ad 
initium  pfalterii,  &  in  aliis  locis. 

2898. 

Evangelia  de'  tempore  Sc  Sandis,  in  Ecclefia  legenda. 
Eleganter  feripta  A.  D.  1587.  Codex  membranaceus 
in  folio  minore.  xvi. 

2899. 

Liber  diurnalis  Philippa  Regina  :  fcil.  Pfalterium  cum 
Canticis,  TeDeum,  Litania,  Sc  Calendario.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  cujus  pagina 
prima  depida  &  litera  inidales  figurata. 

29OO. 

Hora  beata  Virginis,  cum  calendario,  vigiliis  mortuo¬ 
rum,  commendationibus  animarum,  &c.  Codex  men- 
branaceus  in  folio  minore.  xv 

In  the  firft  fpare  leaf  of  this  Manufcript  is  the  fol¬ 
lowing  note,  in  the  hand-writing  of  Mr.  Afhmole  to 
whom  it  once  belonged.  “  Memoranda  One  of  the 
molt  richly  illuminated  &  adorned  I  ever  fav,  with  be¬ 
tween  30  &  40  pidures,  among  which  are  Becket’s  death 
Sc  buryal.” 

This  however  is  by  no  means  a  proof  of  the  writer’s 
ikill  in  the  comparative  merit  of  the  paintings  in  thefe 
fervice  books. 

The  prefent  manufcript  is  handfomely,  and  rather 
fplendidly  illuminated  ;  but,  the  paintings,  with  refped 
to  defign,  belong  to  an  inferior  clafs.  It  is  rather  extra¬ 
ordinary  that  Mr.  Afhmole  fhould  not  have  noticed  infol. 
54.  the  portraits  of  John  Duke  of  Bedford,  to  whom  the 
book  probably  belonged,  and  his  wife,  both  kneeling  be¬ 
fore  the  figure  of  their  patron  St.  George,  who  is  repre- 
fented  as  killing  the  dragon.  The  Duke’s  mantle  is 
furcharged  with  his  crefl  of  an  ermined  lion.  Thefe 
portraits  are  certainly  executed  in  a  very  bad  ftile,  but 
they  fufliciently  difplay  the  artift’s  intention. 

On  fol.  55.  is  a  reprefentation  of  the  Murder  of 
Becket  as  alluded  to  by  Mr.  Afhmole;  but  as  to  his 
burial,  the  paintings  in  fol.  1 28. &  176.  are  no  other  than 
the  ufual  fubjeds  that  accompany  the  fervice  of  the  dead 
in  moft  of  thefe  hours.  With  the  former  of  thefe  illu¬ 
minations  is  the  ufual  hymn  addreffed  to  Becket,  be¬ 
ginning, 

“  Gaude  lux  Londoniarum, 

Thoma  tutor  animarum, 

Dei  providencia : 

Natus  matre  martis  die, 

Sequens  vitam  vere  vie, 

Speciali  gratia.’’ 

This,  as  ufual  with  whatever  relates  to  the  Canter¬ 
bury  Saint,  is  obliterated  with  a  pen  Sc  ink, 

29OI . 

Ordo  Confecrationis  Regis  et  Regina:  Angliae.  xtv. 
Codex  membranaceus  nitide  feriptus  in  folio. 

2902. 

1.  Bedae  Martyrologium  clyJ.tp z\ov.  xu. 

2.  Regula  S.  Benedidi.  “  Aufculta  o  fi!i  precepta." 

3.  “  Nomina  quor undam  fundatorum  Sc  Benefado- 
rum  noftrorum.” 

4.  Carta  fratris  Radulfi  Abbatis  Clarevallis  de  elee- 
mofynis ;  imperfeda. 

5.  Litania.  Codex  membranaceus  &  pulcherrimns  in 
folio. 


Ordo 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse, 


Num.  2903,  2900. 

2903. 

Ordo  Breviarii,  fecundum  confuetudinem  Roraane  Curie, 
fatis  longus :  cum  Calendario.  Codex  membrana- 
ceus  perpulcher,  in  Italia  exaratus,  cum  literis,  initia- 
Iibus  figuratis.  In  folio  craffiore.  xv. 

2904. 

Pfalterium,  fuperadditis  pfalmo  David  “  fcripto  extra 
numerum  cum  pugnavit  cum  Goliath,”  canticis  novi 
et  veteris  teftamenti,  fymbolis  Apoftolorum  &c  Atha- 
nafij,  &  Litaniis.  Codex  membranaceus  pulcherriinus 
in  folio,  literis  initialibus  affabre  depi&is.  In  principio 
libri  habetur  pictura,  non  in  elegans,  crucifixionis.  x. 

2905. 

Pfalterium,  aVpaXo vs-at  dlixrrcv :  cum  Calendario.  xili. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio,  literis  initialibus 
figuratis. 

2906. 

Ordo  Romanus,  fcil.  de  7  Ecclefiafticis  gradibus.  xz. 

1.  “  Ordinatio  ad  clericum  faciendum.” 

2.  “  Ordinatio  ledloris.’’ 

3.  “  Ordinatio  Exorciftis.” 

4.  “  Ordinatio  Acoliti.” 

5 .  “  Ordo  qualiter  in  Romana  ecclefia  diaconi,  pref- 
byteri  elegendi  funt.” 

6.  “  Ordinatio  prelbyteri.” 

7.  Ordo  ad  benedicendatn  ecclcfiam,  cum  exorci- 
zationibus  variis,ornamentorum  ecclefiaz  benedidionibus, 
&  notis  xnuficis.  In  hoc  ordine  rubricse  fequentes  occur- 
runt.  “  Deinde  incipiat  Pontifex  de  finiftro  angulo  ab 
oriente  fcribere  per  pavimentum  cum  Cambutta  fua  al- 
fabetum  Grecis  formis  ita.”  Sequuntur  literal  Grazes 
capitales,  “  et  deferibat  ufque  in  dextrum  angulum  occi- 
dentalem  incipiens  fnnihter  verum  de  dextro  angulo 
orientali  alfabetuin  Latinis  figuris  ita.” 

8.  “  Ordo  in  ccena  Domini.” 

9.  “  Ordo  ad  virginem  benedicendam.” 

10.  “  Benedidio  vidus  qua:  fuerit  callitatem  pro- 
fefla.” 

11.  “Ad  diaconam  faciendam.” 

1 2.  “  Incipit  reconcihatio  penitentium.” 

13.  “  Adabbatem  benedicendum.” 

14.  “  AdMonachos  faciendos.” 

15.  “  Exorcifmus  olei  cathecuminorum.” 

16.  “  Benedidio  ignis  in  Sabbato  fando.” 

17.  “  Benedidtio  cerei.” 

18.  “  Benedidio  fontis.” 

ig.  “  Qualiter  epifeopus  confignare  debet  puerospoft 
baptifma.” 

20.  “  Ordoqua  liter  in  ecclefia  ab  epifeopis  Synodus 
agatur.” 

21.  Litania. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

2907. 

Ordo  miflalis  fecundum  curfum  Romane  Ecclefie :  Prs  - 
figuntur  calendarium,  exorcizationes  falis  et  aquae,  et 
Palho  Domini.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio,  xv. 

2908. 

Miflale  Ecclefiae  Auguftanae  :  cum  Calendario,  picturis, 
Sc  aureis.  literis  in  aliquibus  foliis  purpureis.  x. 

Codex  membranaceus  bene  coni’ervatus,  in  folio. 

2909. 

Pfalterium  :  cum  Calendario,  Canticis,  Symbolo  Atha- 
nafii,  Litania  Sc  pl'alterio  Jeronimi.  Initium  Pfalterii 
prioris  defideratar.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio, 
cum  literis  initialibus  figuratis.  xv. 

On  the  fpare  leaf  before  the  calendar  is  the  follow¬ 
ing  entry.  “  On  Seynt  Valentinis  day  the  xxiiii  yere  of 


Num.  2910 — 2917. 

the  revn  of  kyng.Herre  the  vii'  gave  me  Wittm  Capell 
knyght  than  beyng  prefent  in  theTowr  a  Valentyn  wreten 
w1  letters  of  goold  Sea  Maria  oft'  the  geft  of  the  fare  lady 
than  beyng  wyffe  to  sr.  Rechard  Cholinondcley  leve- 
tenat  of  the  Towr  of  London.”  Then  follow  two 
prayers  in  Latin,  in  jingling  rimes.  On  the  firft  leaf  of 
the  calendar  is  parted  a  flip  with  “  Capell  the  xxvu 
day  of  March  A0  1508.” 

2910. 

Miflale,  cum  Calendario.  Colledarius  liber  dicitur.  Et 
erat  oliin  Conventus  Moguntini,  Orainis  Predicato- 
rum.  xv. 

Huic  Codici  praefigitur  folium  ultimum  S.  Pauli 
Epiftolaead  Coi’inthios  fecundte,  mille  fere  annorum  vnr. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio.  Deeft  maxima  pars 
unius  folii. 

2911. 

Ordinarium  fecundum  ufurn  Ecclefiae  Sarum  ;  finis  defi- 
deratur.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore.  xv. 

2912. 

1.  Ordo  Miflae  celebrandae  per  Pontificem. 

2.  Officium,  poll  Miflam,  in  die  fepulturae  Papae  aut 
Cardinalis. 

3.  Ordo  ad  Catecutninum  faciendum,  fecundum  con¬ 
fuetudinem  Romane  Ecclefie. 

4.  Officium  de  chrifmandis. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  free.  xv.  in 
Italia  feriptus,  cujus  pagina  prima  eleganter  depida. 

29  T3* 

Liber  diurnalis  Francifcanor.cum  Calendario, etlnvitatorio 
“  Venite  exultemus.”  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

xv. 

2914. 

Ledionarium  :  feu,  Lediones  in  Ecclefia  dicendae  p^r 
annum  ;  ad  ufurn  Abbatite  Moiflacenfis.  Ex  biblio¬ 
theca  Domini  Nicol.  Jofephi.  Foucault.  xi. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

29*5- 

1 .  Horae  B.  Mariae :  cum  aliis  officiis,  Orationibus, 

&  calendario.  xv. 

2.  Oratio  S.  Brigidae. 

3.  Pfalmi  de  Paflione  Domini. 

4.  Pfalterium  B.  Hieronymi. 

5.  Orationes  ad  B.  Mariam,  S.  Antonium,  Mariam 
Magdalenam,  Sc  Annam. 

6.  Horae  de  paflione  Chrifti. 

7.  Verfus  de  Eterna  Sapientia. 

8.  Certains  beaux  vers  et  belles  oraifons  a  notre  Seig¬ 
neur  en  Latin. 

9.  Oraifon  a  notre  Dame  cn  Francois. 

10.  Oraifon  a  notre  Seigneur  contre  tribulations,  Sc,c. 
en  Latin. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4'%  minore,  cum  multis 
piduris  elegantioribus,  quarurn  aliquot  fatis  fingulares  &: 
infolentes.  Occurrunt.  etiam  piduraz  quazdain  parvaz  in 
marginibus- 

2916. 

Horaz  beats  Virginis  cum  calendario  &  piduris  rudibus. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  qto  minore.  Defideratur 
principium.  xv. 

2917. 

Horse  beatte  Virginis  cum  calendario  Sc  orationibus  variis 
ad  fandos.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minore, 
nitid&  depidus.  xv. 

Horas 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


710 


Num.  2918 — 2927. 

2918. 

Hors  beatae  Virginis  cum  calendario,  vigiliis  mortuorum, 
&c.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minore,  martifi- 
cialiter  depicius,  cum  figuris  quibuidain  monftrofis, 
vulgo  grotefques.  xv. 

2919. 

Horae  beats  Virginis  cum  aliis  officiis  et  oratione  ad 
Deum  Patrem  in  lingua  Galiica  :  praefigitur  calenda- 
rium.  Codex  membranaceus  in  1 2"  nitide  depidus. 
Vigiliis  mortuorum  accedit  figura  dominae  cujufdam 
forte  libri  poflefloris,  in  genua  procumbentis,  etjaculo 
mortis  percufls.  xv. 

2920. 

: .  Ordo  quando  aliqua  de  novo  ingreditur  Monaf- 
reriu.  xvi. 

2.  Forma  abfolutionis  in  articulo  mortis. 

3.  Benedictiovelliumquarundam  Ikcerdotalium.Oratio 
ad  benedicendum  linteamina  altaris,  &c.  ad  cujus  finem 
feribitur  “  Quefto  libro  a  fafto  ferivere  la  veneranda  re- 
ligiofa  Siiora  Agata  di  Nicolo  Dandrea  Nicoli.  Pregate 
Dio  per  lei,  a  di  vend  d’Odtobre  mille  cinquecento 

XVIII.” 

4.  Ordo  intronizandi  Abbatiflam. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  1  z". 

2921. 

Horae  B.  Mariae,  fecundum  confuetudinem  Ecclefiae 
^Romans :  cum  Calendario,  Picturis  rudibus,  &  aliis 
oradonibus.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minore. 

xv. 

2922. 

Hors  bfcats  Virginis  cum  aliis  officiis  &  pidturis  inarii- 
ficialibus  ;  praefigitur  calendarium.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minore.  In  ultima  pic- 
tura,  dotnina  qua; dam,  forte  libri  polleffor,  ante  beatam 
Mariam  fupplex  videtur. 

2923. 

Horae  beatae  Virginis  ad  ufum  Tornacenfe,  cum  calen- 
dario  &  rubricis  Gallicis.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minore,  cum  pidturis 
nitidis,  fed  multum  detritis. 

2924. 

Horae  Beatae  Virginis,  cum  aliis  officiis.  Praefigitur  ca¬ 
lendarium  in  lingua  Galiica.  xvi. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  1 2"  cum  illuminationibus, 
quarum  nonnullae  eximite  pulchritudinis  j  marginibus 
eleganter  depidtis. 

2925. 

Expofitio  Sequentiarum  (ut  dicuntur)  quae  cantanturper 
annum.  Dceft  initium.  Sequitur  vocabularium  breve 
Anglice  et  Latind.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  mi- 
norc.  xvi. 

2926. 

1 .  R  ofarium  Jefu  &  Marie,  A0. 1 470,  per  fratrem  Nico¬ 
lai;  iu  de  Germania,  in  Monafterio  Sublacenfi.  xv. 

2.  Letania  fratris  Alberti,  quondam  epi  Ratifponen. 
de  tempore  :  in  qua  per  purgativam  viam  prehabitam 
afeeadit  ad  unidvam.  Liber  erat  Monafterii  Sublacencis. 

Codex  membranaceus,  in  4to  minore. 

2927. 

Breviarium  Parifienie :  praemittitur  Pfalterium:  cum 
Calendario.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8yo.  craffiore,  literis  ini- 
riaiibus  figurads. 

g 


Num.  2928 — 2937. 

2928. 

1.  Calendarium.  XII_ 

.  }'  ?reces  ac*  Deum,  S.  Crucem,  Mariam  &  vifitatio 
innrmi. 

3.  Liber  hymnorum  vel  foliloquiorum  prophetae  delo 
C-hrifto :  in  quo  totum  fere  Pfalterium  &  Cantice  V.  & 
N.  Teftamenti  recitantur. 

4-  Orado  dominica,  cum  expofitione:  &  Symbola 
tria. 

5.  Litania :  cum  precibus  &  hymnus  in  totum  annum, 
quando  pedes  lavit  difeipulis  fuis. 

6.  Sermo  Chrifti  in  cena  ultima ;  in  lingua  Roman- 
tica.  (Romanfli.)  «  Avan  lo  dia  feftal  della  pafea.” 

7.  Benediftiones  fuper  ledtionibus.  “  Ineffabilis  Del 
pietas.’’  Verfibus  Leoninis. 

8.  De  laude  pfalmodiae.  “  Quineriam  prophetie  fpi- 
ntus.  Anno  mcxxxv.  Codex  membranaceus  in  12* 
cum  8  illuminationibus  inardficialiter  depi&is. 

2929. 

Hora:  beatse  Virginis,  cum  aliis  officiis  &  oradonibus  ad 
fanaos.  Praemittitur  calendarium  Gallicum.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  1 2°  cum  piauris  rudibus. 

2930- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  i2°faec.  xiv.  exaratus,  quo 
ntinentur, 

1.  Calendarium. 

2.  Quinque  illuminationes  auro  &  coloribus  depidtae. 

3.  Pfalterium,  cantica,  &  Litaniae,  cum  literis  initiali- 
bus  figuratis. 

4.  Vigiliae  mortuorum. 

5.  Traaatus  de  horis  et  facramentis  ecclefiae,  lingua 
Galiica  ;  “  Cilh  ki  ne  feit  dire  fes  hores.” 

6.  Orationes  ad  Jefum  Chriftum. 

7.  Litania;  et  orationes. 

29.31. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  1 20  free.  xiv.  exaratus,  con- 
tinens, 

1.  “  Exurge  Domine,”  cum  nods  muficis. 

2.  Colledtie  quaedam. 

3.  Calendarium. 

4.  Opufculum  de  fiatutis  vel  ufu  ordinis  Ciftercienfis. 

2932. 

Horae  beats  Virginis,  aliaque  officia,  quibus  praemittitur 
calendarium.  Codex  membranaceus,  mutilus,  in’i  2", 
cum  pidturis  rudibus.  xv. 

2933* 

Horae  de  S.  Cruce,  &  B.  Maria,  cum  aliis  officiis, 
calendario,  et  picturis  rudibus.  Codex  membranaceus 
in  120.  xv. 

2934. 

Horae  beatae  Virginis,  cum  aliis  officiis  &  calendario.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus,  in  1 2°,  pidturis  nitidis  ornatus. 

2935- 

Horae  beatae  Virginis,  cum  calendario.  Sequuntur  ora¬ 
tiones  quaedam  &  vigiliae  mortuorum.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  1 2%  picturis  niudis  ornatus. 

2936. 

Horse  beatae  Virginis,  cum  calendario  &  mulds  fandto* 
rum  Stfandtarum  fuffragiis.  xvi. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  12%  illuminationibus 
affabre  exomatus,  et  infuper  marginibus  pereleganter 
depidtis. 

29  37- 

Ordinale  feu  rituale  Ciftercienfium.  xv; 

Codex  membranaceus  in  1 20. 


Form*- 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


711 


Num.  2938 — 2946. 

2938. 

Forma  confecrationis  Epifcopi.  Ad  initium,  pi&ura  ha- 
betur  ritus  ejufdera.  Codex  membranaceus  in  12°. 

XVI. 

2939. 

1 '  Caloidariwn :  ’n  cluo  ^ni"er-untur  Bencfa£lore« 
Monaitern,  quodhunc  Codicem  pofledit.  xvi. 

2.  Regula  monaftica  S.  Auguftini. 

.3*  Sermo  R- Bemardi  Clarcvallenfis  Abbatis,  Jn.  Vi- 
gilia  nativitatis  D.  N-  Jefu  Chrifti. 

4-  Martirologium,  cum  prsefatione  qumBedm  aferi- 
tutur,  et  Epiftola  TJfuardi  Monachi. 

5-  Commenmm  in  Regulam  B.  Augudini.  Finis 
denderatur* 

fl  Codex  membranaceus  in  4'0  minore. 

294^ 

Horae  beatae  Virginis  cum  calendario ;  adjiciuntur 
orationes  per  gaudia,  in  lingua  Gallica.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4'0  minore,  picluris  nitidis 
exornatus. 

294.1. 

Miflale  ad  ufum,  ut  creditur,  ecclefim  Auguftanm. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4'0  minore,  cuinpiduris  qui- 
bufdam  inartifieialiter  depidis. 

2942. 

Proceflionalead  ufum  Sarum,  cum  notis  muficis.  xv. 

In  fine  Libri.  “  Orate  pro  animabus  M.  Joftis 
Lorde,  Curie  Cant.  Procurator^  generalis,  Urfule 
uxoris  ejus,  Simonis  Briggeman,  Marione  uxoris  fue, 
et  omnium  benefaclorum  eorundem  :  cum  quorum  bonis 
xfte  Liber  comparatus  fuit,  &  datus  huic  Ecclefie,  per 
media  Willelmi  Taydard.”  Et  rurfum.  “  Orate  pro 
animabus  Jotiis  Popham  militis,  pro  edificatione  Ecclefie 
adfummam  viginti  librar.  Walteri  Taylard,  pro  edifi- 
catione  Capelle,  adfummam  10  Marc.  Henrici  Gymber 
&Eliz.  uxoris  fue  pro  ...  .  Jotiis  Chirche  pro  .  . 
Reynold  late  Prior  of  Seint  Barth.  &  Richard  late  Prior 
of  the  fame  place.”  Codex  membranaceus  in  Svo. 

2943- 

Hors  beatae  Virginis  in  lingua  Belgica  vel  Flandrica,  cum 
calendario. &  lllummationibus  mediocribus  a  quodam 
pidore  cui  Spierinck  nomen  fuit  perfedis,  Anno  Do¬ 
mini  i486.  In  marginibus  monfirofa  quadam  &  fatis 
pecyliaria  videntur.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to. 
minore. 

2944. 

Horte  beatm  Virginis  cum  calendario  &  rubricis  Gal- 
licis-  Codex  membranaceus  in  410  minore.  xv- 

2945- 

Proceflionale  ad  ufum  Sarum  cum  notis  muficis,  initium 
defideratur.  XVi 

In  fine  occurrit,  manu  aliena :  «  Proceflyon  into  S 
Bartyllmeves  Chriftus  refurgens.  Proceflyon  into  Saynte 
Marys-  Felix  namque-  1 

■  “  Proceflyon  into  I'aynte  Pancracys.  <c  Filie  icrufalenv* 
Proceflyon  to  faynte  James,  “  candidifadi  funt-” 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4'0  minore- 

2  946- 

Breviarium  imperfeauin,  fecmjdum  ufumEccIelie  Sarmn. 

!(le  liber  feriutus  fuit  per  T-  F.  A.  D.  i40r. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8°  crafliore. 

Cat.  FIarl.  Von.  II. 


Num. 


29+/'~ 2953. 


2947. 

Horae  B.  Manae  :  cum  Calendario,  &  Piauris  rudl. 

bus.  xv. 

2.  S.  Margaretac  hiftoria,  verfibus  Callicis. 

2948. 

s  !:  B-  Mariae  et  aliorum  SS.  cum  Calendario, 

« 1  iduris  nitidis.  XvI- 

2.  L’exercife  ordinaire  du  Chreflien. 

3.  Les  15  joyes  lire  Dame,  et  7  requeues  a  nre 
leigneur. 

4-  Preces  ad  S.  Michaelem,  Joh.  Baptiflam,  Chrif- 
tophorum,  Sebaftianum,  Nicholaum,  Hieronymum, 
Martinu,  Agnem,  Barbaram  5c  Margarita:  cu  picluris 
eorundem.  Codex  membranaceus  in  410.  minore. 

2949. 

Pfalterium  ;  cum  canticisN.  &  V.  Teftamcnti,  Te  Deum. 

.  v2UII}cunq;  vult,  &  Letania.  Codex  memhranaceu'* 
m  b  .  Lx  bibliotheca  Domini  Nicolai  Jofephi  Fcucault. 

xvi. 

295°. 

Horte  '-eatte  Virginis  aliaque  officia,  cum  calendario. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore  pulcheirinA 
depidus,  marginibufque  omnibus  auro  &  coioribus 
nitide  exomatis. 

295K 

1.  Ilymnarium  ad  ufum  Sarum,  cum  notis  muficis; 

2.  Calendarium.  Xiv’ 

3.  Commemorationes  de  paflione  Chrilti.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo. 

2952. 

An  elegant  volume  in  fmall  Quarto,  written  entirely  in  the 
french  language  during  the  15th  century,  and  con¬ 
taining  the  following  pieces. 

1  -  A  Prayer  to  the  Trinity. 

2.  A  Calendar. 

3’  paflion  of  Chrilt,  divided  into  matins,  prime 
tierce,  &c.  ’ 

4.  Various  Prayers,  fome  of  them  in  verfe. 

5.  Saint  Bernard’s  pfalter. 

6.  Prayers  to  be  faid  at  the  elevation  of  the  holt. 

7-  The  Prayer  of  Charlemagne. 

8.  The  15  joys  of  our  Lady. 

9.  ’1  he  Prayer  of  Saint  Gregory. 

10.  Various  prayers. 

11.  “  O  intemerata,  en  Francoys.” 

12.  Saint  Jerome’s  pfalter. 

13.  The  hours  of  the  blefled  Virgin. 

14.  A  prayer  to  Saint  Chriftopher  in  verfe. 

15.  The  fixth  pfalm  of  David  in  verfe. 

.  This  manufeript  is  embellilhed  with  many  elegant 
miniatures,  partly  executed  in  what  is  termed  the  camaieu 
gris.  At  the  beginning  there  are  two  portraits  of  the 
perfon  to  whom  it  originally  belonged  and  his  wife 
kneeling  before  the  Virgin.  Thefe  portraits,  as  well  as 
thofe  of  the  Virgin,  Saint  Antony,  Saint  George,  and  the 
Emperor  Charlemagne,  are  of  a  fuperior  kind,  and  the 
coltume  of  their  habits  extremely  deferring  of  an  artifl’s 
or  antiquary’s  attention. 

2953- 

Codex  membranaceus  fee-  xv.  in  8vo.  qui  olim  pertine- 
bat  Conrado  Peutingero,  quo  continentur. 

1.  Pidlura  David  et  Bethfabee,  temporfs  injuria  detrita. 

2.  Calendarium,  cum  obitibus,  Imp.  Cats.  Maximiliani 
Sc  quorundam  familia:  Peutingeriana.*,  manu  Peutingeri 
ipfius  exferiptum. 

3.  Maphc'i  Vcgii  Laudenfis  q::  red  am  de  paflmodia,  ex 
opere  fuo  de  pen-veramia  reiigionis. 

b  £ 


4*  Piilura 


722 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Nuni.  2953 — 2963. 

4.  Piftura  qua:  Gal  lice  dicitur  “  les  trois  vifs  &  les 
trois  morts.”  . 

t;.  Pidtura  perelegaiis,  et  arte  exquifita  perrecta, 
Mortis  triumphum  exhibens  fecundum  defcriptionem 
Petrarcha:  poeta:. 

6.  Pidtura  David  prophets  pfallentis,  eadem,  ut 
videtur,  manu  perfedta. 

7.  Ci  Incipit  liber  hymnorum  vel  foliloquiorum  pro- 

phete  de  Chrifto.”  Hoc  eft  pfalterium,  cui  adjiciuntur 
cantica  varia.  j 

8.  “  Magni  Athanafii  in  pfalmos  opufculum,  Angelo  ^ 

Politiano  interprete.”  ...  | 

9.  Excerpta  queedam  cx  epiftola  Divi  Hiercnymi  ad  j 
Paulam  et  Euftochium. 

1  o.  Orationes  diverik. 

11.  J.  F.  Stapulenfis  in  pfalmos  index. 

1 2.  Pidtura  S.  Chriftophori.  _ 

In  marginibus  Sc  aliis  locis  hujus  codicis  paflim  j 
infcribuntur  commentaria,  excerpta,  et  obfervationes  j 
C.  Pcutingeri. 

2954>  •  I 

Horae  B.  Mariae,  aliaque  oflicia  ;  cum  Calendario  :  Bel- 

gice-  Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo.  xv.  1 

2955- 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore,  ftec.  xiv.  exara- 
tus,  contiuens, 

1.  Calendarium  Gallicum. 

2.  “  Hourefounes  autres  orifons.”  _ 

7.  “  Ci  comance  coment  on  doit  penfeir  alamefi'e.” 

'  Prrefigitur  caflatura  quaedam  terea  8c  perantiqua,  qua 
eJthibentur  paftores  duo  ecclefiaftici  et  eves  plurimi  ante 
imaginem  beats -Virginia  filium  tenentis  fupplices. 

2956. 

Manuale  vel  Ordo  baptizandi,  purificandi  mulierem, 
Sponfalium,  Servitii  peregrinorum,  vilitandi  infirmum, 
l'epeliendi  &c.  fecundum  ui'um  Ecclefiae  Saruni. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo.  xv. 

2957. 

Martyrologium  breve:  cum  Prologis  diverfis,  “  per 
quos  patet,  quantam  diligentiam  1'anSi  &  antiqui  ad 
compilationem  hujus  opufeuli  habebant.”  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  qto.  minore. 

295?. 

Liber  OlHciarius  Ecclefiae  Treverenfis  Collegii.  xui. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  410.  minore. 

2959* 

Horse  B.  Maria:,  aliaque  oflicia :  cum  Calendario,  et 
pidturis  rudibus.  Accedunt  «  Les  X  joies  de  notre 
dame.”  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore.  xv. 

2960. 

‘  Oui  ordo  et  modus  ad  oleum  crifmale  et  alia  olea  con- 
feeranda  lunt  fervandi.”  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore. 

2961. 

Colleckarius  &  Ilyronarius  cum  notis  uiuficis  per  totum 
annum.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore,  cui 
deeft  finis.  x • 

2962.  ; 

Hors  beatm  Virginis  cum  calendario,  orationibus  ad 
ianctos,  &  aliis.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore,  cui  fuperfunt 
pidtura:  parvte  fanctorumSc  fandtarum,  caeteris  excifis. 

2963. 

“  Incipit  unctio  infirmorum.  Scquitur  officium  ad 
fepulturam-”  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore. 


Num.  2964 — 2974. 

2964. 

Ordo  olei  confecrandi.  Initium  defideratur.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore. 

2965. 

Paflio  Chrifti  fecundum  Evangeliftas,  5c  preces  variae  ad 
Deum  be  Sandtos :  literis  Saxonicis.  via. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4to. 

2966. 

Horae  B.  Mariae  :  cum  Calendario,  5c  precibus  ad  pic- 
turas  Sandtorum,  5c  Pfalterio  S.  Hieronymi.  xv. 

In  the  end  of  this  Book  is  the  following  Spell 
againft  Thieves : 

t;  Ho  fo  euer  fay  thes  verfys  here  after  folowyng  in 
tymes  ther  fhall  no  thelfe  nor  enmev  haue  power  to  hurt 
hym  nor  rob  hym  by  the  grace  of  God.” 

“  Jhefus  autem  tranciefis  per  medium  illcrum  ibat. 
Irruat  fuper  eos  formido  8c  pauor  in  magnifudine  brachii 
tui  Domine,  fiant  immobiles,  quafi  lapis,  donee  per- 
tranciat  furor  iuus  Domine,  et  populus  ifte  quern  redi- 
mifti.  Deus  in  carne  venit,  Deus  pro  nobis  mortuus 
eft  et  refurrexit.  Amen.”  Codex  membranaceus  in 
4to.  minore,  cum  pidturis  inartifkialibus. 

2967. 

MifTale  ad  ufum  Romanse  ecclefue,  cum  calendario.  xv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  qto.  et  perelegans,  nitidis 
illuminationibus  ornatus,  marginibufque  pulchre  depidtis. 
In  quibufdam  foliis  habentur  infignia  gentilitia,  prioris, 
ut  videtur,  pofleflbris. 

2968. 

Hora:  fandlte  crucis  5c  beata:  Virginia,  aliaque  officia, 
cum  calendario,  picturis  mediocribus,  8c  rubricis 
Gallicis.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore.  xvi. 

2960. 

Hora;  fandta:  Virginis  Marias,  aliaque  oflicia ;  cum  calen¬ 
dario  et  pidturis  elegantioribus.  xvi. 

Codex  membranaceus  perpulcher  8c  optime  fervatus. 


in  8vo. 


297O. 


Evangeliftarium  :  five,  Ledtiones  ex  Evangeliis  fumptae, 
cum  pidturis  quatuor  Evangeliftarum  8c  paginis  qui¬ 
bufdam  auro  et  colore  purpureo  eleganter  exomatis. 
In  folio  fecundo  feribitur,  literis  aureis,  d“s  pro- 

riTIVS  ESTO  OVDALRICO  PECCATORI.” 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  xi. 

2971. 

1.  Hora;  beata;  Virginis,  aliaque  officia,  cum  calen¬ 
dario  Gallico.  .  XV- 

2.  Les  quinze  joies  de  notre  Dame,  8c  autres  prieres. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore,  pidturis 

nitidis  ornatus. 

2972- 

Hone  beata:  Virginis  aliaque  officia.  cum  calendario, 
quindeciin  gaudiis,  orationibus  diverfis,  Sc  pidturis 
fatis  rudibus.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore. 

xv. 

2973- 

A  Manual  of  Devotion  :  formerly  Eliz.  Wentworth’s. 
A  fmall  quarto,  on  paper.  xvi. 

2974. 

Hora;  B.  Maria:  aliaque  officia,  cum  Calendario  Gallico, 
&  pidturis  mediocribus.  xv. 

Accedunt  Preces  ad  Sanbtos- 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore. 

Breviarium 


Bibliothecae  Harleianae. 


7*3 


Num,  2975 — 2985. 

2975- 

Breviarium  ad  ufum  Romanum,  cum  calcndario,  cyelis 
luns,  tabulis  planetarum,  See-  Codex  partirn  mera- 
branaceus,  partim  chartaceus,  in  quoprscipue  enitent 
liters  initiales  grandiores,  reliquis  piduris  fatis  in- 
artificialiter  confedis.  Margines  paffim  adornantur 
figuris  monftrofis,  vulgarlter  grotefques.  In  8vo.  xv. 

2976. 

1.  Calendarium.  2.  Preces  ad  Chriflum.  3.  Me- 
moria  de  S.  Trinitate,  Johanne  Baptifta  &  Evangelifta, 
Georgio,  C.hriftophoro,  Thoma  Cantuaricnfi,  Anna, 
Maria  Magdalena,  Katherina,  Barbara,  Margareta, 
&c-  xv. 

4.  Hore  B.  Marie,  fecundum  ufum  F.cclefie  Sarnm  : 
cum  aliis  precibus :  item  Pfalmi  poenitentiales  Litania, 
vigilis  mortuorum,  &c.  Codex  meir.branaceus  in  4to. 
minore,  literis  initialibus  &  marginibus  nonnullis  auro 
et  coloribus  exornatis. 

2977- 

Liber  Ritualis  Abbatiae  S.  Edmundi  de  Burgo ;  ab  Ad- 
ventu  ufq;  ad  Kal.  Maii.  Caetera  defunt.  Codex 
membranaceus  in  8vo.  xjv. 

5’97.8: 

PaHio  Chrifti,  ex  4  F.vangeliflis  extrada,  et  in  unum 
redada.  Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo-  xvi. 

2979. 

Ilorae  B.  Mariae,  S.  Spiritus,  Crucis,  aliaque  officia  & 
Calendariu :  accedunt  preces  qusdam  fermone  Gallico. 
Codex  membranaceus,  in  8U.  Defunt  picture  non¬ 
nulls,  reliquis  injuria  temporis  decritis.  •  .Xv. 

2980. 

Hors  beats  Virginis,  aliaque  officia,  cum  calendario 
Gallico  fignis  altrologicis  negotiifque  menfium  pulchrti 
ornato.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to-  minore,  piduris 
inartificialiter  depidis,  marginibus  tamen  muliis  floruin 
animaliumque  figuris,  quarum  alis  monftrofs  et 
perquam  infolentes,  fplendide  illuminatis.  xv. 

2981. 

Ordo  Proceffionis  generalis  perpetuo  faciendae  die  8 
Menfis  Maii,  pro  liberations  civitatis  Aurelianenfis. 
Scriptus  A°  1 642.  Hymnis  Nots  muficales  adjici- 
untur.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore,  cujus 
primo folio  inl'cribitur.  “Ex  dono  alms  urbis  Aurelis 
Anno  Confulatus  Majoris  Domini  De  Bclebat,  Ann. 
1657." 

2982. 

Ilors  B.  Marie,  fecundum  confuetudine  Anglie:  cum 
Calendario,  &  Piduris.  Accedunt  memoria  metrica 
de  fando  Thoma  Cantuarienli,  pialterium  de  pafiione 
Domini,  &  pfalterium  Hieronymi.  Codex  membra¬ 
naceus  in  8vo.  cum  piduris  latis  rudibus,  inter  quas 
habetur  csdes  Thoms  Becker.  xv. 


Ordinale  Ecclefis  Cathedralis  Here&rdenfis.  Codex 
membranaceus  in  4to.  xiv. 

2984. 

Breviarium  fecundu  ufu  Ecclefiae  Sarum,  quo  continents 
Sponfalia.  Ousdam  defiderantur.  Codex  membrana¬ 
ceus  in  4to.  xv. 

2985. 

Hors  beats  Virginis  ad  ufum  Anglicanum  cum  calen¬ 
dario.  Accedunt  alia  officia  & -pfalterium  Beati 
Hieronymi.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore, 


Num.  2y 86— -2996. 

cum  piduris  fatis  rudibus,  inter  quas  habetur  csdes 
Thoms  Beckct,  memoria  fua  metric^  auctoritate  regali 
excifS.  xv. 

2986. 

Breviarium  fecundum  confuetudincm  Curie  Romane  : 
cum  Calendario.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  Olini 
erat  Monafterii  S.  Petri  de  Areno,  in  civitate  .Ta- 
nuenfi.  xv. 

2987. 

Martyrologium  per  anni  circulum,  fecundum  Romananl 
Curiam  :  prsmittitur  Calendarium.  CodeX  mem¬ 
branaceus  in  4to.  xiv. 

2988. 

1.  Pialterium  fratrum  heremitarum,  cum  Calendario 

&  hymnis.  xiv. 

2.  Breviarium  Ordinis  fratrum  heremitarum  S.  Au- 
guflini,  fecundum  confuetudine  Romane  Ecclefie.  Codex 
membranaceus  in  3vo.  cralliore. 

2989. 

Hors  B.  Maris  aliaque  officia;  cum  Calendario  Gallico, 
&  piduris  fatis  inartificialibu?.  Codex  membrana¬ 
ceus  in  4to.  xv. 

2990. 

Rituale,  Ordo  baptizandi,  vifitandi  inflrmos,  et  fepeliendi 
mortuos,  per  Ducatum  Mediolani.  Codex  membra¬ 
naceus  in  4to.  xv. 

2990/ 

Liber  perantiquus  &  optime  fervatus,  fsculo  ix.  exaratus, 
quo  continentur, 

1.  Initium  evangelii  S.  Johannis. 

2.  Pfalterium,  cum  canticis  novi  &  vetcris  Tefl;*- 
menti,  l'ymbolis  Apoltolorum  6c  Alhanafli,  litaniis  & 
orationibus. 

Prsmittuntur  orationes  ad  SS.  Francifcum  &  An- 
tonium,  fsc.  xm.  feripts.  Codex  membranaceus  in 
folio  minore,  cum  literis  initialibus  artifieiofe  depidis. 

2991,  299?. 

Liber  miffalis  Nivemenfis  ecclefis;  maxima  ex  parte  ma- 
dore  lslus,  &  aliter  temporis  injuria  deletus.  Codices 
membrauacei  in  4to.  ix. 

2993- 

1.  Martyrologium  Romanum  :  Scriptu  a  fratre 
Steph.  de  Novaria  Ordinis  Cruciferor.  Venetiis,  A" 

1437- 

2.  Ledionarium  ad  ufum  ordinis  Cruciferorum. 
Finis  defideratur. 

3.  “  Liber  computi  magiflri  boni.” 

4.  “  Ordinatio  dementis  Paps  viti.  Anno  1352.” 

5.  “  Extra vagantes  Johannis  Paps  xxn.”  Cod&x 

membranaceus  in  4to.  olim  Monafterii  S.  Auguftini 
MefTanenfis.  xv. 

2994. 

Evangeliftarium  :  five,  Lediones  ex  Evar.geliis,  in  Ec- 
clefia  Canonicorum  S.  Symconis  Trevirenfis  Iegenda- 
rum  per  totum  annum.  Codex  membranaceus  in 
4to.  xi. 

1995. 

Recucil  de  Litanies  de  plufieurs,  S“.  &  S"‘.  Codex 
chartaceus  in  4to.”  xvn. 

2996. 

Miffs  de  S.  Spiritu;  S.  Trinitate ;  S.  Sacramento;  S. 
Cruce;  et  plurimum  Sandorum.  Codex  membrana- 
ceus  in  4to.  Xvi. 

Miifale 


Cataiogus  Librorum  MSS, 


7H 


Num.  2997- — 3004. 

2997. 

,Milfale  ad  -ifum  Romanum.  Codex  membrana&Us  in 
4to.  XV. 

299?, 

Hoite  B.  Maria:,  aliaque  officia,  cum  Calendario,  et 
pifluris  rudibus.  Codex  membranaceus 

in  4to.  xv. 

2999. 

Horse  beatsc  Maria:,  fecundum  ufum,  ut  videtur  ex 
fanclis  quibufdam  in  Calendario,  ecdefite  Tullante, 
in  Lotharingia.  Accedunt  Stabat  mater,  &  devota 
tneditatio  arinorum  Chrifti,  rhythmice.  xv. 

A.  1).  1  cj9 1 .  libex*  erat  Domini  de  Rambcrviller, 
cujus  4  filiorum  nativitas  ad  finem  infcribitur.  Codex 
membranaceus  iii4to.  minore,  cum  pifturisinartificialibus, 
inter  quas  habentur  infignia  Jefu  Chrifti  five  Paifionis. 

3000. 

1.  Horse  beatse  Virginis  ad  ufum  Anglicanum,  aliaque 

ofiicia,  cum  calendario.  xv. 

2.  Pfalterium,  cantica;  fymbolum  Athanafianum.  xv. 

“  Verba  Divi  Augullini  in  quarto  &  quinto  capiie 

libri  fui  quern  infcripfit  contra  epiltolam  Manichei  quam 
vocant  fundamenti,”  cui  adjicitur  tranflatio  Anglica.  xvi. 

Codex  membranaceus  &  pulcherrimus  in  4to.  per- 
multis  illuminationibus  fplendide  ornatus,  inter  quas 
habetur  oedes  Thomse  Becket.  _  Frequenter  in  hoc 
v olumine  occurrunt  infignia  gentilitia  Edwardi  Domini 
North  depicta. 

3001- 

i.  Gregorii  1.  Papae  de  paftorali  cura,  liber.  xi. 

_ _ ad  Palladia  Prelbyteru  de  monte 

Syna,  Epiftola. 

_ ad  Leandrum  epifcopum  Hif- 

paniorum  Epiftola.  “  Sanftitatis  tue  fufcepi  epiftolam.’’ 

4.  S.  Hieronymi  pvefbyteri  ad  Amandum  Epiftola. 
“  Brevis  epiftola  longas.” 

ij.  Hiftoria  Synodi  Placentiae  habitae,  A.  D.  1095. 

6.  - reconciliationis  Conradi  2  regis,  et 

tJrbani  papae.  A0.  1095. 

7.  S.  Cypriani  Carthag.  epi.  Sermo  de  12.  abufiyis. 

8.  Sermo  cujufdam  de  predeftinatione  &  prefcientia 
Domini.  Pagina  unica  principii  reftat.  Codex  membra- 
naceus  in  4to. 

3002. 

Ilomiliarum  liber  :  ex  S.  Auguftino,  &  variis  anony- 
mis.  xu. 

Liber  olim  S.  Manse  Sanctiq;  Nicolai  in  Arifteyn. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  4to. 

3°°3' 

Ifidori  Hifpalenfis  Archiepi  Liber  differentiarum,  feu  de 
fummo  bono,  five  fententiarum.  Codex  membrana- 
ceus  in  4to.  xv* 

3OO4. 

S.  Auguftini  Ilipponenfis  Epi,  Confeflionu  libri  13.  xu. 

Liber  olun  erat  S.  Marie  Sancliq;  Nicolai  in 
Arinfl e::,; «  quern  fcripfitTheodericusCanonicus  ibidem; 
quern  ft  quis  abftulerit  anatema  fit.” 

In  primo  folio  fcriptum  eft.  “  Hie  liber,  ut  in  calce 
videtur,  a  venerabili  Domino  Theoderico  Abbati  hujus 
monafterij  Arnfteyn  confcriptus,  a  me  Henrico  Schupio 
ejufdem  loci  licet  Abbati  indigno,  l'uis  titulis  capitibulque 
atque  annotationibus  lacre  feripture  refpondentibus  juxta 
.edilicnem  Eralmi  Roterodami  eft  tlucidatus,  anno 
domini  Salvaturis  noftri  Jhefu  Chrifti  miUefimo  quin- 
pentdimo  feptuagefimo.”  Codex  membranaceus  in 


Num.  300^ — 3013. 

3  00  5* 

1.  Expofnio  in  Canticum  Canticorum.  “  Tribus 

nominibus  vocatus  eft  Salomon.”  xu. 

2.  Hiftoria  nativitatis  Chrifti,  ex  Evangelits.  Codex 
membranaceus  in  4to. 

3006. 

1.  Ifidori  Hifpalenfis  expofitio  brevis  in  parabolam 

Jothae,  de  arboribus  ad  regnum  vocatis.  xii. 

2.  Fratris  Rodberti  Commentarius  in  Cantica  Can- 

ticor.  ^  xu- 

Excufus  habetur  inter  opera  Gregorii  Magni. 

3.  S.  Auguftini  Sermo  de  poenitentia. 

4- - de  ioplagis  Egypt!. 

5. - de  juramento- 

0 •  Sermo  in  Efaiam  iv.  1.  “  Apprehendent  feptem 
mulieres  virum  unum.” 

7.  S-Ambrofii  in  Proverb,  xxx-  18  &  19.  “Triu  lent 
diificilia  mihi,’’  Enarratio. 

Ad  finem  fermonis  de.pcenitentia,  habetur  pi&ura 
non  inelegans  Virginis  Deiparse,  dextra  manu  lilium 
tenenlis.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to. 

3007. 

Smaragdi  Abbatis  S.  Michaelis  ad  Mofam,  Diadema 

Monachor.  1  libro.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to-  xu. 

3008. 

1.  S.  Auguftini  De  medela  animae,  libellus.  K  Prima, 

via  ialutis.”  xi. 

2.  S.  Andreae  paflio  “  Quod  oculis  noftris.'’ 

3.  S.  Auguftini  Hip.  Tra&atus  ex  epiftola  S.  Johannis. 
Finis  Tra&atus  8\  et  integri  9“.  et  1  o™“'.  defiderantur. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to. 

3°o9. 

1.  Gregorii  magni,  Dialogoru  liber  3  &  4.  xi. 

2.  F.xtra&a  ex  patribus ;  de  15  iignis  ante  diem  judi- 
cii,  forma  fidelitatis,  genealogia  Chrifti,  fecundis  nuptiis, 
&c.  Deeft  finis.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to. 

3OI°. 

Gregorii  magni,  Homiliarum  in  Ezechielem,  libri  2. 

Maxima  pars  libri  fecundi  defideratur.  xu. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to. 

301  r. 

Gregorii  magni  dialogorum  libri  4.  xi. 

Ad  finem  libri  tertii  habetur  pictura  non  inelegans, 
quA  infcribitur  “  Teodericus  depinxit  hanc  imaginem 
Gregorium  Papam.”  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to- 

301  2. 

i-  S.  Auguftini  Ilipponenfis  Retradlatio  de  animae 
quantitate.  1*. 

2.  Cscl.  Sedulii,  Pafchalis  Operis  libri  5,  foluta  ora- 
tione  deferipti- 

3.  S.  Hieronymi,  in  Apocalypfin  explanatio. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to- 

3013- 

1.  Hymnus  ad  B.  Mariam,  cum  nods  muficis.  xri. 

2.  S.  Aldhelmi  epifeopi,  de  laudibus  SanOarum  virgi* 
num  liber,  cum  glolla- 

3.  Alexandii  3  papae  Epiftola  ad  Rogerum  Ebora- 
cenfem  Archiepilcopum  Quod  Monachi  non  folviuit 
decimas. 

Initio  Codicis  haec  habentur,  “  Liber  See  Marie 
Novi  Monafterii.” 

“  Vifio  cujufdam  Abbatis  Ordinis  Ciftcrcicnfis. 

“  Angelus,  Flecte  caput,  fxli,  quia  dieunt,  Glor:a 
“  pat 


5 


Diabclus 


Bibliothecas  Harleianse. 


7-S 


Num.  3013 — 3017, 

“  Diabolus.  Non  fledet,  triplicem  nifi  ritperit  an- 
l<  tea  funem. 

“  Abbas.  Ne  perdamus  ovem.  Funem  Deus  aufer 
“  8c  hoftem. 

“  Deus-  Libero  captivum.  Tu  cornpe  defidiofum. 
_  “  Monacus.  Ante  caput,  perdam,  quam  denuo  lu- 
Cl  mina  claudam.” 

Epitaphium  magiftri  Petri  Manjur  five  Manducatoris. 

“  Petrus  eram,  quern  petra  tegit ;  didufq;  Co- 
**  ineftor: 

“  Nunc  comedop.  Vivus  docui ;  nec  ceflo  docere, 
,c  Mortuus  ;  ut  dicat,  qui  me  videt  incineratum, 

“  Quod  fumus,  ifte  fuit :  erimus  quandoq;  quod 
“  hie  eft.”  Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto}  eleganter 
feriptus. 

3014. 

Cantica  Canticorum  :  cum  verfione  metrica  Willerami 
Abbatis  Eberfpurgenfis,  Latine :  et  expofitiane  ejuf- 
dem,  Teutonice.  IX. 

Codex,  membranaceus  in  4to  minore. 

3or5* 

t.  Joh.  Chrifoftomi  Conftantinopolis  Epifcopi  Homi- 
liae  30.  xir. 

2.  Ifidori  Hifpalenfis  de  differentiis  libri  dimidia  pars- 

3.  Bedac  Prefbyteris  de  naturis  rerum,  liber. 

4.  Anfelmi  Cantuarias  Archiepifc.  de  libero  arbitrio, 
Liber.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to- 

3016. 

I.  Hildeberti,  Cenomanenfis  Epifcopi,  Epiftolae  ct 

Sermones-  XI 

2- - De  Ctlebratione  miflse,  Tradatus- 

.3* - - —  Querimonia  Spiritus  et  Carnis ;  Pro- 

faica  &  metrica. 

4.  - •  Vita  S-  Maria;  Egyptiacse,  verftbus  leoni- 

nis  confcnpta. 

5.  S.  Auguftini  Hifp  :  Confeflio- 

6.  Conjuratio  contra  dolorem  dentium-  xiv* 

7.  Nomina  civitatis  Hierufalem. 

8-  Verfus  de  x  plagis  Egypti. 

9.  Verfus  de  Simoniacis. 

10.  Verfus  de  facramento  regum  Francorum. 

II.  Verfus  dc  3  Mariis. 

12.  Verfus  de  horis  paftionis  Chrifti. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minore. 

3°I7. 

1 .  Ominum  fauftorum  Sc  infauftorum  catalogi  frag- 

mentum.  6 

2.  “  Incipit  computatio  Grecorum  feu  Latinorum  ; 
primitus  vero  dicitur  de  menfibus.”  Sequuntur  Calen- 
darium,  computationefque  ecclefiaftica;  ct  allronomicte. 

3.  De  Itineribus  &  menfuris  agrorum. 

4.  Argumentum  beati  Theophyli  de  epada. 

5.  Ratio  fphera  Pythagora  philofophi  quam  Apu- 
leius  deferipfit. 

6.  Ejufdem  lunarium  de  asgris- 

7.  Lunarium  Sandi  Daniel  de  nativitate  infantum. 

8.  De  diebus  Egyptiacis  qui  mali  didi  funt  in  anni 
circulo. 

g.  Alphabetum  literarum  Gracarum  cum  notis  nu- 
meralibus,  inter  quas  habentur  Runicte  quaidam. 

10.  Mifcellanea  ad  Calendarium  pertinentia. 

1 1.  Signa  qua:  oftendit  Deus  Efdra  prophetae. 

12.  De  numero  annorum  ab  origine  mundi  ufque  ad 
adventum  Chrifti. 

13-  De  7  fideribus  errantibus,  Zodiaco,  januis  cadi, 
planetis,  &c- 

14.  Horologium. 

15.  De  pofitione  7  ftellarum  errantium. 

1 6.  De  aere,  tonitru,  fulminibus,  8t  vends-. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vol.  II. 


Num.  3017- — 3020. 

17.  De  chronice  vocabulo.  Ex  Ifidoro. 

18.  De  4  Anni  temporibus-  Ex  Ifidoro. 

19.  De  compotu  vel  loquela  digitorum. 

2o-  De  faltu  lunas. 

21.  De  curfu  &  eclipfi  folis. 

22.  Ordo  &  nomina  ventorum. 

23.  Ratio  de  tonitruo,  de  arcu,  de  a:ftu  occani,  de  cir- 
culis  terra  &  divifione  fua. 

24.  Schema  mundi. 

25.  de  curfu  &  magnitudine  folis. 

2f>.  De  4  Anni  temporibus. 

27.  De  fulminibus. 

28.  Cur  marc  non  crefcit. 

29.  De  Nilo. 

30.  De  literarum  Gracarum  pbteftate. 

31.  Numeri  per  quos  poteft  qui  voluerit  alterius  cogi- 
tationes  de  numero  quolibet  quern  animo  conceperit 
explorare. 

33.  De  quantitate  folis  Sc  lunte. 

33-  De  lumine  Sc  curfu  lunte. 

34  De  nominibus  aftrorum. 

35.  De  Arduro. 

36.  De  Nive. 

37.  De  fignis  tempeftatis  vel  ferenitatis. 

38.  De  terramolu. 

39.  De  indidionibus. 

40.  De  opadis  lunaribus. 

41-  De  temporibus,  horis,  &  momentis.  Ex  Ifidoro. 

42.  De  die  Sc  node. 

43.  De  Hebdomada,  8c  menfe. 

44.  Defolftido. 

45.  De  temporibus,  8cannis. 

46.  De  bifexto. 

47.  De  arithmetica. 

48.  De inventoribus  Geometries,  8c  vocabulo  ejus. 

49.  Nota:  muficales. 

50.  De  ponderibus. 

51.  Confiteor. 

52.  De  generibus  atomorum. 

53.  Etymologica  qusedam  de  pundo  Sc  minuto,  ex 
Ifidoro. 

54.  De  inventionehorologii  &:  quadrantis. 

55-  De  diebus,  Sc  quomodo  apud  Chriftianos  nomi- 
nantur. 

56.  Nomina  menfium  apud  Hebraos. 

57.  Ad  feiendum  cyclum  lolis. 

58.  De  figris  (Zodiacis.) 

59.  De  xn.  generibus  annorum. 

60.  Ad  embolifmum  inveniendum. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  feriptus,  ut  ex  fine 
mifccllaneorum  ad  calendarium  pertinentium  apparet 
A.D.  920-  ’ 

3018. 

S.  Auguftini  Retradatio,  de  quantitate  ani mat.  xil. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo. 

3OI9- 

1.  Profperi  Aquitanici  Epigrammata.  xn. 

2.  Etymologicum,  ax«>a*oi<  xa!  xn. 

3.  Tradatus  logicus,  cum  glolfa.  “  Forma  eft  com- 

pofitioni  contingens.”  XII_ 

4.  Vita  Materniani,Remorum  epifcopi,  aKfpaAof.  xi. 

3020. 

1 .  "  Sermo  beati  Bede  facerdotis  et  confeflbris  in  na- 
tale  Sci  Benedicti  Abbatis  qui  fuit  conftrudor  monafterii 
Sci  Petri  principis  apoftolorum  quod  dicitur  aepyjie  mujie 
in  ^^6^1^^0^01^00101.'’  x. 

_  2.  Vita;  S.  Abbatum  Benedicti,  Ceolfridi,  Eofterwini, 
Sigfridi  et  Hwatberhti. 

3.  Pafliones  SS.  Calefti  Papa;,  Stephani  Martyris,Ab- 
donis  &  Sennis,  Felicitatis  cum  7  filiis  fuis,  Simplicii 
Fauftini  &  Beatricis,  Felicis,  Agapiti,  Cornelii  Sc  Juliana:. 
Inter  paftiones  Cornelii  Sc  Julianse  occurrit  pars  fequen- 
8  Y  tiae 


f!  ft 


iff  I 


!'l  ,1 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  3021—3027. 

tfe  vel  cantlci,  “  Nato  canunt  omnia  Domino,”  cum 
noiis  muficis  peramiquis. 

4.  A&usTheophili  qui  Chriftum  negavit.  et  recuparavit 
Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo. 

3°2  I, 

1.  S.  Hieronymi  Epiilola  ad  Paulinum,  de  itiftitu- 

tionc  Clericoru.  xn. 

2.  - ad  Oceanum,  de  vita  Clericorum. 

9.  Juonis  Carnotenfis  Epiftolae  9,  de  concubinatu  et 

matrimonio,  &c. 

4.  Ouseftiones  de  Sanctorum  opufculis.  tc  Utrum 
poft  mortc  peccatores  aliquando  exeunt  de  gehenna  ?  ” 

1 Gifleberti  Abbatis  Weftmon.  Difputatio  Judsei  cii 
Chriftiano.  Codex  membranaceus  in  Bvo. 

302  2. 

1.  Algidii Romani, deregumnepnncipum,  liber,  xiv. 

5.  Animalium  quorundam  breves  deferiptiones,  cum 
expofuicnibus,  afceticis.  Hoc  opus  in  rubrica  Ariftoteli, 
fed  perperam,  tribuitur. 

3.  Vita  S.  Veridiane. 

4.  M.  Aur.  Cafiiodori  Sen.  diverfar.  formar.  liber, 
eft  enim  Cafliodori  Variorum,  Libri  primi  pars  prior. 

- de  anima,  liber. 

6.  S.  Auguftini  Speculum  anime. 

7.  - - Soliloquioru  anime  adDeum, liber. 

8.  B.  Auguftinus  de  Vita  Chriftiana.  ad  Paulinam 
Epiilola.  Codex  membranaceus  in  410.  minore,  cum 
literis  inhialibus  pulthre  figuratis. 

3023. 

1 .  Aur.  Prudentii  Cathemcrinon  :  feu,  Liber  hymno- 

rum  diurnis  aftionibus  convenientium.  xn. 

2.  - Periftephanos  :  feu,  Liber  hymno- 

rum  in  honorem  martyrum. 

2. - Oratio.  O  Dee  cun&ipotens. 

4.  QuEedam  de  rationemetrorum. 

5.  Alexandri  papae  Literae  quaedam  :  inter  quas  una 
ad  G.  comitein  Andegavenfem  defendens  Berengarium. 

6.  De  trimoda  cautela  vitiorum,  Verfus. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  8vo. 

3024- 

Theodulphi  Epifcopi  Aurelianenfis  de  Spiritu  San£to, 
Liber ;  ex  veterum  teftlmoniis  conflatus :  cum  pra:- 
Gxo  carmine  nuncupatorio  ad  Carolum  M.  literis  ca- 
pitalibus  feripto.  ix. 

Accedunt  ad  finem  Preces  variae. 

Theouulphum  autorem  efle  hujus  Codicis  non  du- 
bitant  Gul.  Caveus  et  Joh.  Alb.  Fabricius,  licet  manu 
1 00  annorum  in  C.odice  feribitur,  “  Liber  Anaftafti  con¬ 
tra  Arrianos  hereticos.’’  Nec  occurrit  aliud  nomen 
Autoris  in  Codice. 

Liber  quondam  erat  S.  Marie  &  S.  Nicholai  in 
Arinftein.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to.  minore. 

3025. 

1.  B.  Auguftini,  de  Igne  purgatorio,  Sermo.  xn. 

2.  Ifidori  Hifpalenfis  epi,  Originum  five  Etymolo- 

giarum  liber  7  8  UI.  &  9  et  pars  pofterior  6ti. 

3.  Expofitio  variarum  partium  S.  Scripturae.  « 
xxl  u'V?,ero{.  Codex  membranaceus  in  4to  minore- 

3026. 

Haymonis  Halberftadienfrs  epi,  Expofitio  in  Apocalypfin. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio.  x. 

3027- 

1.  S. Auguftini  Soliloquiorum  libri  2. Deeflinitium.  xn. 

2.  S.  Auguftini  de  immortalitate  animae,  liber  :  cum 
retractatione. 

3.  - de  praefemvi  Dei,  liber. 

■  de  lermone  Dili  in  monte  :  cu  re- 


Num.  3027 


7.  P.  Orofii,  Quasftiones  deTrinitate,  &c.-cum  S.  Au¬ 
guftini  refponfionibus. 

8.  S.  Auguftini  de  gratia  &  libero  arbitrio,  liber,  ad 
Valentinum. 

- Enucleationes  quarunda  propofi- 

tionum  Dulcitii  amici. 

to. - Confirtatio  quorunda  C.apitulor. 

fibi  imputator. 

ii- - Sermones  6 ;  de  nataii  Domini  : 

una  cum  Sermone  Eufebii,  de  eodem  argumento. 

12.  Originis  fermo  de  circumciGone  Domini. 

13.  S.  Auguftini  Sermones  3  de  epiphania  Domini. 

14.  * - Exhortationis  liber,  ad  quendam 

comitem. 

15.  - de  videndo  Deum,  ad  Paulinam, 

Epiftola.  Deeft  Gnis.  Codex  membranaceus  in  Folio. 

3028- 

i.  S.  Auguftini  fermones  de  verbis  Domini.  xni. 

-  de  verbis  Apoftoli  contra  Arrianos 


fermones. 

3-  - 

4. - 


tradtatione.  lib.  2. 


cu  retradt. 

6. 


Expofitio  Epiftolae  ad  Romanos : 
de  12  abufivis,  liber. 


- de  Canonicis  epiftolis  fermones. 

-  Exhortationis  liber,  ad  quendam  co¬ 
mitem. 

5.  - — —  de  disciplina  Chriftianorum,  libellus. 

6.  - Retradlationum  libri  2. 

7.  - fuper  Genefim  ad  literam  libri  12. 

8.  - de  83  quteftionibus,  liber.  Codex 

membranaceus  in  folio.  Ad  ftnem  inferuntur  duo  folia 
manu  fee.  xv.  exarata,  queis  continentur  nomina  prio- 
rum,  canonicorum,  vicariorum,  See.  cum  valore  bene- 
Gciorum  eorum. 

3°29* 

Gregorii  1.  papae,  Expofitionis  in  Job  ;  five  Moraliu  libri 
5  primi.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio.  xm. 

3030- 

1 .  Origenis  Adamantii,  Expofitio  in  Epiftolam  Pauli 
ad  Romanos  :  ex  verfione  Ruffini,  in  libros  10  divifa.  x. 

2.  S.  Hieronymi  Expofitio  Epiftolae  Pauli  ad  F.pheGos. 

3.  Prtemittuntur  Tituli  Canonum  Apoftolorum,  alia 
manu  feripta,  fed  perantiqua. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3°3 

Ambrofii  Mediolani  Epifc  Liber  expofitionis  Pfaluii  1 18. 

xv: 

Scriptor  fic  pergit :  “  Scriptus  per  fratrem  Petrum 
GreyfF  de  palaciolo  monachum  profefVum  ordinis  S.  Be- 
nedidti  anno  Dni  1489,  fub  reverendo  patre  ac  domino 
Abbate  Johanne  de  Breda.  Qui  feripturam  deleverit  hanc 
anathema  fit,  nec  non  &  indignationem  Dei  patris  om- 
nipotentis  et  beatiffime  geneiricis  ejus  noverit  fe  incur- 
furum.” 

Liber  quondam  erat  B.  Marie  ad  mar  tyres  -extra 
muros  Treven.  fuper  litus  Mofelle,  Ordinis  S.  Benedicti. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3032. 

Hefychii  Hierofolymorum  Prefbytcri  Explanationis  in 
Leviticu,  libri  7.  Pergamena  recentior  videtur  ;  &  ita 
probare,  feripturam  non  effe  faeculi.  Ad  ealeem  pauca 
defiderantur.  x. 

Liber  aliquando  Ecclefie  lc;e  Marie  pie  virginis  fciq; 
Nycholai  confefToris  atq;  pii  pontiGcis  in  Arinftein. 

Codex  pulcherrimus  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3°33* 

Gregorii  1  papae,  Moraliu  in  Job,  libri  5  priores  alcXtrot. 


Accedit  Hymnus  ad  B.  Mariam,  cum  notis  muficis 
fee.  ix  exaratis. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

x.  Etvmo- 


Bibliotheca;  Harleianae. 


7-7 


Num.3034 — 3041. 


3°34- 

;  1  •  Etymologicum  parvum  ex  Ifidoro  <c  De  ecclefia 
Efidorus.”  VIIli 

2.  S.  Auguftini,  ad  Laurentium,  Enchiridion. 

3.  Predicationis  Liber,  de  natali  Dili,  &c.  “  Scire 
debetis,  fratres.”  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3°35- 

Ifidori  Hifpalenfis  Epi,  Etyinologiarum  libri  20.  Scripti 
per  fratrem  Gerardum  de  Siegen  A.  D.  1496.  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3036. 

t.  I'lacci  Alcuini,  de  Confellione :  five  defloratiun- 
cul.i  ex  Auguftini,  Gregori,  aliorumq;  patrum  feriptis 
colledta.  x 

2.  Ilugonis,  Abbatis  Cluniacenfis,  Vita  brevis. 

3.  Gregorii  i,  papae,  de  diverfisledtionibus  Evangelii 
hoiuiliae  40.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 


3037- 

1.  Homiliarum  liber,  de  Manna,  corpore  &  fanguine 

Domini,  &c.  xm. 

2.  Juliani  Toletani  Epi,  Prognoflicoruni futuri  faeculi 
libri  3. 

3.  Paflio  7  dormientium,  S.  Kenelmi  regis,  S.  Mau- 
rilii,  S.  Andrea;,  &  Gerardi  Prioris.  Ad  ealeem  nonnulla 
defiderantur. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 


3038. 

“  Leviticus  glofatus  ”  i.  e.  Commentarius  in  Jibrum 
Leviticorum,  dTi^irpi.  xii. 

Prefiguntur  Notae,  de  orthographia,  de  feientiarum 
atq;  virtututn  initiis,  de  fide,  lpe,  charitate,  gratia,  & 
libero  arbitrio. 


qd.  Tuchet. 


Liber  erat  feriptis  in  ufum  S.  Marie  de  Bildewas,  A° 
1176.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  Volume  is  inferted  a  fmall 
fiip  with  the  following  Verfes  written  in  the  fifteenth  cen¬ 
tury. 

“  Do  mon  for  thi  felffe  wyl  thou  art') 
olyve  ( 

fTor  he  that  dofe  after  thou  dethe  ( 

God  let  him  never  thryve.  J 
Da  tua  dum  tua  funt  poll  mortem  tunc  tua 
non  funt. 

Wyfe  mon  if  thou  art  of  thi  gods  (goods)') 
lake  part  or  thou  houfe  wynde  ( 
fTo  -  it  thou  leve  thi  part  in  thi  Secataris  | 
ward  thi  part  non  part  at  laft  end.  J 

Too  Secataris  &  an  Overfeer  make  thre  theves.” 


3°39- 

1.  S.  Auguftini  de  Genefi,  contra  Manichzeos,  libri.  2. 

ix. 

2.  - contra  epiftola  Manichei,  quam 

vocant,  Fundamenti,  liber. 

3.  - contra  Academicos.  libri.  3. 

4- - de  ordine,  libri.  2. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 


3°4°- 

1.  Ctefarii  Arelat.  epi,  Homilia  10,  ad  Monachos.  xv  ? 

2.  - Admonitio  ad  Sororem  fuam. 

3.  Eufebii  Emifeni,  Homilia;  9. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 


3°4J* 

1.  I..  Anfelmi  Lucidarius.  “  Sepius  rogatus  a  con- 

difcipulis  quafdam  queftiunculas.”  xm. 

2.  Bulla  Papa;  Bonifacii  vizi  remiflionum  &  indulgen- 
tiarum  peccatorum.  A.D.  1300. 

immediately  before  this  bull  are  fome  pious  verfes 


Num.  3042 — 3044. 

on  the  pains  of  hell,  addrefled  by  the  Author  to  his  friend 
Girard,  Sc  written  in  theProvencal  language.  They  begin 
“  Si  paradis  &  enfems  font  aital 

Amies  Girard  qon  tot  jor  auzem  dir.” 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3042. 

I.  S.  Ambrofii  de  Officiis,  libri  3.  x. 

2-  - fermo  de  refurredtione  Domini.  x. 1 

3-  - Hexameron  j  feu  de  opere  6  dierutii 

libri  6.  xiii. 

4-  - de  paradifo,  et  lapfu  primi  hominii 

liber.  Deed  folii  ultimi  dimidium.  xm. 

5* - de  poenitentia,  libri  2.  x. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  majore,  olim  tnona- 
fterii  S.  Maria;  Sandlique  Nicolai  in  Arinfteiri. 

3°43* 

Paflionale.  fcil;  Paflio,  xv.' 

1.  Apoftolorum,  Petri  &  Pauli. 

2.  Pauli  Apoftoli. 

3.  Andree,  Apoftoli. 

4.  Jacobi  majoris. 

5.  Johannis  Evangelifte. 

6.  Jacobi  minori's. 

7.  Philippi  Apoftoli. 

8.  Thome  Apoftoli. 

9.  Bartholomei  Apoftoli. 

10.  Matthei  Apofto'i. 

I I.  Symonis  &  Jude. 

12.  Mathie  Apoftoli. 

13.  Barnabe  Apoftoli. 

14.  Luce  Evangelifte; 

15.  Marci  Evangelifte. 

1 6.  Vita  Karoli  M.  a  Turpino  Archiepifcopo  Refhenft 
compofita,  cum  prasfatione,  qute  libris  impreffts  Turpini 
plerumque  deeft. 

17.  VitaS.  Gregorii  pape,  a  Johanne  diacono  con- 
fcripta. 

18.  Vita  &  paflio  originalis  B.  Barbarevirg.  &  mart 

19.  Vita;  Baftlii,  Silveftri,  &  Juliani.  xm. 

20.  Paflio  imaginis  Domini. 

21.  Paflio  S.  Martine  virginis. 

22.  Vifio  mirabilis  cujufdam,  provocans  ad  largitionem 
elemofmarum. 

23.  Gregorii  I,  pape  Sertno  ad  facerdotes. 

24.  - Expofttio  fuperorationem  Dominicam. 

25.  - Sermo,  de  fpirituali  lepra. 

Liber  aliquando  erat  Monafterii  B.  Marie  ad  mar- 
tires,  extra  muros  Treverenfes,  Ordinis  S.  Benedict, 
fuper  litus  Mofelle. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  majore. 

3°+4- 

S.  Hieronymi  Epiftolae,  &  alior.  ad  eum  ;  quarum  deeft 
prima.  xii. 

1.  Damafi  papae  ad  eum.  “  Dormientem  te.” 

2.  S.  Hieronymi  ad  Damafum.  “  Poll;  quam  epifto- 
lam  tue  fan£titatis.’'  In  hac  tradlat  de  egreflione  filiorum 
Ifrael  ex  Egypto,  de  ignorantia  Ifaac  in  benedicentis 
filiis.  Et  addit  verftonein  Origenis  homiliarum  2  in 
Cantica  Canticorum. 

3.  Hieron :  Ad  Tranquiiiinum  Epiftola,  quoipodo 
Origene  legere  debeat. 

4.  Hieron  :  Ad  Damafum,  de  Ofanna. 

5.  &  6. - de  fide,  cui  in  Anliochia  com- 

municare  deberet  • 

7.  S.  Hieronymij  Ep.  ad  Damafum,  de  Seraphin  & 
Calculo. 

8.  - Sermo  de  merte  Ozie,  &  feraphin 

Sc  calculo  in  Ifaia. 

9. '  ■  - Epiftola  ad. Damafum,  de  filio  pro- 

diS°-  . 

10.  S.  Auguftini  epiftola  ad  Hieronymum.  “  Audivi 

pervenifle  in  tnanus  tuas.”  ^ 


Multi  utroq ;  claudicant 

28.  - ad  Alippium 8c  Auguftinum.  “S.Inno- 

centius  prefbiter.” 

29.  Difputatio  de  ralione  Animas.  “  Cum  apud  vos 
casleftis-” 

30.  HieronymiEp.  adHeliodorum.  “  Quanto  amore  et 
ftudio.” 

31.  - ad  Nepotianum,  de  Iapfu  clericor.  & 

monachor.  et  de  vita  monachorum  &  clericoruin. 

32.  - ad  Paulinum,  de  inftitutione  Clerico¬ 

ruin,  &  de  divina:  hiftorias  expofitionibus  diverfis. 

33.  - de  omnibus  divinte  hiftoria;  libris. 

-  ad  Amandum  prefbyteru  de  diverfis 

queftionibus.  Item,  Epifliolaris  Propofitio. 

35.  - ad  Pammachium  de  optimo  genere  in- 

terpretandi. 

36.  Epiphanii  Salamina;  epi  Ep.  ad  Joh.  Chryfoftomum. 
“  Oportebat  nos.” 

37.  Pammachii  &  Oceani  Ep.  ad  Hieron.  “  San&us 
aliquis  ex  fratribus.” 

38.  Hieronymi  ad  Pammac.  &  Oceanu.  “  Scedule 
quas  mififtis.” 

39.  - ad  Oceanum,  de  vita  clericorum. 

40.  - - - de  unius  uxoris  viro. 

41.  - ad  F.vangelum,  Qualiter  prefbiter  & 

Diaconus  differant. 

42.  - de  Melchifedech. 

43.  - ad  Marcum  prelbiteru  Calcide.  “  e- 

rreveram  quidem.” 

as. - ad  Avituru,  ubi  ea,  que  in  libris  peri 

archon  adverfus  fidem  catholicam  l'unt,  pandit. 

45.  Diffinitio  fidei  fymboliq;  Niceni  Concilii. 

46.  Hieronymi  Ep.  ad  Exuperantium.  “  Inter  omnia 
que  mihi.” 

47.  - - ad  Rufticum,  exhortatoria  fuper  poe- 

nitentcm. 

48.  - -  ad  Defiderium.  “  I.edlo  fermone  dig- 

nationis  tue.” 

49.  - Senno  de  3  virtutibus,  fortitudine, 

fapientia  &  pmdentia. 

50.  - — —  Ep.  ad  Dardanum,  de  terra  repromif- 


Non  hec  opi- 


Num.  304.4. 

52.  Hieronymi  contra  Helvidiumde  perpetua  virgin!' 
tate  S.  Marie,  liber. 

53*  — * - adverfus  Vigilantium  Ep.  ubi  ejus  arguit 

blafphemias. 

54. - ad  Riparium  Epiftola,  contra  Yigilan- 

thim. 

54- - item  alia,  adverfus  "Vigilantium. 

56. - ad  Magnum  Oratorem  Rome.  “  Sebe- 

ad  Rufinum,  de  iudicio  Salomonis  in 

fe&ione  parvuli. 

58. - Ad  Vitalem  prefbiterum,  de  Salomone 

ad  Florentinum,  de  ortu  amicitie. 
ad  eundem,  “  In  ea  michi  parte  heremi 

ad  Abigaum  Spanum. 

multorum  mihi.” 

ad  Caflricianum,  ut  de  cecitate  que  ei 
contigit  non  debeat  contriftari. 

63.  - adSabianumDiaconum.  “  Samuel quon- 

ad  Julianum  Diaconum  Aquileie. 
“  Antiquus  fermo  eft.*' 

65.  - ad  Niceam  Ypodiaconum.  “  Turpilius 

comicus.’’ 

66.  - ad  Rufticum.  “Nichil  eft  Chriftiano.” 

67.  - ad  Paulum  fenem  monachum,  “  Hu¬ 

mane  vite  brevitas.” 

68.  — - - ad  Chromatium,  Jovinianum  &  Eufe- 

bium.  “  Non  debet  carta.” 

69.  Hieronymi  ad  Chrifogamum  monachum.  11  Qui 
circa  te  aftedlus.” 

70.  - ad  Antonium  monachum.  “  Dominus 

nofter  humiliratis.” 

71.  - -  ad  Thedofium  &  ceteros  anachoritas 

intrinfecus  commorantes.  “  Quam  vellem  nunc  veftro 
interefle  conventui.” 

—  ad  Minervium  &  Alexandrian  mona- 
chos,  de  refurrettione. 

73. - ad  Ciprianum  prefbiterum,  de  Pfalmo 

— - ad  Pammachium  apologeticum.  “  Quod 

ad  te  hue  ufqj  non.” 

75.  - - - - - “  Chriftiani  interdum  pu- 

doris  eft.” 

/  yS. - ad  Pammachium  &  Marcellam.  tc  Rur- 

fum  orientalibus.” 

77.  ad  Domnionem.  “  Litere  tue  &  amorem  fonant. 

78.  - —  ad  Euftochiam  filiam  S.  Paule,  de  vir- 


ginitate  fervanda. 

79' 


detrahebant. 

80.  - 

guitas.” 


ad  Afellam,  de  fiftis  amicis,  qui  fibi 
■ —  ad  virgines  Emonenfes.  *c  Carte  exi- 
—  ad  Demetriadem  virginem.  “  Si  fumo. 


Inter  omnes  materias.” 


ad  Aletam,  de  inftitutione  filie. 

-  ad  Fabiolam,  dc  vefte  facerdotali. 

-  ad  matrem  &  filiam  in  Galliis  commo¬ 


rantes.  “  Retulit  michi  quidam.’’ 

86.  - - —  ad  Caftorinam  materteram.  “  Johannes 

apoftolus  et  evangelifta.” 

87.  - ad  Foriam,  de  viduitate  fervanda. 

88.  - ad  Salvinam,  confolatoria  deNedibrio, 

&  de  viduitate  fervanda. 

89.  - ad  Aggerutiam,  de  monogamia. 

90.  - ad  Edibiam,  Quasftiones  12. 

91.  - - ad  Algafium,  Quteftiones  1 1 . 

92.  - ad  Marcellam,  de  5  quteftionibus  N- 

Teftamenti,  velde  his  qui  Dno  occurfuri  funt. 

93.  - ad  Marcellum,  de  Onafo. 

94.  Hieronymi 


Bibliothecae  Harleianse. 


9 


Nura.  304.4 — 3048. 

94.  Hieronymiad  Marcellam,  de  Hebraicis  nominibus 
&  verbis. 

- - - de  1  o  nominibus  quibus 


—  de  fide  8c  dogmate  hereti- 

-  de  blafphemia  in  Spiriiu 
•  “  BeatusPamphilus  mar- 
• ct  Ut  tam  parvam  cpifto- 

-  Ne  contrifletur  de  egro- 

-  de  Ephot  &  Theraphiri. 

-  de  derre&atoribus  l'uis. 

-  de  muneribus. 

-  de  fecedendo  ab  urbe. 


95- - 

apud  Hebrseos  Deus  vocatur. 

96. - 

corum. 

97- . — — : — 

fan£tu  irremifiibili. 

9S- - 

tyr.” 

09. - 

lam.” 


tatione  Blefille. 


102.  • 

103.  ■ 

104. 


10  c. - ad  Evangelum  prcfbyterum.  “  Nudius 

tercius  cum  centefimum.” 

10 6. - ad  Marcellam,  de  diapfalma. 

ic  y - ad  Heliodorum  Epifcopum,  de 

exceflu  Nepotiani  prefbyteri. 

,oS.  - - ad  Tyrafium  Confolatoria  de  morte 

filie  fue-  _  . 

1 09. - ad  Julianuin  exhortatoria,  &  de  pig- 


novibus  confultum. 


-  ad  Paulam  Confolatoria  de  dormitione 


Blefille. 

in.  Eieronymi  Epitaphium  fandte  Paule :  feu  potius 
vita  ejus  cui  fubjicitur,  Titulus  Sepulchri. 

112.  — - ad  Theodoram  Spanam,  de  morte 


Lucini. 

113,  - ad  Oceanum,  de  morte  Fabiole. 

x  1 4. - ad  Marcellam,  de  exitu  Lee. 

x  j  - de  vita  Afelle. 

ug, - ad  Innocentium  de  fepties  percuffa. 

11 7.  - ad  Principiam  virginem  de  vita  Mar- 

celle. 

1 1 8.  ad  Painmachium  de  morte  Pauline. 

1 19.  Narratio  de  quodam  Leone  fcil.  S.  Hieronymi. 
«  Contigit  aute  hujufinodi  miraculum.” 

120.  Vita  S.  Hieronymi  prefbyteri,  et  qualiter  in  Beth- 
Ieem  converfatus  eft.  “  Plerolq;  nimirum  illuftrium.” 

Codex  membranaceus,  in  folio  majore. 


3°45- 

1 .  Magnentii  Hrabani  Mauri  opus  in  honorcm  l'an£tif- 

fimecrucis.  _  xn; 

2.  Catalogus  librorum  S.  Marie  St  S.  Nicolai  in 
Arnftein,  “  quicumque  aliquem  abflulerit  anatema  fit.” 

3.  Tabula;  quaedam  arithmetics  8c  menfurarum. 
Codex  mem' ranaceus  in  folio  majore,  eximia;  pul- 

chritudiuis  5c  invcntionis,  pidturis  ornamentifque  variis 
artificialiter  illuminatus,  et  fummo  labore  confedtus. 


3046. 

Homiliae  D.  Auguflini,  Gregorii,  Ambrofii,  Chrifoftomi, 
Bedae,  Origenis  &  alior.  per  tolum  annum,  xv. 
Codex  membranaceus  pulcherrimus,  manu  Italica 
exaratus,  in  folio  majore. 


3°47- 

1.  Ufuardi  Martyrologium.  Xv. 

2.  S.  Pauli  Epiftolae,  cum  Hieronymi  prologo. 

3.  Epiftolae  Canonicae,  cum  prologo,  ut  dicitur, 
Hkronymi.  Deeft  finis. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  majore. 

3048. 

Gregorii  1  papae,  Homiliae  40.  de  diverfis  leflionibus 
Evangelii :  ad  Secundinum  epifcopum  Tauromini- 
tanum  inferiptre.  ix. 

C<  dex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

Cat.  II-yrl.  Vol.I1. 


Num.  3049 — 3051* 

3°49'  . 

t .  De  hoc  libro  fic  habetur  in  prima  paginri- 

Venerabilis  pater  magifter  Willielmus  Ebchefler, 
nuper  Prior  hujus  Ecclefie  Cathedralis  Dunelmtnfis,  fecit 
liunc  librum  fieri,  8c  aflignavit  ipfum  Librarie  cjufdem 
Ecclefie  anno  Domini  1450.  xv* 

Contenta  hujus  Libri, 

In  primis  liber  S.  Ambrofii  cpi,  de  fide  ad  Gratianu 
itnperatorcrn.  1  • 

Item,  liber  ejufdem  de  Spiritu  fco,  ad  eund.  iinpe- 
ratore.  29. 

It.  liber  ejud.  de  incaruatione  Dili,  ad  eundem  im* 
peratore.  5 1  \ 

Item,  liber  Epiftolarum  B.  Ambrofii,  in  o£to  libellos 
diftin£tus,  cu  titulis  capitulorum  in  fine  oftavi  libelli. 

56- 

Item,  Epiflola  ejufdem  ad  ecclefia  Vercellenfem  de 
paftore  eligendo.  1 13\ 

Item  Trattatulus  ejufdem  fuper  illo  Salomonis  ubi 
dicit  tria  effe  libi  impoflibilia,  quartum  penitus  ignorare. 

”9* 

Item,  Explanatio  S. Hieronymi  fuper  epiftolam  Pami 
ad  Titum.  J  20- 

Item  brevis  explanatio  ejufdc  fuper  apocalipfin.  1 30. 

Item,  Expofitio  Abbatis  Joachim  fuper  apocalipfin. 

136. 

Item,  libellus  Yfidori  de  fignificatione  nominu  vete- 
ris  legis  &  evangelii.  220. 

Item,  Trattatus  magiftri  Petri  Cardinalis  Camera- 
cenfis  de  poteflate  pape  &  confilii  generalis.  225. 

Item,  Queftio  Francifci  de  Maronis  de  dominio 
Apoflolor.  234. 

It.  Queftio  mri  Walti  Hunt  Carmelite  de  eo  “  quid 
eft  Ecclefia.”  240. 

Itm.  Queftio  ejufd;  de  preeminentia  Petri  fuper 
alios  apoftolos.  24 1 . 

Itm.  Liber  Yfidori  de  ortu  8c  obitu  fan&or.  Pa- 
trum.  _  243. 

Itm.  Quidam  Tradtatus  vocatus  Liber  provincial^  de 
fedibus  Archiepifcopalibus  &  epifeopalibus  mundi.  247. 

Subjiciuntur  ad  ealeem  codicis,  Extracta  quartern 
de  Expofitione  Abbatis  Joachym  fuper  ylaiam,  ubi  agit 
de  onere  Babilonis. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3°5C*  ' 

I.iber  excerptorum  de  quibufdam  opufeulis  S.  Auguftirfi. 

Prsemittitur  Tabula  Capitulorum.  xm. 

Liber  erat  S.  Marie  8c  Nicolai  in  Arenftein  quern 
fcripfitTimo  Canonicus  ibidem. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3°S/- 

S.  Auguflini,  8c  alioTum  Epiftolarum  liber.  xii. 

1.  S.  Auguflini  Epiflola,  contra  epiflola  Manicheo- 
rum,  quam  vocant  Fundamenti. 

2.  - ad  Volufianum.  **  De  falute  tua.” 

3.  Volufiani  ad  Auguflinum.  “  Petis  me  vir  probi- 
tatis.” 

4.  Auguflini  ad  Volufianum.  “  Legi  literas  tuas.’’ 

5.  Marcellini  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Vir  inluflris  Volu- 
fianus.” 

6.  Auguflini  ad  Marcellinum.  “  Inluftri  yiro.” 

7.  - ad  Italicam.  “  Non  folum  literas.” 

8.  - - - ad  Marcellinum.  “  Epiftolam  tuam, 

quam  per  fanftumj  fratrem.” 

9.  Hieronymi  ad  Auguflinum.  “  Cum  a  fan&ofratre 
noftro.” 

10.  Auguflini  ad  Hieronymum.  “  Jam  pridem  tue 
caritati.” 

1 1 .  Alipii  8c  Auguitini  ad  Aurelium.  **  Impletum  eft 
gaudio.” 

12.  Auguflinj  ad  Longinianum.  “  Solere  aiunt  quen« 
dam.” 

8  Z  13  Long!. 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


o 


Num.  3051. 

1 3.  Longmiani  ad  Auguftinum.  *«  Beatus  fum  :  & 
relucentis.” 

}4‘  Auguftini  ad  Longinianum.  “  Cepi  fruttum 
fcripti  mei.” 

“  — —  ad  Bonifacium. tc  Querisame  utrum.” 

16.  Paulini  &  Iherafie  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Caritas 
Chnit;  que  urget.” 

17.  Auguftini  ad  eos.  {c  O  bone  v Jr  &  bone  frater.” 

1 S.  Pau'iiii  &  1  herafie  ad  Aug.  “  Jam  dudum  frater.” 

19.  Auguftini  ad  eos.  “  Cum  literas  rneas.” 

20.  Paulini  &  Therafie  ad  Alippium.  “  Hcc  eft  vera 
caritas.” 

2  r.  -  ad  Ronianianum.  “  Pridie  qua 

has  daremus.” 

22.  Severi  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Deo  gratias,  frater  Au- 
gulune.” 

filir”  at‘  Return.  “  Legi  epiftolam.  qua  rni- 

24-  •  ■  ad  Licentium.  “  Vix  repperi  occa- 

honem.” 

.  2>  Licentii  ad  Auguftinum.  «  Archanum  Varronis 
iter.” 

26.  Auguftini  ad  Licentium.  £c  Si  verfus  tuus.” 

27.  Max; mi  Grammatici  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Habens 
crebo  tuis.” 

28.  Auguftini  ad  Maximum.  “  Serium  ne  aliquid 
inter  nos.” 

-9- - ad  Armentarium  &  Paulinam.  “  Vir 

egregius,  filius  meus.” 

3°- - aft  Valentinum.  tc  Venere  ad  nos.” 

31* - 's  Crefconiumielicem  Sealium” 

32-  - ad  Vincentium.  Ac  cepi  epiftolam.” 

33-  - ad  Deo  gratias.  “  Queitiones  tibi  pro- 

pofitas.” 

34. - de  fdutione  quseftionum  de  refurrec- 

tione,  corpore  Chriftianx  religionis,  facriftciorum  ftif- 
tin&ione,  &c. 

35-  - - ad  Bonifacium,  “  Laudo  &  gratulor.’’ 

3b.  Macedonii  ad  Auguft.  ‘£  Miro  modo  afticior.” 

37*  Augullini  adMacedonium.  ‘ £  Quamvis fapientiam . ’ ’ 

38.  Macedonii  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Optatas  admodum 
fanditatis.” 

39.  Auguftini  ad  Macedonium.  “  Negociofiffimu  in 
republica.” 

40.  Diofcori  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Pro  hoc  mirari.” 

4 1  ■  Auguftini  ad  Dioicorum.  “  Tu  me  innumcra- 
bilium.” 

42-  - - - —  ad  Dardanum.  “  Fateor  me,  frater.” 

43.  Paulini  ad  Auguftinum.  “  De  paucis  que  nunc 
jam.” 

44.  Auguftini  ad  Paulinum.  “  Quod  de  perventione.” 

45.  Nedarii  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Quanta  fit  caritas.” 

46-  Auguftini  ad  Nedarium.  “Jam  fenio  frigefcen- 

tibus.” 

47* - aft  Maximianum.  “  Prius  quam  ad  te 

veniam.” 

48. - ad  Donatum  preibyterum.  “  Si  poftis 

videre.” 

49-  — - - aft  Evodium.  “  Queftio  quam  mihi 

propofuifti.” 

5°- - ad  Probam.  «  Et  petifle  te  &  pro- 

mififle.” 

51'  — - ad  Paulinam  deviden  Jo  Deum.  “Me- 

mor  debiti.” 

52-  ~ — - ad  Vidorianum  preLytirum.  c  Li- 

terc  tue  implevcre.” 

53-  - ad  Orontium.  “  Ago  gratias  q  -od.” 

54-  - -  aft  Olimpium.  “  Quicquift  fis  lecun- 

dum.’? 

55-  -  atl  Cornelium.  “  Scr:'prfti  mihi,  ut 

ad  te.” 

56. - aft  Donatum.  “  Nollent  quidem  in 

I, is.’ 

57; - aft  Olimpium.  “  Quamvis  mox,  ut  ' 

audiyiiruf.” 


Num.  305  r. 

58.  Auguftini  ad  Seleurianam.  “  Leftis  litteris  tuis.’’ 

59.  ■  ad  Circenfes.  “  Si  id  quod  in  veftrtu” 

60.  aft  Memorium  epifcopum.  “  Nullas 
debui  jam.” 

ft 1  •  ‘  ad  Efichium  Epifcopum.  “  Accepi  litte- 

ras  veneration  is.” 

62-, - ad Florcntinam.  “  Sanclu.-npropofitum 

tuum.  1  r 

.  63- - ad  Italicam. “  Tres  epiftolas  tue  benM- 

mtatis.”  fa 

ftft- - ad  Palmachium.  “  Bona  opera  tua.” 

ftft-  - - ad  Severum  epifcopum,  &c.  “Epiltola 

mea  quam.” 

66.  - - ad  Felicem  &  Hilarium.  “  Non  miror, 

Sathanam.” 

ft/;  - — i - ad  Clerum  &  plebem  Hipponenfem. 

“  Utinam  feriprurx  Dei.” 

68 ; - “  In  primis  peto  caritate  vef- 

tram. 

&9-  “ —  ad  Poffidium,  &c.  ££  Magis  quid  agas 

cum  eis.” 

70.  Audacis  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Habeo  gratiam  beati- 
tudmi  tue.” 

71.  Auguftini  ad  Audacem.  “  Brevem epiftolam  tuam.” 

72.  ad  Maximam.  “  Quantum  nos  tuu  ftu- 
dmm.” 

73.  Alipii  &  Auguftini  ad  Julianam.  “Grate  admo¬ 
dum  nobis.” 

74-  Auguftini  ad  Anaftafium.  “  Salutandi  finceri- 
tatem.” 

75-  - aft  Sebaftianum.  ££  Quamvis  ab  animo 

noftro.” 

76.  - - ad  Confentium,  de  incarnatione  Do¬ 

mini.  “  Quantum  ad  oculos.” 

77- - ad  Proculeianum.  “  Propter  imperito- 

rum.” 

78.  — - ad  Valcrium  fuuin  epifcopum.  “Ante 

omnia  peto.” 

79.  - - ad  Profuturum.  “Secundum  Spiritum 

quantu  Diio.” 

80.  ad  Donatum.  “  Quod  te  adminiftran- 
tem.” 

81.  - —  ad  Madaurenfes.  “  Si  forte  illi  qui.” 

82.  - ad  Elpidium.  “  Quis  veftrum  elfet.” 

83-  - ad  Nebridium.  “  Utrum  nefcio  quo.” 

84-  - et  aliorum  ad  Donatiftas.  “  Cum  in 

auribus  noftris  fama.” 

85.  Publicole  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Scriptum  eft,  Inter- 
roga.” 

86.  Auguftini  ad  Publicolam.  “  JEttus  animi  tui.” 

87.  - ad  Martianum.  “  Abripui  vel  potius  ob- 

ripui.” 

88.  - ad  Probam.  “  Eft  quidem  ita,  ut  dicis.” 

89- - ad  Optatum  epifcopum.  “  Ouamvis  tue 

fan&itatis.” 

90.  *— — — -  ad  Marcellinum.  “  Gefta  que  promilit.” 

91-  - ad  Apringium.  “  Non  dubito  in  hac  po- 

teftate.” 

92.  - ad  Marcellinum.  “  Circumcellionesillos.’’ 

93; - &c.  ad  Papam  Innocentium.  “  Quia  te 

Dominus.” 

.  94-  -- — ; —  ad  Ilonoratum. ££  Confiliutuu  multu  no¬ 
bis  placuit.” 

95-  aft  Glorium,  &c.  “  Dixit  quidem  .Apof- 

tolus.” 

96.  - ad  Demetrium.  “  Ego  cum  audio.” 

97-  *  ad  Eleufium,  &c.  “  Fortuniu  quem  Tu- 

burficii.” 

98. - See.  ad  Generofum.  ££  Quoniam  nobis 

notam  effe.” 

99- - ad  Donatiftas.  “  Caritas  Chrifti,  cui  om- 

nem.” 

100. - ad  Fed  urn.  “  Si  pro  err  ore  homines.” 

xoi. - ad  •Fu'ebium.  “Sat  dcus,  cui  mani- 

fefta  funt.” 


102.  An- 


Bibliothecas  Harleianac. 


Num.  3051. 


102.  Auguflini  ad  Eufebiurn.  “Non  ego  recufanti  vo- 
luntati  tue.” 

103.  - ad  Severinum.  «  Litteras  ffaternitatis 

tue.” 

104.  - ad  Donatiftas.  “  Vobis,  Donatifle,  ca- 

tholica  Eccla.” 

Io5:  ; - —  ad  Januarium  prime  fedis  partis  Donati. 

“  Clerici  et  circumcelliones.” 

106.  ad  Crifpinum.  “  Quia  humilitatem  nof- 

tram.  ’ 

io7*  - - Libellus  contra  Crifpianum  Schifmaticu. 

“  Quonia  quidem.” 

i°8. - ad  Pafcenfium  comitem  Arrianum. 

“  Volueram  quidem.” 

..  - - “  Si  dicis,  te  mihi 

dixifle. 

1 10.  Pafcentii  ad  Auguftinum.  <c  Optaveram  te, 
frater.” 

111.  Auguflini  ad  Pafcenfium.  “  Littere  tue  nec  ad 
reddenda  convicia.” 

.  1 1  -•  —  ad  Probam  &  Julianam  de  converfione  nep- 

tis  Demetriadis.  “  Dominarum  honore  digniffimis.” 

1 13-  - ad  Honoratum  epifcopum.  “  Caritati  tue 

mifTo  exemplo.” 

114-  - ad  Italicam.  “Cum  petiviifes  ut  de  invifibili 

Deo.” 

ll5 ■  ~ —  ad  Bonefacium  comitem.  “  Ornet  mores 
tuos  pudicitia.” 

J 1 6.  Bonefacii  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Tue  fanflitatis  epif- 
tolam.” 

1 17-  Auguflini  ad  Bonifacium. e<  Ego  quos  diligo,  ar- 
guo  &  cafligo.” 

1 18.  ■ - - - ■ -  “  Africe  Iitus,  ut  audio, 

miles  attigit.” 

1 19.  Bonefacii  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Scio  quod  fit  tua 
fan&itas.’’ 

120.  Aug.  ad  Bonefacium.  “  Miror  quomodo  fubito.” 

1 2 1 .  Bonefacii  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Sufcepi  autem  tre¬ 
mens.” 

122  Auguflini  ad  Bonefacium.  “  Dum  quodam  in 
loco." 

123.  Bonefacii  ad  Auguftinum. «  Furens  parato  quo.” 

1 14. - “  Caftinus  ille  privatus.” 

1 25.  Auguflini  ad  Bonefacium.  “  Vir  illuflriflimus 
Caftinus.” 

126.  Bonefacii  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Grande  nobis  eft 
bellum.” 

127.  Aug.  ad  Bonefacium.  “  Gravi  de  pugna.” 

128.  Bonefacii  ad  Auguilinum.  “Manus  i'uperba, 
Deo  juvante.” 

129.  Auguflini  ad  Bonifacium.  “  Ledlo  me,  va- 
care.” 

13°. - ad  Fortunatianum.  “  Sicut  prefens  ro- 

gavi.” 

13 1.  — —  ad  Ecdiciam.  “  Leftis  litteris  reverende 
tue.” 

132.  - ad  Afellicum  epifcopum.  “Litteras  fanc- 

titatis  tue.” 

133.  Auguflini  ad  Paulinum  &  Therafiam.  “  Carif- 
fimus  frater  Celfus.” 

I34- - ad  Bonefacium  comitem.  “Jam  refcrip- 

feram.” 

I35* - a(i  Celeftinum.  “  O  utinam  poffem  af- 

fidue.” 

136. - ad  Antoninum.  “  Cum  a  duobus  tibi 

fcripta.” 

I37- - aft  Gaium.  Ut  abs  te  abceflimus.” 

5  3^* - ad  Romanianuin.  “  Non  hec  epiftola  fic.” 

139.  Hebridii  ad  Auguftinum.  “  Itane  eft,  mi  Au- 
guftine  ?” 

140.  - - - “  Epiftolas  tuas  perplacet.” 

14I-  Aug.  ad  Hebridium,  “  Proemio  luperfidam,  &c 

cito  incipia.” 

x42*  -  - — —  “  Quanqua  mrianimi  cog- 

nitor  fis.” 


Num.  3051 — 3659. 

quam^”  ^  “Nunquam  teque  quic* 

1  4  ft'  "  —  “  Minim  admodum  eft.” 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3052.  3053.  3054. 

Gregonj  1  papa:,  Expofidonis  in  Job,  five  Moralium 
libri35.  Scnpfit  Gregorius  Canonicus  in  Arenftein, 

.  Afed;'  Catalogns  Reliquiar.  in  Capella  S.  Micha- 
ells  in  Arenftein  :  quae  confecrata  eft  A.  D.  1248:  ut  & 
Ecclefia  et  altare  in  inferior!  Diffenbacli ;  et  edarn  altare 
m  bmgoven  :  quae  omnia  collate  fuerunt  Convemui  de 
Alenltein  per  Henncum  comitem  de  Naffer.-:  &  Matil- 
dam  uxorem  ejus. 

_  Verfus  etiarn  in  laudein  S.  Gregorii:  forte  per 
fcriptorem  Libri.  1 

Codices  membranacei  in  folio,  cum  literis  initiali- 
bus  pufehre  depidtis. 

„  ..  3055- 

Gregoni  r,  papae,  Expofitlo  in  Ezechielem  &  Candcum 
Canticorum. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio,  eum  literis  inida- 
abus  pulchre  depiths,  olim  etiam  ecclefiae  de  Arenftein. 

3°56- 

L.  Cash  Ladlantii  Ftrmiani,  Inftitutionum  divinarum  libri 
3  pnmi,  &  Cap.  14  libri  4th  Codex  membranaceus 
m  quarto.  xy_ 

..  3°57: 

1-  L.  Cxi.  Ladlantii  Inftitutionum  divinarum  libri  7 

2-  - de  ira  Dei,  liber,  ad  Donatum. 

,  3\  "  “ - —  de  opificio  Dei,  five  de  formatione 

hominis,  fiber.  Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto  :  literis 
lnniahbus  pulchre  depidlis. 

3°58- 

1.  S.  Hieronymi  Interpretationes  Nominum  Hebrai- 

corum.  XI1I 

2.  Interpretatio  Alphabeti  Hebraici. 

3-  S  Hieronymus  de  Locis  Hebraicis. 

4.  Gloirm  Novi  et  Vet,  Teftamenti  ex  S.  Hieronymi 
Qua.tionibus  Hebraicis,  aliifque  audloribus  excerptsc. 

„  ..  C.od?x  Iylem'jrnUitceus  in  folio  minore,  olim  Eccie/ire 
o.  Mane  de  Arenftein. 

3°59- 

1.  Anfelmi  Archiepifcopi  Cantuarienfis  de  cafu  Dia- 

boli,  Dialogus.  xrv 

2.  - contra  Gentiles,  libri  2.  cur  Deus 

homo. 

3-  — - - -  conceptu  virginali,  &  original! 

peccato,  liber.  0 

4-  — - fte  proceffione  Spiritus  Sandli,  liber 

contra  Graecos. 

5.  S.  Bernard!  de  laudibus  virginis  matris,  liber  •  five 
homiliae  4. 

6.  S.  Hieronymi  epiftola  ad  Paulam  &  Euftochium 
de  affumptione  S.  Marie. 

7.  S.  Auguflini  Sermo,  dc  affumptione. 

8.  Anfelmi,  de  facrificio  Azimi  &  fermentati,  liber. 

9-  -  meditaliones  x,  humane  redemptionis,  & 

2,  terroris  judicii. 

I  o. - Profologion,  feu  alloquium. 

I I  ■  ”  Meditationes  de  Cruce,  de  Chrifto,  Ma¬ 

ria,  Angelis,  ad  S.  Mariam  Magdalenam,  allofq;  SS. 

12. - dc  licerefibus,  liber. 

1 3- - Sigillum  B.  Marie. 

14.  - liornilix  quasdam. 

15.  - de  excellcntia  B.  Virginis,  liber. 

x6.  S.  Bernardi  epiftola  ad  Raymondum  militem 
“  D.ocj:i  petis  a  :  obi  . 


9 


1 7.  Com- 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


73 


i 


Nurn.  3059 — 3064. 

17.  Compendium  de  epidemia,  per  collegium  faculta- 
fft  medicorum  Pariliis  ordinatum. 

1 8-  S.  Bernardi  epiftola,  ad  Raymondum  militem,  de 
cura  rei  familiaris:  eadem  que  fupra  n\  14. 

Codex  membrahaceus,  in  folio  minore. 

3060. 

i  S.Patrum  Senfentiar.  de  amore  Dei,  caritate,  anima, 
fapientia,  lege,  gratia,  &c.  Liber  40  Capitum,  uxtfaXo r. 

Defun t  fiquidem  24  folia  prirna. 

2.  Juliani  Tnletani  epifcopi,  prognofticorum  futuri  fas- 

culi  lib.  3.  viz.  de  origine  mortis,  receptaculis  animarum, 
refurre&ione,  et  extremo  judicio;  epiftola  ad  Idalium 
Barcinonenfem  epifcopum  &  orationeprasmiflis.  Sequuntur 
Idalii  epiftola;  ad  eum,  et  ad  SulIVedum  Narbonenfem, 
in  laudem  operis.  _  .88. 

3.  Quirici  Barcinonenfis  epifcopi  fcriptum  gratiarum 
ad  Hildefonfum  Toleti  epifcopum  pro  opere  de  divinitate 

S.  Maria; :  cum  rcfponfione.  145. 

4.  S.  Ephrasm.  Syri,  Oratio  ad  Chriftum  Salvatorem. 

“  Obfecro  te  Salvator  Mundi.”  146-  b. 

_ de  univerfali  refurreflione,  et 

extremo  Judicio.  *48- 

(3. _ de  beatitudine  Anima;  liber  2du‘. 

152.  b. 

7< _ — —  de  Poenitentia,  Sermo  primus. 

.*55-  k- 

g# _ . _ de  agone  five  luct amine  fpiri- 


tuali.  „  l59' 

g _ de  die  Judicii  et  de  compunc- 

tione  Animas.  x^3* 

10.  - Monita  168.  b- 

1 1 .  Anonym!  Oratio.  “  Due  Ds  omnipotens  qui  in 

Trinitate  perfefta.”  _  ig2.b. 

!  2 . - - - de  Sex  Cogitationibus  Scorum.  ibid. 

1  2. - de  Manfionibus  Vitas.  193. 


Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 


3°6i. 

1.  Pafcafii  Radberti,  de  corpora  &  fanguine  Chrifti, 

liber.  X1, 

2.  Lanfranci  Archiepifcopi  Cantuarienfis  de  corpore 
&  fanguine  Domini,  contra  Berengarium,  liber. 

3.  S.  Auguftini,  de  purgatorio  igne,  Tra&atus. 

In  prima  pagina  habentur  fequentia, 

“  Liber  Ecclefie  fee  Marie  de  Abbendone.  Qui- 
cumq;  ipfum  alienaverit  Anathema  fit.  Hec  fententia 
fingulis  annis  data  eft  in  capitulo  cum  libro  &  candela.” 
«  Liber  Monafterii  S.  Martini  in  Lovanio.” 

“  F.  Joes  Aimerius  contulit  Bibliothece." 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  cum  effigie 
auctoris  in  feriptorio  fedentis  pulchre  delineate. 

3062. 

Ufuardi  Abbatis,  Martyrologium.  Finis  defideratur.  ix. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto. 

3063- 

Commentarius  in  S.  Pauli  epillolas  olxiipxXo; :  literis 
Langobardicis  feriptus.  xii. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto,  cujus  finis  madore 
corrofus. 

3064. 

“  Liber  (ut  feribitur  in  1  pagina)  Monafterii  B.  Marie  ad 
martyres  extra  mures  Treverenfes,  Ordinis  S.  Bene- 
ditfti,”  continens  diverfos  Tratlatus  Auguftini :  viz. 

1.  De  vera  religione  librum.  xvi. 

2.  Queftiones  Orofii  ad  B.  Auguftinum. 

1.  De  poenitentia,  Librum. 

4.  De  natura  fummi  Boni  contra  Mamcheos,  librum. 

5.  :)e  Fide  &  Symbolo,  Librum. 

6.  Ad  Januarium,  libros  2. 

7.  Invocatio  in  librum,  qui  dicitur  Speculum  fine 
macula. 


Nran.  3064. — 306?. 

8.  De  divinatione  Demonum,  librum. 

q.  De  natura  &  gratia,  librum. 

10.  Difputationum  inter  eum  &  Adcodatum,  libium. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

3065-  ,  . 

1.  S.  Hieronymi  de  virginitate,  adverfum  Jovimanum, 

lib.  2.  .  1  X’i 

2.  Rufini,  Prcfbyteri,  Expofitio  in  Symbol  urn,  ad 

Laurentium  Papam  inferipta.  .  . 

3.  De  Philone  Judaso,  ex  Hieronymi  iibro  de  viris 
illuftribtis. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

3c66. 

1.  Canticum.  “  Miferere  mei  Deus  ;  quiamifer,  quia 
reus."  Rhythmice. 

A.  D.  1472.  Hie  Codex  pro  caution  :  erat  in  Cifta 
Winton,  pro  40s.  1  Home  Turpyn  mutuo  datis. 

Et  A.  D.  1539  Liber  erat  RicardiPytt,  Bathon.  ex 
dono  Nicolai  Waryng  Salter  London. 

2.  S.  Auguftini  Enchiridion  de  hide,  Spe,  &  Cari¬ 
tate,  Liber,  ad  Laurentium.  Xl; 

g. - Homilias  10  in  S.  Johamiis  Epil- 

tolam  1. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 


3°67. 

1.  S.  Auguftini  Enchiridion  fenp.  A.D.  1487. 

2.  - Sermo  de  decern  cordis. 

3.  -  Liber  de  opere  Monachorum. 

4.  - Liber  de  patientia. 

5.  - Sermones  vel  orationes  4  de  concupif- 

centia  carnis. 

6.  — — — —  Sermo  de  4  virtuubus  caritatis. 

7.  - Liber  de  quarta  feria. 

8.  - Liber  de  continentia. 

9.  Liber  de  conflictu  viciorum  &  virtutum. 

1  o.  Tra&atus  beati  Thomas  de  Aquino  de  divinis  mo- 
ribus  a  fidelibus  imitandis. 

1 1 .  ProfeCtus  religioforum  a  beato  Bernardo  verfifice 
edit  us. 

1 2.  Pulchra  et  utilis  meditatio  qua  homo  accendatur  in 
divino  amore. 

13.  Vita  Monachorum  B.  Bernardi  Abbatis. 

14.  Hugo  de  pufillan imitate  cordis. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore.  fare.  xiv. 
exaratus.  Olitn  erat  Monafterii  B.  Maria;  ad  martyres 
extra  muros  Treverenfes,  ordinis  S.  Benedict. 


306s. 

1.  M.  An.  Boethii,  de  confolatione  Philofophias, 

liber  primus  &  maxima  pars  2di.  xr. 

2.  S.  Ephrzem  Syri,  Sermo  Afceticus  de  Vita 
monaftica. 

- de  univerfali  refurreefione  et  extreme 

Judicio.  Liber. 

4.  . - -  de  beatitudine  Animas  Liber  alter. 

5 


_ _ de  Poenitentia,  Sermo  primus. 

6. _ de  Agone  five  Luftamine  fpirituali. 


Lib 

7.  _ de  die  Judicii  et  de  Compunctions 

Animas.  Liber. 

8.  - de  humilitate,  vel  opere  monachorum, 

liber.  .  „ 

9.  Gregorii  1  papas  Homilia.  “  Si  nolumus  timere 

Deum.”  .  . 

10.  S.  Auguftini,  ammonitio  ad  populuin.  Kogo 

vos,  fratres.”  r  , 

1 1.  Sermo  de  S.  Paulo.  “  Gaudeo  ergo,  fratres  ka* 
riffimi.” 

12.  Orationes  2  ad  Chriftum  &  ad  Deum. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  longiufculo,  a  quodam 
feriptus  cui  Amulfo  nomen  fuit. 


Bibliothecae  Harleians. 


A  -» 

/ 


Num.  3069 — 3076. 

3o69* 

Profperi  Aquitanici,  Epigrammatum  liber.  Xiv. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto. 

Num.  3077 — 3081. 

3°77- 

1.  S.  Auguftini  de  vita  Chriftiana,  liber.  Xir. 

2.  - de  perfedtione  Jufticis,  liber.  9. 

307°. 

1.  Flac.  Alcuini,  de  virtutibus  &  vitiis,  libripars.  xi. 

2.  Juliani  Toletani  epifcopi  prognofticorum  futuri 
feculi  lib.  3.  cum  epiftola  ad  Idalium  Barcinonenfein 
epifcopum  prsmifia. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

3- - de  tenenda  obedientia,  liber.  11. 

4* - ad  Comitem  devotum  fuum, 

liber,  i2. 

5 • - Soliloquiorum  liber.  31. 

6. - de  difeiplina  Chriftiana,  liber.  52. 

7- - de  miferia  Corporis  &  Anims, 

liber.  57. 

3°7r- 

Gregorii  1.  papa:,  Dialogorum  libri  4. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto,  fcript.  &  finit. 
per  fratrem  Johannem  Cruce fignatum  A.  D.  1427. 

?.  Au&oritates  San&orum  &  Sapientum.  “  Erubefcat 
homo.”  60. 

9.  S.  Bernardi  Meditationum  liber.  80. 

10. - de  formula  honefte  vite3  Tratla- 

tus.  93. 

3072. 

1.  P.  Virgilii  M.  Eclogarum  2“  &  3“  pars,  unico 

folio.  x. 

2.  C.  Sedulii  prefbyteri,  Pafchale  opus ;  feu,  mirabi- 
lum  divinorum  libri  5  :  cum  hvmno,  “  Cantemus 
focii et  Psane  alphabetico  de  Chrilto:  et  etiam  epiftola 
ad  Macedonium  prefbyterum  nuncupatoria,  cum  gloflis 
interlinearibus. 

3.  Aratoris  Subdiaconi  &  Cardinalis,  in  a£ta  Apofto- 
lorum,  libri  2  :  cum  prsfatione  ad  Florianum  Abbatem, 

&  ad  Vigilium  pontificem,  cum  gloftis. 

4.  Homilis  2.  “  Videte,  fratres,  ficut  Dominus 
nofter.” 

5.  Precatio  ad  Chriftum  &  Deum.  ce  O  crucifer  bone, 
lucifator.’’ 

6.  Hymnus  poll  cibum.  “  Paftis  vifceribus,  ciboq; 
fumpto.” 

7.  Precatio  altera. tc  O  mi  cuftos  O  mi  heros  mi  pater.” 

8.  Prifciani  Grammatical  folia  q  prima. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

1 1 .  - Summa,  de  confeftione.  94 

12.  - Verba  ditta  fratribus  fuis  in  fuo 

Tellamento.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

3078. 

r.  Smaragdi  Abbatis,  Diadema  Motiachorum.  x. 

2.  Initium  l'ermonis  in  aflumptionem  fan£le  Marie. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore  ;  quondam 
Abbatis  Moilliacenfis.  Ex  bibliotheca  Domini  Jof. 
Foucault. 

3°79- 

Haymonis  Halberftadienfis  epifcopi,  Homilis  in  Evan- 
gclia  dominicalia,  &  de  fanQis.  ax x«i  silsAfrai. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto.  xii. 

3080. 

S.  Auguftini  Confeflionum  libri  13.  x. 

In  hujus  Codicis  initio  fic  habetur  feriptum  : 

“  Hunc  (e  libris  illuftrillimi  domini  domini  GvviL 

3°73* 

1.  S.  Bernardi  Sermones  iq  a  feftivitate  S.  Johannis 

baptifte  ufq;  ad  feft.  S.  Johannis  Evangelifte.  xm. 

2.  - Sermones  alii  5.  “  Juftum  deduxit 

Dominus." 

3-  - Quidam  Pfalterii  verfus  expofiti. 

4-  - Quatuor  que  debemus  folvere  Deo. 

5-  - Refponforia  &  Leftiones  de  Cruce, 

Virgine,  &  Chrifti  &  San&orum  feftivitatibus.  Cum 
notis  muficis. 

6.  Verfus  quidam  leonini  fcriptione  recentiori. 

Hsc  omnia  ab  Auctore  inferipta  Henrico  Trecenfium 
comiti  Palatino.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

liclmi  Cecill,  Baronis  de  Burleigh,  et  unius  e  Secretariis 
Elizabeths  quondam  Anglis,  Francis  &  Iliberniae 
Reginae)  Manufcriptum  (circiter  annum  Domini  1 209.) 
ego  Edoardus  Chamberlayne  junior  Studens  viginti  et 
duobus  folidis  emi  Londini  1 2  die  Decembris.  Anno 
Jefu  Chrift.  1687.” 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

3081. 

1.  S.  Auguftini  Sermones,  ad  fratres  de  eremo, 

57.  ;v.  xv. 

2.  DeS.  Monica,  matreS.  Auguftini,  Tractatus. 

3.  Calixtus  Papa  de  converfione  S.  Auguftini. 

3°74- 

1.  Leonis  i.papse,  Epiftola:  56.  xi. 

2.  Hilarii  Papa:  Decreta  qusdam.  i.  e.  i°  Canones 
Synodi  Romans  fub  eo  habits.  2°  Epiftola:  2  ejufdem 
ad  Afcanium  epifcopum  Tarraconenfem. 

3.  Anfelmi,  Cantuarienfis  Archiepifcopi,  libri  2. 
quibus  titulus  eft,  “  CurDeus  homo.” 

4.  Gregorii  1,  paps,  Epiftola  ad  Venantium,  ex 
Monacho  Patricium,  “  Podagra:  doloribus.” 

5.  Gregorii  paps  epiftola  ad  Juftinianum. 

6.  Pafchafii  in  lamentationes  Jeremis  fragmentum. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore  olim  monafterii 

S.  Martini  vel  Divi  Trudonis  apud  Hafbanos. 

5.  De  crcmica  venerabilis  Bede. 

6.  Ex  cronica  Vicunenfis  epifcopi  de  S.  Auguftino. 

7.  Ex  cronica  Antonini  de  eodem. 

8.  De  elemofina. 

9.  Ammonitio  bead  Auguftini  ut  filentium  habeatur 
in  ecclefia.  Ad  finem  hujus  tractatus  feribitur.  “  Comple- 
tum  eft  anno  domini  mccccvii.  more  Treverenfium  in 
anno  bifextili  fecunda  feria  poll  fexagefimam.” 

1 0.  S.  Bernardi  Abbatis  Clarevallenfis  fuper  evangelio 
“  Ego  fum  vitis  vera,”  liber. 

11.  - de  7  Columnis,  trafiatus. 

12.  - in  colloquium  Symonis,  &  Jefu 

Chrifti,  liber. 

13.  - - de  confideratione,  libri  5,  ad  Eu- 

3°75- 

Beds  prefb.  Expofitio  in  Epiftolas  Canonicas.  xii. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

genium  Fapam. 

14.  - Epithalamium  Amoris. 

1 5.  Epiftola  Francifci  Petrarchs  laureati  poets,  ad 

3°76. 

Gregorii  1,  paps,  Dialogorum  libri  4.  xii. 

Liber  quondam  erat  S.  Marie  &  S.  Nicolai  in 
Arneftein,  quern  feripfit  Cunradus  quidam,  Canonicus  | 
ibidem.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

Cat.  Harl.  Vox..  II. 

Grifelidis,  mulieris  maxims  conftantis  &i  patientiae. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

9  A  1.  An. 

i.  An. 


73+ 


Catalogus  Librorum  MSS. 


Num.  3082 — 3089. 

3082. 

1.  Ari.  Mr.n.  Torq.  Sev.  Boetii  Quod  Trinitas  fit 
urtus  I  t  us,  &  non  tres  Dii,  Liber,  ad  Symacum 
Sjcerum  :  cum  Comentario  Gilbert!  Porretae.  xm. 

2.  _ An  Pater,  filius,  &  Spiritus  S.  de 

Divinitate  l'ubftantialiter  praedicentur  ;  Liber,  ad  Johanne 
Diaconum  :  cum  Comentario,  Ejufd. 

3.  - Quod  Subftantis,  eo  quod  funt, 

bone  funt  :  cum  Commentario.  Ejufd. 

4.  - Adverfus  Eutichen  &  Neftorium, 

de  duabus  naturis  &  una  perfona  Chrifti,  liber,  ad  Jo¬ 
hanne  Komanae  F.cclefiae  Diaconum :  cum  Comentario. 
Ejufdem  Gilb.  Porretae. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  pulcherrime 
fcriptus  &  optime  fervatus,  cujus  ultimum  folium  manu 
neoterica  reftitutum. 

3°83; 

S.  Ambrofii  Mediolan.  epifcopi,  Epiftols  fere  omues. 
Paflim  inferuntur  ejufdem  Auctoris.  x. 

1.  In  Pfalm  104.  Traci,  pars  pollerior. 

а.  In  Cap.  52.  Efais  enarratio.  7 

3.  In  Cap.  2.  Aggsi  Proph.  Obfervatio.  9. 

4.  In  Cap.  4.  Ecclefialt,  ad  clericos  exhortatio. 

•  23 

5.  In  Cap.  7.  Proph.  Miches  Obfervationes  pnma 

altera.  .  24 

б.  In  Cap.  23.  Nuram.  Annotatio.  35 

7.  Ad  Horontianum  enarratio  prima.  37 

g _ _ altera.  40 

9.  In  Cap.  2.  Genefis  enarratio,  ad  Sabinum.  44 

10.  In  Cap.  17.  Hieremis  enarratio.  52 

11.  In  Cap.  32.  Exodus  Annotatio.  54 

12.  In  Cap.  16.  Exodus  Annotatio.  5? 

13.  In  Cap.  12.  Levit :  Annotatio.  78 

14.  Concio  de  Bafilici- non  tradendis  Hsreticis.  92 

1 5.  Condo,  de  cbitu  Theodofii  Imperatoris.  99 

16.  Traclatus  de  Santtis  Gervafio  et  Protafio.  105. 

17.  Traclatus  de  Nabutha  Ifraelita.  Cap._  r— 5.  8t  6" 
pars  prior.  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore.  107. 

3oS4- 

Rufini  Aquileienfis,  Ecclefiaftics  hiftoris,  libri  11.  ad 
Cromatium  Epifcopum.  xm. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio. 

3°85- 

Levitici  liber  :  acccdit  Gloffa  ordinaria.  Codex  mem¬ 
branaceus  in  folio  minore. 

30S6. 

Jofuze  &  Judicum  libri,  cum  gloffa  ordinaria.  x.  Codex 
membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

3°8-. 

1.  S.  Auguftini,  Confeffionum  libri  13.  xv. 

2.  Epitaphium  Sands  Monies  matris  S.  Auguftini. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto  et  pulcherrimus, 

literisinitialibus  eleganter  illuminatis.  Olim  Monafteru 
Sands  Maris  ad  litus  Maitirum  prope  Trevens. 

3088. 

1.  Tabula  in  S.  Auguftini  libros  de  civitate  Dei, 

ordine  alphabetico  digeila.  _  xv* 

2.  Capitulor :  Libri  de  Civ.  Dei  iniua. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto. 

3089. 

1.  S  C.ypviani  Carthag.  Ep.de  contemptu  Mundi 

ad  Donatum.  .  1' 

2.  _ de  habitu  Virgin  1  m.  4- 

3.  - dcLapiis.  8.  b. 


}7 

ferip 


>9 


Num.  3089 — 3093. 

S.  Cypriani  de  unitate  Ecclefia. 

- dc  oratione  dominica. 

- - de  opere  et  eleemofyiiis. 

- de  mortalitate. 

- ad  Demetrianum  liber. 

- de  bono  patientis. 

de  zelo  et  livore. 


- Epiftols  dus. 

Quod  Idola  Dii  non  fxnt. 


5.  b. 
21. 
28. 
33* 
37* 

42. 

47- 


74* 

81. 

85. 

89. 


- de  Judaica  incredulitate. 

_ de  hsreticis  baptizandis. 

- ad  Quint um  Epift. 

- ad  Pomponium  contra  Epiftolam 

Stephani.  4  9l*  b- 

— . - difpofido  Coens,  Cypriano  falfo  ad- 

120. 

- Hymnus  de  Pafcha  domini.  123. 

- Oratio  quam  fub  die  paflionis  fus 

dixiffe  perhibetur.  124. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto,  diverfis  manibus 
fsc.  xv.  exaratus. 

3°9°. 

1 .  Ivonis  Camotenfis  Ep.  Decretum  in  xvn  partes 

diftributum.  Decima  feptima  pars  defideratur  xi. 

2.  Ordo  Librorum  facrofan&s  Scriptural  qui  funt 
legendi  per  circulum  Anni. 

3.  Sententis  nonnulls  ex  Auguftino,  Ambrofto,  &c. 
Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  nitide  fcriptus  & 
bene  fervatus. 

3°9T- 

1.  Regula  fidei,  metrica,  ftili  mucrone  promuigata 
“  Te  pater  omnipotent. x* 

2.  Periodi  annorum  varii. 

3.  Cantica,  cum  notis  mufxcis. 

4.  Bedae  prefbyteri,  de  r.atura  rerum,  liber. 

3. - de  temporibus,  liber. 

6.  Nonnulla  de  Planetis. 

7.  Ven.  Beda,  de  Equinoftio  vemo. 

g. _ de  Concordia  Luns  et  Maris.  Caput 

nempe  27mus.  libri  de  tempor.  rat. 

9.  Nonnulla  de  planetis. 

10.  Officia  xii  Menfium  metrice. 

11.  Ven.  Beds  Curfus  Luns  per  12  Signa :  item  Ca- 
lendarium  ex  ejufdem  Libro  qui  dicitur  Ephemeris  ex- 
cerpta. 

1 2.  Ven. Beds decennovenales Circuli ufqueadA.  1 272. 
_ de  temporum  ratione. 

J4, - - de  Sex  JEtaiibus  Mundi. 

!  5. - In  Libros  Regum  qusftiones. 

x6. _ et  aliorum  Verftculi  nonnulli  de 

menftbus,  Vends,  &c.  .  .  , 

17.  S.  Columbarii  Epift.  verfibus  Adomcis  fenpta.  Ad 
frontem  prima  paginshujus  codicis  feribuntur,  manu  con- 
temporanea,  qusdam  de  virturibus  herbarum  &  verftculi 
nonnulli. 

Incip.  “  Quifquis  amat  di£lis  abfentum  carpere 
vitam.’’  Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

3092. 

Rabani  Mauri,  de  Univerfo,  five  Etymologiarum  libri  x  1 
pofteriores.  xi. 

2> _ — —  de  compoto,  liber. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  madore  cor- 
ruptus. 

3°93‘ 

1.  Juvenci  prefby.teri  Evangelica  Hiftoria,  4  libris  ver¬ 
fibus  heroicis. 

2.  Aur.  Prudentii  de  pfychomachia,  liber. 

3.  Profperi  Aquiianici  Epigrammatum  liber. 

4.  Theoduli  prelbjteri  Ecloga* 

9  5-  Thet* 


Bibliothecae  HarleiartaS; 


735 


Num.  3093 — 3097. 

5.  Thetbaldi  vel  Theobaldi  Italici,  Liber  phyfiologus, 
metrice. 

6.  Aratoris  Subdiaconi,  in  Apoltolorum  acta  libri  2 
verfibus  heroicis. 

7.  Sedulii  prefb.  Pafchale  opus,  fiveCarminum  libri  5. 
Macedonio  prelbyteroinfcripti. 

8.  - Hymnus  ad  Chriflum. 

Codex  merabranaceus  in  folio  minore. 

3°94* 

1.  Hugonis  de  S.  Vi&ore,  de  Deo,  de  creatiorte  & 
lapfu  hominis,  &  de  Sacramentis,  liber  «*£>«Aor.  xii. 

2.  Paterii,  Teftimoniorum  V.  Teftamenti,  liber  prior. 

x. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  in  fine  et 
alibi  mutilatus. 

3  09  5* 

1 .  Boetii  de  Confolatione  philofophias,  libri  5  cum 

glolfa.  x* 

2.  Miniftrorum  &  sedificiorum  publicorum  nomina. 

3.  De  feptem  diebus  hebdomads;' verficuli.  “  Primus 
in  orbe  dies.” 

4.  Cantica,  cum  notis  mu  fids. 

5.  Schema  cmlorum. 

6.  Boetii,  quomodo  Trinitas  unus  Deus  ac  non  tres 
Dii,  liber,  ad  Symachum,  cum  gloffa. 

7.  - utrum  Pater  et  Filius  &  Spiritus  Sanftus 

de  divinitate  fubftantialiter  predicentur,  liber. 

8.  - quomodo  fubftantitc  in  eoquod  funt, 

bona;  fint,  cum  non  fint  fubftantialia  bona. 

g. - adverfus  Neftorium,  pro  perfona  &  na¬ 

ture  Chrifti,  ad  patrem  Johannem  Diaconum,  liber. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto.  Pauca  fub  finem 
defiderantur. 

3°q6. 

S.  Bernardi  Abbatis  Clarevallenfis  Commentarius  in 
Cantica  Canticorum.  xm. 

2-  De  cognitione  verae  vitae,  liber.  S-  Auguftino  a 
nonullis  tribuitur. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  quarto,  olim  fratrum 
minorum  Wigomiae. 

3097* 

1.  S.  HieronymiexpofitioDanielis  Prophets;.  xi. 

a.  Vita  S.  Nicholai  epifcopi. 


END  OF  THE 


Nuni.  3097 — ‘3059. 


3.  Vita  beatifiimi  Botulphi. 

4.  - SS.  Thancredi,  Torhtredi  &  Tovae. 

5.  De  Tranflatione  Sanftorum  qui  in  Thornenfi  Mo< 
nafterio  quiefcunt. 

6.  Vita  S.  Guthlaci  Anachoritce. 

7.  S.  Ambrofiide  Obfervantia  epifcoporum  liber  paf- 
toralis. 

8.  - de  mifteriis,  liber. 

9.  - de  facramentis,  libri  6. 

10.  - de  militate  ct  laude  fanfti  jejunii. 

11.  Pnefatio  vita;  S.  Nicholai. 

12.  Miraculum  beati  Nicholai  de  epifecpo  in  exilium 
miflo. 


13.  Aliud  ejufdem  de  mercenario. 

Codex  membranaceus,  in  folio  minore. 


3098. 

Liber  cui  titulus.  “  Incipit  liber  Pancrifis.,  1.  [i.  e.^ 
totus  aureus,  quia  hec  auree  continentur  fententie  &  quef* 
tiones  fanftorum  patrum  Auguflini,  Jheronomi,Ambrofii, 
Gregorii,Yfidori,Bede,&  modernorum  magiftrorum  Guil- 
lelmi  Catalaunerifis  epifcopi,  Ivonis  Carnotenfis  epifcopi, 
Anfelmi  &  fratris  ejus  Radulfi.  Guillclmus  de  eflentia  & 
fubftantia  Dei,  &  de  tribus  ejus  pcilonis.”  Incipit  ct  Re¬ 
rum  omnium  quascreavit  Deus. 

Codex  membranaceus  in  folio  minore,  face.  xiii. 
exaratus.  Quondam  erat  fratrum  Carthufienfium  in 
Rutila  prope  Sirck. 

3°99- 

I  .Ifidori  Originum  five  Etymologiarum  lib.  20.  xii. 

2.  - de  nature  rerum,  five  de 

mundo,  liber  philofophicus :  ad  Sifebutum  regem. 

3.  Epiftola  Johannis  regis  Indiae,  qui  vulgo  dicitur 
Prefter  John,  Emanucli  regi  Graecorum  miffa:  &  ab  ipfo, 
Friderico  imperatori  diretta. 

In  principio  dicitur :  “  Liber  fandte  Marie  fan£liq; 
Nicholay  in  Arinltein :  quern  nobis  Monafterienfes  ref- 
tituerunt  pro  paftorali  cure.”  Scriptorum  nomina  in  fine 
libri  occurrunt,  fie-  “  Hec  funt  nomina  illarum  que  ferip- 
ferunt  librum  iflum  j  Gerdrut,  Sibilia,  Vierwic,  Wal- 
derat,  Hadewic,  Lugart,  Derta,  Cunigunt.  Ipfe  namq; 
feripferunt  Monafierienfibus  dominis,  quatenus  Deum 
pro  eis  regent,  ut  a  penis  eas  liberet,  et  in  paradyfo 
collocet.  Quifquis  eis  abftulerit  anathemadzhatus  fit. 
II34-” 


SECOND  VOLUME. 


