iiiliililllillliiililililiiliilillliliiiinlliiiilll 
B    3    MT2    17D 


'^^jcu^xji^^j .   AJHl.    1<lM<. 

1 

LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA. 

Clc7SS 

r 


THE    PEEWICH   PAPEES 


PRINTED   BY 

SPOTTISWOC'DK   AND    CO.   LTD.,    NEW-STREET  SQL'AHK 

LONDON 


THE    DESPATCHES 

OP 

WILLIAM    PERWICH 

ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS 
1(3G9-1677 

PRESERVED    IN    THE    FOREIGN    STATE    PAPERS    OF 
THE   PUBLIC  RECORD   OFFICE,  LONDON 

EDITED  FOR  THE  ROYAL  HISTORICAL  SOCIETY 

BY 

M.  BERYL   CURRAN 


y 


LONDON 
OFFICES  OF  THE  ROYAL  HISTORICAL  SOCIETY 

3  OLD  SERJEANTS'  INN,  CHANCERY  LANE,  W.C. 
1903 


TJik^ 


d  LCT 


PREFACE 


The  diplomatic  correspondence  from  wtiich  the  despatches  printed 
in  this  volume  have  been  selected  is  preserved  in  the  Public 
Eecord  Office  amongst  the  Archives  of  the  Foreign  Office,  cata- 
logued as  '  State  Papers,  France.'  They  form  a  portion  of  the 
multifarious  contents  of  the  old  State  Paper  Office  in  Whitehall, 
which  were  brought  to  light  after  the  death  of  the  famous  Secre- 
tary of  State  of  King  Chai-les  II.,  Sir  Joseph  Williamson,  who  was 
also  keeper  of  the  State  Papers. 

The  bundles  in  which  these  reports  were  formerly  preserved 
seem  to  have  been  kept  apart  from  the  remainder  of  the  series 
of  French  despatches,  with  the  distinctive  label  '  William  Per- 
wich.'  This  arrangement  might  seem  to  indicate  that  these  letters 
were  regarded  as  possessing  a  special  value,  but  the  bundles  in 
question  were  subsequently  dispersed  in  the  chronological  arrange- 
ment of  the  State  Papers.  Unfortunately  the  series  of  letters  is 
not  continuous,  and  is  probably  incomplete.  It  extends  from  1669 
to  1677,  but  the  letters  are  more  numerous  from  1669  to  1673, 
and  from  this  year  to  1677  long  gaps  occur  in  the  official  collec- 
tion. Possibly  these  may  be  due  to  Perwich's  temporary  absence 
from  his  mission,  but  the  loss  of  a  considerable  number  of  letters 
may  be  easily  inferred  from  their  later  classihcation. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  so  little  information  can  be  gleaned 
from     contemporary     sources    concerning    the    writer    of    these 


t  (  ~.-^o 


VI  TUli    DEblUrCUES    UK    AX    KXCil.ISII    AUKXT    l.N    I'AKIS 

despatches,  whose  official  career  is  unrecorded  iu  any  biographical 
work.  The  earliest  mention  of  his  name  occurs  in  the  State 
J'apers  of  August  1666,  in  a  letter  which  contains  the  statement 
that  certain  London  agents  have  forwarded  letters  for  Sir  Joseph 
Williamson  and  Mr.  I'erwich.'  In  the  year  1(368  we  find  him  as 
a  member  of  Lord  Arlington's  household  in  correspondence  with 
Sir  Joseph  Williamson,  who  was  at  that  time  Under-Secretary  for 
State.-  From  the  letters  contained  in  this  volume  it  is  evident 
that  Perwich  was  employed  in  an  official  capacity,  but  that  he 
was  not  one  of  the  trained  body  of  clerks  connected  with  the 
Secretary  of  State's  office  under  the  immediate  supervision  of 
Williamson  himself.^  It  is  possible  that  he  may  have  been 
employed  as  private  secretary  to  Lord  Arlington,  for  in  1668  we 
find  him  writing  to  Williamson  from  Bath,  acknowledging  the 
receipt  of  his  Lordship's  letters,^  and  thanking  him  on  l>ord 
Arlington's  behalf  for  letters  sent  by  Mr.  Stanley.'* 

In  the  early  part  of  the  year  1669  Lord  Montagu  started  on 
his  mission  to  Paris,  and  it  is  evident  that  William  Perwich 
accompanied  him,  for  in  a  letter  dated  February  20,  1670,  we 
learn  that  he  had  been  appointed  secretary  of  the  embassy,  which 
he  speaks  of  as  'a  new  employment ;  '  and  a  certain  Alfred  Ellis, 
writing  to  Williamson  in  April  1670,  suggests  that  all  postal 
arrangements  shall  be  transferred  to  Mr.  Penvich,  '  who  under- 
stands onr  disputes  much  better,'  rather  than  to  Mr.  Francis 
Vernon.'' 

The  latter  had  been  appointed  secretary  to  the  embassy  in 
Paris,  but  he  appears  to  have  given  some  dissatisfaction  to  the 
government  at  home,  and  during  the  next  few  years  Perwich  made 

'  S.  P.,  Dam.,  Ch.  II.,  August  6,  166fi. 
■'  Ibid.  Miiy  21,  1G68.  '  Ibid. 

'  Ibid.  July  18,  1668.  =  Ibid.  July  22,  1668. 

«  Ibid.  April  2],  1670. 


good  use  of  the  opportunity  thus  afforded  him  for  the  display  of 
his  talents  as  a  diplomatist. 

During  the  period  of  negotiations  immediately  preceding  and 
following  upon  the  second  Dutch  war  of  1672  he  seems  to  have 
been  the  chief  source  of  information  to  the  English  Government, 
and  whilst  Sir  Joseph  Williamson  was  acting  as  one  of  the  pleni- 
potentiaries to  the  Congress  at  Cologne  Perwich  maintained  a 
close  correspondence  with  him  from  Paris  and  endeavoured  to  keep 
him  well  informed  on  all  matters  concerning  the  relations  between 
England  and  France. 

It  is  clear  that  the  officials  at  home  placed  gi-eat  reliance  on 
his  opinions,  and  Robert  Yard,  in  one  of  his  letters  from  Whitehall 
to  Sir  Joseph  Williamson,  whilst  the  latter  was  in  Cologne,  remarks 
that  there  is  no  foreign  news  to  communicate,  as  Mr.  Perwich  had 
taken  another  way  to  send  Lord  Arlington  the  advices  of  those 
parts  (meaning  France  and  Italy).' 

In  the  ]\Iontagu  correspondence  preserved  at  Beaulieu  there 
are  various  allusions  to  William  Pei-wich,  all  tending  to  show  the 
value  of  his  services  to  the  Secretary  of  State.  However,  like 
many  other  public  servants  at  this  time,  he  seems  to  have  found  a 
difficulty  in  getting  money  from  England,  and  on  one  occasion 
complains  that  for  nine  months  he  had  not  received  any  part  of 
his  official  salary,  '  his  own  small  stock  being  long  since  devoured 
in  letters  and  other  extraordinary  expenses,  having  for  other 
subsistence  been  beholding  to  Sir  Stephen  Fox.'  ^ 

The  last  mention  we  have  of  William  Perwich  is  found  in  a 
letter  dated  February  6,  1677,  in  which  Montagu  asks  Lord 
Arlington  if  he  is  really  much  interested  in  ilr.  Perwich,  who, 
he  says,  'is  at  a  stand,  though  he  can  seldom  stand,  for  he  is 
most  eternally  drunk.     Therefore,  pray,  my  Lord,  tell  me  in  your 

'  Letters  of  Sir  J.  Willia7nson,  i.  10.  =  S.  P.,  France,  December  30,  1673. 


Vlll  Tllli    I)i:.srATCIIK.s   UK   AN    KXOLISH    AGKXT    IX    I"AKIS 

next  whether  you  are  in  jest  or  earnest  concerned  for  him  ;  if  in 
earnest,  I  will  do  him  all  the  service  I  can,  though  he  can  do  me 
none.'  ' 

AVant  of  space  has  caused  the  omission  of  many  of  the  letters, 
and  in  some  cases  where  letters  of  the  same  date  are  addressed  to 
Lord  Arlington  and  Sir  Jose^oh  Williamson  passages  have  been 
omitted  to  avoid  repetition.  Where  the  original  is  in  cipher,  only 
the  deciphered  portions  have  been  printed,  in  accordance  with  a 
long-established  usage.  The  majority  of  the  letters  are  in  English, 
but  from  the  writer's  frequent  use  of  French  words  and  phrases, 
and  especially  from  his  addiction  to  such  gallicisms  as  '  nothing 
of  extraordinary,'  &c.,-  it  is  evident  that  he  was  well  versed  in  the 
French  language.  Indeed  we  may  easily  conclude  that  Perwich 
owed  his  success  as  a  diplomatic  agent  to  his  perfect  familiarity 
with  the  inner  life  of  the  I'rench  capital.  At  the  same  time  it 
may  be  inferred  that  the  smallness  of  his  official  emoluments 
must  have  deprived  him  of  many  of  the  advantages  attached  to  his 
official  position,  and  we  may  even  suspect  that  the  gossip  of  the 
Bohemian  quarter  was  not  infrequently  retailed  to  his  employers 
as  special  information. 

In  transcribing  the  original  despatches  it  has  been  thought 
desirable,  on  this  occasion,  to  preserve  the  paleography  (in  the 
shape  of  abbreviations)  and,  to  some  extent,  the  punctuation  of  tht^ 
]\1SS.,  since  a  modernised  script  would  have  left  no  impression  of 
the  writer's  peculiarities  of  style  and  orthography.  The  abbrevia- 
tions, where  unintelligible,  have  been  expanded,  but  the  numerous 
eccentricities  of  spelling  have  been  preserved. 

The  special  value  of  the  J'erwich  Papers  consists  in  the  light 
which  they  throw  upon  the  history  of  France  between  the  Treaty 

'  Montagu-Arliiujton  Correspondence,  February  G,  1G77.  p.  o2'A.  -  See  p.  120. 


of  Aix-la-Chapelle  and  that  of  Nimwegen.  The  aim  of  the  foreign 
policy  of  France  during  this  eventful  period  is  well  marked  by  the 
various  intrigues  designed  to  break  up  the  Triple  Alliance  and  to 
win  England  over  to  the  French  interest,  to  destroy  the  com- 
mercial supremacy  of  Holland,  and  to  develop  the  industrial  and 
carrj^ng  trade  of  France  at  the  expense  of  her  foreign  rivals. 

But  Perwich  did  not  confine  himself  exclusively  to  the  doings 
of  the  French  Government.  Whatever  information  came  to  hand 
from  Spain,  Poland,  Italy,  or  any  of  the  German  States  was  imme- 
diately transmitted  to  England.  The  main  portion  of  the  letters, 
however,  is  concerned  with  the  designs  of  France  to  break  up  the 
Triple  Alliance  and  to  increase  the  power  of  the  Great  jMonarch 
both  on  sea  and  land. 

When  Montagu  was  sent  over  as  English  Ambassador  to  Paris 
in  1669,  Charles  Colbert,  brother  of  Jean  Colbert,  was  designated 
as  French  Ambassador  to  England,  whose  king  was  reported  to 
have  '  no  gi-eater  desire  than  to  make  an  alliance  with  France.' 
He  arrived  in  Loudon  at  the  same  time  that  Temple  started  for 
the  Hague  with  instructions  to  form,  if  possible,  a  powerful  league 
against  Louis  by  enlisting  the  support  of  the  Swiss  cantons  and 
the  Princes  of  Brandenburg,  Luxembourg,  and  Saxe.*  It  is  clear 
that  Temple  must  have  worked  unsuccessfully  to  this  end,  for  Per- 
wich informs  Sir  Joseph  Williamson  that  •  the  Swisses  have  been 
lately  bought  off  for  their  intention  of  creeping  into  the  Triple 
Alliance.'  ^ 

Louis  was  anxious  to  complete  an  alliance  with  Charles  II. 
before  Parliament  met  in  England,  and  '  apprehended  much  that 
Van  Beuninghen  is  to  go  ambassador  for  England,  whom  they 
have,  as  they  say,  great  reason  to  hate.'  ^ 

'  Mignet,  N^gociations  relatives  a  la  Successimi  d'Espagne  sous  Louis  XIV, 
iii.  23. 

■-  State  Papers,  France,  May  1,  1069.  '  Ibid.  April  17,  Kili'J. 


X  rnr-;  despatches  of  an  KN(tLisn  agent  ix  paris 

Numerous  references  are  made  to  the  methods  which  Louis 
employed  to  augment  his  army,  and  we  read  that '  no  stone  is  left 
unturned  wherby  the  king  may  with  convenieiicy  increase  his 
strength.' ' 

Trade  between  England  and  P'rauce  appears  to  have  been 
almost  at  a  standstill.  Colbert  carried  out  his  '  protective  '  system 
by  forbidding  '  the  vent  of  foreign  drapery.'  ^  No  draper  in  Paris 
was  allowed  to  buy  any  but  the  manufactures  of  France  under 
pain  of  confiscation.  On  the  other  hand,  in  June  1  (Jdi*  his  French 
subjects  are  much  dissatisfied  '  that  this  king  having  given  a  free 
liberty  to  his  subjects  to  transport  corne  into  foreign  countreys, 
severall  ships  have  lately  been  in  England  to  vent  their  graneries, 
but  found  a  prohibition  against  any  such  importation,  because 
England  was  as  abounding  in  corne  as  France,  &  soe  are  returned 
&  lost  their  voyage.'  ^  And  again,  Perwich  writes  that  '  Mr.  Col- 
bert does  turn  &  wind  in  this  mattei'  of  trade  &  makes  no  diffi- 
culty to  do  anything,  though  manifestly  against  all  treaties,  to 
breake  the  neck  of  our  English  sale  of  drapery  here.'  ^ 

As  the  time  drew  near  for  Louis  to  begin  his  conquest  of  the 
Low  Countries  he  assured  the  Queen  of  .Spain  that  she  need  not 
be  alarmed  at  his  preparations — '  the  same  message  (Perwich  re- 
marks) that  he  had  sent  two  years  ago  when  he  invaded  Flanders.' '' 
His  endeavours  to  m.ake  a  league  with  the  Electors  of  Brandenbui-g, 
Cologne,  Bavaria,  and  Minister  'to  second  his  designs  against  the 
Hollander,  whom  they  call  insolent  people  to  dare  cope  with  a 
mighty  monarch,'  were  not  so  effective  as  the  French  gave  out, 
and  Louis  was  anxious  to  bring  about  an  alliance  before  he  started 
on  his  '  progresse '  into  Flanders  in  the  spring  '  to  visit  ye  new 
fortifications.'     According  to  Perwich  '  ye  k^'  designes  a  warre  w"' 

'  State  Papers,  France,  May  11,  10G9.  -  Ibid.  «ept.  21,  1609. 

'  Ibid.  June  2G,  1669.  '  Ibid. 

=■  Ibid.  Feb.  1,  1070. 


PlollancI  under  cover  of  the  Bp  of  Munster,' '  and  every  possible 
pretext  was  put  forward  to  begin  this  war.  In  a  letter  of 
January  18,  1670,  we  read  :  '  There  is  a  peice  of  land  in  the  Datcli 
dominions,  &  particularly  in  the  possession  of  a  gent,  of  Groe- 
ningen,  to  w"^**  the  Bp.  of  Munster  lays  clayme,  as  belonging  to  him  ; 
the  Dutch,  rather  then  embroyle  themselves  for  a  thing  so  small, 
especially  whatever  is  detayned  from  the  Bp.  becoming  a  generall 
c[uarrell  &  here  called  a  samled<je  (i.e.  sacrilege),  are  contented  to 
deliver  the  few  acres  into  his  possession,  but  are  jealous  that  hee 
may  fortify  upon  it  &  soe  keep  a  gate  to  let  his  armys  into  that 
countrey  when  hee  pleaseth.' 

In  May  1670  'Madam  Henrietta '  visited  England,  and  the 
secret  Treaty  of  Dover  was  signed  on  the  1st  of  June  by  Arling- 
ton, Arundel,  Clifford,  and  Bellings  for  England  and  Colbert  for 
France.^  Perwich  gives  a  graphic  account  of  the  sudden  death 
of  this  princess  on  her  return,  and  does  not  hesitate  to  express 
his  indignation  at  the  conduct  of  '  Monsieur.'  He  remarks  :  '  But 
now,  whilst  all  the  world  [is]  in  tears  &  extraordinary  affliction, 
you  may  well  aske  what  did  Monsieur.  Whi  he  imediately  em- 
ploied  himself  in  sesing  all  Mad™'''  money,  to  a  farthing,  in  any 
of  her  ladis'  hands,  al  her  jewels,  &  imediately  hastned  to  Paris  & 
tumble  over  her  papers.'  ^ 

Buckingham  went  over  to  France  in  August  of  1670,*  and  the 

'  extraordinary    entertaynment '   lie  had    there    and   '  a    resolucdh 

lately  taken  to  send  on  Wednesday  next  about  15  thous''  men  from 

the  camp  to  renderous  at  Perenne,  commanded  by  Marshall  Crequy,' 

confirmed  the  belief  in  France  '  that  the  league  is  broken.'  -''     His 

mission  was  apparently  concerned  with  an  arrangement  with  Louis 

on  behalf  of  the  Protestants  and  with  measures  to  obtain  some 

'  State  Papers.  France,  New  Year's  Day,  1(570.  -  Miguet,  iii.  109. 

>  S.  P.,  France,  -I^^  ,  1670.  '  ^^'8"^''  '"•  -^^- 

June  21  -^  .S'.  P.,  France,  August  23,  1670. 


Xll  rHK   DESPATCHlvS   OF    AN    EN'(iLI.sn    AOnNT   IN    PARIS 

redress  for  the  ill-usage  wbicb  our  London  mercliants  suffered  in 
the  sale  of  woollen  cloths  &  English  silke  stocking.' ' 

Both  Louis  and  Colbert  were  anxious  to  begin  war  in  the  spring 
of  1671,  and  'the  whole  intent '  was  to  swell  up  the  Trcmr  lioijal. 
Perwicb  remarks  that  '  all  buildings  are  surceased,  I  mean,  maisoiis 
roiialcs,  neither  are  the  musick,  esciiries,  &c.,  paid  regularly,  as 
formerly.'  ^  The  diSerent  offices  were  sold  for  large  sums,  for  from 
a  letter  dated  January  G,  1G74,  we  learn  that  the  king,  '  having 
suppressed  a  great  number  of  (jreffiers  all  over  the  kingdome,  has 
issued  out  commissions  for  600  more,  w"^"^  are  to  be  bought  by  par- 
ticulars &  will  raise  great  sums  of  money,'  and  from  time  to  time 
Louis  endeavoured  '  to  squeeze  the  Parliament  into  some  Arrests 
that  will  bring  him  in  millions.' 

Meanwhile  \'an  Beuningheu,  the  Ambassador  from  the  Hague, 
had  not  been  very  successful  in  his  mission  to  England.'  The 
Emperor  had  not  joined  the  Triple  Alliance,  as  had  been  contem- 
plated, and  Sir  William  Temple  had  been  i-ecalled  to  England,  a 
circumstance  from  which  '  the  Court  of  France  proposeth  great 
things.'  * 

The  Lorrainers  had  shown  their  intention  of  raising  an  army 
for  the  J3utch,  and  in  consequence  800  of  the  militia  had  been 
'  condemned  to  the  galleys  for  disobeying  the  declaration  ye  French 
made  at  first, '^  summoning  all  to  fidelity  to  France,  &c.' 

As  Louis  had  encountered  greater  difficulties  than  he  had  ex- 
pected in  his  negotiations  with  the  princes  of  Germany,  and  as  he 
had  no  desire  to  engage  in  a  war  on  land  without  theu'  help,  or 
to  commence  naval  operations  without  being  able  to  overwhelm, 
at  the  same  time,  his  enemy  on  land,  he  was  anxious  to  put  off  the 
war  for  another  year.''     Charles  II.,  on  the  other  hand,  was  ready 

'  S.  P.,  Frmicc,  Oet.  1,  l(i70.  ■'  Ibid.  Sept.  24,  1(570.  "  Mipiet,  iii.  225. 

'  S.  P.,  France,  Oct.  4,  1670.  '  Ibid.  Oct.  1,  lti70.  '  Mi^'llet,  iii.  240. 


to  begin  war,  especially  as  his  demauds  for  money  from  Parlia- 
ment had  been  made  and  granted  on  that  foundation.  Perwich 
writes  in  November  1670,  'Wee  are  most  glad  to  hear  that  the 
great  organ  our  Parliament  is  tuned  to  soe  perfect  a  harmony  with 
his  Ma''"''  will  &  occasions,'  and  '  it  gives  us  a  great  reputation 
abroad.' ' 

Louis  succeeded  in  postponing  the  declaration  of  war  for  a 
more  convenient  moment,  and  the  second  treaty  was  concluded 
with  England  in  December  1670,  no  mention  being  made  of 
Charles's  intention  to  declare  himself  a  Roman  Catholic.-  After 
securing  the  alliance  of  England  Louis  turned  his  attention  to- 
wards the  princes  of  Germany,  to  secure  either  their  co-operation 
or  neutrality.  Sweden,  too,  must  be  bought  off  from  the  Triple 
Alliance,  and  to  effect  this,  Louis  offered  480,000  ecus  in  place  of  the 
200,000  ecMs  which  Spain  owed  that  country.  Louis's  offer,  how- 
ever, came  too  late.  Sweden  had  no  longer  any  inducement  to 
co-operate  with  France,  as  Spain  had  paid  the  portion  of  the 
subsidy  then  due.^ 

In  January  1671  everybody  in  France,  except  the  King  and 
the  Ministiy,  was  '  mad  for  war.'  Perwich  remarks  that  '  if 
there  be  no  warre  a  great  part  of  the  nobility  will  be  ruined,  being 
already  plunged  in  debt  for  the  equipage  the  iii(j;ue  d'Jionnevr  forced 
them  to  make  the  last  year.' '' 

During  this  crisis  Louis  employed  every  possible  means  to 
obtain  money.  He  demanded  '  an  advance  of  eight  millions  of  his 
farmers,  which  many  think  they  are  not  able  to  furnish  him  with, 
notwithstanding  which,  here  is  now  a-working  for  his  service  a 
whole  set  of  gold  plate,  besides  great  massy  silver  tables  &  stands.'^ 

By  his  spies  he  was    kept  well  informed  of   the  troops  that 

'  S.'P.,  France,  November  i  KuO.  =  Mignet,  iii.  241.  '  Ibid.  iii.  284. 

<  S.  P.,  France,  April  11,  IGU.  '  Ibid.  July  25,  1671. 


XIV  THK    Di;SI'AT(.IlK,s    Ol'    A.N    KMiLISlI    ACiE.N'T    l.N    I'AKl.s 

were  being  raised  in  Holland.  I'rom  a  letter  of  July  25,  1071, 
we  learn  timt  '  one  M''  Choupe,  at  present  in  Holland  &  in  a 
pretended  disgrace  here,  is  there  only,  being  an  able  engeneer  & 
a  cunning  man,  to  give  what  intelligence  he  can  of  that  couutrey.' 

Alreadj'  the  United  Provinces  had  made  a  iinal  attempt  to 
obtain  a  closer  alliance  with  England,  Init  Charles  wanted  to 
know  wliat  subsidies  they  would  be  willing  to  give  if  he  lielped 
iu  a  war  solely  to  the  interest  of  Holland.  .Monsieur  Boreel, 
the  Dutch  Ambassador,  answered  that  it  was  their  intention 
to  throw  themselves  '  entre  les  bras  de  la  France '  if  they 
found  that  Charles  was  unwilling  to  tighten  the  alliance.'  lie- 
pulsed  on  the  part  of  PJngland,  the  States-General  turned  their 
attention  towards  the  Empire  and  princes  of  Germany,  and  en- 
deavoured to  form  a  league  in  which  the  Dukes  of  Brandenburg 
and  Luxembourg,  the  Emperor,  the  Electors  of  Mayence  and  Treves 
would  join  witli  tlie  Dliject  of  dei'ending  Hnlliiinl  ami  1lic  Spanish 
Low  Countries.'- 

In  December  1G71  the  States-General  sent  over  an  ambas- 
sador to  Louis  to  desire  his  Majesty  to  declare  his  intentions  and 
'to  offer  satisfaction  in  all  the  just  causes  of  complaint  his  M. 
Xtian  Ma'-''  may  have  ag'  them,  particularly  notionating  the  late 
differences  in  point  of  commerce.  The  Dutch  ha^'ing  hitherto 
huffed  very  much,  it  does  the  more  encourage  these  people  when 
they  find  them  trucking  with  overtures  of  satisfaction.'  The 
Dutch  Ambassador  appears  to  have  had  great  difficulty  in  obtain- 
ing an  audience ; '  Louis  postponed  it  from  day  to  day,  and  two 
months  later  Perwich  wi-ites  to  Lord  Arlington  that  '  the  Dutch 
Ambassador  thinks  of  taking  leave  within  a  few  days,  hee  having 
been  told  that  his  stay  here  signified  no  other  than  j-e  amusing  the 
officers."  ' 

'  Mignet,  iii.  633.  ■  Tbid.  iii.  G33. 

'  ti.  P.,  France,  December  21,  1071.  '  Ibid.  Febiuary  1072. 


Meanwhile  Charles  II.  was  playing  a  double  game,  for  Perwich 
mentions  that  '  the  Dutch  Amb'"  hath  written  out  of  England  that 
ye  King  of  England  had  satisfied  him  as  to  his  adhering  to  the 
League,  with  other  circumstances  of  friendship.' ' 

A  rumour  had  reached  Louis  that  the  Queen  of  Spain  intended 
to  help  'the  Hollanders  if  they  should  be  attacqued,  in  which 
case  the  French  Ambassador  is  ordered  to  declare  that  his  most 
Xtian  Ma'-^'  does  withdraw  his  parolle  donnee  wherein  he  engaged 
himself  not  to  act  against  the  monarchy  of  Spaine  during  the 
King's  minority.'  ^  It  had  also  been  reported  that  the  Dutch,  '  to 
engage  the  Spaniards  more  vigorously  in  their  party,  had  promised 
not  to  treat  with  France  unless  that  country  rendered  up  all  the 
late  conquests  of  1667  to  the  Spaniards,'  an  engagement  which 
Perwich  imagines  to  have  been  '  rather  a  bravado  than  a  probable 
matter.'^ 

A  good  deal  of  information  is  given  in  these  letters  about  the 
levying  of  troops  in  France,  the  disposal  of  the  commands,  and 
the  disposition  of  the  armies  for  the  different  campaigns.  There 
is  an  interesting  account  of  a  dispute  which  arose  about  the  posi- 
tion of  Marshal  de  Turenne.  Louis  had  given  him  the  general 
command  of  the  army,  but  ilarshals  Bellefonds  and  Humieres 
refused  to  receive  orders  from  him  on  the  plea  that  it  was  '  an 
innovation  on  the  great  authority  of  Marshalls  of  France,  since  they 
never  were  commanded  by  other  than  a  connestahle,  which  charge 
being  suppressed,  it  would  derogate  much  from  their  priviledges 
to  obey  one  of  their  brethren.'  Their  answer  much  offended  the 
King,  and  they  were  ordered  either  to  agree  or  '  to  see  his  face  no 
more.'  ■* 

War  was  declared  between  England  and  Holland  on  March  28, 

'  S.  P.,  Frattcc,  December  19,  1071.  -  Ibid.  December  26,  1G71. 

=  Ibid.  January  2,  1672.  '  Ibid.  April  23,  1672. 


XVI  nil-;  Di^rATCHEs  oi'  ax  enuliso  auext  i.\  i'akis 

1G72,'  and  between  France  and  Holland  on  April  G  of  the  same 
year.  From  this  date  onwards  the  letters  are  full  of  the  details  of 
the  campaign  of  1672,  and  the  progress  of  the  English  and  French 
armies  is  minutely  recorded. 

On  August  1  Louis  returned  to  St.  Germains,  '  being  somewhat 
sensible  of  his  fatigue.'  ■  A  triumplial  entry  into  Paris  was  pro- 
posed, but  tlie  King  would  not  agree  to  it,  alledging  that  ■•  hee 
\\ould  not  putt  the  nobility  to  the  charges  they  must  necessarily 
bee  att  to  appear  in  such  a  solemnity,  besides  that  the  enemys 
had  defended  themselves  too  laschhj,  and  tiiat  his  \nctories  had 
cost  him  too  little  for  to  boast  of  them.'  ^ 

From  the  month  of  August  1672  to  May  1673  it  is  probable 
that  Perwich  was  absent  from  his  post,  for  he  writes  to  Lord 
Arlington  on  May  6,  1673,  '  I  am  not  yet  soe  well  settled  as  to 
come  into  the  old  track  of  intelligence.' 

New  supplies  of  money  and  troops  had  been  raised  for  the 
King's  second  campaign.  Vast  sums  were  raised  by  a  declaration 
that  no  process  at  law  or  other  acts  in  writing  should  be  brought 
into  any  court  of  justice  '  without  paying  for  the  prepared  parch- 
ment and  paper  with  the  flower  de  luce  mark.'^  This  tax  was 
rejected  in  the  provincial  Pai-liaments,  and  a  suggestion  was  put 
forward  that  it  should  be  extended  to  whatever  paper  should  be 
used,  not  only  on  proceedings  at  law. 

An  imposition  was  also  laid  on  the  periwig  makers,  but  Per- 
wich writes  :  '  A  tumultuous  body  of  four  hundred  of  their  wives 
hath  been  to  demand  misericm-(h  of  Mons''  Colbert,  whereupon 
their  shops  are  suffered  to  be  opened  again."  ^  In  a  letter  dated 
October  7,  1673,  he  mentions  that  Colbert  'hath  been  feeling  the 
pulse  of  the  custome  farmers  for  the  advance  of  11  millions,  but 

'  Mignet,  iii.  703.  -  S.  P.,  France,  .'Vugust  (i,  1672. 

'  Ibid.  August  14,  1672.        '  Ibid.  August  5,  1C73.         '  Ibid.  August  30,  1073. 


tliey  complained  even  of  their  farms,  because  of  the  deadness  of 
trade,  much  coutrary  to  their  being  able  to  comply  with  so  great 
an  advance.  However  they  are  endeavouring  by  their  creditt  to 
raise  it,  giving  their  farm  as  security  for  the  payment  by  degrees.'' 

Before  the  end  of  the  year  1673  the  French  were  anxious  for 
peace,  and  according  to  Perwich  '  would  be  glad  to  have  one  on 
equall  termes.'  ^ 

In  October,  on  the  King's  return  from  his  campaign,  '  the 
severall  bodys  of  Parliament '  went  to  Versailles  '  to  compliment 
him,'  and  seized  the  opportunity  to  complain  of  the  taxes  and  '  the 
deadnesse  of  trade,  begging  mercy  upon  ye  apprehension  that 
more  will  bee  put  upon  them,  with  many  wishes  that  his  ilaj'^ 
would  make  a  Peace  &  then  take  off  ye  tax  upon  paper.'  ^ 

Meanwhile,  in  England,  Charles  II.  had  found  his  position 
most  grave.  The  war  had  been  preceded  by  events  which  caused 
intense  indignation — the  stoppage  of  the  Exchequer  in  1672, 
an  urgent  Declaration  of  Indulgence  suspending  all  penal  laws 
against  Nonconformists,  and  the  failure  of  Admiral  Holmes 
to  seize  a  rich  Dutch  fleet  sailing  up  the  Channel  in  order  to 
procure  funds  for  the  war. 

By  the  spring  of  1673  the  belligerents  were  willing  to  treat 
for  peace,  and  the  mediation  of  Sweden  was  accepted.  A  Congress 
was  arranged  at  Cologne  to  which  the  Earl  of  Sunderland,  Sir 
Leoline  Jenkins,  and  Sir  Joseph  Williamson  were  appointed  as 
representatives  from  England.* 

The  rapid  success  of  the  French  had  caused  much  uneasiness 
in  Sweden,  where  it  was  considered  that  the  ruin  of  the  United 
Provinces  would  leave  the  English  sole  masters  of  the  sea,  and  it 
was  on  this  account  that  Swedish  mediation  was  offered. 

'  S.  P.,  France,  October  7,  1673.  ■  Ibid.  October  18,  1673. 

'  Ibid.  '  Mignet,  iv.  141. 

VOL.  V.  a 


XVin  THK    DESPATCHES   OF   AX    EXCiLISII    AGENT    IX    PARIS 

P"i-ance  and  England  appeared  to  accept  the  offer  and  stated 
their  demands,  but  the  Dutch  deputies  were  so  much  disconcerted 
at  their  nature  that  they  dechned  a  conference  and  eventually 
decided  to  continue  the  war.  Attempts  were,  however,  made  in 
vain  to  draw  off  England  from  the  French  alliance  and  to  conclude 
a  private  treaty,  but  Charles  replied  '  qu'il  ne  ferait  jamais  de 
paix  que  d'accord  avec  le  roi  de  France.'  ^ 

However  in  February  of  1G74  peace  was  concluded  between 
England  and  Holland,  rumours  of  which  had  reached  the  French 
Court  some  days  before  it  was  actually  concluded,  for  Perwich 
writes  to  Lord  Arlington  on  February  20,  1674,  'We  are  im- 
patient till  our  letters  come  from  England,  these  people  giving  us 
a  mauvaise  mine  upon  a  surmise  they  have  of  our  concluding  a 
peace  with  the  Dutch  with  the  excluding  of  France.' 

Between  ]\Iarch  and  November  1674  Perwich  was  evidently 
again  away  from  Paris,  and  from  this  point  the  correspondence 
falls  off  considerably. 

The  remaining  letters  are  chiefly  concerned  with  the  investiga- 
tion of  the  curious  conspiracy  of  the  Chevalier  de  Rohan  in  the 
year  1674,  a  political  plot  in  which  Sir  Joseph  Williamson  appears 
to  have  taken  a  special  interest,  and  concerning  which  Perwich 
was  commissioned  to  obtain  all  the  information  possible.  The 
details  which  he  gives  in  the  letter  of  January  23,  1675,  were 
obtained  from  the  best  possible  source — '  from  one  who  assisted 
att  his  2^oces,'  though  the  matter  was  supposed  to  have  been  kept 
a  profound  secret. 

Four  persons  were  concerned  in  this  plot — l^ouis  de  Eohan, 
better  known  as  the  Chevalier  de  Pohau,  who  had  incurred  the 
hatred  of  Louis  XIV.  (it  was  said  for  insulting  him  at  a  card 
party)  ;  La  Treaumout,  a  retired  officer  ;  the  Marquise  de  A'illars  ; 

'  Mignet,  iv.  147. 


and  Van  den  Enden,  a  Dutch  schoolmaster  who  had  left  Holland 
on  account  of  the  persecution  of  the  Protestants  and  for  some 
years  had  been  keeping  a  school  in  Paris.  With  the  help  of  these 
confederates  De  Rohan  wrote  an  anonymous  letter  to  the  Count 
de  ilonterey,  at  that  time  the  Spanish  Governor  of  Flanders, 
intimating  that  '  Normandy  was  very  much  dispos"d  to  a  revolt, 
and  y*  if  hee  would  send  a  fleet  with  6  thousand  men,  &  armes 
for  twenty  thousand  w''^  necessaries  for  sieges  &  two  millions  of 
Uvres,  that  there  was  a  greate  man  (meaning  Rohan)  who  would 
engage  himself  upon  ye  assurance  of  thii-ty  thousand  crownes 
pension  and  20,000  crowns  for  Truaumont '  to  put  Quillebneuf  and 
another  maritime  town  into  his  possession, '  and  w"'  the  succour, 
expected  to  master  all  Normandy,  in  so  much  y'  they  might  come 
strait  to  Versailles  without  passing  river  or  bridge.' 

The  plot  was  discovered,  and  Perwich  gives  an  interesting 
account  of  the  manner  in  which  the  conspirators  were  executed  in 
Paris.' 

It  is  the  pleasing  duty  of  the  Editor  of  these  Anglo-French 
despatches  to  acknowledge  the  great  assistance  which  has  been 
rendered  by  Monsieur  J.  Lemoine,  chief  of  the  Archives  of  the 
Ministry  of  War  at  Paris,  in  the  elucidation  of  the  persons  and 
places  mentioned  in  the  text.  Without  the  generous  co-operation 
of  this  distinguished  expert  many  of  the  obscure  allusions  in 
these  despatches  must  have  remained  unsolved  by  an  English 
editor.  As  it  is,  the  space  at  the  disposal  of  her  collaborator  and 
herself  has  permitted  merely  the  briefest  elucidations  of  the  chief 
difficulties  encountered  in  the  following  pages. 

Jzdy  1903.  ^^-  ^-  ^- 

'  For  the  result  of  recent  exhaustive  researches  on  this  subject  among  the 
State  Papers  and  criminal  archives  in  Paris  see  Revue  Hebdomadnire,  December 
1898  to  January  1899,  and  an  article  in  the  Athenaum,  February  i,  1899. 


Erratum. 
Page  69,  line  7,  for  Vif  read  d'lf. 


THE 

DESPATCHES  OF  WILLIAM  PERWICH 

ENGLISH   AGENT   IN    PARIS 

1669  TO  1677. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Aprill  4'",  '69. 

l'^_  Yesterday  morning  my  L''  Amb'' '  had  a  private  Audience  of 
his  Ma'y,  at  w'^''  time  an  expresse  from  Madrid  brings  news  that 
D"  Juan  ^  hath  at  length  prevayled  against  his  enemys  in  that 
Court,  &  y'  y'"  President  of  Castillo  ^  was  out  of  the  Councell  & 
D°  Juan's  Creatures  put  into  offices ;  this  change  hath  j)utt  this 
Court  into  various  thoughts ;  some  &  y'^  most  considerable  seem 
troubled  at  it  becaus  in  case  of  y*^  death  of  y""  young  King  '  D" 
Juan  may  bee  made  King,  y"  Queen  ^  being  inclined  to  resigne  her 
Regency  unto  him  already  ;  others  imagine  to  themselves  that  the 
King  may  reap  some  advantage  by  these  disorders  in  their 
Councell.  On  Sunday  the  M.  Xtian  Ks  went  to  Colomb  to  a 
review  of  about  3,000  good  Horse,  where  hee  was  very  curious  & 
exact  in  viewing  every  particular  man  &  horse;  some  of  these 
Troops  were  newly  come  out  of  Garrison. 

'  Ealph  Montagu  succeeded  his  father  as  3rd  Baron  Montagu  in  1683  ;  created 
Earl  in  1685  and  Duke  in  1705. 

-  Don  Juan  .Jos^  (1629-1679),  the  natural  son   of  Philip  IV.  of  Spain  and 
general  of  the  Spanish  forces. 

'  Dom  Diego  Sarmiento  y  Valladares,  Bishop  of  Ovicdo,  was  President  of  the 
Council  from  May  1668  to  Nov.  1669. 

'  The  King  of  Spain,  Charles  II. 

^  Marie  Anne,  daughter  of  Ferdinand  III.  of  Austria. 
VOL.  V.  U 


Z  Till-:    DESPATCniCS   OK 

To  Sir  Joseph  Willia'm.'!on. 

Pnris  :  Aprill  7-'',  '<;;i,  S.N. 

Fresher  news  comes  still  dayly  from  Madrid  of  tlu-  grand 
revolutions  there  of  D"  Juan's  being  made  Head  of  y'  ('ounce!!  for 
the  people's  grievances,  Captain  Gen"  of  F!aiulers,  &c  ;  Mons""  de 
Villier,^  the  French  King's  Envoye  at  Madrid,  liad  made  a  hody  of 
all  the  French  there  &  opposed  D"  Juan  if  the  Councell  had  not 
speedily  prevented  itt.  However  tlie  M.  Xtian  K«  has  sent  his 
orders  to  his  Minister  there  to  offer  unto  the  Catholique  Queen 
all  assistance  against  any  attempt  that  shall  bee  made  upon  the 
Uoyal!  family. 

^fy  li''  Amb'"  is  come  to  his  house  in  the  Rue  de  Richilieu,  w*^"' 
is  nmcli  disliked  by  him,  &  has  taken  one  by  the  Queen  Jfother's, 
I'Hostel  de  ilous''  do  Roquelaure,'^  w"^''  will  make  amends,  but  not 
bee  ready  in  two  months.  I  am  very  ambitious  of  being  employed 
in  y""  service  here. 

To  Sir  Josejih  Williainson. 

Paris:  Aprill  13'",  1GG9,  S.N. 

Inclosed  goe  the  Edicts  it  mendohs,  w'=''  in  the  future  shall  bee 
constantly  sent  you,  &  if  you  have  not  the  Gazette  n  la  main  from 
other  hands  that  shall  never  fayle  you ;  upon  the  least  intimation 
that  you  have  y"  not  I  shall  also  send  you  the  severall  treatyes  be- 
tween England  &  France  since  1G06,  w*  are  all  new  printed  in 
French.  Your  directions  upon  the  inclosed  Catalogue  of  books 
shall  bee  punctually  observed  &  y"  Prints  sent  weekly  to  j-ou. 
It  would  bee  some  help  if  I  could  understand  the  names  of  all  our 
Consuls  in  y"  severall  parts ;  if  I  shall  not  bee  able  to  learne  them  all 
here  I  must  beseech  you  to  cause  them  to  be  transmitted  hither. 
My  L''  wonders  they  have  not  yet,  as  they  ought,  payd  their  duty 
to  him,  but  must  bee  put  in  mind  of  it. 

The  Queen  Mother^  is  again  relapsed  &  was  blooded  1  times  in 
as  many  days  this  week,  w"^''  hinders  my  L''  of  S'  Albans  ■*  from 
prosecuting  his  intended  journey  for  England  for  a  while. 

'  Pierre,  Marquis  tie  Villars. 

-  Gaston  Jean  Baptiste,  Due  de  IJoquelaure,  1617-83.  Created  Duke  of  Koque- 
laure  1G52.  Took  a  prominent  part  in  the  conquest  of  Franclie-Comte,  1008, 
and  that  of  Holland  (1G72).     Appointed  Governor  of  Guienne,  1G7G. 

'  Henrietta  Maria  of  France,  wife  of  Charles  I. 

'  Henry  Jermyn,  Duke  of  St.  Albans,  Lord  Chamberlain  of  the  Queen  Mother. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  3 

Yesternight  a  priest  was  stabbed  in  liis  bed.  It's  thought  a 
piece  of  jealous}-  promoted  his  end. 

Next  week  tliis  King  sits  in  I'arliam'  in  his  high  seat  of 
justice,  where  (among  other  things)  it's  sayd  he  will  mention  the 
making  a  Law  about  marriages,  that  noe  person  shall  give  above 
10,000  Crowns  with  his  daughter  in  marriage  (with  some  pro- 
visoes, I  believe,  of  Paris  &  Nobles  de  France)  ;  yet  this  shall  take 
no  hold  upon  heiresses.'  This  is  a  thing  talkt  of,  how  certain  I 
cannot  affirnie  to  you.  Hee  is  also  making  a  dismall  ransack  in 
his  Finances,  &  winds  &  turnes  all  things  inside  out,  as  you 
will  see  in  y''  edict  about  the  Officers  of  Justice.'- 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUianisoti. 

Paris  :  Apiill  i'\  '69. 

His  Ex"^*^,  I  think,  intends  to  make  his  publique  entry  on 
Wednsday  next  in  Easter  Week,  w'-''  I  am  persuaded  will  bee  very 
magnificent  by  reason  of  the  great  numbers  of  English  gentry  here. 

Last  night  my  L''  Mordaunt '  arrived  here.  The  King  goes  to 
Versailles  on  Munday  &  returns  on  Thursday.  The  Queen 
ilother,  God  bee  thanked,  is  recovered,  &  my  L''  of  S'  Albans 
will  set  forwards  his  intended  journey  about  the  middle  of  next 
week. 

The  French  apprehend  much  that  Van  Beuning  ^  is  to  goe  Amb"' 
for  England,  whom  they  have,  as  they  say,  great  reason  to  hate, 
his  image  being  in  Holland  engraven  on  a  meddall.  Josuah  like, 
stopping  the  sun's  course.^     By  the  next  I  shall  bee  able  to  send 

'  This  law  was  evidently  never  passed. 

-  Edicts  on  this  subject  were  issued  in  March  and  August  1G69. 

^  .John,  Viscount  Mordaunt,  brother  of  Henry,  2nd  Earl  of  Peterborough. 

'  Conrad  van  Beuninghen,  Dutch  Ambassador  to  France. 

"  After  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  1(108,  by  which  Louis  XIV.  ceased  his 
invasion  of  Franche-Comte,  the  Dutch  oft'ended  him  by  having  their  coins  re- 
struck,  one  attributing  to  them  the  right  of  having  defended  kings,  re-established 
the  liberty  of  the  seas,  and  pacified  Europe,  and  another  representing  Van 
Beuninghen  as  Joshua  stopping  the  sun.  The  words  supposed  to  be  engraved 
on  the  medal  were,  '  In  conspectu  meo  stetit  sol.'  Voltaire  says,  '  Cette  medaille 
n'exista  jamais.  II  est  vrai  que  les  Etats  avaient  fait  frapper  une  medaille  dans 
laquelle  ils  avaient  exprime  tout  ce  que  la  ri5publique  avait  fait  de  glorieux  : 
Assertis  legibus,  emendatis  sacris,  adjutis,  defensis,  conciliatis  regibus,  vindicata 
marium  libertate,  stabilita  orbis  Europae  quiete  '  (Sit'cle  de  Louis  XIV,  vol.  i.  p.  389). 


Tin-:  i)i;sr.\niiK; 


you  some  reflections  made  licre  upon  tlie  Tripple  Lratfiie  '   bv 
indifferent  liand,  w' ''  yet  is  too  long  for  my  transcribing  now. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williavison. 

Pivris  :  Apiill  20''',  '09. 

Yesterday  att  Charenton  (as  it  was  expressed)  '  ceiix  de  la 
religion  avoient  grand  June  -  pour  implorer  I'assistance  divine  sur 
le  pitoyable  estat  de  leurs  eglises  et  de  la  demolition  de  leurs 
[temples]  dans  toutes  les  provinces.' 

Here  are  lately  some  taxes  imposed  by  the  magistrates  of 
Paris  upon  candells,  w*"''  before  were  sold  for  8  sols  the  lb,  shall 
bee  sold  hut  at  (J,  because  (as  I  believe)  the  Chandlers  grow  rich  ; 
in  the  like  manner  beef  it  wood;  ye  latter,  that  is  worth  13 
francs,  shall  bee  set  at  10  only. 

The  King  has  caused  a  vast  quantity  of  corne  to  bee  bought 
in  ]5ourgogne  to  bee  embarqued  on  the  duke  of  T3eaufort's  ^  fleet. 
Mons''  Colbert,  as  I  am  informed,  '  a  este  fort  chagrin '  &  discom- 
posed of  late,  &  has  suspended  58  officers  that  were  designed  & 
nominated  supernumeraries  abord  the  s''  fleet. 

From  W^arsaw  wee  hear  that  the  son  of  the  great  Duke  of 
Muscovy'  is  instructing  him  in  the  Catholiquisme,  pretending  still 
to  the  Crowne'of  Poland,  i^  that  the  Arch  Bpp  of  Guesne  ■  has 
caused  a  libell  to  bee  burnt  ag'  tiie  Prince,'"'  w''*'  the  emissaryes  of 
the  other  Pretender[s]  '  had  spread  abroad. 

From  ]\Iadrid  the  3'"'  Curr',  wee  are  advi.sed  that  a  Pegim'  is 
formed  there  of  600  men  for  the  King's  guards  &  y''  Marq"  of 
Ayetonne*  is  their  Collonel.      D"   Juan   is   still   at  Guadalajara, 

'  The  Triple  Alliance,  1G6H,  between  Englund,  Holland,  and  Sweden. 

'  Z.e.  jeflne. 

'  Francois  de  Vendome,  Due  de  Beaufort,  son  of  C(5sar  de  Vendome  and  grand- 
son of  Henry  IV.  In  1G69  he  was  sent  by  Louis  XIV.  to  help  the  Venetians, 
attacked  by  the  Turks  in  the  island  of  Candia,  and  was  killed  at  Candia  in  August 
of  the  same  year. 

'  Alexius  Michaelowitz,  son  of  Michael  Theodorowitz.      Died  in  1(J7G. 

'  Nicolaus  Prazmoovski,  Archbishop  of  Gnesen  1G6()-1()73  (see  Gazette  de 
France,  1GG9,  No.  49,  p.  HG7). 

"  Theodore  Alexowitz,  son  of  the  above. 

'  The  Prince  of  Nieubourg,  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  and  the  Prince  of  Conde. 

"  D.  Miguel  Francisco  de  Moncada,  oth  Marquis  of  Aitona.     Died  in  1674. 


AN    EXGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  O 

expecting  orders  to  kisse  ye  Queen's  hands ;  another  Jesuit  is 
made  Vice  Inquisitour  of  y'' kingdome.  The  Pope  has  sanctifyed 
with  his  blessing  2  standards,  one  for  D"  Vincerzo,'  who  commands 
y*^  gallies  designed  for  Candia,  &  y""  other  for  M""  du  Beaufort, 
w'=''  hee  has  received  with  a  quantity  of  medalls,  (also  blessed),  to 
bee  distributed  among  y*"  French  ofticers.  Cont  de  S'  Paul "  is  at 
Eome  &  saying  y'  hee  has  a  desire  to  retuvne  for  Candia  with 
y''  French  succour,  JM"'  de  Bourlement '  gave  him  a  L"  from  the 
King  commanding  his  returue  to  Paris  ;  the  succor  for  Candia  will 
goelieuce  ^  the  15th  of  May.     The  King  of  Spain  is  very  well. 

Mess'-'  le  Parlem'  have  liberty  to  assemble  &  make  their 
remoustraces  to  y""  king  about  y''  preservation  of  their  Privileges, 
his  j\Ia'>'  being  almost  obliged  to  cancell  y""  edict  hee  made  contrary 
to  y""  advice  of  le  Tellier  '  &  de  Lyonue.*^ 

Le  Comte  de  Schomberg '  has  married  Mad'*"  d'Aumale 
d'Aucourt.*  The  King  calls  for  an  accompt  of  17  or  18  millions 
'  que  les  maistres  de  Comptes  ont  piis  des  derniers  Royaux  plus  que 
leur  estat  deub  d'espices.'  '  Le  S''  de  Berrier "  n'est  plus  Oeconome 
de  I'Abbaye  de  S'  Germain  des  Pres,  c'est  M''  Paschau,'  who  yester- 
day dislodged  all  y"  Duke  of  Verneuil's  '"  domestique  servants  ; 
it's  sayd  it  is  to  keep  y""  place  ready  for  y°  reception  of  y*"  king  of 
Poland,"  to  whom  this  King  has  given  that  Eoyall  Abby. 

'  Don  Vincenzo  Kospigliosi,  nephew  of  Pope  Clement  IX. 

-  Charles  Paris  d'Orl^ans,  Comte  de  St.  Pol,  later  Due  de  Longueville  (1649- 
1G72). 

'  Louis  d'Anglure  de  BourUmont.  '  '  Embarqued  '  interlined  in  MS. 

5  Michel  Le  Tellier,  1603-1685,  Secretary  of  State  for  War.  After  the  death 
of  Mazarin  he  became  a  Minister  of  State,  and  on  the  death  of  D'Aligre  in  1677 
was  made  Chancellor. 

"  Hugues  de  Lionne  succeeded  Mazarin  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 

'  Frederic  Armand,  Comte  de  Schomberg  (1618-1690),  son  of  Haos  Meynard 
Schomberg.     He  became  marshal  in  1675. 

^  Suzanne  d'Aumale,  dame  d'Aucourt,  his  second  wife. 

°  Louis  Berryer,  secretary  of  Jean  Baptiste  Colbert.  Perwich  was  evidently 
wrongly  informed,  as  Berryer  retained  his  position  until  1673,  when  he  was 
succeeded  by  M.  Pellisson. 

'"  Gaston  Henri  de  Bourbon,  natural  son  of  Henry  IV.  and  Catherine  Henriette 
de  Balzac-Entragues  (1601-1682).  He  married  Charlotte  Siguier,  eldest  daughter 
of  Pierre  Seguier,  Chancellor  of  France. 

"  John  Casimir,  who  resigned  the  crown  of  Poland,  September  1668,  and  retired 
to  France.     See  p.  7,  n.  8. 


6  THK   DESI'ATCUES   OK 

'  M""  Colombel,  Cons"^"'  au  Parleiucnt,  avoit  porte  ;i  Tespargne  la 
demissiou  de  sa  charge,  mais  on  luy  dit  qu'il  n'y  avoit  point  encore 
d'ordre  de  les  recevoir.' 

M''  de  Frenoy  has  gott  y'  Gouvernem'  of  Dunkirke  &  has 
sold  his  Lieut'^''  of  Herdin'  for  ^.  The  K^  has  given  to  the 
Abbo  de  Rourlemont^  the  Bpprick  of  La  Vaur,  to  the  Abbi'  of 
Tressan  ^  that  of  Vabres,  &  y'  of  Dignes  to  y"  Abbe  of  Biscorat. ' 

It  was  not,  (as  its  said),  y''  Chev""  de  Bourlement  that  fought  on 
Saturday,  but  one  il''  de  Bourlement  des  iIoulin>,  wlio  (juarrelled 
at  play  with  il""  le  Chainp-Fleury  ;  at  night  his  body  was  cnterred, 
but  a  mason  discovered  it  &  y'^  Lieutenant  criminel  caused  it  to 
be  put  in  the  Chastellet/ 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Ap.  24'\  '60. 

During  tiiese  Holy  days  wee  can  neither  have  our  Letters  from 
PIngland,  the'  they  are  due  to  us  three  days  since,  nor  any  news 
from  hence  to  send  you,  all  their  time  having  been  spent  here  in 
their  celebrating  their  festivalls  &  their  Ma""-""*  visiting  each  Church 
in  Paris.  Mj  Lord  Amb'  makes  his  publick  Entry  to-morrow 
with  about  50  Gentlemen  that  will  bee  in  his  Trayne,  6  pages  & 
12  footmen.  Little  M''  Kirk"  is  soe  tormented  with  an  ague  that 
it  makes  everybody  pitty  him,  hee  being  the  most  sweet  &  well  bred 
child  I  ever  saw,  yet  tells  mee  hee  has  noe  desire  to  returne  for 
England.  I  make  bold  to  tell  you  this  that  you  may  please  to 
acquaint  Madam  Kirke  with  it  &  that  all  care  imaginable  is  taken 
of  him.  My  L'  S'  Albans  goes  this  day  for  England,  &  with  him 
M'"  Gumbledon,  who  has  made  a  profitable  voyage  of  it,  &  I  believe 
in  G  weeks  has  jjotten  2,000^. 


'  Hesdin. 

-  Perwich  evidently  meiin,s  Louis  d'AnRlurc  de  BourK'tuont.  Tlic  bisliopric  of 
Lavaur  was  vacant  from  1GG8  to  1671. 

=  Ludovicus  de  la  Vergne  de  Montenard  de  Tressan. 

*  Jean  de  Vintimille  du  Luc. 

^  Prison  of  the  '  Chatelet  de  Paris.' 

°  Probably  the  son  of  Colonel  Percy  Kirk  [Kirke],  who  morried  Lady  Mary 
Howard,  daughter  of  George,  Earl  of  Suffolk. 


AX   EXGLISH   AGENT   IX    PARIS  7 

To  Sir  Joitijpli  WiUiamson. 

raris  :  Ap.  27'\  '69. 

Since  my  last  to  you  his  Ex'"'  made  his  Publique  entry  on  y*^ 
2P',  &  yesterday  had  his  publique  audience  with  the  King,  Queen, 
Dauphin,'  Duke  d'Anjoy  -  &  his  sister,'  &  this  morning  is  going  to 
Monsieur  ^  &  Madame  ^  to  the  same  purpose,  soe  that  it  will  make 
this  the  shorter.  According  to  my  L*  Arlington's  order  I  am  making 
a  journall  of  all  the  Ceremouiall  part,  w"^**  shall  goe  by  the  next 
post.  It  is  enough  at  present  I  tell  you  his  coaches  followed  the 
King's,  and  the  Queen's,  &c*,  went  after  liis,  (I  mean  the  Princes  of 
the  blood). 

The  moment  brings  mee  y'"^  of  the  12th  of  April  for  the 
inclosed  list  of  consulls. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  May  1",  '69. 

On  Munday  this  Court  went  to  S'  Germains,  where  the  King 
makes  a  generall  muster  of  all  his  Army,  with  the  ceremony  of 
great  gunns  in  the  field,  &  that  night  hee  went  hence  my  L'' 
Kochester*  was  robbed  in  a  chayse  (of  some  20  Pistolls  &  his 
perewig).  Herewith  goes  a  particular  of  all  that  passed  at  the 
Entrve  &  Aud'^^  The  discourse  of  the  P'=  of  Conde's  '  being  King 
of  Poland  *  is  hottly  renewed,  tho'  wee  hear  the  P*^**  of  Muscouvy 
will  have  an  army   of  near  100™  men  to  second  his  pretentions 

•  Louis  the  Dauphin  (1661-1711). 

"■  Philip,  Duke  of  Anjou  (1668-1671). 

'  Maria  Theresa  (1G67-1672). 

'  Phihp,  Duke  of  Orleans,  second  son  of  Louis  XIII. 

^  Hemiette  Anne,  daughter  of  Charles  I.  '  Le  fils  aine  du  Eoi  s'appelait 
"  Monseigneui" "  ou  "  Dauphin,"  le  frere  du  Eoi  "  Monsieur,"  la  sceur  ou  la  belle- 
fUle  du  Eoi  "  Madame,"  la  fllle  de  Monsieur  "  Mademoiselle  "  (Duruy,  Hist,  de 
France,  ii.  299). 

^  Lawrence  Hyde,  Earl  of  Rochester,  1641-1711- 

'  Louis  II.,  the  '  Grand,'  son  of  Henry  II.,  Prince  of  Conde. 

'  On  September  16,  1668,  John  Casimir  resigned  the  crown  of  Poland  and 
retired  to  France.  There  were  three  candidates  for  the  vacant  throne — the  Prince 
of  Conde,  supported  by  John  Sobieski ;  the  Prince  of  Xeubourg,  supported  by 
Louis  XIV. ;  and  Charles  of  Lorraine,  the  candidate  of  Austria.  The  choice,  how- 
ever, fell  upon  Michael  Korybut  Wisniowieski,  the  son  of  Jeremiah  Michael,  Duke 
of  Wisniowieski.  He  died  in  1673,  and  was  succeeded  in  1674  by  John  Sobieski. 
(See  TU  Story  of  tlie  Nations,  'Poland,'  by  W.  R.  Morfill,  pp.  150-154.) 


8  THE    DESPATCHES    OF 

thereunto.  My  L''  Ainb"'  lias  not  yet  had  puhlii|ue  Aud*^'  of 
Mad:mi,  by  reason  of  her  keeping  lier  bed  for  a  week  after  a  fall 
shee  had  on  her  terras.  Yesterday  the  ^'enetian  Anib''  gave  his 
E.x^'  a  visitt :  that  of  Savoy  will  not  doe  it  till  hee  know  that  bee 
shall  bee  treated  as  Ainb''  from  a  Tesii;  Coin-onne. 

i'rom  Warsaw  we  hear  that  in  the  raising  of  a  crosse  beam  for 
the  place  for  ye  Dyett  a  white  pigeon  fixed  on  it,  &  thence  Hew  to 
the  I'alais  R",  and  returned  again  to  the  beam,  w*'"'  they  interpret 
to  bee  a  good  prognostick  for  y''  1'"^''  of  t'onde,  being  of  the  Ordre  of 
y''  Holy  Ghost,  w"^''  H.  'S  King  of  Poland  gave  his  ancestors. 

The  Suisses  have  been  lately  bought  off  from  their  intentions  of 
creeping  into  the  ople  League,  yet  soe  that  they  will  not  bee 
barred  fi-om  selling  men  to  y''  Span''  for  their  defense,  but  not 
ofiense. 

Are  much  concerned  here  at  the  Hollanders  tampering  with  the 
P"*  of  the  Rhine  as  destructive  to  their  Bordeau.\  trade. 

Its  also  said  that  the  Queen  Regent  of  Spain  has  by  her 
ministers  offered  to  pay  Sweden  the  subsidy  money  if  it  will  signe 
the  guaranty,  which  it  refused  for  some  reasons  that  render  them- 
selves obvious.' 

To  Sir  Joseph   WilliamsoH. 

Paris:  May  11th,  '69. 

Yesterday  his  Ex"'  returned  a  visit  to  the  Venetian  Amb''. 
In  discourse  with  his  Scrye  hee  gives  us  noe  ground  to  believe 
that  of  the  Gi-and  Seigneur's  -  death,  but  with  more  certaynty  told 
mee  letters  from  the  Levant  advised  them  that  the  G''  Segnior 
having  sent  his  orders  to  Constantinople  for  the  strangling  his 
brothers,  the  people  mutinyed  &  opposed  the  execution,  c't  the 
Janizaries  themselves  that  were  left  to  guard  the  place  sided  with 
them,  sending  a  message  in  great  hast  to  the  Emp' '■''  that  if  hee 
came  not  immediately  to  his  capitall  citty  they  should  bee  obliged  to 
appease  the  multitude  by  making  one  of  his  brothers  Emperour. 

It  is  believed,  tho'  the  Amb''  here  &  his  people  \vill  not  owne  itt, 
that  the  Venetian  Ainb''  is  sent  prisoner  by  the  Grand  Vizier ''  to 

'  Spain  had  iJiomised  to  pay  Sweden  large  sums  of  money  to  keep  her  army  in 
Germany  and  to  prevent  the  I'ays-Bas  from  being  attacked  (Mignet,  vol.  iii.  p.  112). 
'-  Mahomet  IV.,  Sultan  of  Turkey. 
'  Leopold  I.  of  Austria  (1040-1705). 
'  Kiuperli,  as  renowned  in  Turkey  as  Turenne  was  in  France. 


AN    EXGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  9 

Canea,  because  hee  seemed  not  to  incline  to  the  proposition  made 
by  the  Vizier  for  peace  in  surrending  Candia. 

Orders  wei-e  lately  sent  &  speedily  put  in  execution  offering 
from  the  King  to  all  the  workemen  &  labourers  that  are  now 
employed  in  fortifying  the  new  conquest  places/  in  number  about 
20,000,  that  if  they  will  engage  themselves  in  his  service  in  case 
any  warre  should  happen  with  Spain,  or  the  young  King  dye,  that 
then  they  shall  continue  as  souldiers  under  the  same  pay  they  now 
are,  w*"''  is  much  more  than  is  ordinary  allowed  to  the  militia,  w* 
shall  bee  p''  them  weekly  ;  upon  default  whereof  they  may  freely 
retire  from  the  service  &  not  bee  obliged  to  serve  more  than  one 
Campagna,  of  w"'*'  proposition  they  have  all  most  chearfuily 
accepted  of,  as  they  say  here.  Thus  you  see,  S"",  no  stone  is  left 
unturned  wherby  the  King  may  with  conveniency  increase  his 
strength,  &  tho'  these  men  are  unexpert  for  souldiers  they  serve  to 
fill  up  trenches,  &  upon  their  backs  hee  may  ride  in  triumph. 

100.000  pounds  st.  are  remitted  from  this  Court  into  Poland 
to  the  Bp.  of  Bezieres,-  the  French  Amb'',  to  bee  distributed  in 
gayning  electo:y  voyces  for  the  Prince.'  Mons""  de  Louvoy  ^  will 
have  a  stately  house  built  in  2  months  upon  the  ground  the  King 
has  given  him  at  S'  Germains,  1,400  men  being  dayly  at  worke. 
In  like  manner  most  of  the  noblemen  will  follow  his  example  upon 
like  proportions  of  land  for  that  purpose. 

Just  as  I  am  writing  this  2  Suisses  are  marching  by  to  bee 
beheaded  for  killing  a  man  about  i  hour  since.  I  pray  God  keep 
us  all  from  such  cruell  blades  &  hands. 

The  Venetian  Scrye  told  mee  also,  when  I  sayd  that  ther  was 

,^  livi-es  found  in  the  Troncs  des  Eqlises  for  the  Candia  succour, 
100  ^ 

that  there  was  but    ,~r,  &  that  when  the  Amb''  had  recomended 

40 

to  the  Arch  Bpp  ^  &  principall  Ecclesiastiques  of  this  place  to  give 
a  noble  &  generous  example  to  y'"  people  by  their  owne  liberall 

'  Those  taken  in  Flanders  in  the  campaign  of  1607.  This  campaign  had 
alarmed  Holland,  because  the  Pays-Bas  formed  their  barrier  on  the  side  of  France 
(Mignet,  vol.  ii.  p.  484). 

-  Pierre  de  Bonzy. 

'  The  Prince  de  Conde. 

'  Francois  Michel  Le  TelUer,  Marquis  de  Louvois  (1639-1691). 

^  Hardouin  de  Beaumont  de  Pereiixe,  Archbishop  of  Paris,  formerly  tutor  to 
Louis  XIV. 


10  THE    UEbl'ATCUES   UK 

contributions,  tliey  replyed  they  had  thought  tlioy  liad  ilonc  the 
liepu1)lic  a  great  service  in  ininding  the  people  to  bee  charitable, 
not  that  they  themselves  thought  to  bee  obliged  any  way  to  be  a 
president  to  y™. 

In  Poland  they  expect  3  Amb"  from  Muscovy,  Avlio  are  on 
their  march  with  a  trayne  of  3,000  gentlemen,  2,000  men  in  livery, 
&  vast  sums  of  money,  that  they  come  to  iissist  at  the  election 

of  ye  Prince  of  !Muscouvy,  &  that  y''  Zzaar  his  fathei'  has  ^  men 

on  the  frontiers,  as  they  apprehend,  to  compel!  them  to  itt. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  May  12th,  '09. 

It  is  talked  here  with  much  secrecy  y'  the  troops  will  not  goe 
for  Candia  at  last,  &  that  from  the  begining  this  King  raised  them 
under  that  Xtian  pretence  only  to  serve  him  upon  another  occasion 
without  giving  jealousy  to  the  world,  they  being  in  a  good  station 
in  case  any  warre  happen  with  Spain  (or  as  some  will  have  it  to 
take  Sardaigne  '  for  y'  French  K^.) 

From  thence  wee  hear  the  j'oung  King  is  secretly  very  ill  & 
that  D"  Juan's  interests  increase. 

Are  not  at  all  pleased  here  with  the  news  from  Poland. 

To  f^'i';'  Jo^iqilt  ]Villiami-on. 

Paris  :  May  ^,  '69. 
On  Munday  last  my  Lord  Ambassadour  went  to  S'  Germains, 
&  I  know  not  whether  he  will  bee  time  enough  back  to  write  by 
this  post.  It's  thonght  the  Court  will  not  stay  long  there,  by 
reason  of  the  paynt,  w"^""  hath  somewhat  indisposed  the  Queen. 
The  news  from  Candia  has  somewhat  startled  these  people,  who 
verily  believe  at  this  instant  that  it  is  taken,  altho'  the  ^^enetian 
Amb""  going  to  S'  Germains  seemed  to  bee  much  pleased,  saying 
hee  had  very  good  news  to  impart  to  the  King.  And  wheras  the 
inclosed  sayes  the  Knights  of  Maltha  were  (hmnirei',  kc,  it  is  by 
others  more  likely  atlirmed  that  they  were  only  woiinded,  having 
ventered  out  beyond  belief  &  beaten  the  Turks  oft'  with  a  great 
carnage.  On  !ilunday  3  Suisses  were  carryed  to  the  place  of 
execution,  where  they  were  condemned  to  fight  with  one  another 


AN    ENGLI.-^H    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  11 

untill  two  of  them  were  killed,  &  the  survivour  to  bee  saved,  bnt 
were  by  the  King's  order  reprieved.  These  were  they  that 
murdered  their  Lieuten'  last  week. 

I  humbly  desire  you  would  bee  pleased  to  let  mee  know  what 
ground  ther  is  for  a  report  (contrary  to  all  reason  &  interest)  that 
the  Span''"  intended  to  seize  on  all  English  effects  in  their  ports, 
upon  what  they  pretend  to  have  suffered  in  Porto  Bell,'  &c,  because 
some  friends  of  mine  in  this  countrey,  that  have  considerable 
interests  in  Spain  at  this  time,  have  been  alarmed  from  England 
&  would  gladly  know  how  to  take  their  measures  by  an  assurance 
of  the  trne  source  of  such  a  report. 

My  Lord  is  jnst  returned  from  S'  Germains  &  bids  mee  desire 
you  that  you  will  bee  pleased  to  learne  of  my  L''  Holies  -  where  the 
Prince  of  Conde  received  him  at  his  first  visit,  whether  at  the 
coach  or  the  stayres  &c,  &  how  hee  received  the  Prince  when  hee 
came  to  visit  him,  all  w"'*'  his  Ex'^"  recomends  to  y"'  particiilar  care, 
because  hee  will  not  know  how  to  proceed  untill  such  time  as  y'' 
letter  shall  give  him  light. 

On  Munday  morning  a  person  came  with  great  assurance  & 
confidence  to  tell  mee  that  letters  from  Toulon  were  arrived  that 
say  how  a  Bassa  with  a  squadron  &  abundance  of  wealth  was 
come  into  that  Koad,  &  rendred  himselfe  under  the  Duke  of 
Beaufort's  protection ;  a  great  storme  from  the  G''  Seign''  threat- 
ning  his  death  caused  his  flight.  I  tell  it  you  as  I  heard  it  and 
you  may  believe  it  if  confirmed. 

The  succors  for  Candia  are  allmost  ready  &  the  beginning  of 
the  next  month  will  see  them  under  sayle,  although  people  in  the 
world  believe  hee  never  intended  really  to  send  any  thither. 

We  have  bad  no  letters  from  Holland  these  ll-  days. 

From  Spain  it's  said  D"  .Juan  is  creating  more  trouble,  w'^''  I 
believe  this  Court  would  willingly  foment,  the  discontents  between 
this  King  &  the  Coiulestable  growing  dayly. 

Yesterday  two  persons  were  apprehended  for  thievery,  &  in  the 
arrest  they  resisted,  &  one  was  mortally  wounded,  condemned 
immediately,  &  hanged  for  fear  hee  should  dye  unpunished ;  the 
other  will  overtake  him  in  a  day  or  two. 

'  Porto  Belle. 

-  Denzil  Holies  [Hollis],  second  son  of  the  Earl  of  Clare.  He  had  acted  as 
Ambassador  Extraordinary  at  the  Court  of  France  and  Plenipotentiary  at  the 
Conference  at  Breda. 


12  THE   DESrATCHES    OF 

To  Sir  Jvitcjili   Williamson. 

Paris:  May  18th.  'OO,  S.N. 

^'oul•.s  oC  tlK*  o'  1  shewed  to  my  L''  Aniba.ssatlour,  especially 
what  concerned  y''  manuscripts.'  His  Ex*^''  told  mee  hee  would 
take  order  in  itt.  I  believe  that  through  the  misunderstandings 
between  him  &  AI''  du  Moulin '■^  it  hath  been  hitherto  neglected, 
neither  can  I  tell  where  they  are  or  to  whom  to  apply  myselfe  to 
know  their  lowest  price,  having  very  often  minded  M''  dn  Moulin 
of  it,  telling  him  how  often  you  were  pleased  to  commit  the  same 
to  my  sdllicitation,  i*i:  fiom  time  to  time  he  told  mee  hee  had  written 
but  had  no  answer  or  order  about  them  from  my  L''  Arlington. 

Letters  from  Madrid  say  that  the  King  is  better,  tlio'  at  the 
same  time  it's  rumoured  about  the  citty  that  hee  cannot  live  much 
longer  (or,  to  say  the  truth,  the  French  would  not  have  him  doe 
so)  ;  that  the  Queen  has  been  lately  indisposed,  &  called  the  Card" 
d'Arragon  '  to  Court,  who  together  with  ye  I'opeV  Nuncio  have 
been  with  the  Queen  nioi/eiiiicr  in  D"  Juan's  behalfe,  who  is  still  at 
( i  uadalaxart,''  discontented  at  the  non  execution  of  the  Ar''". 

They  say  also  that  the  citty  of  (jrenada  upon  the  hronilleries  at 
]\tadrid  had  putt  y"'selves  in  armes,  &  had  been  soe  4  days,  in 
favour  of  D"  Juan,  during  w''''  time  the  King's  ofiicers  kept  them- 
selves incognitis  :  but  hearing  of  the  agreem'  between  the  Queen  & 
him  they  layd  downe  their  arms.  The  Duke  d'Albe,"^  upon  Pere 
Nitard's  ''  retirement  out  of  iS]iain.  is  also  come  into  y''  Queens  par'*' 
again,  alleaging  hee  went  to  D"  Juan's,  to  y''  end  that  father  might 
bee  exiled,  w''''  being  done.  Sec. 

The  advice  from  Lisbon  of  the  French  having  taken  S"  Domingo 
is  soe  important  that  it  needs  confirmation.  From  Sicily  y'^ 
freshest  letters  say  that  the  flames  that  gush  out  of  Jlount  (libel " 
are  soe  violent  that  they  have  brought  the  citty  of  Cantone**  under 

'   See  letter  from  Peter  du  Muiilin  {S.P.,  France)  dated  June  j;,,  IUC'.I. 
-'  Peter  du  Moulin,  Minister  Extriiordinary  for  Charles  II. 

'  I).  Pascual  d'Ara^on  y  Cordoba  (1G2.5-1677),  son  of  D.  Enriijue   d'Ara^on, 
Due  de  Cardona.  and  brother  of  U.  Pedro  d'Aragon. 
'  Guadalajara. 

=  D.  Antonio  Alvarez  de  Toledo,  7th  Due  d'Albe.     Died  in  1G90. 
"  Eberhard  von  Neidhart.     See  footnote,  p.  27. 
'  Mount  Etna  or  Monte  Gabello. 
"  Catania,  on  the  east  coast  of  Sicily. 


A\    ENCilJSH    AGENT    IN    TARIS  13 

their  verge,  burnt  it  &  all  tlie  villages  thereabouts,  tho'  y*^  s''  citty 
is  above  20  miles  from  the  mountain  ;  that  the  countrey  is  all 
ruined,  &  desolate.  Mons""  du  Louvoy  is  going  to  visit  the  fortifi- 
cations of  the  places  conqnises. 

By  expresse  from  the  Duke  of  Beaufort  the  King  has  learnt 
that  13  galleys  were  gone  to  sea  to  proceed  towards  Candia,  &  that 
some  of  the  troops  designed  for  its  relief  are  on  board  them  ;  that 
7  French  men-of-warre  came  from  the  Ponant  into  Thoulon,  com- 
manded by  the  S'' Gaboret ;  ^  that  the  Duke  would  suddainly  follow 
the  gallies  with  the  rest  of  the  forces  that  are  at  Thoulon  ;  that  a 
report  is  come  thither  from  the  Levant  that  y'^  G''  Vizier,  hearing 
of  the  troubles  at  Constantinople,  had  raised  y'"  siege  &  was 
fmbarqning  at  the  head  of  his  Army  to  appease  them. 

The  King  has  sent  a  declaration  to  have  it  verifyed  in  Par- 
liam',  w'^''  are  59  Ar'"^  about  the  Huguenots  somewhat  moderating 
the  Ordonnances  made  ag*  them  contrary  to  the  Edict  of  Nantes. 

To  Sir  JosejfJi,  WiUiamson. 

Paris  :  May  22'>,  '69. 

Herewith  goes  a  letter  from  M''  du  J\Ioulin  to  my  Lord  Arlington, 
acquainting  him  that  my  L''  Amb''  has  expressed  a  desire  for  him 
to  returne  to  England  &  to  receive  his  Lpjj's  orders  thereupon. 
What  ye  Gazetier  mentions  of  4  or  500  women  going  for  xlmerica 
volontaryly  is  false,  becaus  they  are  lewd  strumpets  gathered  up 
by  the  officers  of  the  citty  &  transported  according  to  the  law. 

People  begin  to  talke  very  high  about  the  disputes  with  the 
Connedahle  &  the  likelyhood  of  a  breach  with  Spain,  of  w'-'^  the 
camp  officers  speak  more  assuredly,  &  have  orders  to  thicken  their 
severall  troops  with  more  men,  to  give  noe  such  uoyse  abroad  as 
publique  levies  would  make. 

The  Brandenburgh  proposition  ^  of  getting  the  crowne  of  Poland 
is  confirmed  &  it's  thought  may  succeed  at  the  Dyett. 

The  King  diverts  himselfe  dayly  with  the  camp  in  giving  orders 
&  particular  posts  to  his  severall  troops  in  order  y"^  siege  of  Candia, 
(a  fort  made  there  called  soe),  leather  bullets. &  a  thousand  imper- 

'  Mathurin  Gabaret. 

'  According  to  Ranke  (Mmioirs  of  the  House  of  Brandenburg,  i.  73),  Frederick 
William,  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  twice  refused  the  crown  of  Poland,  because  he 
would  not  desert  the  faith  by  which  his  salvation  was  assured. 


14  Till-:    OKSPATfIlh>;    OF 

tineiicies  IjeiTi}^  pivjxiriii^'  for  y''  di'l'ence  iV  assault  of  yo  ]tlacp,  y'' 
command  of  W''  is  not  knowiic  whom  tlie  King  will  honour  with. 

I  will  learne  ag'  y''  next  post  what  y''  Gazcttier  means  by  a 
renconlre  at  y''  Bois  de  IJologne  wherein  Mad"  de  Monnerot  was 
concerned,  &  ye  particular  of  ye  story  w'''  hee  calls  fabilous.' 

Tu  Sir  Joseph  WiUiiinisoH. 

Pixris  :  May  25,  'G9. 

Letters  of  Aprill  loth  from  Mons""  la  Hayp,'^  this  King's 
Ambassadour  with  the  Grand  Seign'',  say  that  hee  had  att  length 
prevayled  with  him  to  give  him  an  Audience  of  conije  at  Larissa ; 
that  hee  received  very  good  satisfaction  in  all  his  demands,  passe- 
ports  given  him.  &  was  returned  to  Constantinople  to  embarcjue 
himselfe  it  familly  on  board  the  King's  ships  that  attend  him  there  ; 
that  his  friends  need  not  to  apprehend  any  danger  to  his  person, 
those  people  being  affray d  to  provoke  the  I'Vench  King. 

The  Duke  do  Navaille  '  is  lately  arrived  att  TouUon,  who  with 
the  Duke  de  Beaufort  is  ready  to  erabarque  the  latter  end  of  this 
month,  expecting  only  lex  deniiers  ordrex  de  sd  Md'' .  All  y''  troops 
are  ready,  20  men-of-warre  &  13  gallys,  wherof  3  gallions. 

From  Genes  [Genoa]  they  say  y''  Duke  de  St.  Germain  '  is  dead. 
&  that  some  of  the  noblemen  are  in  amies  at  the  head  of  •■'),0()0 
men  to  make  themselves  masters  of  y*^  Isle. 

The  Cantons  of  Switzerland  are  much  troubled  att  the  French 
King's  having  sent  15  hor.semeu  into  Switzeiland.  from  whence  the 
S''  de  Maille,''  the  King's  resident  there,  had  given  information  of 
the  S''  Roux  de  ^larsilly's''  being  there,  negotiating  the  bringing 
the  Cantons  into  y"  3ple  League  by  discourses  much  to  the  disad- 

'  See  letter  dated  May  25,  1669. 

'  Denis  de  La  Haye,  Sieur  de  Vantelet,  Ambassador  to  Constantinople  in  1G69. 

'  Philippe  de  Montault  de  B6nac,  Due  de  Navailles,  1619-1684.  Married  Mile, 
de  Ncuillant,  lady  in  waiting  to  the  Queen  of  France.  He  was  appointed  in  1669 
to  command  the  forces  sent  to  the  help  of  Candia  (under  the  Duke  of  Beaufort), 
lie  took  part  in  the  invasion  of  Franche-Comti5  in  1674.  Marshal  of  France  in 
1675. 

'  Viceroy  of  Sardinia. 

'  The  Sieur  Mouslier  was  the  resident  of  France  in  Switzerhvnd  at  this  period. 

"  Claude  Roux,  Sieur  de  Marsilly.  See  Ludlow's  Memoirs,  ii.  p.  409 ;  Haag, 
La  France  Protcstante,  vol.  ix. ;  and  F.  Ravaisson,  Archives  de  la  Bastille,  vii. 
305-332. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  15 

vantage  of  Fiance,  giving  them  very  ill  impressions  of  the  French 
King's  gouvenwmsnt,  who  was  betrayed  by  a  monk  that  kept  him 
company  &  intercepted  by  y"^  s''  horsemen,  brought  into  France,  & 
is  expected  at  the  Bastille.  I  believe  you  know  y'^  man.  I'me 
sure  I  remember  him  in  Eng''. 

Talke  much  here,  according  to  their  owne  inclinations,  of  warres 
with  Spain  it  the  troubles  ah'eady  there  by  most  of  the  nobility 
adhering  to  U"  Juan. 

I  promised  in  my  last  to  learne  the  story  about  Mad"'  de 
Montenner,'  mentioned  in  the  paper  Gazette,  which  lyes  thus:  Shea 
was  this  week  to  take  the  air  in  her  coach  by  the  Bois  de  Boulogne, 
where  shee  heard  a  dismall  voyce  lamenting  in  pittifulie  termes,  & 
being  come  nearer  shee  saw  a  man  on  the  ground  with  his  hands 
&  eyes  surveying  the  heavens.  Shee  asked  him  what  discomposed 
him  &  took  him  into  her  coach,  thinking  to  bring  him  to  Paris, 
when  hee  told  her  many  horrible  things  &  predictions  of  troubles 
in  this  land,  of  y''  death  of  great  men,  &c.,  &  immediately  vanished 
out  of  y"^  coach.  Wee  maj'  choose  whether  wee  will  believe  itt, 
but  the  foolisli  women  &  multitude  talke  more  assuredly  of  it. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Willifimson. 

Paris  ;  .June  1",  '69. 

This  goes  by  one  M""  Thomson,  who  promises  to  bee  with  you 
before  the  Post ;  hee  is  one  of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  ships 
unduely  seized  by  y*"  widow  of  S'^  Crux. 

My  L''  Ambassadour  desires  you  would  please  to  send  him  the 
copie  of  the  3ple  Alliance  &  guaranty,  as  well  as  the  progresse  of 
the  Treaty  of  Commerce.^ 

The  King  &  Queen  are  at  Versailles,  &  all  the  Court  seem  to 
applaud  the  French  Ambassad'''*  proceedings  with  the  P"^-  of 
Tuscanny,'  becaus,  say  they,  hee  being  in  conference  with  the  Span- 
nish  Amb"'  in  the  King's  gallery,  took  noe  notice  of  the  French 
Amb""  when  hee  past  by  him. 

As  to  the  manuscripts,  M""  du  Moulin  tells  mee  hee  has  order  & 
will  take  care  in  them,  &  I  believe  will  carry  them  himselfe. 

Roux  ilarsilly  has  prudently  declared  hee  had   somewhat  of 

'  The  same  as  Madlle.  de  Monnerot  (see  letter  dated  May  22,  1CG9). 

-  Between  England  and  France  in  l(j09. 

'  Ferdinand  II.,  Grand  Duke  o£  Tuscany.     Died  in  1G70. 


16  TUE    DKSPATCHES   OK 

importance  to  say,  but  it  slioulil  bee  to  tlu'  Kiiij^  liiniselfe,  w'=''  may 
bee  made  means  of  respiting  his  processe  \-,  as  hee  Iiopes.  interces- 
sions may  bee  made  for  him  ;  but  people  talke  so  variously  of  him 
that  I  cannot  tell  whether  hee  ought  to  bee  owned  by  any  I'rince. 

V"'  .Suisses  have  indeed  the  greatest  ground  to  reclaynie  him 
as  being  taken  on  theirs.  They  have  all  his  papers,  w'''  speak 
much  of  the  3p''  Alliance ;  if  they  have  noe  other  pretext  of 
hanging  him  1  know  not  whether  they  can  lawfully  for  this,  hee 
having  been  naturallised  in  Holland  I'v:  taken  in  a  privilegd  countrey. 

liegiii  to  talke  here  of  high  advantages  this  kingdome  will 
have  by  the  Treaty  of  Commerce  now  on  foot,  &  are  preparing 
Ordnnnances,  &c.,  about  the  transporting  of  corne,  etc.,  by  way  of 
anticipation. 

Talke  again  much  in  favor  of  the  Prince  of  Conde,  who  some 
will  say  is  allready  chosen. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  June  22,  'G9. 

Att  length  wee  have  found  y""  3ple  Alliance  in  Mons''  du 
]\roulin's  retirement. 

Talk  much  of  the  Turkish  Amb''  &  hi.s  great  trayne,  but  more 
of  his  businesse,  speaking  of  a  barbarous  union  ag'  the  H .  of 
Austria  &  consequently  all  Xtendome.' 

You  see  how  ready  the  King  is  to  pick  any  quarrell  with  the 
Dutch,  as  to  say  hee  would  give  out  letters  of  reprix.all  ag'  them  for 
ill-usage  a  French  ship  had  in  the  Indyes,  before  the  .States  can 
know  how  the  case  stands,  in  order  to  the  giving  satisfaction. 

1  cannot  believe  what  the  Gazettier  says  of  surceasing  the 
40fications  in  the  Pays  Gonquis  at  the  K^  of  England's  re(]uest, 
unles  it  bee  that  they  have  rendred  those  places  so  .strong  as  not 
to  need  any  addition.  I  am  credibly  informed  most  of  them 
are  already  impregnable,  &  what  cannot  above  20  thousand  doe  ? 
when  they  are  payd  weekly,  who  have  been  at  worke  all  this  k  the 
last  year  ? 

'  The  Grand  Vizier  had  concluded  a  treaty  with  the  House  of  Austria  most 
favourable  to  the  Turks,  by  which  he  had  arranged  to  keep  peace  for  twenty  years, 
but  it  was  well  known  that  he  only  awaited  the  fall  of  Candia  before  resuming  his 
schemes  against  Italy  and  the  Empire.  (See  Vehse's  Memoirs  of  the  Court  of 
Austria,  vol.  ii.  p.  23.) 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  17 

I  am  endeavouring  the  getting  y*"  '  modell  of  the  Louvre ' '  for 
you,  it  being  worth  y'"  curiosity.  There  are  some  printed  biit  none 
sold  publiquely,  &  I  suppose  in  the  hands  only  of  some  Minister  of 
State. 

I  am  informed  that  there  is  a  separate  &  secret  Arf-"  between 
France  &  Holl'^,  by  w'^''  the  latter  is  not  to  pay  but  I  50  sols  per 
tun  for  all  ships,  &c.,  and  I  believe  upon  inquiry  you  may  learne 
as  much,  tho'  at  j^  same  time  I  know  that  y'-  Dutch  doe  pay  all  as 
other  strangers,  &  how  to  reconcile  this  it  is  left  to  y''  more  pollite 
judgment. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUiamson. 

Paris  :  June  20tli,  '(iO. 

Letters  out  of  Switzerland  say  that  the  Cantons  are  mett  att 
Bade,  &  much  incensed  with  the  S''  Moglier  [Muslier],  the  French 
Resident,  for  having  had  commerce  with  1  inferiour  Cantons,  given 
them  money  without  participating  it  among  the  rest ;  that  there  are 
many  Agents  from  forreigne  P"*to  bring  them  into  the  ople  AUy- 
ance,  and  that  if  the  French  have  any  designe  to  jirevent  it,  the 
King  must  send  to  them  an  Amb"'  of  quality  to  renew  their  quon- 
dam confederations.  The  Spaniards  offer  them  great  advantages, 
as  the  revenue  of  their  saltpitts. 

From  the  coast  of  Picardy  the  French  hear  with  much  dissatis- 
faction that  this  King,  having  given  a  free  liberty  to  his  subjects  to 
transport  come  into  foreigne  countreys,  severall  ships  had  lately 
been  in  England  to  vent  their  graneries,  but  found  a  prohibition 
against  any  such  importation,  because  Eng''  was  as  abounding  in 
corne  as  France,  &  soe  are  I'eturned  &  lost  their  voyage." 

A  merchant  of  Rouen  was  with  mee  yesterday,  desiring  to 
know  of  mee  what   measures   hee   is  to  take  in  the  vent  of  his 

'  See  Comptes  des  Bdtiments  dti  Boi  sous  le  Eigne  de  Louis  XIV,  by  .Jules 
Guifl'rey,  vol.  i. 

-  In  the  year  1667  Colbert  made  a  treaty  by  which  the  duties  on  manufactured 
goods  brought  into  France  were  doubled,  amounting  to  nearly  80  per  cent,  of  the 
value  of  the  goods.  This  tax  largely  contributed  to  the  war  of  1672.  It  struck  a 
heavy  blow  against  Dutch  trade,  and  no  sooner  had  it  been  published  than  Van  Beu- 
ninghen  wrote  to  De  Witt  that  they  must  defend  their  cloths.  England  retaliated 
by  a  tax  on  the  importation  of  French  wine,  and  prohibited  the  free  importation 
of  corn  into  England  (Baschet,  Transcripts,  '  Ambassador  Colbert  to  Monsieur 
Colbert,'  September  12,  1669,  and  Clement,  Histoire  dc  Colbert,  p.  296). 

VOL.  v.  C 


18  TIIK    DICSPATrUKS    OK 

comodityes  there,  liccaiise  tlie  Fi'ench,  upon  the  news  of  the  Treaty 
of  Ooininerce  at  London's  levelling  all  custonies,  or  at  least  abating 
them,  will  give  hini  not  a  third  part  of  what  they  offered  before. 
I  told  him  the  l-'rench  made  use  of  that  artifice  onely  for  their 
owne  advantage,  A:  that  it  would  bee  a  considerable  time  before  the 
Treaty  would  bee  liuislied  &  bear  date.  Hee  says  it  is  the  case 
of  all  the  Eng.  Merch'"  there ;  the  same  thing,  I  believe,  may  liee 
reciprocally  in  London  upon  the  same  reason. 

A  vessell  come  lately  toThoulon  from  the  Isles  of  Cerigo'  give[s] 
a  bad  account  of  t'andia,  of  dismall  assaults,  slaughters,  &  taking  of 
fort  iS'  Andre.  I  would  not  send  you  the  particulars,  because  it  is 
not  generally  believed.  Those  of  the  2 1th  of  Aprill  from  Candia 
saj'  the  sicknes  rageth  there  &  that  they  understand  from  y''  Turks 
camp  that  as  soon  as  the  French  succors  come,  the  Vizier  will 
raise  the  siege  &  fight  them  if  they  land  in  the  Isle.  You  will  see 
by  the  list  my  L'  Amb''  sends  by  this  post  to  my  1/  Arlington 
what  strength  they  are  of,  &  how  little  able  they  will  bee  to  fight 
such  an  Army  the  Vi/.ier  has  under  him. 

A  Courrier  from  hence  is  gott  to  Thoulon  \-  followed  y''  Due  de 
Navailles  with  private  orders,  it  it's  talked  of  publiquely  that  if  the 
I'eace  with  the  Turks  should  happen  to  bee  concluded,  or  any  other 
reason  for  their  not  staying  at  Candia,  they  are  to  goe  upon  a 
secret  designe. 

Messina  is  in  amies,  as  they  are  willing  to  believe  here,  &  D" 
Juan  stands  upon  his  jnmctilioes  of  the  case  of  y"  people  in  his 
private  ambition. 
[He]  spoke  on  I  will  not  give  you  any  account  about  Maszillye's  wheel  of  his 
y  wheel  some  misfortune;  you  have  it  at  large,  &c-\  It's  certayn  it  makes  a 
Freifch' Kins''  great  noyse  &  was  by  anticipation  condemned  by  all  the  females 
that  they  for  his  barbarisme  on  himselfe,-  saying,  '  qu'il  meurt.  il  n'y  a  plus 
stopped  his       ;\  quoy.' 

L"c°oth'.^  '"'"^  Though  I  don't  doubt  but  you  have  seen  the  ceremony  (when 

here)  upon  Midsummer  Eve,''  I  will  venter  to  scratch  out  the  other 
folio  to  tell  you  that  it  is  the  custome  for  the  Provost  des  Mar- 
chands,  in  behalfe  of  the  citizens,  to  present  the  gouvernour  of 
Paris  with  a  bonfire  &  fireworks.     I    had  a   good  convenience  of 

'  Off  the  coast  of  Moiea. 

-  He  had  tried  to  commit  suicide  in  piison.     See  supra,  p.  14,  n.  C. 
»  This  refers  to  the  festival  held  on  June  24,  known  as  the  'Feux  de  joie  de  la 
Ruint-Jean.' 


AX    ENGLISH    AGE.NT    IN    PARIS  19 

seeing  it.  The  Gouveniour,'  Provost  &  C4ownemeu,  with  flmnbeaiis 
lighted,  walked  round  the  pile  in  procession,  a  noyse  of  trumpetts 
&  other  nnisick  added  much  to  the  ceremony. 

The  Gouver'"'  set  fire  to  the  wood,  &  all  the  rest  by  his  example 
did  y'  like,  whereupon  about  30  cannon  jilanted  by  it  wei'e  dis- 
charged &  about  5U  chambers.  And  then  the  theater  of  j^  feux 
iVartijice  displayed  itselfe,  &  the  last  rocquets  that  flew  up  sent 
downe  an  unfortunate  &  ungratefull  star  into  the  eye  of  the 
Provost's  only  son,  at  whose  charge  all  this  entertaynm'  was ;  thus 
wee  see  how  the  eyes  of  Providence,  &c^.  The  boy  is  in  a  high 
feaver  &  will  hardly  live. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  June  29th,  '69. 

I  will  begin  with  what  makes  most  noyse  here,  &  what  came 
from  Monsieur's  owne  mouth.  That  the  French  King  having  with 
much  satisfaction  received  the  news  of  the  G''  S"'^  good  intentions 
of  sending  a  Bassa  hither  (Monsieur  de  la  Haye  to  remaine  there 
till  his  returne),  ordered  four  of  his  men  of  warre,  commanded  by 
M''  .d'Almaras,  to  fetch  him.  Now  whether  it  were  a  Turkish  plott 
by  this  Bassa  to  dequoy  those  ships  into  their  lai-e,  or  whether  the 
intention  was  reale  of  sending  him,  is  not  knowne.  But  this  is 
sure  :  being  come  somewhat  near  tie  place,  a  French  captive  escaped 
&  discovered  the  designe  of  the  Bassa's  embarquing  with  him  soe 
many  men  as  his  pretended  trayne  as  would  surprise  them,  or  in 
default  of  that  to  surround  the  men-of-warre  with  40  galleys. 
Upon  the  news  that  the  French  fleet  was  on  its  way  for  Caudia,  in 
what  a  condition  iP'  La  Haye  may  [be]  it's  not  knowne,  but  feared. 
This  bids  mee  tell  you  that  last  night  my  L''  of  AVinchelsea  -  called 
here  at  the  Amb'"''*  house.  His  Ex'"''  being  abroad  I  spoke  with 
him  ;  hee  told  mee  hee  came  in  15  days  from  Rome  &  intends  in 
hast  for  England. 

I  cannot  believe  what  our  Gazettier  says  about  the  P°'^  of 
Tuscanny's  visiting  the  French  Amb'"at  the  Hague,  since  all  other 
j^res  spgak  the  contrary.     I  know  not  how  hee  should  give  him  a 

'  Gabriel  de  Koehechouart,  Due  de  Mortemart. 

-  Heneage  Finch.  Earl  of  Winchelsea.  He  was  on  his  w.iy  to  England  after 
having  been  eight  years  Ambassador  in  Tmkey. 


20  TIIK    DIvSrATClIES    OK 

visit,  since  hee  mett,  S''  W"'  Toinple  '  and  tlic  S]ian  :  Anih''  in  noutor 
])l:ic(>s,  always  staniliug  or  walking. 

'J'lie  Cavaliers  here,  in  tiieir  huffing  hrauvoure,  seem  to  justify 
the  Milfonl  businesse,  '  disant  que  tout  le  monde  doit  fleschir  au 
plus  f^rand  Roy  du  monde.'  Sir  Geo.  Hamilton  commanded  all  the 
camp  this  week,  those  officers  taking  it  by  tui-nes  &  keep  an  open 
&  a  noble  table  where  the  King  comes  constantly  to  dine  with  eacli 
Generall  once,  a  good  way  to  creat  ambition  in  every  one  to  bee  a 
Generall.  They  have  an  absolute  command  over  all  during  the 
week,  &  towards  their  expences  the  King  allows  them  50'  a  day. 

To  Sir  Joi<ej)h  WilliirninD/i. 

I'aiis  :  .Tunc  29,  '09. 

There  is  a  report  come  just  now  that  the  Duke  of  Nieuburgh  ^ 
should  bee  chosen  K^  of  Poland. 

The  next  post  shall  convey  the  falsitude  or  confirmation  of  it. 
It  is  very  strange  news  if  true,  but  much  more  to  the  satisfaction 
of  this  Court  than  if  l^orrain  had  been  soe. 

Father  Patrick  '  is  well  i^'  now  in  Bourgogne,  up  to  the  waist 
as  well  in  money  as  trouble  about  his  Ahhi'. 

To  Lord  Adiilijlon. 

ParLs  :  .July  3^  'G9. 

Being  yesterday  at  the  Savoy  Ambassador's,  his  Scry''  ■*  gave  me 
the  Print  that  goes  herewith,  w""''  I  presume  to  transmit  to  j-our 
Lpp,  because  it  is  not  publique  but  very  like  the  Duke  of  Savoy.'' 

In  discourse  hee  told  me  that  the  Oonde  de  Castelmelhor "  is 
!itt  Turenne  incognito,  imploring  their  II"  H'scs  interposition  that 
hee  may  be  restored  to  his  estate  in  J'ortugall ;  and  hee  kneiv  from 

'  Temple  had  l)eon  sent  to  the  Hague  in  August  16G8. 

=  Philip  William  (1()15-1(!90).  »  Father  Patrick  Mafiinn. 

*  Cliabo,  Marquis  (le  Saint-Maurice,  was  acting  as  the  Ambassador  from  Savoy, 
and  had  with  him  an  agent  named  Planque. 

''  Charles  Emmanuel  II.,  Duke  of  Savoy,  son  of  Victor  Aniadeus  and  Catlierine, 
daughter  of  Henry  IV.  He  was  descended  from  the  House  of  Lorraine,  and 
married  Francisca,  daughter  of  Jean  Baptiste,  Due  d'Orl^ans  and  cousin  of 
Louis  XIV.     He  died  in  1075. 

»  Don  Luis  de  .Sousa  Vasconcellas,  formerly  the  favourite  of  Alphonso,  King 
of  Portugal,  who  had  been  deposed. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  21 

a  very  good  hand  that  an  Agent  is  lately  despatched  from  hence 
to  the  Emperor,  secretly,  to  negotiate  &  obtayn  his  Imperiall 
]\/[g^tie-s  resolncon  what  he  would  doe  &  how  governe  himselfe  in  case 
the  young  King  of  Spayn  should  dye.  Certaynly  they  have  a 
more  than  ordinary  confidence  of  the  Emp'',  becaus  they  speak  here 
soe  assuredly  that  hee  will  nob  come  into  the  League.'  Talke 
much  here  that  if  S''  Tho:  Allen  ^  &  the  D.  de  Beaufort  should 
happen  to  meet  in  the  Mediterranean  it  would  bee  but  &  facheme 
rencontre,  and  that  6  good  ships  are  setting  out  at  Toulon  with  all 
hast  to  joyne  the  latter.  Are  afrayd  also  the  commerce  with  England 
will  not  bee  soe  currant  as  was  expected,  upon  the  returne  of  the 
ships  laden  with  corne  meeting  with  a  prohibicon  in  Eng'  ag'  the 
importacon  of  it,  soe  that  the  King  has  forbidden  the  transportation 
of  any  more  till  further  order,  (some  will  have  it  to  bee  a  generall 
interdiction  of  all  commerce). 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  July  6th,  '69. 

On  Thursday  M'"  Vernon '  &  myselfe  went  to  see  the  Fort 
S'  Sebastians  &  a  generall  muster  of  15,000  men.  As  to  the 
former,  tho'  the  King  will  have  nobody  take  the  modell  of  it  I  shall 
presume  to  tell  you  1  never  saw  any  thing  more  glorious.  Ther 
are  8,000  men  continualy  incamped  in  it,  &  are  certaynly  as  many 
miserable,  their  pay  very  small,  &  by  reason  of  their  vermin  they 
may  be  called  moveable  Tents.  Thej^  sicken  dayly  &  are  removed. 
The  walls  round  it  are  of  durt  &  stak'd  on  the  outside,  to  keep  off 
horse :  a  little  Bastion  at  each  corner,  on  w'^''  are  about  4  guns 
mounted.  The  King's  tent  is  very  rich,  interlined  with  orange 
trees  to  digest  y'  ill  smell  of  y*^  place.  When  wee  came  into  the 
field  the  King  gave  the  Queen  &  Ladys  of  the  Court  an  Entei'- 
taynm'  by  causing  the  15,000  to  fire  successively,  being  all  in  a 
line  that  reached  2  miles.  Twelve  Canon  discharged  first,  &  then 
all  the  Kegiments  &  Troops  as  they  stood  in  order,  at  w*^''  time,  as 
the  fates  had  ordered  it.  the  K^  received  a  dispatch  from  Poland 

'  Louis  XIV.  aimed  at  preventing  the  Emi)eror  of  Austria  from  joining  the 
Triple  Alliance  and  thus  uniting  witli  Holland.     Mignet,  iii.  p.  377. 

-  Sir  Thomas  Allin,  Allen,  or  AUeyne,  commander  of  the  Straits  fleet. 

'  Francis  Vernon  had  been  appointed  Ralph  Montagu's  secretary  for  his 
Embassy  in  Paris. 


22  THE    OEwrATCIIES   OF 

w*^''  aayd  (as  I  am  told)  that  the  Duke  Kinovisky,'  a  Polander,  was 
chosen  King.  Another  from  Rome  puts  the  Due  d'Albret''  in 
hopes  of  a  cap.  .\dvices  from  Lisbon  say  tliat  tlie  Jving  Alphonso  •'' 
aftev  hee  liad  set  sayle  &  was  gone  a  tempest  drove  the  ships  back 
within  sight  of  Lisbone,  which  soe  moved  the  people  witli  compas- 
sion for  him,  who  being  also  discontented  at  ye  present  gou- 
vernem',  that  they  rautyned  &  caused  their  tribune  to  goe  to  the 
Councell  with  their  complaynts,  w'*'  were  that  the  King's  person 
might  be  well  enough  secured  without  sending  him  out  of  the 
Kingdomi^  of  Portugal,  &  that  it  is  inhumane  to  expo.se  him  to  y'' 
dangers  of  the  seas  &  a  desolate  Island,  thereby  depriving  him  of 
all  sort  of  counnunication  with  his  friends,  \c",  tlireiitniiig  that  if 
hee  were  not  sent  for  on  shour,  they  would  punish  the  authors  of 
the  order  for  his  banishm'.  However  endeavors  were  used  to 
appease  the  people  by  arguments  of  y"'  publique  good  &  safety  of 
the  Kingdome,  w"^''  was  in  danger  of  being  troubled  by  the  Castil- 
lous  as  long  as  Alph:  stayd  in  Portugal.  But  what  is  most  appre- 
hended is  that  this  mutiny  was  fomented  by  enemys  to  the  Queen 
&  y""  persons  in  pulilique  manwji:  under  the  P*^'. 

The  French  oMicers  seem  to  bee  in  great  hopes  that  the  Con 
stable  will  dispute  the  discharging  of  y"  Boats,  w*^''  the  M"  d"Hu- 
mieres  '  is  to  force  y'  passage  of,  who  is  getting  together  a  body 
of  7,000  men,  &,  notwithstanding  any  resistance,  will  not  only  force 
y'  passage  of  y'  s''  boats,  but  convej'  through  the  Spanish  dominion 
all  sorts  of  provision  &  munitions  for  the  Pays  Conquis.  They 
will  consist  of  4,000  horse  &  3,000  foot,  who  will  cut  downe  the 
Forest  of  Arscot  &  other  woods  of  y''  P*"  of  Logny  ^  to  make  charcoal, 
to  use  it  in  burning  brick  it  chaulk  for  the  fortifications  there. 

Yesterday  M''  du  ^loulin  went  hence,  it  for  the  ease  of  his  person 
has  left  his  equipage  it  baggage  to  follow  him,  but  cannot  tell  how 
hee  has  disposed  of  the  present  (w''"'  indeed  proves  to  bee  in  the 
future  tense)  the  Court  made  him  for  his  good  service  as  his  Ma''^''' 

'  Mieliael  Korybut  Wisniowieski. 

-  Emmanuel  Theodore  de  la  Tour  d'Auvergne,  first  known  as  the  'Abb6  Duo 
d'Albret,' and  later,  in  KJOi),  as  'Cardinal  de  Bouillon.'  In  1671  lie  was  made 
'  Grand  Aumonier.' 

'  The  Revolutionist  party  in  Portugal  dethroned  Alphonso  VI.  in  KjGS  and  set 
Don  Pedro,  his  brother,  on  the  throne.     Mignet,  iii.  571. 

'  Louis  de  Crevant,  Marquis  d'Huraieres,  marshal  from  IfifiS  to  1()94. 

'  Claude  Lamoral,  Prince  de  Ligne,  Viceroy  of  Sicily  1670- 1674. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  23 

Minister  Extraordinary,  etc".     Hee  will  hee  apt  to  doe  every  body 
here  ill  offices  in  Emrland. 


To  Sir  Jose^ih  Williamson. 

Paris  :  July  10th,  '00. 

Inclosed  goes  what  I  received  yesterday  from  Marseilles.  M'' 
Codgill  ^  coufirmes  to  mee  what  my  last  mentioned,  of  6  raen-of-war 
equipping  att  Toulon,  designed  for  Candia;  that  the  wind  has  been 
favorable  ever  since  ]\Ions'"  Beaufort's  dejjarture,  soe  suddain  news 
may  bee  expected  from  him  &  the  result  of  that  enterprise.  Their 
llende::-Voi($  (it's  sayd)  is  at  Zant,-  where  the  Venetian  Armade 
is  to  joyne  with  them,  as  also  the  Pope's,  &c'''.  At  Toulon  were 
lately  launched  3  stout  ships  of  60  to  7U  guns  each  ;  4  or  5  more 
are  on  the  stocks.  That  on  y'^  28th  past  y*^  ship  '  John  of  Plymouth  ' 
from  Argier  ^  arrived  at  Marseilles,  where  hee  left  that  people  in 
expectation  of  H'  Thomas  Allen's  coming  with  20  sayl  of  ships, 
whose  demands,  they  think,  will  be  soe  high  that  it's  feared  the  issue 
will  bee  a  warre. 

I  will  make  use  of  a  report  instead  of  other  matter  to  fill  up 
this  letter.  The  French  in  all  their  discourse  will  still  flatter 
themselves  with  having  the  greatest  share  in  Poland,  &  that  the 
new-elected  P'^'  ■*  is  accordingly  to  come  &  bee  crowned  att  S' 
Denis,  whei'e  King  Kasimire  is  to  confirme  his  abdication. 

Expect  with  as  much  heat  as  before  the  arrivall  of  a  Bassa  here, 
&  that  the  storming  of  y'^'  fort  S'  Sebastian  is  deferred  till  then. 

To  Sir  Joseplb  M'illiinnsoii. 

Paris  :  July  17th,  '6!1. 

My  L"*  Anib""  wrote  some  time  since  to  my  L''  Arlington  about 
the  having  his  wine  custonie  free,  as  Mons'"  Colbert  has  it  in  Eng- 
land, &  having  had  noe  answer  therein  his  Ex'^'^  desires  that  you 
would  please  to  sollicite  it,  whether  hee  may  presse  for  it  more  than 
hee  has  done  in  this  Court,  &  upon  the  refusall  of  it  here  whether 
it  were  not  reasonable  reciprocally  to  proceed   with   the   French 

'  Consul  at  Marseilles. 

-  Zante,  one  of  the  Ionian  Islands. 

^  Algiers. 

'  Michael  Korybut  Wisniowieski  (Vienovisky).     See  p.  7,  n.  8. 


24  THR    DESPATrnivS    OF 

Ami/  in  this  affaire  by  denying  him  that  priviledge.  Lockart,' 
Oliver's  ^  Amb"",  bad  it  Iiere,  &  all  English  Amb"  before  him.  It 
was  di>nyed  my  L'  Holies,  wee  suppose  upon  the  breaking  out  of 
the  warre.  Wliat  they  alledge  on  this  side  is  that  it  would  bee 
a  president  [precedent]  for  other  Atnb"  of  the  Princes  who  would 
demand  tlie  like,  &  that  in  l-ingl''  y"^^  custome  is  to  give  it  to  all 
forreigue  Ministers,  but  these  argum'"  are  mal  foiuh'e  when  it  was 
ever  given  to  y"  English  Amb"  before  L*  Holles's  time. 

To  Lord  ArUwjlon. 

Paris  :  July  17th,  '69,  S.N. 

1  cannot  omit  by  M'"  Dives  '  to  acquaint  y''  Lpp  with  what  I 
have  this  day  learn'd  from  a  good  hand  :  that  when  the  ilarshall 
d'lluniieres  demanded  whetlier  the  '  Batteaux '  had  been  stopped 
by  the  Constable's  or  a  particular  order  from  the  Councell  of  Spain, 
it  was  answer'd  the  latter,  &  shewed  to  him,  w"^''  hee  sent  by  an 
expresse  to  the  King,  who  has  also  sent  one  to  Madrid  to  know  if 
that  Court  will  owne  &  avow  it.  Wee  hear  by  a  Courrier  arrived 
yesterday  that  Coll.  Waldeck  '  made  a  Salley  out  of  Candia  with  3 
German  Regiments  &  beat  the  Turks  off  of  Fort  S'  Andre  with  a 
great  Carnage,  &  that  j\Ions.  de  Beaufort  was  gotten  to  Zant  (verj- 
near  Candya) ;  tliat  the  spotted  feaver  reigned  violently  among  the 
Venetians,  of  w'^''  many  dyed. 

Drums  are  beating  in  every  street  to  fill  up  the  pretended  or 
reall  vacancyes  of  such  as  dye  at  the  Fort  S"  Sebastian. 

Everybody  hei-e  seems  complainingly  to  despair  of  as  much  as 
having  the  Treaty  of  Commerce  between  England  &  them,  saying 
that  the  Dutch  have  soe  great  an  influence  upon  us  as  to  oppose  it. 
adding  what  great  advantages  (w*"''  Eug.  could  never  hope  for  from 
Spain)  they  would  give  if  the  King  of  Eng'  would  at  least  but 
stand  neuter,  but  much  more  by  a  stricter  &  nearer  friendship. 

By  what  wee  hear  from  Poland,  the  Election  is   disallowed  by 

'  Sir  WiUiam  Lockhart  (1G21-I67f>),  appointed  Governor  of  Dunkirk  in  10.58 
by  Oliver  Cromwell.  After  the  resignation  of  Richard  Cromwell  he  was  continued 
as  Ambassador  to  France,  '  as  a  man  who  could  best  cajole  the  Cardinal,  and  who 
knew  well  the  intrigues  at  Court.'     Clarendon,  iii.  882. 

■^  The  Protector.  '  Afterwards  Sir  Lewis  Dives. 

'  Prince  of  Waldeck,  who  began  life  in  the  service  of  Holland  and  afterwards 
went  over  to  the  Emperor  and  fought  against  the  French  and  the  Turks. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  20 

the  Army  alledgiDg  that  the  Poloniau  P'^''  has  not  d  quoii  to  pay 
the  troops  &  that  the  election  was  made  ag'  the  laws  of  that  King- 
dome  ;  tliat  it  was  most  probalile  the  3  pretenders  would  dispute 
for  the  Crowne  by  a  civill  warre,  which  must  needs  have  a  dismall 
issue,  wherein  the  French  will  have  no  small  share. 

Tu  Sir  Joseph  Williamf:on. 

Paris:  July  '27th,  '69. 

Hearing  of  a  book  called  '  Le  Tiberie  Franfois,'  that  is  lately 
printed  in  Holland,  wherein is  much  concerned,  &  con- 
sequently the  importation  of  them  hither  strictly  prohibited,  hee 
having  sent  one  on  purpose  to  buy  them  all  up  there,  I  have 
written  to  S''  W"  Temple  about  it,  but  for  fear  of  missing  of  it  I 
presume  it  worthy  y'^  curiosity  to  have  it  from  thence,  as  I  hope 
in  a  few  days  to  send  you  the  manuscript  I  menconed  in  print.  It 
is  a  very  curious  peice  &  am  promised  it  by  a  private  fi'iend. 

I  think  I  told  you  in  my  last  that  I  saw  a  letter  from  Madrid 
to  the  Savoye  Amb''  (w'=''  hee  was  pleased  to  send  to  mee)  of  the 
lOtb,  wherein  a  very  particular  account  is  given  of  S''  W™  Godol- 
phin,'  together  with  the  Dutch  minister,  negotiating  in  that  Court 
the  giving  up  of  Burgundy  to  the  French  upon  condition  of  theii" 
M.  Xtian  King's  renouncing  all  pretentions  &  right  to  the  Crowne 
of  Spain  &  surrender  of  Charlesroy,  Ath,  Oudenard,  &  other  places 
adjacent.-  our  letters  from  S''  AY™  giving  us  only  an  oratoricall 
account  of  the  distractions  in  w'''^  hee  left  Portugal],  w*^''  I  suppose 
is  also  transmitted  to  you. 

I  am  now  perusing  all  the  catalogues  of  manuscripts  formerly 
y''  Card"'s  ^Mazarine's  &  now  in  the  King's  Library,  &  what  things 
are  curious  I  marke  downe  &  shall  send  them  to  you,  for  y''  appro- 
bation, that  I  may  have  them  copyed. 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Pai-is  :  August  7th,  '69,  S.N. 
You   have  heard    of    some    ditierence    between    the    Duke    of 
Savoye  &  the  Protestants  of  Geneva  &  of  his  declaring  himselfe  to 

'  English  Ambassador  at  the  Court  of  Spain. 

'  The  towns  kept  by  Louis  under  the  Treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  1668. 


26  Till-;  Div-ji'ATcnES  of 

bee  noe  longer  obliged  to  keep  the  Treaty  between  them.'  For 
your  particular  satisfaction  I  have  inquired  into  the  reason,  w"=''  in 
itselfe  is  a  meer  chanson.  There  is  a  little  Towiie  called  Coringes, 
belonging  to  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  Ixirdering  upon  the  territories  of 
Geneve,  soe  that  one  bouse  stands  i  on  one  &  the  other  lialfe  on 
the  dominions  of  the  other ;  wherein  the  good  woman  hap'ned  to 
fall  sick  unto  death.  &  being  a  U.  Cath  shee  sent  for  a  Prie.st. 
Hee  came:  the  husband,  being  a  Protestant,  flew  upon  him  A;  basted 
him  into  acomplaynt  to  tlie  D.  of  Savoy,  wliereupou  this  declaration 
of  his  is  gi'ounded.  It  verifyes  the  Proverb  on  the  priest  as  well  as 
the  Geneveses,  that  when  they  have  a  mind  to  beat  a  Dcig,  ttc", 
w'''  hatii  caused  them  to  write  to  the  Protestant  Cantons  of 
Switzerland  for  protection.  I  believe  they  have  done  the  like  to 
his  i\Ia'^  f)f  Eng''  too. 

Now  the  cypher  is  before  mee  I  will  torment  you  a  little  more 
by  telling  you  that  the  generall  discourse  of  all  people  here  is  against 
my  L''  Arlington,  as  the  only  person  that  hinders  a  better  under- 
standing between  Eug'  &  France.  It  is  by  M'"  Colbert's  -  mis- 
representation, who  has,  as  I  am  told,  had  great  sums  of  money 
from  hence  to  distribute  amongst  some  Pari'  men  if  he  can  fix  it 
upon  them. 

Inclosed  you  have  what  I  received  this  day  from  Madrid  of 
the  21th  past.^  By  letters  to  others  I  am  informed  y'  the  Coute 
de  Mirande,  Amb''  from  Portugall,  will  returne  about  y'  beginning 
of  7ber,  &  that  an  Abbot  of  I'ortugall,  who  has  been  a  long  time 
at  Home,  is  to  bee  left  llesident.  The  reason  why  the  Crowne  of 
Spayne  sends  only  an  Envoye  into  Eng''  is  becaus  it  will  not  have 
the  occasion  given  of  any  di.sputes  of  precedence  between  the  two 
crownes  of  France  &  Spaine,  something  arising  about  y'^  P'^'^  of 
Tuskanny's  visits  to  y'  Fr.  Amb"".  The  Queen  Regent  has  made 
Le  Coiide  de  Orepesa  '  President  of  the  Councell  for  Italy,  & 
confirmed  to  D"  P.  d'Arragon  ^  to  be  Vicero)'  of  Naples  8  years 
more. 

It  was  sayd  that  D"  Juan  should  have  .sent  to  Madrid  to  demand 

'  The  Treaty  of  St.  Julien,  made  in  1G03  between  Savoy  and  Geneva. 
-  The  inclosuie  is  missing. 

'  Charles  Colbert  de  Croissy,  French  Ambassador  to  England,  brother  of  .Tean- 
Baptiste  Colbert. 

'  D.  Manuel  Joaquin  Alvarez  de  Toledo,  8th  Conde  de  Orepesa.     Died  in  1707. 
'  Don  Pedro  d'Aragon,  son  of  Don  Enrique  d'Aragon,  Duke  of  Cardona. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARKS  27 

the  removall  of  the  Marq.  cl'Ayetone  to  Milan,  the  Card'  de 
Moniada's  being  made  Presid.  of  Castille,'  &  that  the  Councell 
of  Arragon  might  be  removed  to  Sarragosa,  but  all  this  is  sayd  to 
bee  malicious  invention,  the  truth  being  that  y'^  s''  Marq**  d'Ayetone 
is  made  Collonell  of  the  Regiment  w*^''  is  almost  conipleat  &  that 
all  things  are  disposed  to  bee  quiett. 

To  Sir  Joseph   WiUiam.son. 

Paris  :  August  lOtb,  '69,  S.N. 

By  my  last  I  told  you  in  what  a  desperate  condition  Candie 
was,  w'^'^  was  knowne  by  the  King  here  to  bee  quite  otherwise,  but 
dissembled  to  the  end  that  the  news  of  its  relief  might  bee  the 
more  surprising. 

What  you  find  in  the  '  Gazette  a  la  main '  about  Fa:  Nitard  ^ 
is  very  true,  &  the  reason  why  the  Pope  refuses  to  admit  him  in 
the  character  hee  pretends  is  because  a  decree  is  made  by  him  or 
his  predecessors  that  no  Jesuit  can  bee  allowed  to  be  an  Atnb''  at 
Rome. 

j\I''  Werden  is  come  hither,  w'=''  Coll.  Werden  ^  would  bee  glad 
to  hear.  He  goes  hence  in  2  days  for  England  &  S''  Robert 
Southwell  *  may  bee  there  about  Munday  senight. 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris :  Aug.  17,  '69. 
What  is  most  talkt  of  is  of  the  death  of  M''  de  Beaufort,  & 
believe  it  to  bee  true.  You  heard,  S'',  some  posts  since  of  new 
Iniposicions  that  y''  King  is  putting  upon  those  at  Bourdeaux, 
among  the  others  of  50  sous  per  tunn  upon  their  ships.  Inquiring 
into  the  reason,  I  find  it  is  because  that  Tax  upon  forreigne  vessels 
might  not  bee  excepted  against  &  taken  off,  as  is  endeavoured  by 
the  Treaty  of  Commerce  in  hJngland. 

'  See  p.  1,  11.  3. 

-  The  confessor  of  the  Archduchess  Marie  Anne  of  Austria,  who  followed  this 
princess  to  Madrid  after  her  marriage  with  Philip  IV.  In  1666  he  was  appointed 
Councillor  of  State  and  Inquisitor-General. 

'  Colonel  Kohert  Werden. 

'  Clerk  of  the  Privy  Council  and  Secretary  for  Ireland  (1007-1677).  He 
had  been  appointed  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  Portugal,  and  was  on  his  way  back. 
In  1671  he  was  sent  by  Charles  II.  as  Envoy  to  Brussels. 


28  THE    UKSPATCllES    UK 

To  Sir  Joseph   WiUiainso7i. 

I'liris :  Aug.  24th,  '09. 

I!y  .liau  Senilis,  y''  old  :ic(|iKiintriiice,  1  Iiave  sent  you  tlie  copy 
of  the  styles  &  titles  this  King  sends  to  all  tbrreigue  l"-''"  &  States. 

S''  Edw''  Philiniore  dyed  here  two  days  since,  but  for  liis  money 
sake  some  .Jesuits  peisuadcd  him  to  dye  ceremoniously  a  Roman 
Cath'''"'.  The  i\in<if  intends  suddainly  for  Chambor,'  as  well  as  to 
send  more  succors  for  Candia,  according  as  the  next  advise  thence 
shall  give  him  occasion.  Upon  this  ^Mahometan  Amba-ssad" 
arrival!  it  will  bee  necessary  to  consider  how  the  ministers  of  other 
Princes  must  beliave  themselves  as  to  Precedency,  there  having, 
I  think,  as  yet  been  iioe  president  of  that  kind.  Mons''  Richard  - 
charged  mee  to  tell  you  hee  is  much  y''  humble  servant  &  would 
bee  more  if  you  could  (w"^''  I  think  impossible)  help  him  to  a  debt 
of  le  '  Chev''  du  ilerces.'  ^ 

To  Lord  Arlinriton. 

Paris  :  August  28tb,  '60.  S.N. 

The  Turkish  Ambassadour  is  on  his  way  hither,  his  ila'-^  of 
France  having  sent  orders  to  Lyonne  to  defray  his  charges  hither. 

I  cannot  yet  informe mjselfe  how-  tlie  Mini.sters of  Xtian Princes 
behaved  themselves  towards  that  Amb''  the  G''  S''  sent  to  Vienna 
immediately  after  the  late  warre.  Here  are  some  reports,  but 
much  after  the  French  inclination,  as  if  the  Duke  de  Navailles 
has  lately  had  some  dispute  with  the  Marq"  S'  Andre  ]\IonbruTi  ^ 
upon  the  non-performance  of  what  was  agreed  upon,  vi/.',  the 
sending  2,000  W-netians  at  y''  late  salley,  &  that  the  former  has 
rendered  himselfe  master  of  the  Towne.  It's  very  certayne  that 
place  is  become  dismall,  not  one  house  being  left  standing,  the 
enemy  pouring  such  shotts  that  the  people  are  forced  to  live 
underground  in  cellars,  &  that  the  G''  S''  will  run  the  risque  of 
loosing  his  Empire  rather  than  quit  the  seige  after  such  expence  & 
losse  of  men.     I  have  been  this  day  to  see  the  King's  Bililiolheque 

'  Chambord. 

=  Probably  .Tobn  Richards,  one  of  Sir  Joseph  Williamson's  clerks. 

'  Sir  Anthony  des  Marces,  agent  of  the  English  King.     Died  in  1G08-0. 

'  Alexandre  de  Puy  Montbrun.    Died  in  1G73. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  29 

where  are  many  curious  peices.     Upon  y'  Lpp's  orders  I  can  have 
copyes  of  any  of  them . 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris  :  Aug.  31'\  '(jg,  S.N. 

I  humbly  thank  you  for  yours  of  the  16"',  as  well  as  acquaint 
you  that  lions''  il'Albret  ^  is  to  be  sworne  by  the  Pope's  Nuncio  on 
Sunday  next,  &  then  the  Card'  Cap  to  be  presented  him  by  the 
King. 

Two  days  since  my  L''  Ambassadour  met  the  Prince  of  Tuscany 
in  JMons'Tambonean's- garden,  where  they  made  many  compliments 
&  turnes.  His  H*^''  leaves  this  place  when  the  King  begins  his 
journey  for  Chambonr.  At  his  retnrne  thence  hee  goes  awhile  to 
Vincenues,  to  give  the  Ottoman  Amb''  audience,  who,  by  that  time, 
may  see  some  effect  of  Marshal  de  Belfond's  ^  new  levies,  part  whereof 
are  designed  to  bee  thus  disposed  :  500  Reformed  Officers  to  bear 
patisants  &  pistolls  in  their  gii'dles  &  to  have  20  soues  a  day,  each 
of  w''''  to  bee  attended  by  2  servants,  well  chosen  men  with 
musquetts,  pistolls,  &  7'*  per  diem,  w'=''  make  up  1,500  men  to  bee 
dedicated  to  the  Pope  *  &  bear  his  name,  &  the  other  regiment  the 
name  of  his  family,  viz'  Rospigliosi.  Some  will  say  that  this 
supply  is  intended  only  to  relieve  the  place  during  the  winter,  & 
that  at  spring,  as  affaires  may  then  stand,  his  M.  Xtian  Ma'-*'  intends 
to  send  a  good  army  to  raise  the  seige.  This  is  hardly  to  bee 
imagined  when  much  difficulty  is  found  in  the  raising  the  other 
few.  People  being  possesst  with  the  hopes  of  a  warre  with  Spain 
are  unwilling  to  expose  their  persons  &  interests  at  home,  where 
they  find  a  warre  soe  douce  &  not  ghastly,  as  the  other  appears  to 
them  since  the  late  defeat.  The  wise  men  here  say  positively 
there  is  not  above  2,000  French  souldiers  left  entire  in  Candy ; 
that  the  resolution  &  manner  of  this  salley  was  taken  at  a  Councell 
of  warre,  where  was  the  P*^"  of  Conde  &  M"  Turenne  ■'  before  their 

See  p.  22,  n.  2. 
2  Jean  Tambonneau,  President  of  tlie  '  Chambre  des  Comptes.' 
'  Bernardin  Gigault  de  Bellefonds,  made  marshal  in  1CG8. 
'  Pope  Clement  IX.,  Girolamo  Rospigliosi. 

'  Henri  de  la  Tour  d'Auvergne,  Vicomte  de  Tmenne  (1011-1G75).  Made 
Marshal-General  in  1G60. 


30  TIIK    DESPATCHES    OF 

goiug  hence;  that  it  should  be  without  any  concert  with  the 
Venetian  comniaiitlers,  that  in  case  they  liad  succeeded  (of  w*^''  they 
made  noe  doubt)  all  the  glorie  might  bee  to  the  French. 

Wee  can  yet  get  noe  letter  from  Holland.  It  is  2  mouths  since 
we  had  any  thence.  Mons""  de  Louvoy  having  ordered  that,  instead 
of  one,  two  posts  should  passe  to  cS:  from  thence  weekly,  w""''  those 
of  Amsterdam  being  unwilling  to  consent,  upon  some  pretended 
disadvantage  in  their  trade  therby,  called  an  assembly  of  all  their 
French  merchants,  where  it  was  declared  by  them  unitedly  that 
tlu'ir  trade  with  1'^ ranee  was  soe  inconsiderable  that  they  could 
dispence  with  writing  any  L'"'  at  all,  w''''  is  the  reason  that  at 
present  no  courriers  goe  but  an  expresse  weekly  from  the  Court  to 
Mons''  Pomponne.' 

It's  sayd  at  length  that  [the]  Army,  despairing  of  taking  the  Fort 
by  force  of  amies,  is  resolved  at  last  to  starve  it  by  cutting  off  all 
vivres,  soe  that  the  besieged  will  be  forced  to  some  resolute  salley. 
Two  days  since  a  mine  was  sprung  by  those  within. 

Mons''  d'Estree  -  is  come  hither  to  obtayne  the  Vice  Ad'*'  of 
France,  w'^''  hee  could  never  while  M''  de  Beaufort  lived,  because 
of  the  enjoying  the  profit  to  himselfe.  It  is  thought  hee  will 
succeed  in  it.  Hee  has  given  the  king  a  good  account  of  his  affairs 
in  the  ludys,  whence  hee  is  newh^  returned  with  all  his  ships. 

To  Sir  Joi^eplL   WUlimnson. 

Paris  :  Sep.  4th,  'GO. 

^ly  letters  this  day  from  Spain — I  mean  ]\Iadrid — of  the  2P' 
past  say  thus :  Here  are  hot  rumours  of  a  war  with  Portugal, 
where  they  refuse  to  restore  the  gentlemen's  estates  of  y'  countrey 
w°''  sided  with  Spain  in  the  last  war,  &  that  w*  gives  this 
rumor  credit  among  the  wisest  is  the  Conde  de  Miranda's  taking 
leave  2  days  since  of  her  Ma'-''',  part  of  his  baggage  being  already 
on  the  way  to  Lisbon.  The  Conde  de  ^Molina '  is  very  much 
caressed  in  this  Court,  Ac",  &  our  Envoyi'  has  not  vet  had  his 
Aud«. 


'  Simon  Ainauld,  Marquis  de  Pomponne,  Ambassador  at  the  Hapiuc.    Succeeded 
Lionne  as  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  in  1671. 

-  Jean  d'Estrte.     Made  vice-admiral  in  1G70  and  marshal  in  1681. 
'  Spanish  Ambassador  at  the  Court  of  France. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  31 

Yesterda}'  my  L*  Amb''  was  at  S'  Germains  to  bring  my  L'' 
Buckhurst '  &  M''  Saville  '^  to  their  And"^""  of  Conge. 

The  Dauphin  is  reasonable  well  &  and  all  the  world  is  in  hopes 
to  bee  employed  with  lesse  danger  than  at  Candia,  though  tis 
certa\Tie  if  Spain  would  take  no  advantage  by  it  this  King  will 
use  extremity  to  regain  the  honour  lost  at  ye  place  by  sending 
great  forces  at  spring  thither. 

Now  the  camp  is  broken  up  I  presume  it  will  appear  to  be  no 
bugbear  if  I  send  the  draught  of  the  fort,  w"^''  I  took  two  months 
since. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Sept.  14th,  '69. 
In  the  Rue  S'  Antoine  is  a  throne  of  massy  silver  preparing 
for  the  reception  of  the  Turquish  Envoi/i',  w*^^  will  be  ver\^  magnifi- 
cent, as  well  as  y''  present  intended  for  y'-  V"  of  Tuscany. 
The  news  of  Candy  is  verj'  uncertayne. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Sep.  21",  'G9. 

I  must  begin  this  with  a  complaint  that'M''  Codgill  at  Mar- 
seilles never  gives  us  any  advise  of  occurences  there,  some  very 
considerable  happning  weekly  worth  our  information.  Wee  never 
had  but  one  letter  from  him,  &  that  was  5  months  since.  My  L'' 
Amb""  takes  notice  of  it,  becaus  other  people  shew  him  extracts  of 
letters  from  thence,  &c*. 

It  is  most  certayne  that,  according  to  his  instructions  &  orders, 
in  case  in  such  time  hee  could  not  relieve  y''  place,  the  Duke  of 
Navailles  on  the  2P'  past  began  &  has  since  embarqued  the  little 
remnant  of  the  French  w''''  the  Turks  &  sicknesse  have  spared, 
esteemed  by  him  to  bee  about  ^  of  what  bee  brought  thither ; 
that  this  coming  away  of  the  French  has  caused  some  disorder  on 
y""  place,  w"^''  is  believed  by  every bodj-  to  bee  since  rendred  ufj  upon 
capitulations. 

The  Marshal  de  Belfonds  has  sent  away  all  his  hoi'ses  &  bag- 
gage ;  y  Pope  gives  him  1,200  men  &  y"^  title  of  his  H^'*^'  Generall, 

'  Charles,  Lord  Buckhurst,  son  of  Eichard  Sackville,  Earl  of  Dorset. 
•  Henry  Savile,  youngest  son  of  Sir  William  Savile  and  Lady  Anne  Coventry 
(1642-1687).    He  acted  as  Ambassador  at  the  Court  of  Florence  in  1670. 


;52  THE    DICSPATCHES   OK 

&  y*  Hep.  of  Venice  gives  him  ],.jOO  to  be  joyned  in  \>nd\  with  the 
1,500  souldiers  \-  voiiDitetTs  hee  is  raising  here;  notwitiistanding 
all  w''''  nobody  speaks  positive  of  his  going,  the  French  Iiere 
entertayning  as  great  a  dread  &  esteem  of  y''  Turquisli  valour  that 
they  are  with  much  difficulty  induced  to  goe.'  llis  quarrell 
with  M''  de  Louvoy  has  been  since  more  hott.  'i'he  .Mai-q"  S' 
Andre  has  written  for  leave  to  come  thence,  there  having  been 
great  misunderstandings  amongst  y'^  French  &  Venetian  Generalls, 
it  both  proceeded  in  all  things  without  imparting  or  asking  his 
advise. 

Tlie  King  intends  to  receive  the  Turkish  Envoyv  at  Vincennes 
when  he  comes  from  ( "hambort,  where  he  is  now  diverting  iiimselfe 
with  much  magnificence. 

The  people  have  such  a  generall  love  for  the  D.  of  Beaufort 
that  they  lay  great  wagers  of  his  being  alive,  &  some  say  that 
the  King  has  letters  of  it. 

After  you  have  read  the  inclosed^  &  discypher'd  the  King  for 
the  Lys,  Mad"''  la  Valiere^  y''  Rose,  &  Mad"''  de  Montespan  ■*  y'' 
Tubereuse,  be  pleased  to  put  it  into  my  Lady  Arlington's  *  liands. 

All  our  family  is  in  deep  mourning.'^  That  of  y''  Queen 
brother's  expects  ray  L''  of  S'  Allian's  returne  hither  or  Orders 
before  they  can  be  soe.  S''  Tho:  Bond  '  pretends  the  late  Queen 
owed  him  about  10™  pound,  w'^''  he  owes  to  others. 


Tu  Sir  Joiteph    Willunnttdit. 

Paris :  Sep.  24,  'G9. 

Mr.  Nott"  came  here  on  Sunday  last  betimes  in  the  morning, 
&  on  Monday  my  Tv'  Ambassador  had  a  letter  from  Rouen  under- 
written by  one  M''  Cholwich  &  W  Burish,  l*;nglish  Factors  there, 
complayuing  that  on  the  I'Jth  cunant  an  order  came  thither  from 
Mons""  Colbert  to  the  Director  Gen"  of  the  customes  in  Normandy 

'  See  letter  dated  October  30,  1GG9.  ■  The  enclosure  is  missing. 

'  Louis  XIV.'s  mistress.     Became  a  Carmelite  nun  in  1674. 

'  Also  mistress  of  the  King. 

"  Isabella,  daughter  of  Henri  de  Nassau. 

"  On  account  of  the  death  of  the  Queen  Mother,  Henrietta  Maria  of  Bourbon, 

wife  of  Charles  I.,  and  daughter  of  Henry  IV.  of  France. 

'  Controller  of  the  Household  of  the  Queen  Mother. 

"  Robin  Nott,  servant  to  Lord  Montagu. 


AX   ENGLISH    AGENT   IN   PARIS  38 

not  to  suffer  any  drapery  to  be  received  &  exposed  to  sale  in  any 
place  there,  but  by  the  customers  to  bee  fir.-^t  sealed  &  sent 
hither  to  Paris  to  y'-  custome  house,  that  the  customes  may  be 
payd  here  &  the  merchant  obliged  to  send  his  cloth  to  the  Hall, 
there  to  be  sold  &  not  elsewhere.  Upon  inquiry  into  the  matter  I 
find  M""  Colbert  has  a  mind  by  this  means  finally  to  cutt  off  all 
vent  of  forreigne  drapery,  for  he  has  prohibited  all  the  drapers  here 
to  buy  any  but  the  manufacture  of  France  under  pain  of  confisca- 
tion. 

My  L"*  Amb''  sent  an  answer  to  Eouen  that  they  should  take 
no  notice  of  any  such  innovating  order,  but  proffer  to  pay  the 
customes  there  for  the  cloth  newly  come  to  their  hands,  &  upon 
the  customer's  refusall  &  insisting  to  seal  &  send  it  hither,  to  make 
their  complaint  to  his  Ex'^'^,  that  he  may  doe  y'^'  like  here  with 
more  foundacion. 

You  cannot  imagine,  S'',  how  ]M''  Colbert  does  turns  &  wind  in 
this  matter  of  Trade,  &  makes  no  difficulty  to  doe  anything,  tho' 
manifestly  ag'  all  Treatys,  to  break  the  neck  of  our  English  sale 
of  drapery  here,  the  occasion  for  cloth  being  extraordinary  in  this 
time  of  mourning.  It  is  sayd  that  the  D.  of  Navailles  is  i-eturned 
again  with  the  French  to  Candy.  It's  certain  the  King  has  ordred 
8  companies  of  y"  Regiment  du  Plessis  Praslin,'  &  8  more  of  y" 
Eegiment  de  Villeroy  Lionnois,-  and  300  of  his  Guards  to  be 
drawne  out  of  all  the  companies  to  be  commanded  by  3  captains  of 
3*''  Regiment,  the  whole  to  be  joyned  with  y"*  1,500  2-aised  by  the 
Marshalle  de  Belfonds ;  the  Eende-vous  is  at  Thoulon  &  will 
make  3,500  men. 

My  letters  from  Spain  say  that  D°  -Juan  has  sent  for  all  his 
family  to  Consegi-a '  &  resolves  to  live  quiet  at  Zaragosa  ;  that 
Fa:  Xitard  is  likely  to  misse  of  y'^  Cap  Card',  y"  Councell  opposing 
the  Queen's  inclination,  &  naming  the  Doyen  of  Tolede  *  of  the 
family  of  the  Porto  Carrero,  &  that  D"  Juan  de  Castro,  the  great 
Hector  of  Portugall,  is  imprisoned.  Our  Envoye  has  not  yet  had 
his  Aud'^''  there. 

'  Cesar  .\uguste  Francois  de  Choiseul,  Chevalier  du  Plessis-Praslin.  Made 
marshal  in  1645. 

^  Nicolas  de  Neuville,  Due  de  Villeroi  (1044-1730),  colonel  of  the  regiment 
of  infantry  of  Lyonnais. 

'  Consuegra. 

'  Don  Luis  Manuel  Fernandez  de  PortocaiTero. 
VOL.  v.  D 


ol  TnE  nf:srATrnr.s  or 

At  last  Moiis"'  du  Louvoy  has  couiiesceudeJ,  after  iiuich  liulViug, 
tliat  tlie  Holland  post  shall  goe  only  once  a  week,  as  foi'merly. 
The  Dauphin  is  not  well. 

Ti)  Sir  Joseph    Williamson. 

Paris  :  7ber  -isth,  'G'J. 

1  am  told  that  the  succors  designed  tor  Cand\-  carry  a  new 
invencion  with  them  to  save  the  number  of"  pikenien,  that  a  Regi- 
ment shall  consist  of  none  but  musqueteers,  &  to  save  them  from 
the  horse  a  great  number  of  engines  of  wood,  stuck  round  with 
sharp  spikes,  light  enough  to  bee  supported  by  two  men,  are 
making,  to  surround  a  Regiment  on  all  sides. 

By  the  inclosed  you  will  see  what  was  complayned  of  in  our 
last  is  vanished  into  a  mistake.'  Notwithstanding  what  you  hear 
of  the  Duke  of  .Savoy's  dangerous  indisposicion  a  courrier  came 
yesterday  to  y"  Amb''  of  Savoy,  giving  him  hopes  of  his  recovery. 
The  King  is  not  at  all  satisfyed  with  the  reports  of  y''  D.  of 
Beaufort's  being  prisoner,  for  nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  he 
sent  y''  D.  of  Beaufort  only  to  bee  exposed  to  danger,  but  would 
be  very  unwilling  to  ransome  him. 

My  L''  Amb''  desires  you  will  please  by  the  first  occasion  that 
offers  to  send  him  a  copy  of  the  new  Treaty  of  Commerce  with 
France.^ 

To  Sir  Josei'h    Williamson. 

Pmis  :  Hl)cr  1'\  IGGO,  S.N. 

People  speak  variously  about  ransoming  the  Duke  of  Beaufort. 
It's  most  certain,  if  the  King  would  connive,  the  Parisians  would 
doe  it,  tho'  it  cost  them  \  of  their  estates,  so  much  doe  they  dote  on 
him.  However  all  orders  of  the  Adm'-*'  run  in  his  name  as  if  he 
were  here.  The  King  deferrs  declaring  his  mind  till  he  hears  what 
the  \'enetians  will  doe  in  it.  I  am  told  by  a  person  of  credit  that 
y'  King  has  gotten  a  new  mistresse  at  Chambort.  She  is  a  Fleming 
&  most  beautifull. 

Marshall  Belfonds  is  making  all  hast  to  Thoulon,  where  they 
dayly  expect  the  arrival!  of  Mons'"  de  Mavailles.  It's  a  riddle  to 
everybody  to  send  men  thither  at  lunv  expence  i*c  call  away  those 

'  The  customs  on  cloth. 

■  This  treaty  was  not  yet  made ;  it  was  merely  projoctecl. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    TARIS  35 

already  there.  By  M''  Mead,  who  goes  this  week  for  England,  1 
shall  send  over  a  manuscript  I  am  transcribing,  w'^'',  by  insinuating 
flatteries,  invites  y"^  Low  Countreys  to  throw  off  the  Spannish  yoke 
it  put  themselves  under  y'  protection  of  France,  with  many  reasons 
wliy  the  Hollander[s]  should  be  rather  glad  of  having  France  their 
neighbours,  &C'''.     The  Dauphin  is  not  well. 

The  Duke  of  Sav^oy's  distember  is  become  a  tertian  ague. 
Capt.  du  Tel  is  gone,  &  his  name  is  in  every  forreigne  Gazette,  w* 
does  not  a  little  please  him.  I  have  a  letter  from  Alicante  that 
sayes  S''  Thomas  Allen  came  before  Algiers  on  the  last  of  August, 
after  having  refreshed  &  taken  in  provisions  at  Alicante  ;  that  he 
had  sent  out  S''  Ed.  Sprag '  with  8  frigatts  to  cruse  &  endeavor  to 
meet  with  the  10  Algerines  on  their  returne  from  Candy,  where 
they  have  been  to  assist  y"  G'^  Seign'' ;  that  the  Algerines  are 
willing  to  give  S''  Thomas  all  imaginable  satisfaction  ;  that  my  L'^ 
Howard  -  is  gone  for  Tanger '  towards  Salley  [Sallee]  with  great  mag- 
nificence, &  that  Taffiletta  ■*  was  preparing  for  y'=  siege  of  Algiers. 

Besides  what  in  my  letter  in  cypher  is  true  I  can  also  add  that 
y"  King  is  also  smitten  with  Madam  de  Soubise,^  daughter  to 
Madame  de  Rouen.''  For  the  former  you  may  please  to  let  stand,  & 
the  other  she  is  to  be  joyned  with  M.  Mountespan  &  la  Valiere  in  a 
ople  League.  It's  sayd  this  busines  has  been  long  in  agitation  & 
that  all  p"'^'  concurre,  &  that  IM''  de  Peguelin  was  made  Grand 
IMaster  of  Artill''^  for  the  propogating  of  the  negotiation,^  w"-''' 
cannot  but  bee  a  great  blow  to  Flanders. 


To  Sir  Joseph   WilUnmson. 

raris  :  Octot)  oth,  '69. 
You  will  be  pleased  to  excuse  the  hurry  of  a  remove  from  Hue 
de  Richilieu  into  the  faubourg  S'  Germains. 

'  Sir  Edward  Spragg,  English  admiral. 

-  Henry  Lord  Howard,  of  Castle  Kising,  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Norfolk.  He 
was  acting  as  Ambassador  to  Morocco. 

'  Tangiers.  '  Muley  Archid,  king  of  Tafilet  or  Taffaletta. 

'  Anne  de  Eohan  Chabot,  wife  of  Francois  de  Rohan,  Marquis  de  Soubise. 

"  Marguerite,  Ducbesse  de  Eohan,  wife  of  Henry  Chabot,  Due  de  Eohan. 

'  Antoine  Nompar  de  Caumont,  Marquis  de  Puy-Guilhem,  Comte  de  Lauzun 
(1033-1723).  Perwieh's  information  was  evidently  incorrect,  as  Lauzun  was  not 
made  Grand  Master  of  Artillery. 

D  2 


•iC^  THK    DESPATCHES   OF 

If  the  King  resolvps  to  stay  at  S'  Germains  all  the  winter  it 
will  liee  for  his  jjarticnlar  pleasure,  everything  being  more  <''///n/io(/e 
there  than  in  the  Louvre,  in  the  building  w'^''  vast  numbers  of  men 
are  ilayly  at  worke.  The  Mareschal  de  Belfonds  is  indisposed  & 
3oe  are  most  of  those  drawne  out  to  goe  to  Candy. 

M''  Stuart,  a  comm[anding]  officer  in  JaI  Douglas's  regimoiit,  was 
3  days  since  run  almost  thmugh  the  body  by  a  Suisse  with  a  lialibard, 
of  w'''  it's  thought  hee'l  dye.  Y'  King  on  Tuesday  last  after  a  great 
]?all  would  have  forced  a  maide  of  honnour  to  the  Queen,  but  she, 
whether  out  of  policy  or  virtuous  inclinations,  op])osed,  &  tore  y° 
King's  band.  th;it  cost  jiim  200  crownes. 

Ivither  Nitard  is  in  no  small  disgrace  at  ]\ome.  I  am  told  by 
the  Dutch  ^linister  here  that  Holland  takes  it  soe  ill  that  y'  French 
make  such  vast  impositions  upon  all  their  comodities  that  they 
will  bre  forced  to  break  off  all  commerce  with  France. 


To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris :  8ber  IC,  'G9. 

I  have  a  pleasant  passage  in  one  of  my  letters  from  Madrid, 
that  the  Marquesa  of  Leganez,  an  old  virago  of  that  Coui't,  having 
had  some  of  her  tennants  robb'd  of  their  grapes  it  cowcumbers  by 
the  new  regiment,  made  her  complaynt  to  the  Alarq'  of  .\ytona, 
who,  denying  redresse,  was  really  challenged  to  the  field  by  the 
good  old  lady,  which  the  iMan]''  refusing  to  answer  it  is  believed 
shee  will  do  him  a  mischief,  &  to  that  purpose  never  goes  with- 
out pistols  &  Poniards. 

The  Queen  Regent,  hearing  that  the  King  of  J'oland  was 
inclined  to  receive  the  order  of  the  Golden  fleece,  has  consented  to 
it,  &  ordred  the  Comte  d'Arax,'  one  of  that  order,  to  carry  it  to 
the  s''  king. 

The  Card'  de  Hesse  writes  from  Rome  to  the  Empror  that  he  is 
in  great  hopes  at  length  of  getting  a  Cardinalat  at  his  I.  ]\Ia'"'^ 
nomination.  At  Vienne  a  courrier  is  come  from  the  Baron  de 
Villa  Nuovo,  the  Emp'"'*  liesident  at  the  Port,  who  advises  that  the 
G"*  S'"  had  ordred  great  rejoycings  for  the  Vi/.ier's  good  succes  ag* 
Candy,  &  that  de  Beaufort's  head  was  shewne  publicly  at  Larissa.- 

'  Ferdinand  Bonnventure,  Comte  d'Harrach-Bnick  (1G37  170(;). 
-'  The  Venetians  had  been  severely  defeated  at  Candia,  owing  to  tlie  Duke  of 
Navailles  withdrawinR  his  troops.     See  letter  October  30,  IGliU. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  37 

From  Poland  is  written  that  the  marriage  of  that  King  into  the 
H.  of  Austria  will  bee  disliked  by  the  Senators.^  lV:  that  they  talke 
of  a  match  rather  with  a  Princesse  of  Xewburg,  a  Mnscovian 
I'rincesse,  &  the  P'^"*<'  Palatine,^  niece  to  the  late  Queene  &  now  in 
France.  The  letters  thence  left  them  in  great  preparations  for  the 
King's  Coronation,  w'^''  was  to  be  the  next  day. 

Be  pleased  to  expostulate  with  Mons''  Kichards  about  the 
breaking  open  our  letters,  in  wh"^''  they  are  very  punctuall  here,  for 
yesterday  I  received  a  pacquet  from  Spain  w"^''  has  been  in  their 
hands  8  days,  &  they  have  taken  out  of  it  letters  from  Madrid  & 
Lisbon  to  my  L''  Arlington  &  M"  Scrye  Trevor ;  ^  it  may  bee  they 
will  be  soe  good-natured  to  send  them  by  this  post. 

The  King  has  made  an  order  this  week  that  no  forreigne  minister 
shall  send  any  expresse  without  his  leave,  &  I  think  it  reaches  to 
the  receiving  any. 

To  Lord  Arlingfoii. 

Paris  :  8b  19>N  '69,  S.N. 

Herewith  I  send  you  the  Ordonnance  I  mentioned  in  my  last 
about  the  Courriers  ;  the  reason  you  will  hear  to  have  been  grounded 
upon  a  Courrier  having  passed  from  Spain  to  the  Resident  here  & 
hence  to  Flanders  without  being  knowne  at  Court. 

And  if  you  doe  not  expostulate  &  threaten  the  like  usage  in 
England,  all  our  letters  will  bee  continually  stopt  &  broken.  For 
they  doe  laugh  here  to  see  how  they  baffle  every  body  in  this  & 
other  kinds  without  any  resentment. 

Here  is  a  cruell  rumor  as  if  the  G''  Vizier,  after  y"^  amusement 
of  the  Capitulation,  had  surprised  the  Venetians  unprovided  &  putt 
them  all  to  the  sword,  but  this  is  too  dismall  not  to  expect 
confirmation. 

Begin  to  vaunt  here  that  the  Treaty  of  Commerce  lately  con- 
cluded at  London  will  easily  detasch  England  from  Holland  Vou 
will  please  to  send  the  copy  of  it  by  the  first  favorable  occasion. 

'  Michael  Wisniowieski  married  the  Archduchess  Eleanora  of  Austria.  The 
marriage  was  arranged  by  the  Emperor  Leopold,  much  to  the  annoyance  of  the 
Poles,  by  whom  the  Austrians  were  greatly  disliked. 

-  Charlotte  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Charles  Lewis,  Elector  Palatine,  and  grand, 
daughter  of  Elizabeth,  Queen  of  Bohemia,  therefore  gi-eat-niece  (by  marriage)  to 
Queen  Henrietta  Maria.  She  became  the  second  wife  of  Philip,  Due  d'Orleans, 
brother  of  Louis  XIV.,  in  1671. 

'  Lord  Arlington's  colleague  as  Secretary  of  State. 


38  TIJE    DESrATCIlES   OF 

The  King  comes  to  Versailles  this  night  to  passe  his  Media 
Nox,  where  the  Dauphin  is  to  treat  him  and  to  make  much 
of  him. 

There  will  be  some  bustle  in  Flanders  if  the  Marsliall 
d'Huinidres  doe  convoy  the  800  chareites  of  ch(<i-lion  with  such  a 
mighty  force  as  hee  pretends,  the  Span''*  gathering  as  great  to 
oppose  their  passage. 


To  Sh-  Jotteph  Williamson. 

8ber  30,  'G9. 

The  French  begin  to  brag  that  the  Treaty  of  Commerce  now  on 
foot  in  England  will  contribute  much  to  y"  discomposing  of  the 
League,  &  would  persuade  Holland  to  bee  dissatisfyed  at  a  Treaty 
that  only  settles  the  disorders  &  innovations  our  Trade  suflered 
under.  Tho'  it  is  pretended  that  the  C  friggatts  equipping  at 
Itochelle  be  desyned  ag'  Algier,  the  world  is  not  ignorant  when  it 
says  they  are  to  goe  to  the  Indies  ujion  some  foundation  layd  the 
last  year  by  the  0.  d'Estree. 

I  wonder  this  Court  should  think  the  pdit  hustle  at  Bezan^un 
worth  a  Councell,  since  there  was  no  such  thing  as  a  revolt,  but  the 
terme  of  a  j'ear  being  expired  that  the  burgers  obliged  them- 
selves to  quarter  those  of  y''  garrison,  in  w"^''  time  it  was  supposed  the 
Cittodell  might  have  been  finished,  they  refused  them  their  lodging, 
whereupon  the  garrison  went  into  y°  cittadell.  As  soon  as  the 
C.  d'Aremberg  '  was  alarmed  withy^  noise  of  a  huburb,  [he]  comes 
with  a  great  body  of  men  &  bloody  threats ;  y*"  burgers,  timorous  for 
a  while,  opposed  his  entrance,  at  w*^''  all  things  were  quietted,  it 
having  been  very  usuall  for  Princes  to  sacrifice  the  dearest  subject 
only  to  cover  their  owne  errors,  like  patient  victims. 

The  King  has  sent  a  letter  by  one  of  his  footmen  to  the  Due 
de  Xavailles,  forbidding  him  to  come  to  t'ourt  but  retire  till 
further  orders  to  his  countrey  estate,  because  he  had  promised  the 
Pope's  Nuncio  &  Venetian  Amb''  that  his  forces  should  remain  at 
Candy  the  whole  winter,  &  by  reason  of  their  coming  away  the 
place  IS  lost. 

'  Philipiie  l''ianvois  de  Ligiie,  son  of  I'hilippe  Cliarles  de  Ligne.  He  succeeded 
the  Marquis  d'Yenue  as  governor  of  Franche-Comtc  after  the  treaty  of  Aix-la- 
Cliapelle.    Besan^on  was  generally  chosen  as  the  residence  of  the  governor. 


AX   ENGLISH    AOE.XT    IX    PARIS  39 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  November  2'',  S.N.  '69. 

From  Madrid  it's  sayd  that  Arespacochago.  a  Sec'^  of  State,  is 
dead  lately  &  that  D"  Blasco  de  Loyala  [Loyola]  '  is  desperately  sick 

Besides  the  orders  sent  to  the  Dnke  de  Navailles  to  retire 
himselte,  hee  is  enjoyned  by  his  I\Ia'-^'  to  make  a  Journall  of  all  his 
actions  during  his  late  charge,  &  give  in  writing  his  reasons  for 
coming  away  with  the  troops  without  order. - 

Mods''  Lainet,'  great  favorite  to  the  P''  of  Conde,  is  banished 
into  Brittanny  for  saying  publickly  that  the  general!  had  expresse 
commands  to  bring  the  troops  oft'.  All  this  proceeding  is  only  to 
blind  the  world,  w'-'''  is  too  clear-sighted  not  to  observe  this  Bijou. 

The  Pope  ■*  is  most  angry  with  France,  &  the  Venetians  lay 
publick  aspersions  on  the  French,  terming  their  retreat  a  running 
away.  To  salve  all.  a  processe  is  framing  ag^  Navailles,  &  it  will 
(as  they  say)  bee  prosecuted  to  the  utmost.  But  there  is  no 
doubt  to  bee  made  but  that  the  priest  &  the  victime  understand 
one  another  in  the  necessity  of  such  a  proceeding. 

Some  days  since  in  the  iung"s  bed  chamber  a  discourse  was 
begun  about  ambassadors  ;  a  great  man  pray&ed  ilyn  Heer  Van 
Benning  for  his  goode  successe  in  his  negotiation,  w'=''  the  Mareschal 
de  Grammond ''  somewhat  severely  attributed  to  the  favorable 
conjunctui'e  &  not  his  manage.  I  will  not  acquaint  y'  Lpp  with 
what  they  sayd  of  my  L''  Amb'',  because  it  may  bee  imputed  to  a 
vanity  in  niee  as  related  to  him.  I  will  only  say  y"  discourse  was 
very  much  to  his  advantage.  Of  the  Venetian  Amb''  they  made 
a  conceited  ignorant  &  a  mathematician,  without  policy  of  the 
Savoj'ard  that  is  here. 

Are  in  hopes  here  that  the  Elector  of  Brandenburgh  •"'  may 
espouse  the  interest  of  France  &  bee  of  the  League  endeavoured 

'  Principal  Secretary  of  State. 

'-  It  was  owing  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  French  troops  tliat  the  Venetians  were 
defeated  at  Candia. 

"  Pierre  Lenet,  the  principal  agent  of  Conde  during  the  Fronde.  (For  history 
of  Lenet  see  Mivwires  de  M.  Lenet,  Conseiller  d'Etat.) 

'  Clement  IX.,  whose  great  desire  it  was  to  prevent  the  Turks  from  taliiug  the 
island  of  Candia.     He  died  in  1669. 

^  Antoine  de  Grammont,  created  marshal  of  France  in  1641. 

'■  Frederick  'William,  Elector  of  Brandenburg. 


40  TIIK    DKM'ATfllEy    OK 

to  bee  framed  between  the  Duke  of  Baviere,'  the  E.  of  Cologne,'' 
&  Bpp.  of  Munster.'  The  C.  of  Fursteinberg  '  is  the  iiuiii  that 
works  towards  it. 

The  Princesse  of  Portugall''  is  very  much  afflicted  upon  the 
birth  of  a  bastard  son  to  the  Prince  by  an  ordinary  Quean. 

The  Pope  refuses  to  send  the  Bulls  for  the  Bishops  in  Portugall 
open,  as  is  usuall  to  all  kings,  w"^''  hinders  the  establishment  of 
those  creatures  in  theii-  functions. 

1  cannot  easily  believe  what  is  sayd,  that  the  Uountesso  ol 
.Schomberg '' dcferres  her  conversion  till  her  coming  to  iJsbon, 
where  the  Count '  may  also  joyne  in  their  adjurations,  unlesse 
some  great  preferment  bee  the  loadstone. 

The  Emperor  has  reason  to  look  for  some  invasions  in  Hungary 
next  summer,  since  the  world  does  now  whisper  that  France  &  the 
Ottaman  Court  understand  one  another.*'  Hee  ought  to  bee 
applauded  also  for  his  soe  near  correspondence  with  the  Crowne 
of  Poland,  at  w*"''  the  French  cannot  induce  themselves  to  bee  any 
way  pleased,  after  soe  many  endeavors  &  twists  to  gayu  that  Court. 

1  may  venture  to  tell  y''  Lpp,  out  of  cypher,  that  a  letter  is 
seen  here  from  a  person  of  credit  in  the  Court  of  Denmarque  w''' 
mentions  a  match  on  foot  between  y""  Princesse  of  Denmark ''  it 
our  souveraigne,'"  w"^  I  look  on  as  an  idle  report  only,  and  ought 
indeed  not  bee  so  much  as  that. 

'  Maximilian  Emmanuel  of  Bavaria.        '  Maximilian  Henry  of  Bavaria. 

'  Christoplier  Bernaid  dc  Galen.  *  Francis  Egon,  Count  of  I'lirstcnberg. 

»  Marie  de  Savoie-Nemours,  daughter  of  Charles  Am^d^e  de  Savoie,  Due  de 
Nemours,  and  wife  of  Alphonso  VI. ;  afterwards,  by  a  special  Bull  from  the  Pope, 
married  to  I'edro  II.  I'edro  II.  of  Tortugal  did  not  take  the  title  of  king  until 
after  his  brother's  death. 

"  .Jeanne  Elisabeth  de  Schomborg  married  her  cousin,  Frederic  Armand  do 
Schomberg. 

'  The  Count  of  Schomberg  was  noted  as  a  zealous  Protestant,  and  left  France 
after  the  revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes. 

'  According  to  Voltaire  an  alliance  with  the  Turks  had  always  been  the  policy 
of  the  French  kings  since  the  time  of  Francis  I.,  not  only  because  of  advantages 
in  commerce,  but  also  to  prevent  the  House  of  Austria  from  becoming  too  powerful. 
(Hiicle  de  Louis  XIV.,  vol.  i.  p.  357.) 

"  Probably  Frcidericiue  Am(51ie,  eldest  daughter  of  Ferdinand  III.,  who  married 
Charles  Albert,  Due  de  Gottorp. 

'"  Charles  II.  of  England.  A  rumour  was  spread  in  France  at  this  period  tliat 
Charles  II.  was  about  to  repudiate  his  marriage. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAHIS  41 

The  Turkish  interpreter  has  been  with  Mous''  de  Lyoiine  & 
made  a^ipear  to  him  y'  the  person  sent  hither  bears  the  character 
of  Ambassador,  &  not  Eiivoiji  E'"'',  as  was  supposed. 

It  is  most  certain  that  the  King  winds  in  all  parts  of  his 
kiugdome  &  abroad  to  raise  a  considerable  army  ag'  spring,  & 
begins  to  despair  of  doing  any  good  upon  England — I  mean  to 
draw  it  off  the  League,  because  y'"  Parliaments  sitting  may  in  all 
appearance  take  notice  of  the  great  abuses  done  the  English  in 
their  trade  with  France,  &  consequently  desire  the  King  to  doe 
something  reciprocally  on  that  side. 

They  begin  to  be  slack  in  their  fortifications  in  the  Pays 
Conquis,  first  because  they  are  near  finished  &  then  they  have  no 
more  Coale,  but  I  am  assured  they  are  advanced  soe  farre  as  to 
serve  them  considerably  for  defense.  Mons''  Louvoy  is  gone 
to  view  them. 

The  Bpp  of  Beziers  is  making  all  hast  in  his  Embassy  to 
3Iadrid. 


To  Lord  A rl'mgton. 

Paris  :  Novem.  6th,  '69,  S.N. 

This  week  the  Turkish  Envoye  has  had  audience  of  Mons''  de 
Lyoune,  who  was  ordered  by  his  Ma'*'  to  take  the  state  upon  him 
of  a  Grand  Mzier,  &  give  the  same  reception  as  the  French  Amb'' 
has  of  him  at  the  Ottoman  Court.  Mons'"  de  Lyonne  lay  at  length 
on  a  couch  at  the  foot  of  which  was  a  tabouret ;  the  Turk  was 
introduced  bj'  a  gentleman  &  made  most  profound  reverences, 
according  to  his  manner,  which  are  returned  by  a  tip  of  y""  hatt  & 
a  nod  that  hee  should  sitt  downe,  at  w*  time  the  Turk  was 
presented  with  a  dish  of  coffee,  &  Lyonne,  by  the  Interpreter, 
desired  to  see  his  letters  &  papers,  bj"  w"^''  hee  could  not  make  out 
that  hee  was  qualifyed  with  any  other  character  than  that  of 
Envoi/L-.  Whereupon  the  Turk  alledged  that  hee  had  another 
credentiall,  w"^''  hee  was  charged  under  pain  of  loosing  his  head  to 
putt  into  the  King's  owne  hands.  ^P  Lyonne  replyed  that  the 
King  had  appointed  him  to  hear  &  see  all,  but,  since  it  concerned 
his  person  so  near,  hee  would  acquaint  the  King  &  endeavor  to 
persuade  him  to  give  him  audience  himselfe  in  all  the  discourse. 

As  often  as  the  Turk  had  occasion  to  mention  him  hee  stiled 
him  the  Emperour  of  France. 


■1.2  THE  t)i:si'AT{nivs  ui-- 

To  Sir  Josejih  Williamsou. 

Paris  :  'Jber  13th,  '60. 

Yesterday  the  Parliament  of  Paris  assembled,  and  on  the  same 
diiy  tlio  Dutch  gazette  was  bannished  France  for  speaking  some- 
what jilainly  in  some  matters  that  reflected  npon  Candy  &  Mons'' 
de  Navailles. 

Mons""  de  Vivonne  '  hath  brought  the  French  galleys  into 
Civitta  Veccia  soe  disabled  that  they  are  almost  thought  unfitt  for 
service.  However  the  King,  knowing  his  inclination  not  to  live  at 
Court,  has  named  him  his  Vice  Admirall  for  the  Mediterranean 
Sea,  lions''  d'Estn'e  being  soe  qualifyed  for  the  Ocean,  &  is  sayd 
to  command  the  G  freggatts  at  Hochelle  ag'  Salley,  whose  pirates 
have  lately  taken  some  Fi'ench  vessells. 

'At  length  the  courriers  between  Flanders  &  Spain  are  suflered 
to  goe  freely  through  I'Vance,  &  the  truth  is  they  endeavor  all  they 
can  here  to  comply  with  the  present  conjuncture,  finding  it 
not  to  bee  very  favom-abie  to  their  designs,  &  among  other 
mourners  they  regrett  Prinn's-  death,  a  person  they  hoped  much 
from,  becaus  of  his  troublesome  spiritt ;  neither  .ire  they  better 
pleased  to  find  the  '^\)\c  Alliance  mentioned  in  the  1/ Keeper's^ 
speech. 

I  hear  that  some  of  the  .Ministers  hei'e  have  had  some  rubs 
about  the  disobliging  of  strangers  in  their  traflick  &  passage  of 
letters,  being  charged  not  to  meddle  any  more  in  such  ati'aires  but 
that  Mons''  de  Lyonne  only  shall  have  y"  sole  manaijc  of  them. 

The  Turke  besieges  Paris,  changing  his  seat  every  day,  much 
to  the  (Urnrtiscmeni  of  the  jieople  here,  who  take  luuch  delight  to 
see  him  at  his  prayers. 

The  Danish  Jlinister  '  here  cannot  accept  of  the  propo.sition 
made  by  the  Ministers  to  take  wine,  come,  &  salt  in  satisfaction 
of  a  debt  to  that  crowne,  but  insists  upon  having  ready  money, 
alledging  that  they  content  themselves  with  beer  il-  have  sufH- 
cicncy  of  corn e  &  salt. 

'  Louis  Victor  de  Eochecliouart,  Comte  de  Vivonne  (16.S6-1688),  only  son  of 
Gabriel,  Due  de  Eochechouart.  He  was  sent  under  the  Due  de  Beaufort  to  the 
relief  of  Candia,  and  took  chief  command  after  Beaufort's  death.  He  held  the 
office  of  'giSn^ral  des  galeres,'  and  was  made  a  marshal  in  1C75. 

=  William  rrynne  (KiOO  100!)),  the  Puritan  pamphleteer 

»  Sir  Orlando  Bridgeman. 

*  Gabel,  Danish  envoy  since  IGCiT. 


AX    EXGLISU    AGENT    IN    PARIS  43 


To  Sir  Jui^eph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  9bei-  IG,  'G'J,  S.N. 

Yesterday  my  letter  from  Bayonne  of  the  6"^  currant  saitli  that 
severall  letters  from  Cadiz  advise  that  6  of  the  King  of  Spain's 
shijDS  being  on  their  way  to  meet  the  plate  tleet  had  been  ren- 
contred  by  a  squadron  of  his  Ma'"^  friggatts,  which  had  soe  torne 
&  shattered  them  that  they  were  forced  to  come  back,  which  requires 
confirmacon  &  much  more  faith  than  I  have  to  give  credit  to. 

gr  -yyin  Godolphin  writes  mee  of  the  yf''^  P^^*  that  the  Queen 
Regent  hath  been  ill  &  some  say  shee  is  in  danger ;  that  the  death 
of  D"  Blasco  de  Loyola  makes  great  alteracon  among  the  parties 
in  that  Court,  hee  having  by  virtue  of  his  office  greater  oppor- 
tunities with  the  Queen  than  any  ;  that  hee  had  no  late  news  of 
S''  The:  Allen,  saving  that  on  the  22"'  of  7ber  a  boat  came  oft' 
from  Algiers  with  a  letter  from  ye  Consul  to  S''  Tho:,  informing 
him  that  the  Moores  decline  to  exchange  prisoners  with  him  on 
equall  tei'mes,  and  that  the  Bashau '  hath  promised  to  endeaver  to 
dispose  the  duan  -  to  the  best  condicons  of  a  Peace  that  hee  can. 
From  those  that  brought  the  letter  it  was  learnt  that  their  ships 
in  the  mole  are  boomed  up. 

From  Alicante  wee  hear  that  a  French  S<ieltier  arrived  there 
reports  that  some  of  our  friggatts  have  block'd  up  8  sayle  of 
Turks  in  Boggia  [Bugia],  &  from  Cai'thagena  that  an  Algiers  man- 
of-war  had  taken  &  burnt  an  English  ship  laden  with  pilchards  ;  and 
that  the  Bay  of  Tunis  hath  broke  with  France,  but  signifyes  a 
desire  to  have  peace  with  England. 

Thus  far  S''  W"  Go.^ 

From  Rome  'tis  written  that  the  Card'  de  Hesse  [d'Este]  at  a 
second  audience  of  the  Pope  endeavored  to  engage  him  in  a  promise 
to  liis  Imp"  Ma'*'  of  a  cap  for  the  P'^'^  of  Bade^  at  the  first  pro- 
mocon,  which  the  Pope  refused  to  doe,  after  hee  had  told  him  tliat 
the  esteem  hee  had  for  the  Emp''  might  prevayle  much  with  him. 
but  not  on  this  occasion.  And  that  the  C.  de  Prado,  Arab"'  from 
the  P"^'  of  Portugall,  had  made  a  very  splendid  entry  &  was  lodged 
with  the  Card'  Ursini,^  protector  of  that  Nacon.  . 

'  The  Basha  or  Pasha  of  Algiers. 

-  Douan  or  Duan  =  the  Council.  '  Sir  William  Godolphin. 

*  Gustave,  Marquis  de  Bade-Dourlach.  '  Virginio  Orsini. 


4'1  TIIK    DICSPATCIlEtf    OF 

The  King  hath  lately  dispatched  a  Coun-ier  to  the  G''  Seign"" 
to  desire  that  his  uiiuister  here  may  bee  (jualifyed  with  better 
powers  than  hee  has  yett  produced. 

The  Mareschal  de  Turenne  is  shortly  to  bee  made  Connedtible, 
that  hee  may  have  a  title  above  the  rest  of  the  M<ire><chavx,  & 
they  conse((nently  obey  him,  but  hee  is  to  have  that  cliarge  with 
some  restrictions  to  diminish  its  authority. 

Mens''  le  Tellicr  has  sent  10  or  12  Courriers  to  severall  places 
where  the  garrisons  are  too  full,  that  such  a  number  make  all  hast 
to  a  lloulez-vum  appointed  them  in  the  Pays  Bas,  to  strengthen 
the  frontiers. 

Four  new  regiments  are  composing  here ;  one  for  the  Duke 
d'Anjou '  &  3  for  marine  service,  and  it's  sayd  that  the  King 
will  reduce  his  ijardes  de  curps  to  400  and  make  a  Regiment  of 
Horse  of  the  remainder,  w*^''  shall  bee  called  the  Royall  Jtegiment. 

It  is  much  discoursed  here,  my  L'',  as  if  the  Turke  designe  next 
summer  to  invade  Poland.  It  is  also  believed  that  20,000  men 
may  doe  much  in  a  countrey  where  the  souldiery  remains  unpayd 
&  the  nation  itselfe  poor.  Soe  that  the  world  makes  this  meta- 
phor— that  the  late  King,-  like  a  wise  man,  foresaw  the  tempests 
that  would  unavoydably  attend  the  crowne  &  prudently  escaped 
them  by  his  resignacon  ;  but  that  this  young  Prince,^  tempted  by 
the  alurements  of  gouvernement,  may  meet  with  une.vpected  troubles 
that  may  discompose  all  hee  jsromised  to  himselfe  of  satisfaction. 

The  late  King  has  declared  the  Duke  d'Anguien  '  his  heir  to 
all  his  personall  estate. 

This  morning  a  learned  speech  is  made  at  Chaliott  upon  the 
death  of  the  Queen  Mother. 

Monsieur  de  Louvoy.  I  hear,  is  not  so  much  in  reputation  with 
the  King  as  before,  the  Resident  of  Spain  *  having  been  sent  to 
from  his  Ma'^  that  hee  addresse  himselfe  to  M'"  de  Lyonne  in  the 
future. 

This  afternoon  the  King  slu'ws  his  troops  a  generall  review  to 
King  Casimire,  w-ho  to-morrow  is  to  be  received  into  the  Abbey  of 
S'  Germains. 


See  footnote  2,  p.  7.  -'  John  Kasiniir. 

Michael  Koiybut  Wisniowieslii. 

Henri  .Jules  de  Bouibon,  Due  d'Enghien,  son  of  the  '  grand  Condc 
Don  Michel  Iturietta. 


AN    EXGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  45 


To  Sir  Josepli  Williamson. 

Paris  :  9ber  23'^  '09. 

On  Wednesday  the  Queen  Mother  was  interred  in  very  great 
state  &  ceremony,  after  the  same  manner  as  the  Queen  Mother  of 
France  was.  The  particulars  of  the  Ecclesiasticall  part  you  will  see 
printed.  But  believe  not  anything  of  the  sermon  preached  by  the 
Bp.  of  Reims/  wherein  hee  sett  her  forth  for  an  Amazon  riding  at 
the  head  of  an  army  to  relieve  her  husband  at  Oxon.  And  that 
the  reasons  why  her  pious  intentions  for  the  propogating  the 
Romish  faith  did  not  succeed  was  because  God  Aim:  would  have 
that  miserable  people  continue  in  their  heresies,  that  his  judge- 
ments might  bee  the  greater  upon  them,  &c. 

The  Pope's  Nuncio  had  lately  an  audience  of  his  Ma'-*'  about 
the  '  Depeudances  et  limites  dans  les  Pays  Conquis,'  when  the  King 
told  him  hee  might  write  to  the  Queen  Regent  to  send  commis- 
sioners to  Paris,  if  shee  desired  those  matters  should  bee  determined, 
w'^''  if  they  could  not  well  adjust,  that  they  might  have  full  powers 
to  treat  about  an  exchange. 

It  is  sayd  here,  that  besides  ye  10,000  men  ye  Dukes  of  Bruns- 
wick -  give  ^  to  Holland,  those  P"'^  have  resolved  to  raise  14,000  in 
their  room  ;  and  that  Holland  endeavors  with  much  eariiest- 
nesse  to  gett  the  El  Palatin  ^  into  y"  ople  Alliance,  the  diflerences 
between  whom  &  ye  Duke  of  Lorraine  ^  being  at  length  composed. 
The  G''  Treasurer  of  Poland  has  written  to  y'"  King  C'asimire 
desiring  him  to  returne  back  the  Crowne  hee  hath  brought  away 
with  him,  w'^''  liee  took  formerly  in  battle  from  the  D.  of  Muscouvy 
&  is  richly  besett  with  precious  stones.  Upon  refusall,  hee  threatens 
that  his  pencon  shall  bee  stopped. 

The  first  interview  between  the  King  and  Casimire  was  in  a 
Chamber  wherein  they  entered  at   severall  doores ;  the  latter  was 

'  Cardinal  Barberini. 

^  Rudolph  Augustus,  Duke  of  Brunswick,  and  Anthony  Ulric,  Duke  of 
Wolfenbiittel. 

^  '  Sell '  interlined  in  MS. 

'  Charles  Lewis,  son  of  Frederick  V.,  the  Winter  King  of  Bohemia,  and  Elizabeth 
of  England. 

^  Charles  IV.,  Due  de  Lorraine,  son  of  Frangois  de  Lorraine  and  Catherine, 
Comtesse  de  Salm.  He  died  in  1675  and  was  succeeded  by  his  nephew  Charles 
Leopold  Sixte,  who  took  the  title  of  Duke  of  Lorraine  and  Bar. 


40  TIIK    HEsrATCIIKS   OI'' 

(■(iiiil)li:iu'ntf(l  witli  an  oiler  to  choose  any  place  in  France  where- 
in hee  may  enjoy  more  freely  y""  repose  of  y'  retired  life  liee 
promised  to  himselfe  in  resigning  up  his  Crowne. 

Tlie  Commission  is  )>ast  the  Seal  suppressing  the  charge  of 
Ad"  of  France,  iV  all  marine  dispatches  in  the  future  are  to  run 
in  the  King's  name. 

Order  is  sent  by  his  Ma'-^'  to  Ath  to  have  the  trenches  dug 
deeper,  notwithstanding  the  inconvenience  of  y''  season,  &  [he]  is 
resolved  to  augment  his  troops  also  thus  : — Every  standing  com- 
pany consists  of  80  men,  out  of  w'^''  30  in  each  company  deducted 
will  remain  50,  those  30  shall  have  20  new  raised  to  bee  added  to 
them  to  compleat  them  al  to  50,  w"^''  latter  shall  bee  commanded 
by  none  but  reformed  officers. 

The  Bishop  of  Valence  '  is  imprisoned  for  false  coyning  with  2 
of  his  relations. 

M''  de  Ijyonn's  daughter  ^  is  to  marry  with  young  M  dc  la 
Vrilliere,-'  who  is  to  bee  S'^''-^  of  State  after  his  father. 


V'o  Sir  Jo.^'pli  Williamson. 

Paris:  Nov'"  -iTth,  lOCfl. 

Nothing  is  more  discoursrd  here  tlian  of  a  warre  with  Holland 
&  a  good  understanding  with  England,  w*  may  bee  construed  only 
to  alarme  the  former  into  othei-  measures,  as  the  noyse  of  an 
exchange  has  troubled  Portugall,  apprehending  least  in  such  case 
the  Span''*  may  fall  upon  them  without  any  diversion  from  France. 

I  cannot  well  believe  wiiat  is  said  here,  that  the  phuranJs  de 
liesidence  are  executed  still  with  y'^^  former  vigour,  since  at  the 
same  time  wee  are  told  that  this  King  has  resolved  to  satisfy  the 
owners  for  the  woods  hee  has  cutt  dowue  &  made  use  off  in  the 
Pays  Conquis. 

The  French  are  treating  with  the  D.  of  Lorrain  for  sonic  of  his 
troops,  &,  according  as  our  Parliament  in  England,  by  their  dis- 

'  Daniel  de  Cosmic;. 
.   "  Madeleine  de  Lioime,  who,  February  10,  1670,  married  Fraiii,ois  Annibal, 
Due  d'Estr^es. 

»  Balthazar  Pholippeaux  de  Chateauneuf,  became  Marquis  de  la  Vrilliere  in 
1GG9  on  the  death  of  his  eldest  brother  Louis.  He  was  later  appointed  Secretary 
of  St'itc. 


AX    ENOI.ISII    AGEXT    IN    PARIS  47 

a<n'eements,  doe  give  them  enconrageraent.  may  doubtlesse  employ 
their  forces  the  next  spring. 

It  is  whispered  here  with  much  likelyhood  of  truth  that  an 
exchange  is  now  sur  le  tapis  &  likely  to  succeed.' 

To  Sir  Joseplt  Williamson. 

Paris ;  9ber  30'',  '69. 

By  L''  Arlington's  to  the  Arab''  we  find  y^  Mons''  Petit  -  is  com- 
playned  against  by  Colbert  for  libels  ag'  the  person  of  y'^  K.  of 
France.  You  cannot  but  imagine  that  the  block  of  offence  is  the 
paper  we  send  you,  wherein  it's  true  he  used  to  be  too  bold  in  his 
expressions,  yet  never  can  I  hear  that  hee  wrote  anything  else. 

They  could  find  in  their  hearts  to  bee  as  vexed  at  y''  English 
'  Gazette '  as  those  of  Holland,  &  are  troubled  only  to  find  you  have 
soe  good  intelligence.  What  greater  proof  can  wee  have  of  them 
opening  our  lett".' 

In  fine,  you  must  expect,  S"",  to  loose  a  good  correspondent  & 
never  to  have  soe  good  intelligence  from  hence  ;  but  the  Amb''  will 
reason  the  matf  with  Mons''  de  Lionne,  cV  by  the  next  Post  you 
will  hear  further  of  this  businesse. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUianison. 

Paris  :  Decemb  7"",  'C9. 
On  Thursday  I  saw  all  the  magnificence  of  the  French  Court  at 
the  audience  his  Ma'-'''  gave  the  Turkish  Envoye  (for  by  his  recep- 
tion hee  was  allowed  no  other  character).  All  the  troops  were  in 
new  rich  habitts,  especially  the  King's  musqueteers,  who  had  all 
black  velvett  coats  with  guilded  buttons  &  were  on  foot  next  to 
the  Palace ;  the  officers  had  rich  embroidei''d  coats,  and  the  King 
had  a  coat  on  so  much  valued  for  the  great  number  of  diamonds. 
Monsieur  was  in  black  cloth,  had  diamand  buttons,  &  a  belt  cover'd 
with  perles  &  diam'^^  The  Eni-oyc  came  to  y''  Yieux  Chasteau  de 
S'  Germains  on  horseback  with  20  in  comjDany.  ■  Att  his  entrance 

'  In  cipher,  deciphered. 

-  Eene  Petit,  Charles  II.'s  agent  in  Picardy,  Normandy,  and  Brittany.     See 
Kavaisson,  Archives  lU  la  Bastille,  t.  via.  p.  211. 
'  In  cipher,  deciphered. 


■18  Till-:    DKSI'ATCIIES    oK 

into  y''  gallery  (wliicli  was  richly  f'urnislu-d  with  new  tapistry  of 
great  value)  y''  King  being  sati'  on  a  throne  of  silver.  &  along  y^' 
aides  of  y*"  gallery  a  great  number  of  silver  vessells  like  flower- 
potts,  llee  had  on  his  hands  a  silk  enibroydei-'d  cloth,  whereon  was 
y''  letter.  Hee  made  three  or  more  very  low  reverences,  y"  King 
sitting  still,  neither  moving  his  hatt  or  body,  att  w''''  the  /'wicfd/r, 
tlui'  hee  advanced  with  an  assured  countenance,  seemed  much  dis- 
ordered i^'  spoke  very  hollow  ^  full  of  anger.  The  King  told  him 
by  his  Interpreter  h?e  would  willingly  make  a  Treaty  with  the  G'' 
S''  for  the  good  of  his  subjects.  This  magnificence  was  rather  to 
shew  him  the  King's  greatnesse  than  any  respect  of  his  person. 
After  all  was  ended  y''  King  sayd  thus  to  my  L**  Amb'" :  '  Mona"' 
I'Anibassadeur,  j'n'ay  pas  voulu  toucher  mon  chapeau  n'y  me 
mouvoir.' 

The  experimenter  of  the  transfusion  of  blood  on  a  person  who 
dyed  upon  it  is  accused  first  before  y''  Parliam',  &  y"  processe  has 
been  long  in  hand,  but  now  it's  thought  it  may  goe  hard  with  him. 

To  Sir  Joseiili  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Decomli  11th,  'fi9. 

This  week  a  conrrier  came  from  J{ome  in  8  days  &  left  the 
Pope  in  a  desperate  condioJn,  having  named  many  cardinalls, 
among  w^''  Father  Nitard  was  not  number'd,  but  Porto  C'arrero,' 
whom  you  know  was  formerly  nominated  by  way  of  proposicon  in 
the  Councell  at  Madrid,  that  it  was  thought  his  Holynes  would 
not  live  many  hours,  in  so  much  that  at  present  they  believe  him 
here  to  bee  dead,  it  dispatches  are  sending  to  Rome  accord'-''. 

The  losse  of  Candy  hee  took  much  to  heart,^  w"^'',  with  his  great 
age  &  infirmities  that  attend  it,  might  take  him  hence  without  i 
miracle. 

The  Suissers  wind  about  &  the  major  part  of  the  Cantons  are 
inclined  to  hearken  to  some  proposicons  lately  sent  them  by  the 
Court  of  France,  it  deputies  are  nominating  to  peruse  &  answer 
them.  The  reason  of  this  change  most  certaynly  proceeds  from 
the  uncertainty  of  Spain's  promisses  &  y"  disadvantagious  terms 
ofler'd  them  by  the  Hollander. 

'  See  footnote  4,  p.  33. 

■  It  was  due  to  Clement  IX. 's  persuasion  that  Louis  XIV.  sent  help  to  the 
Venetians  in  Cnndia  (Ranke's  Pnjwx  nf  Pmiir.  p.  rJflT). 


AN    ENCl.ISH    AGEXT    IN    TAKIS  49 

The  Eiiiperour,  whetlier  at  y''  Grand  Seigii''-  desire  or  t'eariug  to 
disoblige  bim,  has  lately  demolished  a  fort  near  Nieuliausel,  &  the 
Venetians  are  preparing  great  presents  for  the  Sultan  &  C4''  Vizier 
for  giving  them  such  hon''''  conditions. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Decemb  14th,  '09,  S.N. 

My  letter  from  Madrid  of  y"'  20th  past  saith  the  Queen  Regent 
was  very  well,  &  had  resolved  to  make  a  short  progresse  to  Alcala, 
a  University  6  leagues  from  ^ladrid.  to  pay  her  devotion  there  for 
her  recovery. 

The  new  regiment  of  Guards  are  so  ill-payd  that  a  horse  of  the 
Portuguese  Ambassador  dying  lately  was  carved  into  peices  by 
them  &  boyled  in  their  Ollas} 

An  Eni-oijr  from  y*^  Bpp  of  ]\Iunster  is  lately  come  hither. 
Hee  is  sayd  to  bee  one  of  his  principall  Chancellonrs  and  his 
businesse  to  concert  with  the  King  about  measures  to  bee  taken 
the  next  year. 

Your  advices  from  Holland  tell  you  that,  notwithstanding  the 
resolucon  of  the  States,  taken  about  4  months  since,  of  laying 
greater  imposicons  upon  French  effects,  they  have  since  weighed 
their  advantage  &  losse  thereby,  &  find  their  trade  with  France 
not  soe  inconsiderable  as  they  at  first  esteemed  it. 

This  preamble  is  only  to  inform  you  that  the  Frenche,  knowing 
their  inclinations  &  the  difficulty  of  putting  them  in  execution, 
have  in  returns,  about  3  days  since,  made  an  arrest,  by  which  they 
lay  a  new  Imposicon  of  22  livers  10  sous  on  every  chest  of  sugar 
that  shall  come  hither  from  Holland. 

The  Duke  of  Chaulnes  -  is  going  this  day,  I  think,  the  King's 
Amb''  to  Rome  (upon  the  supposicon  that  y'  Pope  is  dead),  to 
assist  at  the  new  election  in  favour  of  France ;  y'^  new  Card'  de 

'   Cooking-pots. 

^  Charles  d'Albert  d'Ailly,  Due  de  Chaulnes  (1(;2.5-1G98),  third  son  of  Honor^ 
d'Albert.  He  was  sent  to  Eome  for  the  election  of  Pope  Clement  IX.  in  1667,  made 
governor  of  Brittany  in  1670,  and  sent  to  Rome  the  same  year  for  the  election  of 
Pope  Clement  X. ;  named  minister  plenipotentiary  of  the  King  at  Cologne  in  1675. 
Acted  again  as  ambassador  for  the  King  at  Rome  on  the  election  of  Alexander  VIII. 
VOL.  V.  K 


50  xnio  i)h:si'ATrHiv.s  of 

IJoiiillon  '  goes  with  liiin  iV  letters  are  at  tlie  same  time  desjiatclied 
to  the  ('anliiial  de  ilet/.  A:  Griinaldi-  to  bee  at  tlie  Conclav<'. 

At  his  friends  re(|uest.  before  his  deatli,  ye  i'ope  made  8  Car- 
dinalls  (as  ]  toUl  in  my  last)  :  I'orto  (Jorrex.o,^  doyen  de  Toledo,  was 
one  ;  I'a  Lavicini,'  to  whose  neice ''  the  Pope  married  iiis  nephew  " 
lately  A;  had  a  principality  of  that  name  in  portion  ;  JJona,"  a  great 
tlieologician  &  of  Piedmont;  Accaciosy  ;  *  Bonacorsi ; '■'  Altieri,'" 
Cery,"  who  had  severall  charges  under  his  H",  and  Nerli.  Archb]) 
of  Florence.'-  The  last  &  Carii'  Houvizi  '^  are  inclined  to  succeed 
the  defunct. 

The  King  has  given  the  Archbprick  of  Toulouse."  now  voyd,  to 
the  Up  of  Beziers,  w"^''  hee  takes  possession  of  in  his  way  to  Madrid. 
I  believe  hee  looses,  however,  the  cap  promised  him  by  Casimire, 
since  I  find  not  his  name  among  y''  promoted. 

Yesterday  the  S''  Corboyer""  was  beheaded,  but,  notwithstanding 
the  many  curses  of  damnation  proclaymed  to  him  by  the  priests, 
hee  dyed  stedfastly  a  Huguenot,  the'  a  notorious  malefactor. 

Mons'"  Colbert,  (who  was  at  Candy,  &  Navaille's  great  accuser,) 
is  bargaining  for  y''  charge  of  Generall- of  y'^  galleys  with  the  Conte 
de  Vivonne,  who  is  to  have  that  of  Vice  Ad''  of  the  Levant. 

The  King  of  Poland  is  not  most  secure,  &  1  believe  cannot  bee 
merry,  since  y''  Dyett  is  broken  np,  full  of  dissatisfaction  because 
hee  propcsed,  contrary  to  the  principles  &  fundamental  laws  of 
elections,  that  they  should  swear  never  to  depose  him,  in  lien  of 
his  oath  never  to  tjuitt  the  Crowne,  as  Casimire  did. 

To  Lord  Arlintjton. 

Paris  :  December  21"",  'G9. 
Two  days  since  a  courrier  arrived   from  Rome,  who  sa3's  the 
Pope  dyed  on  the  9th,  so  that  the  Duke  of  Chaulnes  may  come  in 

'  Emmanuel  Tlu'odore  de  la  Tour  d'Auvergne,  known  as  tlie  Cardinal  de 
Bouillon. 

-  Girolamo  Grimaldi.  '  Porto  Can-ero.  '  Lazzaro  Palavicini. 

'  Maria  Camilla  Palavicini. 

°  John  Bapti.ste,  Prince  of  Zagarola  son  of  Camillus,  brother  of  Clement  IX. 

'  Giovanni  Bona.  "  Nicolo  Acciaioli.  ''  Bonaccorso  Bonaccorsi. 

'°  Emilio  Altieri.  "  Carlo  Cerri. 

'■-  Friineis  Nerli.  '^  Girolamo  Buonvisi. 

"  The  late  Archbishop  was  Charles  Frani,ois  d'Anglure  de  Bourlemont. 

'^  J.  A.  de  Crux,  Miirquis  de  Courboyer.  See  Ravaisson,  Archives  dc  la  Bastille, 
vii.  335-341. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  51 

good  time  to  improve  his  master  s  '  interest  at  the  new  elecon.  To 
recompenee  him  for  the  charge  hee  sustayned  in  his  former 
Ambassy  thither,  the  King  has  made  liim  (Tovernour  of  Britanny 
&  given  him  leave  to  sell  his  former  charge  hee  had  of  Lieutenant 
Generall. 

The  discourse  is  very  hott  here  of  the  likelyhood  that  the 
Protestants  of  Hungary  will  revolt  to  the  Turks,  for  the  liberty  of 
the  exercise  of  their  religion  &  to  bee  free  from  the  hourly  alarms 
they  have  now  dayly  as  well  from  the  Turks  as  the  Court  of 
Vienna,  the  Emp""  being  gouverned  alltogether  by  the  Jesuits  & 
consequently,  but  not  politickly.  severe  to  those  of  contrary 
persuasion. 

An  officer  of  this  King's  went  from  Pignerol  to  Thurin  with  a 
band  of  souldiers,  &  there  seized  on  a  person,  alledging  publickly 
he  was  a  deserteur,  w'*'  the  Duke  of  Savoye,  hearing  of,  would  not 
suSer  to  bee  done  in  his  dominions  till  the  officer  whisper'd  in  his 
ear  that  the  person  secured  had  designed,  among  some  others  of 
the  Cabal,  to  worke  Mons'"  Fouquet's  escape. 

The  King  has  named  the  I\Iarquis  of  Bethune^  to  goe  his 
Envotje  Ex''y  to  Madrid,  there  to  compliment  her  Cath :  Ma'-'''  upon 
her  late  recovery. 

From  Nancy  wee  hear  new  overtures  are  on  foot  of  a  Treaty 
between  this  King  &  Duke  of  Lorrain,  very  advautagious  for  y'= 
latter,  to  oblige  him  to  espouse  the  interest  of  France.^ 

The  M.  Xtian  King  has  resolved  to  raise  a  new  Regiment  of  30 
companys,  which  shall  bear  the  name  of  the  Count  of  \^ermandois  ^ 
(Adm"  of  France)  &  shall  bee  putt  on  board  the  King's  ships. 
Another  new  regiment  will  also  bee  raised  for  M''  le  Due  d'Anjou, 
and  it's  confidently  sayd  that  the  King  will,  in  all,  lev\-  20U  com- 
panies of  horse  &  foct  for  the  Spring,  all  w°''  serves  to  improve 
the  beliefe  of  most  people  that  there  may  bee  some  jarre  with 
Holland. 

Some  letters  I  have  seen  from  iladrid  of  a  very  late  date,  which 
advise  that  the  Queen  had  alter'd   her   resolucon   of  sending  the 

'  Louis  XIV. 

-  Francjois  Gaston  de  Bethune  (1638-1C92),  son  of  Hipi^oljte  de  Eethune, 
Comte  de  Selles. 

^  See  p.  53. 

'  Louis  (le  Bourbon,  Comte  de  Vermandois,  born  1GG7,  son  of  Louis  XIV.  and 
Madame  de  la  Valliere.    He  was  made  admiral  when  two  years  of  age. 

E  2 


52  THK  nKsrATcnEs  ok 

Marquis  d'l'^licht''  into  roi-tufjall,  but  to  continue  tlio  H.  of 
IJatteville,'-'  wlio  is  say<l  to  have  discovered  some  intrigues  the 
roruier  iiad  on  foot  witli  the  ministers  of  I'oi'tugall. 

I  forgott  to  add  that  at  Ilochelle  about  100  seamen  mutinyed  iK: 
would  not  bee  ])iitt  on  board  some  sliips  y'  iCing  is  semlini,'  towards 
I'ersia;  a  pai't  of  the  garrison  made  tliem  all  prisonei's,  iV-  will  bee 
prosecuted  at  law. 

Wee  hear  the  Dutch  have  lost  2,000  men  on  the  Coast  of  C'hina, 
endeavouring  to  recover  Insula  Formosa  formerly  in  their  posses- 
sion. 

To  Lord  Arlhujlon. 

Paris  :  December  ye  25tli,  'G9. 

The  originall  occasion  of  a  report  lately,  as  if  Letters  of 
Reprizall  had  been  given  out  here  against  the  Hollander  had  onely 
this  foundacxin  :  The  King  made  an  order  wherby  all  French  serv- 
incr  on  Ijoard  any  Dutch  vessells  sliould  quit  the  service,  &  if 
unwilling,  to  bee  compelled  thereunto;  in  pursuance  of  which,  2 
French  men  were  demanded  by  the  governour  of  Marseilles  which 
lice  had  learnt  were  on  board  a  Dutch  convoy  ;  the  Captain  wherof, 
refusing  to  deliver  them,  they  being  in  his  master's  service  about 
20  years  it  settled  with  their  wives  &  children  in  Holland,  sett 
out  to  sea  beyond  y''  reach  of  their  gunns,  expecting  that  the 
sliips  under  his  convoy  would  follow  him,  but  they  were  stopped  & 
remaine  so  still ;  of  w"^^''  the  Dutch  Resident  here  tells  mee  hee  is 
making  complaint,  iS;  I  presume  to  give  y'"  L]>p  an  account,  fearing 
you  might  not  have  had  it  from  other  hands. 

1  am  told  that  a  brother  ki  the  Bishop  of  Muuster  is  with  the 
Court  incognito,  &  that  some  calculations  are  making  with  him 
about  measures  to  bee  taken  att  spring,  in  case  it  shall  bee  thought 
fitt  to  stirre. 

lions'  Colbert  violently  stirs  about  y''  increase  &  y''  propogation 
of  Commerce;  that  under  that  colour  it  may  bee  feared  that  y' 
French  will  have  such  considerable  forces  in  both  y '  Indies,  accord- 
ing to  y"  great  marine  preparacous  they  are  now  making,  that 
upon  y''  first  uoyse  of  a  breach  that  may  happen  to  bee  made,  they 
may  bee  able  to  act  &  find  y''  world  in  those  parts  unprepared  to 
receive  y™. 

'  Don  Gaspar  Memlez  de  Hiiro,  Marquis  de  Liche  [Heliche],  son  of  the  cele- 
brated minister  Don  Luis  de  Haro. 

■-'  Charles,  Baron  do  iJatteviUe  |;\Vatteville]. 


AX    ENGLISH    AliENT    IN    PARIS  53 

A  Suisse  in  much  esteem  here  is  lately  sent  into  Switzerland 
to  raise  men  for  his  most  Xtian  Ma'^.  It  is  sayd  of  the  Turkish 
Eiivoye  that,  being  asked  how  hee  liked  France,  hee  replyed  tiiat 
if  his  master  had  knowne  it  had  been 'so  fine  a  countreyhee  would 
have  come  &  conquer'd  it. 

By  y°  last  courrier  that  came  from  Rome,  sent  to  this  Iving  by 
the  Card'  Ursini  upon  the  Pope's  death,  it  is  learnt  that  the  two 
factions  of  Chigi  A:  Kospigliosi '  are  agreed  unitedly  to  choose  a 
new  one  that  shall  bee  to  their  devocon,  y""  former  having  great 
interest  &  influence  on  y'^  rest  of  the  Cardinals ;  it's  beleived  that 
they  may  have  elected  a  Pope  before  the  Duke  de  Chaunes  can 
possibly  arrive  there,  because  the  Conclave  was  resolved  to  bee 
composed  on  the  19th  currant." 

The  Treaty  I  mentioned  in  my  last  to  your  Ldpp  between  the 
]M.  Xtian  K^  &  y*  Duke  of  Lorrain  is  reported  to  bee  near  a 
conclusion,  wherby  the  latter  engages  himselfe  to  espouse  the 
French  interest  &  consequently  raise  men,  as  is  sayd,  to  ye  number 
of  ten  thousand. 

The  advantages  to  bee  given  to  the  Duke  are  ; — permission  to 
refortify  Nancy  &  restore  to  him  Marsal,  as  well  as  to  favorise  the 
elecon  of  his  son  the  P*^*^  of  Vaudemont  ^  to  bee  his  heir  &  successour 
to  the  Dutchy  of  LoiTain  by  a  general  Assembly  of  the  Estates 
there,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  P'='  Charles  of  Lorraine  his  nephew  ; 
this  works  much  with  the  Duke  towards  the  making  ye  Treaty. 
France  is  by  it  also  to  renounce  &  annuU  all  former  pretencions  & 
treatys,  w*'''  the  French  insist  upon  may  bee  done  in  pi-ivate,  but 
the  other  alledges  that  because  those  formerly  made  were  verifyed 
by  the  Pari'  of  Paris,  the  dissolucion  of  them  ought  also  to  bee 
publickly  manifested.*  This  negotiacion.  it's  thought,  may  hinder 
I"^"  Charles's  marriage  with  the  Emp''''  sister.' 

'  Alexander  VII.,  who  died  in  1667,  was  de.scended  from  the  Honse  of  Chigi ; 
Clement  IX.,  from  the  House  of  Rospigliosi. 

■  After  the  death  of  Clement  IX.  the  Holy  See  remained  vacant  for  nearly  five 
months. 

'  Charles  Henri  de  Lonaine,  Prince  de  Vaudemont  (1649-1723). 

'  For  treaties  between  Fiance  and  Lorraine,  see  Koch  and  Schoell,  Histoire 
abrigic  des  TraiUs  de  Paix.  i.  344-347. 

^  Charles  Leopold,  son  of  Francis  Nicholas  and  nephew  of  Charles  IV.,  Duke 
of  Lorraine,  maiTJed  Eleanoi"a,  sister  of  Leopold  I.,  after  the  death  of  Michael 
Korybut  Wisniowieski  in  1673. 


51  THE   DESPATCHES   OF 

'I'lic  Arcliducliesse  is  already  treated  with  the  title  of  Queen  of 
J'olaiul,  her  marriage  being  in  all  points  agreed  upon  &  persons  of 
great  c|uality  on  their  way  to  conduct  her  towards  the  consum- 
niacion  of  it. 

The  (Jrand  Seign''  has  declared  that  his  intencions  are  to  main- 
tiiine  the  ])eace  between  him  &  y'  Eniperour  inviolably,  provided 
the  latter  will  give  order  it  may  bee  more  punctually  observed 
than  it  hath  been  hitherto  by  his  subjects,  &  not  oppose  any  of  his 
other  designes,  without  mencioiiing  whether  they  were  intended 
against  Poland  or  the  Venetians. 

The  M.  Xtian  King  has  resolved  to  maintainc  on  board  liis 
Adni"  &  Vice  Adm"  two  hundred  young  gentlemen  Volonteers,  that 
they  may  learn  the  Art  of  Navigacion  (by  y'  assistance  of  Masters), 
to  render  them  capable  of  succeeding  in  the  commands  of  officers 
who  shall  happen  to  fayle,  as  also  all  the  colledges  on  the  sea 
coast  are  ordered  by  the  King  to  bee  transformed  into  nurserys  for 
marine  learning,  especially  at  Brest  one  is  to  bee  established  for 
y*^  making  able  pilots. 

The  King,  being  informed  that  some  of  the  Councellors  of  the 
Parliament  at  Bourdeauxhad  reflected  in  their  discourse  somewhat 
severely  on  a  new  Edict  w"''  his  Ma'''  had  lately  verifyed  in  Parlia- 
ment, has  bannished  them  severally  to  S'  Malos,  Alenfon  &  Sens. 

The  Cardinal  de  Ret/,  has  lost  one  of  his  eys  by  a  rhunie  fall  ii 
on  his  sight,  w''''  hinders  him  from  making  his  voyage  to  Pome. 

The  Archbp  of  Rouen  '  is  extremely  sick.  The  tving  will  bee 
at  Versailles  about  12  days,  designing  to  make  round  it  a  wall  & 
forme  it  into  a  little  citty,  to  w"^"  end  all  the  nobility  of  the  Court 
are  to  build  houses  round  it  for  their  use.  Hee  intends  suddainly 
(I  hear)  to  make  two  Dukes  &  Peers,  whereof  one  is  to  bee  the 
Marq'  de  Peguillani. 

To  Sir  Joscpli    Wlllimth'ton. 

Paris :  New  Year's  Day,  1670. 

It  is  no  lesse  true  that  ye  K^  designes  a  %varre  w"'  Holland 

under  cover  of  Bp  of  Munster,  to  w"^''  end  he  intends  to  send  him 

some  troops  as  well  as  money.     Nay,  more  than  all  this,  it  is  sayd 

that  France  is  allmost  sure  of  Spayne  for  a  great  sum  of  money, 

'  Francois  de  Harlay  Clianipvallon. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  55 

which  it  is  to  give  them  in  lieu  of  tlieir  paving  any  to  Sweden. 
But  this,  I  suppose,  is  grounded  upon  Spain's  not  performing 
according  to  agreement  with  the  League.^ 

Are  much  apprehensive  here  of  a  Spanish  Pope. 

^lad™'  Montespan's  husband-  is  divorcing  himselfe  from  her  & 
intends  to  settle  his  estate  as  well  as  his  person  on  a  scrivener's 
daughter,  a  great  beauty  of  this  place.  I'll  assure  you  this  is  great 
news  &  few  know  anything  of  it. 


To  Lord  Arlimiton. 

Paris  :  January  the  4"',  1670. 

Since  my  last  a  gentleman  that  came  out  of  Turky,  &  took  Rome 
in  his  way  on  the  17''' past,  reports  to  y'^^  King  that  the  faction  of  the 
Barbarines  •*  seemed  to  bee  most  prevayling,  that  there  were  great 
differences  among  the  rest,  &  that  the  Conclave  would  in  all 
appearance  last  a  long  time  before  they  may  agree  upon  a  new 
election.  However  the  Duke  of  Chaunes  &  Card'  de  Bouillon  are 
embarqued,  &  the  former  has  orders  that  in  case  hee  shall  hear 
that  a  Pope  bee  chosen  before  his  coming  to  Rome,  hee  shall  not 
enter  that  place  but  returne  imediatelJ^ 

The  5  or  6  ships  soe  long  talked  of,  designed  for  Persia,  will 
hardly  Ijee  able  to  begin  their  voyage  till  ^larch,  their  Com- 
mander, lions'' du  Turelle,''  (as  I  am  informed,)  lying  here  incognito 
to  bee  cured  of  a  fowle  distemper. 

The  last  letters  from  Venice  say  that  the  Jesuits  had  invited 
the  French  and  Spannish  Amb''*  to  a  great  Ceremony  in  their 
Order,  &  accordingly  D"  Gaspar  de  Tebes '"  for  Spain  was  there 
before  the  President  de  S'  Andre,  j'^  French  Ambassador,'^  and 
kneel'd  on  the  Cushion  on  the  right  hand,  w"^''  the  other  perceiving 
at  his  entrance   willed  him  to  rise,  w'^*'  hee  did,  saying  hee  was 

'  Part  of  the  money  promised  by  Spain  to  Sweden  had  fallen  due,  but  Spain 
had  refused  to  pay,  and  Sweden  thereupon  threatened  to  withdraw  from  the  Triple 
Alliance  (Mignet,  vol.  iii.  p.  110). 

-  Henri  Louis  de  Pardaillon  de  Gondrin,  Marquis  de  Montespan. 

^  Franciscus  Barberini. 

'  Monsieur  de  Thurelle-Thiballier,  appointed  '  capitaine  des  galores '  in  1672. 

■■  Don  Gaspar  de  Teves,  Tello  de  Guzman  (1608-1673),  son  of  Don  Melchior 
de  Teves. 

'  Kicolas  Prunier,  Marquis  de  Saint-Andre,  Fiencb  ambassador  in  Venice. 


56  THK    DESPATCHES    OF 

willing  to  give  him  his  place  because  hee  was  obliged  to  wayt  on  a 
lady  home  that  stay'  for  him  at  the  door.  To  repaire  as  much  as 
hee  could  of  the  aHront  the  Frencii  Ambassador  threw  downe  the  seat 
that  was  placed  equall  with  his,  sett  there  for  the  Spannish  Ambas- 
sador. 1'he  ArchHp  of  Thoulouze,  (formerly  Bp  of  Be/.iers,)  is  gone 
on  his  emba.ssy  to  Madrid,  &  has  particular  orders,  as  I  am  told,  to 
sollicite  that  Court  to  give  passage  to  some  of  the  M.  Xtian  K*"' 
troops,  tho'  it  bee  ridiculous  to  imagine  the  Span''  would  consent 
to  any  thing  of  that  kind  so  much  to  their  owne  damage  unles  a 
perfect  understandinu;  were  between  the  two  Crowns. 

The  French  brag  of  a  league  they  hope  is  near  a  conclusion  of 
y''  Electors  of  Brandenburgh,  Colen,'  Baviere,^  &  Munster,  to  second 
their  designes  ag'  the  Hollander,  whom  they  call  insolent  people 
to  dare  cope  with  a  mighty  monarch.  It  is  thought  the  levyes 
that  are  making  by  the  Duke  of  Lorrain  are  to  [be]  employed  by 
the  French  &  assist  the  Bp  of  Munster,  whom  they  now  treat  as 
a  Holy  Prelate  much  abused  by  the  Dutch,  &  have  changed  their 
notes  since  they  sent  a  great  party  of  horse  against  him.  Every 
souldier  here  begins  already  to  calculate  the  number  of  days  that 
such  &  such  citties  in  Holland  can  hold  out  &  ye  minute  they 
ought  to  resigne  or  bee  taken. 

Letters  from  ]\Iarseilles  say  the  S""  Martel  had  declared  warre 
ag'  the  Algerines  &  was  putting  to  sea  with  G  friggatts  with  inten- 
tion to  joyne  with  S''  Tho:  Allen. 

All  imaginable  endt^avours  are  made  from  hence  to  gett  Sweden 
off  of  the  alliance  upon  Spain's  tardinesse  in  paying  y''  promised 
subsidy. 

The  King  of  Poland  has  some  reason  to  fear  hee  shall  be 
deposed  &  have  a  pension  of  30  ™  Crowns,  since  his  authority  is 
slighted,  &  Duke  of  Muscovy  pretends  to  have  his  son  chosen,  w"^'' 
the  people  are  the  rather  inclined  to  consent  to  because  they 
apprehend  the  Turkish  invasion. 

These  are  the  usual  styles  of  this  King  when  hee  writes  to 
Florence  &  Savoye  : 

'  Mon  frere  et  Cousin 
le  Due  de  Savoye : ' 
Mon  fri^re,  j'ay  receu  V''  lettre,'  &c. ; 

'  Cologne.  -  Bavaria. 

'  Charles  Emmanuel,  Duke  of  Savoy,  married  Francisca  Mamlakna,  daugliter 
of  Gaston  .Jean  Ijaptiste,  Due  d'Orleans,  uncle  of  Louis  XIV. 


AN   ENGLISH    AGENT   IN   PARIS  57 

subscription  is — 

'  V''"^  bien  bon  et  afl'ectione 
Frere  et  Cousin, 

Louis.' 
When  the  King  writes  to  the  Duchesse,  y°  words  '  Frere  et  Cousin ' 
are  made  '  Soeur  et  Cousine,'  without  any  other  alteraon. 

To  ye  D.  of  Florence. 

'  Mon  Cousin, 

Le  grand  Due  de  Florence  ;  ' 
Mon  Cousin,  j'ay  de  la  joye,'  &c. 

Ye  close  of  the  letter  is — 

'  Priant  dieu  qu'il  vous  ayt,  mon  Cousin,  en 
sa  sainte  et  digne  garde.' 

Louis. 

To  ye  Duchesse  of  Florence  it  is  only  changing  it  into  '  Cousine  et 
Grande  Duchesse.' 

The  same  to  ye  P'^''  of  Tuskanny.^ 
'  A  mon  Cousin 

Le  Prince  de  Tuscane,' 

without  any  other  alteration. 

2'o  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Jan.  ll'\  70. 
From  Stratsburgh  the  letters  of  the  2''  currant  say  that  all  the 
Cathi'"'  Cantons  of  Switzerland,  excepting  Lucerne,  had  promised 
the  French  Resident  to  enter  into  noe  confederacy  ag"  the  interest 
of  France,  &  particularly  that  of  y''  3ple  Alliance,  and  it  was  expected 
the  Prot.  Cantons  would  come  to  some  speedy  resolucion  also. 

You  have  heard  of  the  disgrace  of  the  P'-''  of  Ausberg'  in  the 

'  Cosmo,  Duke  of  Florence,  married  Maiie  Louise,  daughter  of  Gaston  Jean 
Baptiste,  Due  d'Orleans. 

-■  Cosmo,  son  of  Ferdinand  II.,  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  married  Marguerite 
Louise,  daughter  of  Gaston  Jean  Baptiste,  Due  d'Orleans. 

'  Wolfgang  Engelbert,  Count  or  Prince  of  Haversperg  or  Aversbers.  See 
Gazette  de  France,  1070,  No.  3,  p.  37. 


58  rUK    DESPATCHES    OK 

Court  of  Vienne  ;  the  cause  is  saj'd  to  bee  for  corres|)onding  with 
French  ministers  and  discovering  to  tliem  ye  Cabinet  secrets  of 
the  Emp''.' 

Uefore  iiis  leaving  that  citty,  hee  wrote  a  very  submissive 
letter  to  the  Emp'",  excusing  himselfe  and  desiring  to  be  informed, 
by  ye  Baron  of  Uocher,'^  why  hee  was  disgraced,  was  ans''  that  he 
had  better  acquiesce,  least  he  know  the  cause  with  the  iosse  of  his 
head. 

There  are  some  pctits  disorders  likely  to  bee  from  ye  pro- 
ceedings of  Count  Hanau,'  who  would  alienate  some  lands  i^-  put 
them  into  the  present  possession  of  the  Duke  of  Lorrain  as 
mortgage  for  200™  rixd'"  hee  borrows  of  him,  w*^"  the  younger 
brothers  have  endeavoured  to  oppose,  &  by  the  favour  of  the  El. 
]'alatin,  Duke  of  Firstemberg,  and  Marq'  of  Baden  putt  men  into 
garrisons  of  the  whole  county.  C.  Hanau  is  protected  by  lior- 
rain  and  Mentz,  in  hopes  they  may  convert  him  from  the  Pro- 
testant Keligion. 

To  Loril  Arlim/ton. 

Paris:  .Jan.  15,  '70. 

Here  is  nothing  new  since  my  last,  but  allmost  a  certainty  of 
the  King's  resolucion  to  make  a  progresse  at  Spring  into  Flanders 
to  view  ye  new  fortifications  there,  where  it's  supposed  hee  may  lye 
on  his  guard  all  the  next  summer  in  case  anything  for  his  advan- 
tage may  happen  by  the  ordinary  course  of  generall  ali'aires.  His 
person  will  certainly  have  ye  pretext  of  drawing  many  troops  into 
those  p'".  Wee  hear  out  of  ye  Spaniiish  territories  tiiere  that  ye 
troops  moulder  into  rapine  and  murthers  and  ye  place  in  an  ill 
posture  of  defence. 

I  have  seen  letters  that  say  the  Hollanders  had  sent  a  person  to 
ye  Bp  of  Munster  to  know  ye  reason  of  his  armament  and  if  his 
intention  were  to  violate  ye  Peace  of  1(jG6  ;  ■*  that  they  had  leave 
from  the  Emperour  to  invade  him  upon  the  first  hostile  action. 
The  discourse  is  as  if  the  French  were  almost  sure  of  Sweden,  upon 
the  delays  they  have  fomented  in  ])ayment  of  ye  subsidy.  Talk 
confidently  of  a  Cath'i'"^  League  in  the  Empire  for  the  interest  of 

'  See  Miynot,  iii.  4.53.  -  .lohann  Paul,  Barou  von  Hocher. 

'  Philip  Reinhard,  Prince  of  Hanau.    See  Qazctte  de  France,  1070,  No.  11,  p.  88. 

'  Treaty  of  Breda,  KiOO. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  59 

France,  but   I  don't  believe  tliem  such  saints  to  work  soe  jri-eat 
miracles. 

No  news  yet  from  Italy  or  Spain  by  reason  of  ye  great  snows. 
Instead  of  it  I  will  try  y''  faith  by  a  report  here  that  the  Gd 
Vizier  is  tura'd  rebell  and  made  himselfe  King  of  Candy,  fearing 
to  returne  to  Constantinople  with  the  losse  of  his  head.  To 
render  it  more  improbable  he  has  marryed,  say  they,  Morosiui's  ' 
daughter. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  Jan.  18,  1670. 

You  may  still  wonder  at  our  barrenness  of  news,  it  being 
about  a  month  since  we  had  letters  out  of  Spain,  &  a  long  time 
since  any  have  come  out  of  Italy.  I  am  afrayd  our  '  Gazetteer  a  la 
main,'  is  seised  on,  because  hee  has  fayled  mee  three  times.  I  shall 
in  such  case  have  another  to  send  you. 

My  last  letters  from  Strasburgh,  of  the  11th  currant,  say  that 
what  I  sent  j-ou  lately  of  that  nature  is  so  true  that  C.  Philippes 
Jea(jues,  a  near  kinsman  to  C.  Hanau,  being  lately  dead  without 
heir,  hee  has  sent  a  partey  of  men  to  seise  on  all  his  lands  for 
himselfe,  w*^''  the  cadets  doe  oppose  &  their  petty  armys  are  like  to 
come  to  blows. 

There  is  a  peice  of  land  in  the  Dutch  dominions,  &  particularly 
in  the  possession  of  a  gent,  of  Groeningen,-  to  w'^''  ye  Bp  of  Mun.ster 
lays  clayme,  as  belonging  to  him  ;  the  Dutch,  rather  then  embroyle 
themselves  for  a  thing  so  small,  especially  whatever  is  detayned 
from  the  Bp  becoming  a  generall  quarrell  &  here  called  a  Saiale<hje,^ 
are  contented  to  deliver  the  few  acres  into  his  possession,  but  are 
jealous  that  hee  may  fortify  upon  it  &  soe  keep  a  gate  to  let  his 
armys  into  that  countrey  when  hee  pleaseth. 

What  I  wrote  in  my  last  about  the  King's  going  to  the  Frontier 
is  fixed  to  a  day  ;  I  mean  Easter  Munday  he  intends  without  fayle 
to  set  forwards,  but  it  is  probable  some  things  may  intervene  that 
may  cause  him  to  alter  his  resolution  as  to  ye  pieuse  day,  &  may 
antidate  his  journey  or  deferre  it  longer. 

My  L"*  of  Northumberland  *  has  taken  up  I'Hostel  de  Basion^re 

Francesco  Morosini,  who  had  commanded  the  Venetian  troops  at  the  siege  of 
Candia. 

-  Groninguen,  in  the  Low  Countries.  '  I.e.  sacrilege. 

'  Josceline  Percy,  11th  Earl  of  Northumberland  (1()44-1G70). 


60  THE    DESPATCHES   OF 

(ye  Queen  ^fother's  Iiouse  of  residence  here)  for  8,000  Hires  a  year, 
intending  at  his  returne  from  Rome  to  spend  some  time  &  money 
at  Paris. 

I  hear  many  of  the  reformed  officers  maintaynd  in  Picardy  by 
i  pay  are  in  sucli  impatience  for  a  warre  that  they  have  quitted 
their  garrisons  &  are  gone  over  to  ye  Dutcli  in  liopes  of  finding 
employment. 

I  must  disabuse  you  in  wliat  I  wrote  formerly  upon  the  creditt 
of  a  '  (lazette  k  la  main,'  for  it  is  false  that  any  warre  is  declared  by 
ye  French  ag'  Algiers.  This  I  received  from  ye  Dutch  Consul  at 
Marseilles,  where  it  was  sayd  to  have  been  published.  I  have 
caused  ye  collection  of  this  King's  styles  &  titles  (w"^"*  I  sent  you 
some  months  since)  to  bee  review'd  &  examined,  &  can  assure  you 
that  they  are  perfect  and  now  in  use  without  any  alterations,  but 
such  as  I  shall  send  you  in  a  few  days.' 

To  Sir  Joiieph  WillianisoH. 

Paris  ;  Jan.  22'\  1G70. 

You  have  heard,  I  doubt  not,  of  a  great  tryall  here  between  the 
widow  of  a  person  that  dyed  by  the  experiment  of  transfusion  of 
blood  made  upon  him  and  the  phisitian  who  order'd  it.  The 
J'resident's  son  pleaded  a  long  while  with  much  eloquence  in  the 
Doctor's  behalfe,  but  an  ordinary  councellour  for  the  woman 
carryed  ye  cause  and  thereupon  an  edict  of  Parliament  is  coming 
out  forbidding  the  practise  of  transfusion  of  blood  under  the  pain 
of  corporall  puni.shment.  This  is  a  great  peice  of  news  to  the 
English  Greshaniites. 

Sr  Wm  (iodolphin  writes  mee  that  theMarq'  de  Liche's  lady's - 
dead,  the  great  beauty  of  the  Spannish  Court,  whereupon  all 
discourse  of  his  embassy  into  Portugall  is  layd  aside  for  the 
present ;  that  D"  Lorenza  Santos  de  Han  Pedro  (who  was  that 
prisoner  of  quality  taken  out  by  the  Turks  of  the  English  vessell 
bound  from  ye  Canarys  to  lyisbon)  is  lately  arrived  there.  He  was 
demanded  by  Sr  Tho:  Allen,  but  finding  little  hope  of  libertj'  that 
way  hee  chose  rather  to  pay  downe  2").UtiU  pieces  of  ^  for  his  ransome 
than  expect  our  reduction  of  ye  Moores  to  the  tevmes  wee  pretend. 
With  him  there  came  oft'  at  ye  same  time  220  Spannish  cajitives, 
with  him  redeemed   by  the  Jlervinarian  fryers,^  who  goe  abroad 

'  See  p.  48.  '  Daughter  of  the  Due  dc  Medina  Cell. 

'  I.e.  Fr^res  de  la  Merci,  an  order  founded  in  the  thirteenth  century. 


AN    EXGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  61 

every  year  with  the  almes  they  collect  tor  the  purchasing  Xtians 
out  of  slavery  ;  that  the  morther  of  Dn  Juan  de  Toledo  '  at  Brussels 
hath  much  troubled  the  Queen  and  perplex'd  the  ministers,  hee 
beino-  a  person  most  proper  for  the  Court  of  England  ;  that  the 
Coiule  de  ilolina  is  made  of  the  Councell  of  warre,  and  the  Bprick 
of  •largentum  (antiently  Agrigentuni)  in  tliat  island  of  Sicily,  worth 
about  5,000'  sterl.  per  ann.,  is  sayd  to  bee  kept  voyd  for  Father 
Nidhard  when  his  other  pretentions  in  Rome  shall  fayl  him,  w''''  is 
supposed  hee  hath  put  a  period  to,  finding  himselfe  excluded  out 
of  the  late  promotion  of  Card'.  But  the  brethren  of  his  society 
will  not  believe  that  after  the  great  honours  hee  wore  once  in  that 
Court  hee  will  at  last  descend  to  a  Sicilian  Bprick. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Wiiliamson. 

Palis  :  Jau.  25th,  1670. 

The  latest  news  from  Rome  is  of  December  oP'  &  informs  that 
Cardinal  Antony  having  by  a  Courrier  received  a  despatch  from 
the  King  of  France,  hee  made  an  elegant  speech  to  the  CoUedge  of 
Cardinals,  wherein  hee  desired  them  in  the  name  of  ye  M.  Xtian 
King  to  -suspend  the  election  of  a  new  J'ope  untill  such  time  as  the 
French  Cardinals  &  ye  Duke  of  Chaulnes,  his  Ex''^  Amb''  to  the 
Holy  See,  were  arrived  there,  they  being  as  then  uncapable  of 
proceeding  by  reason  of  the  6  factions — Barbarin,  Panfilio,  Chigi, 
Rospigliosi,  France,  &  Spain. 

The  two  Card'^  de  Retz  &  Bouillon  with  the  Duke  of  Chaunes 
being  arrived  att  Genes  [Genoa]  ye  3'  of  January  visited  some 
Churches  incognitis,  supped  with  the  Princesse  of  Monaco,"  &  without 
any  desire  of  receiving  a  Compliment  from  the  Republick  lodged  on 
board  the  French  galleys,  &  next  day  endeavour'd  to  goe  by  land ; 
but  finding  their  passage  over  the  mountayns  interrupted  by  the 
great  snows  &  ice,  they  were  forced  to  returne  &  embarke  again, 
soe  that  it's  thought  they  could  not  gett  to  l^ome  before  the  15.  of 
January.  Here  noe  news  yet  that  ye  3  severall  Spanish  Cardinals 
are  set  forward  from  Madrid  towards  Rome,  neither  is  it  believed  that 
Card'  d'Arragon  will  quitt  y*  Court  because  of  his  chai-ge.  How- 
ever the  Spannish  faction  seems  to  bee  very  strong  at  Rome,  by  its 
joyning  with  that  of  Barberin,  Panfilio,  &  Rospigliosi  to  oppose  & 

'  Don  Juan  de  la  Puente,  Canon  of  Toledo. 

-  Catherine  Charlotte,  daughter  of  Antoine,  Due  de  Grammont. 


62  THE   DESPATCHES   01' 

I'xeliidc  the  Chigi.  But  as  yet  wee  know  not  on  whom  ye  lott 
may  fall. 

From  Venice  the  letters  of  tlie  0th  Currant  say  that  they  have 
recovreil  some  part  of  the  late  shipwreck  there^  soe  that  the  losse,  it's 
thoui^ht.  may  not  bee  soe  j^reat  as  it  was  feared,  unles  of  the  3 
Venetian  nobles  who  perished  with  a  great  number  of  other  persons, 
ye  storms  &  tempests  having  been  very  violent  in  the  Adriatique  Sea. 

The  Peace  is  soe  well  observed  by  the  \'euetians  &  Turks  in  all 
the  frontiers  that  nothing  can  bee  more  to  their  satisfaction  &  a 
future  prospect  of  quiett.  The  G''  Vizier  is  still  repairing  ye 
fortifications  of  Candy,  &  arming  a  g'  number  of  galleys,  w"^''  does 
not  a  little  alarme  Maltiia  &  Sicily.  T?ut  the  long  seige  of 
Candy  has  wasted  soe  many  souldiers  &  seamen  out  of  yc  Ottoman 
Eiii|)ire  that  it  is  not  probable  the  Turks  can  pretend  to  any 
considerable  seige  these  2.  or  3  years,  uules  the  Xtian  Princes  by 
their  unnaturall  divisions  shall,  in  ye  meantime,  give  life  to  their 
common  enemy.  The  cold  is  extreme  &  all  the  rivers  frozen  up. 
From  Marseille.s  it  is  written  that  the  ]Marq'  Centurion '  has  received 
orders  from  the  King  to  ecjuippe  -i  galleys  w'^''  the  King  lends  him  to 
put  himselfe  in  a  condition  to  bee  soon  at  sea  with  his  s(|uadron.  The 
galleys  are  called  the  '  Dauphine,' '  la  S'  Dominique,'  &  '  la  Galante,' 
comnmnded  by  JMess"  de  Villeneuve,  de  la  Molte,  it  ye  Cheval'' 
de  la  Ueynarde.     Then  hee  intends  to  .seek  out  the  Pirates,  ^c". 

Since  the  first  Courrier  from  \'ienna  w'^''  brought  news  of  the 
Emperour's  being  dangerously  ill,  &  gave  subject  of  great  discourse 
here  in  case  of  his  dying  without  issue  male,  there  is  one  arrived 
yesterday  that  gives  a  better  ace'  of  his  Imp"  Ma'-',  that  hee  is  in 
no  great  danger,  his  feaver  being  become  regular. 

I  am  told  by  a  good  hand  this  day  that  Mons"'  Gourville,^ 
Envoijt'  into  Spain,  was  at  his  first  coming  into  that  kingdomemuch 
complimented  by  a  person  sent  from  Court  on  purpose,  but  being 
come  to  Madrid  &  demanding  in  ye  P'^''  of  Conde's  name  ye  payment 
of  a  debt  you  formerly  heard  of,  upon  default  of  w""'",  threatning 
that  ye  King  of  France  would  grant  him  reprizalls  against  them,  the 
Spaniards  look  on  him  over  their  shoulders  as  if  it  were  nonsence 
he  ask  money  in  this  age. 

Mons'  de  la  Haye'  (not  ye  Ami)''  in  Turkey),  some  say,  is  to  goe 

'  Hippolj'te,  Marquis  de  Centurion. 

-■  Jean  Hevault  de  Gourville  (1025-1703). 

■'  Lieutenant-yeneral  of  the  East  Indies. 


AX    EXCJLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  63 

Ambassador  to  the  G.  Mogul,  thence  to  Suratt,  &  thence  to  Con- 
stantinople, to  reside  there  in  his  name  sake's  place,  w'^''  I  cannot 
believe  by  reason  of  ye  immence  charge  of  such  an  embassy  into 
Persia,  where  no  ordinary  presents  must  make  them  wellcome.  But 
this  I  think  to  bee  more  true  &  likely,  that  bee  is  to  goe  with  two 
East  Ind.  directors  to  Suratt,  &  thence  to  Madagascar,  w'^''  place  bee 
is  to  governe  &  supervise  all  those  who  have  none  but  their  owne 
consciences  to  inspect  the  King's  account  there. 

You  may  be  almost  assured  that  the  neck  of  Munster's  designe 
is  allmost  broken,  since  the  2  shoulders  of  Cologne  &  Brandenburgh 
fayle  him  in  its  support  &  his  affairs  in  France. 

I  am  assured  (for  I  saw  the  list  &  names)  that  all  ye  reformed 
Officers  in  these  troops  will  be  reduced,  and  six  great  officers  of  ye 
militia  are  named  by  ye  King  to  consult  about  the  regulation  of 
the  troops,  better  than  they  are  at  present,  there  being  to  each 
company  i  or  5  captains,  &  ye  number  of  them  comes  to  more  than 
400,  to  save  soe  much  charge.  The  reason  is  that  when  the  King 
shall  have  occasion  to  raise  a  greater  army  hee  will  not  want 
gentlemen  who,  on  the  strength  of  their  owne  purses,  may  bee  able 
to  serve  him  better  in  the  levye  &  save  him  money  in  the 
mean  time.  Xo  stone  is  left  unturned  wherby  the  ministers  think 
they  can  save  any  thing. 

Tho'  it  continues  to  bee  fixed,  the  King's  journey  into  ye  fron- 
tiers, yet  'tis  believed  ye  ministers  will  exercise  all  their  facultys  to 
divert  any  likelyhood  of  a  warre,  &  have  reason  on  their  sides, 
because  of  other  expences  they  are  managing  at  the  Goblins  &  all 
over  the  Kingdome,  wherby  they  ruine  all  forreigne  commerce 
with  them  (being  assured  that  not  many  ells  of  English  cloth  hath 
been  sold  these  4  months  in  this  place  &  other  merchandise  pro- 
portionable), more  than  if  there  were  an  open  warre  between  the  2 
nations.  For  now  covertly  they  vend  what  they  please  in  England 
&  will  sell  nothing  to  English  merchants  for  barter,  but  ready 
money.  This  must  certainly  bee  knowne  in  England  as  well  as 
here.  &  ought  as  certainly  to  bee  remedyed.  I  have  observed  y'' 
directions  about  Codgill,  &  add  to  all  this  that  at  this  moment  of 
time  I  have  a  little  note  from  the  Consull  at  Sevilla^  w''''  says  thus : 

'  Sevilla  :  4'"  of  January,  1670. 
'  S''  Thomas  Allen  has  taken  2  Turks  men  of  war,  of  14-  &  15 
guns  off"  Cape  S'  Martinis  in  his  way  towards  Argier,  where  hee 


64  TIIK    nESPATCHi;.s   OK 

iiitendsto  lyewitli  liis  cleane  fri}r>:fatts.  Ih  is  lioped  that  in  a  short 
time  lice  may  be  able  to  give  a  ltooJ  aecouiit  of  his  taking  more  of 
them.  My  L''  Howard  is  still  at  Tanger,  iresolved  whether  to  pro- 
ceed on  his  Kmbnssy  towards  Tafiiletta,  having  lately  had  some 
rubs  in  his  Treaty  about  proceeding  w"^''  causeth  some  to  believe 
that  his  E.V'  will  not  goe  to  him.' 

To  iSir  Joseph  WilUamson. 

Paris  :  Jan.  29th,  1G70. 

At  Havre  de  Grace  the  great  ship  I  formerly  told  you  of,'  800 
tuiin  and  85  guns,  built  by  the  King  for  a  voyage  into  Persia, 
Madagascar,  itc,  sayling  out  of  that  river  with  intention  to  get  to 
the  rendezroufi  at  Port  Louis,  in  Brittany,  by  a  .strange  wonderfull 
accident  of  a  great  gust  of  wind  was  staved,  i\:  the  Lieutenant  with 
all  the  men  lost,  the  Captain  escaping  by  a  miracle  to  bee  disgraced 
for  the  cause  of  ye  mi.stbrtune  by  his  ill-manage. 

I  forgott  in  my  last  to  ti-11  you  that  Card'  Bona  was  much 
looked  on  at  Rome,  and  some  would  needs  make  him  Pope,  upon 
w''''  a  Pasquil  was  posted  up  thus :  '  Papa  bona  non  est  oratio 
Latina,'  w"-'''  was  ans''  by  himselfe  or  friends,  '  Papa  bonus  non 
est  in  usu.'  The  Card'*  Chigi  -  cS:  Roberti  ^  had  debauched  many  of 
the  old  Cardinals  in  favour  of  Celsi  with  a  distribution  of  2t)O.00U 
crowns,  w'^''  made  good  32  voyces,  but  ye  plot  is  sayd  to  have  been 
discovered  and  all  the  machine  liroken. 

Now  I  will,  o\it  of  cypher,  acquaint  you  with  a  Court  passage. 

The  Queen  lately  won  a  great  sum  of  money  att  play,  where- 
upon the  King  is  sayd  to  have  gone  and  congratulated  her  good 
luck,  but  spoyled  his  compliment  in  a  leving  check  about  the  dis- 
posall  of  it,  .showing  her  an  account  how  D"''  Molina,''  her  great 
favourite,  had  lately  transmitted  into  Spain  considerable  sums  with 
intention  to  build  a  I'alace  worth  o  millions  of  livres,  alledging  it 
was  no  compliment  to  France  to  send  money  out  of  it  to  build  in 
another  countrey. 

I  might  add  a  foolish  report  of  the  cause  of  the  Emp'*  distemper 
to  bee  that  [the]  fountain  whereat  bee  used  to  drink  water  was  full 
of  vipers  and  venomous  creatures. 

'  This  letter  is  missing.  •'  Flavio  Chigi,  nephew  of  Pope  Alexander  VII. 

'  Carlo  lioberti. 

'  Millie.  Molina,  lady-in-waiting  to  Queen  Marie  Thir^se. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  65 

The  King  is  very  well  at  present  &  was  seen  hunting  2  days 
since,  and  ye  main  dispute  att  Court  is  whether  hee  shall  goe  for 
Bourbon  or  Flanders  first.  Hee  is  altogether  inclined  and  bent 
for  the  latter,  well  knowing  that  if  he  stay  at  Bourbon  it  will  bee 
too  late  for  him  to  doe  anything  on  the  fi'ontiers. 

[^Not  addres><ed.^ 

Feb.  1.  iff2. 

Y''  Lpp  will  learne  more  certainly  than  from  mee  ye  cause  of 
this  disorder  at  Court,  yet  I  must  acquaint  you  w">  what  I  heare 
of  it.  The  King  being  highly  incensed  w"'  ye  Chev''  de  Lorraine  ^ 
&  imprisoning  him  in  a  place  like  Newgate,-  Monsieur  was  mnch 
troubled,  hee  being  his  onely  favorite  it  capitulated  ye  reason  soe 
much  w""  ye  King  that  hee  overheard  him  to  repeate  his  words, 
whereat  hee  was  much  enraged  &  commanded  him  &  Madame  to 
retire  to  their  Castle  in  Champagne,  whither  this  morning  they  are 
going.  All  ye  Court  sayd  the  King  was  never  in  soe  ill  a  humour 
&  so  discomposed  ;  some  doe  probably  enough  say  it  was  their 
unseasonable  pressing  for  money.  This,  I  am  sure,  the  storme  is 
not  yet  over.  This  has  made  a  dismall  alarum  in  Paris,  &  people 
grumble  at  ye  King  for  never  coming  hither  since  Beaufort's  death. 

To  Lord  ArUngton. 

Paris  :  February  1,  1670,  S.N. 

I  am  assured  that  the  King  has  sent  to  ye  Queen  of  Spain  that 
shee  need  not  be  alarmed  att  his  voyage  into  Flanders,  ye  very  same 
message  that  he  sent  her  2  years  since  when  he  invaded  Flanders. 

My  Correspondent  att  Strasbourg  says  thus  :  '  Mess^'"*  les  Estats 
Generaux  travaillent  fort  a  un  accomodement  entres  [sic]  les 
Electeurs  de  Mayence  et  Palatin  et  le  due  de  Lorraine ;  ils  ont 
pour  ce  sujet  charge  le  S""  Harmel  Bruynuicks,  leur  resident  a 
Vienne,  d'offrir  leur  mediations,  ce  que  Mayence  et  LoiTaine 
ont  acceptes,  mais  I'Electeur  Palatin  fait  le  difficile  nonobstant 
que  cy  devant  il  avoit  implore  Tassistance  des  Mess"  les  Estats.  ce 
que  nous  fait  soupfoner  qu'il  est  suporte  par  la  France.     Le  bruit 

'  Philippe  de  Lorraine,  known  as  the  '  Chevalier  de  Lorraine.' 
-  Pierre  Encise  at  Lyons.   For  particulars  of  this  quarrel  see  Montagu-Arlington, 
'  Letters,'  Hist.  MS.  Comm.  p.  462. 

VOL.  V.  F 


66  Till-;  nEsr'ATCHEs  of 

qu'on  avoit  fait  courir  d'un  traitt6  entre  le  Due  de  Lorraine  et  la 
France  ne  se  trouve  pas  veritable.'  II  est  vray  qu'on  a  fait  au 
due  des  propositions  fort  avantageuses,  mais  coninie  en  mesme 
temps  on  a  fait  d'un  autre  costo  des  propositions  tout  a  fait  con- 
traires  h  eelles  lil,  cela  a  extremeinent  effarouche  le  d'  Due  qui, 
nonobstant  sa  viellesse,  est  fort  sur  ses  gjirdes.  A  Katisbonne  le 
Due  de  Meeklenbourg^  s'est  expose  a  la  moquerie  de  tout  I'Empire, 
s'estant  laisso  employer  de  recevoir  publi(|uement  et  solonnellement 
I'ordre  de  S'  Michel  de  lions''  de  Gravelle,^  une  action  fort  bien- 
seaiite  :\  un  I'riuce  d'AUemague.' 

This  week  an  extraordinary  expresse  was  sent  from  Court  into 
Holland,  but  I  cannot  learn  its  burthen. 

'J'lie  letters  from  Vienna  give  us  better  news  of  y''  Kmp'',  and 
that  at  present  he  is  endeavouring  to  gain  ]?randenburg  from  the 
French  interest,  to  w'""  he  is  at  present  much  devoted. 

To  Lord  ArliiKiton. 

Paris :  Feb.  8,  1670,  S.N. 

1  have  transmitted  to  M''  Williamson  the  latest  advice  from 
Rome,  &  a  Pasquil  that  concerns  the  Card'*  Letters  from  Madrid  of 
the  8th  past  say  that  Mons''  Gourville,  ye  l"""  of  Conde's  Envoijc, 
had  then  audience  from  the  Cath''"''  Queen  &  some  hopes  to  have 
a  satisfactory  dispatch,  tho  the  Spannisli  Envoyi'  assured  me  two 
days  since  that  Spain  thinks  ye  V"'  ought  to  bee  satisfyed  with 
what  he  has  ali'eady  received,  &  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
induce  the  erowne  to  give  him  any  more.'  It  is  also  true  that  they 
are  apprehensive  &  impatiently  expect  the  arrivall  of  their  Indy 
fleet,  the  rather  because  near  30  pirats  lye  in  wayt  for  them. 

It  is  sayd  there  that  the  Hollanders  offer  to  the  Queen  liegent 
20'"  fast  &  (500  p.  g  yearly  towards  the  defence  of  Flanders  in  case  a 
war  should  happen,  w'' '  is  supposed  to  bee  a  Iimrovre  to  ballance 
an  instructiiin  tiie  ArchlJp  of  'J'lioulouse  carryes  with  him  to  pro- 
pose a  marriage  between  the  King  of  Spain  &  little  Madam*  of 
France,  a  league  ag'  ]lolland  iV  a  remission  of  all  pretentions  as  a 

'  See  p.  53. 

-  Christian  Lewis,  son  of  Adoliili  Frederick,  Duke  of  Mecklenburg. 

'  Abb6  de  Gravel,  French  Resident  at  Mayence. 

'  See  letter  dated  January  25,  1070. 

'  Marie  Th^rise. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  67 

portion,  upon  condition  that  in  default  of  heir  male  the  Dolphin 
shall  inherit  Flanders. 

The  letters  of  ye  22"'  past  say  that  the  Duke  of  Cordona/  head 
of  the  House  of  Arragon,  dyed  suddainly  as  he  was  talking  with 
his  domesticks  ;  that  the  Marquis  de  Liche  has  laj'd  aside  all 
thoughts  of  going  Amb''  to  Portugall  since  the  death  of  his  lady, 
w"^''  he  resents  as  he  ought,  &  the  Spaniards  laugh  at  Miranda  for 
having  dismissed  all  his  trayne  in  that  Court  &  say  that  '  incepit 
a?dificare  et  non  potuit  consummare.' 

Coming  near  home  I  must  acquaint  y''  Lpp  that  the  Marquis  of 
Montespan  is  att  8'  Sebastian  with  his  2  little  sons,  whither  he 
tied  to  avoyd  a  torrent  that  tbreatned  his  destruction,  under  the 
disguise  of  a  military  processe  for  having  abused  his  regiment  in 
their  pay,  &c. 

The  Duke  of  Tremes  -  dyed  3  days  since  here,  aged  97  years. 
Since  the  Chev''  de  Lorraiu's  disgrace  a  sufficient  number  of  guards 
have  conveyd  towards  Lions  &  intend  to  bring  him  to  Montpellier 
to  bee  a  prisoner  in  that  cittadel ;  others  say  hee  shall  be  exiled  to 
Maltha  for  3  years,  '  pour  y  faire  ses  caravanes,'  &  shall  have  a  pen- 
sion from  the  King  of  3  thous''  pistolls — in  fine,  untill  some  ac- 
comodation of  that  busines  be  found  out.  The  King  &  Monsieur 
are  both  angry. 

The  C'  de  Vivonne,  I  hear,  refaseth  to  accept  of  ye  charge  of 
Ad"  of  France  under  the  little  C  de  Vermandois,  great  Ad"  since 
Beaufort's  death,  but  will  rather  keep  that  of  generall  of  the  galleys, 
being  unwilling  to  quitt  a  certaynty. 

The  Polanders  are  exasperated  ag'  their  King  about  his 
marriage  without  the  consent  of  their  nobles  ;  ^  &  the  Venetians,  to 
pacify  the  dragon,  have  sacrifised  near  20  of  their  most  beautifull 
nunns,  whom  they  took  out  of  the  monasteries  with  main  force  to 
furnish  the  G''  Seign''  Seraglio  ;  but  they  &  the  rich  presents  were 
cast  away. 

To  Sir  Joseph    Williamson. 

Paris  :  Feb.  22",  1670. 
From  Venice  it  is  certainly  reported  that  the  liepvhliqtie  has 
within  the  2  last  months  lost  14  vessells  by  shipwreck,  worth  in  all 

'  D.  Luis  Eamon  d'Aragon,  fiftli  Due  de  Segorbe. 

-  Bene  Potier,  Due  de  Gesvres.  '  See  footnote  1,  p.  .54. 

F  2 


68  THE    nKSPATniRS   OF 

by  coiiiputacion  800"  ducats,  w*^''  the  Rep.  had  given  out  orders  for 
the  payment  of.  but  are  since  revoked. 

The  stones  of  tlie  little  windows  where  are  layd  '  les  denonces 
pour  les  affaires  d'estat '  in  the  Palace  of  S'  Mark  have  been  defiled, 
as  well  as  the  vcssells  where  the  Ballot  (it  kmat  were  usually  made, 
(t  2,000  ducats  offred  for  ye  discovery  of  the  author. 

Let ter.s  out  of  the  Conclave  of  ye  2  fth  past  say  that  Vidoni '  was 
the  most  likely  to  bee  chosen,  that  the  2  threat  factions  of  Bar- 
barini  &  Chitri  were  more  powerfull  than  the  other  3  of  France, 
Spain,  iS:  Rospij^liosi. 

'  In  fjuesto  stato  di  cose  1'  un  et  1'  alti-e  de  lucro  si  trova  forte  por 
I'esclusione  de  che  non  vogliano,  ma  debole  por  1'  inclusione  di  che 
desiderano,  e  pero  ciascuno  d'  esti  por  accrescere  la  sua  parte  va 
neir  altre  fazioni  cercando  soccorso.  Rospigliosi  con  poco  seguito 
se  trattiene  indifferente  ne  con  I'unerse  scopertaraente  ad  una  della 
parti  vuol  perder  quell'  occasione  che  le  congjunturo  tra  il  com- 
battimento  tra  piu  debolarsi  d'  esser  il  piu  debole  d'  accantarsi 
alia  Metz.  L'  espagmioli  sotto  Medici  paiono  inclinati  ad  andar 
con  Chigi  trovando  forte  nell  colegio  desto  i  primi  inclusi  dalle 
corona  et  i  francesi  ch'  punto  sin'  bora  non  hanno  data  segno  di 
particular  inclinatione  fuorche  a  Rospigliosi.  Da  queste  si  cava 
un'  apparente  di  confusione  et  un  irresolutesia  de  capi  a  moversi. 
dubitando  ciascuno  coll'  esser  il  primo  a  saltare  in  cainpo  de  dar 
air  aver.sario  occasioni  d'  attacarlo  et  romperlo.' 

The  French  King  is  making  a  regulation  for  his  Infantry  w'^''' 
is  framed  by  Messrs  de  Pradel.-  de  Bi'et,'  h  ilartinais,'  to  this 
effect :  that  in  every  regiment  there  shall  bee  a  Sub-Lieutenaut- 
Collonel ;  that  the  4  first  captains  of  every  Regiment  of  foot  shall 
have  a  pencion  of  1 ,000  crowns  amongst  them  &  each  of  them  five 
dead  pays.''  The  souldiers  pay  shall  bee  augmented  by  '  un  Hart '  a 
day,  &  when  any  troops  shall  bee  commanded  out  the  Captains  shall 
command  them  according  to  their  commissions  whenas,  before,  the 
Captains  of  the  I'icardy  Regiment,  tlio'  never  so  young  iV"  ignorant, 
commanded  all  the  Captains  of  the  Regiments  that  came  behind 
that  of  Picardy. 

'  Petro  Vidoni. 

^  Francois  de  Pr.adel.  '  Alexandre  le  Bret. 

'  Jean  de  Martinet,  killed  at  the  siege  of  Doesburg  in  1G72. 
'  I.e.   '  morte-payes,'   reduced   pay  given  to  officers  or   soldiers  incapable  of 
serving  in  the  army. 


A>'    ENCiLISH    AL.E.NT    IX    PARIS  69 

The  camp  of  S'  Sebastians  comes  into  play  again  in  May,  where 
the  King  intends  to  have  the  number,  com  pleat,  12  thousand  men, 
w*^*"  shall  be  relieyed  in  June  by  the  like  number  &  again  in 
August,  whereby  hee  will  see  all  his  troops  that  are  not  of  abso- 
lute necessity  for  the  defence  of  his  garrisons.  But  the  troops  of 
his  owne  house  shall  not  bee  encamped. 

I  hear  that  the  Chev""  de  Lorrain  is  at  Chasteau  Vif,  near  Mar- 
seilles. On  Saterday  last  '  les  donnations  entre  vifs,'  w'=''  King 
Casimire  makes  to  the  Duke  of  Anguion  ^  of  some  lands  belonging 
to  him  in  Naples,  were  signed  before  the  publick  notaries,  &  it's 
thought  the  P'^''  of  Conde  may  now  exchange  them  with  the  Sieur 
of  Manchivini  -  for  the  Dutchy  of  Nevers.  Upon  ye  whole  an 
expresse  is  dispatched  to  Mons''  de  Gourville  at  Madrid,  who  has  as 
well  this  as  some  other  affaires  to  negotiate  in  that  Court,  from 
whence  the  last  letters  of  the  5th  currant  advise  that  the  ArchBp 
of  Thoulouse  was  expected  there  in  12  days. 

The  Savoyards  proclaime  here  the  extraordinary  civilities  they 
received  in  England. 

The  King's  journey  into  Flanders  is  not  contradicted. 


To  Lord  Arlinijton. 

Paris  :  February  "i'ind,  1670. 

Since  the  last  I  presumed  to  trouble  your  Lopp  with  I  have  seen 
letters  from  the  Conclave  dated  the  24th  past,  w'^^  say  that  Vidoui 
was  most  publickly  thought  upon  for  their  election  ;  that  Bai'berini 
is  not  only  head  of  the  Urbans  &  some  of  the  Innocentia's,  but  of 
other  Innocentia's  formerly  called  '  Squadrone.'  ■*  Chigi  is  head  of  a 
great  faction  adversary  to  the  former,  &  rather  than  they  will 
endure  the  election  of  either  it's  thought  they  may  agree  upon  a 
third. 

It  is  most  certain  these  2  factions  are  more  considerable  than 
those  of  Spain,  France,  or  Eospigliosi.  Spain,  under  Medici, 
seems  inclined  to  side  with  Chigi,  finding  them  powerfuU  in  the 
Colledge  &  friends  to  that  Crowne. 

'  Due  d'Enghien. 

'  Philippe  Julien  Mancini-Mazarini,  Due  de  Nevers  (1039-1707). 

'  The '  squadronisti '  consisted  of  the  cardinals  created  by  Innocent  X.  They 
were  Omodei,  Ottoboni.  Imperiali,  Boromeo,  and  Azzolino  (Ranke.  T7k?  Popes  of 
Home,  vol.  iii.  p.  397). 


70  TITK    DESPATrilFS    OF 

France  has  not  j'et  ap])eaiocl  to  boe  anyways  particularly 
inclined,  iinlesse  it  be  to  the  ]v()spi<(liosi,  \-  the  last  seem  as  yet  in- 
ditl'erent,  ex]ieeting  a  conjuncture  more  securely  favourable  for 
their  declaring  themselves,  every  one  being  very  cautious  of 
appearing  in  the  field,  fearing  to  bee  exposed  too  much  to  the  lash 
of  its  adversaries. 

In  fine,  my  Lord,  the  state  is  said  to  bee  this,  that  each  faction 
is  strong  to  ye  exclusion  of  others,  but  not  for  the  election  of  whom 
they  desire ;  wherfore  at  present  they  all  are  busy  in  endeavouring 
to  strengthen  their  {larty  by  some  of  the  other  factions. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

I'liiis :  March  1",  IfiTO,  K.N. 

Since  my  last  by  il"'  Williamson's  servant,  Card'  Retz  has 
dispatched  a  courrier  hither  with  letters  to  the  King  of  the  4th 
of  Feb.  to  give  his  M.  Xtian  Ma'''  an  account  of  affaires  in  y° 
Conclave,  hee  having  (as  the  French  say)  '  le  secret  de  la  part  de  la 
France.' 

The  Duke  of  Chaulnes  made  a  very  elegant  speech  to  the 
Colledge,  in  w'=''  hee  much  supported  the  H.  of  y*^  Rospigliosi  by 
reviving  the  memory  of  the  late  good  Pope  Clement  9"',  but  hee 
perceived  his  discourse  not  to  bee  soe  favourably  received  as  hee 
imagined.  Severall  of  the  Cardinals,  being  much  indisposed,  have 
quitted  the  Conclave,  among  whom  I'icolomini '  is  much  in  danger. 

The  two  factions  of  the  IJarbarini  &  Cliigi  continue  strong 
enough  to  op])ose  each  other,  but  not  to  promote  the  designs  of 
either.  To  avoyd  prolixities  it  is  believed  they  may  choose  one 
of  the  oldest  of  them  all,  Nerli  or  Altierry,-  who  are  more  than 
80  years  old. 

The  French  party  &  influence  grows  still  greater  there,  while 
none  of  the  3  iSpannish  Card'*  appear. 

From  Venice,  of  y""  8  ct  1 0th  pa.>t,  that  Republick  has  a  suc- 
cession of  misfortunes  by  the  late  tenipe.<tuous  weather.  Four  of 
their  ships  on  their  way  to  conduct  the  Chev''  de  Aloliuo'  towards 
Constantinople  were  driven  into  a  port  by  ill-weather,  where  were 

'  Celio  Piceolomini. 

'  Paulatius  Alticii,  Pope  Clement  X.,  was  eventually  chosen  from  this  party. 
He  died  in  1G76. 

'  The  Venetian  ambas.sador  to  Tnrkey. 


AX   ENGLISH    AGENT   IN   PARIS  '  71 

the  Adm"  &  other  vessells  of  Tripoly,  with  whom  the  Venetians 
fought  a  long  time,  but  were  at  length  forced  to  yield,  y"  Adm" 
having  more  than  600  men  on  board. 

Tlie  Senate  is  preparing  of  new  presents  to  bee  sent  to  the 
Grand  Seign''  in  lieu  of  tliose  cast  away,  &  intend  to  raise  some 
horse  to  strengthen  some  places  in  Italy  &  Dalmatia. 

The  Vizier  armes  many  ships  &  galleys,  suspected  ag'  Italy. 
A  courrier  from  Portugal,  dispatched  thence  the  25th  of  Jan. 
towards  Rome,  passing  through  Lions,  reported  the  ?"="  D"  Pedro 
to  bee  dangerously  ill,  as  my  last  informed  y''  Lpp  with  uncertainty. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  March  3'',  1(570. 

Letters  from  Constantinople  say  that,  notwithstanding  the  en- 
deavors of  the  Valaqui,  the  Gd  S''  [Grand  Seigneur]  had  caused  his 
brother  to  bee  strangled,'  &  those  from  Maltha  of  the  2  ith  Jan.  advise 
that  the  Gd  S'"  refuseth  to  ratify  the  Peace  w"-"'"  the  Gd  Visier  had  con- 
cluded with  the  Venetians,  &  that  for  these  three  reasons:  (1)  The 
Visier  ought  not  to  have  left  the  Beiniblvfte  any  places  in  the  king- 
dome  of  Candy.  2.  Thathee  had  given  to  them  the  citty  &  territories 
of  Clissa,  in  Dalmatia,  with  the  lands  depending  on  the  3  forts  left 
to  y''  Xtians  for  the  habitation  of  ye  Greeks  that  quitted  Candy, 
which  make  as  great  an  extent  as  ye  Island  of  Candy,  &  yields 
a  greater  revenue.  The  3''  reason,  that  the  Visir  ought  to  have 
demanded  the  islands  of  Santoriuo,  Nisia,  Scorpentio,-  Milo,  & 
Antiniclo,  w"=''  the  Turks  pretend  are  dependances  of  Candia,  & 
for  these  reasons  the  Vizier  did  not  well  in  agreeing  to  a  Peace. 

The  last  L"'"  from  Switzerland  advise  that  |  of  ye  towne  of 
Lion,  in  the  countrey  of  Vallay,  have  been  consumed  by  subterranial 
flames,  thought  to  bee  proceeding  from  y'mineralls;  that  the  Pont 
de  Basle,  on  the  Rhine,  has  been  broken  by  the  ice,  as  well  as  that 
of  Soleuse,  the  last  Citty  having  sufter'd  much  by  inundations. 
The  aftairs  in  Swits''  are  very  peaceable,  they  having,  without 
money,  quitted  their  animosity  ag'  y*"  French  &  reimbraced  the 
interest  of  France. 

The  French  have  not  finished  any  negotiations  with  the  P"'  of 
Germany. 

'  A  rumour  without  any  foundation,  as  Souleimann  11.  died  in  1691,  and 
Ahmed  II.  in  169-5.  ■  Scarpanto. 


72  I  THE    nESPATCHES   01' 

A  petty  accident,  w*"''  may  not  be  unworthy  y'  knowledge,  befell 
the  J^"^'  ^V™  of  Furstenburg  (ye  person  you  have  heard  so  much  of), 
much  to  his  mortification.  Going  from  Berlin  hee  by  neglect  left 
on  his  table  his  e^criloiiv,  wherein  were  all  his  papers  &  instructions 
from  France  in  cypher,  with  the  cypher  itselfe,  iV  at  ye  place  where 
hee  dined  liaving  perceived  his  error,  returned  imediately  &  desired 
ye  Elector  to  cause  ye  gates  to  bee  shutt,  W^''  done,  after  much 
incjuiry,  it  was  returned  to  him,  but  certaiidy  they  had  time  enough 
to  peruse  his  instructions  by  ye  cypher  &  given  him  ye  occasion  of 
making  all  possible  speed  hither,  where  hee  is  at  present. 


With  the  presents  ye  King  sent  Madam  among  others  there 
[was]  a  '  Cassette  de  Maroquin  de  Levant  garny  d'argent  doro,' 
wherein  are  20  purses,  in  each  100  Iiuis  d'or,  &  a  letter,  'par 
laquelle  il  luy  mandoit  qu'avant  le  deplaisir  de  ce  (ju'elle  n'estoit 
pas  a  la  cour  pour  mettre  aux  lotteries,  il  y  avoit  voulu  mettre  a 
son  intention  et  en  son  nom ;  que  la  chose  avoit  si  bieu  reussy  f[u'il 
luy  envoyoit  ce  qu'elle  lui  avoit  gagnce.' 

The  rest  of  ye  presents  of  gi-eater  value  were — 1.  A  '  Cassette 
du  bois  de  Senteur  des  Indes,'  never  before  seen  in  France,  wherein 
was  a  rich  toilette ;  ye  2''  of  wood  of  Calembour.  wherein  were 
great  quantities  of  trim'd  gloves  &  many  rarities ;  and  the  S"*  was 
of  Cedar,  wherin  was  a  little  trunk  of  massy  gold,  in  w'''  were  many 
rings,  Jewells,  &  seals  in  stones. 

To  Sir  Joneph  WilUamson. 

Paris  :   March  5'",  1670. 

The  Grand  Balets  have  been  danced  over  &  over  again  to 
wellcome  Mons''  &  Madam.  Ou  Munday  the  King  caused  a  generall 
review  to  bee  made,  where  were  all  the  Court  ladyes. 

His  journey  into  Flanders  is  spoken  of  more  than  ever,  tlio"  the 
neighbours  may  sing  Peace  for  this  year. 

It  is  pleasant  to  see  the  proposalls  made  by  criticks  here  to 
the  Ministers  of  State  about  ruining  the  Dutch  trade. 

The  conclusion  of  all  is  nothing  lesse  than  a  league  between 
Eng'',  France,  Sweden  '  &  Denmark.^  Munster  &ye  Elector  of  Colen, 
&  y''  manner  to  keep  ships  in  all  jiarts  to  stop  their  passage. 

'  Charles  II.  ^  Ferdinand  III. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  73 


'To  Sir  Joscj-ih  Williamson. 

Paris  :  March  8th,  1670,  S.N. 

The  last  letters  from  Rome  of  the  17th  past  say  thus  : — the 
divisions  of  the  Conclave  growing  still  greater  between  Barbarini 
&  Chigi,  it  is  thought  a  Pope  will  not  suddaiuly  bee  chosen, 
because  none  of  them  ha\'e  yet  discovered  the  truth  of  their  inten- 
tions. Vidoni  is  looked  but  coldly  on  at  present,  the  oldest  of  y'' 
Card'''  being  now  ag'  him,  Chigi  himselfe  withdrawing  from  him, 
finding  severall  of  his  creatures  to  have  an  aversion  for  him. 

Two  days  before,  Cardinalls  Antony  &  Spada  '  being  indisposed, 
went  out  of  the  [  ],-  since  when  Card'  de  S'"^  Croix  went  out. 

Card'^  Caraffa '  &  Corsini  ■•  are  ranch  better. 

Chigi,  tho'  much  indisposed  by  a  sore  throat,  for  v?'''  hee  had 
been  2  blooded  in  ye  tongue  &  kept  his  bed,  would  not  quitt  the 
Conclave,  for  fear  a  Pope  might  bee  chosen  in  his  absence. 

The  Spannish  Ambassador  visits  all  the  parloirs  of  y'=  Conclave, 
solliciting  his  partisans  for  a  speedy  &  favourable  election ;  y" 
Portugall  Amb''  does  the  like.  Bona  is  looked  on  as  a  person  inde- 
pendant,  tho'  secretly  supported  by  y''  French.  The  H.  Colledge 
has  answered  the  French  King's  L'''  with  their  humble  thanks  for 
his  sending  an  Ex'-^'  Amb'',  and  Card'  Bouillon  having  had  some 
voyces  Jans  les  scrufines  the  old  zelot  Card"'  have  made  a  great 
noyse,  being  much  offended,  as  if  it  were  ag'  the  oath  they  had 
taken  about  voting,  because  hee  is  but  27  years  old. 

It  was  the  Card'  Maldaquin*"  that  made  this  briipte,  who  is 
esteemed  the  only  foole  in  the  Conclave.  Card'  Anthony,  at  his 
leaving  the  Conclave,  sayd  confidently  in  generall  termes  to  one  of 
his  friends  that  ye  election  would  bee  tedious,  his  brother,  Barbarin, 
being  opiniastred,  with  all  his  creatures,  rather  to  dye  there  than 
suffer  a  creature  of  Chigi's  to  be  elected,  &  the  latter  is  as  obstinate 
on  the  other  side  ag'  Barbarine.  As  to  the  crownes,  the  election 
of  Elci  '^  is  excluded  by  France,  and  Bonaiti  as  much  by  Spain,  as 
well  as  Bonelli "  &  Celsi.     Bona  hopes  much  from  all  the  divisions. 

At  Rome  there  is  a  picture  of  ye  little  ship  of  S'  Peter,  wherein 
is  represented  Card'  Altieri  at  the  putipe,  Barbarin  at  the  sterne, 

'  Orazio  Filippo  Spada.  -  A  blank  in  the  MS. 

'  Carlo  Caraffo.  '  Nerio  Corsini.  ^  Cardinal  Maldachini. 

'■  Soipione  d'  Elci.  '  Carlo  Bonelli. 


74  THK    DESPATCHES   OF 

Chigi  ill  the  lu)kl.  Ixospigliosi  at  a  Utile  table  perusing  the  sea 
chart,  Azzolin  '  grimping  at  y''  little  mast,  Deley '  &  Vidoni  at  the 
owers  [oars]. 

Geiines,  Feb.  Kith.  It  is  sayd  that  a  privateer  of  Maltha,  coin- 
uiaiuled  by  a  French  Chevalier,  li;id  lately  taken  a  Turk  laden  with 
merchandise  bound  from  Alexandria  for  Constantinople:  lUD  Turks 
were  made  prisoners,  about  26  killed,  &  the  prize  worth  70  thousand 
crowns. 

"What  I  told  you  in  my  last  is  coufinned,  that  the  Gd  Seign'" 
refuseth  to  ratify  the  I'eare  made  with  the  Venetians,  unles  that  y' 
Ilepul)lick  shall  first  quitt  the  possession  of  Suda,  Spinalouga,  & 
Garabuza.' 

It  is  written  that  P'=''  Charles  of  Lorrain  having  with  much 
affliction  learnt  the  death  of  his  father,''  proposed  hiinselfe  to  goe, 
'  pour  s'aboucher  avec  le  due  Charles,  son  oncle,'  ^  on  the  frontiers 
of  Germany  &  Lorraine. 

The  French  Minister  Gremonville  att  Vienna  has  had  severall 
conferences  with  P'"^  Charles  about  his  succession  to  the  territories 
of  his  uncle,  &  it  is  thought  that  France  is  in  some  pour  jmrler 
with  that  soveraigne  towards  an  adjustment  of  that  matter,  & 
that  Mons''  de  Choisy.'^  Intendant  in  the  o  Bishopricks  of  Thous,' 
Aletz,  &  \'eidun,  has  instructions  to  discourse  that  matter  speedily 
with  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  at  Nancy." 

The  S''  de  la  Mothe,'-*  brother-in-law  to  ye  S""  de  Gourville,  is 
returned  from  Spain,  &  reports  abroad  that  the  S]ianiards  have 
promised  the  P"^"  of  Conde  ye  payment  of  1,100,000'  due  to  him, 
in  case  hee  will  have  some  jiatience  for  y''  paym'  of  it,  for  the 
performance  of  w*^''  they  offer  diverse  assignations. 

The  King  has  given  leave  to  I'ere  Annat,  a  Jesuite  &  his  con- 

'  Decio  .Tiiuiore  Azzolini.  '  Scipione  Deley. 

'  Gavabuso.     See  p.  71. 

'  Franvois  III.  de  Lorraine,  brother  of  Charles  IV.,  Due  do  Lorraine. 

*  Charles  IV.,  Duo  de  Lorraine. 

«  Jean  Paul  de  Choisy,  Intendant  at  .Metz  1(;G.S-1673. 

'  Toul. 

'  Charles  IV.,  Due  de  Lorraine,  had  concluded  a  treaty  at  Montmartre,  in  1662, 
by  which  on  his  death  his  estates  were  to  pass  to  the  King  of  France,  to  the  exclusion 
of  his  nephew  Charles  (Koch  and  Schoell,  Hisloire  abn'gie  dcs  Traites  de  Paix, 
vol.  i.  p.  3-47). 

'  Francois  du  Biou,  Sieur  de  la  Mothe. 


AX   ENGLISH   ACfFAT   IN    PAIUS  75 

fessor,  to  retire  from  Court,  &  6  Jesuits  having  been  presented  to 
the  King's  choice,  hee  has  taken  Pere  Ferrier,  who  begins  that 
function  after  Easter. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WilliMnson. 

Paris  :  March  12th,  '70,  S.N. 

I  hear,  somewhat  mistically,  that  some  Princes  are  brooding  a 
better  understanding  between  France  &  Spain,  from  w*^''  the  latter 
promiseth  itselfe  great  advantages.' 

From  Brussells  my  correspondent  tells  mee  there  is  some  likely- 
hood  that  the  Spaniiish  Court  uTay  hearken  to  the  great  overtures 
made  them  by  the  Duke  of  Lorrain,  in  case  they  shall  make  his 
nephew,  P'^*^  Charles,  Governor  of  Flanders. 

These  days  past  I  have  seen  many  brasse  guns  of  all  sizes 
brought  out  of  the  Arsenal  &  sent  by  water  towards  Eouen.  & 
nothing  is  more  ye  publick  &  most  hectoring  discourse  than 
of  the  strength  of  the  Crowne  by  sea  even  to  the  disparagem*  of 
all  others.  Others  talk  of  a  patriarch,  but  it  is  most  likely  that  no 
Pope  may  be  yet  cho.sen  this  halfe  year. 

Since  my  last,  '  au  rapport  de  M.  Sanguien,  doyen  de  la  Cour 
des  Aides,  on  a  fait  passer  un  arrest  d'enregistrement  de  la  declara- 
tion du  Roy.  portant  revocation  du  droit  d'entrepot  que  les  vaisseaux 
estrangers  ont  este  oblige  de  payer  cy-devant,  ce  c[\\i  semble  estre 
un  petit  acheminement  au  restablissement  de  I'ancienne  liberte  de 
Commerce."  I  cannot  yet  tell  how  to  explain  it  to  you  (by  the 
next  you  shall  have  it  printed),  whether  it  bee  tonnage  of  50  sous 
or  no,  but  I  cannot  imagine  it  to  be  that. 

The  King's  journey  is  fixed,  if  nothing  intervene. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  March  19tb,  1670. 

This  morning  I  received  a  letter  from  ^ladrid  of  the  Gth  curr', 
containing  the  confirmation  of  the  Conde  de  Molina's  going  for 
England  with  the  character  of  Ex"'-"  Ambassador,  where  his  stay 
will  bee  short,  from  whence  he  is  to  come  to  this  Court ;  that 
many  believe  the  ilarq'  of  Agrapoly,-  named  by  the  Court  of  Spain 
to  goe  Envoye  to  England,  will  bee  counterman nded. 

'  '  The  great  advantages '  would  be  the  succession  of  the  Dauphin  to  the 
throne  of  Spain  if  Charles  II.  died  without  issue. 

'  D.  Gaspar  Ibafiez  de  Segovia,  Marquis  d'AgropoIi. 


76  THE    DESl'ATC'UES   01' 

As  to  tlie  progresse  the  King  resolves  ou  into  Flanders  his 
Ma'-^'  had  concluded  thus — 

From  S'  Gennains  to  Sanbir,' 

Compein,''' 

Han, 

S"  Guentin/ 

Laiidersy/ 

Quesney,''  2  nights, 

Avenue,^ 

Beniardbourg, 

Phillipville,"  -1  nights, 

Charleroy. 

JJizoh," 

Athe,  3  nights, 

Tourny,"  3  nights, 

Odenarde,"* 

Courtray, 

Lisle, '•  four  nights, 

Betlmne,  2  nights, 

S'  \'enant, 

Bergoen,'^ 

Dunquerque,  4  nights, 

Gravelinne, 

Calais, 

Boulogne, 

Hedin,'^ 

Aras." 

But,  though  this  was  2  days  since  fully  resolved  on,  I  hear  now 
the  King  has  altred  his  mind  &  will  take  another  way ;  w"^''  way 
soever  it  bee,  he  hath  ordred  sufficient  numbers  of  foot  to  lye  in  the 
severall  places  where  hee  intends  to  lodge.  And  as  to  commands, 
they  are  as  folio weth  : — 

Rubentel,'''  Capitain  of  ye  Guards,  shall  command  the  12  com- 
panies of  foot  w'^''  are  to  march  towards  Lisle  in  a  few  days. 

'  St.  Quentin.  '  Landiecies. 

'  Philippeville.  '  Binche. 

"  Lille.  "  Beigues. 

Denys  Louis  ile  liubeiitel  de  Monditour. 


Senlis. 

-  Compi^gne. 

Quesnoy. 

"  Avesnes. 

Touniay. 

"  Oudenarde. 

Hesrlin. 

"  .\rras. 

AX    ENT.LISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  7/ 

The  Comte  de  Soisson '  shall  command,  during  the  King's  ]5ro- 
gresse,  the  '  Maison  Royalle '  in  quality  of  Lieutenant  Generall. 
The  ilarquis  of  Rochefort^  shall  command  the  other  troops  of  the 
King's  house  w'-"''  are  not  '  de  la  Quadra  ^  Royalle,"  as  the  Dolphin's 
Regiment. 

Mareschal  d'Humieres  (t  I\I.  d'Estrades^  are  to  command  '  les 
petits  corps  separez.' 

The  King  has  named  two  gentlemen  of  his  bed  chamber  to  goe 
with  congratulations  to  Poland  &  condoleauces  to  Denmark.  His 
Ma'-"  liath  putt  on  purple  for  the  death  of  that  King,  but  intends 
to  wear  it  only  12  days. 

To  Lord  ArUnijtoii. 

Tiu-is  :  March  •22'\  1C70,  S.N. 

Herewith  yourLopp  receives  a  letter  from  Madrid,  to  w""^  I  will 
add  what  1  have  seen  in  others  hence  by  the  same  ordinary,  wherein 
there  was  no  discourse  but  of  leagues,  particularly  of  one  between 
the  Emperour,  Spain,  &  Sweden,  that  in  case  of  an  Ottoman 
Invasion  Sweden  shall  assist  the  Emp"'  with  12"'  foot  &  5,000  horse, 
&  that  they  shall  be  allowed  30™  pieces  of  |^  a  month  respectively 
by  the  Emp''  &  .Spain. 

If  there  bee  really  any  such  thing  I  suppose  it  is  with  a  Pro- 
visoe  that  tlie  ople  Alliance  can  dispence  with  the  absence  of  those 
troops. 

A  league  offensive  &  defensive  is  also  said  to  bee  '  sur  le  tapis ' 
between  Spain  &  Holland,  if  either  of  their  dominions  shall  bee 
invaded. 

The  ArehBpp  of  Toulouze  is  arrived  att  Madrid,  &  splendid 
preparacions  are  making  for  his  entertainment. 

From  Constantinople  advise  of  the  30th  December  says  that 

'  Eugene  Maurice  de  Savoie,  Comte  de  Soissons  (1633-1673),  son  of  Charles 
Bourbon,  Comte  de  Soissons.  He  married  Olympe  Mancini,  one  of  the  nieces  of 
Cardinal  Mazarin ;  became  Governor  of  Champagne ;  in  1672  was  created 
Lieutenant-General.  He  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  '  Passage  of  the  Ehine,' 
and  was  on  his  way  to  join  the  army  of  Turenne,  when  he  died  in  Westphaha,  the 
7th  of  June,  1G73. 

-  Louis  Henri  d'Aloigny,  Marquis  de  Eochefort,  made  marshal  in  1G7.5. 

'  '  Escadron.' 

*  Godefroi,  Comte  d'Estrades,  made  marshal  in  1675. 


78  THE    DESPATCHES   OK 

the  Uraiul  S""  was  tlien  at  Salonique  to  passe  the  winter,  where  hee 
expects  his  Vizier  at  Spring,  to  mold  his  desij^Mis  of  returning  to 
Constantinople,  or  rather,  as  most  believe,  ye  making  a  new  warre, 
and  that  my  Iv'  Ami)''  Harvi'y  '  was  on  his  way  towards  Larissa, 
but  stayd  at  Salonique  untill  the  Gd  S""  came  thither. 

The  letters  from  Rome  speak  more  misticall  than  ever  &  it's 
thought  noe  Pope  may  bee  cho.sen  in  a  long  time  ;  the  factions  cannot 
in  the  least  agree,  &  some  believe  that,  '  nouobstant  {|ue  le  Cardinal 
Bona  soit  dans  I'agitation  et  I'irresolution  des  parties,  le  S'  Esprit 
pourroit  bien  se  jouer  d'eux  en  sa  favoui'.' 

The  Chevalier  de  Fourilles  ^  hath  bought  of  the  Due  de  Coaslin  ' 
the  charge  of '  .Maistre  de  Camp,  general  de  la  Cavalerie  iegere,'  it 
towards  the  payment  of  [it]  is  (ale)  agreed  upon,  the  King  hath 
given  him  20'"  crowns. 

The  disordres  at  Villa  Franca  are  accomodated,  soe  that  Mons"" 
le  Comte  de  Chamilly  *  with  the  three  thousand  men  he  should  have 
march 'd  with  into  Roussillou  are  countermanded. 

The  King  has  lately  established  in  Paris  '  une  chambre  du 
domaine,'  consisting  of  12  blasters  of  Requests. 

The  French  discourse  in  this  place  at  present  is  that  the  Conte 
de  Furstenberg,  nephew  of  the  Elector  of  Colen,  hath  obtained  of 
his  uncle,  for  a  certain  sum  of  money,  a  passage  for  the  King  of 
France  from  Charleroy  to  Li^ge,  that  he  may  gett  near  Holland 
without  treading  foot  on  Spaunish  ground. 

Yesterday  the  King  was  at  a  general!  review,  where  were  all 
the  Guards,  both  French  &  Suisse. 

The  Prince  de  Ligny  is  expected  to  passe  by  this  place  incog- 
nito towards  his  Vice  Royalty  of  Sicily. 

The  French  make  a  foolish  pretence  for  their  sending  more 
foot  into  Flanders,  because,  say  they,  the  Flemings  reforme  some  of 
their  troops  only  to  augment  others,  wherfore  12  companies  of  his 
[the  King's]  Guards  are  marching  towards  Lisle  &  Tournay.  His 
Ma'y  has  lately  received  a  passe  from  the  Queen  Regent  of  Spain, 
in  case,  in  his  voyage  into  Flanders,  hee  have  occasion  to  passe  on 
ye  Spannish  territories. 

'  .Sir  Daniel  Harvey,  EnRlisli  .ambassador  to  Turkey. 

-  .lean-Jacques  Chaumi^'jan,  Chevalier  (afterwards  Marquis)  <le  Fourilles. 

'  Armand  de  Cambout,  Due  de  Coislir 

'  Hcrard  Bouton,  Comte  de  Chamilly 


AN    ENGLISH    AGEXT    IN    PAKIS  79 


To  Sir  Joneph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  March  ■26'\  1670. 

¥"■  letter  mentioning  expence  I  could  wish  it  had  also  added 
reimbursement  for  many  things,  I  having  squeezed  out  of  my 
small  fond. 

I  must  again  recommend  Jean  Seinus  to  y"'  particular  care, 
because  I  am  told,  since  my  last,  that  when  hee  was  here  hee 
received  money  of  Mens''  Colbert.  There  can  surely  bee  no  harme 
in  watching  him,  since  what  I  tell  you  is  purely  out  of  zeale  to  his 
Ma"'-'*  service. 

Mons''  has  not  seen  Madame  these  sixdayes;  I  mean  not  spoken 
to  her. 

The  Count  de  Vivonne  goes  Ambassador  at  ye  head  of  a  fleete 
towards  the  Grand  Seigneur  to  make  a  Treaty  of  Commerce  &  a 
League,  w*-'''  the  Emperour  may  have  reason  to  dread  the  effects  of.' 

I  have  a  letter  from  S'^  John  Finch-  of  the  10th  currant,  w'^'' 
sayes  that  the  Prencipi  di  Lacelli,  Generall  of  ye  Conclave,  hath 
declared  his  resolution  to  lett  no  moi'e  Cardinalls  come  out,  nor 
any  that  are  out  to  re-enter  the  Conclave,  they  being  able,  under 
pretence  of  indisposition,  to  negotiate  with  forreigne  Princes ; 
which  declaration  hee  justifyes  by  a  Bull  of  Pius  V  to  that  effect, 
whereby  Antonio,  Barbarini,  Bonelli,  Nini*  Aeguavina,^  Orsino, 
Palavicino,  &  Gabrelli  °  are  at  present  excluded. 

The  Flemings,  wee  hear,  are  upon  their  guards  on  the  frontier, 
fearing  a  surprise  without  any  reason. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  March  26th,  1670,  S.N. 
Wee  hear  that  the  j'oung  Prince  of  Piedmont,''  onlj'  son  to  the 
Duke  of  Savoye.  continues  still  in  a  weak  condicion,  &  most  of 
that  Court  apprehend  that  hee  is  not  long  lived. 

The  Duke  of  Longueville  is  dayly  expected  here  from  Eome, 

'  This  treaty  was  not  made  until  June  1673  (see  Recueil  d'Actes  Iniematicmaux 
de  VEmpire  Ottoman,  par  Gabriel  Effendi  Moradounghian,  i.  136). 

-  Brother  of  the  Earl  of  'SVinohelsea  and  English  resident  at  the  Court  of 
Tuscany. 

"  Jacques  Nini.  '  Aquaviva.  ^  Julio  Gabrielli. 

^  Victor  Am^d6e  II.  (1666-1732) ;  succeeded  to  the  dukedom  of  Savoy  in  167-5. 


80  THE    DESPATCHES   OF 

when-  hee  lias  been   made  priest,  soe  y'  it,  is  thought  liee  will  quitt 
the  former  title  &  leave  it  to  ye  C.  ile  S'  Paul,  his  brother.' 

It  is  sayd  by  some,  (but  it  seems  most  unlikely,)  that  the  King 
will  goe  to  the  Parliament  of  Paris  before  his  Flemish  voyage  to 
have  sevcrall  edicts  verified,  among  others  one  for  the  suppression 
of  ye  Peceivours  of  Rents  of  L'Hostel  de  Ville,  reserving  onely  two  ; 
another  suppressing  all  the  Peceivours  of  Taxes,  &  ye  gentlemen  on 
the  place  shall  doe  that  affaire,  who  shall  bee  accomjituJilf  to  the 
treasurer  for  all  moneys  they  shall  receive ;  another  suppressing 
'  La  I'aulette  et  les  Ejiices,'  for  ye  ease  of  the  people  ;  his  Ma'^ 
intending  they  shall  have  justice  fjraiis,  as  in  Spain,  to  w*^''  end  the 
President's  '  Procureurs  Generaux  '  &  Lieutenants  Civil,  Criminall 
&  Police,  shall  have  commissions  for  their  respective  charges  & 
pensions. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  ;  April  2'',  '70. 

Though  I  have  yours  of  the  17th  &  a  great  desire  to  pay  all 
the  good  offices  I  can  to  M'"  Ellis, ^  I  cannot  learn  where  to  find 
him.     As  soon  as  I  shall  [do]  so,  your  directions  shall  be  followed. 

The  Venetian  Ambassador  Molino  is  still  at  Candy  w""  the 
G"'  Vizir,  intending  to  accompany  him  to  the  Ottoman  Court, 
which  resolves  not  to  ratify  ye  Peace,  unlesse  ye  Venetians  will 
make  an  exchange  of  all  their  dominions  near  Candy  for  lands  & 
places  in  Dalmatia  as  far  as  the  Baltique  Sea. 

As  soon  as  the  King  returns  from  Flanders  it  is  sayd  he  will 
make  another  progresse  in  Languedoc  to  take  a  view  of  the  Canal  ^ 
so  long  talked  of,  &  I  am  assured  that  18  months  more  may 
render  y'  great  work  compleat. 

The  letters  from  Holland  speak  of  the  Prince  of  Orange's  ■"  going 
for  England  to  see  his  uncle  our  Souveraign. 

About  two  daies  agoe  my  Lord  Amb''  made  his  first  formal 
visit  to  the  King  of  Poland,  who  then  kept  his  bed. 

On  Munday  night  last  Monsieur  &  ]\Iadam  came  to  Paris,  well 
reconciled,  but  her  journey  into  England  is  not  positive. 

'  Jean  Louis,  Comte  de  St.  Pol. 

'  John  Ellis,  Under-Secretary  of  State. 

'  The  Canal  of  Languedoc,  or  •  Canal  des  Deux-Mers,'  begun  in  1GG7  and 
finished  in  IGSl. 

'  William,  Prince  of  Orange,  son  of  William  IL  of  Orange  and  Mary,  daughter 
of  Charles  I. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  81 


To  Lord  A'liimjton. 

Paris  :  April!  5th,  1670,  S.N. 

The  courrier  from  Madrid  brings  us  letter.?  of  ye  29"'  past  & 
an  account  of  the  Marquis  d'Aytona"s  being  dead  after  a  small  fitt 
of  sicknesse ;  that  the  Junta  de  Govierno  desired  the  Queen  not  to 
dispose  of  any  of  his  vacant  charges  without  their  advice,  notw"'- 
standing  which  shee  bestowed  that  of  Mayor-domo-Mayor  on  the 
Duke  of  Pathana/  &  that  of  one  in  the  Junta  de  Govierno  on  the 
Constable  of  Castille,*  much  to  the  disappointment  of  the  Marquis 
C.  Rodrigo,'  &  his  place  of  Mayor  in  Alcantara,  worth  1 6  thous'^  p. 
of  f ,  is  given  to  his  son.''  But  the  command  of  the  Regiment  of 
Guards  is  not  yet  disposed  of,  &  those  that  before  soUicited  much 
for  a  reforme  doe  more  now  for  the  commission.  The  French 
Amb""  is  there,  &  still  his  busines  is  sayd  to  bee  an  exchange  with  a 
marriage. 

Advice  from  \"enice  says  that  the  Vizier  has  playd  the  good 
servant  &  settled  what  contributions  the  Island  of  Candy  shall 
send  the  G'  S"',  viz',  yearly  provide  &  pay  10,000  foot,  500  horse, 
9  galleys,  &  in  money  400,000  crowns. 

All  letters  from  Germany  agree  in  a  prospect  of  troubles,  the 
Hungarians  arming  vigorously,  &  are  certainly  encouraged  by  some 
who  desire  to  divert  the  Emperour. 

Wee  hear  from  Flanders  of  still  greater  alarmes  &  preparacions, 
greater  than  when  their  enemies  were  in  earnest,  att  which  the  M. 
Xtian  King  is  somew'  concerned,  &  hath  complained  of  in  a  letter 
to  the  Queen  Regent,  alledging  his  peaceable  inclinations,  having 
referred  the  difference  about  dejaendances  to  arbitrage. 

The  affaires  att  Rome  grow  madder  than  ever.  Rospigliosi 
had  lately  33  voyces  &  wanted  but  7  to  make  him  Pope,  w"^''  had 
compleated  §''^ 

Upon  the  disorders  of  the  factions,  the  Governor  of  ye  Conclave 
hath  declared  that  if  they  bee  not  speedy  in  an  election  hee  will 
retrench  part  of  their  Dyett  &  starve  y™  into  an  agreement. 

'  D.  Eodrigo  de  Silva,  Duke  of  Pastrano. 

-  Don  Inigo-Melchior  Fernandez  de  Velasco,  7th  Duo  de  Frias,  governor  of  the 
Pays-Bas  1668-1670  (1629-1696). 

'  Marquis  de  Caste!  Eodrigo.  '  Don  Antonio  Veiasco. 

VOL.    V.  G 


82  THE    [)E.SPATfnK.S    OK 

The  Cliaucellor  '  Las  bi-en  lately  very  ill  &  it's  thought  hee  will 
not  live,  wbereupou  people  discourse  of  a  successor,  either  Mons'' 
le  Tellier  or  lions''  Colbert  in  England. 

ilons"'  d'Apravant,'''  Capt.  of  ye  (iuards,  is  ordered  by  y^'  King 
witli  all  speed  to  goe  to  Aras  it  hasten  the  finishing  of  the 
Cittadell. 

Tu  Sir  Joseph  Williitmson. 

Paris  :  Aprill  i)th,  1070. 

Yesterday  the  King  came  to  l-'aris,  visited  some  churches, 
admired  Val  de  Grace,  &  was  present  at  a  gossoping  in  the  Palais 
lloyal,  where  Madam's  young  daughter,  ye  Duchesse  de  Valois,'' 
was  formally  baptised  A:  had  to  her  godfather  ye  Dauphin,  &  ye 
compliment  was  performed  by  ]\ladamoiselle  ■*  &  ye  Queen. 

Ye  French  begin  to  repent  of  their  peace  with  Algiers,  because 
they  find  their  ships  taken  by  those  pirats  under  Salley  &  other 
colours.  Be  pleased  to  take  notice  of  a  particular  in  the  Treaty 
made  by  Turelle,''  that  among  ye  restorations  '  de  part  et  d'autre ' 
an  English  ship  retaken  from  these  pirats  was  putt  again  into 
their  hands.  I  presume  the  civil  law,  not  that  of  Xtianity,  will  not 
justify  such  an  inhuman  proceeding. 

To  Lord  Arlinqlon. 

April  9tli,  1G70,  S.N. 

A  Guernzey  merchant  dying  lately  in  this  place,  his  goods 
were  seized  on  by  droit  d'auhclne,^  but  upon  my  L''  Ambassa- 
dour's  complaint  we  are  in  hopes  ye  King  will  dispence  with  what 
our  former  treatys  have  gi'anted  to  the  subjects  of  England. 

Now  ye  King's  voyage  draws  nigh  &  ye  courtiers  prepare  in 
earnest ;  his  troops  are  upon  the  place  by  this  time,  but  (his 
inclinations  whatever  they  bee    it's  generally  believed  his  inten- 

'  Pierre  Segiiier,  Due  de  Villemor.  He  was  succeeded  by  Etienne  d'Aligre. 
Le  Tellier  did  not  become  Chancellor  until  1677. 

-  Fran<,'ois  de  la  Mothe-Villebert,  Vicomte  d'Aspremont,  made  marshal  in  11)77. 

'  Anne  Marie,  Mademoiselle  de  Valois  (1009-1728). 

■'  Anne  Marie  Louise  d'0r)6ans,  daughter  of  Gaston  Jean  Baptiste.  Due 
d'Orl^ans  and  brother  of  Louis  XIII. 

*  Turelles  Thiballier,  '  elief  d'eseadre.' 

"  The  droit  d'aubaiiie  was  abolished  in  1787,  so  far  as  British  subjects  were 
concerned. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  83 

tious  are  not  to  doe  auvtliing  but  view  his  new  fortifications,  w"', 
I  am  told  by  many  of  judgement,  are  the  best  in  Europe,  &  am 
promised  the  modells  but  not  without  expeiice. 

The  merchants  of  Jersey  &  Guernsey  complain  much  of  an 
arrest  lately  forcing  them  to  sell  their  stockins  within  3  days 
after  their  coming  to  Paris,  or  else  they  shall  bee  confiscated,  an 
invention  to  break. ye  neck  of  that  small  trade  also,  for  they  must 
sell  them  to  losse,  not  being  allowed  time  for  their  markett. 

Here  is  a  discourse  as  if  the  Most  Xtian  King  would  alter  his 
'  Grand  Conseil '  &  joyne  the  charges  of  Oouncellor  in  that  to  the 
'  Maistres  des  Requestes." 

The  French  expect  with  impatience  to  have  a  Popie  of  their 
faction,  ye  Duke  of  Chaulnes  in  his  letters  promising  much  from 
his  conferences  with  the  Queen  of  Sweden,^  an  admiresse  of  the 
'  Squadre  -  volant." 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  AprUl  16th,  1070,  S.X. 

The  like  dismall  account  I  perceive  that  you  have  already  had  of 
affaires  in  Hungary  is  brought  hither  by  a  Courrier  dispatched  in 
hast  from  nenna  by  the  S'"  of  Gremonville,  this  King's  Envoye 
there. 

The  discourse  of  this  place  upon  that  subject  is  joyfuU,  becanse 
the  souldiers  say  they  shall  [have]  warres  again,  &  thus  they  ground 
it :  the  Sweeds'  Army  may  assist  the  Emperour,  &  the  French 
one  may  fall  upon  Flanders  without  any  apprehension  of  being 
opposed  by  that  body  of  men.  A  propos  de  Flandre,  here  follows 
the  exact  rout  &•  course  the  King  intends  to  take  without  any 
alteration. 

On  Aprill  the  28th  hee  goes  from  S'  Germains  to  Senlis, 
12  leagues. 

Leagues 
29th  Compiegne .  .  .  .8 

30      Noyen  [Noj-on]    ...       -5 
May 

£,  r    St  Quentin  ....       9 

'  Christine,  queen  of  Sweden,  abdicated  in  16.54  in  favour  of  her  cousin  Charles 
Albert,  and  lived  for  some  time  in  Rome.  -'  '  Escadron.' 

G  2 


84 


THE    DESPATCHES    OF 


May 


Quesney  [Quesnoy] 

Landrecy  .  .  .  . 
Avesnes  .  .  .  . 
Marit'inbourg  [M  arienbourg] 

Philipville  .         .         .         . 

Charleroy  .  .  .  . 
IJinches       .         .         .  . 

Ath 


Leagues 

10 

3 
4- 
9 


Tcjurnoy 

Oudeuard    . 
Courtrey  [Courtray] 


Lisle 


Donay 
Arras  . 

Betliuue 


Hesdin 

Montrueil  [Mont 
Boulogne     . 

Calais . 


■nil]. 


10 
5 

7 

8 


8  V  Dunquerqui 


iN    ENGLISH    AGEVr    IN    PAKIS 


85 


June   11 

Calais  again 

12 

Boulogne 

13 

Montrueil    . 

1-1  ) 
15 

Abbeville    . 

16 

Poix   . 

17 

Beauvais 

18 

Beaumondt 

19 

S'  Germain 

Leagues 
8 
7 
.        7 

.     10 


Tlie  Duchess  of  Elboeuf^&  many  ladys  of  that  quality  begin  to 
scniple  going  with  Madam  to  Dover,  doubting  about  the  Tabouret, 
as  I  hear. 

For  fear  you  have  not  y''  L"^  fi-om  Spain  in  time,  I  send  you 
the  extracts  thence  w"^''  I  received  from  S''  AV.  Godolphin,  to  w"^"^  I 
may  add  a  circumstance  I  have  seen  in  other  letters  thence,  that 
the  ilinisters  are  in  suspence  what  answer  to  returne  to  y''  French 
Amb''  (whose  publick  audience  was  wagnifique  &  keeps  his  bed 
for  a  kick  of  a  horse)  in  the  matter  of  Arbitrage,  that  Court 
being  inclined  also  to  name  two  &  joyne  the  Emp''  &  States  of 
Holland  in  the  reference  w'^''  the  English  Envoye  (say  the  letters) 
much  opposed,  as  a  matter  y'  would  bee  displeasing  to  his  master. 

My  L"*  Falconberg-  is  yet  at  Lions.  Last  week  dyed  the 
famous  Mons'  Renard,  who  had  been  severall  months  possessed  by 
the  devill  &  disdivilised  by  the  Capudns.  Hee  has  left  a  great 
estate  to  ye  King.     His  house  was  in  the  Thuliries. 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Aprill  19th,  1670,  S.N. 

The  last  letters  from  Eome  say  that  Card'  Antonio,  who  is 
recovered  of  his  dropsy,  was  reentred  the  Conclave,  where  the 
differences  were  growne  greater  than  ever ;  that  C  de  Retz  had 
lately  34  voyces,  bnt  everybody  was  surprised  to  see  the  Curate  of 
the  Parish  S'  Louis  in  Rome  had  33  votes,  tho'  hee  were  no 
Cardinal.     This  proceeding  has  revived  the  memory  that  formerly, 

'  Elisabeth  Ac  La  Tour  de  Bouillon,  eldest  daughter  of  Frederic  Maurice  de 
La  Tour,  and  second  wife  of  Charles  111.,  Due  d'Elboeuf. 

-  Thomas  Belasyse,  Viscount  Fauconberg,  married  Mary,  dau^'hter  of  rrotectcr 
Cromwell. 


86  THE    DESPATCHES   OK 

upon  a  great  divisiou  in  the  Conclave,  they  searched  in  the  deserts 
for  tlie  most  virtuous  hermite  thej'  could  find.  .Many  were  of  opinion 
Card'  Odescalchi'  might  bee  elected  by  an  agreement  of  all  the 
factions,  but  hee  excused  himselfe  as  uncapable  of  soe  gri'at  a  charge. 
Your  Lopp  had  by  the  last  Ord''-^'  a  track  of  this  King's  roijage. 
Hee  goes  on  the  28th,  &  will  have  in  his  owne  coach  the  Queen, 
Monsieur.  Madam,  ilad"'',  ilad°  de  Bethune,"  &  ^lesdames  de  Vali^re 
&  Montespan.  The  Dolphin  will  goe  in  his  owne  coach  with  his 
goveruour,  the  Duke  of  Montauzier.-'  &  severall  persons  of  quality. 

They  will  have  an  escorte  or  guard  of  0,000  horse,  commanded 
by  M''  le  Cointe  de  Lauzun,  great  bodys  of  foot  being  waylayd  to 
bee  '  sur  les  aisles  de  la  marche.' 

I  am  told  by  many,  but  cannot  averre  its  truth,  that  the  King 
lias  an  inclination  to  revive  an  antient  charge  the  Kings  his 
predecessors  made  use  of,  y^'  making  a  Constable  of  France,  &  that 
hee  hath  already  named  the  Marq"  of  Peguelin,  his  favourite,  for 
higli  dignity. 

The  reports  here  are  as  if  the  Spaniards  were  in  a  considerable 
body  on  the  frontiers,  expecting  the  King's  coming,  although  my 
letters  from  Brussels  advise  they  have  scearce  men  enough  to 
def'ud  Dexmund  &  Ypre.  The  Chev""  de  la  Taille,'  nephew  to  the 
ArcliBp  of  Paris,  having  about  18  months  since  killed  a  gentleman.'' 
was  last  week  seized  on  here.  Hee  made  some  resistance  &  killed 
an  archer.  However,  at  his  Uncle's  intercession,  &  that  of  divers 
pi'r.^ons  of  quality  hee  is  released  &  under  his  Uncle's  protection. 

The  Commander  de  Tarre  °  dyed  here  last  week,  much  regretted 
by  the  King  it  evei'ybody. 

The  Comte  de  Furstemberg  was  the  first  man  that  brought  the 
news  of  Hungary  to  the  King,  who  is  sayd  to  bee  much  afflicted  at  it. 

The  East  Indy  Company  has  resolved  to  traffick  noe  more  to  the 
Island  of  Madagascar,  from  whence  they  intend  to  transport  their 
colonies  to  an  Island  a  little  higher  up.  more  to  their  advantage,  & 
the  King  being  desirous  to  encourage  that  commerce,  gives  2  millions 
of  livres  to  the  s''  Company  to  make  good  the  losses  such  gi'eat 
undertakings  doe  ordinarily  meet  with  at  their  first  establishment. 

'  Benedetto  Odescalchi,  later  Pope  Innocent  XI. 

-  Marie  Louise  de  la  Granjje-Arquien. 

'  Charles  dc  Sainte-Maure,  Marquis,  later  due  de  Mont.ausier  (KUO-llJ'.tO). 

'  Nicolas,  Baron  du  Quesne.  ^  M.  Fubert. 

'•  Francois  de  Eochechouart,  Chevalier  de  Jars. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  87 


To   Sir  Joseiih   Williamson. 

Paris  :  Aprill  26th,  1670,  S.N. 

Now  all  this  place  is  in  a  hurry,  the  King  going  hence  after 
to-morrow,  &  really  by  the  preparations  of  gold  embroideries  for 
sadle  clothes,  &c.,  this  voyage  must  bee  of  vast  expences  to  the 
noblemen  &  attendants. 

Some  4  ruffians  wanting  money  on  Wednesday  last,  went  to 
one  of  the  '  Secretaires  du  l\oy,'  an  old  gentleman,  &  being  private 
with  him  told  him  their  necessities,  w'-"'^  he  must  supply  with  a 
thousand  pistolls,  but  the  poor  gent,  endeavouring  to  cry  out  for 
help,  was  stab'd,  &  I  think  dead  by  this  time  :  two  of  them  are 
taken. 

The  King  has  given  a  rich  abbej',  worth  20  thousand  livres  a 
year,  to  the  S''  de  CTremonville  at  Vienna  for  his  good  service  in 
that  station.  The  C  de  ilarsan,'  of  kin  to  the  Chev''  de  Lorraine, 
is  desired  to  make  it  his  request  to  goe  to  Kome,  his  presence  at 
Court  being  sayd  to  bee  very  acceptable,  since,  during  the  other's 
absence,  ye  King  has  given  him  500  loais  d'or  towards  his  expences 
thither.     Hee  convey'd  intelligence  from  a  great  man  to  the  Chev''. 

The  Duke  of  Chaulnes  saith  that  it  may  bee  many  months  before 
a  Pope  bee  chosen,  &  that  those  who  never  so  much  as  could 
entertain  the  least  hope  are  thought  most  likely  to  succeed  in 
that  dignity  through  the  violence  of  all  factions. 

The  '  Mustapha  Aga,'  Envoye  from  the  C4''  Seign"',  goes  hence 
to-morrow.  Monsieur  [  ]  ^  goes  the  King's  Amb'"  in  Ord"'^' 
to  the  Port,  upon  Mons''  la  Hay's  being  recalled,  &  the  Exf^" 
Embassy  of  the  Conte  de  Yivonne  is  still  talked  of,  &  very  rich 
preparations  making  for  the  rendring  it  most  magnificent.^ 

The  King  hath  given  2,000  pistolls  to  ye  gentlewomen  that 
shall  attend  Madam  into  England  to  defray  part  of  their  expences. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Aprill  30"',  1070,  S.N. 

A  courrier  newly  arrived  from  Eome  says  there  is  great 
likelyhood  that  in  a  few  days  a  Pope  may  bee  chosen,  that  by  the 

'  Charles  de  Lorraine-Ai-magnae,  Comte  de  Marsan,  son  of  Henri,  Conite  de 
Harcourt-Armagnac. 

-  A  blank  in  the  MS.  »  See  letter  dated  March  20,  1670. 


y8  Till-:    DISPATCUKS    OK 

]Juke  of  L'haulne's  great  credit  &  influence  on  the  whole  conclave, 
the  great  factions  are  agreed  upon  Bona,  Bonelli.  or  Francitelli. 

By  letters  from  Marseilles  we  hear  the  Freneli  are  very  busy  in 
their  naval  preparacoi'is,  that  no  sooner  one  ship  is  clear  but  another 
is  putt  on  the  stocks,  &  all  ye  seamen  they  can  find  are  ingaged 
in  the  King's  service. 

A  few  days  since  a  present  was  sent  the  Venetian  Ambassadour 
by  the  King's  order,  valued  at  two  thousand  five  hundred  pistolls. 
Hee  being  great  intimate  to  the  Marq"  of  I'agueline,'  ifs  thought  it 
may  have  been  intended  ye  Amb''  to  incline  the  other  to  marry 
the  Duchesse  of  Vaujour.-' 

Myn  Heer  Opdam ''  is  expected  to  salute  the  King  on  the 
frontiers  as  Deputy  Ex'-^'  from  the  States  Generall. 

To  Sir  Joseph   Willucmson. 

Paris :  May  4th,  1070. 

'i'he  Town  talks  of  a  League  concluded  between  Eng''  &  Prance, 
wiiereby  ye  former  is  to  have  Dunquerque,  Ostend,  Nieuport,  Ijut 
all  is  idle. 

Since  I  wrote  this  ye  certain  news  of  ye  D.  of  Lorrain's  drath 
is  carried  to  Court  by  a  courrier. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

May  7th,  1G70. 

The   King   finding  some   inconveniences  in  his  road   he  first 
intended,  hath  alterd  it  thus  : — 
May     Ci  llamoizy, 

7  J\lariambourg,'' 

8  Pbilipville  (stay  there  ye  9th). 

10  Charleroy, 

1 1  Binche, 

12  Bavay, 

13  Quesnoy  (stay  there  ye  11), 
15  Chasteau  Cambresy,* 

IG  Chastelet,"' 

'  Puyguilhem.  ■  Madnme  do  la  Vulliure. 

'  Jnoob,  Heer  Jan  Obdam,  Baron  van  Wassenliaer,  son  of  the  great  Diitcli 
Admiral. 

'  Maritnbourg.  '  Cateau-Cauibrusis.  '•  Le  Catelct. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    TAKIS  89 

May  17  Bapeauine,^ 

18  Aras,  (19,) 

20  Douay,  (21,) 

22  Tournay,  (23,  24,  25,) 

26  Oudenarde,  (27,) 

28  Courtray, 

29  Lisle,  (30,  31,  &  1  of  June,) 
June    2  Bassee," 

3  Bethune,  (1,) 

5  S'Paul,3 

6  Ayden,* 

7  Montrueil. 

8  Bolos^ue, 

9  Calsm, 

10  Dunquerque,  (11,  12,  13,  11,) 

15  Calais, 

16  Bologue, 

17  Montrueil, 

18  Abbeville,  (19,) 

20  Poix, 

2 1  Beauvais, 

22  Beaumont, 

23  S'  Germains. 


2'o  Sir  Joseph  WilUamson. 

Paris  ;  May  10th,  1670. 
Thei"  is  certainly  a  Pope   chosen,  called  C'^  Altierri,  creature 
to  Clement  9th. ^ 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Lisle  :  May  -iOth,  1670. 

The  King  is  expected  here  on  Fryday,  ye  23"',  &  in  order  to 
his  glorious  reception  very  magnificent  preparations  are  making 
for  bonfires,  fireworks  of  an  extraordinary  nature  (as  particularly 

'  Bapaume.  -  La  Bassee.  '  St.  Pol.  *  Hesdin. 

'  Emilio  Altieri  (born  1590).  He  received  no  important  promotion  until  his 
79th  year.  In  November  1669  Clement  IX.  made  him  cardinal,  but  died  before 
he  could  give  him  the  hat.  He  went  to  the  Conclave  without  having  received  it 
and  was  elected  Pope,  April  29,  1670  (Kanke,  The  Popes  of  Home,  vol.  iii.  p.  397). 


00  TllIO    l)F>>PATCHES   OV 

to  l)la/nii  tlip  Kind's  I'v  Queen's  arms  in  the  air),  A"  fountains  to  run 
with  wine.  The  Citt.idell  is  not  cjuite  finisiied  ;  5,000  men  are  in 
garrison  here  as  well  as  at  Arras.  The  ])eople  seem  to  be  better 
satistyed  imder  tlie  Xtian  than  t.lie  Cath''"'  Goveruement,'  because 
at  present  they  are  exempted  from  ye  duties  other  subjects  of 
France  pay.  But  I  mnst  not  omit  a  passage :  As  y'^'  Constable's 
son  D"  A.  Velasco  passed  through  the  pla'Te2  dayssince,  he.  perceiving 
a  great  number  of  souldiers,  burgers,  &  children  to  follow  him  out 
of  tx)wne,  threw  some  hundred  pistolls  &  '  patacons '  ^  among  them, 
who  in  gratitude  cryed,  'Vive  Chariot.  Roy  d'Espagne!'  This  is 
supposed  to  be  in  comjiliment  to  what  ye  Duke  of  Anguien,  Marq" 
de  iiouvoy,  &c.,  did  at  Cambray.  My  L''  Amb''  bids  me  acknowledge 
&  thank  you  for  y''  letter  he  received  last  night  at  his  ari'ivall 
here.  As  he  approached  Arras  my  L''  Douglas^  drew  out  all  his 
regiment,  gave  him  voliyes,  &  .some  great  guns  from  ye  ramparts. 

To  Sir  Joseph    Williavuun. 

Lisle  :  May  22"',  1670. 

I  must  begin  with  what  is  most  remarkable,  &  wliat,  it  may  be, 
you  have  heard  before  this,  viz',  the  Duke  of  Lorrain's  being 
dead,  w'''  will  hasten  (as  I  am  told)  ye  Jving's  returne  to  Paris, 
ye  wise  men  agreeing  with  the  souldiers  inclinations  that  hee  has 
an  indisputable  right  to  that  duchy. ^ 

You  will  find  the  foundation  of  such  their  pretentions  in  a 
book  I  sent  you  by  Osborne,  &  already  everybody  speaks  of  a  visit 
thereabouts 

I  told  you  2  days  since  of  the  King's  resolution  to  come  here 
to-morrow,  but  he  has  surprised  the  towne  by  entring  it  this 
afternoone.  His  guards  are  iu  e.xcellent  good  order  &  discipline, 
consisting  of  near  5,000  horse,  ye  oflicers  all  in  rich  embroideries. 
As  soon  as  ever  he  passed  the  great  vacancy ''  he  went  to  see  the 
Cittadell,  v/'"  indeed  is  tlie  only  thing  he  intended  in  the  visit,  & 
he  found  much  advanced,  as  are  all  other  his  great  undertakings. 

'   Spain. 

■■'  A  Spanish  coin. 

'  Lord  George  Douglas  of  Dumliarton. 

'  See  Koch  and   Schoell,  Uistoirc  abrdgie  des  TraUfs  dc  Paix,  vol.  i.  p.  341. 
The  Duke  of  Lorraine  died  in  1()7.5.     (See  letter  dated  June  7,  1670.) 
■■  This  probably  means  a  review  of  the  troops. 


AN    EX(iLISH    AUEXT    IX    PARIS  91 

Yesterday  his  Ex"^'  went  toTonmej'/  &  was  entertayned  by  the 
Governor  with  a  most  sumptuous  feast  &  a  sight  of  ye  Cittadell, 
w""'  is  near  finished,  ye  halfe  moons  compleat,  as  well  as  all  the 
trenches ;  its  figure  is  a  pentagon,  &  consequently  five  strong 
bastions,  on  each  of  w"''  are  mounted  about  30  gunns ;  in  fine  y' 
place  is  rendred  near  impregnable  ;  it  hath  2,000  men  in  garrison. 

This  goes  by  ilr.  Godolphin,  who  will  be  able  to  tell  you  y"^ 
Madam  goes  hence  on  Saterday  for  Dunquerque,  in  order  to  her 
embarcation  for  Dover. - 

To  Lord  Arlimjton. 

Paris  :  .June  7th,  1670. 

I  must  correct  a  great  errour  in  my  last  caused  by  a  vulgar 
mistake  of  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  ^  instead  of  that  of 
the  Great  Duke  of  Florence,''  on  the  25th  of  May,  for  which  I  most 
humbly  crave  y""  Lpp's  pardon.  On  Wednesday  at  night  another 
ex'-'''  courrier  arrived  here,  dispatched  from  ^ladrid  by  the  French 
Ambassadour  on  the  26th  past  with  news  of  the  young  King  of 
Spain's  being  fall'n  dangerously  ill  '  d'un  double  fievre  tierce,'  for 
which  hee  had  allready  been  twice  blooded,  whereupon  it  has  been 
rumour'd  that  he  was  dead. 

The  Princesse  Palatin*  is  gone  hence  to  make  a  visit  to  the 
Duke  of  Hanover  Brunswick,^  her  son-in-law,  &  assist  at  ye 
baptisme  of  ye  Duchess,'  her  daughter's  child.  Shee  being  an 
active  Princesse  gives  a  suspicon  to  people  that  are  apt  to  mistrust 
that  shee  goes  under  that  pretence  only  to  manage  some  private 
negotiations  in  Germany  in  favor  of  France.'  The  King  ot 
Poland  conducted  her  two  days  journey  on  her  way.  The  French 
King  is  expected  here  in  3  days — I  mean  at  S*  Germains,  near 
which  place  he  hath  caused  a  larger  fort  to  bee  made  than  that  of 
last  year,  for  the  encamping  a  greater  number  of  souldiers  near 
him.  He  hath  also  resolved,  as  I  am  informed,  to  send  a  party  of 
horse  on  the  frontiers  of  Lorrain  to  strengthen  those  garrisons  & 
have  an  eye  on  the  motions  of  that  Duke. 

'  Tournay.  .  -  To  arrange  about  the  signing  of  the  Treaty  of  Dover. 

'  See  letter  dated  May  22,  1670.  '  Ferdinand  II.,  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany. 

'  Elizabeth  Stuart,  wife  of  Frederick,  Elector  Palatine  and  King  of  Bohemia. 
'  Ernest  Augustus,  Elector  of  Hanover.  ■  Sophia  Charlotte  of  Hanover. 

'  Louis   was   trying  to   reinforce   the    league   against  the   Dutch.      (Mignet, 
iu.  286-294.) 


92  THE    DESPATCHES   0¥ 

L""  from  Koine  of  the  22"'  past  advise  that  on  that  day  the 
I 'ope  held  liis  first  coiwi^loire,  wliere  hee  gave  audience  to  the 
Portugal  Ambassador,  the  Conde  de  Prado.  Though  the  Duke  of 
Ciiaulnes  had  taken  his  leave  there,  hee  resolved  to  stay  some  time 
longer,  perceiving  the  face  of  affaires  since  the  Election  to  bee  much 
alt'red,  because  the  Card'  Patron  is  not  at  all  inclined  to  favor  the 
French  interest,  who  hath  prevayled  with  the  Pope  to  alter  ye 
nomination  he  had  made  of  several!  of  the  principal  officers,  to  recall 
the  Nuncio  at  Madrid,  with  intention  to  make  him  .Secretary  of 
State,  &  send  the  S'"  Marescotti,'  formerly  Nuncio  in  Poland,  in  his 
place  to  Madrid. 

Wee  hear  of  a  great  dispute,  likely  to  have  an  ill  issue,  between 
the  Elector  of  Brandenburgh  &  ye  Duke  of  Bromswich  Wolfembutel 
about  a  Castle  called  Reynstein,  pretended  to  by  either  upon  the 
confiscation  of  it,  with  ye  rest  of  the  estate  belonging  to  the  C.  de 
Tatteinbach."  To  justify  the  Electors  pretencoh  he  has  caused 
6,0U0  horse  to  march  &  take  possession  of  it. 

The  Conte  de  Chamilly  with  his  forces  hath  dispersed  the 
ifiqiieletz^''  lately  in  annes  in  Rossillon,  after  they  had  killed 
severall  gentlemen  of  that  countrey  for  exhorting  them  to  returin> 
to  their  duty. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  June  10th,  1670. 
His  ila'-^'  arrived  here  on  Sunday,  &  ^lonsieur  on  Saterday 
night.  Yesterday  my  Lord  Anib''  was  at  S'  Germains  to  compli- 
ment him  thereupon.  On  Sunday,  in  the  evening,  we  received  the 
sad  news  of  my  L''  of  NorthumberlaiuTs  being  dead  at  Turin,  in  his 
ivturne  from  Pome,  of  a  violent  burning  feaver.  His  corps  is  on 
its  way,  as  well  his  afflicted  widow. ^  The  losse  of  this  nobleman  is 
the  greater  because  ye  family  is  extinct  for  want  of  issue  male.  It 
is  ruinor'd  as  if  the  ]\I.  Xtian  King  will  take  the  advantage  of  ye 
druid  d'auheine  &  seise  upon  all   his  horses,  in  number  o*),  with 

'  Galeazo  Marescotti,  Archbishop  of  Corinth. 

■•■  .lohnnn  Erasmus.  Graf  Tattpnbach.  The  London  Gazette  (April  l.S,  IfiTO) 
speaks  of  the  Count  of  Tattenbach  as  '  the  principal  instrument  in  the  disturbances 
of  Hungary.' 

^  Mountaineers. 

'  Elizabeth,  (lau(,'hter  of  Thomas  Wiiotlieslcy.  Earl  of  Southampton. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAHIS  93 

others  goods  liee  left  iu  France,  but  I  cannot  believe  that  droid 
can  stand  good,  since  he  dy'd  not  within  ye  French  dominions. 

The  only  discourse  here  is  of  iladani's  having  gotten  England 
off  from  the  League. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  June  14th,  S.N.,  1670. 

By  my  Lord  Ambassador's  order,  I  was  yesterday  with  the 
Spannish  resident,  who  told  mee  that  he  had  a  letter  from  Madrid 
of  the  28th  past  (two  days  since  the  late  courrier  brought  the  ill 
news  of  the  King's  being  in  danger),  which  sayd  hee  was  recovered 
&  very  well  againe.  I  then  asking  him  whether  the  Court  of 
Spaine  had  as  yet  taken  any  further  resolucon  about  the  referrence 
of  the  differences  in  dispute  between  the  2  Crowns  to  the  arbitre- 
ment  of  England  &  .Sweden,  he  replyed  that  those  Ministers  had 
never  acquainted  him  with  it  from  the  beginning,  neither  knew  hee 
what  they  had  done.  The  Spaniards'  dilatory  proceedings  iu  that 
affaire  is  what  the  French  only  desire,  that  they  may  have  a 
plausible  pretext,  at  the  expiracon  of  the  year  limited  by  this  King 
for  the  determining  those  pretentions,  to  enter  upon  them  by  force. 
There  is  little  likelyhood  of  any  action  this  summer,  tho'  the  King 
will  have  his  forces  near  him  in  case  any  conjuncture  might  happen 
for  his  advantage.  I  hear  they  have  made  a  Peace  with  Tunis, 
tho'  the  French  Adm"  that  blockt  up  that  port,  returning  thence, 
concealed  what  he  had  done,  &  that  the  Tripoleses  are  at  warre 
with  us,  ye  Consul  that  left  England  a  year  ago  not  being  gone  to 
his  charge,  which  is  pretended  to  bee  the  reason  of  the  rupture.  As 
to  our  successe  ag'  the  Algerines,  the  English  are  scotfd  at  by  all 
Xtendom  for  not  attempting  something  considerable  upon  them, 
there  being  at  present  23  of  their  ships  in  Port.  If  S""  Thomas 
Allin's  business  at  Cadix  '  will  permit  him,  everybody  in  those  parts 
believe  he  may  doe  them  much  harme  with  fireships,  &c. 

I  hear  the  King  hath  resolved  to  ask  14  millions  of  the  Parlia- 
ment, or  in  English  money  near  12,000,000  pound  sterling. 

There  hath  been  lately  some  revolt  in  Languedoc  about  paying 
the  dutys,  &c.,  which  is  lately  appeased  by  the  diligence  of  the 
King's  Lieutenant  there  ;  whereupon  a  Councell  hath  been  lately 
held  here,  when  the  Duke  of  Vernueil  (Goveinour  of  that  Province) 


91-  Till-;    Dli,Sl'ATCIJIS    OF 

(lissuailecl  tlio  Kiiij(  from  si'iuling  any  troops  to  bee  garrisonVl  ii])on 
those  people,  who  are  already  very  poor,  it  would  in  such  case  bee 
ruined. 

Tlie  Duke  of  Nieuljourg,  we  hear,  is  treating  with  the  Dutch 
for  their  sending  him  oOU  thousand  crowns,  to  repaire  the  breechi' 
made  in  his  afiiiires  by  ye  great  expences  he  was  at  in  his  preten- 
tions to  i'oland  ;  that  otherwise  hee  shall  bee  forced,  out  of  neces- 
sity, to  treat  with  the  French  about  the  Duchy  of  Julliers. 

To  Sir  Juaeiili    Williamson. 

Paris  :  June  18th,  1G70,  S,K. 

Yesterday  I  was  at  S'  Germaius,  where  the  King  resolved  to 
goe  to  Versailles  to-morrow  for  1 5  days,  about  the  end  of  w"''  time 
the  camp  shall  begin.  Some  days  since  T^-re  Anat '  dyed  here. 
The  onely  discourse  at  Court  is  of  the  King's  sending  a  strong 
fleet  into  the  Mediteranean  to  countenance  the  peace  he  hath 
lately  made  with  the  pirates,  &  encourage  the  Levant  Trade ;  for 
now  all  wheels  are  at  worke  about  breaking  ye  neck  of  the  Ducch 
Commerce,  &  this  they  imagine  to  bee  one  means,  viz' : — Ye  re- 
maining at  Peace  with  the  Corsaires  whilst  they  are  in  warre  with 
us  &  the  Dutch,  wherby  the  I'^reneh  vessells  will  carry  away  ye 
greatest  part  of  the  Trade,  as  running  no  risk  by  the  way. 

My  Lady  of  Northumberland  is  here  on  her  way  to  England. 

Madam  is  expected  this  night  at  S'  Germains,  of  whose  poli- 
cies in  England  much  is  spoken  here,  as  if  the  League  were  quite 
broken. 

I  hear  that  Mons''  tiio/.e,^  residing  here  in  quality  of  Ex""^'  Envoyc 
from  the  King  of  Denmark,  is  recalled  home,  &  that  Mons''  Marsel 
is  to  succeed  him. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  June  "i-ith,  1G70. 

It  may  be  this  is  a  peice  of  news  to  you — that  the  Junta  at 

Madrid,  after  their    many  delays  &  protestations  of  their  being 

inclined   rather  to  loose  every  fort  in   Flanders,   considering  the 

great  charges  they  are  att  in  maintaining  it,  rather  than  stand  to 

'  The  King's  Jesuit  confessor. 
'  M.  Give. 


AX    EUGLISU    AGENT    IN    PARIS  95 

a  referreuce  upon  what  they  pretend  an  undoubted  righc,  have 
resolved  to  accept  of  England  &  Sweden  to  arbitrate  those  differ- 
ences between  France  &  them,  and  that  the  next  Courrier  thence 
will  bring  their  resolution  with  all  its  formalityes,  which  is  a 
matter  France  never  expected  they  could  have  been  brought  to,  & 
consequently  might  in  such  case  have  reasonable  pretexts  to  seise 
that  bj'  force  w*-"''  Spain  would  not  endeavor  to  liquidate  by  an 
arbitration. 

Madam  is  at  S'  Cloud,  ye  King  &  Court  at  ^'ersailles,  where 
last  Sunday  they  had  a  great  entertaynement. 

To  Sir  Joseph    Williamson. 

Paris  :  June  2Bth,  1G70. 

I  pray,  S"',  be  pleased  if  my  L"*  of  S'  Albans  had  any  articles 
coutirmed  here  since  our  King's  restoration,  contayned  in  that  of 
Commerce  made  between  this  Kg  &  Oliver,'  to  cause  them  to  be 
sent  us,  because  I  have  a  busines  on  my  hands  w'^''  much  depends 
thereupon ;  and  whether  if  any  French  merchant  oi-  factor  dj'ing 
in  England,  his  moveable  estate  be  confiscated  to  the  King,  as 
they  will  pretend  here  to  darane  a  Gueruzey  factor's  goods  by  the 
droict  d'aubeine,  altho'  by  our  treatys  the  French  King  dispenseth 
with  that  right,  upon  the  like  reciprocal!  to  his  subjects  dying  in 
England. 

There  are  some  English  merchants  in  company  at  Marseilles, 
called  Hills.-  who  have  offred  my  L"*  Amb''  punctual!  information  of 
all  that  passeth  et  are  particularly  ye  persons  directed  for  any 
addresse  to  S"'  Thomas  Allin. 

I  have  in  my  Ld's  name  incouraged  them. 

To  Sir  Joseph   WiUia.mso'ii. 

1670.     Munday  morning  at  5. 
The  bearer   will  tell  you  that  Madam  fell  sick  of  56  cholick 
yesterday   about   4    in    ye  afternoon  &   dyed    a    most    lamented 
Princesse  this  morning  at  3.    Grief  will  not  let  me  ad,  but  refer  ye 
further  particulars  to  his  relation,  who  was  present  at  S'  Cloud.^ 

'  The  Protector.  -  Francis  Hill.     (See  S.  P.,  France,  for  letters.) 

^  Sir  John  Eeresby  in  his  Memoirs  (p.  82)  says, '  The  Duke  of  Orleans  had  been 
jealous  for  some  time  before  of  the  Comte  de  Guiche,  and  if  stories  _be  true,  not 


96  THK    DESPATCHES   UK 


To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris:  "^"'y^f^'-^J.  1070. •^J"'yF^S.] 
Juno  21.  20  .lune 

Since  what  I  wrote  yesterday  in  hast  it  confusion  by  our 
courrier,  I  liavdng  the  occasion  by  one  going  from  ^[onsieur  tS: 
more  matter  to  enlarge  to  you  upon  the  most  deplorable  subject, 
cannot  but  particularise  what  I  have  seen  &  what  I  have  h-arnt 
from  the  ladys  &  other  persons  attending  lier  K.  II.  On  Thursday 
last  Madam  found  herself  a  little  indisposed.  &  tho'  advised  to  the 
contrary,  went  into  a  cold  bath,  as  she  did  also  the  2  da\"s  following. 
But  on  Sunday  morning  she  declared  she  was  not  well,  without 
knowing  what  visible  distemper  indisposed  her.  She  dined  very 
well,  look't  still  as  well  as  ever  till  1-  clock  in  the  afternoone,  when, 
finding  herselfe  hott  within,  she  drank  2  or  o  glasses  of  juice  of 
chicoris.  imediately  whereupon  finding  a  merveillous  alteration  all 
over,  she  cryed  out  she  was  poyson'd,  chang'd  her  colour  in  a 
moment,  became  blackish  Ik,  yellow,  hollow,  it  the  very  simptomes 
of  death  appeared  in  her  face.  Before  my  L''  Amb''  could  gett  to 
S'  Cloud,  at  9  clock,  she  had  had  G  cloysters  given  her,  but  I  cannot 
tell  you  particularly  it  ye  subsetpient  proceedings  of  ye  physicians. 
Alas,  poor  princesse,  all  along  she  cryed  out  that  she  was  in  great 
anguish  &  paine.  desiring  to  be  dissolved.  The  King  was  by  her 
almost  to  the  last  breath.  About  12  o'clock  ye  Sacrament  was 
administered  unto  her,  at  2  ye  extreme  unction.  &  near  three  this 
most  excellent  Princesse  gave  up  the  Ghost. 

But  now,  whilst  all  the  world  was  in  tears  &  extraordinary 
affliction,  you  may  well  aske  wliat  did  Moils'".  Whi,  he  imediately 
emploied  himself  in  sesing  all  Mad""''  money,  to  a  farthing,  in  any 
of  her  ladis'  hands,  al  her  jewels,  &  imediately  hastned  to  Paris,  & 
tumble  over  her  papers.' 

Al  ye  people  believe  shee  was  poisoned.  You  cannot  imagine 
how  her  lloyall  H'  is  lamented.  But  to  come  to  yesterday  in  the 
afternoone,  when  my  L**  Amb""  went  to  S'  Cloud  to  see  her  opeu'd, 
it  what  might  be  the  cause  of  her  soe  suddain  departure  (taking 
ye  Chamberlain^  &  iP'  Beaucher,  ye  Queen  of  Eng.  chirunjion,  with 

witliout  ground.    It  was  said,  too,  that  she  was  in  love  with  the  Duke  of  Mon- 
mouth whilst  at  Dover.' 

'  In  cipher,  deciphered. 

'-  Godefroi  Frederic  Maurice  de  la  Tour  d'Auvergne,  Due  dc  Bouillon. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  97 

him  to  make  observations),  where  the  doctors  &  ladys  deferred 
her  opeuing  till  S  at  night,  notwithstanding  y'  y"^  Amb''  pressed  to 
have  it  done  sooner  because  of  better  light.  No  sooner  was  ye 
upper  skin  euter'd  but  all  the  house  was  filled  with  the  most 
horrible  stanch  that  anybody  ever  smelt.  She  was  all  over  rotten 
within,  her  liver  wasted,  &  this  ye  generall  opinion  of  ye  Doctors, 
that  they  wonder'd  not  why  she  dyed  then,  but  that  she  lived  soe 
long.  She  was  stuff'd  up  with  bile.  Beaucher  spy'd  a  little  hole 
in  her  stomach,  w'''  the  other  chirunjiens  excused  to  be  the  hast  of 
ye  incisour,  though  it  was  blackish  within.  You  will  please  to 
pardon  this  confused  account,  for  all  we  doe  is  in  disorder.  She  is 
to  be  carryed  to  St.  Denis  this  night. 


To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

July  2'"',  IGTO. 

I  have  nothing  to  say  by  this  but  that  the  King  Casimire  of 
Poland  is  dead  on  his  returne  hither — a  fatall  year.  We  have  no 
news  else  ;  all  ye  world  is  in  lamentation.  Yesterday  the  King, 
Queen,  &  Dolphin  came  to  Paris  to  condole  with  Monsieur,  &  at 
the  same  time  his  Ma'-^  sent  the  Duke  of  Mortimoi-e,'  Gov''  of  Paris, 
to  my  L"^  Amb"'  to  assure  him  that  Madam's  losse  was  as  sensible 
to  him  as  if  it  had  been  the  Queen  his  wife,  A  will  give  him  Aud" 
in  a  daj-  or  two. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

.July  6th,  1070. 

Madam  was  carried  to  S*  Denis  last  night,  followed  by  many 
coaches  &  a  great  number  of  white  torchlights. 

The  King  sent  hence  on  Thursday  last  2  troops  of  his  musque- 
teers,  6  of  ye  Regim'  of  Guards,  &  2  drawne  of  ye  Garde  ile  Corps 
towards  Vivarets,  in  order  to  the  suppression  of  that  rebellion. 

They  went  very  unwillingly,  because  they  shall  not  see  ye 
rebells  in  any  pitcht  posture,  but  be  annoyed  by  them  from  the 
mountains. 

I  am  informed  that  the  French  have  4  millions  lyeing  ready  at 
Dantsigh  to  serve  upon  occasion  in  Poland,  in  case  of  dejjositions 
or   resignations ;    that,  by  reason  of  ye   hatred  that   people  bear 

Due  de  Morteniait. 


08  riiK  i>KsrAT('iii:s  ok 

towiirils  ye  Freiu-li  nation, one  Akakia '  is  ye  person  that  carries  on 
their  hrujiie  in  that  kingdonie.  I  hear  tor  a  certainty  that  the 
Manj'  ot"  ]\Ionterei  '■'  is  named  for  ye  present  to  be  Governor  of 
Fhinders  untiil  ye  Queen  shall  think  fit  to  make  choyce  of  another  ; 
that  it  will  be  otf'nd  for  ye  last  time  to  !)"  Juan,  whom  the  Fle- 
miny;s  most  desire,  proposing  great  things  to  himselfe  from  it. 

To  Sir  Joi^epli    IVilliamson. 

July  HI"',  1070. 

i-'roni  \'ivaret/,,  iiijun  the  approach  of  ye  King's  troops,  we  hear 
those  poor  mountainers  decline  in  their  courage,  it  begin  to  crave 
by  a  letter,  submitting  their  lives  to  the  mercy  of  the  King.  It  is 
thought  the  principall  authors  may  be  hanged  &  the  rest  sent  to 
the  galleys.  'J'lie  King  hath  resolved  not  to  goe  to  Chanifort 
[ChandjordJ  tliit;  nutnmne,  but  will  come  the  sooner  to  i'aris. 

To  Sir  Jose^ili    WilUumson. 

Paris  :  .luly  2Gth,  1C70. 

To  continue  an  account  of  the  hott  rebellion  in  \'ivarets,  you 
may  please  to  be  informed  that  yesterday  I  had  a  l/''  from  a  good 
correspondent  at  Ijyons,  of  the  23"'  currant,  whose  words  are  these  : 
'  By  a  person  this  day  come  from  Vivaretz  I  understood  how  those 
people,  beyond  all  expectation,  have  not  only  beseiged  N'ivaretz, 
their  capitall  city,  where  they  heard  the  King  intended  to  rendez- 
vous his  forces,  but  taken  the  towns  &  putt  all  to  the  sword.' 

They  seiz'd  upon  this  person,  hee  says  himselfe,  but  they  took 
from  him  his  amies  only.  He  says  also  that  they  have  fortifyed 
themselves,  that  they  fear  no  force  the  King  can  send  ag'  them,  & 
for  provision  they  have  gather'd  &  brought  in  all  the  corn  of  the 
countrey  round  about.  Tis  such  impudence,  this,  in  a  time  when 
ye  King  is  not  imbroyled  w"'  any  of  his  neighbo'*,  that  I  confesse 
I  know  [not]  what  to  make  of  it. 

To  found  canon,  they  have  melted  all  the  bells  in  the  countrey  ; 
they  coyne  money  &  give  12  sols  a  day  to  their  soldiers,  &  all 

'  See  London  Gazette  (July  14,  1G70),  which  mentions  that  '  M.  Akukia  was 
recalled  from  Dantzic,'  so  that  he  could  not  help  Poland. 

-  Don  Juan  Domingo  Mendez  de  Haro  (1040-1716),  second  son  of  Don  Luis 
de  Haro.  Became  Count  of  Monterey  through  his  marriage  with  Donna  Iniis 
Francisca  de  Zuniga. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  99 

this  under  one  Eoure,'  that  they  style  Lieutenant  Generall  for  ye 
people  of  Vivaretz  &  for  ye  service  of  ye  King.  The  King's  guards, 
many  of  them,  are  past  Lyons,  but  I  believe  they  will  attein 
greater  succors  before  they  attacke  them,  since  their  place  designed 
for  reiulez-vous  is  taken,  ttc".  These  people  being  exasperated  at 
the  imprisonment  at  ye  Bastile  of  the  deputies  they  sent  to  Court 
to  lay  their  grievances  at  his  ila'"^'^  feet,  &  the  little  hopes  of  mercy 
for  their  former  petty  revolt,  are  growne  desperate  :  in  number,  by 
relation,  of  near  15,000.  well  disciplined,  divided  into  8  batalions, 
&  commanded  by  severall  French  reformed  officers.  JMany  believe 
the  King's  forces  will  hardly  be  able  to  reduce  them  to  obedience. 

1  have  lately  gotten  a  new  correspondent  at  ILarseilles,  much  better 
&  more  punctuall  than  our  doting  Consull. 

He  saj'sthat  S'"  Tho:  Allen,  with  'J  menof  warr,  a  fire  shipe,  & 
a  catch,  is  before  Algiers,  &  by  one  Capt:  Clermond,"  formerly  com- 
mander of  the  '  King  David,'  is  confirmed  what  we  heard  lately,  that 
all  their  ships  are  retired  into  Port,  &  y'  it  is  a  matter  of  no  great 
difficulty  to  fire  &  destroy  them  all.  He  left  behind  him  about  400 
English  slaves  &  paid  for  his  ransome  1,400*'. 

My  L''  Howard,  by  advice  from  Tangier  of  ye  1 2^''  past,  was  on 
his  way  for  England,  viz.  Spayne  &  France,  havinge  efiected  nothing 
as  to  that  embassie  w''  Taffelett,  who  hath  lately  declared  he  will 
have  no  commerce  w"'  any  Xtian  Prince.  M''  Warren,  who  put  his 
Majesty  on  that  embassie,  it's  said  dyed  at  Fetz,-^  of  displeasure 
that  thinges  succeeded  noe  better. 

The  presse  here  for  seamen  still  continues  without  any  respect 
of  patrones  of  barques,  &'^'',  &  all  for  ye  equippuige  out  those 
11  ships  for  Tunis  &  Constantinople.  Att  Thollon,  are  6  news 
shipes  on  ye  stocks,  that  may  carry  from  50  to  70  guns,  &  6  others 
lately  launched  &  finished ;  great  ships,  2  whereof,  of  SO  guns. 
Order  is  given  for  ye  building  of  20  more  w"'  all  expedition,  but 
when  all  is  done  what  they  will  doe  for  seamen  we  knowe  not.  3 
shipes  are  also  building  hereof  in  carying  60  gunes  each,  &  also 

2  galleys. 

'  Formerly  a  sergeant  in  his  Majesty's  Guards  (London  Gazette,  July  23, 1670). 
-  Chevalier  de  Clermont,  capitaine  de  gaUre. 
"  Fez. 


100  TnK    DESPATCHES    OF 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Piiris  :  July  30th.  1070. 

I  have  yours  of  the  14tli,  h  to  your  complaint  about  the  Ordon- 
tumce  I  can  add  one  we  have  newly  received  from  Marseilles  (the 
particulars  whereof  are  herewith  transmitted  to  my  J/  Arlington), 
where  the  otlicers  of  the  Admiralty  have  made  it  a  practi.-^e.  lately, 
to  debauch  our  English  seamen  from  on  board  the  merchant  ships, 
giving  them  money,  &  sending  them  imediately  on  board  ye  King's 
ships  at  Tholon.  This  is  an  intoUerable  abuse,  since  it  hinders  the 
vessells  from  proceeding  on  their  voyages.  My  ]jord  Amb''  has 
ordered  me  about  it,  iS:  intends  to  give  in  a  brisk  ^lem"  in  complaint 
therof,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Ordoanance  about  ye  W.  Indyes.  As 
1o  our  Aubeiiic  affaire,  after  ye  goods  were  confisquated  at  the 
Clutmbre  de  Tresor,  &  a  ]\lem"  given  in  by  his  Ex'^'',  we  are  jiro- 
mised  a  main  levee,  but  with  this  conditiou,  that,  because  our 
treaties  of  commerce  are  all  old,  &  that  there  is  a  new  one  sur  le 
tapis,  it  shall  be  without  consequence,  since  they  know  not  but 
that  concession  may  be  abolished  in  the  new  one.  I  hear  nothing 
more  about  ye  rebellion  in  A'ivarets  but  what  is  dismall  iV  dread- 
full,  that  it  grows  yet  hotter,  &  that  they  have  lately  taken  a 
considerable  place  w'''  give.s  them  passage  to  ravage  Dauphine  also. 

The  JMarq.  of  Segueles,'  son  to  Mons''  Colbert,  is  gone  lately  to 
llochelle,  some  say  to  instruct  himselfe  in  ye  marine  affaires,  he 
Ijeing  Secretary  of  State  &  de  la  marine  in  siirvivance,  but  others 
say  more  probablj-  that  it  is  to  divert  his  mind  from  an  amour 
he  had  at  Court,  wherin  he  could  not  succeed,  viz.  the  marrying 
Madame  de  la  ^lottcV  daughter.*  Mons""  de  Louvoy  went  on 
Saterday  last  towards  Pignerol,  the}'  apprehending  least  these 
desperate  rebells  might  make  any  attempt  that  way. 

The  English  Princesse  ^  went  hence  on  Munday.    J\Iy  L'^  Amb"' 

'  Jean  Baptiste  Colbert,  Marquis  de  Seignelay.  Voltaire,  Sieclc  de  Louis  XIV, 
says  '  secretaire  d'Etat  de  la  marine,  qu'il  rendit  la  plus  belle  de  I'Europe.' 

=  Louise  de  Prie,  wife  of  Philippe  de  la  Mothe-Houdaneourt.  Her  daughter, 
Charlotte-El(Sonore-Madeleine,  man-ied  Louis  Charles  de  L6vis,  Due  de  Ventadour, 
in  1G72. 

"  Anne,  daughter  of  James,  Duke  of  York.  She  had  been  suffering  from  an 
affection  of  the  eyes,  and  had  been  sent  to  France  for  medical  advice.  Since  the 
death  of  her  grandmother,  she  had  been  under  the  care  of '  Madame  '  (S.  P.,  Dom.) 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  101 

met  her  that  night  at  Pointoise.     The  K^  made  Iier  a  jiresent  of  2 
bracelets  to  the  value  of  10,000  crowns. 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  July  30th,  1670,  S.N. 

My  Lord  Ambassador  2  days  since  received  a  letter  from  our 
Consul!  ^  att  Marseilles,  of  w'^'^  his  Ex'^''  hath  ordred  mee  to  trans- 
mitt  to  y''  Lopp  a  copy,  &  another  paper  in  French,  copys  of  the 
petition  of  the  Capt-  of  ye  ship  concerned  to  the  Admiralty  there, 
attested  by  a  jDublick  notary.  By  all  w"^**  your  Lopp  will  see  in 
what  manner  &  with  what  insolence  the  English  are  abused,  &  the 
consequence  that  our  merchants'  ships  shall  loose  their  voyages  for 
want  of  men.  His  Ex'^'"  intends  to  complaine  of  this  by  Memiorall, 
as  well  as  about  the  Ordonnunce  prohibiting  any  forreigners  to 
come  near  '  aux  environs  des  Isles  de  S.  M.  T.  X'''"™ '  in  the 
West  Indys.  I  presumed  to  acquaint  y''  Lopp,  on  my  last,  of  their 
having  confiscated  ye  goods  of  a  Guernsey  factor  who  dyed  here.'- 
I  must  now  add  that,  upon  a  complayning  Mem"  therof  given  in  to 
the  King  by  my  Ld  Ambassador,  his  Ex™  had  yesterday  this 
answer,  that  the  heirs  should  have  a  main  levee,  &  enjoy  ye  goods 
left  by  the  deceased,  but  with  this  condicdn,  that  it  should  bee  sana 
consequence,  they  alledgiug  that  our  Treatys  of  Commerce  are  very 
old,  &  that  there  being  a  new  one  at  present  ><iir  le  tapis,  they 
know  not  whether  therein  the  same  concessions  maj-  bee  granteil 
the  English  as  in  former  treatys. 

The  French  galleys  are  all  come  into  Marseilles  on  the  18th 
curr',  having  been  no  further  than  Cape  de  Cortigo  &  not  meeting 
with  any  thing.  We  cannot  yet  tell  what  to  think  of  the  holt 
rebellion  in  Languedoc,  but  many  apprehend  it  may  not  suddainlv 
bee  appeased.''  I  hear  they  have  taken  a  place  that  opens  them  ;i 
passage  to  ravage  in  Dauphine  also.  It  is  sure  that  the  Marq"  de 
Louvoy  is  gone  to  Pignerol,  upon  an  apprehension  least  ye  rebells 
might  attempt  something  that  way. 

'  Mr.  Codgill.    For  letter  see  S.  P..  France,  .July  HI,  ICiTl. 
-  See  letter  dated  June  28,  1070. 
'  See  letter  dated  June  14,  1670. 


1U2  TiiK  i)i;brATciii;,s  ov 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  Aug.  2'i,  l(i70. 

Vou  !i;ive  lieunl  of  the  insolence  committed  to  the  Turkish 
EnvoifC  at  Valence  by  a  clowne  who  pressed  in  to  see  him.  The 
King  lately  sent  a  letire  de  cnrliel  to  the  Gov"'  of  the  place  to 
present  the  ott'ender  &  ask  the  Turk  to  pronounce  his  sentence, 
but,  like  a  gallant,  hee  being  informed  of  the  contents  of  ye  letter, 
went  to  the  prison  &  discharged  him. 

The  Parliament  of  J'aris  is  now  assembled  principally  for  three 
affairs,  that  of  the  Marq"  of  Courcelles'  with  the  C  de  Callois"-'  upon 
the  complaints  of  the  clergy  that  the  Pari'  had  diminished  ye 
pensions  of  Cun'a  &  taken  away  some  of  their  mrnnes  disnu'sy" 
and  upon  the  P'"  pretentions  to  have  the  precedence  of  ye  clergy 
at  the  ceremony  to  be  made  at  Notre  Dame  for  dececl  Madam, 
npon  w'"  the   I"  has  framed   .Memoi-ialls  to  hee  presented  to  the 

The  ]\Iarq.  of  Coeuvi-os  '  is  gone  to  compliment  the  young  King 
of  Spain's  recovery.  The  Duke  of  Chauhies  thinks  of  selling  his 
charge  of  Jiieut-Col.  of  ye  K^""  ijens  d'aDiies  to  M'  de  C'iievreuse.-'^ 
Last  week  Mons''  went  to  the  '  Feuillans  '  &  was  present  at  a  service 
for  Madam,  accompanied  by  the  little  Princesse  his  dt'.ugliter.^ 
The  Count  de  Lazun  [Lauzun]  has  bought  ye  governement  of  Metz 
for  8O,0UO  crowns  of  ye  Marshal  de  la  Ferti''.'  Some  say  here  that 
iVIons''  de  Gourville  has  received  at  iladrid,  for  ye  P"'  of  Conde, 
()U,000  pistolls  out  of  the  new  Indy  money.  The  '  menu  peuple 
de  Metz'"  have  been  inclining  to  a  rebellion  upon  a  new  tax  on 
every  Cidiarel  pour  le  Buvrhon  ;  5  of  ye  ]irincipall  authors  were 
hang'd,  &  the  rest  wliip'd  by  ye  hangman.  Since  I  wrote  thus  far 
I  must  correct  what  I  .sayd  about  ye  Man-shall  la  Ferte.  lie  has 
received  ye   80,000   crowns  of  ye  King  for  the  demission  of  his 

'  Charles  do  Chiimplais,  Marquis  de  Courcelles. 
■  Louis  d'Ogcr,  Marquis  de  Cavoie. 

'  A  tax  which  consisted  of  a  tenth  part  of  the  produce  of  the  land  to  be  f,'ivcn 
to  the  Church  or  any  ecclesiastical  establishment. 

'  Annibal  d'Estries,  son  of  Francois  Annibal,  Due  d'Estr^es. 

■■*  Charles  Honor6  d'Albert,  Due  de  Chevreuse,  de  Luynes,  et  de  Chaulnes. 

'  Marie  Louise,  Mademoiselle  d'Orl^ans  (16ri2-iri89). 

'  Henri  Senneterre,  Marquis  de  la  Ferte. 

"  The  poorest  part  of  the  population. 


AX    ENlfLISH    AGE.NT^l.N    PARIS  103 

cliarge,  &  it's  sayd  the  Ks  is  inclined  to  dispose  of  it  to  the  Diike 
of  Luxembourg'  or  Mareschal  de  Crequy.  the  C  de  Lauzun  being 
treating  about  ye  governement  of  C4uienne.  The  King  has  given 
to  the  Duke  of  Chaulnes  ye  governement  of  Bretagne  en  chef. 
One  of  the  principall  towns  in  Eoussillon  has  e^rjoriji'  the  French 
garrison,  &  the  magistrates  have  sent  to  the  rebells  in  ^'ivarets 
that  if  they  would  persevere  in  their  designs,  ct  give  them  protec- 
tion, they  would  side  with  them  &  maintaine  that  place  for  them. 
I  think  I  was  mistaken  in  my  last,  when  I  sayd  that  Mons""  de 
Louvoy  was  gone  that  way,  being  since  informed  that  he  parts 
not  till  this  day.  The  people  discourse  much  that  the  Hollanders 
foment  this  rebellion,  &  that  a  Courrier  was  stopt  at  ifoulin  from 
ye  P°''  of  Orange  going  to  them  to  assure  them  of  his  H^  protec- 
tion. It's  said  ye  King  has  sent  order  to  the  nobility  of  Languedoc 
to  be  in  amies,  soe  hott  is  this  sedition. 

I  am  informed  that  the  K»'  intends  in  a  day,  2  or  3,  to  goe  to 
Fontainbleau,  there  to  divert  himselfe  for  about  3  weeks,  &  thence 
for  Chambort.  Ye  King's  going  to  the  first  place  is  certainly  of 
design  to  breake  up  ye  campe  and  send  them  against  ye  rebels,  it 
being  then  the  time  appointed  for  the  releiving  ye  camp,  w*  shall 
not  be  done  by  reason  of  the  King's  absence. 

To  Lord  Arlingion. 

Paris:    J^^yj^^Tth  L?29]_  1,5,0. 
August  the  8tn 

The  late  rebellion  in  Vivarets  having  made  a  great  noyse  by 
reason  of  their  great  numbers,  &c.,  I  presume  with  all  humility  to 
acquaint  y'"  Lopp  with  the  last  advices  thence,  w''''  have  not  a  liltle 
pleased  the  King  &  Court. 

Letters  from  Moutelimer  of  July  28  advise  that  on  the  18th 
Mons"'  de  Vardes^  gott  to  the  Camp.  &  went  the  Friday  after,  at  the 
head  of  the  vanguard  of  ye  army,  with  Mess"  de  Castre,^  du  Roure.^ 
le  Prince  d'Harcourt,-^  W  le  Pret,"  &  many  other  persons  of  quality. 
On  the  first  day  of  their  march  they  mett  with  near  3  thousand  of 

'  Frani;ois  Henri  de  Jlontmorenci,  Due  de  Luxembourg. 

-  Francois  Een6  du  Bec-Crespin,  Marquis  de  Vardes. 

'  Rene  Gaspard  de  la  Croix,  Marquis  de  Castries,  lieutenant-general. 

'  Louis  Pierre  Scipion  de  Grimoard  de  Beauvais  et  de  Montlaur. 

'^  Franijois,  Prince  d'Harcourt,  thu'd  son  of  Charles  II.,  Due  d'Elbnpuf. 

°  Pierre  Cardin  le  Bret,  Sieur  de  Flacourt. 


iUl  IIIK  DixsrAR  Hi;.s  ()!•■ 

ye  rcbells,  who  imediatfly  upon  ye  approach  of  ye  King's  forces 
tlirew  away  their  amies  &  tied,  soe  that  there  were  talcen  but  60 
prisoners  &  50  slayne  ;  since  when  the  army  has  marelied  further 
into  tlie  couutrey  without  pieeting  anything  but  the  SitV'se  that 
were  shutt  up  in  Aubenas  for  above  a  month.  The  rebells  saved 
tlieniselves  in  the  mountains ;  Aubenas  was  pillaged,  &  a  place 
called  La  Chapelle  burnt  to  the  ground,  where  de  Iloure,  ye  head 
of  y'"  [them],  was  borne  &  dwelt. 

The  inhabitants  of  Poivas  [I'rivas],  through  an  extraordinary 
zeale  for  the  King's  service,  went  to  attack  a  body  of  ye  Vivarois 
YfCh  .vrere  to  passe  near  their  towue  to  joyne  with  de  Koure,  but 
they  were  routed  &  the  towne  taken  &  pillaged.  Nostradamus  has 
spoken  of  this  revolt  in  his  '  4^''  Centurie '  in  these  words  :  '  Le 
Camp  plus  grand  de  Roure  mis  en  fuitte,  guere  plus  outre  ne  sera 
pas  chasse,  ost  recanipe,  et  region  reduitte,  puis  hors  de  Gaule  du 
tout  sera  chasse.' 

The  King  has  received  certain  news  by  an  expresse  from 
I\I''  de  Castres  that  de  lloure's  Camp  has  ben  put  to  the  flight, 
oUO  slayne,  &  200  prisoners,  ye  head  himselfe  having  saved  him- 
self in  the  mountains. 

My  letters  from  Marseilles  say  Sr  Tho:  Allin  has  been  lately 
capitulating  with  the  French  Admirall  before  Tunis  upon  his 
hindring  our  ships  from  entriiig  into  that  port,  &  that  the  result 
was  promises  on  both  sides  to  molest  neither  in  their  entrances 
into  Tunis  or  Argiers. 

I  am  informed  that  the  Marq"  of  Louvoy's  journej"  towards 
I'ignerol  was  not  towards  ye  fortifying  that  place,  as  was  pre- 
tended, but  to  confer  with  the  Duke  of  Savoy  about  somewhat 
that  may  in  time  concernc  (leiieva.  with  whom  ye  Duke  has  latclj' 
some  growing  differences. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Willia/mson. 

Paris :  Aug.  I3th,  1670,  S.N. 
To-morrow  ye  ceremony  is  to  lie  performed  for  '  feu  de  Beau- 
fort." ' 

Yesterday  was  a  .solemne  procession  for  ye  purifying  ye 
Church  of  K'''  Dame  &  prayer  that  ye  sin  might  not  be  imputed, 

'  The  n  11  ni versa ry  of  his  death  (dieil  August  1600). 


AN    KXC.LISH    AOEXT    IN    PARIS  105 

&c ;  &  ye  day  before  j-e  Archbp  of  Paris  ordred  a  fast  in  order 
thereunto. 

To  tell  you  ye  towne  talke  is  somewhat  nonsensicall  in  one 
particular (altho' nothing  bee  more  discoursed  of),  viz',  that  Monsieur 
is  to  marry  Mad"""  d'Orleans,*  they  being  so  near  in  blood,  &  there 
being  other  things  that  make  it  improbable. 

The  people  of  Vivarets  are  routed  ye  field,  tho'  I  hear  that  ye 
King's  troops  pursuing  them,  even  on  the  mountains,  had  a  recoyle 
that  spoyled  abundance  of  ye  men,  at  w'-"''  I  hear  also  ye  Ks  is 
somewhat  angry. 

Yesterday  a  gent:  of  quality's  son,  &  heir  to  a  great  estate,  was 
taken  out  of  ye  Chartreux,  where  he  had  entred  himself  but  lately, 
&  if,  after  8  months  being  out.  his  inclinations  are  ye  same  to 
reenter,  he  shall  doe  what  he  pleases  therein  :  all  by  ye  King's 
order  at  ye  Parents'  request. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Aug.  23,  1670. 

Here  is  nothing  more  possesseth  the  people  than  a  reall  belief 
that  the  League  is  broken,  grounded  only  upon  the  extraordinary 
entertajmment  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  hath  had  here,  &  a  reso- 
lucon  lately  taken  to  send  on  Wednesday  next  about  1-5  thous''  men 
from  the  Camp  to  remlevous  at  Peronne,  commanded  by  Marshall 
Crequy.  The  souldiery  is  willing  to  flatter  itselfe  that  there  may 
be  warres,  but  the  designe,  I  believe,  is  no  other  than  to  dispose 
those  troops  into  ye  severall  garrisons,  for  ye  double  inforcing  them 
during  the  winter,  especially  those  where  the  citodells  a're  not 
quite  finished.  But  then,  some  object,  why  so  soone  in  the  year  ? 
&  why  so  many  ?  there  being  already  in  the  frontier  garrisons 
about  17  thousand  men,  unles  the  King  will  have  on  ye  place  a 
sufEceint  body  of  troops  to  take  possession  of  what  he  pretends 
to  sur  les  depeiulances,  w'^*'  differences  cannot  well  be  decided 
within  ye  year  limited  by  the  Iving,  &  he  is  left  to  use  means  in 
such  case  after  it  is  expired. 

Capt.  Pierce,  commander  of  ye  '  Saphire,'  scandalously  lost  in  the 

'  His  consin,  Anne  Marie  Louise  d'Orleans,  daughter  of  Gaston  d'Orieans. 
The  man-iage  did  not  take  place,  as  Monsieur  married  Charlotte  Elizabeth, 
daughter  ol  Charles  Lewis,  Elector  Palatine. 


lOG  Till-;  i)E.si'ATCiii>;  uv 

Medifciani'aii.  will  ln^  Ikm'c  in  ii  day  or  two.'  M(jiis''  de  Ijouvoy  is 
coinc  Ijiick  fVoiii  I'ignerol,  <'^  gives  occasion  to  many  to  talkc 
of  Foiif|ui'fb  enlargement.-  He  will  not  enjoy  ye  Post  Office  long, 
tlie  King  having  resolved  to  take  it  into  his  owne  hands.  I  hear 
tJiat  .Nfons''  Colbert  &  he  cannot  set  their  horses  together,  the 
fVirmer  having  lately  gotten  the  favor  of  his  lady's  '  riding  in  ye 
coach  with  the  Queen.  Le  Tellier's  lady  '  being  improper  for  such 
things,  Louvoy  pretended  to  it  for  his  wife,  but  was  refuf^ed.  The 
iiandgraf  of  Ilesse^  is  come  hither,  mucli  satisfyed  witli  his  enter- 
taynem'  in  England.  He  will  not  appear  at  Court  yet,  but  make 
ye  /(/«)•  (le  la  France  first,  fearing  an  affront  for  his  having  visited 
S"'  W.  Temple*"  at  ye  Hague  &  not  M''  Pompoinie,'  w''  the  latter 
resented. 

This  evening  the  Duke  is  to  be  regaled  at  Versailles  after  ye 
mafia-  nox.     It  is  sayd  he  may  be  going  hence  in  5  or  G  days. 

On  Thursday  was  the  great  ceremony  of  Madam's  enterrinent 
performed  at  8'  ]3enis,  w*^''  I  leave  to  M''  Vernon's  relation  "  as  to 
particulars,  because  I  was  then  about  l)usines  at  >S'  Germains, 
where  all  the  courtiers  talke  of  league  breakings,  warrs  with 
Holland,  millions  to  be  sent  for  England,  40  men  of  war  thence  to 
a.ssist  France,  Ac' ;  but  these  things  I  look  on  as  •  tant  an  vent.' 

Tu  Sir  Joseph  Willianiifon. 

Talis  :  Aug.  27,  1070. 

C)n  this  vei-y  day  (as  I  told  you  in  ray  last)  the  whole  camp 
breaks  up,  &  still  maintains  the  people's  hopes  alive,  that  their 
marching  into  Flanders  must  bee  for  some  warlike  intencon. 

All  I  can  hear  to  be  the  probable  reason  for  soe  suddain  a 
removall  is  want  of  forrage,  &  for  their  marching  into  Flanders  to 
prevent  the  violence  ct  losse  the  countrey  suffer 'd  last  year  among 

'  According  to  the  London  Gazette,  dated  September  28,  1670,  dipt.  Pierce 
iind  his  lieutenant  were  executed,  sentence  having  been  passed  by  court  martial. 

-  Fouquet  remained  a  prisoner  at  Tignerol  until  his  death  in  IfiSO. 

^  Marie  Charon,  daughter  of  Jacques  Charon,  Seigneur  de  Menars. 

'  Elisabeth  Turpin. 

'  Charles,  son  of  William  VI.  and  Hedwig  Sophia,  daughter  of  George  Willi-.im 
Elector  of  Brandenburg. 

"  English  Ambassador  at  the  Hague. 

'  French  Ambassador  at  the  Hague. 

'  See  .S.  P.,  France.     Letter  dated  August  2i,  lOTU. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  107 

their  vendatujes  wheu  the  troops  were  scatter 'd,  as  well  as  ye  giving 
jealousy  to  Holland  &  putting  them  to  great  winter  charges  in 
their  frontiers.  This  is  all  the  naked  account  I  can  hitherto  give 
you  of  the  march  of  soe  great  a  body  of  men. 

On  Sunday  last  there  was  a  gallant  review  of  them,  ambuscados, 
forts  taken,  the  artillery  attacked,  &c.  The  advantage  proposed 
from  this  harmlesse  play  is"  ye  teaching  the  men  practise  of  keeping 
in  order,  &c.  You  will  find,  I  believe,  that  ye  French  will  have 
pretext  enough  given  them  of  doing  something  in  Flanders  early 
in  the  Spring,  it  being  not  very  likely  that  those  differences  will 
be  adjusted  within  ye  time  limited.  Little  Madam,  ye  King's 
daughter,  has  been  ill  of  an  imposthumo  in  her  head,  but  I  hear 
she  is  now  better,  as  well  as  ye  Dauphin,  who  hath  ben  indisposed 
by  some  fitts  of  a  feaver  these  6  days  past. 

That  Heimskirke,'  [by]  whom  S''  John  Trevor  -  sent  his  jMat '''''' 
orders  to  my  L'  Amb''  to  complaine  of  &  endeavor  to  stop  his  voyage 
to  the  W.  Indys,  went  away  above  2  months  since  with  3  good 
ships,  sett  out  by  some  particular  persons,  under  designe  of  finding 
a  Northerne  passage  to  the  Indys.  Herewith  I  transmitt  to  you  a 
copy  of  the  last  Mem"  my  L''  Amb''  gave  in,  to  w''''  his  Ex"""  had 
answer  that  the  King  had  written  to  M''  Colbert  in  England  to 
give  his  Ma'^'  all  satisfaction  he  could  desire. 

My  Lord  Arlington,  at  my  coming  away,  was  pleased  to  promise 
me  20"  a  year  towardes  my  subsistance  here,  w"^''  I  received  for  the 
last  year.  I  beseech  you,  S'",  to  move  his  lipp  in  it  &  be  pleased 
to  trouble  y''selfe  with  the  transmitting  ye  quota  for  this  year  also 
to  mee.  I  beg  y''  pardon  for  this  trouble  &  assure  you  that,  tlio'  I  am 
very  thrifty,  there  are  many  necessary  expences  that  lick  up  all  1 
am  allowed. 

Here  is  a  complaint  come  from  Diep  [Dieppe]  of  a  violence 
done  to  ye  M''  of  a  sloop  belonging  to  our  King.  I  send  you  ye 
extract  of  it  in  French  as  it  is  given  to  ye  Ministers  here.  The 
Duke  of  Bucks  has  been  here  these  3  days  at  Paris.'    I  hear  he  has 

'  Sieur  Hemskirke,  Envoy  Extraordinaiy  from  the  United  Provinces  to  tlie 
Emperor  Leopold. 

-  English  Envoy  in  Paris.     Appointed  Secretary  of  State  in  1669. 

'  Buckingham's  mission  was  concerned  with  an  arrangement  'nith  Lonis  on 
behalf  of  the  Protestants,  and  with  measures  to  obtain  some  redress  for  the  ill- 
usage  which  the  English  merchants  suffered  in  the  sale  of  woollen  cloths.  Before 
he  left  it  was  the  tiim  belief  in  France  that  the  league  was  broken.     According  to 


IU8  TIIK    DICSrATCHES   OF 

beon  prpHPiiti'd  witli  4  of  ye  Kiiitjf's  best  horses,  \-  a  sword,  besett 
with  diamonds,  is  prei)ariii<^  for  liim,  valued  at  20  thous''  crowns. 

The  Holland  Ambas.sador '  is  expected  here  every  moment. 
He  comes  in  a  scurvy  jealous  conjuncture. 

The  people  hate  ye  Dutch  more  than  ever  did  ye  Spaniard. 


V'o  iSi'c  Jusi'jili  Williamson. 

Paris:  Sept.  4th,  1070,  S.X. 
1  sluiuld  have  told  you  in  my  last  of  ye  surprise  in  Lorraine, 
but  I  learnt  it  after  my  letters  were  gone  onely.  The  Chev''  de 
Fourille,  at  the  head  of  7,000  men,  took  Nancy,  ye  Duke  himselfe 
narrowly  escaping  (his  Duchesse,'^  with  2  other  princesses,  put 
themselves  into  a  Nunnery)  to\vards  Humbourg  ;  in  his  way  he 
left  orders  at  Chastel  Surmoisy,  a  strong  place.  Upon  this  advise 
the^Marshall  Crequy  went  post  for  Lorraine,  leaving  M""  de  Vaubrun-' 
to  command  the  moyety  of  ye  Army  that  marched  along  ye  River 
Esni-.'  It's  sayd  they  will  besiege  Lspinan  ^  &  all  the  strong  places 
in  Jjorraine.  You  are  not  ignorant,  I  presume,  of  the  reasons  of  this 
suddain  action,  though  the  outward  ones  were  the  taking  dovvne 
limits,  posts,  impositions,  &c.  The  main  one  is  that  Duke's  en- 
deavors for  these  12  months  past  to  embarke  himselfe  on  the 
league,'"'  with  affronting  propositions  against  Fiance  in  such  case. 

We  have  no  news  since  from  those  parts,  tho'  a  courrier  came  last 
nisrht  to  S'Germains.  It's  believed  generally  all  Lorraine  is  taken, 
tho'  others  are  of  opinion  that  some  holds  may  stand  it  out  a  while  ; 
if  soe,  &  that  the  Duke  have  witt  as  he  has  much  monej^,  he  may 
make  some  sport ;  the  winter  drawing  on,  a  few  men  may  make 
consideral)le  defence. 

The  Duke  of  Buckingham  is  taking  his  leave,  &  M""  Stanley' 
has  his  of  i\Ionsipur  I't  a  present  of  a  ring  with  o<l(il. 

Mignet,  Louis  agreed  to  insist  upon  Charles  giving  the  commantl  of  the  English 
auxiliary  forces  to  Buckingham  (Mignet,  vol.  iii.  pp.  221-225). 

'  Pierre  van  Grotius. 

"  El^onore  Marie,  wife  of  Charles  IV.,  Due  de  Lorraine. 

'  Nicolas  de  Bautru-Nogent,  Marquis  de  Vauhrun,  appointed  Marshal  in  1703. 

'  Aisne.  ^  Espinal. 

°  The  Triple  Alliance. 

'  Peter  Stanley,  brother  to  the  Earl  of  Derby. 


4N    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  109 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  7ber  (i'\  1C>70. 

My  Lord  Ambassador  is  gone  this  morning  to  S'  Gerniains  to 
deliver  in  a  Mem"  upon  our  London  ^Terchants'  complaint,  w''  your 
Lo^p  lately  transmitted  to  his  Ex" . 

At  this  moment  I  have  certain  advice  of  the  Duke  of  Lorrain's 
being  at  Espinal,  a  strong  place  in  that  Dutchy,  but  cannot  averre 
what  is  reported,  that  he  has  sent  L''^'  of  submission  to  the  Frencii 
King. 

It  is  most  true  that  the  Prince  of  Tarante  '  has  turn'd  Koman 
Cathi"^  &  sent  a  letter  to  the  States  of  Holland,  whereby  he 
renounces  all  the  charges  &  commands  he  had  under  them. 

This  is  a  considerable  chocque  to  the  poor  Huguenots,  whose 
interest  declines  dayley  by  the  disertation  -  of  such  great  persons 
that  maiutain'd  it  at  Court ;  the  only  person  left  is  M''  de  Ruvigny.-' 

There  is  no  likelyhood  that  France  will  recede  from  the  refer- 
rence  for  the  determinacoii  of  ye  difierences  about  dependances  in 
any  circumstance,  but  insist  still  that  Eng"*  &  Sweden  have  the 
arbitracon,  without  being  joyn'd  with  the  Hollanders,  who.  thoutrh 
they  seem  outwardly  to  decline  it,  presse  it  home  at  Madrid,  alledg- 
ing  that  as  they  have  ^  in  the  guaranty,  nothing  relating  to  the 
Peace  of  Aix  de  la  Chappelle  ought  to  be  transacted  separate  from 
them,  soe  that,  before  the  2  Crowns  can  agree  about  the  arbitrators, 
ye  time  limited  will  bee  elapsed,  &  it  may  be  a  pretext  given  to 
France  to  use  force  of  armes. 

The  Duke  of  Bucts  is  yet  at  S'  Gerniains  taking  leave,  &  may 
be  on  his  returne  in  a  few  days. 


To  Sir  Joseph  WiUiamtson. 

Paris  :  Sep.  (j,  '70. 

This  morning  news  is  come  by  a  Courrier  that  ye  Duke  of 
Lorraine  is  at  Espinan,  &  some  say  that  he  hath  written  a  submis- 
sive letter  to  the  French  King,  wherein  he  talks  of  surrender,  &c., 
w*'''  displeaseth  much  the  souldiery,  who  proposed  great  things  to 
themselves  from  that  invasion. 

'  Henri  Charles  de  la  Tr^mouille.  -  I.e.  desertion. 

^  Henri  llassufi,  Marquis  de  Ruvigny  (1610-1689). 


11(1  THi:  nicsPATniEs  oi' 

Tlu^  Prince  of  Tarranle,  yon  know,  S'",  lias  been  latrly  in  llollantl. 
At  the  very  nick  of  ye  surprise  in  Lorraine  he  sent  a  \/^'  to  tiie 
States,  wheri'in  he  renounced  all  the  coniniands  he  hail  under  them, 
being  tnrn'd  I'apist  &  exjiecting  greater  preferment  herein  France. 
Tiie  army  that  is  marching  towards  \'erdun  went  from  Senlis  to 
Soissons,  from  Brayne  along  the  river  \'oile '  to  Tismes,'  A  encamped 
near  Reims  on  Thursday  night  last,  whence  they  niarcli  towards 
.Menehou,  &  thence  whither  ye  Marq'  of  Louvoy  shall  conduct 
them.  The  Chev'  de  Fourille  sent  a  summons  to  the  Governor  of 
Chastel  Surmoisy  to  know  for  whome  he  maintayned  the  place, 
whether  for  (he  King  or  Duke  of  Lorraine.'  He  ans''  for  neither, 
but  for  his  soverayne,  P''''  Charles  of  ijorraine,'  whereupon  ihey  are 
puzzled  a  little  how  to  proceed.  I  hear  that  ye  French  troops 
moulder  away  iV  tliat  the  Duke  of  Jjorraine  has  6,000  men.  He 
sent  a  strange  letter  to  the  King  on  Sunday  last  by  an  officer  of 
his  owne.  I  am  told  it  was  much  after  this  style  :  '  Sire,  I  hear 
you  are  angry  with  mee ;  I  don't  know  why.  I  have  no  news  to 
send  you,  but  you  may  be  better  informed  of  all  from  the  Company 
you  have  sent  into  my  couutrey,'  &c.  I  think  the  King  refused  to 
read  it.  The  Chev''  d'Harcourt  is  come  hither,  fpiitting  the  Duke's 
service,  because  he  has  great  benefices  in  France. 

'J'o  Sir  Jusci'Jt    Williamson. 

Sep.  13,  1G70. 

'J'lie  Duke  of  Buck  took  his  leave  on  Tuesday,  &  that  night,  as 
he  sup'd  witli  ye  C.  i/uizun,  ye  King  i*t  .some  ladies  in  masks 
entred,  one  of  whom  disarmed  his  grace,  whilst  the  other  invested 
liim  with  the  rich  sword  &  belt  soe  long  talk't  of.  On  Thursday 
he  was  treated  magnificently  by  ye  M'  Belfonds  at  ye  Louvre,  & 
last  night  by  my  L''  Amb''  in  an  exf-'''  manner. 

To  Sir  Jo.-tepli    WiWfimgon. 

Talis  :  Sep.  17,  1670,  S.N. 
I  presume  this  may  find  you  return'd  to  Loudon  after  a  satis- 
factory divertisenieni  in  the  countrey,  &  that  the  Duke  of  Buck- 
ingham may  be  with  you  before  this,  his  Grace  setting  out  hence 

'  Vesle.  -  Fismes.  '  Charles  IV.  de  Lorraine. 

'  Nephew  of  Charles  IV.  and  son  of  Nicolas  de  Lorraine. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  111 

yesterday  niorniug  early  towards  Calais  in  company  with  AI''  Stanley, 
iP  -James  Porter,  &  C.  Grammout/  besides  the  beautiful!  young  lady 
Mad™"-'  Keroel,-  quondam  maid-of-honor  to  l\Iadam,  who  I  hear  is 
designed  to  have  the  same  raiuj  with  her  Ma'-^  of  England.  Here- 
with I  send  you  an  impertinent  discourse  presented  to  Court 
about  salutes,  to  the  end  you  may  see  what  they  heartily  aim  att. 
The  two  packetts  to  S''M.  Ognate''  are  particularly  recomend'd  to  y'' 
protection.  I  am  told  that  the  King  has  sent  to  the  Tinperatricc 
Dowager  ^  a  remission  of  all  the  attaire  of  Lorraine,  referring  wholy 
to  her  ye  determination  of  that  matter.  Many  look  on  this  as  an 
amusement  onely  for  the  Emperor,  whilst  his  troopes  are  besieging 
Espinal,  &  its  said  P"^'^  Charles  is  join'd  with  his  Uncle  in  order  to 
some  defence.  The  Dutch  Amb''  de  Groot  ^  will  hardly  be  able  to 
make  his  entry  these  2  months  yet ;  his  gout  &  the  King's  going 
for  Chambort  will  keep  him  long  incognito. 

The  world  is  of  opinion  here  tJiat  the  league  is  broken,  that  one 
is  made  ag'  the  Hollanders,  &c.,  in  the  Indies,  but  you  know  how 
true  on  that  side  better  than  wee. 


To  ilUr  Joseph    Williamson. 

Paris  :  7b  24.  1070. 

All  buildings  are  surceased — I  mean  'maisons  royales ' — neither 
are  the  musick,  escaries,  &c.,  paid  regidarly,  as  formerly,  the  whole 
intent  being  on  swelling  up  the  Tresor  Royal  against  Spring  or  a 
wet  day.  I  hear  that  ye  King  asked  M'"  Colbert  for  an  account 
of  his  dayly  charges  in  generall,  who  desired  6  weeks'  time  for  it. 
when  the   K^  replyed  that  Fouquet  could  have  done  it  in  as  many 

(lays- 

The  Venetian  Ambassador,  now  at  Thurin,  refusing  to  render  up 
one  of  his  pages  that  drew  his  sword  in  the  Duke's  palace,  the 
Duke  sent  his  guards  to  the  Amb''"^  house  to  search  it,  of  w'-''  the 
Senate  being  advised  have  called  home  their  Amb"",  complaining 
that  the  droit  de  (jeng  had  been  violated  in  his  person. 

'  Philibert,  chevalier,  aftenvards  Comte  de  Grammont. 

-  Louise  Een^e   de  Penancoet  de   Keroualle   (1649-1734),   later  Duchess   of 
Portsmouth. 

'  Mark  Ognate,  Envoy  Extraordinary  from  Spain. 

*  Eleanora,  daughter  of  Charles,  second  Duke  of  Mantua. 

'  Pierre  Van  Grotins. 


Ill:  TllK    I)llSPATCnE.S    OV 

I'apers  have  been  found  at  Nancy  w"-"''  evidence  that  the  Dukes 
of  Lori'aiiie  liave  usurped  on  the  Territories  of  ye  B'"  of  Metz, 
Toul,  &  X'erdun  (that  liave  lieen  of  ye  House  of  Lorraine),  &  ever 
since  continued  to  keep  possession,  w*^''  the  King  has  resolved  to 
refornie  &  reduce  in  .ftatu  quo.  The  J\in(f's  troops  there  consist  of 
lo,UUO  men,  commanded  by  Marshall  Crccjui,  who  has  not  yet  laid 
formal  seige  to  Chastel,  having  only  4  little  field  pieces  of  15''  ball. 
That  place  is  well  wall'd  &  in  posture  of  defence. 

The  King  told  ye  P"^''  of  Oonde  a  few  days  since  that,  it  his 
Ma'-'  went  to  Lorraine,  the  J'"'  must  accompany  him  thither. 

The  voyage  to  Chambort  is  uncertain. 

To  Lord  Aiiiiiijtoit,. 

Paris:  Octob  1,  1070,  S.N. 

Since  his  Ex"^' wrote  the  inclosed,  my  L''  Amb'"  commands  me  to 
infoi'ine  ycmr  Lopp  that  upon  letters  from  Holland,  France  being 
advised  that  the  Dutch  are  ordering  the  raising  of  twenty  five 
thousand  men,  &  their  resolution  to  have  a  great  armj'  at  Spring, 
the  King  of  France  yesterda}'  gave  order  for  raising  forthwith 
fifteene  thousand  men,  being  resolved  to  push  the  affaire  of  Lor- 
raine to  the  utmost,  which  the  Dutch  have  reason  to  apprehend  i*t 
provide  against. 

Here  has  been  lately  a  prohibitioii  posted  up  in  onely  some 
few  particular  places  forbidding  ye  merchants  to  buy  or  vend 
Emilis/i  silUe  stockins.  1  know  not  whether  the  word  Eiujlish  be 
mentioned,  but  am  sure  the  intent  is  only  against  them.  1  have 
endeavour'd  but  cannot  gett  the  print  yet.  I  hope  to  have  it  to 
transmit  to  y''  Lopp  by  this  post. 

The  abuses  of  that  kind  are  great  &  generall  in  all  the  English 
trade  with  this  kingdome,  &  nothing  but  a  reciprocall  proceeding 
will  obtaine  redresse,  they  being  solely  bent  upon  the  advancing 
the  manufactures  of  Fi-ance  to  the  destruction  of  all  foreigue 
t  rade. 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamsoii. 

Oct.  1. 1(;70. 

I  have  been  to  inquire  for  ye  print  ag'  ye  silke  stockins,  but  can 
learne  oidy  that  there  was  some  kind  of  a  prohibition  posted  up  in 
the  '  Hall  des  ]\Iarchands'  &  in  2  or  '3  jiarticular  places,  but  cannot 
yet  get  the  print  itselfe.     It  may  be  I  shall  have  it  to  send  you  by 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  113 

this  Orel'-'.  The  great  minister  refused  to  give  my  L**  Amb"'  an 
answer  in  writing  to  the  Mem"  I  sent  you  a  copy  of  about  our 
woollen  manufacture.  Indeed  the  whole  designe  is  to  ruine  all 
our  trade  to  Fi-ance  &  promote  their  wine  manufactures. 

Espinal,  I  presume  you  have  heard,  is  taken  ;  7  French  that  were 
found  in  armes  hang'd,  ye  garrison  made  prisoner  of  warre,  &  800 
Lorrainers  of  ye  militia  condemned  to  the  galleys  for  disobeying 
the  declaration  ye  French  made  at  first,  summoning  all  to  fidelity 
to  France,  &c. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Oetob  4,  1670. 

What  yours  of  the  19th  touch'd  upon  is  very  true,  for  already 
the  Court  of  France  proposeth  great  things  from  S''  W.  Temple's 
going  into  England.^  The  Spannish  Resident,  M'"  Iturietti,  told  me 
yesterday  that  by  the  last  courrier  from  Madrid  he  was  advised 
that  the  Queen  Regent  &  Junta  had  at  length  admitted  of  ye 
nomination  France  had  long  since  made  of  Eng'  &  Sweden 
to  decide  the  different  pretentions  of  ye  2  Crowns  about  de- 
pendances.  But  they  have  made  a  generall  restriction  that  the 
arbiters  shall  liquidate  all  differences  of  what  kind  soever,  tho'  the 
reference  made  by  France  mentioned  only  those  about  ye  3  places 
of  Conde,  fort  Lynk.  &  Newport,  soe  that  this  busines  is  farther 
from  any  appearance  of  accomodation  than  ever.  What  can  then 
be  expected  from  weak  obstinacy  ?  The  King  of  France  raiseth 
effectually,  as  well  as  the  Hollanders,  in  promise. 

It's  strange  that  in  Flanders  the  troops  should  be  reform 'd  in 
this  conjuncture.  I  hear  that  Chastel,^  upon  the  first  approach  of 
ye  French  troops,  surrendred. 

I  suppose  you  have  already  the  news  out  of  ye  ]\Iediteranean  of 
S''  Tho.  Allen's  successe  ag'  the  pirates  under  the  command  of  Capt. 
Beach  in  the  '  Hampshire,'  who  with  4  of  our  fregatts  has  burnt  ye 
G  Algeriues  that  Alington  &  Young  were  engaged  ag',  saved  2.50 
Xtians,  whereof  62  w-ere  English.  The  Turks  gott  on  shoare  on 
planks. 

To  Sir  Joseph   WiUinmson. 

Oct.  11,  1670. 

This  vacation  time  gives  me  little  to  write  to  you  of  news, 
therfoi'e  will  entertains  you  with  a  gi-eat  grievance  to  our  English 

'  He  left  the  Hague  in  Sept.  1670.  '  Chastel  Surmoisy. 

VOL.  V.  I 


114  rriE    DIvSPATCIlK-S    OF 

trade  by  the  transportation  of  extraoidi]i;iry  (luantitie.s  of  wooll  to 
the  prejudice  of  our  manufactures. 

in  some  shops  this  week  I  saw  above  20  or  30  great  packs.  I 
am  informed  tliey  liave  it  from  the  Walloons  at  Canterbury,  who 
comb  many  hundred  weight  in  a  week,  &  it  were,  I  believe, 
necessary  that  a  wachfull  eye  be  had  over  them,  iiow  they  dispose 
of  it.  The  way  the  French  have  to  transport  it  is  their  running 
aground  with  their  little  vessels  in  the  night  time,  when  the 
countrey  people  stuff  them  with  wooll,  &  they  get  off  again  by  the 
tyde  before  morning  &  soe  escape  being  taken  notice  of 

Now,  S'',  for  encouragem'  of  its  importation  the  customs  on  it 
are  very  small,  as  30  sous  per  cent,  when  as  those  on  coule.s  are  at 
21'  livresf,  because  they  desire  not  to  have  them  brought  hither. 
And  the  persons  that  vend  the  wooll  in  chief  being  gentlemen  of 
ye  countrey  for  the  improving  their  estates,  little  or  no  notice  is 
taken  of  soe  great  an  abuse  on  the  place. 

There  must  be  some  remedy  applyed  to  this  growing  mischief, 
or  we  must  expect  that  the  neck  of  our  manufacture  commerce  will 
be  broken,  whatever  freedom  may  be  granted  us  by  treaties  ;  for 
already  the  persons  concerned  in  the  manufactures  here  grumble, 
asking  why  ye  Guernsey  men  import  woollen  stocking,  since  they 
can  make  as  good  themselves,  having  the  same  njaterialls  from 
England  ;  the  same  they  say  of  clothe,  &c. 

If  the  farmers  of  our  customs  would  send  a  person  to  Bologne 
they  might  easily  discover  the  persons  that  are  concerned,  &  they 
punished  severely  for  a  terror  to  the  rest. 

To  Lord  ArlirKjimi. 

Paris:  Oct.  1-5,  1G70. 
Herewith  I  presume  to  transmit  to  your  Lopp  two  letters,  sent 
me  from  Marseilles  &  Rouen.  By  one  y''  Lopp  will  see  some 
redresse  upon  the  complaints  of  their  debauching  away  our  English 
seamen,  &  by  the  other  what  extraordin.-uy  high  impositions  the}' 
continue  on  Knglish  goods  imported.  Because  they  would  incou- 
rage  the  felonious  exportation  of  wooll  o\it  of  Eng"",  the  customes  on 
it  ai'e  but  30  sous  per  cent,  &  at  present,  my  Lord,  the  shops  are 
stufi'd  with  it  all  over  this  citty,  to  the  great  prejudice  of  our  trade. 
The  Walloons  at  Canterbury  are  suspected  to  be  the  managers  of 
the  stealth.  This  abuse  cannot  be  remedy 'd  by  any  Treaty,  but  a 
severe  punish  m't  on  the  offenders,  of  whom  I  hope  to  be  able  to 


iN    ENGLISH    AGEXT    IN    PARIS  1  1 5 

iuforme  y''  Lopp  more  particularly.  The  C  Grammont  arrived 
here  last  night  &  is  gone  to  the  King  at  Chambord,  who  is  expected 
to  be  at  Versailles  on  Sunday  next.  I  am  told  by  a  person  come  in 
[a]  few  days  from  Tholon  that  the  French  build  ships  with  extraordi- 
nary vigour,  that  no  sooner  5  ships  are  bottom'd  only  (if  I  may 
use  the  expression)  but  they  are  launched,  &  o  more  begun  upon 
the  stocks. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Oct  15,  1«70. 

The  late  English  resolution  of  setting  a  good  fleet  to  sea  at 
spring  has  quite  altered  the  method  of  people's  discourse  here, 
though  most  hint  that  France  will  fall  out  with  some  body,  & 
particularly  the  Hollander  is  the  subject  of  their  anger. 

From  Tholon  I  am  informed  by  a  person  come  lately  thence  that 
extraordinary  diligence  is  there  used  for  making  a  good  marine 
equipage.  5  friggatts  are  lately  launched,  though  but  halfe  built, 
to  make  roome  for  others  on  the  stocks  ;  that  is,  as  soon  as  ye 
bottoms  are  made  only,  they  are  put  on  ye  water  &  finished  there, 
whilst  they  begin  others  in  their  places.  My  Marseilles'  correspon- 
dent tells  me  that  upon  my  L'  Amb'"'*  complaint  at  Court,  the 
seamen  thej*  debauched  from  on  board  our  merchants'  ships  were 
released,  &  from  Rouen  they  complain  of  ye  extravagant  great 
dutys  laid  on  our  English  importations,  as  125  livres  on  100  barrils 
of  sea  coales,  w"^''  cost  but  5*^  at  Newcastle,  &  on  all  other  goods 
in  proportion. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Oct.  18, 1670. 

I  have  sent  for  some  late  Arrests,  but  believe  the  post  cannot 
stay  for  them.  I  observe  in  y'"  late  London  'Gazette'  that  there 
was  come  in  at  Pendennis  two  little  French  men  of  warre,  of  3  that 
went  out  to  find  a  northerne  passage.  I  believe  that  Heimskirke 
commanded  them,  because  he  went  out  some  months  since  upon 
that  designe,  though  in  England  it  was  imagined  he  went  to  take 
possession  of  an  Island  he  discovered  to  F"'  Kobert '  in  the  W. 
Indies.  If  he  shall  undertake  any  such  thing  you  shall  have 
timely  notice  ;  we  know  him  to  be  a  rogue  &  ought  to  be  watch'd. 

I  have  seen  the  Mem"  the  Dutch  Ambassador  gave  in  to  Mons"" 

'  Prince  Rupert,  son  o{  Frederick  V.  and  Elizabetli  of  England  (daughter  of 
James  I.) 

I  2 


116  TIIK    DICSrATCHRS    OK 

Lyonne  to  be  given  to  ye  King.  It  lirst  insisted  much  wbat 
commerce  was — the  life  &  nerves  of  a  nation,  &  ye  consequence  of 
interruption  of  it,  a  misunderstanding :  then  represented  ye  grievous 
high  Impositions,  &  threatened  the  like  if  not  redressed.  He  will 
make  his  entry  at  ye  King's  returne  from  Chambort. 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris  :  8her  25, 1G70. 

Herewith  I  transmit  to  you  a  copy  of  the  Dutch  Ambassad"""' 
Jlem"  he  gave  in  some  days  since,  to  w"^''  he  expects  a  categoricall 
answer,  but  I  believe  it  may  not  be  to  his  satisfaction,  for  the 
maine  end  for  the  heightning  the  Impositions  on  forreigne  Impor- 
tations being  to  discourage  them,  in  order  to  the  vent  of  the 
French  manufactures,  the  same  policy  still  reigning,  they  will 
neither  gratify  the  Dutch,  nor  much  care  what  dutys  they  may 
raise  in  irolland  on  tho  T-'rench  goods,  especially  since  the  French 
are  at  present  not  very  complaisant  towards  the  Dutch,  &  since 
they  have  not  given  the  English  other  than  faire  words  upon 
positive  complaints. 

The  King  will  be  (liere,  I  mean)  at  S'  Germains  this  day  to 
see  the  Dolphin,  upon  whose  indisposition  the  King  broke  up  all 
his  divedkemcnts  in  the  very  midst  to  come  away.  T  think  I  told 
you  some  thing  of  Jo.  Haines;  now  I  can  add  that  he  lias  behaved 
himselfe  there  to  every  body's  wonder,  &  diverted  the  King  by 
severall  English  dances,  to  his  great  satisfaction  &  that  of  all  the 
Court.  I  believe  lie  will  have  a  present  made  him.  If  you  should 
think  it  convenient,  it  would  doe  him  a  great  kindnesse  in  England 
to  mention  him  in  the  '  Gaxette '  among  the  King's  direriisemcnis 
at  Chambort,  where,  whilst  the  Balets  were  prei)aring,  he  hunted 
the  wild  bore  &  pheasants. 

By  the  enclosed '  you  se«  the  severall  entries  &  manner  of  the 
Balet ;  between  every  one  Haines  had  order  to  dance  by  himselfe, 
&  notwithstanding  the  confronting  of  the  best  dancers,  carried  it 
oB'  to  admiration,  &  was  ordred  to  dance  some  things  twice  over. 

To  Lord  ArUnqion. 

Paris:  Oct.  20,  KiTO,  S.N. 
To  what  I  mentioned  in  my  last  about  the  navall  preparations 
of  France,  I  may  addo  that  the  French  King  hath  sent  orders  for 
'  The  enclosure  is  missing. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  117 

ye  drawing  ten  men  out  of  each  company  of  foot  in  Flandei's  to 
bee  sent  to  Thoulon  &  other  sea  ports,  to  bee  in  a  readiuesse  to  hee 
imbarked  on  his  men  of  war,  &  the  companies  are  to  bee  recruited 
to  their  full  number,  besides  ye  raising  of  twenty  thousand  men, 
for  which  the  drums  beate. 

And  on  the  other  side  the  troops  in  Lorraine  molder  away, 
above  foure  thousand  having  lately  deserted  the  service,  there  pay 
being  but  a  penny  a  day  onely  &  used  with  great  severity.^ 

The  Couutesse  of  Monterei '-'  is  arrived  here  with  a  great  traine 
of  ladies,  &  this  day  is  to  see  the  Queen,  who  gives  her  tlie  honour 
of  setting  in  her  presence.  The  King  will  come  to  Paris  in  a  few 
weeks,  in  order  to  which  many  hands  are  at  worke  in  the  Louvre. 


To  Lord  Arlinijton. 

Paris :  Novemb  ^,  1670. 

The  most  Xtian  King,  hearing  the  particular  resolutions  of  his 
JMa*^-^'  of  England  &  the  States  Generall  for  the  setting  out 
respectively  50  &  70  sayle  of  fighting  ships,  hath  given  order  for 
the  equipping  40  men  of  warr  for  the  Ocean,  &  30  for  the 
Mediterranean,  eight  whereof  are  on  the  stocks  at  Tholon  &  4  at 
Marseilles,  &  will  be  ready  against  Spring,  of  between  50  &  70 
gunns.  And  my  correspondent  there  tells  mee  that  by  their  late 
presse  they  have  secured  a  great  number  of  men  for  the  ships  that 
lye  there. 

Here  were  many  great  persons  that  desired  the  governement  of 
Guienne,'  but  the  King  hath  bestowed  that  charge  on  the  Due 
d'Albret,  who  least  expected  it  &  is  a  person  that,  besides  some  near 
relation,  is  very  well  qualifyed  for  it.  To  morrow  the  Heer  Grotius 
makes  his  publick  entry,  to  which  hee  invited  the  Savoy  & 
Venetian  Ambassadours ;  but  apprehending  that  the  former  will 
pretend  to  have  his  coach  goe  before  that  of  the  Dutch  Amb'",  he 
hath  since  desired  them  not  to  send  their  coaches.  However  I 
believe  they  will  not  desist  fi'om  it,  &  there  may  happen  some  con- 
tention iS:  disorder. 

If  his  ]\la*-^'  hath  resolved  (as  our  last  English  letters  affirme) 
that  his  H**^'  the  Prince  of  Orange  shall  have  the- same  nnvj  in  that 

'  In  cipher  and  decipliered.  -  See  p.  98,  n.  2. 

"  See  letter  dated  Aug.  2,  1670. 


118  TIIK    DKSl'ATCHKS    OK 

court  as  the  Prince  of  Coudu  Iiatli  in  this,  I  presume  to  remind 
your  Lopp  that,  as  the  Prince  of  C'ondo  upon  tlie  Jving  of  England's 
consent  that  his  Ambassador  should  visit  him  (without  any  conse- 
quence of  yielding  the  precedency  in  the  least,  which  his  Ma"-^' 
pretended  that  liis  Ambassadours  should  have  before  the  Princes  of 
the  blood)  vpould  not  accept  of  &  retunie  the  visitt  upon  equall 
termes,  soe  his  H"  the  Prince  of  Orange  may  please  to  insist  on 
the  same  punctilio  with  the  French  Ambassador  to  meet  him  at  the 
Staires'  head,  &  returning  the  visit,  the  Amb""  to  meet  his  H"'  at 
the  couch.  For  if  such  visitt  should  passe  on  equal  termes,  as  the 
Prince  of  Orange  is  declared  of  the  same  rawj  with  the  I'rince 
of  Conde,  it  would  not  conforme  with  the  manner  of  the  Prince  of 
Conde's  proceedings  towards  my  Lord  Amb''  Slontagu,  who  did  not 
visitt  him  for  that  reason, 

'We  next  day  after  his  entry  the  Dutch  Amb""  is  to  have  his 
publick  Audience  at  S"  (iermains  &  because  the  King  would  not 
consent  that  Mons'"  Colbert  should  couferre  with  him  about  his 
complaints  of  the  Impositions,  referring  the  Amb''  to  his  personall 
discourse  with  his  Ma'-*'  only  to  gaine  time,  he  is  resolved  after 
he  hath  made  his  compliments  to  demand  a  cathegoricall  answer. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WilUainson. 

Paris  :  Novemb  ^,  1670. 

Wee  are  most  glad  to  hear  that  the  great  organ  our  Parliament 
is  tuned  to  soe  perfect  a  harmony  with  his  Ma'"'' will  i*c  occasions.' 
Certainly  it  gives  us  a  great  reputation  abroad  &  because  the 
English  &  Dutch  have  already  declared  the  number  of  ships  of 
warre  they  resolve  to  have  at  sea  next  summer,  the  Most  Xtian 
King  hath  given  order  for  the  equipping  of  fourty  sayle  for  the 
Ocean,  &  30  for  the  Mediteranean,  of  w"^''  number  8  are  on  the 
stocks  at  Tholon  &  4  at  Marseilles,  w'^''  you  will  see  by  the  enclosed 
from  my  correspondent  there. 

A  letter  is  come  to  JP  Colbert  from  Brest  that  they  had  seen 
the  East  Indy  ship  they  long  expected,  called  the  '  S'  Marie,'  wherin 
is  the  S""  de  ^lardevergner,  &  some  saj-  he  will  be  clapt  in  prison 
for  having  imbezled  the  money  &  amunition  at  Madagascar. - 

The  S""  de  la  Son  de  I/tjonne,^  who  hath  the  Bastion  de  la  Fraiice 

'  See  MontaguAilington  Papers  (Hist.  MSS.  Com.),  p.  488.  '  See  p.  1-59. 

"  Probably  Sieiir  Picquet.  a  mercbant  from  Lyons,  -who,  according  to  a  letter 
from  Colbert  to  Mazarin,  held  '  Le  Bastion  de  France '  in  Oct.  1672. 


A\    ENGLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  119 

ill  Affi-ica,  hatli  sent  hither  the  Treaty  which  he  hath  made  with  his 
neighbours  there,  by  w^'"  he  establishes  a  Trade  of  Corne,  leather,  & 
whalebone,  to  the  end  that  ye  Levant  Company  might  ratify  it. 


To  Sir  Jose}ili  Willmmson. 

Novemb  8,  1670. 

On  Wednesday  last  the  Marq'  de  Louvoy  went  hence  towards 
Flanders  to  visitt  the  fortifications,  take  a  view  of  ye  garrison 
troops,  draw  out  ye  men  I  lately  mentioned,  &  particular  orders  to 
iucourage  &  favorise  as  much  as  [he]  may  the  Trade  of  Lisle  & 
Tournay,  &  to  consult  the  best  means  of  drawing  all  the  Commerce 
of  ye  neighbouring  Spannish  townes  to  those  2  places,  with  Mons"" 
de  Beliazari,^  Intend'  de  manvfachires — for  ye  promoting  of  w'^'^ 
designe  afmid  is  to  be  established  &  all  workemen  entertained, 
W^*"  they  promise  themselves  will  come  from  many  parts.  Yester- 
day the  Provost  des  Marclicinds  de  Lt/onne  went  hence  with  privi- 
ledges  for  ye  establishing  a  manufacture  of  linnen  cloth  at  Tarare. 
And  besides  ye  Accademy  of  Painters  established  at  ye  Goblins,  & 
another  into  w"^''  M"'  le  Buire  "  inspects,  another  to  be  sett  up  '  de 
tous  les  arts  sur  les  quelles  on  peut  inspecter  les  plus  habiles  en 
chaque  mestier,'  &  all,  in  fine,  to  perfectionate  ye  manufactures;  & 
a  good  dye  being  necessary  for  ye  clothe,  aprentiss  are  putt  in  ye 
Goblins  to  learne  that  art,  &  afterwards  to  be  dispersed  over  ye 
Ivingdome. 

Morosino  is  questioned  at  Venice  for  ye  surrender  of  Candy.' 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Novemfi  19,  1670. 
On  Saterday  next  I  will  give  the  particulars  of  the  Dutch 
Amb"'"'  Entry  &  Audience.  The  former  was  on  Sunday  ;  his  traine 
in  livery  was  small,  four  footmen  &  two  pages.  Hee  is  a  person 
lookt  upon  by  every  body  as  an  iujenious  man  &  one  that  will  not 
compliment.  He  hath  declared  to  the  Ministers,  when  the  question 
was  asked  what  meant  the  levj-es  in  Holl'  at  land  &  sea,  &c.,  that 

'  Francois  Bellinzani.  -  Charles  Le  Brun. 

'  See  London  Gazette,  dated  Venice,  November  8,  1670. 


120  TIIF.    DESPATCHES   OF 

they  were  to  defend  themselves  against  the  insults  of  ye  French,  by 
their  vast  impositions,  as  well  as  posture  of  doing  them  further 
mischiefs. 

To  Sir  Jose^ih  Williamson. 

Paris:  Nov.  29',  1670. 

'I'lio  IIl'lt  vou  Uroot  liatli.  at  a  visit  made  to  lions'"  de  Lyonne, 
be[ejn  received  furt  Iroirlfment,  tov  he  demanding  when  he  should 
have  answer  to  his  Mem",  soe  long  since  given  in,  he  was  assured 
by  M''  de  Lyonne  that  hee  ought  to  expect  none.  Since  the  last 
letters  out  of  Holland  had  brought  the  States"  resolution  of 
lieightning  the  Impositions  on  French  goods  &  forbidding  the 
iinportatioii  of  i?randewyn,  the  French  merchants  doe  as  generally 
complain  us  the  forreigners.  But  there  is  no  redresse  in  view 
either  to  the  lOnglish  or  Dutch.  The  King  comes  this  day  to 
Paris  &  intends  to  S(|ueeze  the  Parliament  into  some  Arri'(:iK  that 
will  bring  him  in  millions.  You  hear,  I  suppose,  how  he  hath  sent 
an  advertisement  to  ye  Elect'  of  Treves  '  of  his  designe  to  lodge  some 
troops  in  his  countrey,  which  hath  much  alarm'd  that  Prince,  the 
French  King  pretending  to  be  protector  of  his  countrey,  being  in 
possession  of  that  of  Lorraine,  as  ye  Duke  of  that  name  was. 

There  are  about  25,000  men  compleat  quartered  in  Lorraine  in 
good  order,  &  preparing  themselves  for  mouth  &  gun,  as  if  some 
considerable  attempt  were  in  prospect. 

To  Lord  ArlitKjton. 

Paris  :  Decemt  G,  IHTO. 
Nothing  of  e.xtraordinary  hath  happ'ned  this  week  worthy  y"' 
Lopp's  communication,  unlesse  that  about  three  days  since  a 
courrier  arrived  here  from  the  Sieur  de  Gremonville,  the  French 
Agent  at  Vienna,  with  complaints  of  his  being  affronted  to  the 
utmost  by  the  Prince  of  Lobkowits  ^  &  the  Emperors  refusall  to 
give  him  audience.  Thereupon  the  Coun'ier  was  sent  back  the 
same  day  with  instructi(jns  for  his  behaviour.  Some  believe  they 
tend  to  his  revocation  &  leaving  the  further  resentment  till  the 
Imp"  Envoye  shall  come  hither.  Others  are  of  opinion  that  the 
provocations  were  great  on  designe  to  cause  the  affront  &  give  a 

'  Carl  Gaspar  von  tier  Ijcyen. 

-  Weuceslaus  Eustbius,  Prince  of  Lobkowitz.  He  succeeded  Aversberg  as 
Prime  Minister  of  Austria  in  1C70,  and  was  overthrown  by  the  Jesuits  in  1676. 


AN   ENGLISH   AGEXT    IN   PARIS  121 

pretext  of  complaining.  The  Dutch  Amb''  cannot  obtaine  any 
answer  to  his  complaints,  &  at  present  the  Dutch  &  French  are 
upon  very  ill  termes,  Mons'"  de  Lyonne  telling  the  Amb"''  that, 
since  his  master  had  begun  the  laying  new  Impositions  on  the 
Fi'ench,  the  King  would  not  be  complaisant  towards  them,  but  to 
those  already  made  he  would  heighten  the  dutys. 

I  must  beg  y"'  excuse  for  not  writing  by  the  last,  being  upon 
the  same  employment  after  one  Doughty,'  servant  to  D.  Bucks, 
who  came  lately  and  hath  seen  the  Ministers.- 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  December  lU'*',  '70. 
It  is  agreed  upon  that  Mons"^  Peguelin  shall  be  married  to 
Mad"'=  de  Montpensier  ^  who  is  to  be  made  Due  &  Peer  de  France, 
and  that  the  C  de  Louviguy  ^  is  also  to  wed  M"''  La  Valiere.  He 
is  son  to  M"-  Grammont.  The  former  surpriseth  every  body  after 
ye  many  discourses  of  Monsieur.  Don't  you  hear,  S"",  of  a  meeting 
of  some  of  ye  German  Princes  where  Fustemburg  is  to  be  present 
&  maintain  ye  French  interest  ? 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Decemb  20,  70. 
1  told  you  in  my  last  of  the  King's  having  consented  to  the 
marriage  of  Mad"''  to  the  C  de  Lauzun,  but  now  I  must  forbid  the 
banes,  because  Monsieur,  the  Queen,  &  P'="  of  the  blood,  being 
much  troubled  at  the  inequality,  have  since  soe  possessed  the  King 
with  upbraidings  of  his  having  made  the  match,  with  such  ex- 
asperating termes,  as  discomijosed  his  Ma'^',  &  on  Thursday  night 
he  sent  for  her  &  told  her  that  he  was  very  sorry  he  had  seemed 
to  connive  at  the  choyce  she  had  made,  since  it  had  abused  the 
world  with  a  beliefe  that  because  of  his  kindnes  for  ye  Count  he 
had  framed  ye  alliance  &  therfore,  to  shew  the  contrary,  he  was 
obliged  to  declare  she  should  not  marry  him.  You  may  imagine 
the  mortification  after  the  publick  compliments  made  them  there- 

'  For  a  full  account  see  Montagu-Ai-lington  Papers  (Hist.  MSS.  Coinm.),  p.  400 

^  In  cipher  and  deciphered. 

'  Anne  Marie  Louise  d'0rl6ans. 

'  Antoine  Charles,  Comte  de  Louvigny,  afterwards  Due  de  Grammont. 


1  22  THE    DESPATCIIEP    OF 

upon  &c"  to  hiive  a  cloud  overcast  the  satisfaction  they  proposed  to 
tliemseives.' 

The  Imp"  Enroi/i',  the  C  de  Winderscligratz,^  is  here ;  his 
busines  cliiefly  about  Lorraine,  but  it  is  said  he  is  to  propose  a 
match  between  Monsieur  iV  the  Emp'»  sister  ; '  besides  w*^''  it  is 
believed  he  hath  order  to  discourse  about  a  busines  in  Alsace. 


To  Loi'd  Arlington. 

Palis  :  Decemb  20,  1G70. 

'riiore  having  some  considerable  occurrences  hap'ned  this  week, 
I  will  presume  to  give  your  Lopp  the  severall  particulars. 

It  is  the  generall  ojnnion  that  France  being  most  intent  upon 
the  improving  its  Commerce  it  hath  no  further  designe  than  in 
order  thereunto,  by  rumours  &  preparacons  to  putt  its  neighbours, 
the  Dutch,  into  perpetuall  alarmes,  &  to  the  vast  expences  that 
must  attend  them.  And  to  foment  their  apprehensions  will 
all  ways  maintaiue  troops  in  gaiTison  on  the  fi-ontiers,  as  well  as 
endeavour  to  be  great  in  marine  force.  The  Dutch  being  their 
eysore  in  point  of  trade,  the  politicians  have  brought  the  King  to 
two  resolutions  viz' : 

1.  That  far  from  disbui-th'ning  the  merchandise  imported  of 
the  great  dutys  laid  upon  them,  the  Dutch  shall  transport  nothing 
out  of  France  without  paying  extraordinary  new  dutys  to  be  laid 
upon  the  French  merchandise.  To  the  end  therfore  that  the 
marchants  of  this  Kingdome  may  be  encouraged  to  make  the 
Trade  the  Hollanders  used  of  the  French  manufactures  they  shall 
pay  little  or  no  dutys,  which  is  a  way  wholly  to  take  out  of  the 
Hollander's  hands  the  advantage  they  had  by  carrying  their  French 
traffick  into  other  parts,  especially  northward.  One  reason  why 
this  resolucon  is  taken,  proceeds  from  their  oljserva(5ons  that 
since  the  Northerne  Com]5any  hath  been  established  here,  they  send 
to  &  have  returnes  from  the  Baltique  Sea  of  near  a  hundred  ships 
yearlj'  to  good  account.     Most  of  the  vesseils  they  have  hired  or 

'  Louis  XIV.  had  given  his  consent  to  this  maniago,  but  Mme.  de  Montespan 
used  her  influence  to  break  it  oS  on  account  of  Lauzun's  ambition.  See  Madanie 
de  MontcKpan  el  Louis  XIV,  par  Tiene  Clement,  p.  .S2. 

-  Gottlieb,  Comte  de  Windischgratz. 

'  See  p.  .53,  n.  .5. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  123 

bought  of  the  Dutch  &  laden  them  with  French  commodities,  which 
heretofore  the  Dutch  had  the  dispersing  of  in  those  jDarts. 
Already  also  the  French  perceive  the  conquest  townes  in  Flanders 
to  flourish  more  &  more  in  point  of  Commerce,  since  they  have 
desisted  from  trading  with  the  Dutch  for  French  wares,  &  have 
them  out  of  France  at  much  a  cheaper  rate.  Now  whatever 
advantages  the  French  propose  to  themselves  by  this  resolution, 
though  they  have  some  ends  in  incomoding  the  Dutch,  they  will 
certainly  find  other  nations  as  unwilling  to  receive  their  manufac- 
tures as  they,  in  a  manner,  refuse  to  take  those  from  abroad. 

2.  The  second  thing  resolved  on  is  the  endeavouring,  by  all 
imaginable  means,  to  draw  the  English  &  Portugueze  into  a  Triple 
League  with  France  beyond  the  line,  therby  to  become  masters  of 
the  Commerce,  as  the  Hollanders  are  to  the  prejudice  of  Portugall. 
This  I  believe  y''  Lopp  maj-  have  heard  of,  &  therfore  I  need  not 
enlarge  upon  its  possibility. 

Here  is  lately  arrived  from  Guiny  an  Envoi/e  sent  by  the  King 
of  Ardre.  His  name  is  Dom  Matheo  Lopes  &  son  of  a  Portuguese. 
Yesterday  hee  had  Audience  from  his  Ma'^,  at  which  hee  fell  flat  on 
his  face,  &  clapp'd  his  hands  very  often  before  hee  made  his  speech. 
Here  are  severall  idle  discourses  upon  the  occasion  of  his  coming, 
but  most  agree  that  the  French  desired  that  he  might  be  sent  to  give 
a  colour  &  shew  of  traflick  to  adventurers,  they  having  of  late 
been  very  backward  in  hazarding  their  stocks  on  that  foundation. 
Hee  hath  brought  with  him  3  wives  &  as  many  sons ;  the  fourth 
wife  he  kill'd  by  the  way  for  jealousy.  Hee  converseth  every  day 
with  Mess"'  de  Comm,eri:c} 

The  Comte  de  Windeschgratz,  the  Emperour's  Envoi/e,  arrived 
here  a  few  days  since.  The  main  busines  he  hath  to  negotiate  is 
said  to  bee  about  Lorraine,  &  some  say  he  brings  a  proposic'oii 
with  him  of  a  match  between  Monsieur  &  the  Emp''''*  sister,  though 
others  will  have  her  to  be  married  to  P'^'"  Charles  of  Lorraine.  I 
believe  hee  hath  orders  also  to  discourse  about  a  declara(5oh  this 
King  lately  sent  to  the  Empire,  about  his  pretentions  to  some 
places  in  Alsace,  that  he  had  staid  long  enough  expecting  satis- 
faccon,  but  now  that  he  would  doe  himselfe  justice. 

'  The  members  of  the  Conscil  de  Commerce,  instituted  in  1644.  His  object 
was  to  make  a  treaty  of  commerce  between  the  King  of  Ardre  (in  Africa)  and 
Louis  XIV.     See  London  Gazette,  dated  January  6,  1G70. 


1 2 1  Tiir:  PEsrATciiKS  of 

Your  Lopp  hath  heard,  by  the  last,  of  a.  surprising  match 
between  Mad"°  de  Montpensier  &  the  C  de  Lauzun,  to  w*^*"  the 
Kin"  had  see  far  consented,  that  all  the  nobility  &  gentry,  (the 
I'rinces  of  the  blood  excepted,)  made  their  compliments  to  lier 
thereupon.  But  a  cloud  hath  since  overcast  the  great  satisfaction 
tliey  proposed  to  themselves.  Monsieur  &  the  I'rince  of  Condo 
entertained  the  King  strangely  upon  this  subject,  upbraiding  him 
of  having  made  up  such  an  unequal!  alliance  ;  the  Queen  also  was 
extremely  troubled  I't  all  together  soe  discomposed  the  King,  that 
on  Thursday  night  last,  he  sent  for  Madam"^  &  told  her  that  as  to 
liis  owne  inclinations,  since  she  had  desired  it,  he  was  well  enough 
satislyed  with  the  choyce  shee  had  made.  But  since  that  every 
body  "laid  it  wholly  at  the  King's  door,  as  haying  a  particular 
kindnes  to  Lauzun,'  he  was  resolved  to  disabuse  the  world,  & 
declare  she  should  not  marry  him,  but  that  he  would  give  his  con- 
sent to  any  other  choyce  she  should  make. 

¥■■  Lopp  may  imagine  the  mortification  of  these  two  after  the 
publication  &  compliments,  especially  to  the  Count,  who  had 
already  layd  foundations  on  the  hopes  of  his  greatnesse. 

To  Sir  Josejih  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Xtmas  Eve,  '70. 

I  have  seen  M''  Smith,  &  made  him  offers  of  all  the  good 
ofBzes  &  service  in  my  power  for  y''  recomendation ;  his  relacoh  to 
M''  Trer^  &  his  owne  good  (jualifications,  theConsull  at  Villafranca 
shall  be  indited  to  a  correspondence.  But  as  well  he,  as  others 
have  done,  will  desire  news  from  England,  &  if  I  had  y''  manuscript 
I  could  satisfy  them  all.  To  wliat  I  said  in  my  last  about  ^lad""".  I 
may  now  add  that  the  King,  according  to  his  promise  of  considering 
the  C  Lauzun's  disappointment  some  other  way,  hath  bestowed  on 
him  lands  to  the  value  of  fiveteen  thousand  pounds  yearly,  tho'  shee 

'  In  1669,  when  the  position  of  Grand  ilaltre  de  VArtillerie  fell  vacant  by  the 
resignation  of  the  Duke  of  Mazarin,  Louis  secretly  promised  it  to  the  Count  of 
Lauzun,  but  the  latter  failed  to  keep  the  .secret.  Louvois  heard  of  Louis's  intention 
and  dissuaded  him  from  it.  Lauzun,  indignant,  is  said  to  have  broken  his  sword 
in  front  of  the  King,  .saying  he  could  never  serve  under  a  king  who  broke  his  word. 
He  was  imprisoned  in  the  Bastille,  but,  through  the  intercession  of  his  friend  the 
Count  Guitry,  was  pardoned  and  made  In  cajritahie  de  la  premUre  compagnic 
franqahe  des  gardes  du  co)j)s.   (See  Nouvclle  Biographic  Gtnirale,  t.  29,  p.  9.57.) 

>  Trevor. 


A\    ENCiLISe    AGE^'T    IN    PARIS  125 

is  become  most  impatiente  declaiiug  she  will  ever  love  him  cut 
iinem. 

The  King  &  Court  remove  this  dcay  to  Versailles  to  passe  awav 
the  holydays,  5  or  0  days  there. 

The  Imp"  Enroi/i'  has  had  his  Audience,  at  w''*'  he  told  the  King 
he  had  something  of  consequence  to  communicate  to  him  from  the 
Emp''  &  some  P'^"  of  ye  Empire,  &  therfore  desired  his  ]Ma''''  to 
appoint  a  ]\Iinister  to  hear  him,  to  w"^''  the  King  replyed,  that  he 
would  hear  him  himselfe  then,  or  at  any  other  time,  but  hoped 
that  it  was  not  concerning  the  busines  of  Lorraine  from  the  friend- 
ship he  had  for  the  Emp''  &  his  readines  to  assist  him  at  all  times, 
to  w''''  the  Envoi/i'  said  he  was  not  perfect  in  his  instructions,  but 
would  in  a  few  days  demand  another  Audience.' 


'To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Jan.  •2'^,  '71. 

The  King's  journey  is  said  to  begin  about  a  week  hence,  &  all 
the  troops,  that  are  ordred  to  march,  are  to  be  furnished  with  pro- 
visions, kd^.  as  if  they  were  designed  further  then  a  meer  review. 
And  what  is  thought  will  be  the  first  enterprise,  is  his  Ma^'^'"" 
taking  possession  of -Juliers  by  agreement  with  the  Duke  of  Nieu- 
berg,  moijenant  a  great  sum  of  money  said  to  be  lately  sent  him, 
&  some  are  of  opinion,  that  the  King  may  protect  the  s''  Duke  in 
his  pretentions  ag'  the  Dutch  about  the  citty  of  Ravestein. 


To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris  :  January  3'',  IGTJ. 
Our  English  post  is  not  yett  come  in  &  all  of  consequence  that 
hath  occurred  is  the  death  of  Hardwin  de  Perefix,  Arch  Bishop  of 
Paris,  &  Chanceller  of  the  King's  Orders,  w*  dignity  is  by 
his  i\Ia'-^'  conferred  upon  the  I\Iarq*  of  Louvoy.  But  for  that  of 
his  function  there  are  severall  pretenders.  The  Card''  de  Retz  & 
Bouillon  stand  fairest  for  it,  tho'  il"'  Colbert  endeavours  the  putting 
in  the  Bp  of  Chaalons  ;  -  there  are  besides  the  Arch  Bpps  of  Auche  ' 

'  See  Montagu-Arlington  Letters  (Hist.  MSS.  Comni.),  p.  493. 
-  Jean  de  Maupeau  was  Bishop  of  Chalon-sur-Saone,  and  Felix  Vialar  de  Herse, 
Bishop  of  Chiilons-sur-Marne. 

'  Henri  de  la  Motte-Houdancourt. 


12G  TUE    DKSPATCIIES   OF 

and  Bourges  '  that  have  some  hopes.  About  the  initldle  of  April), 
tlie  King  designs  to  Ijegin  his  journey  into  Flanders,  where  he 
will  have  a  camp  all  the  summer  of  about  40,O0U  men  &  another 
in  Lorraine  of  12,000.  It  is  believed  he  will  be  absent  all  the 
summer  from  this  place.  The  Emperour's  Eiirtiijr  iiath  had  a 
second  audience,  but  I  cannot  yet  learne  what  hath  j)asst'd  thereat. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamso7i. 

Talis  :  Jan.  G,  '71. 

The  King  hath  this  week  throwne  downe  all  his  manufactures, 
as  loth  to  be  any  more  at  that  expence  &  losse. 

The  Dutch  Amb'"  had  Aud™  on  Munday,  but  I  cannot  yet 
learne  what  passed,  it  being  in  the  King's  Cabinet. 

Since  the  news  of  an  accomodation  at  CuUen,  people  speake 
of  peace  for  the  next  year,  thougli  I  hear  that  iP  de  Louvoy  lias 
visitted  as  well  Spannish  as  French  garrisons. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Jan.  7,  j^. 

I'lom  till'  ^lediterranean,  these  traders  here  have  lost  one 
of  their  ships,  richly  laden,  valued  at  5  millions  of  livres,  w'^''  was 
cast  away  coming  from  the  Levant.  There  were  only  2  seamen 
saved,  &  20  knights  of  Maltha  that  were  on  board  her,  were  also 
lost.  They  endeavor  to  encourage  the  Indy  Traders  here,  & 
promise  them  some  good  account  of  their  adventures  thereby  ;  but 
the  designe  is  only  to  squeeze  out  the  payment  of  the  3*  quai-ter, 
for  which  the  officers  of  the  Parliaments  of  ye  Provinces  give 
their  acquittances  for  a  year  of  their  wages. 

The  monopoly  they  are  designing  to  make  of  ye  voitures 
towards  Lyons,  causeth  a  great  cry  among  the  traders,  who  have 
sent  a  deputy  to  represent  the  consequences  to  his  Ma'^'. 

By  Arred  of  Counsell,  tliey  have  reestablished  the  liberty 
of  vending  all  sorts  of  merchandize  in  the  severall  provinces,  where 
they  shall  be  discharged  also  by  the  customers,  but  it  excepts 
what  comes  from  Geneva,  in  so  much  that  all  goods  thence  cannot 
be  o])cned  but  at  the  custome  house  at  Lyons,  in  what  place 
soever  they  shall  first  arrive.     This  is  a  great  stroke  to  spoyle  the 

'  Jean  de  Montpezat  de  Carbon. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  127 

Geneva  Trade,  which  the  Lyoiiaois,  &  those  of  Marseilles,  doe 
complain  of  as  much  prejudized  by  it,  because  Geneva  brings  out 
of  Holland  all  sorts  of  spizes,  sugars,  cloth,  &  other  merchandise,  & 
furuisheth  Provence,  Lyons,  Dauphine,  &  Brest  therewith. 
Is  the  Emp""  entred  into  ye  League  as  is  reported  here  ? 

ce  7  Jan''.,  1(J72.' 
'  Samedi,  an  soir,  le  Koy  changea  la  resolution  qu'il  avoit  prise 
d'aller  en  Champagne  faire  reveuee  de  ses  troiippes,  et  declara  que 
ce  voyage  estoit  tout  a  faict  rompu,  surquoy  les  grandes  seigneurs 
de  la  Cour,  qui  avoyent  desju  faict  partir  leurs  equipages,  ont 
renvoye  apres,  pour  les  faire  revenir.  L'on  n'a  pu  encore  penetrer 
quelle  est  le  veritable  cause  de  ce  changem'  de  resolution  de  sa 
Maj*^ ;  cependant  les  trouppes,  qui  sont  en  marche,  ne  sent  point 
encore  contirmandees. 

'  L'on  a  receu  advis  a  la  cour,  qu'outre  un  nouveau  traicte,  qui 
s'est  faict  ii  la  Haye  pour  la  deffense  de  Cologne,  entre  I'Empereur, 
TEspagne,  et  les  Estatz  des  Provinces  Unies,  par  lequel  ils  ont  reigle 
les  secours  que  chacqun  deux  y  devoit  envoyer.  Dom  Emanuel  de 
Lira,  Envoye  d'Espagne,  a  encore  convenu  avec  Mess''-*  les  Etatz  des 
articles  d'un  autre  traicte,  par  lequel  eux,  et  la  couronne  d'Espagne. 
s'engagent  mutaillem'  a  s'entresecourir  d'un  certain  nombre  de 
trouppes,  en  cas  que  Fun  de  ces  deux  Estatz  soit  attaque  par  la 
France,  sans  touttefois  que  I'Espagne  soit  obligee  de  rompre 
ouvertem*^  avec  le  Roy  tres  Chrest:  en  secourant  les  Hollandois, 
mais  que  cet  Envoye  leurs  promet  d'obtenir  de  nouveaux  pouvoirs, 
pour  traicter  une  ligne  plus  estroitte  avec  eux,  et  uue  declaration 
de  la  Eeine  Catholique  en  leur  favour,  en  cas  qu'ilz  soyent  attaques 
par  la  France,  sur  lesquelles  promesses,  Ton  ne  faict  pas  grand 
fondz  dans  Topinion  ou  Ton  est,  que  la  Reine  d'Espagne  veut,  a 
quelque  prix  que  ce  soit,  se  conserver  la  paix  avec  la  France  durant 
la  minorite  du  Roy,  son  filz. 

'  Lundy, Monsieur  Grotius,  Ambassd''de  Hollande,eut  I'Audience 
du  Roy,  qu'il  soUicitoit  depuis  quelque  temps,  en  laquelle  il  dist  a 
sa  Maj*"',  qu'il  avoit  ordre,  de  ses  maistres,  de  luy  demander  la  con- 
tinuation de  I'honneur  de  sou  amitie  et  de  sa  protection,  a  la  quelle 
ainsy  qu'a  celle  des  Roys,  ses  predecesseurs,  ils  recounoissent  devoir 
ce  qu'ilz  sont,  qu'aussy,  de  leur  coste,  ilz  ont  toujours  tesmoigne  un 

'  The  date  should  be  1G71  according  to  the  letter  which  is  attached  to  the  MS. 


128  TIIK    UESrATCHEa    UV 

grand  zelle  pour  les  iuteretz  de  sa  couronne,  que  cependant  ils 
avoyeiit  appris  que  les  Ambassad"  et  Ministres  de  sa  Maj**',  qui 
sont  dans  les  pays  estrangers,  publioyent  que  k-s  grand/,  armemeutz, 
que  faict  sa  ilaj'"",  estoyent  destines  ctmtr'eux.  suniuoy  ilz  protes- 
toyent  jI  sa  ilaj*^',  qu'el/,  n'avoyeut  jamais  ricn  faict,  qui  la  pust 
(iH'enser,  et  que,  si  dans  le  suitte  des  afiaires,  il  s'estoit  passe  quelque 
chose  dans  leur  conduitte  qui  eust  deplu  A  sa  -Maj*"  centre  leurs 
intentions,  ilz  la  suplioyent  de  le  leur  faire  scavoir,  et  qu'en  ce  cas 
ils  luy  offeryent  toutte  sorte  de  satisfaction,  non  seulenieut  par  sa 
bouclie,  niais  encore  par  la  lettre  qu'ilz  luj-  ont  escritte  sur  ce  suject, 
que  cet  Ambassad""  presonta  a  sa  Maj'' ,  qui,  en  la  recevant,  luy  dist 
(ju'il  scavoit  desja  son  contenu,  ses  Maistres  en  ayant  faict  part  h 
divers  Princes,  qui  luy  en  avoyent  envoye  coppie. 

'  La  reponse.  que  le  Roy  fist  a  cet  Anibassadeur  sur  son  discours, 
fut,  qu'il  estoit  vray  qu'il  nvoyt  de  grandz  sujectz  de  n'estre  pas 
satisfaict  de  la  nianifire  d'agir  de  ses  maistres,  que,  depuis  quelques 
temps,  ils  les  avoit  toujours  trouves  oppozos  a  ses  interetz  et  ii 
ceux  de  ses  allies,  qu'il  avoyt  commence  un  grand  armement,  et 
qu'il  estoit  resolu  de  le  continuer  pour  I'interest  de  sagloire,  et  pour 
la  protection  de  ses  sujetz,  et  celle  de  ses  amys. 

'  Aprijs  cette  Audiance,  le  Roy  donna  a  M''  le  Prince,  qui  y  estoit 
present,  la  lettre  que  les  Etatz  luy  ont  ecritte,  et  luy  dist  de  la  lire, 
ce  qu'il  fist  avec  M""  de  Turenne,  et  en  presence  de  quelques  autres 
seigneurs  de  la  Cour. 

'  L'on  juge  par  la  reponse  de  sa  Maj'^',  ainsy  que  par  d'autres 
circonstances,  quelle  n'est  pas  resolue  de  recevoir  les  satisfactions 
que  luy  offrent  les  ditz  Estatz,  quoy  que  ilessieurs  le  Tellier  et 
Colbert  ayent  este  noninu's  avant  cette  Audiance,  pour  recevoir  ses 
propositions,  sur  la  demande  que  le  diet  Ambassad""  a  faicte,  qu'on 
luy  donnast  des  commissaires. 

'  L'on  a  advis  que  M''  de  Louvoy,  aprds  avoir  visitte  Ath  et 
Charleroy,  est  alle  a  S'  Hubert,  et  de  la.  k  Nuitz '  dans  I'Electorat 
de  Cologne,  conferer  avec  I'Electeur  de  ce  nom,  sur  les  affaires  de 
la  guerre,  qu'il  se  dispose  a  entreprendre  contre  les  Hollandois, 
moyeuant  la  protection  du  Roy,  qu'il  y  a  faict  passer  de  nouvelle 
artillerie,  et  a  vizitte  les  magazins  d'armes,  et  de  munitions  de 
guerre  et  de  bouche,  qui  se  sont  faitz  en  ce  pays,  par  ordre  de  sa 
Maj'' ,  ainsy  que  les  trouppes  frauf aises  que  Ton  y  a  mises  sur  pied. 
L"on  a  appris  que  le  S""  de  Podwitz  -  n'a  este  destine  p""  commander 
'  Nuys.  ■'  Henri,  Comte  de  Podewilts,  1018-1690. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGEXT    IN    PARIS  129 

les  trouppes  du  Due  d'Hanower '  qu'ii  dessein  de  les  amener  an 
service  du  Roy  tres  Chrestien,  et  qn'il  est  party  pour  se  mettre  a, 
la  teste  de  2,000  homines  des  dites  trouppes  que  ce  Due  est  con- 
venu  de  prester  a  sa  Majeste,  pour  en  seeourir  ses  allies. 

'  Quoyque  le  Roy  ne  marclie  pas  en  Champagne,  Ton  continue  de 
dire  que  M''  de  Turenne  ira  a  ISIetz,  et  de  la  a  Verdun,  pour  voir 
sou  Regiment  d'Infanterie,  qui  est  en  garnison  en  cette  derniere 
ville,  et  si  Ton  fait  un  destachement  des  trouppes  du  Roy,  comme  il 
a  este  propoze.  au  nombre  de  20  niille  hommes,  pour  aller  joindre 
les  trouppes  de  I'Electeur  de  Cologne,  Ton  croid  que  ee  sera  mon 
diet  Sieur  de  Turenne  qui  commandera  cette  armee,  ainsy  que 
celle  du  diet  Electeur.  et  des  autres  Princes  allies  de  sa  Majeste. 
L'on  mande  de  Chaallons,-  qu'aussytost  que  les  Mousquetaires  du 
Roy  y  out  este  arrives,  on  les  a  faict  marcher  a  Metz,  et  de  Naney, 
que  les  officiers  des  gardes  du  corps  du  Roy,  qui  sont  en  Lorraine, 
ont  reeeu  ordre  d'en  destacher  300,  et  de  les  mener  a  Metz,  oii  ilz 
out  ordre  de  se  rendre  le  6"^  du  eourant,  et  oii  touttes  les  autres 
trouppes  eontinuent  de  marcher,  n'y  en  ayant  poinet  encore  de 
contermandt'es,  uonobstant  la  rupture  du  voyage  de  sa  ^laj'', 
plusieurs  croyent  mesme,  que  ce  pretendu  voyage  du  Roi  n'a  este 
qu'une  feinte,  afin  d'avoir  pretexte  de  faire  marcher  les  trouppes 
de  sa  maison,  et  que  Ton  crust,  que  ce  n'estoit  que  pour  assister  a 
la  reveue,  qui  se  devoit  faire,  et  luy  servir  de  garde,  et  que  e'est  par 
cette  raison,  que  sa  Maj*"  a  attendu  a  declarer  qu'elle  ne  partiroit 
poinet,  que  les  dittes  trouppes  ayent  este  bien  advancees  dans  leur 
marclie  pour  raieux  couvi-ir  ses  desseins. 

'  Le  Roy  a  donne  a  M''  le  Canm,-''  Procureur  General  de  la  Cour 
des  Aides  de  Paris,  la  charge  de  Premier  President  en  la  mesme 
Cour,  et  a  donne  eelle  de  Procureur  C4eneral  au  S''  du  Bois,  filz  du 
Premier  Commis  de  I'Espargne,  tout  deux  parentz  de  M''  Colbert. 

'  Mardi,  le  Roy  fist  assembler  les  dix  compagnies  du  Regiment 
des  Gardes,  qui  ont  este  icy,  et  les  fist  mettre  en  battaille  entre  les 
chasteaux  de  S'  Germain,  et  sa  Majeste,  apres  en  avoir  faict  la 
reveue,  fistrecevoir  a  leur  teste  le  Due  de  la  Feuillade,^  en  sa  charge 
de  Maistre  de  camp  du  diet  Regiment,  et  ce  Due  recent  la  pique 
des  mains  de  sa  Majeste. 

'  John,  second  son  of  Christian  Lewis,  Duke  of  Bi'unswick-Zell. 
-  Chalons-sur-Marne. 
'  Nicolas  le  Camus. 

'  Francois  d'Aubusson,  Mareohal  de  la  Feuillade,  1G2.5-1691. 
VOL.  V.  K 


130  TITE    nRSPATCHRS    OF 

'  Le  Mareschal  de  Hellefoncl/.  est  dans  le  desseiu  de  veiulie  sn 
cbai'ge  de  Preinier  Maistre  d'Hostel  du  Roy  pour  payer  ses  debtes, 
et  ron  croid,  que  le  S'"  de  Villaserf,'  Premier  ilaistre  d'Hostel  de 
la  Reine.  et  parent  de  Monsieur  Colbert,  a  dessein  de  I'achepter. 

'  Le  S''  Moloiidin,'-'  Colonel  des  Gardes  Snisses  dn  Roy,  a  trotive  a 
Chaallons  un  ordre  de  sa  Maj''  de  raniener  !•  des  compagnies  de 
ce  Regiment,  des  sept  qui  estoyent  en  marcbe. 

'  Le  Roy  fera,  ii  la  tin  de  ce  mois,  une  reveue  dans  la  plaine  de 
S'  Denis,  des  trouppes  italiennes,  escossaises,  et  autres  estrangers, 
qui  sont  en  France,  et  dont  nne  l)onne  partye  ont  leurs  quartiers 
aux  environs  de  l\aris,  et  ou  les  autres  ont  ordre  de  se  rendre  dans 
ce  temps. 

'  L'on  a  appris,  que  I'une  des  raisons,  pour  lesqnelles  M""  de 
Lonvoy  est  alle  a  Xuitx,,  a  este  A  dessein  d'y  riablir  une  p^arnison  de 
o,llOO  f'antassius  et  de  mille  cbevaux  des  trouppes  du  Hoy,  pour  la 
garde  des  magazins,  qui  y  ont  este  faitz,  et  ipie  nion  diet  S''  de 
Louvoy  est  entre  dans  la  ville  de  Cologne  easuitte  de  la  conclusion 
de  son  accomodenient  avec  TElecteur  de  ce  nom. 

'  Le  Marquis  de  Capelmelbor,^  cy-devant  Premier  Ministre  de 
Portugal,  est  iiouvellem'  arrive  en  cette  Cour,  pour  prier  le  Roy 
d'interceder  pour  hiy  aupres  du  Prince  Regent,  son  maistre,  afln 
d'obleiiir  de  luy  la  liberte  de  retourner  en  son  pays,  pour  y  vivre 
en  liomine  prince,  en  telle  ville  (pi'il  plaira  au  diet  prince  de  luy 
marquer,  et  a  rendu  a  sa  Alaj''  une  lettre  de  ncommendation,  (pi"il 
a  obtenue  dn  Due  de  Savoye  a  cet  eftect,  et  ce  ]\[arquis  Portugais, 
s'estant  trouve  a  I'Audianceque  le  Roy  a  donnee  a  M""  Grotius,  il  le 
fist  demeurer  dans  son  Cabinet,  afin  qu'il  fust  present  a  tout  ce  (]ui 
s'y  passeroit. 

'  Le  Roy  a  faict  scavoir  a  Mess'"  de  N'andosme,''  qui  estoyent 
pour  lors  a  Rome,  qu'ilz  ayent  a  revenir  en  France  par  la  mesme 
[route]  qu'ilz  ont  tenu  en  alleut,  sa  Majeste  ne  voulant  pas  qu'ilz 
revienneiit  par  I'Allemagne,  comme  ilz  en  avoyent  faict  le  dessein, 
et  cet  ordre  les  a  encore  empesches  d'aller  jl  Naples,  oil  ilz 
estoyent  sur  le  poinct  de  se  rendre  lors  qu'ilz  I'ont  receu. 

'  Edouard  Colbert,  Marquis  de  Saint-Pouange  et  de  Villacerf,  cousin  of 
Colbert. 

'  Laurent  d'Estavay^  de  Molondin. 

'  Castelmelhor.     See  n.  6,  p.  20. 

*  Louis  Joseph,  Due  de  Venddme,  and  his  brother  Philippe.  Chevalier,  later 
Prince  de  Vcndomc. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  131 

'  Aujourdhuy,  Ton  a  charge,  au  Thresor  Royal,  8  chariotz 
d'argent  monuoye,  qui  sont  sortys  de  Paris,  escortes  d'enviroii  30 
clievaux  de  la  Garde  du  Roy,  et  les  ditz  chariotz  estoyent  tires  a 
six  ckevaux  chacqiin. 

'  Le  destachem'  de  20  mille  homines  des  trouppes  du  Roy,  qui  a 
este  projette,  est  destine  pour  aller  prendre  possession  des  places 
de  I'Electorat  de  Cologne,  et  pour  les  y  faire  hiverner. 

'  L'on  asseure  que  Ton  est  convenu  d'un  traicte  avec  les  Dues  de 
Brunswick,  par  lequel  ilz  s'engagent  d'entretenir  -~  homnies  pour 

la  service  du  Roy,  moyennant  les  subsides  que  leurs  ont  este 
accordes,  et  que  M''  de  Pompons  doibt  passer  par  leur  estat  pour 
signer  traicte,  et  de  la  passer  par  Cologne,  et  que  le  diet  S''  de 
Pompone  apporte  avec  luy  un  traicte  de  renuvellem'  d'alliance, 
qn'il  a  faict  avec  la  Suede." 

To  Sir  Joseph  WilliarmfOH. 

Paris :  Jan.  9,  71. 

You  see,  iu  this  paper,  the  particulars  of  the  Dutch  Amb'''' 
Audience,  which  agree  with  all  other  relations  soe  farre,  but  I  can 
add  one,  which  was  the  Amb''""  enlarcring  on  his  Master's  continuing 
still  to  maintaine  a  friendship  with  the  King  had  refused  to  hearken 
to  some  overtures  made  them  by  the  Spaniards  to  enter  into  a 
defensive  league.  To  which  it's  said  the  King  replyed,  that  hee 
could  prove  the  contrary,  &  that  it  was  his  Master  had  projected 
such  alliance  with  the  Spaniards  ;  that  therefore  he  would  render 
himselfe  yet  more  potent  as  not  to  fear  all  the  alliances  the  Dutch 
could  make  against  his  interest.  &  that  of  his  allyes. 

I  have  before  me  a  letter  from  Mets,^  dated  the  3''  currant, 
wherein  I  hear  that  M''  de  Crequi  had  made  ready  tliere  four 
thousand  bamlls  of  wheat  to  be  sent  towards  Nuits,  &  had 
embarqued  20  pieces  of  canon,  nine  chests  of  gold,  coverd  with 
come,  to  be  landed  at  Boom,^&  soe  on  further  ;  that  he  had  ordred 
a  great  many  boats  to  be  on  the  river  between  Metz  &  Nancy,  & 
had  cutt  the  ice  to  make  passage. 

An  expresse.  from  M''  de  Pompone,  brings  an  alliance  he  con- 
cluded with  Sweden,  after  he  had  taken  his  leave.  Its  contents  are 
said  to  be  that  crown's  asisting  the  French  against  any  but  the 


132  TlIK    DKSrATCllKS    OK 

Spaniards,  wliose  money  they  had  received,  &  could  not  in  honour 
doe  anything  against  them.'  It  is  concluded  here,  that  the  King 
lias  bought  Nuitc'h-  &  some  other  places  on  the  l{hine,  &  that 
suddainly  a  body  of  army  may  move  and  fortify  thereabouts. 

I  have  searched  among  all  the  edicts  it  arre!<t.i,  but  find  no  new 
ones  of  late.     As  any  come  out,  I  shall  have  an  eye  to  them. 

To  Sir  Jiisi'j'li  Williamson,. 

Paris :  Jan.  10.  '71.  S.N. 
Herewith  I  send  3-ou  what  I  have  yesterday  received  from 
.Marseilles,  iV  have  also  to  acquaint  you  with  an  important  resolution, 
taken  last  night  in  the  Coit.seil  d'Estat,  that  an  (iirettl  shall  be  sett 
out  forbidding  the  subjects  of  France,  under  great  penaltys,  to  sell 
any  salt,  wine,  or  brandewine  to  the  Dutch.  '  C'est  un  coup  de 
preven  : '  since  the  Hollanders  have  been  soe  long  upon  resolving 
on  ye  heightning  ye  impositions,  after  they  had  declared  their 
intentions.  The  French  pretend  hereby  extremely  to  incomode 
the  Dutch,  especially  in  their  marine  provisions,  w'^'"  require  much 
salt,  but  the  other  p'-"  tells  me  they  can  be  furnished  with  near  as 
good  from  Portngall.  As  to  the  wines,  the  French  could  not  doe 
them  a  greater  kindnesse,  since  it  will  reduce  the  commonalty  to 
the  drinking  of  beer,  &  save  the  expence  of  wast  in  wine.  And  as 
to  the  Braudewynes,  you  know,  S'',  thev  are  already  forbidden  in 
Holland. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris:  Jan.  11,  71. 

You  will  hear  loudly  of  a  desperate  attempt,  made  last  night  on 
the  Princesse  of  Conde,-^  by  one  Duvall,''  formerly  her  footman,  who, 
having  free  accesse  to  her,  whether  it  was  for  money,  or  what  other 
matters  may  be  in  the  wind,  stab'd  her  with  a  dagger  in  one  of 
her  breasts,  but  thanks  to  her  whalebone  boddys,  w'^''  made  ye 
weapon  glance  only,  &  though  the  wound  be  large,  it  is  not  deep, 
&  consequently  the  Princesse  in  no  great  danger.     The  person  is 

'  Spain  had  paid  the  rest  of  the  subsidy  owing  to  Sweden  in  August  1G70 
(Mignet,  vol.  iii.  p.  284). 

-  Nuys. 

'  Clara  Clementina,  cousin  of  Cardinal  Richelieu. 

*  For  an  account  of  this  dispute  see  Histoire  des  Princes  de  Condi,  par  M.  lo 
Due  d'Aumale,  t.  vii.  p.  201. 


AN   ENGLISH    AGENT   IN   PARIS  133 

taken,  &  will  have  condigne  punishment.  It  is  said  that  among  the 
many  other  preparacons  against  Spring,  the  King  hath  brought  up 
all  the  jlamhi'aiu:  he  found  ready  made  at  Nancy,  I'tc".  thereabouts, 
to  the  number  of  30  thousand,  &  hath  caused  more  to  bee  made  to 
follow  his  Army.  The  designe  is,  as  many  suppose,  that  in  summer 
during  the  heats,  the  army  march  in  the  night,  &  in  ye  code  of  ye 
mornings  &  eves.  Moreover,  it  is  reported,  that  when  the  King 
shall  be  at  Dunquerque,  at  ye  head  of  40  tli''  men,  all  his  whole 
fleet  of  near  100  sayle  shall  be  riding  before  that  place. 

To  Sir  Josepli  WitJiamson. 

Paris:  J:iu.  21,  '71,  S.N. 

Herewith  my  L''  Ambassador  transmitts  to  my  L''  Arlington 
the  ilem''*'  \jnemoire],  wherby  this  King  promiseth  to  prolong,  for 
the  space  of  a  whole  year,  the  time  for  the  arbitration  of  tjie 
Bependaiices,  &c.,'  but  with  an  exclusion  of  any  other  matter 
whatsoever  to  be  treated  by  the  Arbitratoii  than  merely  this  one. 
Insomuch,  that  if  Spain  persist  in  its  pretentions  to  have  those 
contrepreteutions  liquidated  at  the  same  time,  all  this  will  signify 
nothing. 

But  in  generall,  you  may  gather  hence,  that  there  will  be  no 
warres  in  Flanders  next  summer,  unles  the  maximes  of  surprise  be 
brought  upon  the  stage  again.  As  to  Holland,  here  are  diverse 
discourses  ;  some  speak  of  a  French  ship  called  the  '  Falcon  '  to  be 
taken  beyond  the  line  by  the  Dutch,  but  there  can  be  no  greater 
preludiums  of  a  rupture  than  by  the  breech  of  commerce  already 
made  de  part  et  d'cmtre. 

The  King  goes  this  day  to  Vincennes.  To-morrow  there  will 
be  great  feasting,  the  next  day  masking,  &  the  third  hunting,  for 
w"^''  everybody  must  have  three  severall  habits. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  .Jan.  23,  '71. 

W  de  I'Estrade  -  visited  the  Dutch  Arab""  by  order  of  M"'  le 
Tellier,  &  told  him  that  the  King  would  not  hear  of  any  accomoda- 
tion.   Whereupon  the  Amb''  has  resolved  to  see  jM""  de  Pompone,  & 

'  See  Montagn-Arlinqton  Letter's,  p.  493. 

-  Godefroi.  Comte  d'Estrades.  He  had  succeeded  De  Thou  as  Ambassador  of 
France  in  Holland  in  1669. 


131-  TIIK    DESPATCHES   OK 

ileiiiaiid  ail  Audience  of  Coiuju.  However,  lie  does  not  believe  he 
sli.iU  leave  this  place  before  the  end  of  February.  The  King  has 
made  the  followiuj,'  propositions  to  the  Queen  of  Spain. 

First.  That  liee  had  ".jiveii  another  year  for  the  regulating  the 
Ik'jwndaHCes,  &  ii'  Spain  would  not  have  England  to  arbitrate,  his 
Ma'^  was  content  to  refern-  it  to  the  Pope. 

2.  That  for  the  cultivating  a  better  corres])ondence,  hee  oH'red 
to  make  a  League  with  Spain,  which,  if  they  believed,  would  choque 
the  3ple  Alliance,  France  proposes  to  admit  the  Emperor  instead 
of  the  Hollanders. 

3'"-''.  That  if  the  Queen  would  not  declare  against  the  Dutch, 
let  her  remain  neuter  &  give  them  no  assistance. 

4.  That  shee  give  passage  to  the  French  troops,  &  in  considera- 
tion of  that  favour,  the  King  would  quitt  his  preteucions  to  the 
'  Escluses  de  Nieuport '  A:  other  adjoyning  Ports. 

And  the  last  was  a  kind  of  marriage  between  the  King  of  Spain 
and  J\lad"''  de  France.' 

To  w"^"*  the  Queen  is  said  to  have  answered,  that  shee  would 
keep  to  the  Treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  which  permitted  the 
succoring  of  allyes.  The  French  Amb""  replyed,  that  the  King,  his 
Master,  should  bee  then  obliged  to  hinder  it  by  maintaining  an 
army  of  10  thousand  men  to  Flanders;  another  of  18,000  in 
Catalogne,  one  of  twenty  thous'  in  Italy,  &  a  great  camp  against 
the  Dutch  with  whom  he  was  to  make  warre. 

Whereupon  the  Spaniards  doubt  not  of  a  warre,  &  have  sent 
Prince  Percie  into  Germany  to  make  a  recruit  of  Germans  for 
Catalogne. 

The  Count  de  ilonterei  hath  written  a  very  civill  letter  to  the 
King,  but,  in  conclusion,  he  intimates  that  he  believes  not  that  all 
these  preparations  are  against  the  Spaunish  Low  Countrys,  yet,  if  it 
were,  soe  he  was  in  a  posture  of  defending  them. 

The  Hollanders  are  sending  AP  \'aii  Beuning  into  Sweden, 
where  they  believe  hee  may  arrive  time  enough  to  gaine  those 
people,  because  the  Treaty  made  with  M'"  de  Pompone  was  only 
de  louche,  &  not  yet  signed.  In  the  meantime,  the  Swedes  are 
sending  IG  thous''  men  into  Pomerania. 

Twelve  ships  are  gone  from  Zeeland  with  1,000  men  towards 
the  West  Indies. 

'  See  p.  121,  n.  3. 


AN    ENGLISH    AtiENT    IN    PARIS  135 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Jan.  24,  71. 

We  hear  great  complaints  of  poverty  &  misery  for  want  of  trade, 
&  certainly  the  next  year  will  convince  these  Ministers  that  more 
damage  will  arise  to  France  by  its  late  inhibitions  than  to  any  of 
its  neighbours.  As  to  this  place,  the  ablest  merchants  cannot  find 
ready  money  upon  any  account  of  ti-ading  as  formerly. 

I  presume  ours  is  at  a  stand  in  any  thing  but  wines,  which 
carrying  ready  money  without  exchange  of  goods  for  goods,  I 
believe  may  be  dispenced  with,  since  these  people  pretend  to  doe 
the  same  in  effect  with  our  cloth,  stockins,  (to". 

These  three  days  past  have  been  full  of  great  dicertisements  & 
Banquets. 

The  Protestant  deputies  are  in  ye  Bastille,  &  ye  fellow  that 
hurt  the  Princesse  to  be  broken  this  day. 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris  :  Jan.  ult.,  '71,  S.N. 

From  Marseilles  Jan.  20,  T  am  advised  of  S.  Ed.  Spragg's 
having  taken  an  Algier  man  of  warre  of  36  guns,  being  a  new  ship 
that  never  had  been  before  at  sea.  He  mett  her  as  he  was 
cruising  with  one  man  of  warre  &  a  fireship,  near  the  Island  of 
Mayorca,^  chased  her  six  days  till  shee  ran  herselfe  agi-oimd  on  the 
coast  of  Algiers,  when,  through  much  diligence,  as  dismounting  the 
guns  to  lighten  her,  shee  was  gott  off.  In  her  were  found  the  Captain 
&  32  Xtian  slaves.  She  is  sent  to  Tanger  to  be  fitted  out  with  all 
expedition,  being  an  excellent  sailor.  At  a  Ball  given  two  nights 
since  by  little  S''  Geo.  Hewet,  among  other  maskers.  I  am  told 
O'Brian  -  was  present.  Here  is  much  discourse  of  a  rupture  between 
the  Sweeds  &  Danes ;  I  mean  they  wish  it  were  soe,  that  the 
Sweeds'  forces  might  be  employed,  &  most  believe  that  Munster 
doth  nothing  but  by  order  from  hence. 

The  Huguenots'  deputies  are  yet  in  prison. 

L'Abbe  Courtillon.^  Bro.  to  the  Marq'  d'Anjou,''  is  made  Ledeur 
du  Roy,  for  w"^''  he  paid  80,000  livers. 

Ye  convent  of  ye  Capucins  won't  receive  la  Valiere  without  a 
dispensation  from  the  Pope.^ 

'  Majorca.  -  Cliarles  O'Brien. 

'  Louis  de  CourcrUon,  AbW  de  Dangeau. 

*  Philippe  de  Courcillon,  Marquis  de  Dangeau.  ^  See  n.  3,  p.  32. 


13G  TiiK  i)i:si-A allies  uk 


'J'o  <sir  JutyCjih    Williamson. 

Paris:  Feb.  7,  '71,  S.N. 

A  courrier,  hiti'ly  arriving  from  .Munster,  hath  put  ;i  stop  to  tlie 
levyes  making  here  by  the  C  de  Koningsmarck  '  tor  the  Hp,  since 
that  a  'J'l-eaty  is  conclnded  with  tlie  !'"  of  Wolt'enibuttel,  A:  nothing 
remains  but  the  publication,  w*^''  the  Jip.  will  not  permit  to  be  made 
before  the  garrison  be  taken  out  of  Hoxter,  whilst  the  other  persists 
to  have  the  Treaty  proclaymed  first. ^ 

On  Ash  Wednesday,  the  King  leaves  this  place  for  alitogether, 
resolving  to  be  at  Versailles  or  8'  Germains  till  hee  begins  his 
progresse,  w'^''  some  will  have  to  extend  to  the  end  of  next  winter, 
w'^''  hee  may  passe  at  Tholon. 

As  to  tlie  matter  of  trade,  I  hear  that  the  politician  hath  sent 
Commissioners  into  all  the  provinces  &  ports,  with  money  to  buy 
up  the  product  of  ye  countrey  &  transport  it  themselves  Northward, 
as  formerly  the  Dutch  did.  This  is  believed  may  not  turne  to  their 
account  for  want  of  ships  li:  cheap  sailing 

The  generall  opinion  here  is  that  there  will  be  no  warre  this 
summer  in  any  parts. 

Yesterday  night  the  King,  (^ueen,  ^lonsieur,  it  most  of  the 
Court,  were  at  the  foire  de  <S"  (lermains. 

To  Sir  Joseph    Williamson. 

Paris:  Feb.  11,  '71,  S.N. 
In  y''  last  Gazette,  I  find  Mons''  Verjuss'  ^  name  as  if  he  was 
designed  for  the  North,  to  establish  there  the  French  Commerce, 
but  now  I  can  assure  you  that  hee  is  going,  I  mean  gone,  towards 
the  Elector  of  Cologne,  under  the  proffer  of  the  Xtian  King's  pro- 
tection &  assistance  in  his  differences  with  the  citty,  to  endeavor 
the  interrupting  the  Ducch  Commerce  to  the  Rhyne.  Thence  he  is 
to  visitt  ^Munster  &  Wolfembutel,  to  participate  in  the  accomoda- 
tion, if  there  be  likelyhood  of  any,  or  rather  to  foment  their  broyles 

'  The  famous  ctncral,  Count  Kcinigsmarck,  a  Swedish  nobleman,  killed  at  the 
siege  of  Bonn  in  1673. 

-  Rudolph  Augustus,  Duke  of  Brunswick- Wolfenbiittel,  had  been  at  variance 
with  the  Bishop  of  Miinster  concerning  Hoxter,  which  was  under  the  protection  of 
the  Brunswick- Wolfenbiittel  farailj'.     (See  Cat.  S.  P.  Dom.  1671,  p.  14.) 

'  Louis  de  Verjus,  Comte  de  Crecy,  French  Envoy  to  Brandenburg. 


A\    ENH;LI8H    agent    in    FAKIh  137 

to  a  degree  that  may  engage  the  Empire  iu  troubles.  Hee  told 
me,  at  parting,  that  he  was  also  to  receive  uew  iustructions  as  he 
past  by  ^letz  for  his  further  proceedings. 

ilad"^  La  Valiere,  ou  Ash  Weusdaj',  put  herselfe  into  tlie 
Nunnery  at  Charliot,  with  a  message  she  left  for  the  King, 
'  qu'elle  nemporta  que  son  corps  avec  elle,  lequel  devoit  commencer 
une  penitence,'  which  the  King  no  sooner  heard  of,  but  hee  sent  for 
her,  whereupon  she  is  gone  again  to  Versailles. 


To  Sir  Jo^epli   Williamson. 

Paris :  Feb.  21,  '71,  S.N. 

The  C  de  Wiudisgrats,  a  few  days  since,  demanded  an  Audience 
of  the  King,  but  he  was  answered  that  Versailles  was  no  place  for 
businesse.  It  seems  he  desired  that  the  King  would  referre  the 
differences  with  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  to  the  Emperor's  arbitration, 
w''''  is  well  knowne  here  would  fall  in  favor  of  the  Duke,  it  ther- 
fore  declined,  because  the  King,  if  he  hath  any  ?uch  thoughts, 
would  rather  restore  it  as  an  act  of  grace,  than  by  that  of  constraint. 

This  week,  one  Pabst,  an  officer  employed  here  by  the  Bpp  of 
Munster,  was  imprisoned  in  the  Bastille  for  having  been  somewhat 
lavish  in  his  tongue,  as  if  the  forces  his  iP  was  making  were  not 
so  much  ag'  the  P*^''  Wolfembutel,  as  designed  ag'  the  Dutch. 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

S' Dennis:  Feb.  2.5,  71. 

I  hope  in  a  few  months  to  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  all 
y''  favor  &  protection  in  person,  as  I  doe  now  y''  last  of  ye  9"', 
wherein  you  require  an  account  of  ye  4  East  Indy  ships,  to  w""''  I 
am  glad  to  answer  iu  another  way,  that  the  Fi'ench  Levant  Com- 
pany is  upon  the  brink  of  breaking,  of  which,  when  I  have  a  little 
leisure,  I  will  send  you  at  large  the  reason. 

The  Newfoundland's  ships,  preparing  at  Bayonne,  will  in  all 
probability  loose  their  season  of  going  this  year  through  the 
obstinacy  of  the  mutinyed  seamen  &  the  ill  successe  of  the  C"  de 
Guiche,'  who  would  have  enregistred  them  for  the  King's  service 
again,  &  they,  with  many  protestations,  have  taken  armes  again. 

'  Anuiind  de  Gramont,  Comte  de  Guiche. 


138  THE    DFai'ATCHKS   OF 

To  Sir  Joseph   Willimnsoii. 

Paris:  February  28,  71. 

-M'  Diinis  '  is  nametl  to  cominaiid  the  troops  iu  Flanders.  A 
great  sum  of  money  is  sent  to  Guienne  to  buy  up  wines  & 
Hrandyes,  w""''  are  thence  to  be  brought  to  Dunqnerquc  for  the 
service  of  the  Army,  &  there  siiall  be  such  quantitys  of  them  as  to 
sell  them  to  strangers.  All  this  seems  to  bespeake  some  great 
designe  of  bringing  the  wine  into  the  same  branch  as  the  salt  is  at 
present,  especially  since  it  is  proposed  that  the  King  should 
have  cellars  royall,  Sc  taverns,  whence  all  strangers,  goers  & 
comers,  shall  be  obliged  to  furnish  themselves  with  wine  t^  brandy. 
These  cellars  shall  be  such  as  the  King  of  Spain  Sc  the  Hmp''  have 
in  their  countrey. 

The  S""  Carlof  is  at  Havre  de  Grace,  whore  he  imbarkes  for 
Guinny  for  the  service  of  the  W.  Indy  Company.  This  week,  the 
s"*  Company  made  a  generall  division  of  the  last  year's  profit  among 
the  persons  concerned,  &,  as  I  am  informed,  they  gott  no  more  than 
•t  ]ier  cent,  but  they  promise  themselves  greater  profit  the  nest 
year,  if  they  are  not  out  in  their  caloilations. 

I  have  now  particular  accounts  of  the  French  proceedings  at 
Lisle  in  order  to  our  trade,  of  w"''  my  L*  A  nib''  will  make  the  best 
use  he  can.  But  whenever  we  speak  of  grievances  in  that  kind,  they 
alledge  that  we,  iu  England,  began  the  heightning  of  dutys  from 
time  to  time,  that  as  then  they  were  not  soe  clearsighted  in  the 
point  of  trade  as  now  they  are,  &  that  nobody  can  take  it  ill  if  they 
endeavor  all  they  can  for  the  improving  i^  advancing  of  trade. 

To  ib'u"  Josepli    Williamson. 

Paris:  March  14,  '71,  S.N. 
M""  de  Louvoy  goes  hence  on  the  1*'  to  prepare  all  things  for 
the  King's  following  him  into  Flanders  on  the  20th,  where  one 
designe  will  be  to  render  Dunquerque  capable  of  harboring  a  great 
number  of  ships,  ^'  of  liaving  tlie  qualification  of  a  freei'ort,  whence 
much  is  promised  for  the  improvement  of  Trade. 

There  are  2  marine  Regiments  marching  to  Amiens,  being 
discharged  from  the  sea  service,  &  their  officers  ordered  to  raise 
more  in  their  rooms. 

'  JacqupB  Henri  de  Durfort.  Marquis.  Inter  Due  de  Duras,  nephew  of  Turenne. 


AN    EN'tLISH    agent    IN    PARIS  139 

The  Treasure  E"  liath  surceased  of  late  the  accustomary 
payments  for  the  maiutenance  of  the  manufactures  R",  designing  to 
erect  them  into  monopolies  &  distinct  parts. 

The  King  is  at  present  at  S'  Germains. 


To  Sir  Joseph   ]\  illiuinsoa. 

Paris:  March  18,  '71. 

You  will  see,  inclosed,  something  of  the  Marq.  de  Saissac  being 
disgraced  about  cheating  at  Play.'  He  is  since  come  to  Paris,  & 
putt  himselfe  into  the  Bastille,  declaiming  he  will  not  come  thence 
till  hee  hath  clear'd  himselfe  of  those  accusations. 

Yesterday  the  new  invented  bridge  was  shewne  to  the  King, 
with  which  hee  is  much  satisfyed,  &  commanded  that  it  should  be 
kept  from  the  sight  of  people  yet  awhile.  As  I  understand  it,  it 
is  to  be  taken  in  pieces  &  sett  together  again  on  the  place,  as 
occasion  shall  serve,  &  soe  become  portable  to  follow  the  Array. 

The  S''  Verjus  is,  in  case  of  a  peace  between  Munster  &  Lunen- 
bourg,  to  engage  as  many  of  their  troops  as  he  can  for  the  French 
service. 

7'o  Sir  Joseiih   Williamson. 

Paris  :   March  25,  '71. 

Because  the  King  hath  i-eferred  the  Imperiall  Envoye  for  an 
answer  to  his  being  in  Flanders,  it  is  now  generally  thought  he  will, 
then  &  there,  restore  Lorraine  into  the  Emp''*  hands,  to  be  dis- 
posed of  as  he  sliall  think  fitt.  M''  de  Louvoy  has  undertaken  the 
furnishing  the  army  with  a  sufficient  quantity  of  pruvisious,  but 
many  believe  he  will  not  be  able  to  performe  it,  &  of  a  suddain  it's 
imagined  this  summer  will  rivell  out  in  blood  through  the  Munster 
quarrell  ct  the  assistance  France  &  HolT'  may  give. 

The  Parliament  of  Rouen  hath  lately  given  an  arrest,  since 
confirmed  by  an  Ordoanance  of  the  Intend'  of  Normandy  this  very 
month,  forbidding  all  Captains  of  ships,  pilots,  &  other  Protestants, 
as  long  as  they  shall  be  at  sea,  to  say  their  prayers,  or  sing  Psalms 
in  their  cabins,  to  the  great  consternation  of  ye  sea  officers  that  are 
in  that  province,  since  they  must  be  bound  to  hear  masse. 

The  inhabitants  of  Privas,  a  Protestant  people,  who  had  been 

'  See  iTcmtagu-Arlingion  Papers  (Hist.  MSS.  Comm.),  p.  498. 


1  ID  Tin;  iii:sr.\T(Hi:.s  ok 

restablislied  since  (lie  late  tnmljlt's  of  N'ivaivls,  iS;  liad  sifjfiialisi'il 
tlieiuselves  a^''  those  rebells,  liave  been,  within  12  days,  through 
f^reat  violence  to  their  persons  &  estates,  turned  out  again  from  their 
liabitations,  not  knowing  where  to  settle  themselves  in  surety. 

T(j  Sir  JuKCiih    WUlidmsoii. 

Paris:  Jlarcb  28'^  71. 
In  a  few  days  I  shall  be  able  to  send  you  an  exact  list  of  the 
French  Infantry,  Horse,  &  ^laritime  forces.  What  reason  may  bee 
for  it  I  know  not,  but  everybody  expects  some  considerable  action, 
from  the  great  prepai'ations  &  likelyhood  of  France's  protecting 
either  ilun.ster  or  the  l-il.  of  Cologne  in  the  jarrs  at  present 
extant.  They  promise  themselves  here  much  from  tlie  coolnes  in 
our  Fnglish  Court  towards  the  Dutch  propo.sitions  for  the  entring 
into  a  stricter  alliance  with  us.  As  for  our  entring  into  one  with 
these  people,  whatever  fair  pretences  may  be  given,  as  long  as  we  are 
abused  to  a  strange  degree  in  our  trade,  I  don't  see  how  it  can 
consist — 71091  hene  conveniuni — &  as  long  as  the  manufacture  reigns, 
it  is  impossible  we  have  any  redresse. 

To  Sir  Joseiilt    Williamson. 

Paris:  .\prill  1,  '7). 

I  was  yesterday  at  S'  Germains,  where  I  understood  that,  by 
reason  of  the  ill  weather,  the  King  thought  of  deferring  the  day  of 
his  progresse  till  the  5th  of  May. 

In  the  morning,  he  bestowed  on  the  Count  de  Lauzun,  the 
goveruement  of  Berry  with  1 0  tlious''  crowns  a  year.  Mens""  de 
Bonnueil  ^  had  also  the  charge  of  Introductor  of  Ambassadour  in 
Berlize's  place,  inoyeHmint  4  thous'  crowns  to  his  heirs,  M''  lam- 
boneau  being  not  willing  to  give  so  much. 

This  day  M''  Colbert  setts  out  towards  the  sea  coast,  Kochefort, 
&c.  to  visitt  the  magazines,  preparations,  &c.  There  are  coaches  of 
relais  for  his  more  speedy  passage. 

On  Saterday,  M'de  Louvoy  begins  his  journey  towards  Lorraine, 
w°''  place,  it's  believed,  may  l)e  restored,  since  the  greatest  parte  of 
the  troops  will  be  drawne  thence  towards  Flanders. 

All  this  great  charge  &  preparations  at  sea  &  land,  in  such  an 

'  Michel  Cliatenet  de  Bonneuil. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  141 

extraordinary  [manner],  may  comett  some  action,  but  where  it  will 
point  is  yet  uncertain,  &  I  really  believe  depends  on  emergencies. 
I  mentioned  something  in  my  last  about  the  Huguenots,  to 
which  I  have  now  to  ad  the  great  calamity  falling  upon  them. 
The  nobility,  at  the  King's  example  in  turning  off  all  Protestants  of 
his  guards,  &c.  have  also  begun  the  like  throughout  all  their  estates, 
particularly  the  Duches  of  Eguillou  '  hath  given  order  for  it  in  her 
Duchy,  &  there  is  a  kind  of  an  inquisition  in  print  of  160  articles 
distributed  among  all  the  curates,  by  authority  of  which,  in- 
formations are  admitted  of,  &  some  persons  are  condemned  to  death, 
others  to  the  galleys  for  pretended  scandalous  speech  ag'  the 
Homan  religion  fiveteen  or  20  years  agoe.  And  at  Privas,  in 
Vivares  couutrey,  the  S""  Fardeau  Baily  -  (sic)  hath  confiscated  all 
the  poor  Protestants'  estates,  pretending  they  quitted  not  their 
habitations  on  ye  day  appointed. 


To  Sir  Josei'h    Williamson. 

Paris:  Ajnill  4,  71,  S.N. 

AP  de  Bezons,^  Intend'  in  Languedock,  hath  order  to  trace  all 
his  coast  &  enregister  all  the  seamen  he  can  find  for  the  King's 
service.  Tbe  Premier  President  of  Provence  hath  also  the  like 
orders  along  his  coast. 

The  Levant  Company  hath  received  advise  from  Constantinople 
of  a  likelyhood  that  they  shall  have  a  very  rich  &  profitable  returne. 

The  King  hath  lately  bestowed  the  Lieutenancy  &  governement 
of  Chasteau  Trompette  on  ilons''  de  Montegut,''  a  Gascon,  who  was 
governor  of  Roercy  [Rocroy]  &  is  now  succeeded  by  the  Chev''  de 
Hilaire,'  Lieuten'  of  ye  Gardes  de  Corps.  Mons''  Villars,  who  is  to  goe 
for  Spain  in  the  A.  B  ^  of  Tholoze's  place,  is  to  receive  two  different 
instructions,  one  from  Mons''  de  Lyonne  for  ye  affairs  of  State,  & 
another  from  M""  Colbert  for  the  improving  &  better  establishing 
the  commerce  between  France  &  Spaiue,  for  w*^"''  reason  the  mer- 

'  Madeleine  de  Wignerod,  Duchesse  d'Aiguillon,  niece  of  Cardinal  Richelieu. 

■  Baily  =  bailli. 

'  Claude  Bazin,  Sr.  de  Bezons,  intendant  of  Languedoc, 1653-1673. 

<  Comte  de  Montaigu,  lieutenant-general  of  the  King  in  Guienne. 

•  .lean  Franc^ois  de  Polastron,  Chevalier  de  la  Hiliere. 

"  Archbishop. 


1  12  THE    nESPATCIlES    UK 

chants  are  ordered  to  {,'ive  in  tlu-ir  memoires  &  three  days  in  a 
week  to  conferre  with  M''  de  Belliz.ini.  Tntendant  of  ye  Commerce 

'J'he  S""  IJiiinet,'  being  advised  that  liis  worke  of"  the  joiidinn 
(le.'i  th.-ux  mers  will  be  examined  this  summer,  doubles  hi>  en- 
deavours for  the  putting  it  in  a  good  posture,  '  mais  il  y  a  grand 
apparence  que  les  diH'erents  cju'il  a  a  surmonter  ne  soyent  plus 
graiides  qu'il  ne  se  I'imagine.' 

The  Port  they  are  making  in  the  Mediterranean  for  the  mouth 
of  the  Channel!  ismuche  forwarded,  &  it's  thought  it  may  be  a  very 
good  harbor,  because  tlie  foundation  is  good. 

They  expect  here  news  out  of  Muscovy,  &  if  they  hear  that  all  is 
quiet,  a  gentleman  is  ready  to  goe  &  establish  a  trade  with  the 
Creat  Duke. 

To  Sir  Joujili  WfllhiDw^ijii. 

Paris:  April  8.  '71. 

The  news  a  la  main  mentions  something  of  M""  de  Magoletti.-' 
1  can  assure  you  that  he  went  thence  three  days  agoe  towards 
Italy,  to  raise  two  regiments,  one  of  two  thousand  men,  of  which 
he  is  to  be  Maistre  rlr  Camp,  &  it  is  also  believed  he  hath  com- 
missions to  some  i'rinces  of  Italy,  'pour  prendre  des  mesures  avec 
eux  en  cas  de  rupture.'  The  King  hath  given  to  the  Prince  of 
Piemont  a  liegim'  of  foot  of  twenty  companies,  one  Regiment 
of  Horse  of  twelve  troops.  &  a  Company  of  ;/e/(,s  d'anneg.  All  the 
ofliccrs  shall  be  named  by  the  s''  Prince  &  shall  be  all  Savoyards, 
or  of  Piemondt,  &  are  to  be  raised  in  those  parts.  You  see.  S'', 
hereby  what  stones  are  turning  in  all  quarters  for  the  rendring 
Fi'ance  very  considerable  in  land  forces  as  well  as  at  sea. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris:  Ap.  11,  '71. 

I  need  not  take  care  of  finding  some  way  of  continuing  the 
advices  to  you  in  my  absence,  since  here  is  one  busines  of  soe 
extraordinary  an  importance  as  will  keep  me  here  &  deprive  me 
of  the  honor  I  promised  myselfe  of  kissing  y''  hands  in  England. 

'  Pierre-Paul  lUquet,  constructor  of  the  '  Canal  ties  Deux-Mers  '  or  the  '  Canal 
(le  Languedoc' 

•  Comte  de  Bardi  MaRalotti,  Colonel  of  the  Italian  lict-iment.  See  Montagu- 
Arliugton  Letters,  p.  499. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  143 

But  as  to  what  shall  passe  in  the  King's  voyage,  I  have  alreadj 
taken  my  measures,  Sc  shall  have  from  a  faithfull  hand  the  gi-eatest 
secrets  it"  there  be  any. 

I  cannot  imagine  what  may  be  the  issue  of  all  these  great 
preparations,  but  this  is  certain,  if  there  be  no  warre,  a  great  part 
of  the  nobility  will  be  ruined,  being  already  plunged  in  debt  for  the 
equipage  the  pique  d'honni-.ur  forced  them  to  make  the  last  year. 
But  this  time  they  will  all  appear  more  splendid.  If  they  could 
gett  the  whip  hand  of  the  ministers,  there  would  certainly  be 
warre,  but  as  long  as  i]icj  are  employed  in  all  things  that  con- 
cerne  the  military  state.  i*t  retrench  the  allowances  of  all  Governors 
&  Commanders  of  townes  of  halfe  their  former  priviledges,  there  is 
little  likelyhood  that  the  military  faction  can  prevayle,  unles  there 
be  a  warre,  &  this  is  the  reason  that  the  Ministers  are  most 
against  it.  Therefore  they  find  out  such  a  petit  excursion  as  that 
of  Lorraine  now  &  then  to  divei't  the  King,  &  it  is  believed  that, 
about  the  end  of  this  Campmjna,  they  may  putt  him  upon  some 
little  job  or  other. 

PS.  The  camp  before  Dunquerqiie  will  consist  of  2b, 000 
Pietons  k  6,00il  horse,  and  the  French  troops  coming  out  of 
Lorrain  ought  to  be  on  the  20th  comrant  at  Donchery  &  Mesieres  ' 
to  embaif|ue  there  &  land  at  Chasteau  Renau,  thence  to  march 
towards  I'hillipville  &  the  Camp. 

The  'Grand  Orient,'  newly  putt  in  at  TJoclielle  without  masts, 
sayle,  or  guns,  reports  that  of  six,  shee,  &  two  others  that  are  putt 
into  two  severall  ports,  are  all  that  are  saved,  it  that  the  others  are 
perished,  unles  the  '  Grand  S'  Jean  '  should  have  escaped  &  gott 
beyond  them.  On  Tuesday,  the  East  Indy  •'"ompany  sent  a 
courrier  to  Mons''  Colbert ;  it's  thouglit  '  que  c'est  pour  luy  prier  de 
ne  luy  laisser  pas  perdre  la  mousson.'  But  the  season  is  much 
advanced,  &  it's  believed  their  ships  will  not  be  soe  soon  ready  as 
they  imagined. 

Mons""  Colbert  de  Terron  -  is  supposed  to  be  dead.  &  his  (innul 
chagrin  is  said  to  be  the  cause  therof. 

The  S""  Depuis,  valet  de  Chumhre  to  the  King,  has  brought  out 
of  Spain  18  true  Andalousia  horses. 

'  Mezi^res. 

-  Charles  Colbert,  Seigneur  du  Terron.  iinele  of  Jean  Baptiste  Colbert,  died  in 
1684. 


Ml 


THE   DESPATCHES   UF 


To  Lord  ArlliKjinn. 

Paris  :  Apiill  15'",  71. 
'I'his  flay  sennight,  tlie  King  intends  to  sett  forward,  &  the  day 
following  tlie  Camp  will    be  compleat  before   Duiujuerque,  as  y'' 
Ijopj)  will  see  by  the  following  track. 

The   foot,  that  shall  compose  the   Camp,  shall   consist  of  'IS 
thousand  four  hundred  &  eighty  men. 

From    Lorraine  iV  Barrois  there  will  bee  11,000  men  of  Cham- 
pagne Keginients  thus  -  - 


Compagnies   . 

10 

Dauvergne  [D 

A  uvergue] 

10  Com] 

du  Roy 

;il. 

De  Lyonuois  . 

11 

Du  Dauphin  . 

21 

De  Crussol     . 

10 

De  Louvigny 

10 

Royal  des  vaissean.\ 

21 

d"Ai'tois    . 

10 

d'Anjou    . 

21  ' 

The  fores'!  1  1,OGO  men  shall  goe  from  \  erdun  towards  I'hillip- 
ville,  thence  to  Aeth,  where  they  shall  meet  the  Regiment  of 
Castehiau,  w"''  will  make  them  II, -500. 

At  Tournay  12  Companyes  of  RiiMuondt  will  be  added  to 
them,  &  aoe  become  12,l()i'.  At  LisK' they  will  lintl  0.700  men 
composed  of  Ricirdy  Regiments  thus 

' Comp : . 
De  Navarre   . 
de  Duglas  [Douglas] 
de  Turenne    . 
de  la  Reyue  . 
d'Alsace 

Wherby  there  will  bee  19,1  On  men  at  Lisle,  who,  marching  to 
Dun(iuer(|ue,  will  find  there  justly  9,320  men,  composed  of  the 
French  Regiment  of  Cuards  thus  : 


.     10 

10  Con 

P 

8 

10 

10 

.     15' 

AX    KXGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  145 

'  Comp :  .  .  .  .         .  .28 

des  Guardes  de  Suisse    ...       9  Coinp  : 
Normandie    .  .  .  .  .10 

de  la  Marine .  .         .  .  .10 

de  Kambure  .  .         .  .  .10 

de  Sault 10 

du  Plessis  Praslin  .  .  .  .10 

le  Eoyale 10 

de  Bourgogne         .  .  .  .     10 ' 

which,  in  nil,  will  amount  to  28,480  foot,  besides  four  troops  of  the 
GiirJet(du  L'oiys  &  three  of  the  Dragoons,  w''''  are  to  bee  at  Phillip- 
ville,  &  12,000  men  under  the  name  of  troops  of  the  King's  house; 
the  troops  that  march  from  Lorraine  shall  be  the  22"'^  Aprill  at 
Elsendam,  the  23'''  at  Fuernes,  &  the  24  at  Dunquercjue. 

Mons''  Colbert,  having  been  sick  of  the  collick.  caused  by  the 
extraordinary  hast  he  made,  is  returning  home,  &  expected  here 
on  Fryday. 

It  seems,  that  after  the  vast  expence  the  King  hath  been  at  for 
magazins,  &c'''.  there  hath  been  nothing  done,  or  any  considerable 
progresse  made,  in  the  designe  first  projected.  Wlierfore  the 
King  intends,  at  his  returne  from  Flanders,  aboixt  the  end  of  July, 
to  goe  from  hence  to  Orleans,  Chambort,  &  thence  to  Rochell,  & 
when  hee  shall  have  visited  those  places,  he  returnes  to  Chambort, 
where  hee  will  passe  away  the  Autumne.  Some  days  since  he 
told  the  Marshall  Grammont,  'que  les  Holandois  luy  vouloient faire 
la  guerre,'  and  this  was  grounded  on  a  discourse  here  that  the 
Hollanders  would  not  be  exposed  to  such  a  yearly  expence,  but 
as  soon  as  their  army  was  compleat  that  they  would  not  be  idle. 

The  Emperour's  Enroyc,  since  the  answer  the  King  gave  him 
referring  him  for  a  categoricall  one  till  his  being  in  Flanders,  hath 
demanded  Audience,  but  can  obtaine  none. 

It  is  very  certaine  that  Lon-aine  will  be  restored,  &  to  which 
of  the  young  Princes  that  best  please  the  King,  but  it  is  the 
generall  opinion  that,  if  there  be  any  designe  ag'  the  Hollanders, 
he  will  keep  it  somewhat  longer  in  his  hands  for  the  convenience 
of  his  troops. 

The  ^Nlarshall  Crequi  hath  been  chequed  for  what  hee  did 
lately  on  those  frontiers  by  the  firing  of  some  guns  &  killing  some 
men  &  cattell. 

VOL.  V.  L 


1  IG  TIIF.    DESPATCIIKS    OF 

The  Emperor  hath  written  a  large  letter  to  his  Knvni/r,  wliereiii 
liee  pretends  tiiat,  by  reason  of  the  confiscation  of"  some  rebell's 
estates  in  Hungary  &  the  quietnes  settled  tiicre,  bee  is  resolved  to 
have  an  army  of  (30,000  men,  w*^''  shall  be  no  charge  to  the  Emp'' 
or  the  iStates  of  the  Empire. 

The  King  intends  to  raise  a  new  Tax  iV  have  GO*  upon 
chimneys.  &  is,  in  fine,  become  the  generall  merchnnt  of  all  the 
Kingdome,  as  well  in  wine  as  salt. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Apr.  22"',  '71. 

"W'sterday  T  was  at  S'  Germains,  where  I  saw  numbers  of  rich 
coats  &  garments.  To-morrow  the  King  setts  forwards  towards 
Cliantilly,  where  very  expensive  preparations  are  making  for  his 
entertainment  the  two  days  he  shall  stay  there  ;  one  particular  is 
a  night  hunting  in  the  fine  wood,  in  order  whereunto  all  the 
publick  lantherns  of  this  place  are  carried  thither,  to  be  hung  up 
on  the  trees,  it  frames  are  sent  with  little  jlamLeanx,  to  be  .sett  in 
the  middle  of  the  jeis  (Vecmx,  which  will  be  extraordinary  diverting 
in  the  night  time. 

iM''  Colbert  is  come  back,  &  hath  given  a  kind  ot  a  satisfactory 
account  of  what  he  went  to  visitt. 

By  the  inclosed,'  you  will  see  what  new  incroachings  are  come 
on  our  nianufact[ures],  &  complaints  are  already  come  to  niee  that 
the  visiter[s]  of  ye  Drapery  have,  in  order  thereunto,  sei.sed  on  some 
of  our  stufl's,  pretending  that  they  are  not  of  fuflicient  length  or 
bredth. 

To  Sir  JoKeph  Willia'mson. 

Paris  :  Aprill  25'^  '71. 

The  King  is  gone  this  day  from  Ohantilly  forwards,  on  his  way 
to  Flanders. 

You  may,  for  once,  believe  the  Guzeitier  in  what  bee  saith  of  ye 
P'^'^  of  Conde's  great  charge,  &  just  now,  I  am  told  that  his  Maistre 
d'llostel  hath  killed  himselfe,  because  the  '  Greenfish '  came  not  in 
due  time. 

The  King  hath  sent  for  the  C  de  S'  Geran,  in  order  to  his 
going   for   England,  hee  having  altei'ed  his  choyse   of  ye  C  de 

'  The  enclosure  is  missin". 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  147 

Grauimont,  foi'  some  private  reasons.  The  Uuech  Amb''  follows 
the  Court  &  the  C  de  Windisgrats  is  going  homewards,  leaving  his 
negotiation  imperfect,  though  it  is  believed  the  King  will,  of  him- 
selfe,  restore  Lorraine  to  P'''^  Charles  upon  his  coming  hither  & 
making  his  submissions  and  conditions. 

I  pray  advise  iP'  Dodington  '  not  to  send  any  newspapers,  or  any 
thing  else,  wherein  reflections  are  made  on  the  persons  of  Princes. 
il''  de  Lyonne  having  complained  of  one  that  was  scandalous  to  the 
King  of  France.     This  ah  amko. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamso/i. 

Paris  :  May  2'',  '71. 

Here  is  no  dram  of  news  stirring.  The  Court,  it's  thought,  may 
be  back  here  about  the  end  of  June  at  furthest.  The  match, 
between  the  C  de  Lauzun  &  Madamoiselle,  holds  on  again,  nay, 
many  believe  it  consummated,  though  not  thought  fitt  to  be  pub- 
lished till  such  time  as  the  King  shall  have  conferred  proportion- 
able honours  on  the  Count.  At  first  the  Governem' of  Languedock 
was  thought  upon,  moyeiiant  a  sum  to  the  Duke  of  Vernueil,  but 
Monsieur  opposed  it,  to  stop  whose  mouth  he  hath  the  revenew  of 
Rimanlin  near  Blois  &  Nemours  near  Fontainbleau,  besides  4,000 
louis  d'or,  given  him  lately  by  the  King,  soe  that  now  another  thing 
is  sur  h  tapis  for  ye  Count,  viz' — the  making  him  ViceRoy  of 
all  the  Conquests  in  Flanders,  &  Artois  to  be  joined  to  them  in  one 
governement,  moi/ennnt  a  sum  to  ye  Duke  of  Elbeuf,-  the  present 
Governor  of  Picardy  &  Artois. 

To  Sir  Joseiih  Willidmson. 

Paris :  May  9",  '71. 

It  is  the  generall  discourse  here  that  the  King  will  bee  back 
here  about  the  middle  of  June,  so  that  the  Hollanders  may  unbrace 
their  drums  &  calculate  their  expences,  to  which  they  may  be 
exposed  year  after  year  if  they  come  not  to  some  assured  accomo- 
dation, w'^''  some  say  is  at  present  on  foot,  even  to  a  near  under- 
standing. But  I  hope  this  may  prove  only  a  supposition  &  not 
a  reall  matter  in  agitation,  though  I  am  assured  that  De  Wit 

'  John  Dodington  (Dorrington),  Secretary  to  Lord  Fauconberg's  Embassy  to 
Italy  in  1G70. 

■-■  Charles  III.  de  Lorraine,  Due  d'Elktuf  (l(j20-lG9-2). 

L  2 


1  18  TFiR  rir.sPATcnr.s  iw 

hath  been  eii<]eavoiiiinf^  to  briiif,'  soiiiethinn;  .-('/•  Ir  IhjiIs.  I  liave 
heard  of  a  straiii^e  scandalous  meddall  the  Duti'h  have  lately  made 
by  authority,  which  is  thus  described  to  me,  viz'  Peace  is  trampling 
on  a  Fury  that  hath  a  face  exactly  resembling  his  Ma"-'  &  women's 
breasts.  Hut  it  may  be  these  things  are  done  by  third  persons  to 
foment  a  jealousy  between  us. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  May  10.  '71. 

I  am  advised  from  TJochefort,  that  of  35  King's  ships  which 
are  there  l)ut  five  are  in  equipage,  &  they,  with  some  others,  an- 
designed  for  salley,  on  what  enterprise  I  cannot  learne. 

The  King  will  be  at  Lisle  the  25th,  &  here  somewhat  sooner 
than  he  first  designed.  The  Court  .se  ^ro?(ce  cnnuye,  mo.st  of  them 
having  no  money  left ;  the  great  ones  have  lost  all  they  earned  at 
play,  &  left  many  debts  behind  them  here  for  their  trappings.  The 
army  has  been  sickly,  &  the  monopolist  that  undertook  the  furnish- 
ing them  with  provision  is  much  blamed. 

To  Sir  Jogrplt.  WiUiamson. 

Paris  :  May  20,  '71. 

We  hear  from  Flanders  that  the  Marshall  Crequi  is  designed 
to  goe  with  some  troops  I'd  assist  the  Elector  of  Cullen,  others 
advise  thence  that  the  Duke  of  Luxemburg  is  to  march  with  men 
of  the  lloi'se  iV  encamp  on  the  Rhine. 

From  other  hands.  I  hear  that  the  Bishop  of  Munster,  thinking 
of  an  accommodation,  the  Duke  of  Lorrain  retires  his  troops,  &  lends 
them  to  the  I'l  of  Cullen,  insomuch  that  all,  in  generall,  believe 
there  may  be  some  doings  thereabouts,  that  the  Dutch  &  Dukes  of 
liunenburgh  will  assist  the  citty,  <t  that  the  !•' reach,  Lorrainers,  tt 
the  Elector's  forces  will  besiege  it. 

You  see,  8'',  what  we  are  forced  to  say  at  a  distance,  since 
we're  far  from  any  positive  assertions. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUiamson. 

Paris  :  May  2G,  '71. 

It  seems  that  the  Dutch  have  brought  to  passe  with  the 
Emperor  that  there  will  be  no  fear  of  France's  acting  any  thing 


AN    ENCiLISH    A(iEXT    IN    PARIS  11-9 

towards  Cullen,  as  was  designed,  &  a  cei'tain  prospect  of  troubles  by 
engaging  severall  neighbours  '  pro  &  con '  in  that  quarter  is  vanished. 

It  may  appear  somewhat  rliomantic  to  you,  as  it  did  to  me,  but 
I  am  confident!)'  assured  that  there  is  bringing  from  Nancy  a  great 
brazen  horse,  which  is  of  soe  great  weight,  that  200  horses  are 
employed  daily  to  draw  it  this  way.  But  there  is  no  likelyhood  it 
can  be  brought  hither  these  many  months,  according  to  the  slow 
pace  it  moves.  They  are  forced  to  cutt  through  woods,  &c^,  for  its 
passage.  It  is  esteemed  of  very  great  value,  &  the  King's  statue  is 
making  to  be  set  upon  it. 

It  is  said  here,  that  the  Duke  of  Lorrain's  accomodation  is 
made. 

I  have  just  now  a  letter  from  Spain  of  ye  loth  ]\Iay,  wherin 
some  hopes  are  given  of  Sii'  W"''*  ^  recovery,  though  they  apprehend 
much  some  fiebras  tercianas,  which  may  endanger  him,  otherwise 
he  may  be  upon  his  legs  in  a  month's  time. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  May  l^"\  '71. 

Letters  from  Turin  advise  that  the  Duke  of  Savoy  hath  not 
thought  fit  to  suffer  one  M''  du  Clo[s]  to  make  levyes  of  two  regi- 
ments for  this  King's  service,  (of  which  I  formerly  gave  you  some  in- 
formation.) excusing  himselfe  from  the  small  number  of  his  subjects 
that  were  capable  of  bearing  amies,  &  for  which  rea;^on  most  of  his 
owne  guards  were  French  ;  that  he  could  not  permit  those  few  to 
leave  his  countrey  to  serve  a  King  who  had  so  many  of  his  owne 
subjects  to  employ,  soe  that,  hereupon,  the  person  is  gone  for 
Florence,  where  it's  believed  he  may  speed  little  better,  from  the 
indifferency  that  Duke  hath  for  the  French. 

The  Pope  has  sent  an  expresse  to  call  home  his  Nuntio,  Bar- 
gulini  [Bargellieni],  with  orders  to  passe  to  Avignon,  as  Vice-legat. 
He  hath  written  back,  that  he  could  not  goe  hence  till  he  had  his 
Audience  of  Conge,  &,  at  the  same  time,  dispatched  a  Courrier  to 
M''  de  Lyonne,  to  know  his  Ma'"''''*  mind,  who  returned  his  Ma'*'''* 
desire  that  he  would  stay  till  his  returne,  &  have  Aud'^^''  of  Vanrje. 

Here  is  arrived  I'Abbe  Vibo,"  who  came  post,  from  liome  to  doe 
the  oiBce  of  Internuntio  till  the  Pope  should  have  made  choyce  of 

'   Sir  William  Godolphin,  English  Ambassador  iu  Spain. 
-  Cardinal  Cibo. 


150  TIIK    DlCSl-ATCHKS    OF 

another  Nuiitio.  Now,  S',  tlio  present  one  is  most  unwilling'  to 
leave  this  Court,  when-  lie  is  much  made  of,  which  is  the  reason  the 
Court  of  Kome  would  have  him  removed,  accusing  him  of  too  much 
complaisance,  itc",  and  all  endeavours  will  be  made,  by  these  peoph-, 
to  have  him  continued. 

The  Marq'S'  Andre  Monbrun  writes  hither  that  the  Turks  had 
enter"d  upon  the  undecided  limits  in  Dalmatia,  without  staying  for 
the  discussion  of  those  matters  by  Comm",  as  was  agreed  upon  by 
treaty ;  and  that  the  Venetians,  apprehending  a  new  warre,  had 
ordered  all  their  subjects  to  give  no  occasion,  stopping  the  I}asta"s 
mouths  with  presents. 

J\l'  Colbert  is  to  be  here  before  the  Court,  to  prepare  all  things 
for  his  Ma'''^'"  returne.  His  son,  the  Marq'  de  Seignelay,  is  come 
back  from  Home  into  France,  &  will  speedily  [be]  here,  in  order 
to  his  marriage  with  the  great  beauty  &  fortune  of  the  house  of 
Alegre,'  which  it  seems,  notwithstanding  the  former  difficulties,  is 
now  agreed  upou.^. 

The  French  complain  of  the  rudnes  of  our  people  between 
Dover  &  London,  &  soe  does  the  D.  of  Bouillon''  that  he  had  not  the 
title  of  Altesf:e  given  him. 


To  Sir  Jusejjh  Williamson. 

Palis,  June  (i.  71. 

The  horse  I  mentioned,  that  was  to  be  brought  from  Lorraine, 
came  before  the  Louvre,  being  seven  weeks  from  Kancy  to  the  river 
side. 

The  King  is  expected  here  about  the  beginning  of  July,  &  all 
apprehensions  seem  to  vanish  of  any  action  this  summer,  if  soe  bee 
the  busines  at  CuUen  be  accomoded. 


2'o  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Piuis  :  June  10th,  "71. 

I  have  received  some  good  news,  from  Marseilles,  of  Sir  Fd. 
Spraag's  success  ag'  the  pirates  of  Algier.  My  letter  bears  date 
the   30th  of  May,  &  its  contents  are,  that  on  the  17th,  after  Sir 

'  Jean  Baptiste  Colbert,  son  of  the  '  Grand  Colbert,'  married  Marie  Marguerite 
d'Aligre,  daughter  of  Charles  Yves,  Marquis  d'Alfegre. 
2  See  p.  2<)9. 
'  Godcfroi  Maurice  de  la  Tour,  Due  de  Bouillon. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  151 

Edward  Spraag  had  battered  2  daies  against  the  castles  of  Bngia, 
a  place  near  Algiers  (where  many  of  their  ships  of  warre  were  in 
harbor),  hee  sent  in  a  fireship  under  the  castles,  where  their  ships 
were  att  anchor,  but  finding  y"'  barricaded  by  masts,  &c,  which 
they  had  thrown  into  the  sea,  was  not  only  hindred  from  executing 
anything  upon  them,  butt  sunk  by  the  Castles.  Notwithstanding 
which,  S"'  Edward,  continuing  still  battering,  armed  out  several 
boates  &  hngantines,  sent  them  in,  who  cutt  their  barricades  to  make 
the  passage  clear,  which  done,  hee  sent  in  two  fireships,  who  burnt 
twelve  Algier  men  of  warre,  I  suppose  the  whole  number  of  ships 
in  the  Port,  &  most  of  their  men  are  said  to  have  perished  aboard 
them.  Sir  Edward  has  sent  five  of  his  ships,  that  are  maimed 
through  the  continuall  battering  against  the  castles,  to  Miniorke,' 
&  is  gone  with  the  remaining  9  to  Argier,  where  are  10  sayle 
more  of  their  men  of  warre,  &  it's  hoped,  as  good  ace'  may  be 
given  of  them  as  those  of  Bugia.  This  news  was  brought  by  a 
barque  from  Jlajorka, 

Now  I  have  given  you  this  piece  of  good  news,  I  think  I  am 
pretty  well  introduced  to  acknowledge  the  good  line  I  received 
from  you.  I  depend  upon  y""  good  nature  to  pardon  the  freedome 
I  have  taken,  as  you  may  allways  on  my  utmost  acknowledgments 
in  a  cordial  sense,  though  really  I  shall  never  be  able  effectually,  to 
own  ye  continuance  of  such  an  obliging  friendship.  I  spy  a 
designs  in  the  French  to  beseige  Hombourg  &  Biche,  but  this  is  a 
secret  yet,  though  it  will  not  be  so  some  weeks  hence.  They  are 
towns  in  the  hands  of  the  D.  of  Lorraine  pawned  for  a  great 
sum,  now  the  sum  is  like  to  be  paid,  &  ye  Emp'',  deputing  some 
Electors  to  keep  them  till  both  parties  be  agreed,  it  seems  the 
King  will  pretend  to  them  as  in  the  Duke  of  Lorrain's  possession. 


I  pray,  as  the  occasion  gives  you  leave,  represent  me  with,  all  duty 
to  my  Lady  Arlington,  whose  letter  I  have  sent  to  the  Fa: 
Patrick  -  to  Besanfon.  He  was  with  us  5  days,  &  as  much  made 
of  as  he  could  imagine  or  we,  &c''. 

'  Slinorca. 

-  Father  Patrick  MaRiun, 


152  riiK  DHsrATcnKs  of 

To  Sir  Josej'h  Williamsoii. 

Lisle:  June  28,  '71. 

I  must  now  acquaint  you.  y'  we  are  more  persecuted  in  our 
tiaili'  than  ever  as  to  our  woollen  manufactures,  w'"'  hitherto  have 
received  noe  redresse  as  to  ye  high  dutyes,  notwithstanding  ye 
woollen  drapers  of  this  towne  have  made  it  their  rtMjuest  to  ye 
magistrates,  to  depute  some  one  of  their  assemlilie  to  lions'"  Colbert 
to  presente  their  greivance,  &  how  y' ye  country  people  will  cloathe 
theniselves  in  ye  neighbouring  Spanish  townes,  to  ye  losse  of  their 
trade,  whenas  it's  impossible  for  this  city  to  make  mixt  clothe  for 
many  reasons,  as  want  of  ye  abundance  of  wool  proper  for  it,  w"^'' 
wee  in  England  have,  want  of  water  &  fulling  mills  soe  proper,  & 
wante  of  ye  same  earthe,  &,  w'''  is  as  materiall  as  ye  rest,  want  of 
art,  nor  can  ever  ye  manufacture  of  this  towne  be  aflbrded  soe 
cheap  as  3-e  English,  for  ye  magistrates  gave  a  flatt  denyall,  that 
they  would  not  medle  in  it.  it  being  matter  of  state,  &  for 
advancem'  of  ye  commerce,  those  defences  against  forreign  woollen 
comodityes  ct  interest  in  ye  magistrature,  besides,  because  severall 
of  them  are  &  have  been  clothiers,  or,  if  not,  are  dealers  in  Spanish 
wools,  &  when  ye  vast  quantityes  of  our  English  manufactures,  these 
late  2  or  3  yeares  have  come  in,  ye  Spanish  wools  was  [s/c]  of  little 
valeue,  &  consequently  ye  cloathing  trade  of  this  towne,  W''  is  only 
for  white  cours  goods,  excepting  some  few,  it  decayed  every  day,  so 
as  would  be  in  danger  of  loseing,  soe  y'  w'  [what]  little  trade  wee 
have  at  present  by  stealth,  &  at  great  charges,  as  I  believe,  in  a  short 
time  wee  shall  be  tired  out,  &  must  remove  our  stations.  That  w'^'' 
troubles  mee  mod,  is  if  ye  Prince  of  Lieije,  who  is  a  Petty  Prince, 
should  enjoy  (/reater  priviledges  to  trade  than  his  Ma'"'  suhjects 
for  the  clothe  made  in  that  Prince  his  dmniuion,  «•'■''  is  not  a  little 
corner  in  free  of  all  dvties,  &  i^ayes  nothhuj.  Methinkes  it  shovld  be 
requisite,  my  Lord  Ami"  were  acjiiaintcd  w"'  this  affront  to  our  nation 
iif''  I  thouyht  ijood.  to  let  you  know,  cfc  shidlbci/  the  favour  of  you,A:c} 

S"',  is  there  noe  remedie  against  the  exportation  of  Engli.sh 
wools,  w"^''  I  am  a  daily  spectator  of  whole  waggon  loads,  w*^''  come 
from  Calais  &  other  parts,  &  if  they  can  bi-iiig  such  quantityes  now 
ye  nights  are  so  short,  what  will  they  steale  out  when  the  winter 
comes.  As  long  as  France  can  have  such  quantityes  of  our  wool  at 
pleasure,  wee  must  expect  their   presumption  in  prohibiting  our 

'  These  words  are  underlined  in  the  MS. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  153 

fabricks,  for  so  they  beat  us  w"'  our  owne  weapons,  &  work  our 
wool  into  their  own  fabricks.  This  is  a  sad  greivance,  &  ye  nation 
will  soone  be  sensible  of  ye  inconvenience.  It's  possible  j-e  gentle- 
man looses  a  little  rente  from  ye  tenant  through  ye  abundance  of 
wool  &  no  consumptione  for  it,  but  ye  nation  will  loose  its  trade 
&  navigation  in  ye  conclusion,  w*^'',  if  the  wool  were  kept  in,  there 
would  in  time  be  a  greater  demand  for  our  fabricks,  &  so  it  would 
be  all  wrought  within  ye  kingdome,  whenas  now  it  goes  out, 
strangers  undervallue  our  fabricks,  by  serving  themselves  w''  our 
wool.  You  see  how  vigilant  the  King  of  France  is,  in  continuing 
all  advantages  for  ye  trade  of  his  kingdome  &  dominions.  I  wish  we 
were  as  diligent,  &  matter  of  ti'ade  is  matiere  d'estat  in  France  now  : 
it  hath  been  heretofore  so  in  England. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  July  1",  '71. 

I  send  you  here  inclosed,  a  complaint  of  our  ill-usage  in  point 
of  trade,  which  being  of  as  great  conseejuence  as  the  utmost  violence 
can  be  offered  to  our  nation,  it  may  be  hoped  that  his  Ma'-^'  will 
please  to  give  timely  orders  that  it  may  as  well  be  redressed  on 
this  side  as  the  exportation  of  wooll  severely  proliibited,  there  being 
nothing  more  easy,  if  the  ofiBcers  would  but  apply  themselves  to  it; 
&  if  the  few  gentlemen  of  the  countrey,  whose  profit  it  makes,  had 
not  soe  great  a  faction  as  to  countenance  the  transportation  of  it, 
for,  in  France,  the  officers  are  so  vigilant,  that  a  pair  of  gloves  can 
hardly  escape  their  view,  when  as  whole  ships  come  laden  over  with 
our  wooll.  Laws  signify  very  little  if  they  are  not  putt  in  execution. 
It  is  long  since  these  complaincts  have  been  made,  &  may  be 
soe  yet  longer,  till  the  French,  at  last,  will  not  value  our  manufacture 
nor  come  to  any  Treaty  of  Commerce  with  us,  since  at  present  it 
is  more  to  their  advantage.  You  perceive  how  the  Dutch  treat 
them,  nay,  of  late,  in  their  teeth  have  they  contrequarred  them  & 
made  the  impositions  higher  on  the  French  goods,  on  designe  only 
to  bring  them  to  reasonable  termes.     Basfa. 

For  news  I  have  little  or  none.  There  has  been  a  quarrell 
lately  at  Court  between  the  D.  of  Longueville  &  ye  C.  Lauzun 
about  something  of  Md"  de  Montpensier.  &  the  former  intended 
to  have  made  him  draw  his  sword,  but  a  friend  to  both  discovered 
the  busines  &  soe  it  rests.    I  am  told  that  the  great  man  is  smitten 


lol  THE    DESrATniKS   OF 

with  !i  yuuiif^  laJy,  daugliter  to  ye  iiio[ther]  '  of   the  ilaitls  [of 
IldiKnir]  iV  iiiteiuls  a  socoiul  con(|iiest  in  tlie  I'ays  Bas. 

To  Sir  Joseph    Williamson. 

Paris  :  July  4",  71. 

All  tlio  (liscourse  of  this  is  of  the  consequences  in  case  Bruns- 
wick should  hold  out  il-  have  assistance  from  Sweden,  as  the 
J'rinces  have  a  Ke<^iment  from  Denmarke.  J^ut  what  is  most 
wonder'd  at,  is  the  great  levies  making  in  all  places  for  the  King 
of  France,  his  augmentation  of  French,  those  hee  exi)ects  out  of 
Switzerland,  Italy,  Ireland,  and  Scotland,  wliich  will  render  his 
army  most  prodigious  it  capable  of  doing  anything  before  ever 
others  could  putt  themselves  in  a  posture  to  oppose  him.  ^[any 
believe  that  the  retarding  his  journey  proceeded  from  his  desire  to 
see  what  becomes  of  Brunswick.  The  disputes  between  the  P'  [J'ar- 
liament]  &  the  ^[llh•<lres  des  h'equestcs  have  made  a  great  bustle, 
insomuch  that  there  has  been  buffetting  in  the  Palais,  &  undoubtedly 
the  latter  will  have  the  better  from  Court  &  the  other  be  chequed 
a  little  in  their  priviledges. 

To  Sir  JusejiJi    WilUnmson. 

Paris  :  July  ll'\  '71. 

All  the  news  of  this  place  is  the  Duke  d'Anjou's  death  ^  yester- 
day, insomuch  that  the  King  will  come  to  S'  Germains  this  night 
too  late  to  see  him,  the  chief  Fhisician  having  assured  him  that  he 
would  preserve  him  alive  till  his  Ma"'  came.  But  these  things 
are  past  the  assurances  of  any  humane,  how  skillfull  soever.  What 
you  were  pleased  to  transmit  to  mee  about  the  defeat  at  Bugia,'  I 
am  putting  into  French  that  it  may  be  also  printed  here,  notwith- 
standing the  envious  nature  of  these  people,  that  will  acknowledge 
nothing  of  great  or  glorious  but  what  they  doe  themselves.  I 
know  not  what  to  say  to  you  as  to  the  demesle  between  tlie  French 
Amb''  &  the  G*  Seign'',  or  the  consequences  of  it.  But  this  is 
certain,  he  has  made  loud  complaints  hither  of  his  ill-usage  &  the 
great  duties  laid  on  the  Fi'ench  nation,  more  than  on  any  other. 
Besides  the  demand  of  a  great  sum  of  money,  the  Turks  insist 

'  I.e.  the  governess  of  the  Maids  of  Honour  of  the  Queen. 

-  See  p.  7,  n.  2.  "  See  letter  dated  June  10,  1B71. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  155 

upon  a  reparation  for  the  false  ducats  the  French  have  from  time 
to  time  brought  thither.  I  am  told  that  the  King  has  sent  a 
message  to  the  C  de  Monterei,  wlierby  hee  advises  the  C  de 
Molina  not  to  proceed  on  his  embassy  hither,  as  he  has  on  this  side 
stopped  M"'  de  Villars  going  for  ^Madrid.  Some  imagine  this  to 
proceed  from  what  passed  at  Vienna ;  others  ground  it  upon  the 
report  the  ABp  of  Thoulouze  has  made  of  his  negotiation  there. 
From  ^Madrid  wee  have  the  Jamaicans  attempt  confirmed,  &  great 
noise  is  in  that  Court  upon  such  breeches  (as  they  call  them)  of 
the  late  Treaty  of  Commerce. 

There  must  certainly  be  some  greate  designe  in  hand  against 
the  Spring,  because  such  vast  preparations  are  making  here  of  land- 
force  ;  it  is  said  that,  besides  which,  the  Iving  has  an  influence  on 
all  the  Lunenburg,  Cullen's  &  ]\Iunster's  forces.  I  know  not 
on  what  gi'ound,  but  everybody  says  here  that  6  or  7,000  men  are 
raising  in  Ireland  &  Scotland  for  the  French  service. 

Paris  :  .July  1.5.  '71. 

The  Court  is  putting  itselfe  into  mourning  for  the  Duke  of 
Anjou,  but  they  discourse  variously  of  the  time  how  long  it  will 
continue. 

I  told  you  in  my  last  of  some  exceptions  taken  here  ag'  the 
Spannish  Court,  even  to  the  surceasing  of  all  correspondence  untill 
satisfaction  be  given.  It  seems  that  the  ABp  of  Thoulouse  has 
complained  of  his  having  been  highly  affronted  at  ^ladrid  by  the 
Duke  of  Albuqurque,  &  that  he  could  obtaine  no  redresse. 

I  believe  you  remember  there  was  some  time  since  a  scufHe  at  a 
procession  among  the  Pages.  &  this  is  all  that  hinders  ilolinas 
coming  hither  &  ]\P  de  Villar's  going  for  Spaine. 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  .July  i.J"",  71. 

The  great  levyes  the  King  is  making  in  all  parts  seem  to  por- 
tend some  action  the  next  year,  or  it  may  be  this  summer,  if  the 
differences  between  the  Elector  &  Citty  of  Cullen  should  come  to 
blowes,  as  in  all  probability  they  will  suddainlj-,  least  the  latter 
have  time  enough  to  render  itselfe  stronger.  Whatever  the 
designe  may  be,  on  s'attend  d  quelque  chose,  &  about  the  20th 
of  August,  there  are  ordered  20  thousand  foot  &  6  thous'  horse  to  be 


15()  THK    DIvSPATCHES   OK 

encainpeil  near  Met/,.  Some  say  the  King  will  passe  some  time  at 
Fontainbleau,  others  that  hee  intends  to  goe  suildainly  to  Coin- 
jjiC'gne,  but  the  most  probable  is  that  iiee  will  settle  upon  noe 
resolution  (ill  hee  hears  what  satisfaction  he  shall  have  from  the 
Courts  of  Vienna  tV  Madrid  upon  the  late  pretended  insult  offred 
liis  Resident  in  tlie  Mnii)''"  C'ourt.  It  seems  that  hee  has  be[e]n  at 
very  vast  expences  of  late,  since  his  treasure  is  soe  much  exhausted, 
that  this  weeke  he  has  demanded  an  advance  of  eight  millions  of  his 
farmers,  which  many  thinke  they  are  not  able  to  furnish  him  with. 
Notwithstanding  which,  here  is  now  a  working  for  his  service  a  whole 
sett  of  gold  plate,  besides  great  massy  silver  tables  &  stands. 

It  is  thought  that  one  -M''  du  Choupe,  at  present  in  Holland,  (& 
in  a  pretended  disgrace  here.)  is  there  only,  being  an  able  engineer 
&  a  cunning  man,  to  give  what  intelligence  he  can  of  that 
countrey.  And  accordingly,  he  lias  written  to  Coui't  how  that  the 
states  designe  the  having  80  sayle  of  ships  at  sea  the  next  Spring, 
&  25  thous''  landmen  on  board  them  to  make  a  descent  upon  occa- 
sion, besides  a  land  army  of  seventy  thous'  men  they  will  have  for 
the  defence  of  their  countrey,  adding  that,  if  France  doe  not  fall 
out  with  them,  they  will  begin  first  with  France. 

The  men  that  are  raising  in  Italy  are  to  be  here  in  September, 
about  which  time  the  levies  making  here  will  be  compleated  twenty 
live  thousand  men.  to  the  end  they  may  be  exercised  &  made  fitt 
for  service  att  Spring. 

The  Dolphin  has  of  late  been  troubled  with  soundings,'  which 
has  induced  the  Doctoi's  to  leave  of!' bathing  him. 

The  Count  de  Windisgratz  is  named,  by  the  Emp'.  to  goe  his 
Ami)''  1'].k''-*'  to  the  Crowne  of  Sweden,  in  order,  as  I  am  informed, 
to  make  a  league  between  his  Imp"  Ma'-'  and  that  of  Sweden. 

Mons''  de  Louvoy  is  come  back  from  Lorraine,  where  he  had  a 
view  of  .M"  Crequi's  army,  &  given  many  commissions  to  reformed 
Captains  for  the  i-aising  new  troops  which,  that  there  may  be  the 
better  discipline,  he  drew  out  of  each  troop  15  men,  soe  that  the 
Captain  is  to  add  35  of  them. 

The  King  has  ordered  S'  Queutin  to  [be]  fortified  since  the 
discovery  of  Van  Beverning's-  proposition  at  ^ladrid,  incase  Spain 
would  break  with  France.  The  politicians  here  have  been  much 
out    in   their  measures,  for  they   never  designed  that   Brunswick 

'  I.C.  swooning;;. 
•  .larome  Van  Bevcining  (BeverninKk),  Spanish  Ambassador  to  Holland  in  lr,71. 


AN    EXaLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  157 

should  be  besieged,  nor  that  the  Bpp  of  Muuster's  forces  should  be 
idle.  But  since  affaires  have  not  be[e]n  favourable  hitherto  for  great 
actions,  every  body  here  makes  no  doubt  but  there  will  be  a  warre 
at  Spring.  Notwithstanding  that,  some  of  the  ilinisters  doe  much 
oppose  the  thoughts  of  any. 

The  French  talke  great  of  the  fleet  they  will  have  at  sea,  & 
they  say  that  their  want  of  seamen  will  be  supplied  by  land 
souldiers.  There  is  working  at  the  Louvre  a  very  rich  &  large 
PuviUen  for  the  Grand  Louis. 

I  have  a  letter  in  20  days  from  my  L"*  jMiddlesex  •  that  sais  how 
TafSlett  is  at  present  in  Fez,  having  disbanded  his  army  &  sent  all 
to  their  owne  eountreys  except  some  few  blacks,  which  remain  a 
guard  to  his  person  ;  whereupon  the  enemy  near  Tanger  becomes 
numerous  ;  that  the  forces  in  sally  increase  dayly  ;  that  9  were  then 
cruising  abroad,  &  four  more,  which  Taffilett  is  fitting  out  of  20 
guns  each,  would  be  in  a  month  ready  to  goe  out. 

We  hear  from  Spain  of  their  suddain  resolutions  to  send  10,000 
men  to  the  W.  Indys,  in  order  to  the  reducing  of  Panama.  But  it 
may  be,  when  they  are  there,  -Jamaica  may  also  be  in  their  eye. 

To  Sir  Josej^ili  Williainson. 

Paris  :  Aug.  5"',  '71. 

I  believe  this  may  find  you  returned  from  y''  Plymouth  voyage. 
The  King  is  gone  for  Fontainbleau,  where  his  stay  may  be  till  the 
14th.  Hee  has  received  a  letter  from  the  Queen  of  Spaine,  wherein 
shee  disavows  the  knowing  anything  of  what  his  Ma"'  complains, 
of  affronts  offi'ed  his  Resident  at  A'ieuna  by  the  Spannish  Amb'  in 
concert  with  the  P"'  of  Lobkowits,  concluding  that  in  such  case 
the  King  shall  have  all  the  satisfaction  he  can  desire.^  It  seems 
that  aftaire  is  shuffled  up  at  last  as  a  private  demesle.  M''  Stoup  ' 
is  gone  for  Switzerland  to  raise  6.000  men  there  at  six  crownes  a 
head,  and  the  C  de  Koningsmarc  is  to  have  the  command  of 
a  Brigade  raising  in  Germany  of  2,400  horse.  All  the  reports 
of  the  King's  going  to  Lorraine,  to  Sedan,  Compiegne,  &c.  are  only 
amusements  to  continue  the  Hollanders  &  others  in  alarme.    What 

'  Lionel  CranBelil,  Earl  of  Middlesex  (1C2.5-IC74). 

-  See   Recucil  des   Instruciions  donnies  aux  Ainbassadeurs  ct  Ministres  de 
France  en  Espagne,  par  A.  Morel-Fatio,  t.  i.  p.  261. 
'  Pierre  de  Stuppa,  Colonel  of  the  Swiss  Eegiment. 


loS  Till-.    DKSPATCnKS    OK 

is  most  expected  lu-iv  is  the  result  of  tlie  Kiiip'''  being  at  IJatis- 
boniie.  Fa.  ]\itrick  is  witii  us  &  tells  us  a  strange  story  of  a  young 
virgin,  of  about  20,  at  Troyes,  that  has  eaten  nothing  but  the 
sacrament  these  9  years,  &  that  from  her  middle  downe  she  is 
(juiti-  dead.  This  the  Abbot  saw,  he  sais,  &,  if  true,  is  a  kind  of  a 
miracle. 

'J'n  Ijonl  Arliuijlon. 

Paris  :  August  9tb,  '71. 

Tiie  King  being  att  present  at  I'ontainebleau  &  having  caused 
a  kind  of  surcease  of  busines  during  his  .«tay  there,  here  is  little 
of  moment  worthy  your  Lopp's  knowledge. 

Att  his  Ma" '"  returne  only  from  S'  Germains  the  Commissions 
will  be  given  out  for  the  new  levies  of  foot.  &  those  for  the  horse 
will  not  be  deliverd  before  ye  beginning  of  October.  Some  say 
that  they  are  deferred  till  then  because  the  King  is  unwilling  to 
take  up  any  n\oney  by  advance,  &  about  that  time  his  owne 
revenue  will  furnish  him  sutficiently,  it  being  at  present  generally 
believed  that  his  coffers  are  very  low.  And,  in  order  to  the 
amassing  of  a  good  treasure,  hee  has  stopped  the  four  millions  that 
were  to  be  paid  o"  course  for  vacant  charges,  &  all  payments  to 
Governours  of  Provinces  &  officers  of  his  house.  In  general!,  nil 
things  seem  to  bespeak  a  warre  att  spring,  and,  notwithstanding 
la  jjcirole  domu'r-,  most  believe  that  Flanders  is  the  object ;  how- 
ever, it  were  convenient  that  all  neighbours  be  on  their  guards. 
A  person  of  quality  was  discoursing  yesterday  very  familiarly  of 
our  affaires  in  England,  &  not  knowing  the  relacon  I  had  to  it, 
was  very  brisk  upon  the  facility  of  making  an  attempt  upon  us  att 
Chattham,  in  order  to  the  destroying  of  our  great  ships.  He  said 
he  had  lately  seen  the  fortificacons  at  Sheernesse.  that  he  approved 
of  them  as  to  what  was  towards  the  sea,  but  that  it  was  easy  to 
land  a  fesv  men  not  farr  from  it  with  whom  hee  pretended  much 
might  be  done  without  any  great  opposicon,  because  we  had  noe 
fortificacon  to  the  landward.  I  acquaint  y''  Lopp  with  this,  to  shew 
you  that  sometimes  these  people  look  towards  us,  &,  notwithstanding 
the  exteriour  shew  of  friendship,  they  cordially  mean  otherwise, 
the  English  reputation  &  honour  being  an  eyesore  unto  them, 
which  will  ever  improve  as  long  as  his  !\Ia'-^  shall  be  dreaded  and 
courted  at  once.  Mons''  Colbert  wrote  hither  out  of  England,  a 
letter,  wherein  hee  assured  the  Ministers  that  he  had  at  last  gotten 


AN    ENGLISH    AtiENT    IN    PARIS  159 

a  prevayling  interest  att  Court,  &  could  doe  what  hee  pleased. 
The  whispering  discourse  here  is  that  the  Iving  will  make  all 
imaginable  efforts  to  buy  Sweden  off,  by  offering  a  sum  bj-  way 
of  a  present,  &  giving  them  more  yearly  than  they  had  from  the 
Spaniards,  which  may  prevayle,  considering  the  present  poverty 
of  those  people,  unles  the  negotiacon  be  contrequai-red. 

New  complaints  come  dayly  of  our  English  merchants  being 
much  abused  in  their  trade  in  the  Pays  Conquis.  tliat  the  French 
give  the  little  P"^'  of  Liege  those  priviledges  which  they  deny  us. 
1  wonder  how  they  can  pretend  to  court  his  ^la"''*  friendship  at 
home,  when  his  subjects  are  so  manifestly  insulted  on  abroad. 

From  Marseilles,  they  write  that  a  person  is  going  thence 
towards  Dalmatia  to  raise  a  Eegiment  of  Horse  for  the  King's 
service,  his  Amb^  at  Venice  having,  it's  said,  obtained  leave  of  the 
Republick,  as  that  of  Luca  has  granted  such  to  the  S''  Magalotti 
for  the  levy  of  three  hundred.  It's  somewhat  strange  that,  at  the 
same  time,  the  King  should  make  levies  in  all  places  of  Xtendome, 
the  Cantons  having  given  leave  for  6,000  Suisse,  at  six  crowns  a 
man,  to  be  raised  by  one  ^P  Stoupe,  for  the  French  service. 
I  hear  that  six  hundred  Scotch  are  arrived  at  Dieppe,  being  my  L'' 
Douglas's  recruits  Amb''  Molina  wrote  to  the  Spannish  Resident, 
that  he  had  caused  to  be  revoked  the  permission  granted  for  the 
raising  some  men  in  Ireland. 

I  have  a  note  from  a  Correspondent  at  Court,  which  sais  thus  : 
'  On  a  des  nouvelles  icy  que  les  Holandois  envoyent  un  Amb'"  Ex"''' 
en  Espagne  pour  obliger  la  Reyne  a  rompre  avec  la  France,  on  la 
menafer  de  partager  avec  elle  le  reste  des  Pays  Bas.' 

The  processe  against  the  S''  de  Montvergue'  goes  hard  against 
him,  &  it  seems  he  is  like  to  be  sacrifised  for  all  the  losses  this 
East  Indy  Company  has  suffered  in  the  Indyes. 

The  S''  de  Gremonville  has  sent  a  courrier  hither,  giving  an 
account  of  an  accomodation  in  the  late  pretended  affront,  &  that 
he  had  not  delivered  the  letter  his  Ma'-*'  sent  to  the  Emp'',  wherin 
the  iving  treated  him  somewhat  roughly,  but  had  given  him 
another  in  milder  termes,  the  both  being  sent  that  the  Resid',  as 
he  saw  fitt,  might  deliver  either.     These  people  are  mighty  glad 

'  Director  of  the  French  East  India  Company.  According  to  the  London  Gazette 
dated  September  4,  1671,  he  succeeded  in  clearing  himself  of  all  the  charges  made 
against  him.     See  p.  118. 


KJO  TIllC    DKsrATCHKS    OF 

tliiit   the  hrouillenc  is  thus  passrd  over,  because  all  agree  that  the 
Hesiilent  was  much  in  the  wrong. 

Tiie  C  (le  Koninpsniarc  has  engaged  himselfe  to  raise  in 
(lerniany  a  Urigade  of  21  Troops  of  Horse,  which,  he  is  to 
command,  &  is  to  have  sixty  thousand  crownes  to  make  the 
levies. 

The  present  state  of  tlie  land  forces  is  GO  thons'  foot,  to  which 
will  be  added  two  hundred  new  companies,  besides  the  troops  of 
the  King's  house  of  15  thous'  horse  that  will  be  raised  ag'  next 
spring. 

The  King  has  offred  a  thousand  pistoUs  to  any  person  that  shall 
make  a  distich  in  two  verses  to  be  putt  on  the  frontispeice  of  the 
Louvre,  which  .shall  be  approved  of  to  be  the  best,  soe  that  all  the 
witis  are  very  busy  in  France  k  Italy,  but  it's  believed  the  author 
of  the  following  distich  will  gett  the  Prize 

'  Par  Urbi  doinus  est,  urbs  orbi,  neutra  triuniphis 
Et  Pace  &  bello  par  Lodovice  tuis.' 

l'"a:  l\trick  went  hence  towards  Lisle  ye.sterday,  after  having 
been  much  caressed  by  all  persons  here. 


'/'(;  Sir  Joinqili   WUliiimxun. 

Piu'is :  Aug.  15,  '71. 
The  inclosed  '  will  give  you  all  the  news  of  this  place,  excepting 
a  new  Proposicon  made  to  the  King  by  certain  I'lulertakers  who 
have  been  some  years  digesting  it  with  some  method.  It  contains. 
princi]Mlly,  the  giving  the  King  every  day  a  million  of  livers  or  a 
hundred  thousand  pistfiUs,  in  lieu  of  all  his  revenue.  They  pretend, 
hereby,  to  ease  the  people  of  much  oppression,  as  particularly  they 
shall  pay  no  Land  Tax,  ouely  each  I'aierfamiUas  shall  ]iay  according 
to  the  number  of  children  &  servants,  it  may  be  20  sous  a  head, 
besides  a  chimney  money  &  a  new  invention  for  the  distribution 
of  salt,  wherby  the  Ua'ielles  will  amount  unto  twice  as  much  as 
ibrmerly  &  no  burthen  to  the  people.  It  seems  the  many  thou- 
sand oflicers  employed  for  the  Tallies,  l^ahelle^,  &c.  will  be  thus 
retrenched  &  consequently  so  much  saved.  There  will  be  no 
(Iriili  (I'enlri'c  .f>ir  le  rin.  This  is  likely  to  take  effect,  as  many 
believe,  t'v:  herein  the  nobility  is  not  spared. 

'  The  enclosure  is  missing. 


AN    ENGLISH    AtiENT    IN    PARIS  IGl 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris:  August  lo"',  '71  S.N. 
The  greatest  matter  of  discourse,  in  this  place,  is  the  matcli  said 
to  be  concluded  between  Monsieur  &  the  Princesse  Palatin,  in 
order  whereunto  the  P'-''^-'^'  PaJatine,  her  Aunt,^  is  going  hence 
towards  Heydelberg.  It  is  said  that  the  Ceremony  will  bee  att 
Chaalons,  in  Champagne,  about  two  months  hence,  and  his  R" 
H*""  will  meet  lier  att  Metz,  having  sent  Marshall  du  Plessis 
Praslin  to  receive  the  Princesse  in  his  name ;  her  jointure  is 
settled  at   ^.^  livers  a  year.      The    King  has  resolved  to  cause 

a  Carouzal  to  bee  made,  &  other  dirertisements,  for  the  solemnizing 
this  marriage. 

This  week,  M'  de  Louvoy  has  caused  near  two  hundred 
Commissions  to  be  deliverd  to  as  many  captains  of  foot,  with 
50  pistolls  to  each  for  the  raising  their  men,  and  it's  said,  that,  at 
the  King's  returne  from  Fontainbleau,  as  many  will  [be]  given  out 
to  other  Captains.  The  Chevaux  ler/ers,  which  are  to  consist  of  80 
Troops  of  50  men  in  each,  will  not  be  ordered  to  be  raised  before 
the  end  of  ( )ctober.  The  last  news  out  of  the  Pays  Conquis  is 
that  abundance  of  the  souldiers  have  deserted  their  colours  because 
of  the  great  fatigue  they  are  putt  to  in  working  on  the  new 
fortifications,  of  which  I  have  all  the  plans  here  ready  to  transmitt 
to  y""  Lop  by  the  first  occasion,  that  you  may  see  what  has  been 
done  there  since  the  warre.  Here  are  deputies  come  thence  to 
petition  his  Ma'-^'  that  an  Arrest  du  Conseil  be  recalled,  wherby  no 
money  is  sufiered  to  be  currant  of  the  Spannish  coyne,  excepting 
their  pistolls,  which  the  Deputies  say  is  exceedingly  to  the 
dammage  of  all  those  people. 

The  S''  ]\Ioulier,  the  King's  Resident  in  Switzerland,  writes 
hither  that  he  had  presented  a  new  memoriall  to  their  Assembly 
at  Baden,  declaring,  that  if  they  would  not  conforme  to  the  resolu- 
tion of  three  of  their  Cantons  not  to  enter  into  the  ople  Alliance, 
or  any  other  against  the  French  interest,  they  should  loose  the 
ai'rears  of  their  pension.  Their  answer  was,  that  they  were 
resolved  to  maintaine  punctually  &  execute  the  Treaty  of  a 
perpetuall  peace  &  alliance  they  have  with  the  King,  according  to 

'  Anne  tie  Gonzague,  widow  of  Edward,  Prince  Palatine. 
VOL,  V.  M 


1G2  TlIK    DICSPATC'UKS    OF 

its  tenour,  without  explaining  themselves  as  to  the  3ple  Alliance, 
they  pretoiiiling  that  such  treaty  does  not  tye  up  their  hands  from 
entiing  into  iiny  other  alliance  they  sh.ill  think  fitt.  And  as 
to  their  arrears,  they  ans'',  that  it  the  {{esident  did  not  cause  them 
to  be  paid  in  September  next,  the  13  Cantons  would  send  an 
Embassy  to  receive  them  from  tjie  King's  owne  hands.  In  the 
mean  time,  the  Troops  raising  there  are  said  to  be  near  coinpleat,  & 
that  they  will  consist  of  above  ten  thousand  Suisse.  Wee  hear 
that  the  Duke  of  Savoy  hath  made  a  new  alliance  with  the  t'athi"'-' 
Cantons,  including  the  V'^'  of  Pii'mont,  iiioi/enKnt.  some  thousand 
ducats  distributed  among  the  Cantons. 

From  Italy,  my  letters  advise  that  a  Courrier  had  passed  from 
tlie  Court  of  Spain  with  orders  to  all  the  Spaunish  Vice  Roys  on 
the  Mediterrau :  to  seise  on,  by  way  of  reprise,  all  the  English  ships 
&  goods  they  can,  imagining  that  what  was  lately  done  att 
Panama  was  by  orders  from  England. 

They  write  from  IJochelle  that  ir  Colbert  du  Teron,  Intendant 
there,  has  received  orders  to  equip  out  twenty  of  the  King's  sliips. 
but  to  this  I  cannot  give  much  credit  as  very  unlikely. 

The  C  de  Molina's  Mayor  domo,  about  8  days  since,  passed 
this  way  towards  Inlanders,  with  despatches  from  Madrid,  but  at 
I'eronne  all  his  paquetts  were  taken  from  him,  I  know  not  whether 
bv  order  or  not ;  however  the  Spanuisli  Resident  has  made  his 
complaints  att  Court. 

The  King  has  had  a  new  proposicou  given  in  by  certain 
Undertakers,  who  will  give  him  a  million  of  livers  every  day,  & 
pretend  to  ease  the  people  of  much  oppression  as  the  paying 
of  tuxes  1*1:  wine  duties.  The  foundation  is  a  certain  Roll  tax  or 
head  money,  without  excepting  the  nobility,  &  a  general!  Chimney 
money,  &  a  new  invention  for  the  distribucou  of  salt,  which  will 
bring  in  twice  as  much  as  the  Gahellat  have  formerly  dono.  The 
land  will  not  thus  be  taxed,  but  every  man  according  to  the 
number  of  his  children  &  servants  shall  be  rated  at  soe  much,  it 
may  be  two  shillings  a  head.  This,  every  body  looks  on  as  most 
feaseable,  &  has  been  some  j-ears  digesting,  but  the  nobility  will 
l)ee  much  troubled  if  it  take  effect,  as  in  all  probability  it  will. 

The  Rope  has  ])roposed  to  the  King,  that  in  case  hee  will  wage 
warre  with  the  Turkes,  besides  what  threes  hee  shall  desire  out 
of  Italy,  hee  shall  have  great  surams  &  notable  ayds  by  dissolving 
of  severall  Religious  Orders,  tenths,  &  the  like. 


AN    ENCrLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  ]  63 


To  Lord  Arli'iKjton. 

Paris:  Aug.  19,  '71. 

I  have  advice  from  Fontainbleau,  that  the  last  courriei-  from 
Heydelberg  brought  new  difficultys  as  to  the  match  for  Monsieur, 
the  Princesse  Palatin  being  not  inclined  to  change  her  religion, 
which  is  a  necessary  article  in  the  marriage  ;  &  at  Court  they 
believe  that  the  scruple  will  be  soon  over,  soe  that  allready 
preparations  are  making  for  some  great  solemnities,  the  designe 
of  which  is  kept  as  secret  as  if  it  were  a  matter  of  state.  The 
ArchBp  of  Thoulouze  is  made  Grand  Au^moaier  de  la  lieyne, 
which  is  looked  on  as  an  '  effet  du  credit  de  M''  de  Lyonne,'  that 
in  case  of  Regency  he  might  have  a  great  share  in  the  Minidt'ir. 

The  King  &  Court  divert  themselves  extremely  att  Fontain- 
bleau ;  however,  he  returns  to  Versailles  in  8  daj's. 

It  is  believed.  &  w*''  much  confidence,  that  there  will  bee  war 
this  winter.  As  yett  wee  cannot  give  any  certaine  account  where  it 
may  be.  If  the  dependences  in  Flanders  bee  not  adjusted  in  time, 
it  is  indubitable  that,  even  in  the  winter,  some  place  will  liee 
beseiged.  By^  the  end  of  September,  there  will  bee  compleate 
in  Ffrance  a  hundred  &  twenty  thousand  foot  &  thirty  five  thou- 
sand horse.' 

The  Spannish  Resident  carried  to  Court,  the  last  week,  a  letter 
of  condoleance  upon  the  Duke  of  Anjou's  death,  when,  being  asked 
bj'  the  ilinister  why  the  Queen  sent  not  an  Envoy  on  purpose,  hee 
replyed  that  her  Cath*"  Ma'-''',  having  heard  that  the  King  had 
refused  to  admit  of  her  Amb'^  she  thought  an  Envoye  would  bee 
much  lesse  acceptable. 

Letters  out  of  Spaine  advise  that  the  preparations  for  the 
Indyes  begin  to  slacken  upon  the  advice  they  had  received  of  the 
English  having  left  Panama.  Wee  hear  out  of  (Termany  that 
the  affaires  of  Cullen  grow  dayly  more  despei'ate,  &  upon  them  are 
grounded  here  some  thoughts  of  action  to  counter  the  party 
engaged  for  the  defence  of  the  Citty.  It  seems  the  Holland  & 
Kieuburg  Envoijrs  have  had  a  smart  dispute  for  jjrecedence,  of 
which,  for  the  allegation's  sake,  I  transmit  to  y''  Lopp  particulars. 

In  cipher,  deciphered. 


164  THE    DESPATCHES    OF 

7V(  Lord  Arlhuiiiin. 

I'mis  :  AuR.  •2!^'^  '71. 

lleiv  hatli  liappned  this  week  a  niiitter  that  inny  prove 
of  great  coiise(|uence.  It  seems  tlie  Governour  of  the  l^ow 
Countveys,  visiting  the  frontiers,  found  a  Biireav  estaVjlished  hy 
the  French,  (as  hee  pretends.)  on  the  Spannish  territories,  where- 
upon hee  sent  llie  d'ov''  of  Vpre  to  Jjisle  with  complaints,  but  had 
noe  otlier  answer  than  that  tliey  should  bee  represented  to  the 
King.  Whereupon  some  Spannisli  .souldiers  were  sent  to  beat 
ddwne  the  Biircn'i  k  take  away  tlie  Registers,  which  they  did,  & 
the  M"  d'Humiers  has  given  the  King  an  accomit  of  it,  who  has. 
I  hear,  sent  orders  that  the  Bvrean.  be  sett  up  again  in  the  same 
place  de  iji-r  on  ile  forre.  &  that  some  troops  be  gott  (<>gt>tlier  (d 
see  it  done  &  authorise  the  same  in  case  the  Spainiiards  siiould 
endeavour  to  oppose  it.  On  whatever  side  the  wrong  bee,  it  is 
most  certain  that  the  rules  of  the  Arbitration  are  infringed  on. 
They  have  also  given  his  Ma'-"  an  account  that  his  troo])s  diminish 
dayly  by  the  vast  numbers  that  desert  the  service,  whereupon  the 
King  has  resolved  to  grant  a  generall  amnisty  with  a  promise  of 
augmenting  their  pay  in  ca.se  they  will  returne,  because  it  is 
advised  that  the  Dutch  have  entertained  most  of  the  deserters. 
Another  thing  troubles  the  Court,  since  the  letters  out  of 
Germany  mention  the  Emperor's  inclination  to  make  the  P'*' 
Charles  of  Lorrain  King  of  the  Komans. 

The  levyes  in  all  parts  goe  on  with  much  vigour  as  well  as 
the  maritime  preparations. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris:   Sep.  2,  '71. 

I  much  suspect  y''  news  from  Algier,  because  here  have  be[e]u 
letters  from  Genes  of  a  later  date  that  speak  only  of  our  Admirall's 
being  before  that  pLace  with  ten  men  of  warre  without  mentioning 
any  action,  only  one  which  makes  a  great  noyse  here,  viz' — his 
having  taken  3  French  ships  with  contreband  goods  on  board  & 
hang"*  the  three  patrons  as  a  proceeding  pretended  to  be  tres 
rigorous  &  unjustifyable. 

The  Court  is  come  from  Fontainbleau  &  most  intent  on  the 
new  levies. 


AX   EXGLItiH    .IGEXT    I.\    PAKIS  1  U-j 

S""  H.  Jones  '  is  gone  towards  Germany,  (as  bee  pretemls,)  in 
order  to  the  raising  most  of  bis  Regiment,  though  the  officers  are 
to  bee  all  English  &  I  believe  old  ones  that  served  in  the  old  times. 

The  busines  of  the  Bureau  is  accomoded,  the  French  having  set 
it  up  backed  by  2,000  foot  &  600  horse  &  the  Governor  of  Flanders 
disowning  the  proceeding. 

M""  de  Lyoniie  continues  in  a  very  week  condition  &  many 
doubt  of  his  recovery,  &  as  many  will  lament  bis  losse  as  a  very 
complaisant  &  civill  person  to  strangers. 

Notwithstanding  the  hopes  given  by  the  last  ordinary,  this  day 
brings  in  the  Venetians  absolute  denying  the  French  any  levyes  iu 
Dalmatia ;  metbinks  France  being  soe  populous  no  nation  should 
draine  itselfe  to  send  men  into  it.     Bada. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Sep.  5'\  '71. 

I  have  the  favour  of  yours  by  the  last,  but  my  L''  Ambassador 
is  not  yett  arrived.  I  believe  the  winds  have  been  contrary.  It 
seems,  when  I  told  j-ou  in  my  last  of  M""  de  Lyonne's  being  in  a 
desperate  condicon.  that  he  was  actually  dead  though  not  publickly 
knowne.^  His  son  ^  has  the  I'eversion  of  his  secretaryship,  but  is 
thought  too  young  for  the  ministry,  which  it's  said  is  shoulderd 
upon  the  Arch  Bp  of  Tholouze,  but  I  believe  M''  Colbert  will 
endeavor  the  getting  both  for  his  brother  in  England  moijenant 
some  sums.  This  night,  after  media  nox,  the  King  gives  a  great 
regal  at  Versailles  to  celebrate  the  honour  of  his  birthday.  The 
Court  is  much  dissatisfyed  with  the  Venetians  for  refusing  the 
levyes  they  had  at  first  granted  for  the  King.  Cap.  Crow's' 
busines  has  made  a  great  noyse  here,  but  nothing  so  much  a 
talke  as  Blood's'  being  forgiven.     There  is  some  body  corresponds 

'  Sii-  Henry  Jones,  formerly  lieutenant  and  captain  in  the  Earl  of  Oxford's 
regiment  of  Horse  Guards.  He  raised  a  regiment  for  the  French  king.  KiUed  at 
the  siege  of  Maestricht  in  lt'.73. 

-  He  died  on  September  1.  ^  Louis  de  Lionne,  Marquis  de  Berny. 

'  Thomas  Crow,  Captain  of  the  'Merlin,'  arrested  'for  failing  to  do  his  duty 
towards  the  Dutch  men-of-war  who  refused  to  strike  to  the  king's  flag.'  S.  P.,  Dodi. 
1671,  p.  4.S3. 

'  Thomas  Blood,  son  of  Colonel  Thomas  Blood,  arrested  on  the  charge  of 
stealing  the  crown.     Evelyn  says  of  this:  'How  he  came  to  be  pardoned  ...  I 


1()(!  THE   DKbl'ATCIJKS   OK 

vi'iy  puiii'liKilly  lieiv  &  gives  a  strange  discriplioii  of  affaires  iu 
Engluiul ;  it  might  be  found  out  at  the  J'ostliouse  if  a  search  were 
niatlo.  If  you  pU'ase  to  pay  M""  Nott,  hee  will  call  upon  you  for 
the  money  &  returne  it  to  mee. 

To  Lord  Arlimjton. 

Paris  :  Sep.  5,  71. 

My  Lord  Ambassador  is  not  yett  arrived,  1  believe  because  the 
winds  have  not  be[e]n  favorable.  The  greatest  busines  here,  at 
present,  is  the  settlement  of  the  forreigne  ministry,  since  Mons''  de 
Lyonne's  death,  into  other  hands.  His  son  has  the  reversion,  &  not- 
withstanding that  hee  has  been  nursed  up  in  the  busines,  it  seems 
it  is  not  thought  fitt,  as  vet,  that  hee  shall  have  the  function. 
1  hear  that  the  Arch  Bp  of  Thoulouze  hath  the  charge,  at  present, 
of  all  forreigne  affaires,  but  many  believe,  that  motjemini  a  good 
sum,  the  place  may  bee  bought  for  Ambassador  Colbert,  if  the 
other  two  ministers  doe  not  spoile  the  intrigue.  M''  Colbert  was 
sent  by  the  King  a  little  before  J\l'"  de  Lyonne's  death  to  speak 
with  him  about  severall  affaires,  it  in  generall  of  all  the  negotia- 
tions now  on  foot;  after  which,  hee  putt  a  seal  on  all  hi>  papers. 
There  are  many  reasons  why  the  death  of  this  Minister  will  putt 
the  present  intrigues  to  a  little  kind  of  confusion,  no  other  having 
any  share  in  them  k.  the  King  having  wholy  reived  upon  his 
conduct.' 

I  hear  that  his  M.  Xtian  Ma'-^  has  resolved  to  add  to  Marshall 
Cre(juy's  army  in  Lorraine  as  many  men  as  will  make  up  seven 
thousand  horse  and  thirteen  thousand  foot,  upon  the  advice,  sent  by 
the  s''  generall,  that  the  Lnp"  Troops  were  drawne  up  &  marching 
along  the  Rhine.  Everybody  here  talks  of  w-arre,  but  none  that  can 
say  positively  where.  The  busines  of  the  Jhti-cua  in  Flanders  is 
accomoded.  There  are  many  that  suspect  an  intrigue  between  the 
French  &  Dutch.  If  there  be  any  it  is  very  much  dissembled,  both 
parties  pretending  to  annoy  each  other  in  all  circumstances.  It  is 
said  that  France  &  Portugall  is  \_sic^  agreed  to  root  out  the 
Hollanders  in  the  Indies,  particularly  at  Cochin,   but  I  doe  not 

never  could  come  to  understand.'  He  was  pardoned  on  August  81, 1('>71  (see  .S.  P., 
Dom.,  1671,  p.  460). 

'  M.  de  Pomponnc  succeeded  M.  de  Lyonne  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  (sec 
p.  167). 


AX    EXGLISn    AGENT    I.\    FAKIS  167 

hear  of  any  considerable  forces  the  Frencli  have  that  way.  At 
last  the  marriage  between  Monsieur  &  the  Princesse  Palatin  is 
said  to  be  agreed  on,  &  the  Marshall  du  Plessis  to  goe  the  loth 
currant,  in  order  to  the  conducting  her  into  France. 

This  night  the  King  makes  a  great  regal  after  midnight 
(because  he  may  not  eat  flesh)  in  solemnity  of  his  birthday. 

To  Sir  Joscjih  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Sep.  9,  '71. 

I  told  you  that  the  Arch  Bp  of  Thoulouze  bad  the  forreigne 
Ministry  put  into  his  hands,  but  now  I  must  unsay  it  &  assure  you 
that  the  King  has  made  choyce  of  IM"^  de  Pompone,  his  pi'esent 
Amb^  in  Sweden,  as  a  person  he  thinks  more  capable  of  that 
charge,  being  of  excellent  dispatch  &  well  versed  in  all  affaires. 
A  courrier  was  sent  to  him  with  the  compliment,  &,  in  the  mean- 
time, untill  he  shall  have  finished  his  embassy,  his  Ma'-*  has  put  the 
management  into  M""  de  Louvoy's  hands,  a  comj)  iVesprit  of  M''  le 
Tellier,  therby  to  bring  his  son  ^  into  the  conseil  d-estat.  The 
C"  de  Koningsmark  has  sent  a  Courrier  with  excuses  hither,  that 
he  cannot  performe  what  he  undertook,  since  none  of  the  Princes 
will  let  him  raise  men  in  the  Empire. 

~Sl''  Nott  tells  me  [he]  has  waited  upon  you  for  iP  Dean's  money,^ 
but  that  you  knew  not  the  sum  I  laid  out,  which  I  repeat  to  you 
was  thirty  five  crownes,  or  in  livers,  104.  It  is  no  hard  matter  to 
calculate  the  sum  &  will  be  a  kindnes  the  sooner  it  shall  be 
returned. 

To  Lonl  Arlington. 

Paris:  Sep.  16,  '71. 

By  the  two  papers  inclosed,  your  Lop  will  see  how  the  deme^li' 
at  Vienna  is  accomoded  to  this  King's  great  satisfaccon,  &  how 

'  Louis  Fran(,'ois  Le  Tellier. 

^  Probably  the  son  of  Sir  Anthony  Deane,  Charles  II.'s  shipwright  at  Ports- 
mouth. This  money  was  for  Mr.  Dean's  outfit.  In  a  letter  dated  June  21,  1671, 
Perwich  says :  '  I  have  bought  il'  Dean  a  good  substantiall  suite  that  is  decent  & 
lasting,  which  with  stockins,  shooes,  hat  &  garnitur  cost  me  sixty-five  livers.  Ilis 
going  by  the  messenger  will  cost  me  twelve  crownes,  'besides  which  I  doe  not 
reckon  to  you  the  expenoe  I  have  been  at  here  for  his  entertainment  because  it 
is  considerable,  hee  having  dined  &  lodged  with  me.'  According  to  the  S.  P.,  Dom., 
1671,  Sh'  Anthony  Deane's  son  was  in  France  at  this  time. 


1(58  TDE    DESI'ATCIIKS   OF 

partial  the  Nuncios  were  in  bringing  it  about.'  Many  believe  that 
there  is  a  great  mistery  in  all  that  busines  &  that  it  was  continued 
on  purpose  bj'both  parties  only  to  disguise  the  intelligence  wherein 
it  is  thought  they  live. 

Our  letters,  from  Spain,  say  that  the  flota  from  the  Indyes  is 
safely  arrived,  laden  with  six  millions  of  pieces  of  f  &  one  of  mer- 
chandise. 

The  levies  here  goe  on  but  slowly,  &  from  abroad  they  will  have 
but  a  lame  account  of  those  they  desired  to  raise.  It  is  said  here 
that  the  Prince  of  Tuskany  consented  to  them,  provided  they 
would  take  no  married  men,  artisans  or  peasants. 

Paris :  Deeemb  10''',  '71. 

Being  arrived  only  since  the  last  post,  this  will  serve  to  pay  you 
most  humble  acknowledgments  for  your  kindnesse  when  I  was  in 
Eng'',  beseeching  you  that  you  will  please  to  render  mee  happy  iu 
the  continuance  of  it." 

My  Lord  of  Sunderland  ^  went  forward  yesterday,  as  did  also  JP' 
Nott  back  for  England,  liut  his  few  hours  stay  here  gave  mee  noe 
time  to  send  anything  by  him. 

By  letters  from  Lyon,  we  hear  of  M''  de  Lauzun's  being  arrived 
soe  far  &  lodged  in  the  same  Chamber  where  IP  Fouquet  did,  on 
his  way  to  Pignerol.  It  seems  he  has  been  soe  ravingly  melan- 
choly upon  the  way  as  not  to  eat  or  speak ;  only  once,  at  a  dangerous 
passage,  when  he  was  desired  to  gett  out  of  the  Coach,  he  said  he 
would  not,  since  no  danger  could  compare  with  that  he  had  run  of 
his  Ma"'"  displeasure. 

To  liord  Aiihujlon. 

Paris  :  Deeemb  fr,,  '71. 

Since  my  coming  hither,  the  greatest  discourse  has  been  of  a 
manifesto,  said  to  i)ee  penned  by  Mons''  Pelisson  ■*  (the  faniousoratour), 
&  to  be  suddainly  published.  Its  contents  are  said  to  be  consisting 
iu  severall  neighbouring  I'rinces' pretentions  against  the  Dutch,  as 
particularly  the  P"  of  Liege,  the  Bp.  of  Munster,  (tc".    A  few  days 

'  See  letter  dated  July  22,  1671. 

'  During  October  and  November  Pcrwich  was  evidently  over  in  England  (see 
Montagu-Arlington  Letters,  p.  50.5). 

'  Eobert  Spencer,  second  Earl  of  Sunderland. 

'  Paul  Fontanier  Pellisson,  the  French  Academician. 


A:f    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  169 

will  discover  the  bnsinesse.  In  the  mean  time  I  hear  that  yester- 
day the  Heer  Grotius  sent  to  demand  an  Audience,  pretending  that 
he  had  received  a  letter  from  the  States  Generall  to  the  M.  Xtian 
King,  wherein  they  offer  him  satisfaction  in  whatever  complaints 
his  Mo}-'  hath  made  against  them,  and  that  if  the  King  would 
daigne  to  receive  the  letter,  the  Amb"'  was  ready  to  enter  into 
negotiation ;  otherwise  that  he  had  orders  to  goe  home  again. 

Mons''  de  Louvoy  goes  hence  on  Munday  towards  Flanders,  to 
make  a  round  through  all  the  garrisons  there,  &  to  retui-ne  hither 
before  the  King  begins  his  journey  into  Champagne,  which  will 
bee  about  the  20"'  of  January,  by  which  time  all  the  new  levyes, 
&  some  other  troops,  are  oi'dered  to  be  there  for  a  generall  review. 

The  Dutch  Amb' '  hath  written  out  of  England  that  ye  King 
of  England  had  satisfied  him  as  to  his  adhering  to  the  League  with 
other  circumstances  of  friendship,  which  gives  occasion  of  much 
discourse  here.^ 

A  list  of  books  is  preparing  to  be  sent  y'^  Lopp  with  the  price. 

To  Sir  Josej'h  Williamsan. 

Paris  :  Decemb  23"'    71. 

My  last  told  you  how  the  Dutch  Ambassador  had  desired  an 
Audience,  which  has  been  since  named  him  to  be  on  Sunday  last, 
but  the  day  come,  hee  was  remitted  to  this  day.  What  the  result 
will  bee  many  expect  with  impatience,  since  most  believe  it  may 
not  be  too  favorable  for  the  Hollanders.  However,  hee  is  loaden 
with  overtures,  in  order  to  the  giving  these  people  satisfaction. 
When  the  Courrier,  that  came  last  night,  shall  returne,  you  may 
have  a  more  particular  account  of  all. 

On   Munday,  my  L''  Amb'',  accompanyed  by  all  the  English 

'  V'an  Beuninghen  had  been  sent  over  to  England  in  April,  when  the  Dutch 
discovered  Louis's  intention  to  go  to  Flanders.  The  Dutch  feared  a  union  between 
Charles  and  Louis  and  charged  Van  Beuninghen  to  demand  (1)  the  admission  of 
the  Emperor  and  the  other  princes  of  Europe  into  the  Triple  Alliance,  or  a  separate 
treaty  to  be  made  between  England,  Sweden,  Holland,  and  the  Princes  of  Europe, 
by  which  each  one  must  help  to  defend  the  other,  if  necessary ;  (2)  that  the 
contest  about  Surinam  should  come  to  an  end  and  an  agreement  [be]  made  which 
would  fix  for  the  future  the  relations  of  the  English  and  T)utch  companies  of  the 
'  Indes  Orientales.'  Charles  had  assured  Colbert  that  the  mission  of  Van  Beuninghen 
would  result  in  nothing  and  Louis  was  satisfied.     (Mignet,  vol.  iii.  p.  204.) 

-  In  cipher,  deciphered. 


170  THE    KESPATfllKS    DV 

gentry  in  Towne,  had  audieDce  of  Monsieur  &  afterwards  of  Madam, 
to  coinplim'  them  on  their  marriage,  as  had  also  the  other 
Amljassadors  I'v:  Kesidents.' 

1  cannot  well  tell  when  the  K*.  setts  out  for  Champagne,  but 
most  believe  it  may  be  the  IS"*  of  Jan. 

M''  de  Louvoy  is  said  to  be  gone  for  Flanders,  though  once  his 
journey  was  put  oH'. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Deccnib  24',  '71. 

All  that  ofl'ers  at  present  worthy  your  Lopp's  knowledge  is  tliat 
since  my  last,  the  King,  att  the  Dutch  Ambassadour's  request,  ap- 
pointed last  Sunday  for  his  Audience,  that  then  hee  remitted  him 
till  yesterday,  &  thence  till  his  Ma""'''  returne  from  Champagne. 
Thus  your  Ijopp  may  perceive  how  ill  a  correspondence  there  is 
between  them.  Now  many  blame  the  Ambassadour  for  having 
declared  his  having  a  submissive  letter  from  the  States,  when  as 
their  orders  were,  that  in  case  hee  was  well  assured  of  the  French 
designs  to  attaque  Holland,  hee  should  in  such  case  deliver  the 
letter,  which  offers  satisfaction  in  all  the  just  causes  of  complaint 
his  M.  Xtian  Ma'-^  may  haveag'  them,  particularly  notionating  the 
late  differences  in  point  of  Commerce.  The  Dutch  having  hitherto 
huffed  very  much,  it  does  the  more  encourage  these  people  when 
they  find  them  trucking  with  overtures  of  satisfaction. 

The  King  goes  hence  the  5"'  of  Jan.,  but  no  ministers  follow 
him,  e.xcepting  the  Marq'  of  Louvoy.  The  hidden  discourse  is  as 
if  Ilis  .Ma'-'''  intended  imediately  to  take  possession  of  Juliers  upon 
agreement  with  the  Duke  of  Nieuburg,  which  place  will,  in  this 
case,  bee  able  to  intercept  all  Correspondence  between  Holland  & 
Maestricht. 

To  Jjord  ArUnijton. 

Paris :  Deceiiib  26"',  '71. 

Since  the  dispatching  away  the  last  courrier,  little  hath  hap- 
pned  here. 

The  King  has  ordred  20  companies  of  the  French  guards  to 
march  this  day  towards  Chaalons,  &  seven  of  the  Snit'se  Companies 
goe  hence  to-morrow.  His  Mat''  intending  to  follow  them  on  the 
,5th  of  January.      Some  believe  hee  may  go  as  far  as  Metz.  whither 

'  See  p.  107. 


A^    EXCJLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  171 

the  Marshall  Crequi  is  drawing  liis  oien,  in  order  to  the  review  to 
be  made  att  Chaalons.  after  which,  it  is  thought  the  King  will 
[march]  a  body  towards  the  Rhine. 

I  hear  that  au  expresse  is  sent  into  Spaine,  with  orders  to  the 
Marq*  de  Villards  to  informe  the  Queen  of  Spaine  of  the 
complaints  this  King  hath  against  the  Dutch,  &  to  demand  a  posi- 
tive answer  whether  shee  be  inclined  to  enter  iu  a  league  with 
them,  as  hee  is  informed  from  the  Hague  shee  is,  &  would  assist  the 
Hollanders,  if  thej'  should  bee  attacqued.  In  which  case,  the 
French  Ambassador  is  ordered  to  declare,  that  his  most  Xtian  ila'-' 
does  withdraw  his  parolle  donnee,  wherein  hee  engaged  himselfe  not 
to  act  against  the  Monarch}-  of  Spaine  during  the  King's  minority. 

It  is  said  that  his  Ma'-'  hath  created  a  new  charge  in  favor  of 
Mons''  Colbert,  entitled  '  Director  Generall  of  all  ]\Iariue  Affaires,'  as 
it  were,  tutour  to  the  C'  of  Vermandois,  xidm"  of  France,  which 
hee  is  to  enjoy  untill  the  young  Prince  comes  of  age. 

il"'  de  Pompone  is  expected  here  '  in  a  few  days,  &  M''  Courtiu 
has  written  to  Court  that  his  embassy  into  Sweden  will  bee  needless, 
since  the  other  is  said  to  have  concluded  a  Treaty  of  alliance 
between  France  &  Sweden. - 

It  is  thought  the  Dutch  Ambassador,  upon  the  late  marques 
de  nu-spris,  may  think  of  returning  home. 

The  P'^'^  of  Conde  has  sent  one,  du  Verger,  to  make  his  owne 
equipage  &  provisions  of  forrage,  &c.  near  the  Rhine,  the  Prince 
being  willing  to  be  at  the  espence  himselfe  &  not  to  make  use  of 
the  King's. 

Monsieur  Gremonville  hath  sent  a  Courier  by  which  hee 
advises  ye  King  ot  Ffrance  that  the  Empei'our  had  sent  for  him  & 
told  him  that  hee  did  know  that  ye  King  of  Ffrance  designed  to 
send  an  army  to  assist  ye  Elector  of  Cologne  against  ye  City,  that 
hee  desired  him  to  let  ye  King  of  Ffrance  know  that  hee  could 
not  suffer  any  forreigne  forces  to  come  into  ye  Empire  ;  upon  which, 
I  heare  that  ye  King  of  Ffrance  hath  sent  orders  to  Monsieur  de 
Chamilly  to  block  up  Cologne,  to  prevent  ye  Emperour's  forces, 
which  are  yet  in  Hungaiy.     A  few  days  will  discover  the  truth. ^ 

Since  I  wrote  this,  I  hear  the  King  has  diflferred  his  iourney 
till  the  20th  of  Jan. 

'  From  his  Embassy  in  Sweden.  -  See  letter  dated  .Tanuary  la,  IGTi. 

'  In  cipher,  deciphered. 


172  THE    DI'iSl'ATCHES   OF 

To  Sir  Jiiseiili    Willi(iiiu<(>ii. 

I'luis:  Deceinb  30"',  '71. 

Tlif  hoiiovu-  of  yoiir  first,  since  I  came  hither,  I  received  yester- 
day, for  wliich  1  most  humbly  thank  you.  As  to  tlie  edicts  you 
mention,  1  am  making  a  collection,  &  shall  transmit  them  by  the 
first  opportunity,  but  those  that  are  most  inateriall  you  shall  have 
by  the  next  ordinary.  As  I  remember,  I  told  you  one  particular  at 
parting  relating  to  the  jn-esL-nt  Qtnwre  in  yonrs,  that  since  the 
Treaty  of  1G62  '  between  the  French  &  Dutch,  the  French  began 
to  raise  the  Impositions,  as  well  on  the  latter  as  other  forreigners, 
but  that  the  Hollanders  first  began  the  blunt  prohibition  of  French 
importations,  (&  incited  the  (governor  of  Flanders  to  doe  the  like). 
Whereupon,  the  King  did  resolve  the  like,  &  then  the  Northerne 
Company  was  established  here.  It  is  believed  here,  that  notwith- 
standing the  Emp'''  message  hither,  declaring  hee  could  not  suS'er 
any  forreigne  troops  to  come  into  the  Empire,  either  Cullen  is 
allready  besieged  or  will  very  suddainly  bee  see,  orders  having  been 
said  to  be  sent  hence  to  M'  de  ("hamilly  to  that  purpose,  &  the 
Imp"  forces  being  now  in  Hungary.  And  I  was  told  yesterday, 
that  a  certain  sum  of  6i^  th""  louis  d'or  had  been  carried  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Uliine  &  delivered  to  persons  in  disguise,  which 
some  conjecture  to  be  ]?runswickers. 

The  King's  journey  begins  not  on  the  5th,  as  was  said.  The 
Dutch  Amb""  told  the  Introductor,  that  if  the  King  would  not 
give  him  an  Audience  of  business,  hee  desired  to  have  one  of  Cowje. 

On  ilunday,  the  29"',  his  Wa'-'  entertained  Madam  &  Monsieur 
at  Versailles,  at  which  time,  it's  said,  M""  Colbert  came  in  hast  to 
tell  him  that  the  new  raised  German  troops  were  disorderly  & 
beat  the  French  because  their  pay  dislikes  them. 

We  shall  hear  the  same  thing  of  the  Irish  liegiment  very  sud- 
dainly, since  they  are  hardly  used. 

'  In  10(;2  the  Dutcli  had  taken  advantage  of  an  embassy  sent  to  congratulate 
the  King  of  France  on  his  marriage  with  the  Infanta  of  Spain  to  conclude  an 
alliance  with  the  Dutch  which  would  ensure  them  her  support  in  the  event  of  a 
rupture  with  England.  The  contracting  parties  were  to  assist  each  other  hi  main- 
taining all  their  possessions,  rights,  and  privileges,  that  of  the  Dutch  fishing  being 
expressly  named,  and  in  case  of  either  being  attacked  the  other  was  to  declare  war 
against  the  enemy  before  the  end  of  four  months.  (See  Davies,  Hist,  of  UollaniJ, 
vol.  iii.  p.  IG.) 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  ]  7-i 

The  letter,  from  the  States  to  the  Iviug,  is  not  so  submissive  as 
was  said,  but  only  imagining  that  his  present  discontent  with  them 
proceeds  from  choquings  in  point  of  Trade,  that  thev  were  ready 
to  reduce  all  things  to  the  state  they  were  at  the  Treaty  of  1(562. 


To  Sii-  Joseph  ]Villiarnson. 

Paris  :  Jan  2-',  1G72. 

After  the  having  wished  your  honour  the  succession  of  many 
prosperous  New  Years  to  attend  your  great  worthiness  &  merit,  I 
must  beg  your  honoui-'s  excuse  for  not  writing  by  the  last  post, 
there  being  then  nothing  of  novelty  extant.  We  expect  every 
hour  to  hear  of  a  battle,  nay,  the  letters  from  Chalons  mention 
that  there  has  been  one  to  great  loss  on  both  sides,  but  we  must 
expect  further  contirmatiou. 

il''  de  Schomberg  is  gone  for  IVpignon  to  hinder  the  Spaniards 
from  renewing  the  incursions  they  have  lately  [made],  &  the  Count 
de  Koningsmark's  regiments  marching  to  his  assistance,  he  himself 
staying  here,  after  all  the  discourse  of  his  going  to  command  in  the 
Sweed's  Army. 

M'"  de  Valbel '  is  sailed  with  8  men  of  war  &  many  barks  with 
provisions  for  the  relief  of  Messina,  which  people  have  declared  that, 
if  they  be  not  succoured  before  New  Year's  Day,  thev  would  be 
forced  to  make  the  best  composition  they  could. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson} 

Jan.  2,  167.\. 
'  Les  lettres  de  Madrid  portent  que  les  grandz  appretz  de  guerre, 
du  Roy  tres  Chrestien  commencent  a  allarmer  cette  Cour  et  a  la 
reveiller  de  I'espece  d'assoupissement,  ou  elle  a  este  jusqu'icy,  que  la 
Reine  Catholique  faict  presentement  tenir  devant  elle  un  nouveau 
conseil,  qu'elle  a  estably  pour  les  [sic]  des  Pays  Bas,  et  que  sa  reso- 
lution touchant  les  Hollaudois  est  de  les  secourir  secretement  sans 
se  declarer  en  leur  faveur  en  cas  de  rupture  avec  la  France,  de  peur 
d'attirer  sur  les  Pays  Bas  de  sa  Maj*^  Catholique  les  amies  du  Roy 
ti"6s  Chrest,  et  afin  aussy  d'empescher  autant  que  faire  se  pourra 
la  ruine  des  affaires  des  ditz  Hollandois,  en  leurs  fournissant  des 

'  Jean  Baptiste,  Chevalier  de  Valbelle. 
-  The  first  portion  of  this  letter  is  missing. 


]7'1-  TIIK    DKSI'ATCIIKS    OK 

luuuitions  de  guerre  et  de  bouche,  en  licentiaut  des  trouppes  pour 
les  faire  passer  fl  leur  service,  en  couppant  les  vivres  aux  trouppes 
de  sa  Maj**'  tri^sj  Chrest,  et  enfin,  en  favorisant,  autant  qu'il  sera 
possible,  les  ditz  Ilollaiiclois,  In  conservation  des  I'ays  Bas  de  sa 
Maj'"  Gtli:  estant  reganli'  par  le  conwil  d'Jispagne  coiunic  insepa- 
rablem'  attaclie  a  celle  des  Provinces  Unies. 

'  Mons''  (li-dtius,  Ami)''  de  Hollande,  voyani:  que  le  Koy  ne  luy 
avoit  pas  dunne  Mercredi  I'Audiance.  f|u'on  luy  avuit  faict  esperer,  a 
renvoye  le  courier,  que  Mess'"  les  Estatz  luy  avoyent  depesche,  pour 
luy  porter  la  lettre  qu'ils  ont  escritte  au  Uoy,  et  il  leursa  demande, 
par  cette  voye,  de  nouveaux  ordres,  touchant  ce  qu'il  avoit  a  faire,  et 
pour  scavoir  s'il  doibt  se  retirer.  n'augurant  rien  de  bon  pour  leur 
estat  du  delay  de  cette  Aiidiance  sur  le  poinct  du  depart  du  Hoy  et 
de  la  inarclie  des  trouppes. 

'  L'on  a  advis  de  la  Have,  (jue  le  I'rince  d'Oranges  est  sur  le 
poinct  d'estre  pourveu  de  la  charge  de  Capitaine  General  des 
J'rovinces  Unies. 

'  Le  Regiment  de  Cavallerie  de  Piedmont  de  2,000  chevaux,  leves 
en  ce  pays  pour  le  service  du  Hoy,  est  arrive  a  Bar  sur  Seine. 

•  Ti'on  a  nouvellem'  arreste  a  Paris,  par  ordre  du  Roy,  le  MaiYniis 
de  Ciiandenier,'  cy-devant  Capita[i]ne  des  Gardes  du  Corps  de  sa 
^Maj*^',  le(]uel  a  este  conduit  dans  le  chasteau  de  Loches,  en  Tourraine, 
pour  n'avoir  pas  vouln  demeurer  en  son  exil  de  Bourges.  sunpioy  il  a 
diet  qu'il  estoit  oblige  a  sa  ]\Iajeste  d'avoir  pourveu  a  sa  subsistance 
en  le  faisant  mettre  en  prison,  n'ayant  pas  de  (juoy  subsister 
autrem'. 

'  Mons''  de  Turenne  accompagne  le  Roy  dans  son  voyage  et  par- 
tira  deux  jours  devant  pour  aller  a  Metz.  La  plus  part  des  Princes 
et  grands  Seigneurs  de  la  Conr  marclient  anssi  et  partiront  quel- 
ques  jours  avant  sa  Maj'' . 

'  L'on  a  receu  de  nouveaux  advis  de  Cologne,  ([ui  porleut  que 
raccomniodem'  de  cette  ville  avcp  son  Arolievesque,- qxie  I'oncroyoit 
rompu,  s'est  renoue  et  conclud  a  I'advantage  de  son  Alt.  Electo- 
rale,  que  la  garnison  Hollandoise  en  doibt  sortir,  et  que  la  ville 
demeurera  neutre,  en  cas  de  rupture  entre  le  diet  Electeur  et  les 
Provinces  Unies.' 

'  Fvan(;ois  de  Eocliecliouart,  Maiquis  de  Chandenicr,  IGll-Ki'JG  ;  di.sgiaced  in 
1051. 

■■'  Maximilian  Henry  of  Bavaria. 


AN    EXCUSE    AtfENT    IN'    PARIS  175 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamgon. 

I'liris :  Jan  2'',  7i. 

The  King's  journey  draws  nigh,  &  many  believe  it  may  not  end 
at  the  Bendevous ;  that  when  he  shall  be  there,  the  manifesto  may 
be  published ;  that  Julier  may  be  the  first  thing  entred  into.  But 
many  believe  there  is  a  private  agreeni'  with  the  Duke  of  Nieu- 
burg,  in  order  to  the  assisting  him  in  his  pretentions  ag"  the 
Hollanders. 

Their  Amb''  here  knows  not  how  to  proceed,  &  expects  orders 
for  his  returne.  The  edicts  I  had  chosen  are  not  brought  mee,  soe 
that  I  am  afraid  they  will  not  come  time  enough  for  this  Post. 

The  iuicellier  ^  desires  me  to  expose  his  hand  no  more,  for  fear 
the  letters  be  opened,  there  being  a  strict  search  after  such  game. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUinmson. 

Paris  :  Jan.  13,  7.}.  S.X. 

Le  Due  de  Luxembourg  a  receu  ordre  avant  hier,  de  Sa  Ma''', 
d'aller  commander  dix  mil  hommes  tl  Cologne,  et  I'Electeur  de 
06  nom,  i[''  I'Evesque  de  Munster,  et  le  Due  Nieuburg,  ont  fait  un 
accord,  par  lequel  ils  s'obligent  au  Roy  tres  Xtien  de  tenir  une 
armee  de  vingt  mil  hommes,  dont  une  partie  sera  commandee  par 
M.  de  Chamilly  pour  Cologne,  celle  de  I'Evesque  de  Munster 
par  M''  le  Bret,-  et  celle  de  Nieubourg  par  M"'  de  Podovis.  The 
agreem'  between  France  &  Sweden  is  founded  on  the  monthly 
sum  of  four  hundred  thous'*  livers,  or  a  hundred  thirty  od  thous'' 
crownes,  to  be  paid  only  from  the  time  the  King  shall  begin  to 
make  [use]  of  the  Sweed's  assistance. 

It's  believed  the  Queen  of  Spain  will  hardly  ratify  the  league 
between  the  Dutch  &  ye  Governor  of  Flanders,  because  she  has 
promised  France  to  make  none  with  the  Dutch  within  ye  space  of 
a  year. 

The  Dutch  Amb"',  it  seems,  when  the  King's  answer  was  brought 
him  to  the  States'  letter,  asked  the  Introductor  for  the  copy  also,  as 
was  usuall  in  the  like  case,  but  he,  briskly  replying  that  hee  had 
none,  the  AmV  told  him  hee  could  not  transmit  the  letter  without 
seeing  the  contents  &  therfore  opened  it  in  his  presence,  which  is 
looked  on  here  as  a  coup  de  maistre. 

'  Newsmonger.        •  .\Iexandre  le  Bret,  appointed  lieutenant-cenera  in  1(;74. 


171')  THK    riKSrATCIHX    (IF 

T(i  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

'  cc  14'  Jan'",  1G72. 

I/on  maiide  de  Met/,   que  Ton   y  a  amaspi',  par  ordre  du  Roy, 

^   .septiers  de  farine,  (jue  Ton  continue  a  y  faire  amas  d'une  trOs 

grande  quantito  de  touttea  sortes  de  munitions,  et  (jue  Ton  y  atten- 
doit  M''  de  Louvoy,  (|ui  devoit  aussy  aller  i\  Sedan  on  il  a  donnu  un 
rendi'/.-vous  au  S"'  Jacqnier,  t'ommissaire  de.s  vivres,  pour  ordonner 
de  leur  employ,  dont  la  plus  grande  partye  doibt  estre  envoyee  a 
Nuit/.  et  autres  places  de  I'Electorat  de  Cologne  par  dessus  la 
Ma/.elle.' 

'  L'on  mande  de  Boon  que  les  fortifications  de  Nuitz  s'avancent 
fort  et  sont  desj;\  esievees  jusquesau  cordon  et  en  estat  de  dett'ense, 
qu'il  y  a  jiri^s  de  100  pieces  de  Canon  dans  cette  place  et  de  la 
poudre  et  des  boullet/  pour  tirei-  1,500  coups  de  cliacqune,  et  que 
M''  de  Jjouvuv.  aj)res  I'avoir  visitte,  estoit  alle  en  la  dicte  ville  de 
Boon,  ou  il  avoyt  confere  avec  I'lillecteur  de  Cologne  et  avoyt  aussy 
veu  M'"  riOvesque  de  Minister  avec  lequel  il  avoyt  faict  la  debauche 
ou  inon  diet  S''  de  Louvoy  avoit  enyvre  tons  les  convi[v]es,  sans  en 
excepter  le  diet  Evesque. 

'  Le  Boy  a  resolu  de fiiire  encoro 400  compagnies  d'infanterie  et 
six-viiigt  de  cavallerie,  desquelles  on  distribueia  200  d'infanterie 
et  GO  de  cavallerie,  immediateni'  apres  le  retour  de  M""  de  Louvo}', 
et  le  reste  six  semaines  a])re.s,  Sa  Maj'''  ayaiit  resolu  d'augnienter 
ses  trouppes  depuis  150  niille  lioinmes  jusques  Ti  180  niille  entre 
cy  et  Teste  procbain,  et  l'on  tirera  la  ])lus  part  des  olficiers.  deux 
nouvelles  levees  des  compagnies  des  Cardesdu  Corps,  ^Ious(|uetaires, 
Gend'armes,  et  Chevanx  Legers  de  la  garde  et  de  la  iikusoii  du  Boy. 

'  LoBoy  adeulare.  ipiil  donneroit,  durantlacampagne  procliaine, 
le  commandeni'  general  de  son  armee  navale  sur  I'ocean  au  Cointe 
d'Estrces,  Vice  Admiral  de  France,  avec  la  raesme  authorite  de 
I'Admiral. 

'  Sa  Maj'"'  doibt  tenir  liientost  un  grand  conseil  de  marine,  ou 
les  principaux  ofEciers  et  anciennes  capitains  des  vaisseaux  de  sa 
dicte  Maj'"  seront  appelees,  et  dont  il  ya  desja  une  partye  en  cette 
ville,  et  entr'autres,  le  S'"  Du  Quesne,-  lieutenant  generall,  et  le  S'" 
des  Rabiniers,'  chef  d'escadie. 

'  Moselle.  '  Abraham  du  Quesne,  named  tlie  '  Grand  du  Quesne.' 

'  M.  des  Kabesniires  de  Treillebois  de  la  Tremblade. 


AN    ENC;LIt;H    ACJliM'    IN    PARIS  177 

'  Lon  mande  de  Marseille,  qu'il  est  arrive  ;\  la  Ciutad,'  ville  de 
Provence,  400  bona  vjUk,  venant  de  Venize,  que  cette  republique 
a  accordes  a  sa  Maj*^'  pour  servir  sur  ses  gallores.  et  que  le  dernier 
du  passe  la  compagnie  des  Ciardes  de  la  ^[arine,  commande  par  le 
S''  de  Cujac,  fut  cassee,  en  execution  des  ordres  qui  en  avoyent  este 
envoyes  par  sa  Maj*^'. 

'  Et  de  Thoulon,  qu'il  y  estoit  arrive  un  vaisseau,  monte  de  27 
esclaves  Chrestiens,  lesquelz  se  sont  empares  de  ce  vaisseau,  aux 
costes  de  Barbarie  et  se  sont  sauves  apres  avoir  jette  dans  la  mer 
les  Turcs,  qui  estoyent  dedans,  et  essuyti  pluzieurs  coups  de  canon, 
qui  leur  furent  tires  de  terre :  que  Ton  a  appris  cjue  les  Algerius, 
apres  avoir  tue  leur  Roy,  out  couronne.  en  la  mesme  qualite.  un 
Eenegat  liollaudois,  nomme  Trie,  et  que  le  S''  de  Previllj',  capitaine 
de  vaisseau  du  Roy,  n'estoit  party  de  Malthe  que  le  27"^  de  Noveniti, 
pour  aller  a  Constantinople  porter  le  S''  d'Arnieu,  envoye  par  sa 
Maj**'  a  la  Porte  pour  porter  des  lettres  au  Grand  Seigneur  et  au 
P'""  ^  Yizir,  et  des  ordres  au  S'"  de  Nointel,^  son  Amb'',  et  que  les  Cor- 
saires  de  Malthe  estoyent  presentem*  fortz  de  30  vaisseau[x]  qui 
crusoyent  les  mers  et  avoyent  nouvelleni'  pris  de  leurs  courses  deux 
vaisseaux  des  corsaires  de  Barbarie,  qui  n'ozent  tenir  devant  eux. 

'  L'on  escrit  encore  de  Thoulon,  qu'il  y  est  arrive  un  des  vaisseaux 
de  guerre  du  Roy  distacbo  de  I'Escadre  du  S''  d'Almeras,  qui  I'a 
envoye  avec  4  flustes  pour  y  charger  des  vivres  et  les  apporter  Ti 
sa  dicte  escadre,  qui  est  compose  de  12  vaisseaux  de  guerre,  avec- 
laquelle  il  a  ordre  de  tenir  les  corsaires  de  Thunis  assieges  dans  le[s] 
ports,  jusqu'a  la  fin  du  mois  de  Mars  prochain  ;  qu'il  est  presentem' 
devant  le  fort  de  la  grailette,  et  qu'il  a  pris  nouvellem'  un  grand 
vaisseau  de  Thunis  charge  de  bois  de  galba ;  que  le  Chev''  de 
Tourville,^  capitaine  de  la  mesnie  escadre,  en  a  pris  un  autre  de  la 
dicte  ville  de  Thunis,  qu'il  a  rencontre  en  croisant  sur  les  costes  de 
Barbarie,  et  que  le  diet  S'"  d'Almeras  a  longtemps  donne  la  cliasse 
a  sef)t  vaisseaux  de  Tripoli,  mais  qu'il  ne  les  a  pii  joindre. 

'  Les  lettres  de  Yienne  poi-tent  que  l'on  y  a  eu  advis  que  le 
Bacha  °  de  Varadin,  s'estant  remis  en  canipagne  et  ayant  faict  ren- 
contre d'un  des  capitaines  de  cavallerie  de  I'Einpereur  avec  deux 
officiers  et  12  cavaliers  de  sa  compagnie,  il  les  avoyt  faits  prison- 

'  La  Ciotat.  '  Premier. 

^  Charles  Oilier,  Marquis  de  Nointel,  French  Ambassador  in  Constantinople. 
'  Anne  Hilarion  de  Cotentin,  Comte  ile  Tourville.  Vice-Admiral  of  France. 
'  I.e.  Pascha. 


178  TiiR  i)EspATcm:,s  or 

nierset  ammenes  avec  liiy.et  a  faict  scuvoir  (|ii'il  n'estoit  pas  resoln 
(le  les  renilre  (|ne  I'l'Inipereur  iie  luy  eust  faict  raison  des  noiivelles 
courses  qiril  ilic-t  ijiie  les  Hussartz  ont  fuitz  sur  les  terres  du  ^and 
Seigneur. 

'  L'ou  mande  de  Cologne,  fjue  la  paix  de  cette  \-iile  avec  I'l'^iecteur 
de  ce  nom  ayant  este  conclue,  t^ant  de  la  part  de  son  Altesse 
I'/lectorale  que  des  ]\Iagi.sfratz  de  la  dicta  ville,  ils  avoyent.  en 
execution  du  diet  traictr,  congedie  le  regiment  du  Colonel 
Banipliield  '  que  les  ITollaiidois  y  entretenoyent,  ainsy  ()ue  les 
autri's  trouppes  qu'il/.  avoyent  nonvellpni'  receiies  de  lenr  part  pour 
taire  place  a  celles  du  cercle  de  Wesphalie,  et  avoyent  contermando 
deux  autres  regimentz,  que  les  estats  des  Provinces  Unies  envoy- 
oyent  encore  h  leur  secours. 

'  lie  Roy  a  envoye  a  M''  Grotius,  Amb''  d'Hollande,  nne  lettre 
qu'il  a  escritte  a  ses  maistres  en  reponse  de  la  leur,  et  le  luy  a  faict 
donner  toutteouverte,  afin  ([u'il  soit  informo  de  son  contenu,  qui  est 
encore  pins  fier  que  ce  que  sa  ifaj"  luy  a  respondu  de  vive  voix. 

'  Les  trois  premit'r[e]s  conipagnies  du  Regiment  des  Gardes 
Suisscs,  (jui  ont  est('  rappolres,  arrivrrent  dinianclie  a  Paris,  et  les 
Mousquetaires  et  (iardes  du  Corps  du  Roy  ont  continue  leur  marclie 
vers  Jletz,  ainsy  (pie  oO  compagnies  d'lnfanterie,  12  de  Chevaux 
Tjcgers,  et  3  de  Dragons,  adesseiii  a  ce  (]ue  Ton  croid  de  pas.ser  dans 
I'Electorat  de  Cologne. 

'Le  i^uc  de  Luxembourg  partyt  hier,  a  niidi,pour  .Met/,  a  dessein 
de  passer  dela  aupres  de  I'Klectenr  de  Cologne  pour  commander  ses 
trouppes  en  qualite  de  T>ieutenant  General.  Le  ]VLarquis  de  Genlis-  y 
va  aussi  pour  servir  de  Maresclial  de  ( 'amp,  et  le  Comte  de  Saut '  est 
party  pour  se  rendre  a  son  regiment,  (|ui  est  dans  les  trois  Evesclii's. 

'  L'on  a  advis  de  ]\letz,  que  les  ^^lous(|uetaires  du  Roy  y  estant 
arrives  des  premiers,  y  ont  attendu  les  300  gardes  du  corps  du  Roy 
qui  y  arriv^rent  le  G'",  et  qu'ilz  en  partirent  tous  ensemble  avec 
pluzieurs  compagnies  de  cavallerie,  le  tout  faisant  le  nombre  de 
1 ,500  chevaux,  le  rf  du  courant,  pour  vers  I'Electorat  de  Cologne 


'  Colonel  Joseph  Bampfiekl,  at  one  time  a  Koy.'ilist  agent,  then  spy  to  Cromwell. 
After  the  Restoration  he  entered  the  service  of  Holland.  (See  Diet.  Nat.  Biog. ; 
and  Ludlow's  Memoirs,  ii.  429). 

-  Een(5  Brulart,  Marquis  de  Genlis. 

'  Fran<;ois  Emmanuel  de  Blanchefort  de  Crequy,  Comte  de  Sault.  later  Due  de 
Lesdigui^res. 


AX    EMU.ISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  179 

escortes  de  I'infanterie  que  Ton  y  faict  marcher,  doii  on  faict  esperer 
aux  ditz  Gardes  du  Roy.  a  ce  qn'ilz  niandent.  d'estre  de  retour  en 
leurs  quartiers  dans  im  mois. 

'  L'on  adjouste  que  M''  de  Louvoy  a  faict  uu  nouveau  traicte  avec 
rElecteur  de  Cologne  et  I'Evesque  de  ^lunster.  et  que  I'Electeur  de 
Treves  y  entre  pour  convenir  des  conditions  du  passage  qu'il  doibt 
accorder  aux  trouppes  du  Roy. 

'  Le  Due  d'Estrees  est  party  pour  son  Ambassade  de  Rome,  et 
va  s'embarquer  ;i  Marseille,  n'ayant  pas  voulu  passer  en  Savoye 
pour  eviter  la  conte.staoh  pour  la  droiete  avec  le  Due  de  ce  iiom, 
qui  ne  vent  pas  la  ceder  cliez  hiy  aux  Anibassad'''  Ex''^^  de  France, 
qui  la  protendent. 

'  Le  Due  de  Thouars.'  fils  du  Prince  de  Tarente,  espouze  ]\Iad"' 
de  Crequi  ^  iiUe  unique  et  heretiere  du  due  de  ce  nom. 

'  M''  de  Pompone  est  venn  de  Munster  par  la  i-outte  d'Anvers 
sans  passer  par  Hollande,  et  on  Tattend  aujourd'huy.' 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamso'ii. 

Paris :  Jan.  Ifj,  7 J. 

Yesterday  came  S''  Martin  Wescomb  '  hither  on  his  way  towards 
Madrid.  The  same  day  I  also  received  a  letter  from  our  cor- 
respondent at  ^Marseilles,  dated  the  6th  current,  with  the  news  of 
S''  Edward  Spragg's  having  concluded  a  very  honourable  & 
advantagious  peace  with  the  Algerines.  The  particulars  hee  knew 
not,  but  in  generall  that  all  Xtian  slaves  should  bee  set  at  liberty 
without  redemption,  that  a  considerable  sum  of  money  should  be 
paid  us  by  way  of  satisfaction  for  former  demands,  but  the  space  of 
three  years'  time  alotted  for  the  performance  ;  and  that  48  hours  was 
limited  for  the  cessation  of  hostility,  in  which  time  Capt.  Beach 
met  with  two  of  their  men  of  warre.  who,  after  a  sharp  fight,  escaped 
him,  but  with  much  damage,  being  shattei-'d  in  the  fight. 

M""  Pompone  is  come  home,  &  M"'  Bonneuil  ^  has  been  at  Brussels, 
where  his  stay  was  but  short  &  his  busines  thought  to  bee  to 
demand  a  passage  for  some  troops  into  the  Pays  de  Juliers. 

'  Charles,  Due  de  La  Tr^mouille  and  de  Thouars. 

-  Madeleine  de  Cr^quy. 

^  Consul  at  Cadiz. 

'  Nicolas  Auguste  de  Harlay,  seigneur  de  Bonneuil. 


180  THE    DESrATCIIKS    OK 

'J'o  iSir  ■fosejih  Willianixoit. 

Paris  :  Tan.  20.  7.\. 

Wee  hiive  news  that  the  Mareschal  di-  Crequi  is  inarched  from 
'I'ianville,'  in  Luxembourg,  along  the  Moesel,  on  one  side  of  Treves,  at 
the  head  of  MmiKijuetaire^  dn  Itoi/,  the  Gen  d'Annes,  (.'hcranx 
iJijcrt!,  &.  other  troop.s.  M''  du  Loiivoy  wa.**  to  see  them  goe  away 
&  sent  the  Lieutenant  (/"  lloij  at  Theonville  prisoner  hither  for 
having  refused  to  obey  M''  de  Cre(|uy'.s  order  i'^-  let  tlie  troops  come 
into  the  towne,  whereuppon  they  forced  the  gates  &  gott  in. 

We  hear  the  Dutch  have  two  camps  rolant  near  the  Rhine. 
They  have  sent  hither  S"'  George  Downing's  -  ilem"  which  hee 
gave  in  to  the  States  about  saluting  his  ^la'''"  flagg,  which  it 
seems  they  have  printed  at  the  Hague.  One  circumstance  came 
along  with  it,  that  it  was  thought  the  States  would  not  vouchsafe 
to  answer  it. 

The  discour.se  is  much  here  that  the  C  de  Montei-ei's  party  at 
Madrid,  in  the  .Junta,  has  prevayled  to  have  orders  sent  him  to  assist 
the  Hollanders,  in  case  they  bee  attacked,  which  orders  are  said  to 
be  intercepted. 

The   King  has  tiioughts  of  being  at  Metz   in   time  of  action 
wither  Amb'''  &  Ministers  may  follow  him. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

•  ce  21'-  Jiin".  1072. 

'  L'on  escrit  de  La  Haye,  que  les  conditions  avec  les  quelles 
Mess""'  les  Estatz  sont  dans  le  dessein  d'establir  le  Prince  d'Oranges 
en  la  qualite  de  C'apitaine  (General  de  leur  Lstat,  sont  qu"il  aura 
toujours  aupr^s  de  luy  le  Comte  (luillaume  de  Nassau,"  son  parent, 
en  qualite  de  directeur,  avec  six  Conseilliers  d'Estat,  tires  du  corps 
des  Estatz,  qui  le  suivront  a  I'armee,  et  sans  la  participation  des 
quelz,  ii  ne  pourra  rien  resoudre  ;  que  le  diet  I'rince  d"Oranges  aura 
nn  regiment  des  gardes  et  les  mesmes  apoinctemens  que  ses 
predecesseurs,  mais  (pie  la  charge  qn'ilz  possedoyent  de  (loverneur 
de  I'Estat  demeurera  suprimee.  Ces  lettres  adjoustent,  que  ces 
habitans  de  la  campagne  des  Provinces  Unies,  commencent  a  faire 

'  Thionville.  -'  English  Minister  at  the  Hague. 

'  The  son  of  Lewis,  Lord  of  Lecke,  and  Elizabeth,  Countess  of  Horn,  1G32-1705. 
Related  to  William,  I'rince  of  Orange,  in  so  far  as  they  were  both  descended  from 
William,  Count  of  Nassau,  who  died  in  1584. 


A.N    E.NULISH    AGE.NT    l.N    TAKIS  181 

transporter  dans  les  villes  ce  qu'ilz  ont  de  meilleur,  dans  I'attente 
oil  ilz  sont  d'une  guerre  prochaine. 

'  Le  ^larquis  de  Seignelay,  Secretaire  d'Estat  de  la  Marine,  doibt 
aller  a  Brest  pour  y  faire  equiper  I'armee  navale  du  Roy,  et  il  a 
este  resolu  de  destacher  des  escadres  pour  envoyer  dans  les  Indes 
Orientales  et  Occidentales.  et  par  tons  les  lieux  ou  les  Hollandois 
traficqiient,  a  dessein  d'y  ruiner  leur  commerce,  en  y  enlevant  leurs 
vaisseaux  marcliands. 

'  Par  le  traicte.  coiiclud  avec  TElecteur  de  Treves,  il  a  este 
convenu  qu'il  observeroit  exactem'  la  nentralite  en  laqnelle  il  s'est 
engage,  et  donneroit  passage  libres  a  toiittes  les  trouppes  de  sa 
Maj'"  qu'elle  vondroit  faire  passer  par  son  Estat,  a  condition  qu'elles 
n'y  feroyent  aucun  desordre  et  payeroyent  les  vivres  quelles  y 
prendroyent,  ce  qui  luy  a  este  promis,  et  ce  que  M''  de  Louvoy  faict 
executer  ponctuellem',  ayant  faict  deffendre,  sur  paine  [peine]  de  la 
vie,  aux  soldatz  des  trouppes  de  sa  Ma*^,  qui  passent  dans  les  terres  du 
diet  Electeur,  de  rien  prendre  de  ses  sujets  sans  payer,  et  afin  de  faire 
mieux  observer  cet  ordre  et  uue  exacte  discipline  aux  dittes  trouppes, 
il  les  faict  marcher  en  corps  et  camper  durant  leur  marche,  et  a 
separe  en  trois  brigades  douze  mille  liommes,  (jui  sont  commandes, 
pour  aller  dans  I'Electorat  de  Cologne,  se  mettre  en  garnison  dans 
4  places  de  I'Electeur  de  ce  nom,  scavoir  Boon,  Nuitz,  Keiserswert' 
et  Lin,^  et  ces  trois  brigades  partent  de  Metz  quelques  jours  les  unes 
apres  les  autres,  atin  de  trouver  des  vivres  sur  leur  routte  plus  com- 
modement. 

'  L'on  a  advis.  que  Ton  est  convenu  avec  M''  I'Electeur  de  Cologne 
C[ue  ces  trouppes  franpoises  luy  presteront  serment  de  fidelite  en 
entrant  dans  ses  places,  que  M''  de  Louvoy  estoit  venu  a  Metz  pour 
en  faire  partir  les  dictes  trouppes  et  en  estoit  i-eparty  pour  les 
conduire. 

•  On  mande  de  Liege  qu'on  y  faict  de  grands  magazins  de  bledz  * 
pour  les  trouppes  du  Roy,  et  que  les  marchands  liegeois  en  ayant 
achepte  quantite  a  Mastrick*  qu'ils  y  avoyent  faict  venir  du 
Pays  de  Juilliers  pour  fournir  ces  magazins,  les  magistratz 
de  la  dicte  ville,  ayant  eu  advis  que  c'estoit  a  dessein  de  les  vendre 
aux  Franfois,  avoyent  d'abord  faict  diiScultc  de  les  laisser  sortir  de 
leur  ville,  mais  qu"ilz  s'y  estoyent  enfin  resolus,  sur  roffre  que  ces 
marchandz  leurs  firent,  de  leurs  laisser  ces  bledz  pour  le  mesme 
prix  que  Tori  leurs  en  donne  a  Liege, 

'  Kaiserswertb.  -'  Lintz.  ^  I.e.  bles.  '  Maestricbt. 


182  THK    UlCSI'ATCHKa    OK 

'11  y  a  quelijues  jours  que  Mods''  le  Prince,  parlaiit  iiu  Hoy  des 
despenses  qu'il  faisoit  pour  son  equi|)age  de  guerre,  il  dist  a  sa 
^laj'"'  (|ue  Mens''  [le]  Due,  son  filz,  estoit  niauvais  inesnager,  et  se 
ruinoit  par  les  de.spenses  qu'il  faisoit  pour  le  sieu,  et  qu'il  auroitbieii 
be.soing  de  ([uelque  secours  pour  I'achever ;  surquoy  sa  Maj^'' 
demanda  ii  inoii  diet  Sieur  le  l^rinee  conibien  il  faudroit  encore 
d'argL'ut  a  Mous'"  le  Due  pour  I'achever  ;  i  quoy  ce  prince  respondit 
qu'il  auroit  besoing  encore  de  30  ou  10  mille  francs,  et  le  mesme 
soir,  le  Roy  list  expi'dier  un  brevet  d'une  nouvelle  pension  de  GO 
mille  livres,  dont  sa  Maj''  fist  present  a  Mons''  le  Due  sans  prejudice 
de  ses  autres  pensions,  ny  de  celles  de  Mons''  son  pere.  Sa  Ma'"' 
ayant  seen  que  le  Mareschal  de  Bellefontz  avoit  resolu  de  vendre 
sa  charge  de  I'remier  Maistre  d'Hostel  pour  payer  sesdebtes,  qui  se 
montent  a  100  mille  escus,  sa  diete  Maj*"^'  luy  a  ordoune  de  la 
garder,  et  luy  a  f'aict  present  de  200  mille  francs  pour  donner  a 
ses  ereanciers. 

'  Dinianche,  Mons''  de  Pompone  alia  avec  Mens''  Colbert  en  la 
maison  de  feu  Mons''  de  i^ionne,  ofi  ilz  out  levc  le  scellt-  que  Mons'' 
Colbert  avoit  mis  sur  les  papiers  et  memoires  d'estat  du  detfuiict. 
et  travaillerent  ensemble  a  en  faire  linventaire  ensuitte  duquel 
ilz  furent  remis  entre  les  mains  de  M''  de  Pompone,  qui  a  preste 
serment  de  fidelite  au  Roy,  est  entre  au  conseil  de  sa  Majeste  et 
dans  touttes  les  fonctions  de  sa  charge  de  Secretaire  d'Estat. 

'  L'instruction  que  le  Due  de  Luxembourg  a  receuoe  du  Roy  en 
partantpour  I'Klectorat  de  Cologne,  est  ([u'il  commaudera,  en  (lualite 
de  Lieutenant  (ieneral,  touttes  les  trouppes  que  sa  ]\Iaj''  envoye 
dans  le  diet  Electorat  ainsy  que  celles  de  I'Eleetorat  pour  le  service 
de  ce  Prince,  et  mesme  celles  de  I'Evesque  de  Munster,  qui  s"y 
doibveiit  joindre. 

'  L'onniande  de  Metz  quelescompagnies  du  Heginient  desGardes 
y  ari-iv?rent  le  1 2"^  et  devoyent  coutinuer  leur  routte  vers  Cologne 
lors([ue  d'autres  trouppes,  que  Ion  attendoit,  les  auroyent  joinctes,  et 
que  AP  de  Louvoy  n'avoit  este  que  deux  jours  ii  J\letz  et  estoit 
retourno  dans  I'Lleetorat  de  Cologne. 

'  Le  S''  de  S'  Poiiange,  Premier  Commis  de  M'' de  Louvoy,  escrit 
de  la  dicte  ville  de  Metz,  cju'il  y  est  demeure  pour  en  faire  partir 
le  reste  des  troujipes,  apres  quoy  il  ira  rejoindre  il'"  de  Louvoy  ;"i 
Nuitz,  d'ou  mon  diet  S""  de  Louvoy  partira  jjour  revenir  en  France 
par  les  Ardennes,  lorsqiie  le  diet  S""  de  S'  Poiiange  y  sera  arrive, 
lequel    demeurera    a    Nuitz   jusqu'au   10''    du   prochaiu,    pour   y 


AN    KNGIJSH    AUENT    IX    PAKIS  183 

faire  Tinventaire  des  magazius,  apres  quoy  il  s'eu  revieudrii  eu 
France. 

'  L'on  escrit  de  Theoiiville,  du  1 4''  do  couraut.  qu'il  y  avoit  passe 
2,000  chevaiix  des  tronppes  dn  Roy  allant  dans  I'Electorat  de 
Cologne,  que  Ton  y  attendoit  2,000  Suisses,  les  Regimentz  de  Pied- 
mont et  de  la  Reine.  et  le  Regiment  des  Cjardes  qui  devoyent  prendre 
la  mesme  routte,  et  que  ^I''  de  Louvoy  y  avoit  repasse  retournant  a 
Nuitz ;  et  de  Treves,  t|ue  mon  diet  8''  de  Louvoy  y  a  vieu  [vu]  ri:^lecteur 
de  ce  nom,  qui  luy  a  ottert  de  luy  donner  la  droicte  chez  luy,  ce  que 
ce  Ministre  n'a  pas  vonhi  accepter,  et  qu'il  a  regie,  avec  le  diet 
Electeur,  les  estapes  des  tronppes  de  sa  Majeste,  qui  doibvent  passer 
sur  les  terres  de  son  Electorat. 

'  JP  le  Marquis  de  Seignelay  partit  Mardi  a  dix  lieures  du  matin, 
en  poste.    L'on  assenre  qu'il  a  ordre  du  Roy  de  passer  en  Angleterre. 

■  Le  Roy  est  a  Versailles,  ou  il  a  resolu  de  passer  15  jours. 
Monsieur  et  31adame  arriverent  Mardi  an  soir  ii  Paris,  Me[r]credi 
]\lonsieur  alia  au  Val  de  Grace  assister  a  un  service  qui  s'y  faict 
tons  les  ans  pour  la  feu  Reine ;  aujourd'huy  Monsieur  donne  le  bal 
et  collation  au  Palais  Royal. 

'  La  I'rincesse  Palatine  a  este  blessee  du  dessus  de  sa  chaise  qui 
se  leve  qu'un  de  ses  porteurs  luy  a  laisse  tomber  sur  la  teste,  dont 
elle  s'est  mise  au  lict.' 


To  Sir  Joaepli  WilUamson. 

'  ce  28  .Jan.,  Ili72. 

'  L'on  mande  d' Aire,  en  Artois,  que  le  go[u]verneur  de  cette  place 
espagnolle  y  arrivoit  de  Bru.xells,  d'ou  il  avoit  apporte  un  ordre 
du  Comte  de  Monterey  de  faire  razer  et  demolir  tons  les  fauxbourgs 
de  la  dicte  place,  en  consequence  du  quel  ordre,  tons  les  habitants 
de  ces  fauxbourgs  commengoyent  a  se  retirer  et  a  transporter 
leurs  meubles  dans  la  ville.  L'on  adjouste  que  ce  gouverneur  a  diet, 
que  l'on  avoyt  mis  en  deliberation  dans  le  eonseil  du  diet  Comte  de 
Monterey  de  razer  les  fortifications  de  pluzieurs  places  des  Pays 
Bas,  afin  de  n'estre  poiuet  oblige  d'y  tenir  des  garnisons,  qui  affoi- 
blissent  les  trouppes  d'Kspagne,  et  que  l'on  y  deliberoit  aussy  sur 
la  deffense  propozee  des  vins  de  France  dans  les  provinces  de 
I'obeissance  de  sa  iLaj*^  Cath'""  a  I'exemple  des  Provinces  Unies. 
lesquelz  preparatifs  semblent  tesmoigner  (pie  les  Espagnolz  se  dis- 
posent  a  la  guerre  centre  la  France. 


1st  riiK  nivsi'ATciiKs  (jk 

'  L'on  escrit  tie  Dmickerque,  que  douze  annateurs  fnuifois  y  ont 
ili'-sjil  receu  den  com  missions  du  Roy  pour  iVjuiper  des  vaisseaux 
eii  guerre,  et  faire  des  courses  centres  les  eniiemys  de  I'Estat, 
lesiiuelz.  a  ce  que  jxirtent  leurs  commissions,  lenrs  seront  designes 
par  le  S"'  d'l'lstvades,  Go[u]verneur  de  cette  place  avaiit  qii'ilz  en  par- 
tent.  L'on  a  advis  de  Saumur  que  le  S''  de  Montuergue.'  cy- 
devanfc  Vice  Roy  pour  la  compagnie  des  Indes  Orientales  de 
France  <\  Madagascare,  et  qui  avoit  este  transfiTe  du  port  J^ouis 
dans  le  Chasteau  de  Saumur,  y  est  niort  presques  subitement, 
n'ayant  pas  receu  ses  sacreraent/. 

'  M''  le  riiancelier  estant  tombe  malade  a  Textremite,  et  ayant 
perdu  la  parolle,  le  Due  deCoislin,"  I'flvesque  ITOrleans^  et  le  Mar- 
i|uis  de  Rochefoi't,  ses  heritiers,  allrrent  Lundy  remettre  les  Sceaux 
entre  les  mains  du  Kny,  afin  (jue  sa  Majeste  en  put  disposer  en 
faveur  de  quekpie  autre  ;  le  Roy  les  receut  et  leurs  dist  qu'il  les 
garderoit  jusqu'a  ce  qu'il  fust  mort  ou  guery. 

'  La  plus  commune  opinion  est,  que  le  Roy  ne  fera  poinct  de 
nouveau  Chancelier,  et  donnera  a  M''  le  Tellier  la  commission  de 
Gai'de  des  Sceaux  ;  d'autres  croyent  que  le  Roy  les  pourra  donner  au 
^Laresclial  de  Villeroy,^  en  consideration  de  ce  qu'il  a  este  son 
Governeur  et  est  un  de  ses  plus  anciens  Cons(>illers  d'Estat,  et  chef 
de  son  Conseil  des  Finances.  Cette  ojiitiion  est  en  partye  fondce  sur 
ce  que  le  Roy  s'est  informe,  s'il  y  avoit  plu/.ieures  exemples  dans 
I'histoii'e  de  France  que  les  Roys  ayent  donne  les  Sceaux  a  des 
gentz  d'espee,  sur  quoy  l'on  en  a  trouve  13  faisant  profession  des 
amies,  dont  le  dernier  a  este  le  Conestable  de  Lnines,  qui  a  este 
quelques  temps  Garde  des  Sceaux.  Le  ZVIarqnis  de  Lionne,  filz, 
aisne  de  feu  'SI''  de  Lionne,  estant  a  Versailles,  et  sortant  le  soir  de 
cbes  le  Roy  par  la  porte  d'un  balcon  dont  I'appuy  n'estoit  pas 
encore  faict.  et  croj'ant  sortir  par  une  porte  oi'dinaire,  s'est  laisse 
tomlier  du  premier  estage  dans  la  cour,  et  a  tombe  sur  un  corporal 
du  Regiment  des  Gardes  (|ui  estoit  en  bas,  a  qui  il  a  cass^  une 
espaule,  ce  qui  a  un  pen  diminiie  la  gi'andeur  de  sa  clieute,  dont  il 
est  cependant  fort  blessea  la  teste,  ou  la  blessure  est  si  dangereuse, 
que  l'on  parle  de  le  trepaner ;  et  I'Abbi'   de  Lionne,''  sou  frere,  a 

'  See  pp.  118  and  159. 

-■  Armand  de  Ciimboul,  Due  de  Coislin  (1635-1702). 

'  Pierre  de  Cambout  de  Coislin  (Ifi.Sli-lTOfi). 

'  See  p.  33,  n.  2.     He  was  Governor  to  Louis  in  164(i. 

'  Jules  Paul,  Abbt'  de  Marnioutiers,  second  son  of  Hugues  de  Lionne. 


AX    ENiiLISH    AGENT    IX    PAKIS  185 

este  presques  au  mesme  temps  blesse  au  visage  pai-  des  eclatz  d'une 
vitre  cle  son  carrosse,  qui  s'est  brisee  en  versant. 

'  Le  Due  de  Vantadour,^  estant  alle  en  masque  a  la  suitte  de 
Monsieur  eliez  le  Roy  Cazimir  de  Pologne,  et  y  estant  demeure 
apres  que  ilonsieur  fut  party,  le  jMarq"  de  Ta vanes  -  vint  I'aborder, 
et  voulut  luy  arracher  son  masque,  disant  qu'il  le  connoissoit ; 
surquoy  ce  Due  luy  donna  un  soufflet,  apres  quoy,  ce  Marquis,  qui 
n'estoit  pas  masque,  luy  donna  pluzieurs  coups  de  pied  et  fureut 
ensuitte  separes  ;  depuis,  ^lonsieur  le  Prince  les  a  accomodes,  et  les  a 
faict  embrasser,  avec  proniesse,  de  part  et  d'autre,  d'oublier  le  passe. 

'  Les  Archevesques  de  Rheims  et  de  Paris  s'estant  broiiilles  sur 
ce  que  le  dernier  a  voulu  empescher  le  premier  d'officier  aux 
Jesuittes  ainsy  que  pluzieurs  autres  pi-elatz  en  la  ceremonie  de  la 
canonisation  de  S'  Francois  de  Borgia,'  par  ce  quil  ne  luy  en  avoit 
pas  demande  permission,  ce  qu'il  pretend  luy  estre  deub  dans  son 
diocesse,  le  Roy  les  a  accordes  et  a  ordonne  que  ^Monsieur  I'Arclie- 
vesque  de  Rheims  officieroit  et  qu'il  en  feroit  auparavant  demander 
I'agreenient  a  I'Archevesque  de  Paris.'' 

'  Le  Roy  a  resolu  de  faire  cesser  touttes  sortes  de  bastiments  et 
mesme  ceus  du  Louvre  durant  cette  annee  a  la  reserve  de  ceux  de 
Versailles,  pour  en  employer  le  fondz  aux  despenses  de  la  guerre. 

'  Le  Comte  de  ^Molina,  Ambassadeur  d'Espagne  en  France,  est 
arrive  depuis  quelques  jours  a  Paris,  venant  d'Angleterre,  oii  il 
estoit  en  la  mesme  qualite,  et  Ton  a  advis  de  Beaiivais,  que  lors 
qu'il  y  a  passe  les  tambours  du  Regiment  d'Alsace,  qui  y  est  en 
garnison,  estant  alles  le  salluer  d'une  chamade.  ilz  out  este  arrestes 
prisonniers,  pour  I'avoir  faict  sans  ordre  de  leurs  officiers. 

•L'ou  mande  de  Bayonne,  qu'un  courier  extraord''",  venant 
d'Espagne,  avoyt  este  tue  avec  son  postilion  en  BLscaye  pres  de  la 
dicte  ville  de  Bayonne.  Ayant  voulu  resister  a  quelques  cavaliers 
qui  Tout  attaque,  I'uu  desquelz  a  este  tue  par  ce  courrier,  qui  a  este 
vole  par  les  autres,  qui  se  sont  sauves. 

'  L'on  a  appris  par  la  voye  d'un  courier  extraordinaire,  depesche 
par  TEvesque  de  Laon  pour  ses  affaires,  que  le  Cardinal  Borromes ' 
est  mort,  et  ^lessieurs  de  Vandosme  ont  escrit  de  la  ville  d'Ast,* 

'  Gaston  Jean  Baptiste  de  Levis,  Due  tie  Ventadour. 

-  Charles  Marie  de  Saulx,  Marquis  de  Tavannes. 

'  The  third  General  of  the  Order  of  the  Jesuits,  born  in  1510  and  died  in  157'2. 

'  Franvois  de  Harlay  de  Champvallon.  '  Gilberto  Borromeo. 

"  Aoust. 


18(3  TIIK    DKSl'ATCHK.s    Ol- 

dans  I'estat  du  Due  de  Savoj'e,  par  la  voye  de  ce  counier,  qu'ilz 
retournoyeiit  iucessaniin'  a  I'aris,  ou  I'oti  les  attend  aux  premiers 
jours. 

'  Le  Ruy  partira  de  N'ersailles  Lniuly,  premier  jour  de  Fevrier. 
pour  retourner  deiiieurer  a  8'  Germain  et  y  faire  ses  devotions  le 
lendeniain.  jour  de  la  ^'ierge.' 

■  Les  Sceaux,  ayant  este  remis,  comnie  nous  I'avons  diet,  entre  les 
mains  du  Roy,  fia  Maj''  a  resolu  de  faire  sceller  en  sa  jiresence, 
et  pour  cet  eftect,  a  faict  advertir  les  ofliciers  de  la  Cliancellerie,  qui 
y  doibvent  assister  de  se  trouver  aujourd'hny  a  V^ersaiile,  ou  sa 
JMaj'''  fera  tenir  le  Sceau  devant  elle,  en  attendant  (pi'elle  ayt 
pourveu  a  cette  charge. 

'  L'on  a  appris  que  Monsieur  de  Louvoy  est  party  de  ri^lectorat 
de  Cologne  pour  revenir  ea  relais,  et  Ton  attend  deuKiiii  au  soir  a 
Paris. 

'  L'on  raande  de  I'Electorat  de  Cologne  que  les  troujipes  du  Hoy, 
qui  y  sont  arrivees,  outpreste  serment  de  lidelite  a  ri'jieeteur,  et  de 
Jletz  que  le  troisiesme  destacliement  de  LdOO  lionimes  en  partit 
le  18'^  du  eourant,  pour  aller  joindre  les  autres  trouppes  dans  le 
diet  Electorat  de  Cologne." 


'/'(/  Sir  Ju^ejJi   Willldmson. 

'  Ce  1=  Fevrier,  1672. 

'  I /on  mande  de  'J'oulon,  (j[iv]un  desvaisseaux  du  Roy,  commaudc 
])ar  le  Chevalier  de  Tourville,  qui,  au  retour  de  I'escadre  du  Sieur 
d  Alnieras,  en  avoyt  este  disperse  par  la  tempeste,  et  dont  on 
n'avoit  eu  aucunes  nouvelles  depuis  (pi'elle  est  arrivee  a  Toulon,  y 
est  venu  a  bou  port,  ipie  l'on  en  faict  partir  deux  vaisseaiix  pour  en 
aller  relever  trois  autres.  (pii  sont  demeures  devant  Porto  Farino, 
pour  empescher  les  Corsaires  de  Tunis  d'eu  sortir,  ny  d'y  entrer, 
durant  I'hiver,  et  que  le  Roy  ne  tiendra  cette  annee  que  13  vais- 
seaux  dans  la  mer  Mediterranee  ou  le  Sieur  de  Martel  eommandera 
en  sa  qualite  de  Lieutenant  General,  et  que  le  sui'plusdes  vaisseaux 
du  Roy,  qui  sont  en  celte  mer,  passeront  dans  I'ocean  pour  se  venir 
joindre  a  I'armee  navale  de  sa  Maj'",  commandoe  par  le  Comte 
d"Estrces,  qui  doibt  estre  de  31'  grandz  vaisseaux  et  de  pluzieures 
moindres,  sans  comjjter  ceux  que  Ton  a  dessein  d'envoyer  aux  Isles 
de  I'Amerique  et  aux  Lides  Orientales. 

'  I.e.  the  Feast  of  the  I'liriticiition. 


AX    E.NULISH    ALiENT    IM    I'AKI^  187 

'  L'on  iiiande  encore  de  la  dicte  ville  de  Toulon,  que  ron  y  avoit, 
par  ordre  du  Roy,  congedie  1,200  ouvriers  deceuxqui  travailloyent 
a  la  construction  des  vaisseaux  ueufs  que  sa  Majeste  y  faisoit  bastir, 
(ju'il  n'en  restoit  plus  que  4  on  500  dans  le  pare  ou  ils  travailloyent, 
et  qii'on  estoit  sur  le  poinct  de  les  congedier  tons  et  de  farmer  ce 
port  jusqu'a  un  autre  temps,  sa  Maj*^'  voulant  employer  ailleurs  les 
sommes  qui  y  estoyent  destinees,  et  se  trouvant  presentement  un 
nombre  suffisant  de  vaisseaux. 

'  L'on  escrit  de  la  Haye,  les  actions  ou  portions  des  interesses  en 
la  Compagnie  des  Indes  Orientales,  establie  en  ce  pays,  diminuent 
uotablemeut  de  prix  depuis  les  dispositions  que  l'on  y  void  a,  une 
prochaine  guerre  contre  la  France,  en  sorte  que  les  partz  en  la  dicte 
Compagnie  qui  valoyent  6,000  livres  au  commencement  de  I'annee 
passee,  ne  se  peuvent  plus  vendre  qu'a  raison  de  4,000  livres.  L'on 
adjonste  qu'il  y  a  une  bancque  ou  l'on  revolt  presentement  a  douze 
pour  cent  d'interest  I'argent  de  ceux  qui  y  veulent  constituer  des 
pensions  a  vie,  et  que  l'on  s'occupe,  en  ce  pays,  k  cliercher  divers 
moyens  d'avoir  de  I'argent  comptant  pour  subvenir  aux  necessites 
urgentes  de  cet  estat,  oii  il  y  a  grande  consternation  parmy  les 
negotians. 

'  L'on  a  adverty,  par  ordre  du  Roy,  tons  les  principaux  marchandz 
de  Paris  qu'ilz  ayent  a  retirer  les  effectz  qu'ils  peuvent  avoir  entre 
les  mains  des  marchandz  Hollandois,  parce  que  sa  Majeste  a  resolu 
de  declarer  la  guerre  conjoinctement  avec  le  Roy  de  la  Grande 
Bretagne  aux  Estats  Generaux  des  Provinces  Unies. 

'  Monsieur  de  Louvoy  estaut  de  retour  de  TElectorat  de  Cologne 
il  va  travaillera  expedier  les  nouvelles  commissions,  dont  on  a  parle 
pour  la  levee  de  20  niille  fantassins  et  de  6.000  clievaux,  a  dessein 
d'en  distribuer  une  party e  an  l-y  du  courant,  et  le  reste  vers  la  fin 
de  Mars. 

'  L'on  a  advis  qu'une  partye  des  trouppes  de  France,  partyes  de 
^letz,  sout  allees  dans  le  pays  de  Juilliers  prendre  leurs  quartiers 
aux  environs  de  Duren.  Apres  que  le  Chancelier  de  France  fut 
mort,  le  Lieutenant  Civil  de  Paris  '  allaches  luy  mettre  le  scelle  sur 
ses  meubles  pour  estre  ensuitte  distribues  il  ses  heritiores,  suivant  les 
formalites  de  la  Justice.  L'on  asseure  qu'il  n'est  pas  mort  si  riclie 
que  Ton  le  ci'oyoit,  et  qu'il  n'a  laisse  (|u'environ  80  niille  livres  de 
rente  en  fondz  de  terre,  cent  mille  escus  d'argent  comptant,  dont  il 
a  distribue  une  partye  a  ses  domestiques  et  aux  eglises  de  Paris, 
'  The  lieutenant  civil  of  the  Chiitelet  (prison)  of  Paris. 


188  IHK    DJiil'ATlIIES    OF 

pour  y  faire  dire  des  messes,  sans  compter  son  hostel  ny  ses 
meubles. 

'  Ij'on  travaille  aux  pre])aratifs  tVune  graude  pompe  funebre  que 
Ton  doiljt  faire  h  son  corps  dans  I'eglise  tie  sa  paroisse,  en  laquelle 
•1-  Prezidans  an  mortier  porti'ront  les  quatre  coings  dii  poesle;  touttes 
les  cours  souverains  y  assistei-ont,  et  luy  rendront,  comrne  au  chef  dc 
la  justice,  des  honneurs  (ju'ilz  ne  rendent  (|u'anx  Roy.s,  et  ensuitte 
de  cette  ceronionie  son  corps  sera  porle  a  Pontoi.-^e,  son  coeur  a 
Nazaret,  et  ses  entrailles  en  I'eglise  de  S'  Andre  des  Arcs,  dans  la 
chapelle  de  ses  ancestres. 

'  L'on  a  propoze,  dans  le  conseil  du  Roy,  de  demembrer  la  charge 
de  Garde  des  Sceaux,  en  noniniant  quatre  Maistres  des  Hequestes 
pour  sceller  les  arrests  du  conseil  prive,  et  donnant  an  grand  Sceau 
a  chaque  Secretaire  d'Kstat  pour  sceller  les  expeditions  qui  depen- 
dent de  leurs  chai'ges,  niais  l'on  ne  scayt  pas  encore  qu'il  [sic]  est  le 
sentiment  du  Roy  la-dessus.  i/on  croid  <|ue  sa  .Majeste  fera  tenir  le 
Sceau  devant  elle  Samedi,  si  elle  n'a  pourveu  a  cette  charge  avant 
ce  jour-la,  et  die  n'a  poiuct  faict  sceller  a  V'ersailles,  comme  le 
bruict  en  avoyt  co\iru  sur  certains  billetz  que  Ton  avoyt  faict  ini- 
primer,  qui  donnoyent  ce  faux  advisatous  les  officiersde  Sceau,  ce 
que  le  Roy  a  trouve  raauvais  et  a  faict  faire  repriniande  a  des 
advocats  du  conseil,  qui  I'avoyent  fait  sans  ordre. 

'  Lundy  le  Roy  jxirtit  de  Versailles  pour  retourner  a  S'  (Jerinaiu. 

'  M''  de  Louvoy,  depuis  son  retour,  a  pris  sceance  dans  le  conseil 
du  Roy,  en  qualite  de  ^linistre  d'Kstat,  quoy  (pi'il  ayt  quitte  la 
direction  des  affaires  estrangers,  en  vertu  de  laquelle  le  Roy 
I'avoyt  fiiict  asseoir  dans  le  diet  cunseil  oil  il  n'assistoit  auparav'ant 
que  debout,  sa  Majeste  ayant  bien  voulu,  jjour  reconnoistre  ses 
services,  Fhonorer  de  tiltre. 

'  Le  Roy  a  donne  une  charge  de  Conseiller  d'l'jstat  au  S""  de  la 
Galissonni&re,'  I\Iaistre  des  Retjuestes,  et  Intendant  de  la  Haute 
Normandie. 

'  Le  Comte  de  Chonilierg-  faict  dessein  de  re])asser  bientost  en 
Portugal. 

'  Les  dernieres  lettres  de  Rome  portent  que  I'Evesque  de  Laon 
estant  en  conference  avec  le  Cardinal  Altieri,  ce  Cardinal  luy  a 
diet  qu'il  avoit  advis  du  depart  du  Due  d'Estrees,  son  frere.  pour 
I'ambassade  de  Rome,  et  qu'il  se  disposoit  k  le  faire  recevoir  avec 

'  Jacques  Baniii,  Sieur  de  la  Galissonnieie.  '  Schomberg. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARLS  189 

tons  les  honneurs  deubz  a  son  caractere,  moyenant  quoy,  il  esperoit 
que  sa  Majeste  tres  Chrest:  receveroit  aussy  le  Nonce  que  sa 
S""" '  luy  vouloit  envoyer,  a  quoy  cet  Evesque  luy  repartit,  qu"il 
croyoit  cpie  c'estoit  I'intention  de  sa  dicta  Majeste. 

'  Les  dernieres  lettres  de  I'Electorat  de  Cologne  portent  qiie  les 
trouppes  de  France  y  estant  aiTi'vees,  TElecteur  alia  les  recevoir  a 
six  lieues  de  Boon,  et  les  niit  en  bataille,  au  norabre  de  5,000 
fantassins  et  de  3,000  clievaux  qui  luy  presterent  serment  de  fidelite 
pour  autant  de  temps  qu'ils  resteroyent  dans  son  Estat ;  que  M''  de 
Louvoy  estoit  present  ;\  ce  serment,  en  suitte  de  quoyil  partit  pour 
France,  et  que  les  Hollandois  ont  un  corps  de  15  mille  hommes, 
disperses  dans  trois  places  voisines  de  TElectorat  de  Cologne,  pretz 
a  secourir  la  premiere  qui  sera  attaque.  Madame  la  Princesse  de 
Conty  -  est  morte  ce  matin  a  4  heures.' 

To  Lord  ArUnrjton. 

Paris  :  Feb.  r,<",  ItlTL'.  S.N. 

Since  my  last,  I  hear  that  the  following  establishment  is  resolved 
on  in  case  a  warre  break  out. 

ISIons''  le  Duo  de  Luxembourg  shall  command  the  troops  that 
the  King's  allyes  doe  sett  on  foot  for  his  service. 

The  Prince  of  Conde  to  command  a  royall  Army. 

The  King  to  bee  at  the  head  of  another  on  the  frontiers  of 
Luxembourg. 

The  Marshall  d'Humiers  shall  command  all  the  great  garrisons 
of  conquest  townes. 

And  ^lousieur  is  to  goe  into  Catalonia  in  case  the  Spaniards 
draw  the  warre  on  themselves,  &  under  him  the  Marshalls  de  Belle- 
fons  &  Crequi. 

As  to  the  Marine,  it  is  resolved  that  thirteen  men  of  warre  shall 
bee  in  the  ^lediterranean,  &  that  M""  le  Martel  shall  command  them 
as  Lieutenant  General :  that  the  C  d'Estre'es  shall  command  a  fleet 
of  34  great  ships  in  the  Ocean,  besides  others  that  are  designed  to 
both  the  Indyes. 

It  is  said  that  the  Hollanders,  to  engage  the  Spaniards  to  their 
party,  have  promised  not  to  make  any  peace  with  France  untill  all 
the  conquests  of  1667  bee  restored  to  Spaine,  but  this  Article  is 

'  i.e.  Saintete. 

-  Anne  Marie  Martinozzi,  widow  of  Arniand  de  Bourbon.  Prince  de  Conti. 


TOO  TIIK    nivSPATCIIKS    OF 

more  a  QiutJicoiuule  tliau  iiiiviliing  |)racticable,  as  cases  stand.  In 
the  meantime,  tlu-  Spaniards  prepare  for  a  warre,  making  great 
levyes  &  giving  out  that  they  fear  nothing  towards  Catalogiiia, 
tliiit  they  received  with  great  joy  the  Treaty  conclnded  at  the 
Hague  by  Don  Emanuel  de  Lira,'  and  that  the  Queen  intends  not 
to  give  any  answer  to  Mons''  de  Villar's  propositions  at  Madrid, 
particnhirly  as  to  her  assisting  the  Hollanders,  the  Spaniards 
desiring  that,  hee  should  guesse  at  their  intention  rather  than 
declare  them  themselves. 

The  Empei'or  is  tardy  in  his  resolutions,  hee  a])prehending  some 
troubles  from  the  Turks  or  the  reljells  in  Hungary,  it  all  that  hee 
can,  it's  thought,  will  bee  the  selling  some  forces  to  the  Spaniards  & 
Dutch,  especially  those  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg  shall  send  his 
Imp"  Ma'y. 

It  is  believed  that  ]\1'"  de  Molina  will  bee  here,  only  incognito, 
because  hee  makes  noe  great  hast  for  his  ecpiipage,  \-  being  resolved 
first  to  si'e  the  result  of  matters  now  in  agitation. 

Two  days  since  the  Princesse  de  Conti  dyed  here,  much  regretted 
for  her  signall  vertue  &  i)iety.  ]\Iadam  has  been  indisposed,  but 
would  not  bee  blooded,  because  the  Prince  her  father  -  gave  her  a 
caution  of  the  French  Physicians. 

M''  de  Louvoy  is  returned  &  in  greater  vogue  than  ever.  The 
seals  will  now,  they  say,  bee  given  in  commission  to  four  Mainfres 
de  Nequesfes. 

To  Sir  Joseph    WiUinmsoa. 

'ce  11-  Feb.  I(i72. 

'  L'on  escrit  de  ^fadrid  que  le  Marquis  de  Villardz,  Ambassadeur 
de  France,  a  declare  a  la  Reine  d'Fspagne,  suivant  lordre  qu'il 
en  a  receu  du  Roy,  son  maistre,  (pie  si  sa  Majeste  Catholique 
secourait  directement  on  indirectem'  les  IloUaudois,  sa  Maj''  ties 
chrestienne  eiitreroit,  en  main  arinee,  dans  les  Pays  Bas  du  Roy 
d'Espague,  pour  s'en  einparer  avec  60  mille  combattans  et 
attaqueroit  encore  la  Catalogue  avec  une  armee  de  20  mille 
homines,  et  le  Milanez  avec  une  autre  de  pareil  iiombre,  et  qu'en 
cas  que  sa  ditte  Majeste  Cath:  veuille  demeurer  neutre  en  cette 
affaire,  le  Roy  tres  chrestien  luy  promet  de  surseoir  les  demandes 
qu'il  faict  des  dependances  de  ses  coiiquestes.  jusqn'a  la  majorite 
du   Roy  Catholiciue,  et  que  si  elle   veut  accorder  a  ses  trouppes 

'  The  Spanish  Ambassador.  ^  Chai-les  Lewis,  Elector  Palatine. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  191 

le  passage  libre  par  dessus  ses  terres  des  Pays  Bas,  et  It-urs 
faire  fournir  des  ditz  Pays  Bas  les  vivres  et  fourrages  dorit  elles 
pouiTont  avoir  besoing.  sa  i[ajeste  tres  clnvstieime  luy  offre  de 
luy  abandonner  entiereiii'  touttes  ses  pretentions  touchant  les  dittes 
dependances,  sur  quoy  Ton  attend  la  response  de  cette  Reine. 

'D'antres  lettresde  ^Madrid  du  20"  dn  passe  portent  que  le 
bruict  est  _gi-and  en  cette  Cour  que  la  Reine  d'Kspagne  a  ratifie  un 
traicte  de  ligue  deffensive,  faict  par  le  Comte  de  ^lonterey,  avec  les 
Estats  Geiieranx  des  Provinces  Unies,  par  lequel  ils  s'engagent 
reciproquement  a  s'entresecourir  d'un  certain  nombre  de  trouppes. 
mais  que  la  Reine  d'Espagne  s'est  reservee  a  n.-  se  declarer  centre 
I'attaquant  que  six  mois  apres  la  declaration  de  la  gueri-e. 

'  L'on  mande  de  Vienne.que  le  Ministre  de  I'Empereur  a  la  Pox-te 
y  negotie  uu  renouvellement  du  dernier  traicte  faict  entre  sa  Maj'' 
imp:  et  le  Grand  Seigneur,  et  que  pour  obteuir  une  prolongaon 
de  la  treve  poiter  par  ce  traicte,  il  s'engage  d"abandonner  la 
Pologne  a  la  discretion  des  armes  Ottomanes,  et  de  ne  donner  aucun 
secours  au  Roy  de  Pologne,  son  beau  frere,  mais  que  Ton  a 
advis  que  la  Porte  a  envoye  Capigi  Bachi,  arrive  a  Vienne,  poiir 
demander  passage  par-dessus  les  terres  de  sa  Maj''^  Imp:  en 
Hongrie,  pour  une  armee  que  les  Turcs  veulent  faire  eutrer  en 
Pologne  par  ce  chemin,  ce  qui  embarasse  fort  cette  cour  dans  la 
crainte  ori  elle  est,  que  si  Ton  refuse  ce  passage,  les  Turcs  n'eu 
prennent  occasion  d'attaquer  la  Hongrie,  et  que  si  on  la  leurs 
accorde,  cette  armee  ne  retombe  sur  la  Hongrie  apres  avoir  ravage 
la  petite  Pologne. 

'  Sa  Maj''^'  Imp :  a  escrit  au  Roi  tres  chrest:,  a  la  sollicitation 
des  Estatz  Generanx  des  Provinces  Unies,  pour  luy  oftrir  sa  media- 
tion,^ et  luy  permettrt'  de  Uiy  faire  obtenir  toutte  sorte  de  satisfaction 
de  leur  part,  si  sa  Maj''  tres  chrest.  veut  suspender  les  resolutions 
qu'elle  pent  avoir  prises  contr'eux  et  sa  dicte  Maj'"  Imp:  est  dans 
le  dessein  d'envoyer  un  ministre  vers  le  Roy  d'Angleterre  pour  le 
mesme  siijet. 

'  L'on  escrit  de  La  Haye  que  le  Prince  d'Oranges  n'a  pas  encore 
accepte  la  charge  de  C'apitaine  General  des  Estatz  avec  les  condi- 
tions airsquelles  elle  luy  a  este  offerte  pares  que  ses  amys  ont  trouve 
que  son  pouvoir  y  seroit  trop  limite,  et  que  n'estant  esleu  que  par 

'  A  footnote  is  attached  to  the  MS.  as  follows  :  '  The  Elector  of  Mentz  solicited 
the  Emperor  for  mediation  between  France,  &c.' 


lilli  THE    DlvSrAR'IIKS    OK 

interim  jusques  au  moisde  Noveinbre  procliaiii,  il  devoit  la  refviser, 
A  moiiis  qu'il  ii'en  fust  pourveu  aux  iiie.siius  Loiiditioiis  ijue  ses 
preili-cesseurs  I'ont  possodt'e,  siirquoy  Ifs  provinces  df  (iui-ldre  et 
de  Zelaiidf  out  tesmoigm''  du  uncouteutimeiit '  contiv  la  Province  de 
1  lollande  de  ce  qu'elle  a  voulu  y  mettre  ces  restrictious,  t-t  menafent 
uiesnie  de  sc  dcstacher  d'avec  elle  et  de  se  nietti-e  soubz  la  pi'otec- 
tiou  de  la  France,  si  elle  ne  consent  a  restablir  plainement  le  Prince 
D'Oranges  dans  touttes  les  charges,  honneurs,  et  prerogatives  de  ses 
piires,  et  que  les  ditz  Etatz  se  sont  reassembles  pour  delibrer  tout 
de  uouveau  sur  cette  att'aire. 

•  L'on  mande  de  Thoulon,qne  le  S'' d'Almeras  y  areceu  du  Rov 
des  lettres,  par  lesquelles  sa  Maj''  le  faict  Mar(|uis  avec  les  ]iro- 
visions  de  Centre  Admiral  de  France,  et  commission  de  commander 
cette  annce  une  escadre  de  six  vaisseaux  du  Roy  et  un  bruslot 
dans  la  nier  Mediterranee,  oil  le  8''  de  ilartel  en  comraandera  une 
autre  de  pareil  nombre. 

'  L'on  escrit  de  la  Rocbelle,  que  l'on  equipe  a  Hocliefort  plu/.ieurs 
grandz  vaisseanx  du  Hoy,  et  qiTil  en  doibt  sortir  au  printemps,  tant 
de  la  riviere  de  Charente  que  de  Brest,  40  de  la  jiremiere  grandeur, 
et  onze  fregattes  on  brulotz,  sans  compter  pluzieurs  autres  vaisseaux 
moindres  qui  sortiront  tant  de  ces  portz  que  du  Havre  de  Grace  et 
autres. 

•  L'on  a  faict  un  nouveau  party  qui  doibt  fournir  au  Roy  huict 
millions  pour  les  despenses  extraordinaires  de  la  guerre,  lequel 
consiste  en  la  supression  que  l'on  va  faire  de  pres  de  la  moitie  des 
Tresoriers  de  l-'rance,  dont  il  y  a  un  grand  nombre,  en  obligeant 
ceux  qui  resteront,  de  donner  au  Roy,  chaqun  dix  mil  livres,  a 
cause  de  raugmentation  de  la  valeur  de  lenrs  charges  par  cette 
supjiression,  moyenant  quoy,  on  leurs  i-endra  le  droict  annuel,  qui 
leurs  a  este  oste. 

'  De  plus,  par  le  mesme  party,  l'on  taxe  tous  les  roturiers  qui 
posscdent  des  fiefz  nobles ;  l'on  faict  financer  tous  les  receveurs 
geueraux  des  finances  en  augmentant  leurs  gages ;  l'on  recherche 
les  notaires,  grefliers,  huissiers,  et  sergentz  qui  ont  exerce  sans 
estre  pourveu  en  tiltre  d'office  pour  les  taxer;  l'on  recherche  encore 
ceux  qui  ont  degrade  ou  uznrpe  sur  les  foretz  du  Roy,  et  l'on  cassa 
une  jiarty  des  officiers  des  greniers  a  sel,  dout  on  attrilnie  la  fonc- 
tion  aux  esleus,  moyenant  certaine  somme  qu'ilz  seront  obliger  de 
payer.  Samedi,  le  Roy  tinst  le  Sceau  assiste  de  six  Conseillers 
'  i.e.  Micontent. 


AN    E.\(iLlSH    A(iE.\T    IN    PAKIS  193 

d'Estat,  qui  estoyeut  assis  et  couvertz,  trois  de  chaqiie  coste  d'un 
table,  et  le  Roy  au  bout,  avec  six  ^laistres  des  Requestes,  qui  estoyent 
debout  et  decouvertz  derriere  sa  chaire,  et  qui  rajiporterent  les 
arretz,  les  graces,  et  aiitres  pieces  qu'il  y  avoit  a  sceller,  et  la  Reine, 
ayaut  faict  demander  au  Roy  si  sa  Majeste  agreeroit  qu'elle  satis- 
fist  la  curiosite  qu'elle  avoit  de  le  venir  voir  tenir  le  Sceau,  le  Roy 
luy  fist  response,  qu'elle  y  pouvoit  veuir,  et  elle  y  vint  avec  un  par- 
chemiu  a  la  main  contenant  la  grace  de  S"'  de  la  Rocliecourbon, 
gendre  de  iP'  Colbert  du  Teron,  et  cy-devant  Lieutenant  des  Gardes 
de  la  Marine,  qui  a  tue  le  Chevalier  de  Bouillon,^  laquelle  grace  elle 
pria  le  Roy  de  sceller,  ce  qti'il  fist,  en  disant  que  la  suppliante 
estoit  de  trop  bonne  maison  pour  estre  refusee.  Lundy,  le  Roy 
continua  de  tenir  le  Sceau  pour  achever  de  faire  sceller  ce  qiai 
restoit,  et  sa  Majeste  porte  la  clef  de  la  cassette  oil  sont  les  Sceaux 
comme  faisoit  M"^  le  Cbancelier,  et  a  donne  cette  cassette  a  garder 
ail  S''  de  Chamarante,  I'un  de  ses  premiers  Valletz  de  Chambre.  L'on 
asseure  que  le  Roy  a  resolii  de  ne  point  faire  de  Chancelier,  ny  de 
Garde  des  Sceaux,  et  de  continuer  d'en  faire  les  fonctions,  et  que  M"" 
D'Aligre  -  presidera  seulement  au  conseil  des  parties,  ainsy  que  M'" 
le  Mareschal  de  Villeroy  a  celuy  des  finances. 

'  Le  Roy  a  resolu  de  prendre  le  soing  de  I'educatiou  des  princes 
de  Conty,^  et  de  les  faire  eslever  aiipres  de  M''  le  Dauphin,  et  les 
faire  manger  a  sa  table.  Sa  iLijes'"'  a  pris  ]e  petit  deiiil  pour  la 
mort  de  Ma''*"  leur  mere.^ 

'  Le  ^larquis  de  Miossens,''  frere  du  ^lareschal  D' Albi-et,  Gover- 
neur  de  Guienne,  a  este  tue  en  ce  pays-la  par  le  S""  de  S'  Leger, 
frere  du  S""  de  la  Rocliecourbon,  qui  vient  d'obtenir  sa  grace. 
L'on  croid  que  c'est  un  duel,  et  le  dit  S"'  de  S'  Leger  a  este  pris 
prisonnier. 

■  Le  Comte  de  Konigsuiark,  qui  est  icy,  a  receu  ordre  de  la  Reine 
de  Suede  de  se  disposer  a  prendre  la  qualite  de  son  Ambassadeur 
Extraordinaire  en  cette  Cour. 

'  Mardi  au  soir,  le  Roy  envoy  a  commander  au  Marquis  de  Villeroy 

'  Constantin  Ignace  de  la  Tour,  Chevalier  tie  Bouillon. 

-  Etienne  d'Aligre. 

'  The  sons  of  Armand  de  Bourbon,  the  brother  of  the  '  grand  Cond^.'  The 
eldest,  Louis  Armand.  born  1661,  married  Mademoiselle  de  Blois,  the  daughter  of 
Louis  and  Madame  de  la  Valliere.  The  second,  Francois  Louis,  Prince  de  laEoche- 
sur-Yon,  boin  1064,  married  Adelaide  de  Bourbon.  *  See  p.  189,  n.  2. 

'  Frani^ois  Amanieu  d'Albret,  Comte  de  Moissens,  Seigneur  d'AmbleviUe. 
VOL.  V.  0 


19'1'  TIIK    nEsPATCHES   eli- 

de se  retirer  a  Liou  :  I'ou  iie  scayt  pas  I'licore  lu  sujet  de  sa  disgrace.' 
Le  briiict  court  quv  le  Due  de  Lorraine  a  faict  son  accomodenient, 
par  lequel  le  lioy  le  n-niet  en  possession  di-  sa  Ducheet  de  ton.-*  li-s 
revi'iiucs  ([ui  en  dependent,  a  condition  que  sa  .Majeste  y  pourra 
faire  passer  telles  trouppes  que  bon  lay  semblera  en  payant,  et 
qu'fUr  pourra  mesmc  y  faire  sejournir  °^  honimes  de  pied  et 
•],l)Ul)  chevaux  quand  il  lay  plaiia,  et  y  i'airr  une  dtadclle  a  Nancy 
ou  ailleurs,  k  son  clioix,  i-n  laqiielle  sa  Majestc'  tiendra  garnisun 
pour  s'asseurer  de  la  tidelite  de  ce  Due.  qui  ne  pourra  avoir  aucune 
place  fortifiee  dans  son  i'Jstat." 

To  iSir  Josejih   WiUiamsoji. 

Paris:  Feb.  l.T\  72. 

Two  days  since,  at  the  n'quest  of  I\Iadam,  the  King  declared 
that  if  the  Cliev''  de  Lorraine  came  to  Court  hee  should  bee  well- 
come,'-  whereupon  Mons''  le  Grand  ^  imediately  sent  a  courrier  to 
Rome  &  it  is  said  that,  at  his  returne,  the  King  will  give  him  the 
commission  of  .Marshall  du  [sic]  Battaille,  there  being  no  more 
^larshall  de  Camp.  In  ;i  former,  I  advised  you  that  there  was  .some 
misunderstanding  about  receptiims  of  Ami)'"  I'V'  Nuntios  here  \'  at 
Rome.  I  may  now  reconcile  all  by  the  King's  desiring  that  Nerli 
may  bee  the  man.  in  which  case  hee  shall  bee  received  with  much 
honour  &  civilty,  but  will  by  noe  means  admit  of  an  Italian  or 
Spaniard  in  that  Commission  (i.e.)  that  are  of  such  interest  other 
than  that  of  France.  Wee  hear  thence  also  of  the  Duchesse  of 
^lazarine  '  being  lately  dead. 

They  talke  here  of  peace  as  if  never  were  any  dessigns  for  a 
warre,  but  I  attribute  it  to  their  being  weary  of  one  discourse. 
M""  du  Louvoy  saith  hee  hath  bought  at  Mayence  &  conveyed  to 

Nuys   -TTT- —  of  powder. 
''     miUiers 

'  See  letter  dated  Feb.  13,  1G72. 

-  Footnote  to  MS.,  '  But  the  Marq'  de  Villeroy  was  disgraced  because,  as  1  hear, 
}iee  insinuated  unto  Madam  to  make  that  request.' 

'■'  Le  Graiid  Ecuycr,  Louis  de  Lorraine,  Comte  d'Armagnac. 

'  Hortensia  Mancini,  niece  of  Cardinal  Mazarin  and  mistress  of  Charles  IL 
(See  Macaulay,  History  of  England  from  tlte  Accession  of  James  II.,  vol.  i.  p.  430  ; 
St.  R^al,  Mi'moires  de  la  Duchesse  de  Masarin ;  Evelyn's  Diary,  Sejjt.  G,  1U7G. 
and  June  11,  1699.) 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  19o 

The  Dutch  Amb""  would  fain  make  people  believe  that  hee  is 
treating  for  an  accomodement,  but  since  what  I  mentioned  to  yon 
in  C3'pher,  I  have  inquired  &  found  that  he  hath  seen  noe  minister 
these  15  days. 

To  Lord  Arliwiton.         ^    . 

■'  Paris  :  Feb.  17,  '72. 

I  hear  that  Mons''  Crackow/  Resident  from  the  Duke  of  Bi-an- 
denbourg,  had  received  orders  from  his  master  to  sound  the 
minister  here  to  the  Duke's  mediation,  for  the  composing  all  the 
differences  between  the  French  &  Dutch,  telling  of  Mons""  Pompone 
that  the  King's  Resident,  ^M""  de  8'  (Teran,  had  explained  to  the 
Elector  of  Brandenbourg  the  reasons  his  Ma'-^'  had  to  bee  offended 
with  the  States,  as  generall  &  particular  aspersions  on  his  person, 
their  detaining  places  belonging  to  his  allyes,  but  what  was  most 
sensible,  their  insolent  behaviour  towards  his  subjects  in  their 
trade,  &  by  all  means  endeavouring  to  ruine  the  commerce  France 
was  establishing.  Crackow  replyed  to  these  that  the  Duke,  his 
master,  if  his  IMa'-'  would  hearken  to  an  accomodement,  ofFer'd  that 
the  States  should  give  him  satisfaction  as  to  the  point  of  honour,  bj' 
punishing,  as  his  i\Ia'-'''  shall  think  fitt,  any  persons  in  their  state 
he  shall  pick  out  that  have  offended  him  ;  that,  as  to  the  second 
point,  the  States  should  restore  Rhinsberg  to  the  Elector  of 
Cullen,  &  to  the  last  about  trade,  that  they  should  enter  in  such 
Treaty  for  the  regulation  of  it  as  the  King  should  think  fitt.  M'' 
Pompone  acquainted  the  King  with  what  the  Re:;ident  had  proposed, 
promising  him  an  answer,  but  his  I\Ia'-'''  sent  for  him  himselfe  & 
told  him  that  hee  would  accept  of  the  Elector's  mediacon  as  soon  as 
of  any  other  Prince,  but  it  was  no  time  to  think  of  an  accomoda- 
tion, provocations  having  exasperated  matters  too  far  not  to 
bee  revenged  of  them.  I  suppose  the  Dutch  putt  the  Elector  on 
offring  his  mediation  &  their  giving  all  reasonable  satisfactions, 
although  it  bee  likely  they  will  disowne  all,  since  it  took  noe  effect 
here.  The  King,  having  occasion  for  all  eminent  officers  to  serve 
him  the  next  Campagne,  hath  called  the  Duke  de  Navailles  to 
Court  again,  whose  disgrace  proceeded  from  some  mistakes  at 
Candia.  He  hath  also  sent  for  jSIons''  de  Cologni,-  who  commanded 
the  Hungarian  troops,  &  one  M''  Passage,'  an  able  officer. 

'  Lorrenz  Georg  von  Erockow. 

-  Jean  de  Coligny,  Comte  de  Saligny  (1617-1686). 

'  Aimard  de  Poisieux,  Marquis  du  Passage,  lieutenant-general. 


196  THE    DESPATCIIFS    OK 

They  say,  at  Court,  that  Spaine  will  not  yet  declare  itselfe  as  to 
the  present  conjuncture  ;  whether  it  bee  to  gaine  time,  in  order  to  the 
putting  itselfe  into  a  better  posture,  or  a  hesitation  in  its  councells 
what  measures  to  take,  wee  know  not. 

The  Card'  I'atroon  hath  sent  a  manifesto  to  all  the  Pope's 
ministers  in  other  Courts,  wherein  is  a  declaration  how  this  Court, 
contrary  to  the  rules  Si  customes  of  all  others,  pretendi-d  to  have 
their  Andxissador  received  at  Rome,  without  assuring  at  the 
same  time  that  the  Pope"s  Nuntio  should  also  be  admitted  of  here. 

These  days  past  the  Ofiiccrs  of  the  King's  house  have  been 
consulting  about  all  necessary  orders  for  the  march  of  the  King's 
household. 

The  enclosed  for  M''  Treasurer'  is  an  account  of  a  sad  disaster 
befallen  his  kinsman  M''  Hals  &  one  il''  J'eyto,  whower  both  killed 
in  the  streets  on  Sunday  last  by  two  other  English. 

'  ce  18"  Fevrier  1G72. 

'  L'on  a  expedie  de  nouveaux  ordres  dii  Roy  pour  faire  encore 
marcher  en  Allemague  ueuf  a  dix  mille  hommes  des  trouppes  de 
sa  Majeste  qui  doibvent  prendre  la  mesme  routte  que  les  precedentes 
en  partant  des  trois  Evesches  pour  se  rendre  par  le  pays  de  Treves 
dans  I'Electorat  de  Cologne. 

'  Sa  Maj''-  a  diet  que  cette  annee  elle  mettroit  en  campagne  75 
mille  hommes  de  pied  et  20  mille  chevaux  pour  le  secours  de  ses 
allies,  sans  compter  les  garnisons  de  ses  places,  et  quelq[u]'un  ayant 
diet  la-dessus  a  sa  Majeste  qu'il  faudroit  bien  des  vivres  pour  entre- 
tenir  tant  de  trouppes  en  campagne,  le  Roy  respondit  quil  scavoit 
qu'il    luy   falloit    '"    rations  de  pain    par  jour,    mais    que    quand 

ses  trouppes  seroyent  entrees  dans  les  terres  des  Hollandois  il  en 
faudroit  moins,  et  que  le  pays  leurs  en  fourniroit  une  bonne  partye 
en  le  faisant  contribuer.  II  y  a  quelques  jours  que  Madame  dist  au 
Roy  qu'elle  avoit  une  grace  a  luy  demander,  mais  qu'elle  ne  luy 
diroit  poinct  ce  que  c'estoit  si  sa  ilaj'"'  ne  luy  promettoit  de  la  luy 
accorder,  et  qu'elle  esperoit  que,  comme  c'estoit  la  premiere  qu'elle 
luy  eust  encore  demandee,  il  ne  la  luy  refuseroit  pas,  a  quoy  le  Roy 
luy  respondit,  qu'il  la  luy  accorderoit  volontiers,  pourveu  qu'elle 
n'allast  pas  contre  le  bien  de  son  Estat,  et  alors  IMadanie  luy 
demanda  le  retour  dn   Chevalier  de  Lorraine,  ce  qu'elle  a  faict  a  la 

'  Sir  Thomas  Clifford. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIb  197 

priere  de  Monsieur,  a  qui  sa  Maj'"  dist,  apres  I'avoir  accorde  a 
Madame,  qu'il  pouvoit  envoyer  un  courier  a  Eome  pour  en  faire 
revenir  ce  clievalier  ainsy  que  le  Comte  de  Marsan,  son  frere ;  sur- 
quoy  ^lonsieur  luy  en  depescha  un  aussytost  pour  le  rappeler,  et 
son  Altesse  Royalle  luy  faict  faire  im  he\  equipage  a  dessein  de 
I'envoyer  au  devant  de  luy,  et  de  luy  en  faire  present.  De  plus,  sa 
Majeste  a  resolu  de  faire  le  dicte  Chevalier  de  Lorraine  Tun  des 
Mai'eschaux  de  Camp  de  son  armee,  mais  le  Roy  s'estant  informe 
qui  avoit  conseille  a  ^lonsievir  de  se  servir  de  Fentremise  de 
Madame  pour  obtenir  le  retour  de  ce  chevalier,  et  ayant  sceu  que 
c'estoit  le  Marqui.s  de  Villeroy,  Ton  attribue  en  partye  a  ce  conseil 
la  disgi-ace  et  I'exil  de  ce  ilarquis  ainsy  qua  un  emportem'  de 
parolles  qu'il  a  eu  contre  il'"  de  Louvoy,  sur  ce  qu'il  n'a  pu  obtenir 
la  qualite  qu'il  demandoit  de  Marescbal  de  Camp  pour  la  campagne 
prochaine.  L'on  asseure  que  le  Roy  a  resolu  de  rappeler  Monsieur 
de  NavaUles  et  de  luy  donner  de  Temploy  pour  servir  en  la  pro- 
chaine guerre.  Le  Cardinal  de  Retz  arrive  aujourd'huy  ou  demain  a 
Paris. 

'  Les  Ai-chevesques  de  Rheims  et  de  Paris,  qui  avoyent  eu  quelque 
demesle,  se  sent  reconcilies  et  ont  disne  ensemble,  et  I'Archevesque 
de  Paris  en  a  faict  de  mesme  avec  le  Cardinal  de  Bouillon,  avec  le- 
quel  il  s'estoit  brouille  touchant  les  rangs.^ 

'  Les  derniers  lettres  de  Rome  portent  qu'il  y  est  aiTive  un 
coun-ier  extraord"  de  France  qui  y  a  apporte  la  nomination  faicte 
par  le  Roy  tres  christien  du  Comte  Guillaume  de  Furstemberg 
pour  estre  faict  Cardinal  en  la  premiere  promotion  des  courounes, 
sans  prejudice  des  pretentions  de  I'Evesque  de  Laon  a  la  nomination 
de  la  couronne  de  Portugal  et  celles  de  I'Archevesque  de  Thoulouse 
a  la  nomination  de  la  Pologne.  L'on  diet  que  ce  dernier  va  a  Rome 
solliciter  luy-mesme  son  chappeau,  comme  faict  I'Evesque  de  Laon. 
L'abbe  Vibo,  Intemonce  du  Pape  en  France,  a  faict  scavoir  en  cette 
Cour,  par  ordre  de  sa  S"',  qu'ayant  appris  que  le  Due  d'Estrees 
estoit  en  chemin  pour  venir  faire  les  fonctions  d'Ambassadeur  de 
France  a  Rome,  elle  avoit  aussytost  donne  ordre  au  S''  Nerli  de  se 
rendre  a  Paris  pour  y  exercer  I'employ  de  son  Nonce,  et  que  pour 
conserver  I'egalite  entre  sa  dicte  S"'  et  sa  ]^Iajeste  tres  chres- 
tienne,  elle  declaroit  qu'elle  ne  pouvoit  pas  recevoir  ie  diet  Due 
d'Estrees  en  qualite  d'Amb'',  qu'a  condition  que  sa  Maj"  promettoit 

'  See  p.  185. 


198  TiiK  ni:sivm  iiEs  tH' 

de  recevoir  au  inesine  temps  le  S""  Nerli  en  qualite  de  !<oii  Nonce 
Apostolique;  surquoy  M''de  Pompone  luy  a  respondit  [sic]  de  la  part 
du  Hoy,  quf  le  Due  d'Estrees  estoit  charge  d'ajuster  cette  affaire  avec 
la  Gourde  Rome,  laqiielle response  a  este  faictc  a  densein  de  mettre 
par  advance  ce  JJuc  en  possession  de  son  employ  d'Amb'',  et  d'obliger 
la  Cour  de  liome  Jl  le  recevoir  en  cette  qualite,  en  attendant  que  Ton 
se  soit  determine  touchant  la  reception  du  nouvean  Nonce. 

'  L'on  diet  que  le  Comte  de  Marcin  est  en  traicte  pour  I'eutrer  au 
service  de  la  France  par  rentreinise  de  M""  le  l^riuce,  soubz  lequel  il 
serviroit  en  ce  cas  en  Allemagiie  avec  la  (pialite  de  General  des 
troupjies  de  I'Klecteur  de  Cologne  dont  il  est  ne  suject,  estant  du 
i'ays  de  LiSge,  dont  cet  Elect  eur  est  Evesque ;  et  que  nioyenant  ce 
nouvel  attachni'  Sa  Maj'''  tres  chrest:  luy  doibt  faire  de  graiidz 
advantages  pour  le  recompenser  de  30  mille  escus  d'apoinctein"^ 
(|u'il  a  presentem'  au  service  d'Espagne  en  qualite  de  Mestre  de 
Camp  general  de  touttes  les  trouppes  des  Pays  Bas,  et  que  ce  qui 
luy  peut  encore  obliger  est,  qu'outre  sa  qualite  de  suject  de  I'Electeur 
de  Cologne,  il  a  de  grandz  hiens  en  France  du  coste  de  sa  f'enime,' 
qui  est  franfoise,  et  qui  a  faict  naturalizer  ses  enfantz  en  f'rance. 

■  Le  Marquis  de  S'  Andre  Montbrun  ayant  demande  au  Roy  la 
permission  d'aller  en  Hollande  querir  sa  iille,  qui  y  est  mariee  a  un 
Hollandois,  pour  I'esloigner  des  desordres  de  la  gueiTe  en  la  tirant 
de  ce  pays  et  I'amenant  en  France,  Sa  Maj"'  luy  a  oftert  tous  les 
passeportz  necessaires  pour  la  faire  revenir  et  ne  luy  a  pas  voulu 
permettre  de  passer  en  ce  pays  ;  Ton  croid  (|ue  cette  permission  luy 
a  este  ref'usee  de  crainte  que,  par  la  zclle  que  ce  Marquis  a  pour  sa 
religion  Calviniste,  il  ne  s'engageast  au  service  des  Hollandois  et 
ne  voulust  pcrir  les  armes  a  la  main  pour  leur  deffense. 

'  Le  Roy  a  donne  un  memoire  aM'de  Louvoy  de  120  Capitaines 
de  Cavallerie  qu'il  a  choisis,  avec  ordre  de  ivmplir  de  leurs  noms 
autant  de  nouvelles  comissions  en  blanc  qui  estoyent  touttes  prestes 
ii  estre  expediees,  et  qu'on  leurs  doibt  deslivrer  incessamment  poui- 
faire  une  nouvelle  levee  de  (5,000  chevaux.  II  arriva  Samedi,  au 
soir,  un  com'rier  extraordinaire  d'Espagne.  qni  a  apporte  des  lettres 
du  Marquis  de  Villardz,  par  lesquelles  il  mande  que  la  Reine 
d'Espagne  ne  luy  rend  poinct  de  response  positive  sur  le  suject  des 
Hollandois,  surquoy  le  Roy  a  ordonno  d'expedier  ces  120  nouvelles 
commissions  de  cavallerie. 

'  Catherine  de  Neuvillc,  daughter  of  the  Due  de  Villeroi. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    TAKIS 


199 


Sa  ^lajeste  partira  le  Mecredi  des  Cendi-es  de  S'  Germaiii,  pour 
aller  a  Versailles  a  dessein  d'y  demeurer  la  plus  gi-ande  partye  du 
Cai-esme. 

'  Hier,  ^loniieur  Grotius,  Ambassadeur  de  Hollande,  alia  a  S' 
Germain,  ou  il  coiifera  avec  M''  de  Porapone.' 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Feb.  20"',  '72. 
You  cannot  expect  much  news  at  present  from  this  Court, 
since  it  is  alltogether  diverting  itselfe  with  Balets,  etc*. ;  the  common 
bruit  is  of  the  Dutch  having  ofl'red  above  20  millions  to  the  French, 
satisfaction  to  England,  restitutions  to  Cologne  &  ]\lunster,  but  all 
these  I  believe  proceed  only  from  what  I  wrote  to  you  about 
the  Elector  of  Brandenburg's  Resident.' 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  February  ye  27"",  '72. 
The  last  courrier  from  Spaine  brought  letters  from  the  Marq^ 
de  A'illars  to  the  King,  intimating  that  the  Queen  Regent  was  not 
disposed  to  make  a  positive  declaration  how  Spain  would  behave 
itselfe,  but  still  persisted  that  by  the  Treaties,  without  any 
rupture,  it  could  assist  its  allyes,  whenas,  at  the  same  time,  wee 
hear  from  Holland,  that  the  ratification  of  the  defensive  league  made 
at  the  Hague  was  arrived  by  sea,  &  that  Don  Emanuel  de  Lira 
had  exchanged  them,  adding  further,  that  hee  had  a  full  com- 
mission sent  him  from  the  Queen  to  enter  into  a  further  alliance 
with  the  offensive  also,  &  that  without  writing  to  Spaine  or  ex- 
pecting any  orders  thence  upon  this  subject ;  tt  that  thereupon 
hee  was  in  continual  negotiation  with  the  States.  AVherby  vour 
Lopp  may  perceive,  that,  as  I  said  in  a  former,  the  Court  of  Spaine 
had  rather  that  France  should  deviner  &  guesse  at  its  intentions 
than  to  give  a  solemne  declaration  what  measures  it  will  take. 
From  Switserland  wee  hear  that  there  is  like  to  be  a  rupture 
between  one  of  the  Cantons  ('atholypw  &  that  of  Bearne  upon  an 
old  difference  which  it  seems  is  not  yet  made  up ;  in  which  case,  all 
the  Protestant  Cantons  will  joyne  with  the-  latter,  as  will  the 
(Jatlioliqiie^  with  the  former. 

'  See  letter  dated  Feb.  17.  1672. 


200  THK   DESPATCHES   OK 

The  Elector  of  Brandenbiirgh  keeps  both  the  Frencli  &  Dutcli 
Ministers  in  siispence.  The  first  soliicites  a  neutrallity,  i*t  the  other 
complyiince  with  some  antient  defensive  Treaty,  when  the  States 
had  ditterences  with  the  Bpp  of  Mnnster,  iSjc".'  However,  the 
Mlector  answers  to  the  French  agent  that  hee  ariiies  for  the 
defence  of  his  owne  territories,  &  to  the  Dutcli,  that  noe  Treaty 
obligi'tli  him  to  assist  them  against  the  Frencli.  Hee  hath  already 
1(),OUO  men  in  amies  at  all  adventures. 

The  Dutch  Ambassadour  thinks  of  taking  leave  within  a  few 
days,  hee  having  been  told  that  his  atnj  here  signifyed  no  other 
than  ye  amusing  the  officers,  who  have  commissions  to  raise  men 
with  apprehentions  of  an  accomodation  in  hand.  Hee  went  a  while 
since  to  visit  M''  Pompone,  &  told  him  that  hee  made  it  not  as 
Ambassador  to  a  Minister,  but,  as  they  were  intimate  friends 
formerly,  he  desired  liis  opinion  in  some  matters ;  that  as  to 
himselfe,  hee  was  a  Frenchman  borne,  &  of  all  the  States"  subjects 
the  most  devoted  to  the  King's  service.  Wherfore  hee  was  much 
concerned  to  know,  whether  after  all  these  heats,  there  were  not  a 
possibility  of  having  some  propositions  for  an  accomodation  laid 
before  the  King,  in  which  case,  hee  would  adventure  to  assure  him 
that  his  Ma'''  wonld  in  some  degree  rest  satisfied.  M''  Pompone 
replyed  that  it  was  too  late,  &  that  his  Ma*^'  would  not  hearken  in 
the  least  to  any  such  thing — '  et  que  le  Hoy  seroit  bien  aise  qui! 
prist  son  Aud'^'^'  de  Conge.' 

The  King's  troops  in  the  Elector  of  Cullen's  countrey  have 
been  forced  to  remove  out  of  Nuits,  Keyserwaert,  Boon,  c^cc".  into 
some  open  \allages,  for  better  air,  because  some  diseases  incomoded 
them  in  those  places,  where  soe  many  were  thronged  together. 
Here  is  some  misticall  discourse  of  growing  differences  between 
the  Elector  Pnlatin  ct  that  of  Ments,  insomuch  as  the  latter  hath 
sent  the  Conte  de  Schonborne "  to  the  Emp""  to  demand  protection 
against  insults  the  other  might  make  on  him,  from  his  new  alliance 
with  France,  otherwise  that  hee  himselfe  must  also  throw  himselfe 
on  France. 

ilore  commissions  are  dayly  given  out  for  the  raising  of  more 
foot  &  horse.    It  is  resolved  that  the  Prince  of  Conde  shall  command 


'  Louis  had    been   endeavouring   since   16GS   to   form   an   alliance  with  the 
Elector  of  Brandenburg  (Mignet,  iii.  288). 
^  Melchior  Frederic  de  Sehoenborn. 


AN    E.\(;LISH    agent    in    PARIS  201 

the  auxiliary  troops,  viz*,  those  that  are  &  shall  be  sent  towards  the 
Rhine,  the  Due  d'Anguien,  his  son,  to  bee  his  Lieuten'  Generall,  & 
with  him  two  Marshals  of  i'rance,  of  which  M""  de  Crequi  will  bee 
one.  It  is  said,  also,  that  the  Conte  de  Vivonne  will  bee  Lieutenant 
Generall  in  the  King's  army  in  order  to  his  being  made  Maresclial 
&  his  command  of  the  Galleys  to  bee  officiated  by  his  Lieuten'. 

The  King's  daughter  '  hath  been  very  ill  these  6  days,  insomuch 
as  the  physicians  despair  of  her  recovery. 

Hee  hath  given  order  for  his  owne  equipage  to  bee  ready  by  the 
loth  of  Aprill. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  March  2'',  '72. 

Yesterday  I  received  the  honour  of  yours  Feb.  loth,  &  the  day 
before  arrived  a  courrier  from  the  Bpp  of  Laon  with  adnse  that 
the  Pope  was  on  the  making  some  promotions.  &  that  hee  thought 
himselfe  would  bee  one  ;  but  imediately  after  him  came  another 
expresse  to  the  ArchBpp  of  Thoulouze,  with  news  that  the  Pope 
had  made  3  Cardiualls,  one  Bavinnes,  (if  I  mistake  not.)  a  Neopoli- 
tain,  the  P"^*"  of  Bade  for  the  Emperour,  &  the  s"*  ArchBpp  for 
Poland.  Soe  that  you  perceive  how  the  Bp  of  Laon  has  been 
hitherto  mumpt.  However,  since  P.  Nitard  is  not  yet  promoted, 
hee  hath  still  hopes  of  a  Cap.  The  Court  of  Eome  having,  as  they 
imagine,  put  a  kind  of  slight  upon  this,  it  is  resolved  that  the 
D.  d'Estree  shall  bee  honourably  received,  because  his  H*'  hath  been 
assured  that  the  s''  Amb'"  hath  orders  to  declare  that  a  Nuntio  shall 
bee  Wellcome  at  Paris. 

Upon  the  news  of  Spain's  having  ratified  the  project  made  at 
the  Hague,  the  King  has  given  out  new  commissions  for  the 
raising  16,000  men,  wherof  seven  thous''  are  to  bee  horse.  It  is 
now  to  bee  feared  least  France  turne  the  first  designes  into  an 
inroad  in  Flanders,  leaving  us  &  the  Dutch  engaged,  &  not  able  to 
stop  the  currant.  If  soe.  the  whole  laudable  designe  of  the  ople 
Alliance  will  bee  frustrated,  for  I  really  believe  France  vvill  act  no 
otherwise  against  the  Dutch  than  by  the  troops  it  lends  the 
Elector  of  Cullen  &  Bp  of  Munster. 

'  Marie  Tlierese. 


.'U2 


THE    PKSPATCIIES    OK 


Tu  Lord  ArliiKjbin. 

Paris  :  March  5"'.  '72. 
Since  the  news  of  the  Queen  of  Spain's  ratif;>ing  the  Treaty  ' 
made  at  tlie  Hague,  the  King  has  resolved  on  the  making  new 
levyes,  i!i:  accordingly  lOO  commissions  are  given  out  for  the 
raising  of  horse  to  as  many  captains  who  were  all  chosen  out  by 
the  King  hiraselfe.  Besides  which,  hee  is  resolved  to  raise  2,00U 
horse  in  forreigne  parts  &  8,000  foot,  besides  the  120  companies 
of  foot  hee  gave  commissions  for  some  time  since.  The  Army,  that 
is  at  present  on  foot,  consists  of  1,500  companies  of  French  foot,  at 
I  ;2'^?2  *"'*' Z''™'^''    ^3  men  in  each   company,  amounting  to,  in  all,  79  thousand  GoO 

■J   38,818    „    Forcignc  r,,,         ,.  ^        ■'.  -.   9  ■  '  ,-,         ,  i 

ui8,-4;7Foot  men.      Ihe   torreyue    reguiients   or   foot  amount    unto  ob  thous'' 

27.702 Hor.c  yjv^    ,„j.u       ^W  the  horse,  as  Well   r,'--,w  d'Ar,ne><,  Chcrmu-  Liyor,, 

Dragoons,  as  others,  make  27  thou*'  792,  which  in  all,  hotli  foot  A- 
horse,  amount  unto  146,271  men,  not  counting  the  Kegiment  of 
French  guards,  the  Suifse,  nor  the  Gens  d' Amies  dtt  Roy.  Yester- 
day, tlie  King  named  Mareschal  d'HumiSres  to  goe  &  command  the 
troops  about  the  Rhine,  telling  him  that  his  5la'''  himselfe  would 
follow  him  in  a  short  time.  Mons''  d'Artagnan  ^  is  to  command  in 
Lisle  in  the  s'  JMareschal's  absence,  and  the  King,  hearing  that 
the  Spaniards  were  sending  an  Army  into  Catalonia  of  above 
twelve  thousand  men,  the  S''  le  Bret  was  ordred  to  goe  into 
Ixoussillon,  to  head  those  troops  that  are  on  the  place,  which  are  to 
bee  augmented  to  the  number  of  8,000  foot  &  2,000  horse,  untill 
such  time  as  his  ^la'-^  shall  name  a  Generall  to  connuand  them,  for 
which  charge  the  Marshalls  de  Crequy  &  Bellefonds  stand  connx^ti- 
tors,  as  well  as  the  C  de  Schomberg. 

From  Italy,  the  last  courrier  brought  news  that  tlie  I'ope  iS;  the 
\'eiietiaiis  were  arming  upon  the  account  of  a  diftereiice  lietween 
fheni  five  years  since,  about  the  River  Po,  which  the  N'enetians 
turned  from  the  territories  of  Ferrare  to  the  great  prejudice  of  that 
count  rey,  which  belongs  to  the  Ciiurch.  but  everyliody  looks  on  this 
as  an  amusing  pretext  only  for  their  arming,  which  tends  to  the 
assisting  of  the  Spaniards,  in  case  the  French  sliould  attaque  Milan  ; 
&  I  believe,  if  the  King  hath  any  designes  that  way,  that  the  Duke 
of  Savoy  may  bee  concerned  against, the  Milaneses. 

'  Treaty  of  the  Pyrenees,  by  which  the  Dutch  and  Spanish  arranged  to  help 
each  other. 

■•'  Charles  de  Bats-Castehnor,  Comte  d'Artaignan. 


iX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  203 

In  the  French  Gazette  your  Lopp  will  see  how  successful!  the 
undertakers  have  been  as  to  the  joncficm  (les  chux  mers,  a  worke 
that  hath  liitherto  seemed  ridiculous. 

The  Coiii't  is  in  deep  mourning  for  the  deatli  of  Madam  the 
Kins's  daughter. 


To  Lord  Arlinriton. 

Paris  :   March  7"',  '72. 

Yesterday,  by  the  ordinary  post.  I  made  bold  to  trouble  your 
Lopp,  &  now  the  inclosed  letter  '  being  fallen  into  my  Lands  by  the 
mi-stake  of  a  name,  it  being  intended,  to  perceive  by  the  contents, 
for  somebody  belonging  to  the  Spannish  Ambassadour  here,  I 
thought  it  not  amisse  for  some  expressions  as  '  dos  personas  de  la 
sala  baja  '  &  what  preceded  them,  to  transmit  it  to  your  Lopp.  By 
the  consequence  of  the  hints  about  the  ratifications,  the  cypher 
being  subsequent,  it  may  give  line  to  the  sequel  about  the  Parlia- 
ment. Att  Court  the  visage  is  much  altered,  for  before  there  was 
nothing  more  discoursed  than  to  attack  Flanders.  Catalonia,  Milan, 
&c'%  &,  at  present,  it  is  said  '  que  le  Roy  ne  vent  pas  faire  la  guerre 
anx  Espagnols,'  &  all  is  attributed  to  the  English,  who  are  said  to 
bee  much  against  any  rupture  towards  Flanders ;  nay,  this  hath 
taken  soe  much  root  among  the  Soldutesque,  that  thev  begin  now 
to  apprehend  that  there  will  be  noe  warre.  The  Duke  of  Savoy 
hath  sent  order  to  his  Amb.  liei'e  to  acquaint  the  King  that  hee  is 
intended  to  arme  himselfe.  seeing  all  his  neighbours  are  putting 
themselves  into  defensive  postures. 

The  Dutch  give  out  here  that  they  are  in  a  manner  assured  of 
the  Sweeds  if  troubles  should  continue  after  this  year  bee  expired. 
Their  Amb''  is  to  have  this  week  his  Audience  of  Com/e,  if  at  last 
these  people  doe  not  listen  to  fair  propositions,  hee  having,  of  late, 
been  very  busy  to  endeavor  the  patching  up  an  accomodation, 
which  is  the  more  spoken  of  because  the  French  seem  to  bee  out  of 
the  measures  they  had  proposed  to  themselves,  which  they 
ingeniously  begin  now  to  confesse  were  to  embroyle  us  in  a  warre 
with  the  Dutch,  it  fall  on  Flanders. 


The  enclosure  is  missing 


201  THi;    DK.SPATC'IIKS    UK 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williaimon. 

Paris  :  >r(irch  9th.  72. 

Here  is  little  of  variety  only  in  looks  &  discourse  of  some  people, 
in  soe  mncb  that  the  Solflnti'sque  begin  to  desjtaire,  imagining  that, 
after  all  these  noises  of  warre,  there  may  bee  little  of  action  this 
summer.  However,  all  the  great  oflicers  are  nanieil  who  shall  have 
an\'  considerable  command  in  ye  armies.  A:  400  horse  are  preparing 
for  to  carry  the  King's  owne  bagage,  which  hee  will  use,  rather  than 
waggons,  for  more  speedy  removalls  from  place  to  place  as  occasion 
shall  serve. 

The  C  de  Charroot '  hath  sold  his  place  of  Capt:  of  the  Guards  to 
the  Due  Duras,  nephew  to  iM"  Turenne  tnot/enant  oO  th''  pistolls,  & 
the  other  is  made  Lieutenant  (ht  Bnij  in  Picardy,  under  the  Due 
d'Elbeuf  The  Chev""  de  TiOrrain  has  been  at  C'c)urtthese3  days,  & 
for  more  modesty.  I\Iousii>ur  was  at  Paris  at  that  time  when  hee 
came  to  Versailles,  '^'esterday,  my  L''  Ami/  had  Aud'^'  of  Condole- 
ance  upon  the  death  of  ]\Iadam,  la  jille  du  Roy.  M''  Digby  ^  arrived 
here  last  night,  <t  his  Ex'^''  [is]  gone  to  Versailles  again  this  morning. 
Wee  hear  that  Quinones  ^  intends  to  quitt  the  governem'  of  the 
Franche  Comte,  forseeing  that  hee  shall  not  be  able  to  maintain  it 
in  case  the  French  enter  into  it  this  summer,  vvhich  1  can  hardly 
believe  they  will  doe.  if  some  neighbours  consider  their  interest. 


To  Lord  Arlhujtan. 

Paris  :  March  12"',  72. 

Att  Court,  the  late  busines  has  been  to  name  the  generall 
officers  for  this  Campnipie  ;  the  Bpp  of  ilunster  intending  to 
command  his  owne  forces,  which  are  said  to  bee  more  then  20,000 
men,  the  Duke  of  Lu.xembourg  is  to  bee  next  him,  it  iP  de  Kenel  ' 
to  command  the  horse,  assisted  by  ilons''  de  La  ^'aliere  '  (brother  to 
the  lady  of  that  name). 

'  Louis  de  B^thune,  comte  de  Charost. 

'  Captain  Francis  Digby,  sou  of  George,  Earl  of  Bristol. 

"  DonHieronimode  Quinones,  member  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  War  in  Madrid 
He  was  .subordinate  to  the  Comte  de  Monterey,  governor  of  the  Low  Countries. 

'  Louis  de  Clermont  d'Amboise,  Marquis  de  Itcuel. 

'  Jean  Frauvois  de  la  Baulme  le  Blanc,  Marquis  dc  la  Valliere,  governor  of 
Bourbonnais. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  205 

I  sent  your  Lopp  a  list  of  the  French  King's  army,  of  which,  I 
hear,  hee  intends  90,000  foot  &  35,000  horse  shall  bee  in  the  held, 
the  rest  to  remaine  in  the  severall  garrisons,  &  it's  given  out  that 
hee  himselfe  will  bee  at  Lisle  to  observe  the  motions  of  the 
Spaniards,  the  late  discourse  of  attaquing  them  in  soe  many  places 
being  vanished  for  the  present.  However,  the  King  intends  to 
have  forces  ready  in  all  quarters,  lions''  de  Schomberg  being  to  goe 
into  Ivoussillon,  &  the  Prince  of  Conde,  his  son,  the  Marshalls  of 
Belfonds  &  Humieres,  towards  the  Rhine.  The  latter's  command 
at  Lisle  is  to  bee  succeeded,  for  the  time,  by  the  Sieur  d'Artagnan, 
&  the  Sieur  de  Nancre,'  Governor  of  Aeth,  is  made  Lieutenant 
Generall  in  one  of  the  armies. 

Here  is  at  present  one,  l-'resid'  Canon,  sent  by  the  Duke  of 
Lorrain  to  moyemude  an  accomodation.  The  conditions  will  bee 
somewhat  hard  to  the  Duke  if  they  come  to  an  agreement,  the 
King  being  resolved  that  his  troops  shall  have  winter  quarters, 
passage,  &c^.  in  Lorrain,  after  the  restoration.  &  Prince  Charles  to 
ratify  the  Treaty ;  &  untill  his  answer  be  come,  there  will  be  nothing 
done  here  as  to  that  negotiation.  Wee  hear  that  the  Elector  of 
Cullen  hath  sent,  to  the  Empire,  his  exciises  for  having  lett  in 
forreigne  troops  into  his  countrey,  but  at  the  same  time  pleading 
the  reasons  hee  had  for  it ;  hee  proposed  that  if  the  Emp""  could 
prevayle  on  the  Dutch  to  take  off  the  cause  on  their  sides,  hee 
would  answer  for  the  withdrawing  of  the  French  troops  on  his, 
on  condition  that  Rhynsberg  bee  restored  to  him  without  any 
reserve  :  that  thereupon  the  p]mp''  had  sent  orders  to  the  Baron 
d'Isola  -  to  move  it  to  the  States,  especiallj-  because  M''  Gremonville 
assured  him,  that  were  Rhynsberg  restored,  his  Master's  troops 
should  goe  out  of  the  Elector's  countrey.  The  French  have  reason 
to  wish  this  proposition  took  effect,  because  soe  considerable  a  post 
could  not  then  stop  their  progresse  &  their  troops  might  comply 
with  the  agreement,  quitting  the  Elector's  countrey,  &  advancing 
further  into  that  of  the  Hollanders. 

It  is  thought  the  King's  march  will  be  late  in  the  spring,  by 
reason  of  the  winter's  severity  &  backwardnesse.  Instead  of 
chaiTiots,^  hee  has  ordered  four  hundred  Sumpter  horses  to  bee 

'  Claude  Antoine  de  Dreux,  Comte  de  Nancr^. 
-  The  Ambassador  of  Austria  at  the  Hague. 
'  '  Waggons '  interlined  in  MS. 


200  Till-:  i>Ksi'Arcni':.s  ok 

brouglit  to  carry  his  biitrffuge,  that  hee  iimy  move  with  more  speed 
from  ])liice  to  place.  Tlie  expences  of  liis  Army  this  ('aiiipiujnv 
are  estimateil  at  the  'JVeasury  to  amount  unto  13,7U(),0Oll  livers 
every  four  months,  upwards  of  eleven  hundred  thousand  pound 
sterling. 

The  Ghev'  de  Lorraiii  is  come  back,  not  a  little  to  Monsieur's 
satisfacticm.'  Here  is  a  report  as  if  the  (','  tie  Lauzun,  out  of 
rliiiijriii.  having  much  wood  in  his  chamlu-r,  set  fire  on  it,  it  if  the 
centinell  had  not  perceived  a  smoke,  iM''  Fouquet  who  lodgeth 
above  hiin,  had  siiU'ered  by  it. 


To  Lord  Ai-liiu/ton. 

Paris,  March  19'»,  72. 

Since  my  last  to  your  Lopp  a  Councell  of  Warre  hath  been 
held  at  \'crsailles,  as  well  for  the  naming  of  principall  Commanders 
as  for  the  disposing  of  the  maritime  aliaires,  in  order  whereunto 
the  following  officers  were  named. 

In  the  kinus  owne  Army. 

The  (.'oiiil  de  Soissons 

.M'-  de  la  Feuilla.le 

.M''  de  IJochefort  #  •     ,  ,, 

.\r  Je  Grand  Maistre  ' 

M''  de  Lorge '' 

M'' de  Gadagne  '  ' 

The  Chev''  de  Lori'aine   , 

]M''  de  Moutal  '  \i      1    IT     ;    /-t 

Tjfr  1    n     I-  ■  '11"*^  .\larsh;uls  dc  Camp. 

J\r  de  Grenlis  i  ■' 

M""  ^Martinet  ' 

It  is  supposed  that  Mareschal  Tureinie  commands  the  whole  army 
next  the  King. 

'  See  p.  C5. 

-  Henri  de  Diiillon,  Comte,  later  Due  clu  Lude,  Grand  Maitre  de  IWrtillerie 

'  Guy  de  Durfort-Duras,  Comte,  later  Due  de  Lorges. 

'  Charles  F^Oix  de  Galean,  Comte  de  Gadagne. 

^  Charles  de  Moutsaulnin,  Comte  de  Mental. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  207 


111  the  I'rince  of  Conde's  Army. 

The  C'  de  Guichc       | 

M'"  de  S'  Abre  '  -  are  Lieutenans  Genera-ux. 

M''  de  Foiicaut  -         J 

W  le  C  du  Plessis 

M'' le  C  de  Chovseiil '   ,,      ,    „     ,    ^ 
ivir  1    rn   1    XT     "    4- 1  ■  Marshall^  ('t:  Gem//. 
il'  le  U  de  Nogeiit  ^  ,  -' 

il''  de  Magalotti  ' 

it  being  still  supposed,  as  I  formerly  advised,  that  the  Duke 
d'Anguien,  with  two  Mnrei^chnnx  de  Franre,^  will  bee  generalls  in 
this  army. 

And  ^larshall  de  Crequi's  army,  (en  camp  volant,  to  bee  moving 
to  &  again,  as  occasion  shall  serve,)  will  have  M''  de  Nancre,  Governor 
of  Aeth,  for  its  Lieutenant  Generall,  &  M''  de  Vaubrnn,  witli  the 
Chev""  du  Plessis,  for  ilarshalls  de  Camp. 

As  to  the  ^Maritime,  de  la  Fabouliere,  (an  Ingineer  your  Lopp 
remembers  served  in  England)  was  sent  yesterday  in  haste  to 
Rochefort,  with  orders  to  il''  Colbert  de  Terron  for  tlie  hastning  out 
the  fleet,  which  hee  told  mee  consisted  of  the  choycest  &  best  ships, 
(the  least  carrying  near  GO  gunns,)  &  eight  new  fireshipps.  Hee 
added  that  the  King  had  asked  him  for  his  map  of  England  & 
spent  much  time  in  observing  the  place  of  the  French  squadron's 
conjunction  with  onr  fleet,  which  hee  said  was  between  the  Isle  of 
Wight  &  Portsmouth,  and  that  the  reason  why  hee  was  sent  in 
such  hast  was  because  there  was  a  noyse  at  Court  that  the  Dutch 
would  bee  early  at  sea  to  intercept  them. 

Here  are  making  at  the  Arsenal  above  a  hundred  copper  boats 
of  small  weight  but  capable  of  holding  above  a  douzen  men.  It 
seems,  at  first,  something  fabulous,  but  had  I  not  seen  [some]  of 
them  already  finished  I  should  not  have  presumed  to  mention  it  to 
your  Lopp  ;  the  designs  of  them  is  said  to  passe  men,  notwith- 
standing the  sluyces,  as  occasion  shall  serve. 

'  Jean  de  la  Cropte,  Marquis  de  Saint-Abre,  killed  at  Sintzeim  in  1(j74. 
-  Antoine  de  Foucault,  killed  at  Turkheim  in  1G7.5. 

'  Ai'mand  de  Bautru,  Comte  de  Nogent  killed  at  the  '  Passage  of  the  Ehine 
June  22,  1672. 

'  Marshals  de  Beltonds  and  d'Humieres. 


208  THE    DESrATCIIKS   OK 

On  Thursday  last,  I  hear,  a  Couucell  was  held  to  consult  how 
l''raricr  should  behave  itselfe  towards  Spaine  in  case  the  Queen 
assists  the  Hollandi-rs  according  to  agreement  between  them,  & 
that  it  was  at  last  resolved  not  to  break  with  the  Spaniards,  how- 
ever, unlesse  they  should  first  declare  themselves  against  France. 

The  Dutch  Amb''  has  sent  away  all  his  baggage  &  will  take  In's 
leave  about  two  days  hence.  Wee  hear  that  the  C  de  Monterei 
lias  raised  great  duties  on  the  cornc  &  other  provisions.  The 
French  passe  through  part  of  Flanders  towards  their  magazines  in 
Nuits. 

Yesterday  arrived  here  the  .Marq*  de  Blanquefort,  &  this 
morning  JI"'  Digby  is  gone  for  \'ersailles.  M"'  Martin  is  also  come, 
&  my  Iv'  Ami)''  will  have  speedy  Audience  about  his  busines. 


To  Sir  Joseph  WilUamson. 

Paris  :  March  23,  '72. 

I  have  very  little  matter  to  entertaine  you  with  by  this  ordinary. 
C.  Digby  goes  hence  this  day  towards  Kochefort  to  visit  the  French 
ships.  &  wee  expect  every  moment  ]\I'"  Lockharts  '  arrival!,  as  wee 
doe  also  that  of  M'"  de  Schomborne  [Schoenborn]  from  Vienna  to 
adjust  in  this  Court  matters  for  the  security  of  the  Empire  during 
the  demesle,  as  particularly  that  the  French  might  proceed  to  reduce 
several!  places  the  Dutch  possesse  on  the  Rhyne  without  any  choqiie 
to  the  Empire,  provided  that  they  restore  them  to  the  proprietours 
ct  not  keep  them  in  their  owne  hands.  In  my  last  I  sent  you  a  list 
of  the  general!  officers  ;  I  hear  since  that  M''  de  Riissy  -  is  to  com- 
mand a  small  l)ody  in  Bourgoyne,  ^l''de  Bret  anotlier  in  Catalogue, 
1*1-  that  in  Flanders,  with  the  King  liimselfe,  I  hear  may  in  all 
]>rol)ability  make  some  inroad  because  it  is  conjectured  so  from  the 
aljundance  of  horsi'  providing  for  the  carriage  of  all  manner  of  pro- 
visions which  were  otherwise  needlesse.  Wee  hear  from  Spaine 
that  they  intend  to  send  9,000  old  souldiers  that  served  ag'  the 
Portuguese  into  Flanders,  besides  the  3,000  raising  in  Germany, 
that  18  ships  are  equipping  in  Biscaye  &  Cadis,  &  that  they  expect 
24  from  the  Dutch. 

Mons""  Stoop  is  gone  for  Switserland  to  capitulate  the  raising 

'  Ambassador  from  England. 

''  Roger  de  Rabutin,  Comte  de  Bussy. 


AX    ExVGLlSH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  209 

6,000  Suisse  &  hinder  the  3,000  the  C  de  Dhoiia  was  raising  for 
the  Dutch  to  goe  into  their  service.' 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  March  26'\  '72. 

On  Thursday  last  the  Dutch  Ambassadour  had  his  Audience  of 
Conge,  at  which  time  the  King  told  him  what  a  great  esteem  & 
kindnesse  hee  had  for  the  Amb''"^  person,  but  that,  as  to  his 
blaster's,  hee  desired  not  to  hear  any  mention.  Whereujjon,  hee 
complimented  the  King  in  very  high  termes,  wishing  him  prosperity 
&  successfuU  armes  against  any  of  his  enemies,  excepting  only  his 
owne pairie.  Hee  was  yesterday  to  take  leave  of  my  L'  Amb""  & 
goes  hence  about  Tuesday. 

In  my  last  I  sent  your  Lopp  a  list  of  the  generall  officers  of  the 
three  armys,  since  when  there  has  been  no  alteration  but  addition 
of  Aides  de  Camp ;  among  others  are  the  C  d'Ayen,-  the  ^larq^ 
d'Angeau,'  &  a  son^  of  the  C  d'Estrades,  besides  brigadeers  that 
shall  command  6,500  men.  The  King's  army  is  now  said  to 
consist  of  52,000,  wherof  13  thousand  are  horse  ;  the  Prince  of 
Coude's  army  to  bee  of  33,000,  besides  allyes,  &  that  of  ilarshall 
Crequi  of  24  thou''  men.  After  this  manner  I  hear  the  three 
armies  are  to  bee  disposed  of:  the  King's  owne  to  goe  into  the 
Pays  de  Liege  along  the  Meuze  towards  ^laestricht,  whence,  if 
occasion  bee,  it  may  passe  along  the  Ehyne  &  joyne  with  the  Prince 
of  Conde,  which  can  also  march  along  the  Issel  &  joiue  with  the 
Bpp  of  Munster's  forces  ;  and  that  of  the  ilarshall  Crequj'  is  to 
bee  in  Flanders  to  observe  the  motion  of  the  Spaniards,  &,  if 
occasion  bee,  may  serve  for  a  corps  de  reserve.  The  chief 
re'iuLez  vans  is  to  bee  at  Eocroy,'  where  most  of  the  troops  are 
ordered  to  bee  the  24th  of  Aprill  to  march  thence  towards  Maziers,* 
&  soe  forwards  into  the  Pays  de  Liege.  I  believe  the  King  him- 
selfe  will  bee  not  long  after  them,  hee  having  given  order  that  all 
his  owne  baggage  bee  ready  against  that  time. 

'  On  the  part  of  Sweden. 

■-'  Anne  .Jules,  Comte  d'Ayen,  later  Due  de  Noailles. 
^  Philippe  de  Courcillon,  Marquis  de  Dangeau. 

'  Louis,  Marquis  d'Estrades,  who  was  made  the  Governor  of  Gravelines  and 
Dunkirk  after  his  father's  death  in  1711. 

'  Footnote  to  MS.,  '  Cbarleroy.'  «  See  p.  143,  n.  1. 

VOL.    v.  p 


"210  TlIK    nESPATCHRS    OK 

I  am  told,  but  cannot  ascert"  the  truth  of  it,  that  another  Treaty 
is  made  at  Brusselles  oU'ensive,  &  that  ye  Dutch  have  prevailed  on 
ye  Queene  of  Spaine  to  seise  on  all  English  ships  it  goods  in 
Spaine  as  soon  as  ye  English  shall  take  any  Dutch  ships.' 

AVee  hear  from  Italy  that  the  Marq'  d'Asturgas  -  has  behaved 
himselfe  like  a  Spanyard,  for  he  no  sooner  heard  that  I'ere  Nitard 
was  left  out  in  the  last  promotion  of  Cardinalls  but  [he]  refused  to 
give  the  Nuntio  audience,  &  in  a  manner  confined  him  to  his  palace, 
bocause.  before  hee  left  Rome,  the  Pope  had  promised  liitn  the  s"* 
father  should  have  the  Cap  at  the  first  promotion.  The  Siiatinish 
Amly  is  preparing  for  his  publick  entry  &  it  is  thought  his  stay 
may  not  bee  long  after  it. 

To  Lord  ArUngtoii. 

Paris :  Apiill  •2^  '72. 

On  Wednesday,  the  Marq*  de  Seignelay  went  towards  Kocheibrt 
&  Brest  to  hasten  the  ships  out.  Before  hee  went,  hee  was 
established  in  his  father's  charge  of  '  Secretaire  d'Estat  de  la  maisou 
du  Hoy  et  de  la  Marine,'  &  accordingly  performed  the  functions 
in  signing  dispatches,  &c".  Mons"'  Colbert  &  M''  le  Tellier  stay 
with  the  Queen,  who  is  to  b(!e  present  in  Conncell  &  at  the 
sealing,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  King  does  at  present. 

gr  YJ^m  Lockhart  arrived  here  yesterday  &  I  believe  may  leave 
us  in  a  few  days.  The  >Spannish  Ambassadour  should  have  made 
his  entry  two  days  since,  had  not  hee  made  a  difficulty  about  his 
preceding  the  Princes  of  the  blood,  grounded  upon  the  dispute  my 
Iv'  Holies  made  here.  Hee  allows  that  before  the  Marq'  de  Fuentes  •' 
&  other  iSpannish  Ambassadours  gave  precedence  to  the  P'^^'  of 
the  blood,  but  since  an  English  Amb""  has  stickled  at  it,  hee  cannot 
but  doe  the  like.  A  few  days  will  learne  us  what  will  bee  done 
herein. 

L'Abbe  Cataloni,  who  came  hither  with  the  Cap  for  the 
ArchBp  of  Tboulouze,  hath  had  audience  of  the  King,  but  some- 
what coldly,  &  it  is  believed  may  bee  somewhat  mortified  before 
hee  leaves  this  place,  since  this  Court  is  very  positive  for  the  Bp 

'  In  cipher,  deciphered. 

'  Don  Antonio  Pedro  Gomez  Diivila  Alviirez  Osorio  y  Toledo.  Marquis  de  San 
Eomfin,  Marquis  d'Astorga,  Viceroy  of  Sicily  1072-107.5. 
'  Marquis  de  la  Fuente. 


AN    EXCJLISH    AUENT    IX    PARIS  211 

of  Laon,  as  hatli  Card'  Altieri  in  a  manner  sworne  that  hee  shall 
not  bee  promoted  as  soon  as  hee  expected. 

As  to  the  affaires  with  Holland,  it  was  once  resolved  that  a 
herauld  should  bee  sent  to  declare  the  warre,  but  I  hear  since  that 
a  valet  de  pied  du  Roy  carries  a  leffre  de  cachet  to  that  effect, 
&  a  manifesto  in  the  presse  ag'  the  Dutch  supervised  by  ]M'" 
Pelisson,  the  famous  oratour  of  France.  Here  is  also  a  book 
printed  which  I  have  sought  after,  containing  the  reasons  why 
England  &  France  should  bee  nearly  allyed.  As  soon  as  it  comes 
to  my  hands  y''  Lopp  shall  have  it  sent  j-ou. 

From  Germany  we  hear,  that  as  soon  as  the  Emp'"  shall  be 
assured  of  the  Turks'  designes  only  ag'  Foland,  hee  will  send 
15,000  men  to  assist  the  Dutch  &  posted  in  the  Franche  Comte. 

The  Prince  of  Conde  goes  away  suddainly,  &  it's  said  the  King  will 
bee  soe  near  him  as  to  have  advice  from  his  army  eveiy  6  houres  ; 
that  Wesel  will  bee  the  first  place  besieged,  &  as  for  Maestricht, 
that  the  King  himselfe  maj-  make  it  a  diverting  siege  without  the 
losse  of  a  man  by  raising  of  workes  about  it,  as  was  at  Candia ; 
that  the  troops  in  Cullen  are  much  stressed  because  of  the  dearnes 
of  Provision.  The  King  has  regulated  all  the  tables  in  the 
armys,  that  no  e.xtraordinary  expences  shall  bee  made  at  them  in 
sweetmeats  &  delicacies,  but  that  all  shall  consist  in  substantial! 
butcher's  meat.  Hee  hath  given  the  governement  of  St  Quentin 
to  M''  de  Pradel  because  of  the  importance  of  that  place.  The 
rendevous  of  the  P*^*"  of  Conde's  army  is  to  bee  at  'SLeta  &  Verdun, 
thence  into  Cologne.  &  to  assemble  near  Rhynsberg.  The  King 
will  not  goe  till  about  the  5th  of  May  S.N. :  he  will  march  strait  to 
CharleRoy  where  hee  will  meet  his  army  to  goe  thence  towards 
the  Pays  de  Liege. 

The  Overtures  the  Dutch  make  to  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg 
are  to  take  out  their  garrison  in  the  citty  of  Orsoy,  to  leave  the 
Elector  in  full  possession  of  it,  &  to  give  him  400,000  crownes  to 
raise  12,000  men  in  his  territories,  which  shall  bee  maintained  in 
the  Duchy  of  Cleves  in  the  Elector's  name.  The  C  de  Lislebonne  ' 
is  come  to  Court  from  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  to  make  his  sub- 
missions au  Botje  &  sollicite  his  being  restored  to  his  Dutchy. 

The  King  has  sent  letters  to  all  his  maritime.provinces,  acquaint- 
ing  them  with    the  warre   hee    designed    against   the    Dutch,  & 

'  Fian(,oi3  Marie  Jules  de  Lillebonne. 


212  rnE  DEsrATCHES  of 

coinmandiiifif  them  to  keep  the  commonalty  in  a  posture  to  prevent 
any  injury  on  the  coasts. 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris:  Apiill  (Jth, '72. 

I  was  at  Versailles  yesterday  &  the  day  before  with  S'"  W" 
T.ockhart,  wlio  had  a  favorable  Audience  of  the  King,  &  was  gene- 
rally well  received  att  Court. 

'J'he  iviuj?  talks  t)f  going  to  the  GatnixKjnc  about  the  latter 
end  of  this  month,  but  many  doubt  it  because  of  want  of  forrage, 
as  to[o]  early  in  the  year.  W'  de  Lislebonne  had  brought  the 
Duke  of  Lorrain's  affaires  into  a  fair  way  of  au  accomodation,  but 
all  was  broken  off  two  dales  agoe.  The  Treaty  contained  the 
Duke's  being  restored  to  his  countrey  moijenant  the  King's  building 
cittadt'Us  where  hee  pleased,  maintaining  12,000  in  his  countrey, 
the  Duke's  keeping  ■"),()()< )  horse  for  the  I'rench  service,  i^-  the  P'''  of 
\  andemonts  renouncing  of  former  concessions  by  articles  upon 
the  receiving  a  certain  sum  of  money.  I  know  not  what  should 
break  such  an  advantagious  Treaty  on  this  side,  unles  it  were  the 
death  of  ]\fad'  La  Douairie.re  d'Orleans  '  on  Sunday  last. 

The  King  was  expected  at  Parliament  on  Saturday  last,  but  it 
seems  hee  would  not  vouchsafe  his  presence.  However,  a  body  of 
them  hath  assured  him  of  compljance  to  all  his  edicts  for  the 
raising  of  money  ;  nay,  I  hear  of  a  person  in  Paris  who  is  an 
usurer,  &  was  told  the  King  had  been  informed  how  rich  hee  was 
&  how  unprofitable  to  the  publick  in  burying  all  his  wealth,  that 
hee  had  better  compound  to  save  the  rest,  which  hee  has  done,  &,  1 
am  told,  within  2  daies  hee  is  to  pay  -50  thousand  pound  sterling. 

To  Lord  Arliniiion. 

Palis  :  Ap:  0'\  '72. 

Herein  goes  this  King's  declaration  against  the  Dutch,  which 
was  pronounced  on  Thursday,  at  which  time  I  being  at  Versailles, 
Mons''de  Pompone  told  mee  he  had  by  order  sent  for  Rompf  [Rumpf], 
the  Dutch  agent,  &  told  him  hee  should  advertise  his  masters  '  qu'ils 
se  tienent  sur  leur  garde,'  &  have  care  hereafter  as  to  his  corre- 
spondence with  them,  since  his  being  left  here   is  pretended  to 

'  Jlaiguerite  de  Lorraine,  wife  of  Gaston  Jean  Baptiste  d'Orleans. 


AX    EXULISH    AtiEXT    I.\    PAKIS  213 

manage  the  Prince  of  Orange's  concernes.  I  told  your  Lopp,  in 
my  last,  that  the  Duke  of  Lorrain's  treaty  was  broken  oft",  the  C^ 
de  Lislebonne,  who  was  here  to  negotiate  the  accomodemeni ,  being 
since  gone  away,  for,  besides  what  I  intimated  to  y"'  Ldpp,  the  King 
insisted  on,  not  only  the  P"^'  of  Vaudimont's  quitting  the  Spannish 
service,  but  ye  withdrawing  also  all  his  troops  &  concernes  into 
that  of  the  French.  Besides  which,  the  King  had  been  informed 
that,  during  the  Uuke's  soliciting  to  bee  restoi'ed  to  his  countrey, 
hee  was  busy  in  favouring  the  Dutch  levies,  whereupon  the  s'' 
Count  had  orders  sent  him  to  retire,  because  his  master  had 
rendred  himselfe  unworthy  of  the  grace  the  King  intended  him. 

On  Thursday  the  Spannish  Amb''  made  his  entry,  &  his  coaches 
were  preceded  by  those  of  the  Princes  of  the  blood,  and  the 
King,  being  informed  that  the  C  de  Monterei  had  stopped  some 
boats  with  corne  &  other  provisions  his  victuallers  had  sent  downs 
the  ileuze  for  the  service  of  the  armies  after  they  had  twice  payed 
great  duties,  hath  caused  complaint  therof  to  bee  made  to  the  s"^ 
Amb""  &  sent  a  gentleman  to  Brussells  to  know  the  reason  of  the 
seisure.     The  Edicts  now  verified  in  Parliament  are : 

1*',  to  suppresse  all  the  '  Secretaires  du  Roy,  maison  et  couronne ; ' 
his  ]\Ia'y  reserving  to  himselfe  the  reestablishing  two  hundred  of 
them  out  of  the  great  body :  that  is  to  say,  in  English,  every  one 
shall  pay  considerably  to  be  of  the  number. 

the  2'',  to  suppresse  part  of  the  treasurers  of  France,  to  the  end 
the  remaining  advance  also  a  good  summe. 

the  o**,  lays  an  imposition  of  20  sous  a  marc  for  all  the  silver 
plate  the  goldsmiths  shall  hereafter  sell,  &  30  sous  the  ounce  on 
the  gold. 

'P'^'y,  a  tax  on  all  the  roturierg,  people  that  are  not  noble  &  have 
bought  noble  lands  called  /'/Yr/io/fe/k 

o"",  a  hereditary  establishment  of  all  procurors,  notaries, 
sergeants,  &c^.  upon  paying  a  set  sum. 

And  lastly,  a  creation  of  new  rents  at  the  18""  penny,  payable 
out  of  the  clearest  part  of  the  King's  revenue  to  such  as  will  lend 
the  King  money  upon  that  fondation. 

In  consequence  of  the  first,  the  Sccretnii-ef  are  treating  for  the 
revoking  it,  and  offered  GO  thousand  pistols  to-  M''  Colbert.  It  is 
believed  that,  if  they  add  twenty  thousand  more,  they  may  prevayle. 

The  Prince  of  Conde  goes  away  the  next  week,  &  all  the  troops 
are  ordered  to  bee  at  Charleroy,  or  thei'eabouts,  on  the  S"*  of  May, 


2 It  THE   DESPATCHES   OF 

at  wliicli  time  it  is  also  expected  that  tlie  Duke  of  .Monmouth's 
ref(iment  should  bee  compleat  &  ready  to  march,  according  to  what 
il""  de  Louvoy  told  mee,  when  I  went  to  see  what  orders  were  taken 
for  the  payment  of  those  already  here. 

The  Duchesse  of  Havirre '  hath  written  to  a  person  of  great 
c|uality  that  undoubtedly  the  Grand  Visier  designed  to  besiege 
\'ienna,  &  by  all  advice  from  Constantinople,  the  storme  against 
Poland  will  bee  blowne  over. 

Here  are  some  Jersey  &  Guernsey  merchants  come  purposeh' 
to  complain  of  their  being  ill-used  by  the  French  in  their  trade,  in 
that,  whereas  befoi'e  they  were  confined  to  two  ports  only  for  the 
bringing  in  their  manufactures,  those  two  are  now  forbidden  them, 
which  ought  the  rather  to  bee  redressed  because  in  time  of  warre 
ships  must  import  only  where  they  can  &  all  ports  to  bee  open  to 
them. 

To  Lord,  Arlington. 

Apr:  14,  '72. 

The  Spannisli  Ambassad  hath  received  orders  fi'om  the  Queen, 
his  mistresse,  to  follow  the  King  this  Oampagn.e,  as  hath  hee  also 
assurances  of  others  sent  to  the  C  de  Monterei  for  his  giving 
passage  to  the  King's  troops,  gunns,  ammunition,  &c°.  The  Savoy 
Amb''  does  also  attend  the  Court,  &  the  C  S'  Maurice,  his  son,  hath 
the  charge  of  Aide  du  Cam}}  in  the  Army. 

I  hear  that  Mons''  Hecre  is  to  goe  to  the  Emp''  &  make  the 
King's  compliment  to  that  ila'^,  in  that  during  his  demede  with 
the  Dutch  hee  hath  not  opposed  his  designs,  wherefore  hee  is  also 
to  assure  the  Emp''  that  nothing  of  violence  shall  bee  offered  to 
any  limne  of  the  Empire.  Thence  the  s''  Minister  goes  to  the 
lAgnez  '^  with  endeavours  to  qualify  their  heats,  to  take  their  alarmes 
&  dissuade  them  from  assisting  the  Dutch. 

Mons  de  S'  Remain,'  lately  Amb''  at  Lisbon,  is  designed  for 
Switzerland. 

Card"  Bonzy  being  suspected  to  have  too  much  iniiuence  on  ye 
Queene  of  France  in  case  hee  should  remaine  at  Court,  ye  ministers, 
being  jealous  of  such  his  sway  during  ye  managem'  of  aflaires,  doe 
intend  to  send  him  to  his  Archbishoprick  at  Tolouse.'' 

'  Adelheid  Henrietta,  wife  of  Ferdinand  Maria  of  Bavaria. 

'  i.e.  the  boundary  line  to  the  Swiss  Cantons. 

"  Melchior  Harod,  Jlaniuis  de  Saint-Komain.  "  In  cipher,  deciphered. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGEXT    IX    PARIS  21  J 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Palis  :  Aprill  [no  date],  '72. 

The  Iviug's  journey  now  di-aw.s  nigh.  About  the  29th  of  this 
month  hee  intends  to  goe  hence  towards  Rocroy  &  thence  to  bee  at 
the  rendezvous  at  Charleroy  the  2.'^  or  3''  of  May  S.N.,  in  order 
whereunto  the  troops  of  his  house  &  equipage  march  the  24th 
currant.  The  Prince  of  Conde  goes  to  Sedan,  which  makes  some 
believe  hee  will  besiege  Maestricht  before  hee  putts  himselfe  at  the 
head  of  his  Army  near  the  Rhine ;  the  Marshall  Belfonds  may 
command  in  his  absence. 

Wee  hear  from  Belle  Isle  that  the  squadron  to  bee  commanded 
by  the  S""  du  Quesne  is  already  come,  &  from  Rochefort  that  those 
ships  expected  only  a  favourable  wind  to  bee  also  at  that  rendez- 
vuxts,  Capt.  Digby  with  the  assistance  of  the  Marq^  de  Seignelay 
having  contributed  much  to  the  hastening  them  out. 

I  have  translated  the  King's  declaration  against  the  Dutch 
into  Frencli,  &  caused  it  to  bee  printed  here,  in  order  to  the  dis- 
persing of  it  all  over  Europe. 

To  Lord,  Aiiington. 

Paris  :  Aprill  23",  72. 

Yesterday  my  L''  Amb''  had  his  Audiences  of  Conge  at  S' 
Germains  jointly  with  M'^  Godolphin,  conducted  by  the  Duke  of 
Longueville. 

The  King  having  endowed  the  Mareschal  de  Turenne  with  a 
generall  superiour  command '  in  his  owne  army,  as  well  as  in  that 
under  the  P"^*^  of  Conde,  next  under  himselfe,  and  the  Prince,  on 
Thursday  night,  acquainted  the  Marshalls  de  Belfonds  &  d'HumiSres 
with  such  his  resolution,  to  the  end  they  might  comply  with  it  & 
receive  orders  from  Turenne.  But  they  made  mauj^  scruples, 
alledging  it  to  bee  an  innovation  on  the  great  authority  of 
Marshalls  of  France,  since  they  never  were  commanded  by  other 
than  a  Connesfahle,  which  charge  being  suppj-essed,  it  would 
derogate  much  from  their  priviledges  to  obey  one  of  their  brethren. 
This  their  answer  much  offended  the  King  in  that  they  should 
dispute  his  pleasure,  but  out  of  great  kindnes  to  Mons'"  Belfonds. 

'  A  footnote  is  inserted  in  the  MS.,  as  follows  :  '  Mareschal  du  Camp,  General 
des  Armies  du  Koi,  a  title  new  created.' 


2Ui  THE    PESrATCnKS   OK 

liee  sent  for  him  again,  imagining  that  upon  second  thoughts  hee 
would  not  remain  ojnniinftrc.  The  King  tlien  told  him  hee  must 
comply  with  what  hee  dccived  for  the  good  of  his  service,  or  see  his 
face  no  more.  The  ^larsliall  theriipon,  (as  I  am  told,)  made  a  low 
silent  reverence  &  retired.  It  is  added,  that  a  courrier  is  sent  to 
the  ^1"  Crequi  to  acquaint  him  with  the  King's  mind  herein,  to 
the  end  hee  submit  thereunto,  or  expect  a  consequence. 

The  King  goes  away  on  Thursday  without  faile,  most  of  his 
household  &  the  remaining  troops  being  already  on  the  march. 
The  29th  hee  lyeth  at  Laon,  &  thence  to  Charleroy,  where  the 
Marshall  Crecpii's  forces  are  ordered  to  bee  after  that  they  had 
rendei-OKsd  at  Binch  &  Aeth. 

The  King  is  sending  the  Jlarq"  de  Traesnel  to  negotiate  among 
the  Italian  princes,  &  particularly  it  is  given  out  that  his  bu.sines 
with  the  1*'^'^  of  Tuscany  &  Repub:  of  Geneva  is  to  obtaine  of  them 
a  prohibition  not  to  let  the  Dutch  ships  come  into  their  ports ;  but 
this  is  very  uidikely,  either  that  one  should  demand  or  the  other 
grant  it. 

To  Lord  Arliiujton. 

Paris  :  May  14th,  72. 

j\ly  Lord  Ambassador  went  hence  post  towards  Eng'  on 
Thursday,  as  did  the  Duke  of  Monmouth  '  &  -M''  Godolpliin  towards 
Metz  the  day  before.  His  Grace's  equipage  was_the  most  maijiu- 
Jique  I  ever  saw  in  France. 

The  King  left  Charleroy  on  Munday  last,  at  which  time  all 
the  troops  began  to  march  towards  the  I'ays  de  Li^ge,  since  when 
wee  hear  that  31  "■  de  Fourille  was  sent  out  at  the  head  of  3,000 
horse  &  300  dragoons,  &  after  him  marched  M.  de  Turenne,  as  was 
thought,  to  invest  Maestricht. 

Mons''  Rousseau  is  come  hither  frcmi  Sweden  with  the  Treaty 
of  Neutrality  M""  Pomponne  was  promised  &  M"^  de  Courtin  -  hath 
since  concluded  att  Stockholme.  The  French  are  somewhat  in 
paine  for  two  of  their  men  of  warre  they  apprehend  are  fallen  into 
the  hands  of  four  Dutch  men  cruising  in  the  .Mediterranean,  which 
makes  them  hasten  out  of  Thoulon  the  shi])s  designed  for  that  sea. 
Att  the  mouth  of  the  River  Charante,  they  are  planting  above  three 
score  peice  of  canon  for  the  defence  of  the   King's  ships   in  that 

'  .Tames  Scott,  Duke  of  Monmouth,  illegitimate  son  of  Charles  II. 
'  Honore  Courtin. 


iN    ENGLISH    AUEXT    IN    PARIS  217 

port  against  an\-  attempts  of  an  enemy,  &  some  horse  are  also 
drawing  towards  that  coast  for  the  same  purpose.  The  squadron 
of  seven  ships  to  cruise  on  the  coasts  of  Spain  &  Bai-baiy,  com- 
manded by  the  Sieur  de  Chasteaurenant,  are  almost  ready  to  sett 
out. 

The  ilarq'  de  Seignelay  is  gone  after  the  King  to  performe  his 
charge  of  Secretaire  d'Estat  during  this  Campagne,  &  to  give  the 
King  an  account  of  his  having  left  his  fleet  of  30  men  of  war, 
7  tire  ships,  6  fregatts,  &  four  flutes,  ready  to  sayle  for  the  coast  of 
England. 

To  Lord  Arli'iujton. 

May  lt!7^ 

Having  just  now  received  my  letters  from  a  good  correspondent 
in  the  King's  army,  1  presume  to  give  your  Lop  a  breviary  account 
of  its  motions  since  its  leaving  Charleroy,  whence  on  the  lUth  it 
marched  four  leagues  &  camped  at  Tongrenelle,'  near  Conroy,^  in 
Brabant,  on  the  12th  it  passed  on  the  right  side  of  Giblou,  & 
camped  at  Pertie.'the  next  day  at  Branchon,^  the  14th  attClogne, 
where  it  reposed,  expecting  that  the  Prince  of  Conde  &  M"  Turenne 
should  have  entrepris  qiielque  hlocus  to  joine  with  it ;  besides,  the 
march  being  long,  the  King  would  not  fatigue  the  troops.  It  was 
then  supposed  that  hee  would  passe  by  Maestricht  &  besiege 
Wesel,  or  Rbynsberg,  or  Emerick,  the  last  being  most  likely  to 
facilitate  the  taking  of  Ximeguen,  which  the  King  might  attempt 
at  the  same  time  as  the  Prince  of  Conde  should  endeavour  the 
passing  the  river  Yssel,  to  divert  the  Dutch  troops  designed  for  its 
defence.  But  noebody  could  doe  otherwise  than  guesse  at  the 
designes  because  a  generall  silence  was  observed  siir  les  affaires 
dii  temps.  Att  Liege,  there  are  provisions  &  magasins  to  main- 
taine  an  army  of  fourty  thousand  men  for  8  months.  A  bridge  is 
built  over  the  Meuse,  between  Liege  &  Maestricht,  which  confirmed 
some  in  the  opinion  qu'on  va  au  likin. 

On  the  loth  Mons""  de  Chamilly  went  to  jMazik  °  (a  little  place 
below  ]\Iaesti'icht  w'*"  would  never  receive  a  garrison  from  the 
Elector  of  Cologne).  His  orders  were  to  siimmon  it  to  receive  one, 
&  upon  refusal!,  to  force  them  to  it,  because  it  is  said  to  bee  agreed 
on,  in  the  Treaty  between  the   King  &  that   Elector,  that  Mazik 

'  Tongi-es.  ^  Conneroy.  '  Pei-wis. 


21S  TIIK    DRSPATCHK^    OK 

sliall  remain  to  the  French  in  case  ^laestricht  bee  not  taken, 
but  otherwise  tiie  I\ing  shall  restore  that  little  place  to  the  Elector, 
who  shall  resigne  up  to  his  Mn,'>'  all  his  rights  to  ^faestricht. 

On  the  lUth,  the  Army  marched  strait  to  Veset  [Vise]  where 
is  the  bridge  I  mentioned.  It  reposed  till  the  22'  to  prepare  for  a 
longer  march. 

M''  de  Chamilly  prevayled  on  those  of  Mazik  to  receive  a 
garrison  of  48  companies  of  foot,  who  are  now  at  work  to  fortify 
the  place.  The  King  left  2,000  men  in  Tongn4  [Tongres].  &  as 
many  at  Viset,  soe  that  Maestricht  is  somewhat  bridled  on  all  sides. 
^I''  de  Lorge  appeared  within  shott  of  its  walls,  as  he  escorted  a 
great  convoy  ;  they  fired  much  at  him,  but  in  vaine.  When  the 
King  came  to  his  quarters  over  against  Xavagne,  the  Governor  of 
that  Spannish  towne  gave  him  a  hellc  salve  of  musquet  &  canon  ; 
the  latter  killed  at  one  shot  five  cavaliers  &  one  Lieutenant. 

I  have  another  fresh  letter  from  Veset,  which  says  that  the 
Mai'shall  Turenne  had  joined  with  the  King's  army,  that  there  was 
much  likelyhood  of  the  King's  passing  beyond  i\Iaestricht  &  going 
strait  to  Nimegue  or  Wesel ;  or,  if  those  places  seem  to  be  hie7i 
nmnies,  that  his  Ma'-''  would  take  more  easy  posts  &  fortify  them 
in  order  [to]  the  passing  the  Yssel  or  the  Nahal,^  because  hee  will 
make  some  gi-eat  enterprise.^ 

The  Duke  of  Monmouth  is  ombarquing  his  Regiment  at  I\Ietz. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris:  Jlay  the  21". 

The  last  letters  from  the  army  advise  that  all  the  bodies 
should  joine  in  the  I'ays  de  Li6ge  on  the  19th  &  that  on  the  20th 
they  might  proceed  on  some  designe ;  that  the  King  had  sent  an 
Envoy  to  the  Governour  of  Flanders  to  demand  passage  for  his 
troops  through  the  Spannish  Low  Countreys,  but  was  answered  1)y 

'  Nahe,  a  river  in  Belgium. 

-  Mignet,  vol.  iv.  p.  4,  says  that  Holland  could  be  attacked  from  two  sides — 
the  Meuse  and  the  Bhine.  The  Prince  of  Condi  proposed  to  take  Maestrioht  first, 
which  lielonged  to  the  Elector  of  ColoRnc,  so  as  to  keep  the  Spanish  in  check. 
Turenne  opposed  this.  His  idea  was  to  put  troops  in  Maseick  (on  the  Meuse),  so 
as  to  block  Maestricht,  and  then  to  march  towards  the  Rhine.  This  idea  pre- 
vailed. Turenne  invested  Maseick,  and  after  the  to\vii  had  surrendered  he 
fortified  it  and  left  a  considerable  garrison  under  the  command  of  the  Comte 
do  Chamilly. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  319 

the  C  de  Moiiterei  in  a  letter  to  tlie  King,  tliat  bee  could  give  no 
passage  nntill  hee  had  written  to  the  Queen  his  Mistresse  ^  to 
know  her  ]\Ia''"='^  intentions,  whereupon  I  hear,  the  Envoye  told 
him  his  master  would  not  be  delayed,  but  make  his  owne  way  in 
case  passage  were  denied  him.  The  King  has  also  complained  to 
the  s"*  Governor  of  some  f!orties  the  Dutch  troops  in  the  Spannish 
garrisons  had  lately  made,  threatning  the  attaquing  the  places 
they  retreated  in,  if  they  were  suffered  to  doe  the  like  for  the 
future. 

The  Marq*  de  Fouquicres,-  whom  I  formerly  advised  was  gone 
for  Germany,  is  since  ordered  to  succeed  M''  Courtin  in  Sweden, 
who  is  returning  into  France,  the  Treaty  of  Neutrality  being 
concluded  much  to  the  satisfaction  of  this  Court,  &  to  continue  for 
three  years  during  the  warre  against  the  Dutch,  in  which  time,  if 
any  Prince  of  Germany  should  declare  warre  against  the  King  of 
France,  the  Sweeds  are  engaged  to  fall  upon  such  Prince  with  all 
their  forces,  moyenant  about  a  hundred  thousand  pound  sterling. 

M''  de  Euvigny  lyes  dangerously  ill,  with  little  hopes  of 
recovery. 

To  Lord  Arlinqto)i. 

[May  23,  1672.]' 

Yesterday  L'Abbe  Vibo,  the  Popes  Internuntio,  received  an 
extraordinary  dispatch  from  the  Card'  Patron,  with  the  news  of 
father  Nitard  &  the  Bpp  of  Laon  being  promoted  Cardinals  on 
the  16th  currant. 

In  my  last  I  gave  your  Lopp  an  account  of  the  French  armies, 
since  when  wee  hear  that  upon  the  Prince  c>f  Conde's  joining  the 
King,  great  Councells  of  Warre  have  been  held,  &  as  yesterday  the 
King  had  resolved  to  march  forwards  towards  Rhinsberg.  The 
King  having  thought  fitt  to  keep  all  his  great  magazins  in  the 
Pays  de  Liege,  hee  hath  demanded  the  putting  garrisons  into  most 
of  the  great  towns  in  order  to  secure  such  magazins  against  any 
incursions  from  the  Dutch,  the  King  having  given  his  word  to  the 
Elector  to  withdraw  his  garrisons  as  soon  as  he  should  have  no 
more  need  of  the  citty  of  Liege  to  favourise  his  attempts  against 
Maastricht.     Whereupon  a  Chapter  has  been  called  &  it's  believed 

'  The  Queen  of  Spain. 

-  Isaac  de  Pas,  Marquis  de  Feuquieres. 

'  Endorsed  with  this  date  at  tlie  bade  of  the  MS. 


220  rHK    DESrATCHEH    OK 

they  will  consent  unto  it.  I  hear  the  King  has  been  see  ill  satis- 
fied with  S'  George  Ilainilton's  regiment  as  to  order  its  being  left 
in  garrison. 

To  Lord  Arlhu/ion. 

Paris :  May  (no  datp),  ir>72. 
I  was  yesterday  at  S'  Geniiains  where,  to  the  great  joy  of  all 
the  Court,  a  courrier  brought  advice  of  the  fleets  being  joyned,  as 
they  had  also  letters  from  the  King's  army  of  its  being  march'd 
on  a  great  designe  after  lions'"  de  Turenne,  but  it  is  the  opinion  of 
most,  that  ^laestricht  will  not  bee  the  first  attaqiied.  The  Deputies 
of  Languedock  had  Audience  yesterday  of  the  Queen  ]?egent,  at 
which,  after  having  made  many  compliments  upon  her  Ma'"  "conduct 
in  the  governemcnt,  S<c'\  they  made  a  present  from  the  states  of  that 
Province  of  two  millions  of  livers,  excusing  the  not  giving  more 
upon  the  great  charge  they  are  at  in  the  great  undertaking  of  the 
jonction  des  deux  mers.  And  to  the  end  y"'  Ldpp  may  see  how 
that  worke  is  advanced,  1  transmit  the  book  newly  printed,  of 
which  they  gave  one  to  the  Queen,  it  being  of  great  curiosity  to 
see  the  severall  ways  for  the  sujiplying  the  Canal  with  water,  even 
to  the  cutting  into  a  rocky  mountain  ^:  making  a  Ijasoii  to  esclui<e 
upon  occasions  into  the  severall  cliannells.  Your  Lopp  may  also 
please  to  observe  the  maimer  they  proceed  for  the  building  a  mule 
at  the  I'ort  de  Cepte  [Cette]  in  the  Gulph  of  Lyons,  but  I  much 
doubt  the  successe,  because  of  the  rapidity  of  that  sea  there. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  May  28,  '72. 

I  have  little  worthy  y'"  notice  by  this  post  to  communicate  to 
you,  all  news  that  is  being  what  motions  are  at  land  or  actions  at 
sea.  As  to  the  former  I  will  give  you  the  same  account  I  have 
from  a  very  good  correspondent.  His  last  was  fi'om  Mset  of  the 
18th  &  goes  here  inclosed.'  The  King  is  now  at  i\Ia-/.ik,  a  ])lace 
near  Maestricht  which  would  never  receive  ye  Elector  of  Cullen"s 
garrison,  where  hee  stays  till  this  day  ordring  the  fortificatious. 
Hee  is  to  have  that  place  by  Treaty  between  the  Elector  &  him  in 
case  ^laestricht  bee   not  taken,  otherwise  the  Elector  is  to  have 

'    The  enclosure  is  missing.    Louis  crossed  the  Meuse  at  Vise,  situated  lietween 
Liege  and  Maestricht,  on  May  17  (Mignet,  vol.  iv.  p.  5). 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  221 

Mazik  &  resigne  up  all  his  rights  to  Maestricht.  The  P'^"  of 
Conde's  army  &  that  of  ^P'  de  Turenne  have  joined  the  King's. 
Wesel,  Nimeguen  &  Ehinsberg  are  the  places  that  may  be  first 
besieged.  At  Viset  a  bridge  is  made  over  the  ileuse  between 
Liege  &  Maestricht  which  makes  some  believe  that  a  body  is 
intended  towards  the  Rhine. 


To  Lord  Arlinfjton. 

Paris:  June  the  1',  '72. 

I  was  yesterday  at  S'  C4ermains,  among  other  things  to 
soUicite  some  redre:^se  to  the  cryes  of  our  Jersey  &  Guernsey 
marchants,  who  were  forbidden  the  entrance  of  any  port  of  France 
on  penalty  of  confiscation,  onely  one  little  creek  being  allotted 
them  where  are  no  houses  nor  protection  for  their  ships  against 
an  enemy,  insomuch  that  an  armed  boat  may  seize  on  them.  But 
I  perceive  here  is  no  good  to  bee  done,  the  Mess"  de  la  Mami- 
fadui-e  bearing  too  strong  an  influence  for  our  obtaining  any  reliefe. 

My  correspondent  in  the  army  adviseth  that  on  the  23'*'  past 
the  baggages  passed  the  Meuse,  on  the  bridge  lately  made  there, 
near  Viset,  within  shott  of  Navagne,  a  Spannish  towne.  The  next 
day  the  King  followed  them  to  encamp  within  sight  of  Maestricht, 
&  thence  will  continue  a  long  march  along  the  Rhine.  The 
Elector  of  Cologne,  intending  to  see  the  King,  desired  first  that 
the  ceremonies  of  the  visit  might  be  adjusted  &  P'"*"  William  of 
Furstenburg  was  sent  to  Visit  for  that  purpose.  The  Elector 
pretended  to  have  the  fautueil  [sic]  &  that  the  King  come  out  of 
his  chamber  to  meet  him  &  accompany  him  after  the  visit, 
alledging  for  reasons,  that  the  Emperor  treats  Electors  after  that 
manner.  But  the  King  answers  that  the  Electors  creat  &  make 
the  Emperours  &  that  the  King  is  made  soe  by  none,  that  his 
ila'-^'  never  goes  out  of  his  chamber  for  anybody  it  gives  the 
fivutueil  only  unto  kings.  Moreover,  that  Gustavus  King  of 
Sweden '  gave  the  Duke  of  Saxony,^  who  did  eat  with  him.  only  a 
chaise  a  dos,  soe  that  it  is  now  ordered  that  the  Elector  shall 
meet  the  King  on  horseback  in  the  field,  an  expedient  to  avoyd 
ceremonies.  The  K^  made  a  review  of  the  P"'*  of  Conde's  army 
consisting  of  18,000  foot  &  6,000  horse. 

'  Gustavus  Adolphus  (1594-1632),  killed  at  the  battle  of  Liitzeu. 
^  John  George,  Elector  of  Saxony. 


ZZ.1  Tin;  DiobPATonts  ok 

To  Lord  ArUngluii. 

Paris  ;  June  the  4th,  72. 

'I'he  (lay  before  yesterilay  arrived  liere  the  Sieur  de  Nerli  as 
N initio  from  tlie  Pope.  I  mentioned  some  tiling  obscurely  in  my 
last  to  y''  Tjpp  about  S""  l^obert  Walsh.  I  am  since  informed  as 
well  from  hiniselfe  as  others,  hee  iK:  S''  Andrew  White  liad  intrigues 
with  ye  Dutch  Amb"".  pretending  for  rewards  to  discover  &  execute 
strange  things  against  the  I'higlish,  in  soe  much  that  ye  Amb""  sent 
ye  passe  &  a  kind  l''^  to  S""  Ilobert,  but  these  confederates  falling 
out,  S""  Andrew  got  possession  of  ye  passe  &  has  put  [it]  into 
Colbert's  hands,  soe  that  ye  other  is  afraid  of  being  imprisoned. 
In  iine,  tliey  iiave  both  ye  report  of  being  great  knaves.' 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris,  June  the  11th,  '72. 

In  the  Gazette  that  goes  herewith,-  your  Lopp  hath  all  the 
particulars  of  the  Camp  proceedings.  The  King  hopes  to  have 
taken  Rhinsberg,  Orsoy,  Wesel,  i^  Burich  by  the  lo"*  of  this  month.'' 
The  (ittuijiien  being  very  briske,  many  men  are  lost,  one,  iP'  S' 
Hilaire,'  a  Protestant,  &  much  esteemed  in  France,  is  killed ;  lie 
was  Lieutenant  General  of  the  Artillery.  I  have  this  account  of 
affaires  from  Liege  the  6th  currant :  '  Quant  aux  places  assiSgez 
on  assure  (pie  les  troupes  sont  dejil  sur  le  contrescarpe  de  Wesel, 
qu'on  alloit  donner  un  assaut  general  jeudy  ii  2  heures  aprds  midy 
a  Burich,  que  Rhinsberg  estoit  en  partie  bruslee  et  que  I'Orsoy 
n'avoit  encore  que  2  !•  heures  de  terme  pour  se  rendre,  et  memo 
j'av  une  lettre  de  JIaezik  qu'elle  estoit  prise  par  assaut.  Trente 
officiers  reformez,  estant  sortis  de  -Maestricht  jeudy  passe  pour 
aller  du  coste  de  Tongres,  furent  rencontrez  par  des  gens  du  C.  de 
Chamilly,  qui  les  tuerent  tons  a  la  reserve  de  5  ou  6,  qui  deman- 
derent  quartier.  Les  Ilollandois  nous  menafent  de  nous  declarer 
la  gueiTe,  nous  faisant  la  cause  de  leurs  malheurs.' 

'  In  cipher,  deciphered.  -  The  Gazette  is  missing. 

'  Orsol,  Biirick,  and  Khinsberg,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Khine,  and  Wesel,  Eees, 
and  Merick,  on  the  right,  were  occupied  by  Dutch  troops.  They  defended  the  entry 
into  their  countiy  on  the  side  of  the  Gueldre  and  on  the  side  of  Germany 
(Miguet,  vol.  iv.  p.  G). 

'  Pierre  de  Mormfs  do  Saint-Hilaire  died  in  1080.  Perwich  was  evidently 
wrongly  informed. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGEXT    IN    PABIS  223 

AVee  Lave  had  courrier  upon  courrier  from  Calais  with  news  of 
the  fleets  being  engaged,  from  the  great  shooting  they  heard  ever 
since  Tuesday.  Your  Lop  has  herein  the  sad  relation  of  the  earth- 
quake at  Rimini. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamsan. 

Paris  :  -June  the  15th.  '72. 

Herewith  I  send  you  a  relation  of  the  taking  of  Wesel,  as  you 
will  see  in  my  L''  Arlington's  paquet  a  pi'int  of  the  taking  the 
four  places  1  mentioned  in  my  last.  Not  knowing  as  yet  where 
M''  Godolphin  is,  I  must  depend  upon  other  correspondencies. 
Since  the  taking  of  the  4  places  I  hear  Rees  has  snrrendred  & 
that  the  Bpp  of  Munster  has  besieged  Deventer,  &  that  the  King 
has  sent  him  6  th'  men.  Moreover,  it  is  said  by  the  Dutch  them- 
selves, that  they  doubt  not  the  King's  passing  the  Yssel  because 
of  the  lownes  of  the  water. 

Yesterday  a  solemne  procession  was  made  here  with  drums 
beating,  of  above  30  flags  taken  in  the  towns  surrendred,  all  the 
Parliament  in  their  robes  receiving  them  in  ceremony  at  '  Nostre 
Dame  Church '  where  they  are  to  remaine,  &  this  day  a  '  Te  Deum  ' 
is  sung  at  the  same  place  for  the  new  borne  Prince  d'Anjou,'  the 
Queen  having  very  happily  been  delivered  of  him  on  ilunday  at 
midnight.  The  victories  at  land,  reports  of  such  at  sea,  &  this  new 
birth,  concentring  in  one  criticall  time,  makes  a  gi-eat  jov  in  this 
place. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  June  the  18th,  '72. 

Since  my  last  I  have  this  following  account  from  the  army 
w"^*"  was  on  the  3 1"'  past  encamped  near  Juliers,  at  a  place  called 
Roer  ;  the  nest  day  the  King  went  to  Xuits,  followed  only  by  the 
mules  &  coaches  (the  charriots  &  carts  being  to  follow  at  little 
stages)  where  his  Ma'-^'  will  see  the  Elector  of  Cullen ;  a  detache- 
ment  of  3,000  horse  &  4,000  foot  was  made  the  same  day  to  bee 
commanded  by  M''  de  Turenne,  tlie  other  officers  following  the 
King,  excepting  M""  de  Lorge  who  is  to  conduct  the  remaining 
troops  rt.  petit  pas.  The  2''  of  this  month  the  King  designed  to 
passe  the  Rhine  at  Keyserwert,^  thence  imediately  some  place  will 

'  Louis  FranQois,  Due  d'Anjou. 

=  Louis  encamped  at  Nuys  on  May  31,  and  remained  on  the  left  bank  of 
the  Rhine  with  Turenne,  whilst  Conde  pitched    on  the  right  near  the  town  of 


221-  mr.  okspatciiks  of 

bee  invested  &  the  maske  will  then  bee  taken  off  as  to  the  King's 
(lesiirnes,  which  cannot  but  succeed  to  his  satisfaction  &  honour. 
They  ad  that  the  i'rince  ol"  Orani^e  is  in  AVestplialia  witli  ]-j,O00 
horse  \-  2U,IIU0  loot  ravaging  all  that  countrey,  &  that  the  Prince 
of  Condo  hastens  as  much  as  possible  to  the  assistance  of  the  lip 
of  Munster. 

M''  de  Koningstnark  told  the  King  that  at  his  first  Audience 
hee  had  a  letter  to  put  into  his  hands ;  liis  Ma'-''  replyed  hee  nnght 
doe  it  at  that  time  santi  f(i^vH,hut  tlie  Amb''  answerd  the  letter  was 
with  his  baggage,  &  its  contents  being  oflers  &  propositions  of 
mediation,  it  would  bee  time  enough  after  the  Gumfaijne  to  bee 
given  to  his  !Ma'-^'. 

To  Lord  Aiihujton. 

Paris:  June  ye  IH.  '72. 

Since  my  last  wee  have  news  by  a  conrrier  to  the  Queen  of  tlie 
taking  four  oflier  places  as  Rees,  I'immerick,  Dotecum,  &  \\  eel 
[Wesel].     What  follows  is  copy  of  the  King's  letter. 

'  Le  7''  Juin  je  fus  a  llhinsberg  pour  faii-e  chanter  le  '  Te  Deum  ' 
pour  rendre  grace  a  Dieu  de  la  prosperito  de  mes  amies.  I\l'' 
L'Klecteur  de  Cologne  me  receut  a  la  porte  de  I'eglise,  me  pre- 
senta  la  croix  et  I'eau  beniste,  il  vint  ensuite  disner  avec  moy  k 
mon  Camp.  M"'  de  Strasbourgh '  y  dina  aussi.  Ce  fut  un  repas 
presque  a  I'Alemande.  Le  8''  Juin  je  vins  a  Ausember.  M""  de 
Turenne  me  manda  que  le  fort  de  Rees  avait  este  abandonne  par 
la  garnisou  a  la  veue  des  premiers  troupes  qui  en  approclierent  sans 
avoir  tire  sur  les  nostres  qu'un  seul  coup  de  canon  et  unemousque- 
tade.  Le  meme  soir,  M"'  le  Prince  -  donna  advis  de  la  prise  d'Emerick. 
J'avance  ce  matin  de  bonheure  [bonne  heure]  pour  haster  encore 
par  ma  presence  les  ordres  que  j'ay  donne  des  hier  pour  le  passage 
du  Rhin.  II  y  a  un  pont  volant,  nne  redoubte  Hottante,  et  ces  deux 
machines  peuvent  passer  chacune  deux  mil  hommes  a  la  foy  [fois]. 
On  travaille,  outre  cela,  a  faire  un  pont  de  batteaux  qui  sera  prest 
en  8  heures.  sur  letjuel  je  passeray  moy-meme  pour  aller  camper  an 
de  la  de  Wesel,  et  ce  moment  est  arrive  un  trompette  de  ]\1''  le 
Prince  avec  deux  hostages  de  Rees.  Apres  les  avoir  enteudu  j'ay 
accorde  aux  habitants  la  conservation  de  leurs  biens,  et  pour  ce 

Kaiserswertb.     These  two  places  belonged  to  the  Elector  of  Cologne  ;  he  had  placed 
them  at  the  disposal  of  Louis  to  help  his  passage  (Mignet,  vol.  iv.  p.  .5). 
'  Francis  Egou  von  Fiirstenberg.  •'  The  Prince  de  Cond(5. 


AN    EXCiLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  225 

qui  est  des  officiers  et  soldats  de  la  garnison,  ils  demeurei'ont 
prisoniers  de  guerre,  excepte  le  gouveraeur  et  quatre  autre  choisy 
[sic'].  Voyla  6  places  sur  le  Rhine  et  deux  forts  royaux  conquis 
en  6  jours  sans  que  nous  ayons  perdu  un  seul  bomme  de  nous. 

'  Au  camp  de  Rees  le  10'^  -Juin  j'ay  eu  nouvelle  en  ce  lieii  que 
M''  de  BeauNase,  avec  600  chevaux  et  200  dragons,  a  pris  Dotecum 
sur  le  petit  Yssel,  et  que  d'autre  coste  avec  la  cavalerie,  Choisel  ^ 
a  pris  Weel.  II  y  avoit  500  li™"''  de  guerre  qu'il  a  fait  prisoniers, 
aprcs  les  avoir  entendu  et  accorde  la  consei-vation  de  leurs  biens 
et  privileges/  - 

This  is  all  the  present  news  from  the  Camp.  I  hear  that  I\I'" 
Godolphin  is  dangeron.sly  ill. 

Since  I  wrote  this  I  hear  that  at  an  aft'Ofue  of  Schinken  Scans' 
the  P'^''  of  Condo  was  vrounded  in  the  arme,  the  Duke  of  Longue- 
ville^  killed  downright,  the  Duke  de  Nogent  drowned,  the  Counts 
de  Vivonne  &  Guitry  ^  wounded  mortally,  &  in  fine,  about  200 
gentlemen  slayne  who  were  too  forward  to  signalise  themselves ; 
the  Dnc  de  Coaslin  killed,  ct  30  of  the  first  quality  in  France 
are  slaine  in  the  attempt.  It  seems  both  officei's  &  souldiers  were 
too  vigorous  at  first,  insomuch  that  many  are  drowned  by  pre- 
cipitation. 

It  is  reported  here  that  the  Yssel  is  passed,  l)ut  with  the  los  of 
many  thousand  French,  but  I  am  now  told  all  the  losse  was  at 
Sclienken  Schans,  the  nttaqne  being  «  la  nnrfe  &  about  18,000  men 
killed  &  drowned. 

I  must  correct  a  mistake  in  my  letter.  The  P"''  of  Conde 
endeavored  to  take  a  fort  called  Esquin  over  ag*  Schenken  Schans, 
the  horse  swimming  over  the  Rhine  to  attaque  it.  The  losse  has 
ben  very  great  &  I  hear  the  fort  capitulated. 

'  Choiseul.     See  p.  33,  note. 

'-'  The  famous  '  Passage  of  the  Rhine'  took  place  on  June  22  (Mignet,  iv.  9). 

'  Schenkenschanz. 

'  Voltaire  {Siicle  de  Louis  XIV,  i.  397)  says  :  '  La  tete  pleine  des  fum^es  du  vin, 
il  tira  un  coup  de  pistolet  sur  les  ennemis,  qui  demaudaient  la  vie  a  genoux,  en  leur 
eriant :  "  Point  de  quartier  pour  cette  canaUle."  II  tua  du  coup  un  de  leurs  officiers. 
L'infanterie  hoUandaise  desesp^r^e  reprit  ii  I'instant  ses  armes  et  fit  une  decharge 
dont  le  due  de  Longueville  fut  tni.' 

'  Guy  de  Chaumont,  Marquis  de  Guitry. 


Zlb  THK    nKSI'ATCHES    OF 

'To  Lord  ArlrMit-f/n. 

Pnris  :  June  the  22,  '72. 

Being  this  clay  at.  S'  Germains,  I  had  the  following  account  of 
the  King's  progresse.  On  the  11th  the  King,  being  encamped 
before  JJces,  went  with  Mons''  to  joyne  the  Prince  of  Condo  about 
3  leagues  off  upon  the  river,  near  the  fort  d'Esijuin  ;  and  it  being 
necessary  that  the  Rhine  should  bee  passed,  a  battery  of  10  guns 
was  made  to  favorise  the  passage.  At  the  same  time  it  is  said  that 
the  Count  de  Guiche,  without  apprehension  of  the  fire  or  water, 
swam  over  with  ten  cavaliers.  &  was  imediately  followed  by  all  the 
Niililc):se  that  were  near  the  King.  The  Prince  of  Conile  passed  in 
a  lx)at,  at  which  iiioment  three  sq\iadrons  of  the  enemy  made  a 
discharge  on  them,  notwithstanding  which,  they  all  landed  iS:  routed 
tile  enemy  after  having  made  two  charges,  insomuch  that  the 
Prince  having  pursued  them  even  to  the /"(/•;•/<,';•','»,  where  were  many 
foot  intrenched,  hee  commanded  them  to  lay  downe  their  amies,  that 
otherwise  hee  would  have  them  all  hanged.  Whereupon  they  had 
layn  downe  their  raustiuets  &  demanded  (juarter,  but,  by  mis- 
fortune, the  Duke  of  Longueville  approaching  another  harrirre  with 
other  cavaliers,  with  a  pistoll  in  his  hand  (not  knowing  what  the 
P'"'  had  reduced  the  enemy  to)  cryed  out  '  kill,  kill,  it  no  quarter.' 
He  slew  a  man,  wherby  the  enemy  was  obliged  to  discharge  on  the 
IVeiich,  which  killed  it  wounded  many.  The  names  are, — the 
Prince  wounded  in  the  wrists,  which  has  occasioned  his  keeping 
bed,  though  the  Doctors  assure  there  is  no  danger ;  the  P'"''  of 
Morsillac  '  wounded  dangirously  ;  the  Duke  of  C'oaslin  in  the  hand  ; 
the  Counts  de  Vivoune  &  de  Saux  ^  wounded  mortally  in  the 
shoulder  ;  il''  Belligon,  M''  Brouilli,  Ayde  Major  of  the  Guards, 
I\l''  de  la  Salle  ''  &  M''  de  Renell  '  all  irrecoverable;  il"'  Dopterre  ^ 
slightly  hurt ;  M'"  de  Meny  de  ilontauban  "^  &  il""  de  Terme  [Termes] 
hurt  in  the  mouths.      Killed  are 

'  Fianvois,  Due  de  La  Kochefoucauld,  Prince  de  Marsillae. 

-  Franijois  Emmanuel  de  Blanchefort  de  Cr^quy,  Comte  de  Sault,  later  Due  de 
Lesdiguiferes. 

'  Louis  de  Caillebot,  Marquis  de  La  Salle. 

'  Louis  de  Clermont  d'Amboise,  Marquis  de  Eenel ;  killed  at  the  siege  of 
Cambray  in  1677. 

'  L^oii  d'EsparbJs  de  Lussan,  Chevalier  d'.\ubeterre. 

'•  Francois  La  Tour  Gouvernet-Montauban,  known  as  the  '  Chevalier  de  Mesnil.' 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  227 

The  Duke  de  Longueville 
de  Guitry 
de  Mombisson 
de  Teobon  [Tlieobon] 

Bourir  [Boury] 
M""  Tasse 

le  C.  de  Nogent  i   drowned  with  many 
Chev""  de  Salliere  i  other  gendarmes  &c'' 

However  they  becamemasters  of  the  post  which  the  enemy  possessed, 
&  most  of  their  foot  were  either  killed  or  taken  prisoners,  for  as 
soon  as  ever  the  V'^'  was  wounded,  the  French  fell  on  with  fury 
&  made  a  great  slaughter;  the  place  thej-  j^assed  was  called  Tolus.' 
The  P"'  is  at  Emerike,  &  some  believe  his  wound  not  dangerous ; 
since  when  we  hear  that  the  troops,  marching  towards  Arnheiin 
they  met  a  body  of  Dutch,  whom  the\-  beat  in  to  its  ports,  but  not 
without  the  losse  of  the  C  de  Plessis  I'raslin.  ^I"  Turenne 
commands  the  P''"'  army  untill  liee  bee  well  recovered.- 


To  Lord  ArUmjton 

Paris  :  June  the  25"",  '72. 

From  the  Camp  before  Doesburg  the  19th  currant  I  have  this 
account :  That  the  same  day  iP'  de  Bonneuil.  Master  of  the  Cere- 
monies, had  received  a  letter  from  ]\P'  de  Grotius.  wheriu  hee 
demands  a  passeport  &  permission  from  the  King,  for  liimselfe  & 
five  other  deputies,  to  come  &  see  the  King.  Whereupon  His 
^la'-^'  called  a  Couucell  &  imediately  after  sent  3P'  de  Pompone  to 
]\P'  Godolphin  to  impart  the  busines  to  him  &  to  concert  with  him 
what  answer  to  make,  to  assure  him  that  hee  would  doe  nothing 
without  the  participation  of  his  Ma'-^'  of  England.  '  et  qu'il 
vouloit  luj-  donner  le  premier  advis  des  avances  de  I'enemy.'  How- 
ever, it  was  agreed  that  the  deputies  might  come,  that  they  should 
bee  heard,  that,  however,  his  iVIa'^  would  proceed  to  '  pousser  les 

'  Tolhaus.  The  taking  of  Orsay,  Ehinsberg,  Biirick,  Wesel,  Kees,  and  Emerick 
broke  the  line  of  defence  formed  by  the  Prince  of  Orange,  v,'ho  then  marched  to 
Khenen  to  join  the  Count  de  Monterey  (Mignet,  iv.  8). 

-  For  the  list  of  officers  killed  and  wounded  at  the  '  Passage  of  the  Rhine  '  see 
Histoire  Militaire  du  Eigne  de  Louis  le  Grand,  by  the  Marquis  de  Guiney, 
i.  323. 


228  11  IE    DRSrATCHES    OF 

desseins  suivant  son  premier  projet.'  My  correspond'  adds  this 
expression,  '  enfin  voyla  des  gens  bien  l)att[us],  et  on  croit  que  le 
roy  leur  jiardtiniiera  aux  conditions  qu'il  trouvera  bonnes,  tant 
pour  satisfairo  ;\  soy-mr-me  qu'iV  les  allien.' 

Tlie  ('.  de  Dliona,'  who  commands  in  Uoesburg  with  oO  com- 
panies of  i'oot,  seemed  tx>  bee  resolute  for  the  defence  of  the  phice. 
but  because  tlie  outworkes  are  not  very  strong,  it  was  thought  hee 
coukl  not  keep  it  four  (hiys.  On  the  lilth  at  night,  ilie  J'Veiich  Ijegan 
to  open  tlie  trenches,  &  at  the  same  time  advice  was  brought  tliat 
/ut]ilien  began  to  capitulate  only  upon  the  sight  of  I'"rencli 
si|iiadrons  that  passed  that  way.  Deventer  is  besieged  by  the  ISpp 
of  -Munster,  iV  the  fort  de  Skenk  by  the  M"  Turenne,  who  on  the 
1  8th  began  to  open  the  trenches.  There  was  much  shooting  heard 
all  day,  &  it's  thought  the  place  may  make  a  stubborne  resistance 
having  1,300  men  in  garrison.  The  King  sent  out  il''  de  ilochefort 
with  2,U00  horse  to  goe  towards  Utrecht.  The  Castle  f)f  Nimegue 
surrendred  itselfe  after  a  notable  resistance.  Aernheim,  to  avoyd 
being  pillaged,  would  not  suffer  its  garrison  to  defend  the  ])lace. 
'i'he  Yssel  is  abandoned,  because  the  workes  could  not  hinder  the 
passage.  The  Bpp  of  Munster  does  his  owne  busiues ;  having 
]iillaged  (4roll,  u/i  xe  iaisse  faire,  il  travcuille  itonr  luij.  Tiie 
Hollanders,  suspecting  M'de  Muntlnis  -  for  not  hindring  the  passage 
into  the  Isle  de  Bitau,  have  imprisoned  him.  The  King  thinks  of 
demolishing  Orsoy,  Burick,  &  Kmerick,  &  to  fortify  ^Vesel. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUiamson. 

Paris  :  June  yc  29.'  72. 
.Since  M''  Godopphin's  courrier  from  the  Army,  there  came  one 
this  morning  early  from  the  J'rince  of  Conde  of  ye  25"',  with  advice 
of  his  being  almost  well  of  his  wound  &  intentions  to  goe  to 
Aernheim  in  3  days  to  command  his  armj-.  Hee  adds  that  Utrecht 
&  all  the  countrey  thereabouts  as  Naerden,  Ac",  hath  submitted  with 
desires  that  they  might  have  no  garrison.  It's  strange  that  in  soe 
short  a  time   his   army   should   flow   along   with   such   successe. 

'  See  footnote  1,  p.  209. 

'  Jean  Barthon,  Viconite  de  Montbas,  had  manied  Corn(!'lie  de  Groot.  Foot- 
note to  MS. :  '  This  man  is  of  near  kin  to  Grotius  A-  was  here  some  months  before 
the  warre,  had  severall  conferences  with  M'  Pompone  &  Grotius  himselfe  is  also 
much  suspected.'     The  word  '  Montbar'  is  underlined  in  MS. 


AX    EXliLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  229 

Doesburg  made  little  resistance,  Skenke  held  out  but  4  hour?, 
Zutphen  never  stroke  blow,  but  I  hear  that  before  Doesburg  il''  de 
^lartinet.  a  ]M"  de  Camp,  was  killed,  very  famous  for  a  brave 
souldier  &  an  excellent  pillager,  which  last  article  created  a  quarrell 
between  M.  de  Louvoy  &  him.  I  hear  the  Elector  of  Cullen  begins 
to  be  dissatisfied,  thinking  himselfe  a  little  slighted.  De  Grotius 
is  come,  as  I  hear,  to  the  French,  to  avoyd  the  rage  of  the  people. 
The  Earl  of  Sunderland  will  be  here  this  night,  but  poor  M""  Chud- 
leigh  '  is  left  behind  sick  of  the  small  pox  at  Bourdeaux. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williumgoa. 

Paris  :  July  6'"  72. 

I  could  not  write  to  you  by  the  last  because  of  ray  being  at 
S'  Germains  about  my  L*  of  Sunderland's  busines,  since  when  we 
have  news,  but  it  comes  soe  tedious  &  uncertain  to  us,  that  I  am 
sure  you  have  it  some  days  before  it  can  be  sent  you  from  hence. 
The  last  mentioned  a  rash  attempt  of  M'"  de  Nancre,  Governor  of 
Aeth  &  Lieuten'  G"  of  an  army,  on  the  frontiers  of  Flanders  in 
Pays  Conquis,  who  marched  all  night.  II-  leagues,  towards  Arden- 
burg.  near  Sluys,  &  in  that  wearysome  condition,  without  any 
refreshm',  made  an  assault,  was  beaten  off.  it  allmost  all  the  regiment 
of  iP  de  Sourche  '^  cutt  to  peices ;  that  Zutphen  is  taken  at  last, 
but  that  Nimigue,  as  well  as  iluyden,  which  has  also  had  succours 
from  P"=  Maurice,'  holds  out  stubbornly,  -1,000  Spaniards  being 
entred  into  its  succour.  The  Duchesse  of  Anguien  ^  is  delivered  of 
a  son.^  Card'  de  Bonzi  is  gone  for  Tholoze  &  Card'  Mancini  *  is  dead 
at  Rome. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris:  July  the  16,  '72. 

Though  it  bee  possible  that  your  Lopp  may  have  news  sooner 
from  the  Army  than  through  Paris,  it  is  my  duty,  however,  to  give 
you  what  wee  learne  thence,  least  by  accident  your  Lopp  should 
not  have  received  it  otherwise. 

'  Thomas  Chudleigh,  Secretary  to  the  Embassy  to  Sweden  in  1673. 

-  de  Bouchet,  Marquis  de  Sourches. 

'  Count  (Grave)  Maurice  of  Nassau,  Prince  of  Orange. 

'  Anne  de  Baviere,  wife  of  Henri  .lules  de  Bourbon,  first  Due  d'Enghien. 

'  Henri  de  Bourbon,  Comte  de  Clermont. 

'  Francesco  Maria  Mancini. 


2iJU  iiii:  Dicsi-Aauivs  ov 

I  here  inclose  to  y"'  Lopp  the  relation  of  /utpheu's  surreuder 
since  when,  letters  of  the  8th  have  also  informed  us  that  Nimiguen. 
after  a  great  resistance  i*i:  much  slaughti-r  on  both  sides,  had  also 
capitulated,  insomuch  that  upwards  of  1,.jU0  men  are  made  prisoners 
of  warre,  that  the  Uegimeut  of  Navarre  had  been  spoyled  in  the 
siege,  &  that  near  4,000  French  were  slayne  in  the  severall  attivpies 
&  sorties. 

It  is  added  that  the  King  left  Utrecht  on  the  9th  to  goe  with 
his  whole  army  before  Boisleduc  (or  'Sherzoghem  bosch).'  which 
place  having  received  a  renjort  of  near  3,000  Span'''  (into  whose 
hands  the  keys  of  the  towne  are  putt),  it  is  believed  it  may  hold 
stoutly,  it  having  always  been  esteemed  one  of  the  strongest  places 
in  Holland.  The  French  are  raising  more  men  all  over  the  countrey. 
On  the  sea  coasts  their  militia  is  in  armes.  &  the  grand  Provosts- 
-Marshalls  have  orders  to  draw  up  their  usuall  quota  of  men  &  to 
inarch  towards  the  coiiqunrd  towns,  whence  they  are  to  conduct  the 
Dutch  iS:  Spannish  prisoners  that  they  may  bee  dispersed  intxj  the 
severall  prisons  of  this  kingdome. 

Since  I  had  sealed  up  this  I  was  advised  of  an  accomodation 
on  foot  for  the  Duke  of  J^orrain.  The  propositions  are  not  very 
cleai-ly  represented  to  niee,  but  they  are  to  this  etl'ect,  that  the  King 
shall  keep  Nancy  &  some  places  about  it,  &  that  the  Duke  shall 
have  some  lands  in  France  in  lieu  of  them,  &  his  choyce  of  them. 
Lastly,  that  if  the  l^uke  consent  not  to  this  offer,  his  nephew  Prince 
Charles  shall  enjoy  the  effect  of  them. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  .Tuly  ye  17,  '72. 

3Iore  men  are  raising  everywhere  &  the  Provost-Marshall s 
through  all  the  J'rovinces  have  oi-ders  to  prepare  in  order  to  the 
dispersing  the  Ducch  ct  Spannish  prisoners  into  their  severall 
prisons.  Here  is  a  report  as  if  the  Dutch  Anib''  was  stopt  on  the 
frontiers  of  Spain  in  his  way  to  Madrid. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  .Tuly  ye  20,  '72. 

Yesterday,  by  a  courrier  from  Turin,  wee  were  assured  of  the 
Duke  of  Savoy's  having  broken  upon  the  (Tenovezes,  with  a  body 

'  Uertogenbosoh. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGEXT    IN    PARIS  231 

of  seven  thousand  foot,  &  live  thousand  horse,  that  hee  hath  taken 
one  place  on  the  frontiers  that  formerly  belonged  to  him  &  was 
unjustly  detained  fi-om  him,  and  that  hee  had  endeavom-d  to 
surprise  Savona,  but  his  designe  was  prevented  bj-  timely  succours 
the  Kepublick  had  sent  into  that  place.  There  has  been  a  long 
while  great  janglings  between  them,  &  the  French  mediated  to 
reconcile  their  dififei'euces,  which  was  soe  well  contrived  as  to  break 
off  the  mediation  pretending  the  Eepubliipi.e  was  unreasonable ; 
since  when  the  Duke  has  taken  this  conjuncture  of  time  to  right 
himselfe  &  this  not  without  the  consent  of  this  court.  This  small 
rupture  may  make  great  troubles  in  Italy,  many  of  the  Princes 
there  by  alliance  will  bee  engaged  on  one  side  or  the  other.  The 
Spannish  Ambassador  is  gone  for  the  Army  without  taking  leave 
of  the  Queen,  her  ^la}>'  having  refused  him  audience  because  of  the 
ill  satisfaction  the  King  has  conceived  against  the  C  de  Monterei's 
proceedings.  I\Iolina  pretends  to  disavow  that  hee  had  orders  from 
iladrid  to  bee  soe  vigorous  in  sending  assistance  to  the  Dutch  &,  at 
the  same,  to  justify  his  having  done  well  considering  the  necessity. 
I  hear  the  Prince  of  Conde  is  very  ill,  having  the  gout  in  his 
wounded  arme  &  legs,  which,  together  with  chagrin  to  bee  under 
the  chirurgion's  hands  in  this  time  of  action,  have  putt  him  into  a 
violent  feaver.  Xew  levies  are  making  here  &  so  much  doe  they 
want  men  in  the  Army,  that  T  hear  they  give  5  pistols  a  head 
besides  clothes. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  July  ye  23,  '72. 

In  this  inclosed  paper  '  your  Lopp  will  see  all  the  late  progresse 
of  the  French  army.  The  last  letters  thence  left  Boisleduc, 
Neusden,  &  Bommel,  besieged.  Last  night  late  came  a  courrier 
from  Danzick  with  advice  thence  of  the  9th  currant  of  the  disorders 
at  Warsovie,-  which  we  find  to  be  not  soe  great  as  was  before  repre- 
sented, as  if  the  King  were  made  prisoner  &  an  Interregnum 
declared.  But  this  is  certain  that  ^Marshall  Sobieski  came  to  that 
place  with  a  body  of  6,000  choice  souldiers  instead  of  the  like 
number  of  friends  that  did  usually  attend  him,  &  having  broken  up 
the  Dyet,  he,  by  an  artifice,  made  himselfe  master  of  the  Arsenal, 
at  which  time  the  King  retired  into  the  Castle,  being  guarded  bv 
his  friends,  whereupon  a  certain  number  of  Bishops  ct  nobles  came 

'  The  enclosure  is  missing.  -  Warsaw. 


232  THE    DESrATcnES    OK 

in  ;i  botly  to  him  &  desired  him  for  .severall  reasons,  in  order  to  the 
piibliquo  good,  that  liee  would  resigne  up  his  royalty  &  abdicate  as 
did  the  late  King,  but  hee  answered  that  at  tlieir  election  of  him 
they  made  him  swear  never  to  I'enounce  his  kingdome,  wherfore  hee 
would  not  doe  it  unles  the  whole  body  of  the  Dyet  should  reijuire 
it  of  him  &  discharge  him  of  his  oath ;  that  the  next  day  other  of 
the  clergy  were  endeavouring  to  compose  matters,  but  it  is  here 
believed  that,  as  soon  as  they  shall  hear  of  the  JJnke  of  Longueville's 
death,  all  these  clouds  may  passe  over,  since  it  is  no  secret  that  the 
designe  tended  to  the  making  him  King  upon  his  marrying  the 
present  Queen  because  of  the  other's  impotency.'  It  is  much 
surmised  in  this  place  that  the  C  de  Monterei  is  declaring  rtppui/i'; 
by  the  (Jerman  Princes.  The  issue  may  bee  a  very  long  warre  & 
the  ruin  of  Flanders. 

To  Lord  Aiiiru/ton. 

Paris:  the  30tli  of  July.  1672. 

It  is  likely  that  this  may  pay  my  humble  duty  to  your  Lvrpp  at 
Calais  because  the  last  letters  from  Bruxels  left  y''  Lopp  still  at 
Antwerp. 

Last  night  the  Queen  went  to  meet  the  King,  insomuch  that 
by  this  time,  I  believe  him  to  be  at  S'  Germains,  because  a  '  Media 
Nox  '  is  ordered  to  bee  made  at  Mad:  Lavalier's  '^  ajinrtemeid.  It  is 
said  his  stay  will  not  bee  above  2  months  hereabouts,  &  that  hee 
will  passe  the  winter  at  Metz  with  an  army  of  30  thousand  men 
about  him.  An  entree  en  friomphe  is  preparing  for  him  here  at 
the  citty  expence  which  will  bee  very  niagnificent.  Ilis  troops  are 
dispersing  into  garrisons  it  quarters,  IjOUO  horse  are  left  at  Utrecht, 
as  many  on  the  Rhine,  2,000  in  the  Betau,  \-  the  rest  on  the  Y'ssel. 
Wee  hear  now  that  the  C  do  iSIonterei  begins  to  comply,  &  the 
present  discourse  is  of  an  exchange,  in  case  of  a  peace,  of  the  late 
conquests,  for  Maestricht,  Breda,  Boisleduc,  &  some  other  places,  & 

'  The  great  nobles  were  anxious  to  get  rid  of  Micliael  Wisniowieski.  They  took 
the  Queen  and  the  Emperor  Leopold  into  tlieir  counsel,  and  Queen  Kleauora  agreed 
to  comply  with  their  wishes  if  they  would  choose  Charles  of  Lorraine,  to  whom  she 
was  greatly  attached.  But  Sobieski  opposed  any  scheme  which  would  place  the 
country  under  the  espionage  of  .\ustria,  and  exhorted  them  to  choose  the  Due  de 
Longueville  (the  nephew  of  Conde).  Everything  was  ready  for  his  election  when 
news  came  that  he  was  slain  at  the  •  Passage  of  the  llhine.' 

-  Duchesse  de  la  Valliere. 


AX    EN(tLI8H    agent    IN    PARIS  203 

that  IM""  de  Grotius  is  to  come  liither  again  as  Deputy.  Upon  the 
late  irruption  between  the  Savoyards  &  Genovezes  we  hear  the  Duke 
of  Baviere,  brother-in-law  to  the  Duke  of  Savoy,'  has  offerd  him  a 
succor  of  6,000  men,  soe  that  it  is  believed  the  Republick  may  have 
assistance  from  ^lilan. 

To  Lord  Arliwjton. 

Paris  :  August  the  Bth,  '72. 

I  have  forborne  of  late  to  trouble  your  Lopp  with  my  letters 
because  the  scene  of  all  afiaires  was  with  your  Lopp  at  the  camp. 
The  King  hath  been  here  these  five  days,  attended  but  by  few 
persons  of  quality.  Hee  was  somewhat  sensible  of  the  fatigue  & 
has  reposed  accordingly.  The  Prince  of  Conde  comes  by  water  as 
far  as  ^Metz,  &  will  not  bee  at  Chantilly  yet  these  14  days.  His 
Ma'^'  hath  ordered  him  to  the  value  of  thirty  thousand  pound 
sterling  for  his  good  services  during  this  Gamjiagne.  The  late 
promotions  &  pi-eferments  which  his  Ma*y  hath  made  are  to 
^larshall  Turenne,  the  governm'  en  chef  of  all  the  conquests  in 
Guelderland,  &  his  nephew,  the  0  de  Lorge,  is  to  command  under 
him,  to  which  governement  since  the  taking  of  Bommel,  all  that 
Island  is  added,  but  of  the  place  itselfe  the  Marq'  de  Resnel  hath 
the  command.  The  Marq'^  de  Rochefort  is  made  governor  of  Nancy 
&  all  Lorraine ;  Mons''  Montaubau  ^  of  Zutphen,  &  Doesbourg  is 
given  to  Mens''  A'illiers  ;  and  it  is  said  that  Mons''  le  Tellier  shall 
be  Chaucellour  though  the  Seals  bee  continued  in  Mons''  d'Aligre's 
hands,  but  this  I  give  little  credit  to  as  chose  inoiiie. 

Here  passed  by  some  days  since  a  person  of  great  quality  in 
post  from  the  C.  de  ^lonterei  towards  Spaine,  but  his  busines  not 
knowne ;  it  is  guessed  only  that  hee  was  dispatched  to  give  the 
Queen  an  account  of  his  IMa"''*  plenipotentiaries'  demands  at  Ant- 
werp. It  is  reported  here  that  the  Dutch  have  made  a  project  of 
exchange  in  order  to  an  accomodemenf  with  France  by  putting 
into  the  possession  of  her  Catliolvpie  Ma'^  all  the  places  they  hold 
in  Brabant,  as  Breda,  Boisleduc,  &c''.  with  the  citty  of  Maestricht, 
upon  condition  that  ye  citty  &  province  of  Luxembourg  bee  putt 
into  the  hands  of  his  Xtian  Ma"",  wherby  a  reciprocall  convenience 
is  pleaded  to  the  French,  Spaniard,  &  Dutch. 

'  Ferdinand  Maria,  Elector  of  Bavaria,  married  Adelheid  Henrietta,  sister  of 
Charles  Emmanuel,  Duke  of  Savoy. 

-  Kene  de  La  Tour  du  Pin,  Marquis  de  Montaubau. 


2.3 1  THE    Dl'.Sl'ATCIIKS    UI- 

To  Lord  Adin<ilon. 

[No  (late  iittiiclicil ;  perhaps  Aug.  7,  lG7i.] 

iSiiice  my  hist  a  courrier  is  come  from  Spaine  with  an  answer 
that  tlie  Queen  Regent  &  Councell  had  rellecteJ  upon  the  late 
demands  that  had  been  made  for  the  withdrawing  the  Spannish 
garrisons  out  of  the  Dutch  holds,  &  because  her  Ma'-^'  could  not 
soe  well,  att  that  distance,  declare  her  resolutions  what  were  most 
convenient  as  well  for  the  satisfaction  of  France  as  the  preservation 
of  her  couutreys,  shee  had  sent  full  powers  to  the  Conde  de  Mou- 
terei  to  doe  therein  whatever  hee  shall  think  fitt  upon  the  place, 
with  a  kind  of  approbation  of  liis  conduct  hitherto.  The  Councell, 
it  seems,  was  in  labour  above  fourty  liours  before  this  resolution 
was  brought  forth  &  severall  debates  on  both  sides  struggled  hard 
the  delivery.  It  is  hard  for  mee  to  make  a  guesse  whether  this 
pleaseth  or  dissatisfyea  the  Court  of  France.  The  latter  appears 
outwardly,  but  from  the  active  humour  of  the  C.  de  Monterei  it  is 
naturall  to  believe  that  these  people  will  not  bee  sorry  to  have 
occasions  given  them  of  warring  in  Flanders.  It  is  still  confirmed 
that  the  Imperiall  forct-s  are  on  their  march,  wherefore  .Mons''  de 
Louvoy  is  going  to  the  Army  to  consult  with  M''  de  Turenne  upon 
the  present  &  probable  conjuncture  of  affaires,  it  being  further 
assured  here  tiiat  the  ratifications  are  signed  at  Vienna  to  a  Treaty 
between  the  Emp''  &  the  States. 

The  Marshall  Grammout  is  coming  back  to  make  his  report  of 
affaires  towards  Catalogne;  his  son,  the  C.  de  Guiche,  is  gone  back 
to  the  Army. 

It  is  confidently  said  here  that  the  Danes  are  sending  some 
men  into  Germany,  &  that  the  Sweeds  are  reviewing  their  troops 
in  the  Pays  de  Bremen.  But  after  all,  it  is  the  grave  opinion  here 
that  these  noises  of  troops  from  all  parts  are  in  order  to  a  generall 
peace  &  not  to  come  any  ways  to  blows. 

Since  I  wrote  this,  I  received  this  account  from  Dantzick  of 
Aug.  the  Gth,  that  a  I'olish  army  commanded  by  the  Castellan  de 
Pololie  beyond  Volinie,  which  was  joyned  with  the  Generall 
Hanenko,'  &  the  Cosacks  loyal!  being  marched  to  the  succour 
of  the  cittj  Human,  besieged  by  the  Turks,  by  Doroscensko, 
Generall  of  the  Coi^aqucs  rebells  &  the  Tartars,  hath  been  totally 

'  General  of  the  Cossacks. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    I'AIUS  lo-J 

defeated  ;  '  and  that  L'Amerbawl  Je  la  Xohlesse,  which  is  ready 
to  goe  to  the  Campaqne,  will  not  defend  Kameniez  nor  the  other 
places  in  Ukrani  [Ukraine].^  The  King  was  to  goe  the  12th  instant 
to  the  generall  renclevous  of  Arriirhand,  which  is  at  Sokal  in  Russie. 

To  Sir  Joseph    Williamson. 

I'aris :  Aug.  14,  '72. 
Since  I  had  sealed  up  my  other  letter  to  your  Lopp  I  am  pretty 
well  assured  of  some  intrigue  not  unworthy  your  Lopp's  know- 
ledge. The  first  is  of  a  negotiation  the  Dutch  have  some  time 
since  managed  with  the  Grand  Vizier,  foreseeing  the  approaching 
stormes,  moyenant  a  sum  of  money  not  to  fall  on  Hungary,  that 
the  Emperour's  forces  might  not  bee  diverted ;  that  this  was  carried 
on  with  such  successe  as,  when  the  French  Ambassador  had  in  a 
manner  concluded  a  Treaty,  the  Vizier  refused  to  signe  it,  & 
denied  him  conge  to  retire,  soe  that  it  is  affirmed  that  hee  is  slip'd 
away  privately.  I  gave  your  Lopp  a  large  account  in  my  last  of 
the  affaires  in  Poland,  whence  a  courrier  came  last  night  with 
advice  that,  notwithstanding  all  appearance  of  accomodation,  the 
King  will  be  at  last  deposed,  that  the  person  likely  to  succeed  him 
is  the  Chev'"  de  Lorraine  since  the  D.  of  Longueville's  death,  in 
exclusion  to  Prince  Charles  of  Lorrain,  for  whom  France  has  no 
small  aversion,  &  that  a  Peace  is  likely  to  be  accomoded  between 
Poland  &  the  Turke  at  the  interposition  of  the  '  Kam  des  Petits 
Tartares  '  &  the  '  Seigneur  de  Volakie.' '  It  is  thought  the  King 
will  be  gone  for  the  Army  again  before  the  end  of  this  month. 

To  Tjord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Aug.  14,  '72. 

I  wrote  not  by  the  last  post,  because  I  had  lieen  some  days  at 
S'  Germains  &  came  thence  but  yesterday.     The  Baron  de  Ghent,' 

'  This  defeat  was  made  by  the  Sultan  Mohamed  IV.  and  the  Grand  Vizier.  In 
October  167'2  Michael,  King  o£  Poland,  signed  the  Peace  oi  Buozacz  (Oct.  IS,  1672), 
the  terms  of  which  were  greatly  detrimental  to  the  Polish  interests  (Story  of 
Nalioiis  :  Poland,  p.  134). 

-  See  Recueil  des  Instructimis  donni'es  aux  Ambassadetirs  et  Minislres  de 
France  :  Pologyie,  par  Louis  Fargis,  i.  118. 

'  Seigneur  de  Talachie.     This  refers  to  the  Peace  of  Buczaez.     See  note  1. 

'  Baron  de  Goes.  See  VrJ^imdcn  und  Acfetistiicke  zur  Geschichfe  des  Kur- 
fiirstcn  Fricdrich  WiUichn  vmi  Brandenburg,  iii.  402-403. 


236  TIIK    liKSPATCIIKS    OK 

who  followed  the  King  by  order  of  the  States,  was  lodged  at  a 
plnce  near  S'  d'ermains.  but  two  days  since  went  hence  homewards, 
according  to  the  cdiintL'rmaiul  they  sent  him. 

Tiie  King  hath  been  harangued  by  all  the  Courts  soveraigne 
of  Pai'is  upon  his  victories  &  returne,  to  which  hee  answerd  with 
much  modesty,  that  as  to  the  triumphal  entry  they  proposed  to 
him,  they  might  employ  that  money  towards  the  beautifying  of 
their  citty,  because  hee  would  not  putt  the  nobility  to  the  charges 
they  must  necessarily  bee  att  to  appear  in  such  a  solemnity, 
besides  that  the  enemys  had  defended  themselves  too  laschly,  & 
that  his  victories  had  cost  him  too  little  for  to  boast  of  them. 

The  hrouleries  continue  still  between  the  Savoyards  &  those 
of  Geneva,  in  which  the  latter  pretend  to  have  had  the  advantage ; 
but  the  last  courrier  from  Turin  speaks  of  a  desperate  escape  their 
Generall,  with  oOO  men  only,  made  out  of  Castel  Viecca  '  through  a 
body  of  8,000  Genoveses.  The  Pope  hath  endeavourd  to  interpose 
&  make  himselfe  arbitrator,  but  the  hostilities  continue  on  both 
sides.  From  the  Army,  wee  hear  that  all  things  are  disposing  in 
order  to  the  siege  of  ilaestricht,  for  besides  the  other  troops  that 
have  in  a  manner  bridled  up  that  place  all  this  summer,  the  ]\Iarq' 
of  Kochefort  is  quarterd  tlicn^  with  his  brigade  of  6,000  horse. 

The  Earl  of  Sunderland  A:  31''  Godolphin  are  gone  this  day  to 
S'  Germains. 

To  Lord  ArUn<ifmt. 

Paris  :  Aug.  18,  '72. 

Since  my  last  here  hath  been  little  alteration  in  affaires.  The 
fresh  assurances  of  the  Imperiall  forces  being  on  their  march 
towards  the  Bpp  of  ^lunster's  territories  is  the  subject  of  the 
present  discourse,  in  which  case  the  King  will  goe  suddainlv  for 
:Mets. 

Yesterday  came  a  courrier  from  Italy  with  an  account  of 
affaires  there,  how  the  Genovese  had  lately  defeated  a  body  of  two 
thousand  Savoyards,  whereof  half'e  were  slaine  &  many  made 
prisoners.  The  ftesident  here  hath  made  his  complaints  upon  the 
irruption  without  a  ilcdamtion  piTolahlc,  &  was  answerd  that  this 
flame  was  not  only  contrary  to  the  interest  of  France,  but  his 
JMa'''-'  inclinations  also,  of  which  hee  would  give  snfflcient  evidence 
by  the  means  hee  would  use  for  an  accomodation.     In  the  mean- 

'  Castello  Vecchio. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  Z6 1 

time,  the  Republick  of  Venice  bath  designed  the  making  an 
offensive  it  defensive  league  among  the  Princes  of  Italy  &  desired 
the  Pope  wonld  bee  the  head  of  it,  but  hee  refused  it  upon  a 
pious  allegation  that,  as  hee  was  the  common  father  &  impartiall, 
hee  could  not  side  with  any  one  party,  it  being  his  busines  rather 
to  salve  &  reconcile  all  differences. 

Here  is  now  no  more  talke  of  sieges  ;  that  before  Groeningen  is 
raised  &  all  the  troops  disposed  into  postures  of  defending  what 
thev  have  gotten  in  case  the  Germans  should  come  downe  upon 
them.  The  Uuke  of  Lorraine  is  gone  to  joyne  them,  &  some  say 
is  to  command  some  horse  he  hath  by  his  interest  raised  in 
Germany. 

I  mistook  when  I  said  in  my  last  that  De  Ghent  was  gone 
away,  since  hee  is  hei-e  still,  though  he  hath  taken  his  leave  in 
order  to  his  returne. 

To  Lord  ArUmjioii. 

Paris  :  Aug.  24,  '72. 

I  have  very  little  to  communicate  unto  j-our  Lopp  by  this  post. 
A  Councell  of  Warre  hath  been  held  at  S'  Germains  since  my  last, 
of  which  the  result  is  not  publick,  but  it  is  no  secret  that  orders 
are  sent  to  Mons''  de  Tureune  by  M.  Doras  to  fight  whatever  bodys 
of  men  they  shall  hear  are  gathering  together  in  Flanders  or  else- 
where, in  consequence  of  the  late  powers  sent  unto  the  C.  de  3Ion- 
terei  from  Madrid,  as  is  M.  de  Rochefort  to  watch  along  the 
Rhine  the  motions  of  the  Germans.  The  Duke  d'Anguien  made 
an  offer  lately  to  march  at  the  head  of  12,000  foot  &  8,000  horse 
against  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg's  army,  which  is  to  rendevous 
at  Upstadt,  but  the  King  told  him  his  person  was  too  dear  to  him 
to  be  exposed  that  way.  It  is  said  that  M"  Crequi  is  to  goe 
into  Italy  with  a  little  army  to  assist  the  Duke  of  Savoye,  but  I 
doe  not  believe  hee  will  come  into  favour  or  that  the  King  will 
protect  the  Savoyards,  since  hee  hath  declared  that  warre  to  be 
against  his  inclinations  &  interest. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  August  the  27"',  '72. 

Here  is  arrived  at  Court  a  courrier  from  the  French  Envoi/e 
at  Berlin,  with  assurances  that  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg  will  doe 
nothing  that  may  choi^uc  the  French  King  as  long  as  his  amies 


238  riir,  i)K.si'Ar('iii:.s  ok 

are  employed  against  the  Hollander,  &  that  the  league,  into  wiiicli 
the  Elector  is  enterd  with  the  l']mperoiir  iS:  other  Princes  of  tlie 
1-,'nipire.  is  intcndL'd  only  for  the  security  thereof.  However,  tlie 
orders  I  im-ntioiied  in  my  last  are  confirmed  for  tiie  watching 
the  motions  of  the  (ierraans,  &  in  case  tliay  undertake  any  thing 
upon  the  late  conquests,  or  the  territories  of  the  King's  allyes,  the 
French  are  to  fight  them  without  expecting  any  farther  orders 
from  hence. 

The  Chev'"de  Nancre  '  is  come  hither  from  the  Marq.  deNancre, 
(Joveruour  of  Aetli,  to  give  an  account  of  atfhires.  hee  having,  as  I 
hear,  goti  together  a  body  of  ;J0.()UO  men. 

The  Prince  of  C'onde  came  this  week  to  see  tlie  King  tV  was 
luucli  caressed,  but  it  is  believed  hee  will  be  employed  noe  [not]  in 
any  command  of  Army,  there  being  a  rub  still  remaining  as  to  the 
]iassage  of  Tholus  which  troubles  him  extremely,  especially  now 
hee  perceiveth  busines  can  bee  done  without  liini. 

It  is  much  bruited  here  as  if  the  Duke  of  Lorrain  had  amassed 
a  body  often  thousand  horse  &  was  posted  near  his  owiie  countrey, 
l)ut  this  is  not  very  probable. 

Att  the  great  ceremony  of  the  King's  procession  there  hap- 
pened a  dispute  about  precedence  among  the  Secretaries  of  State. 
Mons''  de  Chasteauneuf,  who  has  the  reversion  of  iM'do  La  \'rilliere 
his  father's  phace,-'  pret.ended  to  precede  Mons''  Ponqionne,  but  the 
dispute  is  not  yet  decided  by  his  Ma'-^'. 

Wee  hear  the  Genovese  have  defeated  another  party  of 
Savoyards  upon  the  mountains  &  slaine  1,800  of  them. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUiamsmi. 

fPans:       "       ,  HiT2.  ' 
Sept.  1. 

Y'"  favour  by  the  last  shall  bee  punctually  complyed  with,  as  to 
the  narrative,  as  soon  as  any  comes  into  the  presse.  Herein  I  .send 
you  new  cutts  of  the  late  conquests,  but  for  news  wee  have  none, 
unles  it  bee  the  taking  of  Groningue.  Wee  hear  the  Dutch 
fleet  is  at  sea  130  in  all,  ofif  the  Ulie,  and  that  the  privateers  of 
Zeeland  had  come  up  the  river  S'  Valerie  within  2  leagues 
of  Abbeville,  and  taken  away  some  salt  boats  to  a  great  value. 

'  Claude  de  Dreux.  -  See  p.  40. 

■'  Endorsed  at  back  of  MS.  witli  this  date. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  239 

You  have  the  Ohev''  de  Rohan  '  with  you  ere  this,  he  having 
avoyded  the  being  brought  before  the  Marshalls  of  France  for 
giving  (or  boasting)  the  coiqi  de  canne  to  the  Chev''  de  Lorraine. 
I  know  not  how  long  or  short  my  stay  may  bee  here. 

To  Sir  Joscjih  WiUlomson. 

Paris  :  Sep.  7,  '72. 

I  have  yours  of  the  22"'  past  to  acknowledge,  &  hope  you 
receive  mine  punctually.  Here  is  nothing  of  news  at  Court.  We 
liear  that  ]\[arshall  Turenue  has  passed  the  Rhine  into  the  Pays  de 
C'lC'ves  with  21',00U  men  to  watch  the  motions  of  the  Gei'mans,  tK: 
hath  orders  to  ravage  all  over  that  couutrey.  Some  will  have  it 
that  the  Peace '■^  is  by  this  time  made  between  the  Genovese  & 
Savoyards,  &  others  say  that  8,000  men  are  to  be  sent  from  hence 
to  assist  the  latter.  The  King  is  now  at  Versailles  but  the  Court 
is  very  thinne,  no  man  of  any  v?orth,  excepting  Princes  of  the 
blood,  daring  to  shew  themselves  from  the  Army.  Here  is  in 
towne  a  regiment  of  disbanded  Irish  officers  without  any  money 
to  carry  them  back. 

To  Lord  Arlinijtoii. 

Paris  :  Sep.  lOtli,  '72. 
The  Germans  being  thought  to  bee  in  earnest,  it  is  believed  the 
bloquing  of  Maestrict  will  bee  slack'ned,  &  all  those  troops,  as  I 
hear,  are  ordei-ed  to  follow  ilons''  de  Turenne.  The  French 
Enroi/e  follows  the  motions  of  the  Brandenburg  forces  &  hath 
sent  the  Elector's  answ^er,  that  what  hee  did  was  according  to  the 
constitutions  of  the  Empire  ibr  its  preservation,  &  against  some 
of  its  members  that  had  violated  &  acted  contrary  to  its  interest, 
of  which  I  hear  the  Bp.  of  Munster  is  somewhat  apprehensive,  & 
hath  sent  to  Vienna  to  endeavour  an  accomodement  as  to  his 
particular.  The  Empereur  declares  his  reason  for  arming  to  bee 
against  infringings  on  the  Empire,  but  after  all  it  is  doubtfull 
whether  those  forces  will  hazard  themselves  in  a  fight  against  the 
French  or  attract  therby  such  a  powerfull  force  into  their  bowells. 

'  Louis,  Chevalier  de  Rohan,  youngest  son  of  Louis  VIL  de  Eohan,  Prince  de 
Guem^nS,  born  1U3-5,  executed  1674.  '  II  ^tait,'  according  to  La  Fare,  '  I'homme  le 
mieux  fait  de  son  temps  et  de  la  plus  grande  mine.' 

'  For  the  terms  of  peace  proposed  by  the  French  Envoy  (Monsieur  Gaumont) 
see  London  Gazette,  dated  September  14,  1072. 


21(1  THE    nESPATCHES   OI' 

Uere  was  tlu'  last  week  a  complaint  against  the  (tovernor 
of  Xaniur  for  having  stopped  some  French  boats  laden  with  pro- 
visions, whenipon  ^1''  de  \'arenne  was  sent  to  the  C.  de  Monterei, 
but  the  busines  being  examined  on  the  place,  it  was  found  a 
vanity  &  a  report  of  noe  foundation. 

Yoni'  Lopp,  I  ])resnrae,  liatli  heaid  from  Spainc  Iiow  at  the 
Duke  of  X'cragua's  '  imbarcation  on  the  Armada  hee  had  orders  to 
ii])en  his  instructions  after  hee  should  bee  some  leagues  at  sea. 
I  hear  since  they  bore,  that  hee  should  sayle  towards  the  coast  of 
Flanilers,  but  this  is  not  soe  probable  as  his  being  to  protect  their 
India  returne  fleet  on  their  way  home. 

Herewith  I  send  your  Lopp  a  narrative  of  the  difference 
between  Savoy  &  Geneva.- 

Yesterday  I  saw  a  letter  from  De  Witte.  He  wrote  to  a  friend 
of  his  in  this  place  wherein  hee  mentions  the  demission  of  his 
charge  of  Pensionar,  i*l:  the  preandile  is  thus  : — The  suddain  sur]irise 
of  the  Towns  on  the  llhyne,  the  enemies  breaking  tlirougli  the 
Yssel,  &  the  totall  losse  of  the  province  of  (luelderland,  Utrecht, 
&  Overyssel,  without  any  considerable  resistance  &  by  an  unheard 
of  la!<chei('  &  cowardice,  if  I  may  not  also  use  the  word  treachery, 
hath  confirmed  mee  more  &  more  in  the  opinion  &  truth  of  what 
was  formerly  sayd  of  ye  Rejruhliques  of  Rome.  '  Prospera  oninefi 
sihi  veiulicant,  w^rersa  nm  virfpidariiar,'  to  that  degree  that  I  find 
the  Batavians  will  not  only  lay  all  their  misfortunes  tt  disasters 
on  my  shoulders,  but  that  they  are  in  a  manner  satisfyed  with 
my  being  massacred,  as  far  as  lay  in  the  power  of  those  four  armed 
men  that  sett  upon  mee,  although  by  (lod's  great  goodnesse  I  am 
recovered  of  my  wounds.  And  among  all  the  other  magistrates 
who  had  any  direction  in  affaires,  their  iuite  falls  principally  on 
mee,  although  I  was  but  their  servant,  which  is  the  reason  I  have 
given  up  my  charge,  etc". 

There  coming  a  great  clamour  from  Diepe  of  the  poverty  of 
those  people  for  want  of  fishing,  the  Sieur  Rompf,  formerly  agent 
for  the  States,  &  now  for  the  Prince  of  Orange,  wiis  desired  from 
Court  to  obtaine  of  his  if''  150  passeports  for  as  many  vessells  to 
fish  for  herrings,  etc". 

'  D.  Pedro  Manuel  Colon  de  I'ortUKal  y  Sandoval,  Due  de  Veragua  et  de  la 
Vega. 

''  The  cause  of  the  differences  between  Savoy  and  Geneva  was  a  dispute  about 
the  frontier  towns  (see  Lotidon  Gazette,  1672). 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  241 

To  Sir  Joseph  WilUmnson. 

Palis  :  Sep.  22,  '72. 

Yesterday  broiight  me  the  honour  of  two  from  you  of  the  Sth, 
rejoycing  much  at  that  the  L''*  Comm'"'  are  pleased  to  doe  me  as 
to  the  commission  of  which  I  attribute  much  to  your  kindnesse,  & 
therfore  give  my  humble  thanks,  but  I  wonder  at  their  naming 
j\I''  H.  Thynne  ^  to  be  joyned  with  me  who  has  been  in  Eng''  these  two 
months  &  is  now  with  M''  Scry'  Coventry.'-  Wherfore  I  have  written 
to  S""  Rob  Howard  that  a  new  commission  bee  issued  out  of  the 
Excheq''  nominating  some  other  person  on  the  place  here,  as 
S''  William  Pulteney^  (who  lodges  at  my  house),  or  S""  Thomas 
Clarges.''  Au  rede,  you  may  bee  sure  I  shall  have  all  the  care 
imaginable  to  discharge  myselfe  herein,  as  I  ought  in  duty. 

By  the  nest,  I  hope  to  transmit  to  you  a  copy  of  the  late 
Treaty  concluded  between  France  &  Sweden  for  10  years,"  as  also 
some  papers  that  concerne  the  present  dispute  between  Savoy  & 
Geneva.  Wee  hear  that  ]Marshall  Turenne  hath  sent  circular 
letters  to  the  Princes  of  the  Empire  advising  them  not  to  assist 
the  Dutch,  with  threats  of  falling  on  them  in  case  they  doe,  &  that 
if  their  arming  were  only  for  the  security  of  the  Empire  &  not  for 
the  annoying  the  King's  allies  or  assisting  his  enemys,  they  need 
apprehend  nothing  from  his  passing  the  Rhine. 

It  is  said  that  Mons''  de  Viti-y,''  M'"  d'Anjou/  &  M'  de  Vaubrun 
are  to  goe  towards  Germany  upon  negotiations.  Orders  are  given 
here  for  the  raising  5,000  horse  &  15,000  foot,  the  armies  being 
much  mouldred  away. 

To  Sir  Josejih    Williamson. 

Paris  :   Oct  5,  [1672]. 

Last  night  came  hither  the  Countes  of  Northumberland,  but 
her  stay  will  bee  Very  short.  -   It   is    said  the  M"  Turenne  hath 

'  Henry  Frederick  Thynne,  Clerk  of  the  Privy  Council. 

-  Henry  Coventry  (1619-1686),  Seeretaiy  of  State,  third  son  of  Thomas,  first 
Lord  Coventi^y,  and  brother-in-law  of  Anthony  Ashley  Cooper,  Earl  of  Shaftesbuiy. 

'  A  distinguished  Member  of  Parliament,  and  gi-andfather  of  the  first  Earl  of 
Bath. 

'  Son  of  John  Clarges,  a  farrier  in  the  Savoy,  Sti'and. 

'  Treaty  of  alliance  between  France  and  Sweden,  signed  .July  4,  1672. 

'  Fran(;ois  Marie  de  I'Hopital,  Marquis,  later  Due  de  Vitry. 

•   See  p.  209,  n.  3. 
VOL.  V.  R 


242  THE    DESPATCHES    Ol' 

orders  to  make  the  l']leetor  of  Bramleaburg  widiJraw  his  troops 
or  imediately  to  fight  them. 

Yesterday  went  lience  a  person  sent  to  Court  by  the  Grand 
Marshall  &  nobility  of  Poland.'  M''  de  Pomponne  gave  him  letters 
for  the  Grand  M",  for  his  lady,  &  a  generall  one  to  the  nobility, 
with  this  particular  at  parting :  '  You  cotne  &  make  propositions  & 
demand  a  King  of  us  ;  have  you  not  a  King  already  ?  ' 

The  Connestable  de  Colonna"  is  removed,  by  order,  from  the 
convent  of  Lj-s  to  that  of  Reims.  I  wonder  1  hear  no  more  of  the 
commission  from  S'"  Rob.  Howard,  because  the  time  expires. 

To  Sir  Joseph   W{lliamso7i. 

Paris  :  October  the  8"',  '72. 
As  long  as  1  stay  here  you  shall  be  troubled  with  my  letters, 
though  in  truth  my  being  here  signifies  little  more  than  great 
expence,  wherfore  I  hope  my  L''  of  Arlington  will  please  to  send 
me  his  orders  what  I  am  to  doe.  The  Ministers  are  now  at  worke 
for  the  raising  more  money,  &  they  talke  of  a  great  tax  to  bee  laid 
on  this  citty  par  toise  lor  the  maintenance  of  fourty  thousand  men. 
In  the  meantime,  all  the  fa'uxhourijx  on  this  side  are  incorporated 
in  the  citty.  the  gates  being  pulled  downe  that  separated  them,  to 
the  end  that  all  trades  compound  with  the  King  for  their  freedomes, 
which  will  raise  a  vast  sum  of  money.  Before  this,  I  presume  you 
have  heard  of  S''  And.  White's  disgrace  &  his  being  sent  prisoner 
towards  Calais.  The  person  that  took  him  had  600  lotris  for  his 
pains,  though  really  1  believe  all  hee  was  capable  of  doing  could 
not  signify  six  pence  of  the  money.  I  suppose  it  is  upon  an  old 
account  I  gave  my  L''  of  Arlington  notice  of  three  months  agoe, 
about  his  &  S'  Rob:  A\'alsh  having  proposed  great  matters  to  the 
Dutch  Amb''%  &  a  passejwrt  hee  sent  them  to  that  effect,  wherein 
one  betrayed  the  other,  S""  Rob.  discovering  to  Kng"",  &  S""  And.  to 
France,  only  as  1  sup()Ose  by  an  Irish  trick  to  get  reward  from 
both.'  We  hear  the  French  army  beyond  the  Rhine  is  much 
incomoded  by  reason  of  the  present  season.  Mr.  \^ernon  is  here, 
and  leaves  in  a  few  days. 

'  The  Poles  were  still  trying  to  get  rid  of  Michael  Wisniowieski. 
-■  Marie  Mancini,  Constable  Colonna. 
^  See  letter  dated  June  4,  1(172. 


AN    ENGLISH    AUENT    IN    PARIS  243 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  OctoB  12th,  '72. 

Upon  advice  from  the  army  of  the  Germans'  intentions  to  take 
up  their  winter  quarters  iiear  Cologne,  his  Ma'^  has  ordered  his 
troops  de  sa  maison  to  bee  in  a  readinesse  to  march  in  three  days, 
&  last  night  the  Prince  of  Conde,  coming  from  S'  Germaius,  gave 
out  he  was  to  goe  in  sis  days,  the  King  himselfe  having  resolved 
to  passe  the  winter  at  Mets.  Here  is  news  also  of  some  skirmish 
between  the  French  &  Germans  at  a  certain  passage,  wherein  the 
former  had  not  the  better.  The  league  is  now  finally  concluded 
at  Brunswick  between  the  Emperour,  the  Electors  of  Ments,  Ti-eves, 
Saxony,  &  Brandenburg,  &  the  Dukes  of  Brunswick,  Hesse  Cassel,^ 
&  Saxlavenburg,-  into  which  alliance  the  King  of  Denmai'ke  is  also 
entered,  &  from  it  they  suddainly  expect  a  body  of  thirty  thousand 
men  to  what  they  have  already.^  The  Prince  of  Conde  has 
demanded  troops  for  the  defence  of  Burgundy,  it  being  not  im- 
possible that  the  breach  may  come  in  that  way  as  the  most  open. 
The  Amb''  is  gone  this  day  to  S'  Germains  with  M'  Saville.' 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  May  fhe  Jj,,  '73. 
I  am  not  yet  soe  well  settled  as  to  come  into  the  old  track  of 
intelligence.''  I  can  only  acquaint  y''  Lop  with  the  Conde  de 
Molina  having  left  this  place,  &  a  report,  I  suppose,  of  his  framing 
as  if  all  the  English  concernes  in  Spaine  were  seised  on,  but  I 
presume  hee  is  mistaken  &  meant  it  for  a  declaracon  made  by  that 
Court,   wherby   all  persons  interested   in   the   plate   fleet  should 

'  See  p.  106,  n.  5.  -  Julius  Francis,  Duke  of  Saxlavenburg. 

^  By  the  Treaty  of  Cologne,  1672,  Spain  and  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg  had 
promised  to  help  the  Dutch,  but  Brandenburg,  feeling  too  feeble  to  do  anything 
against  Louis,  had  formed  an  idea  of  a  league  between  the  Emperor,  the  King  of 
Denmark,  the  Dukes  of  Lunenburg,  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse,  and  all  the  German 
Princes  who  were  alarmed  at  Louis's  ambition.  The  Emperor  and  the  Elector  of 
Brandenburg  had  made  a  treaty  on  June  23,  1672,  to  defend  themselves  against 
France.  This  violated  the  treaty  of  November  1671,  by  which  Leopold  had 
promised  Louis  to  remain  neutral  (Mignet,  vol.  iv.  p.  76).  See  Koch  and  Schoell, 
Histoirc  abriSgi'e  dcs  Traitis  de  Paix,  vols.  i.  and  ii.,  for  a  full  account  of  treaties 
during  this  period. 

'  PeiTvich  had  evidently  been  in  England  from  November  1672  until  April  1073. 

H  2 


244  TIIK    OESrATCHES    OF 

enregister  their  concernes  at  the  custome  house  in  order  to  tlie 
borrowing  &  diverting  it  to  the  publick  use.  However,  the 
Spaniards  are  growne  very  complaisant  of  late  towards  the  French, 
in  granting  passage  for  troops,  &c".  but  oppose  all  they  can  a 
IVace  with  the  Dutch. 

The  Treaty  with  Brandenburg  is  finally  concluded,  wherby 
the  Elector  is  to  have  all  the  townes  belonging  to  liim  restored 
againe,  as  particularly  Wesel,  besides  a  sum  of  money,  w"''  last 
circumstance  bears  as  if  something  extraordinary  were  expected 
from  him.' 

Here  is  a  rumour  of  the  Emperour's  designe  to  many  in  the 
House  of  Bavi6re,  as  also  that  the  Arch  Duchesse  had  declared  she 
would  not  have  him,  but  y""  Lopp  has  better  inforraacon  of  these 
matters  for  the  place. 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  May  the  20th,  '73. 

On  Thursday  last  Monsieur  went  hence  en  relais,  lay  that  night 
at  Amiens,  &  makes  great  hast  to  bee  with  the  King,  who  sent  for 
him  by  a  Courrier.  The  letter  mentioned  '  qu'il  pourroit  avoir 
part  a  ses  deliberations  et  a  ses  entreprises.  s'il  le  joignoit  Ic  20" 
de  ce  mois.'  The  Courrier  went  in  all  diligence  towards  Madrid, 
&  it  is  said  that  ho  carries  orders  to  Mons"'  Villards  to  retire  from 
that  Court. 

Letters  from  the  16th,  from  Courtray,  advise  the  King's  being 
arrived  there  that  day  &  intended  to  make  a  review  of  all  his 
troops  on  Munday  the  22"'  near  that  place,  which  ai-e  to  consist  of 
fourty  hataillons  of  GOO  men  each,  &  of  75  squadrons  of  horse  of 
300  horse  in  each ;  in  all  24,000  foot  &  22,500  horse. 

His  Ma*y  hath  received  news  of  the  Holanders  having  blowne 
up  all  the  outworkers  of  their  townes  in  Brabant,  as  Maestricht, 
Breda,  &  Boisleduc,  &  that  the  Spaniards  were  retiring  out  of 
those  places. 

I  have  many  letters  from  Vienna  by  the  last  Courrier,  wherein 
noe  mention  at  all  is  made  of  the  match  lately  spoken  of  between 

'  A  treaty  between  the  Elector  and  Louis,  made  April  10,  by  which  the  Elector 
agreed  to  give  no  further  help  to  the  Dutch.  Louis  was  beginning  to  draw  off  the 
German  Princes  from  the  Dutch  cause. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  245 

the  Emp'^  &  the  Arch  Duchesse,  but  rather  that  hee  is  to  many 
elsewhere.^ 

To  Lm'd  Arlinqton. 

Paris  :  May  ye  31",  '73. 

In  a  pacquet  that  goes  herewith  to  M''  Eichards,  I  suppose  your 
Lopp  will  have  all  the  news  from  the  camp  at  Landeghent,  since 
the  date  of  w'-'''  letters,  wee  have  fresh  advice  that  Monsieur's 
passing  the  Lys  with  ten  thousand  men,  was  only  to  amuse,  hee 
having  orders  sent  him  to  returne  on  the  28"^ ;  that  Mous''  de 
Kochefort  hath  passed  Lesiau  with  6,000  men  &  artillery,  as  some 
believe  in  order  to  the  siege  of  Breda,  or  Maestricht,  but  others 
imagine  hee  may  passe  near  Bruxells,  there  having  already  been 
some  little  hostilities  between  the  French  &  Spaniards.  Mons''  de 
Hautefeuille,-  Amb'  from  Maltha,  as  hee  passed  the  Lys  with  six 
hundred  horse,  fell  upon  a  Regiment  of  Spanniards  who  were 
marching  towards  a  considerable  post ;  hee  made  about  15  prisoners 
&  about  the  like  number  were  killed,  with  the  losse  only  of  one  Page. 

JSIons'  de  Turenne  continues  still  near  Ham  because  hee  hears 
the  Imp"  forces  are  moving.  Hee  expects  a  revfmi  of  12,000  men 
from  the  Duke  of  Bavaria,  although  his  army  consists  of  38  thousand 
men.  M''  de  Gremonville  hath  orders  to  expostulate  with  the 
Emperour  upon  his  being  soe  much  concerned  for  the  Dutch  the 
last  j'ear,  &  to  threaten  a  strange  story  about  Bohemia  in  case  hee 
bee  troublesome  this  Campagnia.  Here  are  people  sent  on  purpose 
from  Vienna  to  buy  wedding  garments  for  the  Emp'',  &  others  for 
a  Princesse,  &  a  certain  place  is  named  in  Austria  for  the  marriage, 
but  I  camiot  say  very  positive  it  is  the  Ai-chduchesse  of  Inspruck, 
because  there  are  soe  many  German  matches  proposed ;  it  may  bee 
to  amuse. 

The  Prince  of  Conde  writes  word  that  hee  begins  to  bee  on 
his  leggs  again,  &  hoped  on  the  29th  (the  day  the  King  decamps 
also)  to  bee  on  horseback  upon  a  great  enterprise. 

The  French  India  Ueet  is  not  yet  arrived,  &  the  persons  con- 
cerned are  in  some  apprehension  least  the  Dutch  have  snapped 
them  on  the  way. 

'  Leopold  of  Austria,  1640-1705,  married  (1)  Marguerite  Teresa,  daughter  of 
Philip  IV.  of  Spain,  who  died  in  1673 ;  (2)  Claudia  Felieitas,  daughter  of 
Ferdinand  Charles,  Archduke  of  Tyrol  Innsbruck,  who  died  in  1670 ;  (3)  Eleouora 
Maddaleue,  daughter  of  Philip  William,  Palatine  of  Neuberg. 

-  Etienne  Texier,  Chevalier  d'Hautefeuille. 


246  TUli    DliSl'ATCHES    OK 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris:  June  the  3^  '73,  S.N. 

I  should  not  have  given  your  I^opp  any  trouble  by  this  Post 
had  not  iMadam  given  me  a  just  occasion  by  her  being  deliverd  of 
a  son  '  this  night.  Shee  did  soe  lament  Monsieurs  absence  that  in  3 
days  shee  would  not  eat  and  would  have  been  more  disconsolate 
had  shee  brought  a  daughter.  The  joyfull  news  will  tind  .Mon.sieur 
in  the  trenches  before  Maestricht,  a  C'ourricr  just  now  passing  by 
here  with  the  advice  of  the  Prince  of  Condo's  having  formally 
besieged  that  place  and  that  the  King  intended  to  bee  encamped 
there  on  the  5th  currant. 

Your  Lopp  will  see  in  the  Gazette  an  account  of  his  march, 
&  I  believe  all  that  passes  there  comes  sooner  to  y""  Lopp's  hands 
than  through  this  place. 

My  Lord  of  Sunderland  liatii  been  abroad,  &  1  believe  may  bee 
going  in  four  or  five  days. 


To  Sir  Joseph  WiUiamsmL 

Paris  :  June  9tb,  '73. 
Yesterday  I  received  the  honour  of  one  from  y""  Ex'^"  w'^''  left 
you  at  Antwerp.  I  cannot  give  you  soe  good  an  account  of  my 
L*  of  Sunderland's  being  any  way  advanced  towards  the  place  of 
Treaty,  his  Ex''"  not  designing  to  leave  us  yet  these  4-  or  5  days. 
Wee  have  here  no  manner  of  news,  but  are  gaping  after  some  from 
the  camp  dayly,  the  Courrier  being  come  back  who  was  dispatched 
lately  into  Spain,  with  some  demands,  &  gone  in  hast  to  the  Army, 
Wee  cannot  devine  what  answer  liee  bears,  but  believe  that  in  the 
present  conjuncture,  they  studj"  nt)thing  but  complaisance  in  every 
point  to  avoyd  any  trouble  they  might  otherwise  expect.  From 
Tangier  we  hear  of  a  very  advantageous  Treaty  -  made  with  Gayland  ' 
with  large  allowance  of  limitts. 

'  Alexandre  Louis,  Due  de  Valois  (1G73-1676). 

^  See  Tangier  State  Papers,  Nov.  IG,  11)72. 

'  The  Moorish  chief.  For  account  of  Gajland  see  History  of  tlie  Second 
Queen's,  now  Vie  Royal  West  Surrey  Begiment,  by  Col.  J.  Davis,  vol.  i.,  Ap- 
pendix B. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  247 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  June  the  lOth,  '73. 

The  last  advice  from  the  Army  left  it  at  Vossem,  marching 
towards  Maastricht,  the  C'^  de  jMontal  &  de  Lorge  having  already 
invested  that  place,  &  the  King  hiiiiselfe  designing  to  bee  there 
as  yesterday.  When  the  Camp  was  at  Affleic  within  a  league  of 
Bruxells,  the  Couutesse  of  Monterei  sent  D°  Emanuel  de  Lira  to 
compliment  his  Ma*^,  with  assurances  that  her  husband  had  orders 
from  Spaine  to  give  his  i\I.  X.  Ma'^  what  passage  hee  should 
desire  in  Flanders  &  withall  to  acquaint  the  King  that  the  s"' 
Countesse,  as  well  as  severall  ladies  of  quality  there,  could  not  but 
bee  alarmed  at  the  approach  of  soe  great  an  Army,  with  the 
disorders  that  attend  it,  &  their  apprehensions  had  been  greater 
were  his  Ma'^  not  at  the  head  of  it  to  restrain  the  souldiers'  inso- 
lence. To  w"''  the  Kyng  is  said  to  have  replyed,  that  hee  thanked 
the  Queene  of  Spaine  for  her  civility,  &  that,  as  to  his  Army,  it 
was  a  very  difficult  matter  to  hinder  some  disorders  during  its 
march,  w"^*^  hee  would  endeavour  to  prevent  as  much  as  hee  could 
by  the  exact  discipline  hee  ordred  to  be  observed  ;  that  as  to  the 
person  of  the  Countesse  &  the  other  ladys  that  are  in  Bruxells, 
the  King  had  too  great  an  esteem  of  them  not  to  give  them  what 
securities  they  could  desire,  in  case  they  desired  to  goe  elsewhere. 
The  compliment  concluded  with  a  present  to  De  Lira. 

The  courrier  I  told  y""  Lopp  of,  who  was  dispached  into  Spaine 
to  the  French  Amb'',  is  come  back,  &  after  having  given  a  Pacquet 
to  M""  Colbert,  is  gone  towards  the  army,  it  is  supposed  with 
that  Coui't's  answer  to  some  demands  made  by  Mons''  de  Villards 
there. 

The  French  fleet  of  inarchants  from  Cadix  is  come  in  at  S' 
Malo's  under  convoy  of  M''  de  Martel's  squadron,  -svho  is  gone 
with  it,  as  is  reported,  in  order  to  joine  with  the  French  fleet. 

The  King  has  written  hither  that  in  Maestricht  are  3,600  foot 
&  2,000  horse  who  are  resolved  to  hold  out  the  place  to  the  last 
extremity,  although  the  French  think  it  a  job  of  about  three 
weeks. 


248  nil-;  DiisPATcuEs  ok 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  yc  13""  of  June,  1(173. 

By  this  time  I  presume  y"'  Ex"''  is  at  Cologne,'  but  at  all 
adventures  I  send  this  to  Li^ge,  &  least  you  miglit  not  have  heard 
the  good  news  by  other  hands,  I  give  y''  Ex'^'the  enore  huen[(j\  of  our 
victory  at  sea,-  here  coming  a  Oourrier  last  night,  a  person 
of  quality,  volunteer  on  board  the  French  squadron,  with  an  assur- 
ance of  our  having  routed  the  Dutch  after  a  light  of  two  days.  Hee 
could  tell  mee  but  few  particulars,  w'''  were  these,  that  the  Holander, 
perceiving  wee  would  take  them  at  a  disadvantage,  came  out  to  a 
regular  tight,  in  w''''  Tromp,'' Vice  Adm",  &.  another  \'ice  Adm",  were 
burnt,  ■[■  or  5  sunk,  7  or  8  more  burnt,  &  some  frigatts  taken,  that 
]-•"'■  Robert's  ship  was  much  torne  &  many  men  lost  on  board  her, 
&  that  one,  ^1''  Hamilton,'  had  his  thigh  shott  off.  This  is  all  1 
could  learne  of  him  in  hast;  the  further  particulars  1  dayly  expect, 
&  shall  be  faithfully  transmitted  to  y''  Ex*^''.  ]May  your  negotia- 
tions have  also  good  successe. 

At  the  same  time  came  surprising  news  also  from  the  camp,  as 
if  Maestricht,  Breda,  Boisleduc,  &  Berg-op-Zoom  should  bee 
reudred  up  to  the  Xt"  King  in  order  to  a  Peace.  This  particular 
yr  j^^ce  i^nows  better  then  wee  at  this  distance  ;  however,  it  is 
written  hither  from  very  good  hands. 

ily  L''  of  Peterburgh  ^  has  orders  to  bee  noe  more  Amb'"  for  the 
luspruck  match,  the  Emperour's  silence  giving  noe  consent  unto  it, 
but  has  some  private  commission  to  goe  to  the  Army,  as  some 
imagine,  to  seek  a  French  Lady  for  his  ii.  H.  Hee  sends  back 
his  people  for  Eng''  as  well  as  the  Secretary  of  the  Embassy. 

The  next  news  wee  expect  to  hear  from  England  is  of  the  J3.  of 
York's  being  embarqued  with  troops  in  order  to  a  descent  in 
Holland.     I  pray  God  give  us  good  successe  &  preserve  y''  Ex^''. 


'  Sir  Joseph  Williamsou,  the  Earl  of  Sunderland,  and  Sir  LeoUue  Jenkius 
had  been  appointed  joint  plenipotentiaries  from  England  to  the  Congress  at 
Cologne. 

-'  See  S.  P.,  Do7n.,  1673,  p.  313,  for  account  of  this  victory. 

■'  CorueUus  van  Tromp. 

'  Colonel  James  Hamilton.     See  S.  P.,  Dum.,  1673,  p.  313. 

'  Henry  Mordauut,  Earl  of  Peterborough,  1621-1697. 


A.N    EXliLIriH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  249 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris :  June  ye  17th,  73. 

Some  five  days  since  we  had  an  imperfect  account  of  the  en- 
gagement with  ye  Dutch  by  a  gentleman  who  was  volunteer  on 
board  the  French  squadron,  wherein  these  people  accuse  them- 
selves of  too  much  temerity,  but  however  that  the  victory  was 
signall. 

From  Holland,  according  to  their  old  custome,  they  have  burnt 
&  sunk  many  French  &  English,  but  an  ingenious  sufferer  from 
Middlebm'gh  writes  in  geuerall,  that  the  Holland'""  are  returned  in 
a  deplorable  condition,  their  ships  unmercifullj^  torne,  &  abundance 
of  their  men  slaine  &  wounded,  insomuch  that  theii"  conster[n]acon 
was  beyond  imaginacoh.  De  Ruyter  has  sent  a  Courrier  to 
Marshall  Wurtz  to  let  liim  know  that  the  English  &  French  had  a 
designe  to  make  a  descent  at  the  ^VaIcheren,  to  the  end  hee  might 
put  himselfe  in  a  condicwi  the  precaution  required.  Hee  wrote 
also  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  that  hee  had  separated  the  English  & 
French,  &  burnt  &  sunk  some  of  them,  that  hee  himselfe  shifted 
ship  four  times,  &  that  Tromp  changed  thrice. 

From  the  Diette  at  Ratisbonue  wee  hear  that  the  Sieur  de 
Gravelle  had  putt  in  another  Memoriall,  demanding  a  categoricall 
answer  whether  they  will  declare  themselves  for  the  Emperour  or 
the  King,  his  Master,  &  that  it  was  believed  they  would  not  make 
a  favourable  resolucmi  for  the  French.  The  Emp"'  has  sent  into 
Switserland  to  know  theii"  intentions  in  this  conjuncture,  &  the 
Cantons  have  answered  that  they  would  allways  favorise  his 
Imp"  Ma"- "  designs. 

The  last  letters  from  Maestricht  say  that  the  French  were 
making  their  lines  of  circumvalacon  &  contra valation,  &  had 
ordered  all  the  towns  &  villages  in  the  Principality  of  Liege  to 
work  in  them  under  pain  of  being  foaragez ;  the  guarrison  has 
made  5  or  6  salLies  by  way  of  prelude  for  tryall,  but  had  been 
allways  beaten  in  after  some  skirmishes,  wherein  were  some  few 
slaine  on  both  sides  ;  the  French  hoped  to  open  the  trenches  on 
the  15"';  that  they  learnt  by  some  prisoners  that  the  guarrison 
consisted  of  5  thousand  foot  &  a  thousand  horse ;  &  that  they 
should  find  much  difficulty  to  make  their  approaches,  because  the 
place  fired  vehementlj-  upon  them. 

Marshall  Turenue  decamped  on  the  8"'  to  quitt  the  territories 


250  THE    DESPATCHES    OK 

of  Brandenburg,  &  instead  of  coming  towai'ds  Wesel,  hee  marched 
strait  to  Wetzlar'  upon  tlieLohn,-'  upon  the  advice  tlie  S*"  de  Gre- 
inciiiville  sent  him  from  Vienna  of  the  Em])erour's  liaving  ordered 
his  army  to  bee  in  a  readiuesse  to  returue  towards  the  Rhine  under 
the  command  of  Generall  Montecuculi'  for  the  succour  of  his 
allyes. 

Since  1  wrote  this,  I  hear  of  the  King's  being  gott  before 
Maestricht,  with  some  part  of  his  Army.  Immediately  upon  his 
arrivall,  hee  visited  the  I'osts  occupied  by  his  Troops  under  the 
command  of  the  C"'  de  Lorge,  &  while  his  -\la"-'  was  making  the 
tour,  in  a  sku-mish  a  prisoner  being  made  &  brought  unto  him,  hee 
caused  him  U>  be  released  with  this  message,  that  if  the  towue  did 
not  resigne  itselfe  in  8  days,  hee  would  give  them  no  quarter.  His 
Ma"^'  hatii  detache  Monsieur  with  9,000  foot  &  G,000  horse,  to  post 
himselfe  before  Wyck  [\Vyk]  on  the  other  side  of  the  Meuse.  The 
(■'  de  Soissons  is  dead,  much  regretted  by  everybody. 

Just  now  I  am  told,  but  cannot  give  it  y''  Lopj)  for  currant,  that 
.Madam  the  I\Iarquesse  of  Jlontespan  is  dead  at  Tournay,  in  childbed. 

To  Lord  Arli'tufton. 

Piiris  :  June  ye  21%  '73. 

Little  of  moment  has  happned  since  my  last,  the  working  at 
the  outlines  having  delayed  the  opening  the  trenches  before 
Maestricht,  into  w'^''  jilaee  the  Count  de  Dhona  is  gotten  by 
stratagem.  The  French  thought  him  to  bee  of  their  nation  till 
such  time  as,  being  near  the  place,  hee  spurred  his  horse  &  soe 
entered.  In  a  former  I  mentioned  a  threat,  sent  to  the  Governor, 
of  giving  no  quarter  if  hee  yielded  not  in  8  days,  to  which  I  hear 
the  Spaniard  made  this  answer,  that  his  M.  Xtian  Ma'^,  having  the 
nmowne  of  a  generous  hero,  would  esteem  him  to  bee  lasche,  & 
unworthy  the  command  of  such  a  place,  if  after  having  sustained 
the  siege  of  Valenciennes,  hee  should  surrender  a  place  soe  wdl 
fortifyed,  with  a  provision  for  a  year  &  soe  well  manned,  &  that  to 
gaine  tin-  more  credit  with  his  Ma'*',  hee  would  hold  the  place  with 
resolucon  to  the  last  drop  of  his  &  his  souldier's  blood.  However, 
the  French  pretend  to  bee  masters  there  in  11  days  after  the 
trenches  are  opened.     I  hear  the  Duke  of  Monmouth  grows  to  an 

'  Westslar.  -  Lon,  a  tributary  of  the  Ehine. 

'  Leopold  Ptiilip,  Priuce  of  Montecuculi. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    I.\    PARI.S  •  251 

extraordinary  degree  in  the  King's  pai-ticular  affections,  &  has  one 
of  the  four  bodys  that  beleaguer  the  towne  under  his  command. 
The  Princesse  of  ^[ecklenbiirg'  has  seen  the  King,  soe  that  now  her 
husband  has  no  more  a  guard  upon  him,  in  order  to  her  leaving  his 
territories.  It  seems  hee  was  complimented  into  a  confinement, 
pretending  that  the  guard  was  to  prevent  injuries  from  her  rela- 
tions, otherwise  it  were  a  little  harsh  to  a  petty  soveraigne  Prince. 
I  am  in  pursuit  of  a  Dutch  Anabaptist  who  has  coyned  dis- 
advautagious  news  to  us,  &  hope-to  obtayne  his  bannishraent  to 
the  galleys. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  June  24th,  73,  S.N. 

The  last  advice  from  the  Army  of  the  20th  represents  the 
French  Camp  much  advanced  in  its  works,  being  within  a  hund'' 
paces  of  the  Gontrescur^i.  On  the  18th  the  trenches  were  opened, 
at  w"^**  they  made  near  a  thousand  paces,  &  lost  a  captaine  of  the 
R"  Regiment  with  some  other  under-otScers.  Three  batteries  are 
raised,  the  royall  one  of  12  gunus,  &  two  others  of  8  each  ;  the 
compliments  have  been  hansomely  made  on  both  sides,  however, 
according  to  the  I'egular  proceeding  of  the  French ;  it  is  generally 
believed  that  it  will  not  be  a  businesse  d  traisner  en  longueur, 
though  with  the  losse  of  some  men.  Some  ofiicers  of  the  Crowne 
have  made  their  compliments  to  the  King  in  that  hee  exposed 
himselfe  too  much  in  making  the  rounds  &  running  the  same 
riske  of  every  common  souldier  ;  however,  his  Ma'^y  doth  not  desist 
from  visiting  the  workes  to  compleat  the  renowne  of  being  a  great 
hero,  as  is  Monsieur  come  from  the  siege  of  Wyke,  to  encourage 
with  his  presence  the  opening  of  the  trenches.  The  motion  of  the 
Imperialists  is  diversly  spoken  of ;  however,  Mons""  de  Turenne 
keeps  the  course  of  Wetzaert  to  hinder  any  exploits.  Yesterday 
all  the  English  had  like  to  have  been  embroyled  in  a  quarrell 
against  a  sworme  of  Germans,  who  believe  the  Dutch  gazetts  to  be 
infallible,  but  it  was  soon  appeased  when  they  found  our  gentle- 
men in  earnest. 

Wee  hear  fi-om  Rome  of  the  promocdh  of  four  Cardinalls,  as  y*" 
Sieur  Nerh,  Nuntio  in  France ;  Guastaldi,  Treasurer  of  the  Apo- 

'  Isabelle  Angelica  of  Montmorency,  wife  of  Christian  Louis,  Duke  of  Mecklen- 
burg (see  Histoire  des  Princes  de  la  Maison  de  Condi,  par  M.  le  Due  d'Aumale, 
vii.  390-391). 


■Li3Z  THE    DESI'ATCHKS    OK 

stolick  Chamber ;  Bazadouna,'  &  Cacauallu,-  all  four  creatures  of 
the  Pope  &  the  C"  Patron. 

Yesterday  was  burnt,  in  this  place,  a  priest  who  had  diverted 
himselfe  with  a  certaine  superior  of  a  Nunnery  &  some  of  the 
Nuuns.  Hee  suffei'ed  because  it  was  kuowne,  otherwise  the 
doctrine  of  those  people  is  that  a  concealed  sin  is  halfe  pardoned. 
At  his  last  confession  he  smiled  when  the  Crucifix  wa.s  offerd  him 
to  kisse,  &  soe  hee  dyed.  Your  Lopp  will  see  in  the  Print  how 
fairly  I  have  ^'presented  tlie  first  sea  iight,  that  the  malicious 
spirits  that  are  here  might  not  infect  the  people  with  fables.  The 
best  argument  the  Dutch  have  hitherto  given  of  their  victory  pro- 
truded is,  that  the  Italian  Astrologer  had  foretold  the  day  of  the 
light,  &  that  the  Hollands  should  be  victorious. 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris:  July  1,  '73. 
It  may  bee  that  this  will  come  too  late  to  give  your  Lopp  an 
account  of  the  Duke  of  Monmouth's  behaviour  at  the  taking  of  the 
contrcfcarp  &  demyhme,  because  the  King  of  France  savd  hee 
would  give  his  Ma'^'  a  relation  of  it  himself.  ,1  can  only  add  this 
ci)-cumstance  my  French  Correspondent  adviseth  me,  that  after  the 
enemy  had  taken  the  advantage  of  the  springing  a  mine,  w*"''  blew 
up  (JO  of  ours,  &  the  disorder  that  attended  it,  &  had  retaken  the 
dcinijlane,  his  Grace  imediately  went  I'eqive  a  la  nudn  with  his 
volunteers,  &  the  Sieur  d'Artagnan  with  his  Mousqiieiaires,  to 
liindcr  the  enemy's  socours  to  the  demijlune,  &  finding  himselfe 
abaiulon'd  by  his  souldiers,  returned  in  a  fury  '  et  leurs  dit  d'un  ton 
ferme  et  de  reproche  :  faut-il  caniarades  que  je  vous  monstre  deux 
fois  le  cht^min  moy-mesme  pour  aller  aux  enneniis  ? '  w""''  being 
seconded  by  his  example,  &  the  English  volunteers  that  followed 
him,  encouraged  the  rest  so  much  as  to  become  a  second  time 
master  of  the  demijlime,  with  the  losse  of  ilous"'  d'Artagnan,  S'' 
11.  Jones'  much  regretted,  &  Charles  O'Brian  wounded.  Mycorre- 
s[)(mdent  adds,  '  qu'il  a  eu  une  pretence  d'esprit  dans  toute  cette 
journee,  et  nne  conduitte  d'un  General  qui  auroit  comaude  '60  ans 
des  trenchees,  le  Roy  en  a  esto  charme,  aussi  bien  que  toute  sa  Gour, 

'  Pietro  Bazadonna.  -  Frederic  Cacoia. 

'  Sir  Henry  Jones  was  commanding  a  regiment  of  horse  lor  Charles  (Evelyn's 
JJiary,  June  1071). 


AN    ENGLISH    AGKNT    IN    PARIS  253 

Sa  Ma**'  luy  clit  an  sortir  de  la  tranches,  '  je  suis  bien  aise  de  vous 
voir  apres  tout  ce  que  vous  avez  fait ;  le  Roy  d'Angleterre  sera  bien 
aise  de  scavoir  tout  cecy  : '  M''  le  Due  de  IMonniouth  luy  dit,  '  qu'il 
n'avoit  pas  essuye  grand  feu,'  sa  Ma*^  lui  repliqxia,  '  cela  est  beau  a 
vous  de  parler  ainsy,  mais  noirs  sfavons  ce  qui  en  est.' 

My  L''  of  Sunderland,  being  ill  again,  has  desired  me  to  write 
to  Sir  Joseph  '  that  he  has  no  hopes  left  of  being  able  to  go  to 
Cologne. 

To  Lord  Arlingfon. 

Paris  :  July  5th,  73. 

Last  night  this  citty  celebrated  the  conquest  of  JLaestricht  - 
with  fireworkes  &  a  great  tintamar  of  wai'ly  musick,  the  King 
having  sent  the  inclosed  letter  for  a  '  Te  Deum  '  to  be  sung.  The 
capitul aeons  were  honourable  enough  on  the  Governour's  side,  bee 
excusing  to  his  Ma'^  his  not  defending  the  place  any  longer,  in  that 
his  Spaniards  were  most  killed,  &  that  the  Dutch  officers  would  not 
fight.  It  is  believed  now  that  Breda  will  bee  the  next  scene,  nay, 
some  letters  say  it  is  actually  invested,  &  that  the  Prince  of  Condc 
has  taken  Muyden  at  last.  IMuch  of  the  honour  of  the  Siege  of 
Maestricht  is  attributed  to  his  Grace  of  Monmouth  &  the  English 
tliat  followed  liim,  a  truth  spoken  out  of  the  mouth  of  emulation 
itselfe. 

Wee  hear  strange  stories  from  Geneva  of  the  French  having 
with  a  certaine  number  of  galleys,  after  the  chase  of  2  Genovese 
Galleys  &  five  PaUaclies  ''  enterd  their  port,  notwithstanding  the  fire, 
&  taken  them  d  leur  Imrbe,  since  when,  allthough  they  have  force  to 
match  what  hath  attaqued  them,  they  sitt  still,  &  say  they  had 
better  loose  a  little  than  attract  greater  inconveniences. 

I  also  transmitt  to  your  Lopp  the  lost  joumall  printed  of  the 
late  siege,  least  yon  might  not  have  it  soe  particular  from  other 
hands. 

To  Lord  Arlincjton. 

Paris  :  July  8,  '73,  S.N. 
Since  the  taking  of  Maestricht  wee  have  no  certaine  advice  of 
the  King's  motion,  but  believe  hee  will   not  make  a  second  royall 
siege,  leaving  the  honour  of  the  next  to  the  Prince  of  Conde.     The 

'  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

'  Louis  attacked  the  town  of  Maestricht  on  June  10,  and  it  capitulated  July  2 
(Mignet,  iv.  147).  '  Small  ships  of  war. 


254  rilK    DKSI'ATCIIES    01' 

Queen,  having  been  indisposed,  is  to  bee  this  night  at  Amiens,  & 
it  is  sayd  his  Ma'^'  is  going  towards  Dunquerque  because  the 
Tinperiulistsdoe  not  advance  upon  the  Duke  of  Baviers  [IJavaria's] 
threats  to  stoj)  their  passage,  alledging  that  auch  their  descent 
would  attract  the  armies  of  France  on  the  body  of  the  Empire. 

By  a  letter  from  Marseilles  I  hear  our  new  cousuU,  M''  .Martin, 
was  arrived  at  Algiers,  &  the  old  one  lost  not  only  his  charge,  but 
made  a  fatal!  eud  uf  itt  for  having  pistoll'd  a  Jew  to  death  in  pre- 
sence of  the  King,  Ijefore  whom  he  was  called  for  justice  concerning 
a  debt  the  s'^  Jew  demanded  of  him.  Heo  had  imeJiately  his  head 
splitt  in  two  for  the  desperate  action  &  his  body  dragged  about  the 
streets. 

My  L'  of  Peterburgh  has  been  at  Dusseldorf,  &  ere  this  is 
returned  to  Culleu,  whence  it  is  saj-d  that  the  C  de  Tot '  is  gone 
towards  the  French  Court  to  interpose  for  a  cessation  of  armes. 

My  L'  of  Sunderland  is  sending  his  traine  for  England  bnt  will 
remaine  himself  here  in  private  to  drink  some  waters  out  of 
Normand3^ 

The  King  went  not  into  Maestricht,  as  it  was  intended,  to  sing 
a  '  Te  Deum,'  because  a  powder  plott  was  discovered  under  the 
Church. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  July  the  15th,  1C73. 

Since  the  great  conquest,  we  have  had  very  uncertaine  advices 
of  the  motions  of  the  French  Army.  Here  is  a  rumour  as  if  his 
Grace  of  INIonmouth  had  taken  a  fort  of  the  depeiuhmces  to  ]\taes- 
trict  but  in  the  possession  of  the  Spaniards.  It  is  believed  that  in 
case  the  Germans  come  not  downe,  his  most  Xtian  Maj'^  will 
returne  to  S'  Germains  about  a  month  hence.  The  Queen  being 
troubled  with  vapours,  the  faculty  of  Paris  have  sent  five  of  the 
best  Physicians  to  meet  her  at  Terre,  where  it  is  presumed  the 
King  will  make  her  a  visitt,  leaving  his  Army  in  the  Pays  de 
Treves  to  eat  up  the  countrey,  in  remembrance  of  the  Elector's 
having  suffered  german  garrisons  to  bee  putt  into  Coblents  & 
Hermanstein.  It  may  be  also  the  King  will  putt  a  garrison  into 
Treves  itselfe  for  better  assurance. 

The  last  advice  from  Italy  left  the  Pope  indisposed,  &  add[s]  that 
hee  had  declared  the  S''  Sachetti  to  be  his  Nuntio  in  France  upon 

'  Claude  (Ic  Tott,  lieutenant-general  of  the  King  of  Sweden. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  255 

the  promocdh  of  the  S''  Nerli  to  be  Cardinal  &  Secretary  of 
State. 

The  Genoveze  are  much  troubled  to  have  given  the  French  an 
occasion  of  intei'rupting  their  trade  by  taking  all  the  ships  they 
meet  belonging  to  that  Port,  &  have  resolved  to  send  a  supplicatory 
embassy  hither,  &  another  to  the  Pope,  craving  his  intercession  with 
the  most  Xtian  King  that  no  more  acts  of  hostility  be  exercised 
against  them. 

The  Dutch  deputies  at  Cologne  seemed  to  be  so  astonished  at 
the  demands  of  the  two  Kings  that  they  would  not  come  to  the 
conference.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  Campagne  is  now  over, 
the  xlrmy  being  divided  into  sevei'all  quarters,  some  gone  towards 
Utrecht,  others  near  Treves,  &  a  party  remaining  near  ^laestricht. 
•Just  now  fresh  letters  intimate  that  the  King,  being  informed  that 
severall  to'svns  in  Alsace  had  received  Imp"  Garrisons,  notwith- 
standing that  the  Treaty  of  Munster  gave  them  into  the  protec- 
tion of  France,  is  turning  that  way  from  Mets  in  order  to  the 
asserting  of  his  right. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris :  July  22'\  '73. 

The  King  arrived  at  Rethel  on  Sunday  last,  where  hee  niett 
the  Queen.  Thence  hee  goes  to  Nancy,  where  his  ila'^  will  make 
some  stay  to  observe  the  motions  of  the  Imperialists  as  well  as 
those  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  who  has  designed  to  passe  into  the 
Franche-Comte,  w"^''  the  Duke  of  Navailles  hath  orders  to  oppose,  & 
troops  are  sent  him  accordingly.  There  are  hott  disputes  at 
Ratisbonne  &  some  will  have  them  to  be  on  the  point  of  declaring 
the  French  to  be  the  common  enemy  of  the  Empire.  Marshall 
Turenne  advanceth  &  has  now  30,000  men  compleat,  besides  the 
ti-oops  the  Duke  of  Baviere  is  obliged  to  send  the  French.'  The 
Sweeds  are  in  the  countrey  of  Bremen  24,000  strong ;  some  say 
the}'  are  to  act  in  concei't  with  France  according  as  the  conjuncture 
shall  require,  but  others  believe  they  will  fall  upon  Bremen. 

Monsieur  came  hither  two  days  since,  to  the  great  joy  of 
Madame,  who  is  mighty  fond  of  him.  The  King  told  him,  as  he 
came  away,  that  if  the  Germans  came  downe,  he  would  send  for  him. 

'  Turenne  was  sent  to  Alsace  to  watch  the  movements  of  the  Imperial  troops 
and  those  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  (Mignet,  iv.  184). 


256  THi:    DESPATCnES    OF 

Two  Diitcli  dejiiities  are  pjone  to  confen-o  with  tlieir  Masters 
upon  wliat  the  medi.itoiii-s  have  represented  to  them.  &  to  know 
witli  wliat  oflers  the  States  will  load  them  back  to  bee  made  unto 
the  two  Kinofs. 

(PR)  Just  now  we  liear  that  Charle.«  O'Brian  is  dead  after  his 
leg  was  cutt  off. 

To  TjoriJ  Arlington. 

Paris  :  .July  29'",  '73. 

Wee  have  very  little  news  here,  there  being  yet  noe  action 
considerable.  The  King  is  himselfe  at  Nancy  to  encourage  the 
fortifications  there. 

The  Duke  of  Navaille  is  marched  towards  the  Tranche  Comtc 
with  7.000  men,  to  hinder  the  passage  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine 
with  liis  few  troops. 

The  ]\Iar.shall  d'Huniiers  is  encamped  between  Ath  &  Charleroy 
with  a  body  of  nine  thousand  horse  (t  foot.  It  is  thought  hee  may 
joine  the  Prince  of  Condc  in  ordei'  to  the  observing  the  motions  of 
the  Spaniards,  who  are  drawing  their  troops  together  with  intention 
to  march  towards  Breda,  where  it  is  sayd  the  Prince  of  Orange  is 
to  meet  them  with  the  best  of  his  troops.  Some  believe  the  designe 
is  to  goe  over  into  Zeal'  upon  tlie  apprehention  of  a  descent. 

The  Duke  of  Noailles  is  gone  into  his  government  of  Pous- 
sillon,  by  order,  to  observe  the  Catalonians,  as  is  the  Marsh" 
D'Albret  gone  to  Bayoune  for  the  same  purpose. 

To  Sir  JosejyJi  Williamson. 

Paris  :  July  29th,  '73. 

I  was  yesterday  honourd  with  one  from  y''  Ex'^'^,  bnt  the  letters 
mentioned  to  be  sent  with  it,  come  not ;  however.  I  believe  I  received 
the  same  from  Bruxels  seven  days  since.  Your  Ex'^*'  hath  sooner, 
from  all  active  parts,  an  account  of  what  passeth,  than  wee  at  Paris. 
Our  letters  yesterday  from  England  left  the  Blackheath  Camp 
embarqued  &  the  fleet  ready  to  sayle  the  day  after.  Some  par- 
ticular ones  hinted  that,  at  the  Duke  of  Monmouth's  arrivall,  hee 
had  the  compliment  made  him  of  the  Duke  of  Buck's  charge  of 
Master  of  the  Horse  vKt)irii(nit  n  certaine  .sum  to  be  payd  ; '  & 
this  day  I  saw  a  letter  from  the  French  people  there,  that  add  a 

'  See  S.  P..  Dotn.,  1G73,  p.  475. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  257 

commission  mi  pelfo  to  constitute  the  D.  of  Bucks  Presid'  of  Yorke- 
shire. 

The  Span"'*  drawing  some  troops  together  in  Catalona  hath 
occasioned  his  M.  Xtian  Ma'^  ordring  the  Duke  of  Noailles  to  repaire 
to  his  governement  of  Roussillou,  as  is  the  Duke  of  Albret  likewise 
commanded  to  Bayonne,  a  place  depending  on  his  governm'  for  the 
like  purpose. 

To  Lord  Arlimiton. 

Paris  :  August  5,  '73. 

The  inclosed  from  S''  W.  Lockhart  is  better  able  to  give  your 
Lopp  an  account  of  the  French  Court  than  wee  at  Paris.  The 
Elector  of  Cullen  has  dispatched  a  courrier  to  his  M.  Xtian  Ma'^, 
with  proposicdns  from  the  Elector  of  Treves,  that  in  case  his  ila'^ 
would  not  make  a  degnst  in  his  territories,  as  was  intended,  liee 
would  not  ouely  disgarrison  the  Germans  that  were  putt  into 
Coblents  &  Hermanstein,  but  oppose  the  passage  of  the  Imperialists 
through  his  countrey,  w*^''  the  King  has  approved  of,  &  the  Elector 
of  Cullen  guaranty  for  the  esecucon.  In  case  the  Emperour's 
army  comes  downe,  as  it  is  hardly  to  be  doubted,  his  Ma'^  intends 
to  give  them  battle  in  person  ;  it  is  believed  even  that  hee  will 
very  suddainly  joine  Mons"'  de  Turenne. 

I  inclose  to  your  Lopp  a  declaracdn,  verifyed  in  Parliament,  in 
order  to  the  raising  of  vast  sums  of  money,  in  that  no  processe  at 
law  or  other  acts  in  writing  shall  be  brought  into  any  Court  of 
Judicature  without  pa\ung  for  the  prepared  parchment  &  paper 
with  the  flower  de  luce  mark.  Your  Lopp  hath  seen  the  like  in 
Spaine.  It  is  expressed  for  the  extraordinary  expences  of  the 
warre,  but  these  people  are  accustomed  to  looke  upon  every  new 
imposicoli  as  a  new  inheritance.  All  the  news  of  this  place  con- 
sists in  new  regals,  comedies,  promenades  at  S'  Clou  &  the 
pleasant  seats  hereabouts,  as  quiet  &  tranquil  as  if  there  were  no 
such  thing  as  a  wari'e,  the  Presidents  of  Parliament  &  the  robemen 
having  the  day,  now  the  swordmen  are  away. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Aug.  9,  '73. 
The    inclosed  from  S"^  W"    Lockhart '    will   excuse    me    from 
repeating  to  your  Lopp  any  news  from  the  Court  of  France.     My 

'  See  S.  P..  France,  letter  dated  Nancy,  Aug.  ^it  '73. 
VOL.  V.  S 


258  Till-:  DESPATcnEs  of 

Lord  of  PettM'biirgh  went  hence  yesterday,  &  at  the  same  nick  of 
time,  I  had  a  message  from  R""  Bernard  Guascon  '  fiiving  mee  a 
renxievous  to-morrow  two  leagues  out  of  towno,  which  makes  mee 
believe  he  will  goe  strait  for  Hngland  without  passing  through  this 
citty.  With  tlie  news  book,  I  enclose  another  Print,  to  undeceive 
Father  Patrick  in  a  miracle  hee  went  on  purpose  to  see  at  Troys, 
of  a  wiiman's  subsisting  many  years  on  nothing  but  the  sacrament, 
of  w'"'  I  remember  hee  made  great  remarkes.-  It  seems  the 
Bishop  began  to  suspect  &  discovered  the  cheat,  of  which  he  has 
made  the  narrative. 

Monsieur  Colbert  gave  a  great  rcijal  to  Monsieur,  Madame,  the 
Duchesseof  Guise, ^  &c''.  on  Thursday  last.  I  was  yesterday  to  wayt 
upon  him.  a>  I  usually  doe  twice  a  week,  to  receive  his  commands. 
Either  all  things  are  under  a  very  strict  secrecy  as  to  the  present 
conjuncture,  or  noe  fi.xed  I'esolutions  are  taken,  for  all  matters  & 
motions  appear  either  very  misticall  or  uncertaine.  Wy  Lord  of 
Sunderland  prepares  himselfe  for  England. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Witliamson. 

Paris  :  Aug.  12,  '73. 
This  place  is  very  insipid  as  to  news.  All  we  have  is  in  the 
Prints  I  send  y''  Ex'^''.  If  I  knew  in  how  many  days  you  received 
y'"  letters  from  England,  I  could  guesse  whether  news  thence 
might  come  sooner  or  later  this  way,  &  time  it  accordingly.  In 
two  days  the  Earl  of  Peterburgh  goes  for  Italy  to  mannage  the 
matter  in  a  manner  concluded  on,  as  to  a  match  with  the  Princesse 
of  ilodena.'  My  private  letter  from  Eng"^  tells  me  that  my  L'' 
Treasurer^  [is]  not  onely  very  sick  in  body,  but  in  danger  of  the 
quality  itselfe  sooner  than  hee  expected,  quatiniis  the  charge, 
&  that  my  L'^  Chancellor  "^  had  been  indisposed.  My  L"*  of  Sunder- 
land is  in  a  dispute  with  himselfe  whether  hee  shall  take  the 
season  of  going  for  Courbonor  directly  for  England. 

'  On  his  v?ay  from  Italy,  where  he  had  acteii  as  EngUsh  ambassador. 
■■'  See  p.  158. 

'  Elizabeth  d'Oil^ans,  Duchesse  d'AJenvon,  daughter  of  Gaston,  Due  d'Orleans, 
and  wife  of  Louis  .Joseph  de  Lorraine,  Due  de  Guise. 

*  Maria  of  Modena,  sister  of  Francis  IL,  the  reigning  duke,  and  daughter  of 
Alphonso  d'Este  and  Laura  Martinozzi,  niece  of  Mazarin. 

*  Sir  Thomas  Osborne. 

"  Anthony  Ashley  Cooper,  Earl  of  Shaftesbury. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  259 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Aug.  26'\  '73. 

His  3Iost  Xtian  Ma'-''  removeth  this  day  from  Nancy  towards 
Brisac  in  Alsace,  where  his  progresse  will  wast  about  a  month  or  a 
longer  time,  according  as  the  Imperialists  move. 

I  heare  that  ye  Spaniards  endeavour  all  they  can  to  obstruct 
ye  manage  w"'  ]\Iodena,  having  greater  interests  in  its  allye  than 
Eng''  or  France,  especially  upon  ye  proposition,  how  improbable  so 
ever,  of  a  match  with  ye  K.  of  Spaine.  This  is  the  oppinion  ot 
persons  of  great  repute  &  intrigue.' 

Yesterday  being  the  King's  jowr  de  feste,  the  Dolphin  gave  a 
great  I'egal  at  Versailles,  where  were  all  the  persons  of  quality  that 
compose  the  harmony  of  this  place. 

Your  Lopp  hath  heard,  as  I  thinke,  from  mee  in  a  former,  of  a 
new  Imposition  upon  paper  lately  verifyed  in  Parliament  here. 
I  am  since  informed  that  the  Pari™'  of  Tholonze  has  refused  to 
doe  the  like,  at  w^''  wee  wonder  much,  for  in  the  French  air  Par- 
liaments are  become  extremely  complaisant,  in  that  they  serve 
only  to  ratify  the  edicts  composed  in  Councell. 

The  French  are  somewhat  choqu'd  at  the  Count  de  Monterei  is 
shewing  Van  Beverning  a  power  to  declare  warre  with  France 
when  ever  he  should  think  fitt,  &  ye  Swedes  begin  to  bee  trouble- 
some as  to  ye  advance  of  ye  French  forces  in  ye  Empire. 


To  Lord  Arliiujton. 

Paris  :  Aug.  30,  '73. 

Being  yesterday  to  wayte  upon  Mons''  Colbert  at  his  countrey 
house,  in  my  way  I  made  a  visitt  to  the  Countesse  of  Shomberg, 
where  I  was  charged  with  the  inclosed  paquet ;  the  othei-  from 
Lyons  was  intended  to  have  been  sent  by  an  expresse  fi-om  thence, 
but  coming  by  the  ordinary  Post  to  mee,  I  thought  it  might  goe 
as  fast  as  a  courrier  from  hence  to  London,  there  being  very  little 
difference  as  to  speed,  &  I  dare  not  pretend  to  send  your  Lopp 
news  from  the  Court  since  yon  have  also  a  ixiquet  thence.  As  for 
this  place  the  people  begin  to  complain  extremely  of  the  new 
taxes  ;  that  upon  paper,  as  I  advised  in  a  former,  has  been  rejected 

'  In  cipher,  deciphered. 


260  THE   DESPATCHES   OF 

ill  the  provinciall  I'arliaments,  &  now  'tis  believed  the  weight  of 
it  shall  be  taken  off  of  particular  persons  (as  only  on  procet^diiio^ 
at  Law)  &  imposed  on  all  in  general!  whatever  paper  shall  be 
used,  wherein  I  shall  be  somewhat  concerned  according  to  the 
dis]iatches  I  am  obliged  to  make  every  day.  There  Ijoing  a  great 
impositiim  layd  on  all  the  perewig  makers,  a  tumultuous  body  of 
four  hundred  of  their  wives  hath  been  to  demand  niiserirorde  of 
!Mons''  Colbert,  whereupon  their  shops  are  suflered  to  be  opened 
again.  The  taking  of  Treves,  &  the  advance  towards  Coblents, 
makes  a  noise  in  the  Empire,  lions''  de  Fourilles  was  the 
Elector's  proxy  for  some  time,  lodging  himselfe  in  his  palace  & 
riffling  all  of  value  in  the  same  manner  as  he  did  formerly  at 
Nancy  when  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  quitted  his  conntrey.  The 
Imperialists  have  been  on  their  march  ever  since  the  18th  currant, 
but  the  ^Marshall  Turcnne  is  posted  so  advantagiously  on  the  River 
Main,  back'd  by  the  Elector  Palatin,  &  easily  to  be  joyn'd  by  the 
Bavarians,  that  the  Germans  will  find  some  difficulty  to  passe 
further.  Wee  are  in  great  expectation  to  hear  the  event  of  the 
decisive  conference  at  Cologne.  The  scurvy  Hollanders  have 
possessed  these  too  credulous  people  here  with  their  falsehoods  as 
to  the  last  engagement,  &  I  have  much  adoe  to  persuade  them  to 
the  contrary,'  but  the  taxes  &  surcease  of  trade  makes  them 
believe  very  easily  what  they  in  a  manner  wish. 

To  Lmxl  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Sept.  Uth,  73. 

Our  letters  from  Court  speak  as  if  his  Ma'-''  would  be  here 
about  the  end  of  this  month,  the  Emperour  having  in  some  manner 
satisfied  him.  All  Alsace  hath  been  in  a  y»r/U'jii(e  consternation ; 
the  towns  of  Colina  &  Slestadt  were  at  first  something  stubborn 
as  to  the  giving  passage  to  the  King's  troops  but  thej'  have  since 
given  themselves  up  at  the  King's  approach,  the  inhabitants  being 
disarmed,  &  their  canon  sent  to  Brisac,  while  their  owne  boores 
help  the  souldiers  to  demolish  the  fortifications ;  severall  of  the 
neighbouring  towns  have  sent  to  appease  his  Ma'*'.  I  cannot 
believe,  however,  but  that  there  is  an  offensive  league  newly  con- 

'  Mignet,  vol.  iv.  p.  160,  says :  '  The  sea  fight  of  August  21,  1673,  between 
Prince  Eupert  and  De  Ruyter  (won  by  tlie  Dutch)  made  the  Dutch  less  ready  to 
accept  the  terms  of  tlie  French  and  English.' 


AX   ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  261 

eluded  between  the  House  of  Austria  &  the  Dutch,  especially  since 
their  deputies  at  Cologne  continue  their  haughtinesse  &  arrogancy, 
&  that  the  Emperour  is  much  in  earnest. 

I  hear  the  Mai"q*  d'Aiijou  is  called  back  from  his  journey 
towards  ilodena. 

To  my  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Sep.  9,  73. 

The  present  conjuncture  is  soe  very  delicate  that  wee  know 
little  of  certainty,  resolutions  being  soe  often  changed.  Some 
imagine  the  King  will  returne  hither  within  two  months,  but  the 
Emperour's  army  being  on  its  march  since  the  26' '  of  Aug.,  I 
believe  his  ]\Ia"^'  wUl  not  be  here  soe  soon  ;  the  Elector  of  BaviSre 
has  granted  passage  for  the  Imperialists  through  the  Upper 
Palatinat,  notwithstanding  the  pretended  alliance  with  France. 
It  is  thought  that  the  body  w'^''  the  Prince  of  Orange  has  gott 
together  near  Bommel  may  be  soon  mett  with  by  the  Duke  of 
Luxembourg.  Eveiy  moment  we  expect  to  hear  of  the  C.  de 
Jlonterei's  declaring  warre,  he  having,  in  order  to  it,  caused  all  of 
worth  to  be  brought  into  the  strong  places. 

Monsieur  is  to  be  here  on  ilunday  &  in  5  days  returns  to  the 
King.  The  Chev''  de  Lorraine  is  almost  past  hope  of  recoveiy,  the 
phisitians  having  given  their  opinion  that  his  illnesse  is  composed 
of  a  languishing  poison,  w"^''  is  past  the  art  of  man  to  countermine,  to 
the  great  disconsolation  of  ilonsieur.  Now  it  is  said  that  Treves 
is  taken,  &  designed  to  be  demolished.  The  King  has  endeavourd 
to  cure  the  citty  of  Strasburg  of  their  pannique  af)prehentions  by 
fresh  assurances  of  his  having  no  designe  on  them,  but  only  the 
reducing  the  10  Anseatique  towns  under  his  jurisdiction,  to  the 
end  the  Emp''  may  putt  no  garrison  in  them. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Sep.  16"",  '73. 

This  morning  Monsieur  went  hence  towards  the  French  Court 
from  whence  the  King  hath  sent  away  his  owne  guards  to  joyne 
with  Turenne's  army.  Some  are  of  opinion,  however,  that  after  all, 
an  ex-pedient  will  be  found  out,  par  qiieh/ue  entremvte,  to  hinder  the 
coming  to  blows,  notwithstanding  the  great  heats  in  Germany 
upon  the  taking  of  Treves  &  the  other  towns  in  Alsace.  Madam 
hath  been  somewhat  troubled  to  find  the  French  not  very  much 


2G2  rni-:  DEsrATcnEs  of 

Hiitisfii'd  witli  licr  fhtli<-i''s  beliaviour  in  thi.s  coiijuiicture,  as   if  he 
were  in  a  manner  wavering. 

Old  S'  Andre  Montbruu  is  dead  at  his  countrey  house,  uiiicli 
regretted  by  everybody,  but  the  Chev''  de  Lorraine  recovers  apaci- 
in  order  to  the  following  Monsieur. 

To  Lord  Arliiirjton. 

Paris:  Sep.  20tli,  '73. 

Ijast  night  we  had  advice  by  a  courrier  from  the  Marshall 
Turenne,  that  being  within  a  mile  of  the  Imperial!  Army,  he 
rainged  his  army  in  hattaill  array  in  order  to  fight  them,  w*^'' 
Moutecuculi  perceiving,  he  retired  under  a  niountaine  in  some 
disorder,  &  the  Marshall  was  then  marching  after  him.  The 
Prince  of  Conde,  mth  all  his  horse,  is  gone  in  order  to  the  joining 
of  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg  &  the  retaking  of  Naerden.  The 
King  is  yet  at  Nancy  thougli  he  pretended  to  have  removed 
thence  without  declaring  whither.  This  citty  wisheth  much  for 
peace,  it  being  drained  of  whatever  can  be  found  of  worth  by  new 
taxes,  to  the  degree  that  a  house  built  without  the  limits  (of  w""'' 
there  are  some  thousand)  that  cost  800  crowns,  pays  downe  100 
imediately  to  the  King. 

To  Lwd  A'di'Mjton. 

Paris :  Sep.,  '73. 

The  French  court  is  a  little  emharrasse  upon  the  present  alarmes 
the  Austrian  Alliance  giveth  it.'  At  this  moment  we  imagine 
Turenne  to  be  engaged  with  the  Enip''"''  forces,  as  well  as  the 
Prince  of  Orange's  having  encountred  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg. 
Treves  has  been  very  peremptory  in  its  defence,  the  French 
having  lost  many  good  officers  in  the  severall  approaches,  of  w"^''  1 
presume  to  give  your  Lopp  thi.^  narrative. 

The  Governour  of  that  jslace  having  made  no  answer  to  the 
summons  sent  him  to  surrender  after  the  convocation  of  the  little 
governni\  Alous''  de  Kochefort  began  the  opening  of  the  trenches 
on  the  30th  of  Aug.  about  50  paces  from  the  towne,  but  notwith- 
standing the  weeknes  of  the  place,  it  hath  killed  a  great  number 
of  officers,  wounded  many  more.  &  about  600  souldiers  slaine,  but 

'  An  ofiensive  alliance  had  been  made  between  the  Dutch,  the  Emperor,  the 
King  <.l  Spain,  and  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  (Migntt,  vol.  iv.  p.  105). 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    l.\    PARIS  263 

the  French  hoped  iu  two  days  to  become  masters  of  a  phice  soe 
untenable,  lions''  de  Rochefort  they  say  is  wounded  :  the  Marshall 
Grammout  is  sent  for  in  all  hast  upon  some  consultation  of  great 
consequence,  &  Monsieur  goes  away  also  upon  the  King's  summons 
in  three  days. 

From  Court  they  wi'ite  of  a  league  being  certainly  concluded 
between  the  Emp'',  Spain,  Holl"^,  &  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  but  this  is 
nothing  if  no  other  Prince  enter  into  it,  as  these  people  pretend. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Sep  23,  1673. 

Because  ye  King  of  France's  army  is  of  necessity  obliged  to 
bee  divided  into  severall  bodies,  as  the  present  conjuncture  doth 
require,  ye  K.  of  France  maketh  very  considerable  ofiers  to  ye 
Emp''  iu  case  hee  will  quit  ye  Dutch  interest.' 

The  advices  from  the  two  armys  are  very  different.  M''  de 
Turenne  pretends  to  have  caught  the  Germans  in  a  pound,  & 
Montecuculi  thinks  he  has  been  too  cunning  for  him  by  some 
counterfeit  marches,  &  pretends  to  bring  his  army  to  Armsteiu  & 
Coblents,  without  Turenn's  being  able  to  oppose  it.  We  know 
yet  nothing  whither  the  King  will  steer  his  Court ;  some  say  he 
will  send  the  Queen  hither  &  that  he  will  make  a  turne  into 
Flanders,  but  his  Ma'-^  contrives  his  afl'aires  with  such  secresy, 
that  hardly  any  of  the  Court  know  his  intentions  till  the  moment 
they  are  to  be  put  in  execution. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris :  Sep  27,  '73. 

This  day  was  sett  by  the  most  Xtian  King  for  his  leaving 
Nancy,  &  yet  nobody  says  positively  where  hee  goeth.  Although 
hee  ordered  provisions  to  be  in  readinesse  at  S'  Quentin,  it  is 
believed  that  was  only  to  amuse,  &  that  really  he  intends  to  goe 
into  the  Franche-Comte  to  give  them  another  visitt.  In  the 
meantime,  the  Prince  of  Conde  amasseth  all  the  force  he  can  in 
order  to  some  suddain  enterprise  &  some  will  have  it  to  be  upon 
ilons,  but  he  complains  that  though  his  horse  be  indifl'erent  good, 
all  his  Infantry  is  composed  of  raw  young  boys.  Wee  long  to 
hear  the  event  of  the  two  great  arniyes.  By  a  gentleman  come 
post  from  that  of  M"  Turenn's,  I   hear   hee  depends  most  upon 

'  In  cipher,  deciphered. 


264  TIIK    DESPATCHES   OK 

the  English  troops,  because  the  CTennans  pretend  their  t^n-ut 
advantage  to  bee  in  their  foot. 

Some  Dutcli  sliips  have  made  an  insipid  bravado  on  the  coast 
of  Normandy  &  burnt  a  village,  with  tlie  conquest  of  10  or  12 
boats  laden  with  butter. 

The  Queen  is  expected  at  tlie  Louvre  in  a  few  days,  but  we 
believe  the  King  will  not  be  here  so  soon,  especially  if  a  warre  be 
declared  in  Flanders,  as  the  Comt[e]  de  Jlonterey  is  obliged  to  doe 
it  twenty-four  liours  after  the  Prince  of  Oranges  citation. 

I  have  received  just  now  these  iiints  from  my  correspondent  at 
Court :  '  Ton  a  rien  appris  de  particulier,  si  non  que  les  deux  armces 
sont  toujours  an  meme  endroit.  L'on  dit  que  le  roy  est  fasche 
contre  Mons'"  de  Turenne  et  cjue  son  chagrin  est  tr^s  grand,  et 
Ton  dit  meme  qu'il  est  fasche  contre  ilons'"  de  Louvoy,  sans 
toutes  fois  le  tesmoigner.  Le  Prince  de  Conde  presse  fort  le  Roy 
de  renforcer  son  armee,  qui  n'est  presentement  que  de  six  mil  cinq 
cent  chevaux  et  de  sept  mil  hommes  de  meschant  Infanterie.' 

If  the  King  undertakes  an\-tliing  in  the  Francho  Comte,  he 
has  certainly  inteligence  with  the  gentry,  who  are  malcontents  & 
will  facilitate  his  worke,  they  being  all  piqued  against  the  C.  de 
IMonterei,  &  friends  to  the  late  goveniour,'  who  was  disgraced  by 
him. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris :  September  30th,  '73. 

Wee  are  yet  in  an  uncertainty  which  way  the  King  removes. 
He  pretended  to  have  gone  to  Toul  on  the  27th,  but  I  hear  since 
he  retarded  his  leaving  Nancy  yet  five  days. 

The  Bishop  of  AVirtzpourg,  Duke  of  Frauconie  -'  has  declared 
himselfe  for  the  Emperour,  whose  forces  have  seized  in  his  territories 
a  great  quantity  of  provisions  with  their  convoy  of  150  horses  as 
they  were  passing  to  Marshall  Turenne's  army,  whereupon  this 
tient'rall  made  his  complaints,  but  the  Bishop's  answer  was  coole, 
that  he  could  not  quitt  the  Emperour's  interest.  Turenne  has 
left  his  post  near  the  Imperial!  Army,  &  is  descended  five  or  six 
leagues  lower  on  the  Mein  plain],  &  the  King  has  drain'd  himselfe 
of  troops  to  send  them  to  his  army.  The  Prince  of  Conde  has 
written  to  the  King,  that  in  case  his  army  bee  not  suddainly  rein- 

'  Don  Hieronimo  de  Quinones,  si  Spaninrd. 

-  Joannes  Hiirtmaim  von  Eosenbiicb,  Bishop  of  Wiirzburg  and  Worms. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  265 

forced,  lie  shall  be  obliged  to  retrench  himselfe,  or  retire  to  some  of 
the  great  towns,  because  the  Spaniards  engrossed  their  troops  with 
those  the  Dutch  have  sent  them. 

Ye  King  of  France  doth  not  sleep  well,  there  being  soe  much 
embarras  on  His  ilaj'"'^''  hands,  his  rage  ag'  ]\ions'"  Louvoy  arising 
from  his  over  positive  [assertion]  '  ^vith  relation  to  ye  present  con- 
juncture.- 

We  expect  the  Princess  of  Modena  within  2  months  at 
farthest,  as  we  doe  also  the  Queen  of  France  very  suddainly. 

To  Lord  ArUnijtoib. 

Paris  :  Octob  4,  '73. 

The  King  is  now  on  his  way  towards  S'  Quentin,  after  having 
sent  four  thousand  men  to  Mons''  de  Tureniie,  six  thousand  to 
the  Prince  of  Conde,  &  2,000  to  ^P'  de  Xavailles.  The  Empire 
begins  to  grow  very  troublesome,  and  some  Princes  thereof  that 
promised  neutrality  are  declaring  for  the  Emp'',  as  the  Elect''  of 
Ments,  and  even  the  Prince  Palatin  of  the  Rhine  inclineth  that 
way.  The  Suisse  pretend  to  secure  the  Franche  Comte  by  agree- 
ment, as  if  Spaine  should  have  put  it  into  their  bands  for  two 
years.'  Some  particulars  at  Geneva,  I  am  informed,  have  engaged 
themselves  to  furnish  the  King  of  Spain  with  a  hundred  thousand 
Crowns  a  month,  for  two  years,  but  I  know  not  upon  what  agree- 
ment, since  the  Eepublick  in  generall  is  not  concerned. 

M""  d'Anjou  has  written  to  some  of  his  particular  friends  here, 
that  the  Princesse  of  Modena  is  but  13  years  old,'  very  little,  & 
leane,  w'^'*'  is  contrary  to  what  he  advised  in  his  letter  to  the  King, 
and  is  come  to  the  King's  knowledge. 

To  Lord  Arlinqton. 

Paris  :  Octob  7th,  '73. 

Wee  are  yet  kept  in  the  darke  as  to  the  affaires  of  the  Rhine, 
all  the  letters  from  Germany  having  been  stopt  of  late,  w'-''  makes 

'  This  word  is  illegible  in  the  MS. 

^  In  cipher,  deciphered.  A  co.alition  had  been  formed  against  Louvois,  headed 
by  the  Prince  of  Conde  and  Marshal  Turenne.  (See  Histoire  de  Louvois,  par 
Camille  Rousset,  i.  510-514.) 

^  Maria  of  Modena  was  born  in  1568,  according  to  Anderson's  Royal  Geiiea- 
logies,  so  that  she  was  15  years  old. 


266  Tin:  oicsPATCUEfs  ov 

people  guesse  tlie  worst.  I  believe  that,  without  a  pitcht  battell, 
the  Iinperialists  will  contrive  that  Turenne  shall  remove,  especially 
.since  hi.s  provisions  of  all  kinds  have  been  in  severall  places  inter- 
cepted by  the  Germans,  &  the  troops  the  King  sent  from  Nancy 
to  joyne  that  army  cannot  passe  the  Nacker,'  because  some  places 
that  have  strong  guarrisons  from  other  Princes,  have  opposed  the 
passage. 

All  the  ten  Alsatia  Townes  are  now  razed  to  the  ground,  I 
mean  their  fortifications,  &  Spire,  the  place  of  the  generall 
asseniblv  of  the  Imp"  Chamber,  is  also  tln-eatued,  as  well  as 
Worms.  Strasbourg  itselfe  is  not  too  much  at  ease,  whereupon 
the  suits  have  called  an  assembly  of  all  the  Cantons  in  generall,  in 
order  to  some  present  resolutions  in  this  conjuncture.  The  Queen 
will  be  suddainly  at  Viucennes,  much  to  the  joy  of  the  Parisians, 
but  we  know  not  yet  which  way  the  King  will  take  ;  some  imagine 
he  will,  out  of  complim'  to  Paris,  passe  three  months  here,  but  he 
alters  liis  mind  soe  often,  that  nobody  can  speak  certainly  of  his 
resolutions.  I  believe  he  will  rather  keep  near  Flanders.  Here 
is  a  hott  report  come  hither,  as  if  the  Modena  match  were  in 
peices  againe,  but  I  can  say  nothing  of  it,  it  being  sometime  since 
1  heard  from  my  L'  of  Peterborow. 

The  late  tax  upon  the  paper  raiseth  abundance  of  money,  & 
maketh  people  pay  dearly  for  their  contentions  at  the  Falah  ; 
money,  however,  growetb  scarce  as  doe  the  inhabitants  poor.  Mr. 
Colbert  hath  been  feeling  the  pulse  of  the  customB  farmers  for  the 
advance  of  14  millions,  but  they  complained  even  of  their  farms, 
because  of  the  deadnesse  of  trade,  much  contrary  to  their  being 
able  to  comply  with  soe  great  an  advance.  However  they  are  en- 
deavouring by  their  creditt  to  raise  it,  giving  their  farme  as  security 
for  the  payment  by  degrees. 

Tu  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris:  October  11,  7:^. 

S''  W"  lioekhart  tooke  leave  of  the  King  at  lleims  on  the  8th. 
His  ]\Ia'-^  is  at  present  at  S'  Quentin.  but  we  are  not  certaine  of 
his  presence  here  yet  awhile.  The  Marshall  Turenne's  army  & 
the  Emperor's  lye  watching  for  advantages.  The  French  com- 
manded by  Mons''  S'  Clas,'''  have  had  a  skirmish,  &  brought  off 

1  Necker.  '  Jeiin  Louis  de  Genouilhac,  Sieur  de  Saint-Clas. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    I.\    PARIS  267 

about  oi)  prisoners,  but  these  are  only  small  games,  &  in  truth, 
hitherto,  ^Montecuculi  has  shewed  himselfe  a  very  politick  souldier. 

I  hear  that  our  new  Duchesse  of  Yorke  sett  out  from  ^lodena 
ou  the  2 '  instant,  but  it  is  yet  uucertaine  whether  shee  will  passe 
through  this  place. 

I  have  seen  this  morning  a  letter  from  the  French  ilinister  in 
Switserland,  intimating  that,  at  the  generall  Assembly  of  all  the 
Cantons,  they  have  unauimously  declared  to  hearken  to  no  Imperiall 
overtures,  but  to  favour  the  French.  This  otherwise  I  could  hardly 
have  believed. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Oct.  18,  '73. 

The  French  begin  to  desire  peace  extremely,  and  I  believe 
would  be  glad  to  have  one  on  equall  termes.  The  Parliament  hath 
been  yesterday  to  compliment  the  King,  &  therein  seemed  to  hint 
how  much  a  peace  is  necessary  ;  money  is  wanting,  &  noe  commerce 
stirring,  that  the  taxes  were  heavy  to  a  great  degi-ee  requires  that, 
instead  of  new  ones,  that  that  on  the  paper  were  taken  oflV  Our 
new  duchesse  of  Yorke  is  on  her  way  from  Lyons  with  a  traine  of 
12  !Modena  gentlemen,  &  Coll:  Dick  Talbot  -  went  hence  yesterday 
in  post  to  meet  her. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  October  18,  '73. 

Since  the  King's  returne,  the  severall  bodys  of  Parliament  have 
been  to  compliment  him  at  Versailles,  particularly  the  President  of 
the  Court  of  Ai/def  made  a  very  fine  harangue,  but  at  ye  later  end, 
represented  ye  poore  condition  of  his  people,  by  reason  of  ye  great 
taxes  &  ye  deadnesse  of  trade,  begging  mercy  upon  ye  apprehen- 
sion that  more  will  bee  put  upon  them,  with  many  wishes  that  his 
Maj-^  would  make  a  Peace,  &  then  take  ofl'ye  tax  upon  paper.  It 
is  certain  ye  King  of  France,  finding  how  afiaires  are  at  present, 
would  faine  make  up  a  Peace,  if  hee  could  doe  it.' 

They  talke  at  Court  as  if  his  Ma'^  was  thinking  to  make  a 
carousel  against  Christmas  for  his  divedisements. 

'  In  cipher,  deciphered. 

-  Created  Earl  of  Tyrconnel  by  James  11.  and  made  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland. 
(See  Les  demicrs  Sfuarts  a  Saint-G(nrmain-eii-Laye,  par  la  Marquise  Campana  de 
Cavelli,  i.  93,  Ac.)  ^  In  cipher,  deciphered. 


268  rilE    DESPATCHES   OK 

To  Lurd  Arliiuitfjn. 

Paris  :  Octob  21,  73. 

Yesterday  was  the  warre  with  Spaine  very  solemnly  proclaimed 
all  over  this  citty,  after  a  long  consultation  held  the  day  before  at 
Versailles  upon  the  sulaject  matter  of  the  villages  the  Spaniards 
burnt  not  farre  from  Calais,  &  the  Conte  de  Monterei's  having  de- 
clared warre  with  France  at  Antwerp  on  the  1 G"'.  Whereupon  it 
is  now  believed  that  the  King  will  goe  suddainly  hence  to  be  near 
the  Prince  of  Condi''  (who  hath  with  him  a  body  of  11,000  horse 
besides  foot)  much  to  the  grief  of  these  inhabitants,  in  that  they 
promised  themselves  some  foiihiiieme'nt  by  his  ^la'"^""  preseuce  here. 

Wee  have  no  certaine  news  from  the  two  great  armyes,  three 
courriers  of  four  having  been  killed  by  the  way.  It  is  the  generall 
beliefe  that  the  Germans  have  ordered  their  matters  soe  well  as  to 
passe  the  Kliine,  notwithstanding  what  Turenne  may  endevour  to 
the  contrary,  in  w*^''  case  they  will  come  into  Lorraine,  but  many 
accidents  may  intervene  before  such  an  advantagious  project  be 
put  in  execution. 

Herein  your  Lopp  hath  the  declaration  of  war. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Oct.  25th,  "73. 

The  penchant  of  our  expectations  inclines  most  towards  the 
passing  by  of  our  new  Duchesse  of  York,  wlio  will  bee  within  ten 
days  at  Calais,  in  order  to  her  embarcation  for  England.  Those 
who  were  present  at  the  marriage,  rejwrt  her  to  be  very  beautifull, 
of  delicate  white  hair,  &  of  a  very  good  stature.  The  warre  or 
rather  the  cow/re  sus  uux  Espagnoh,  was  declared  here  four  days 
agoe,  &  a  gentleman  is  sent  to  Madrid,  to  call  home  the  Marcf  de 
Villars  (as  is  Molena  [^lolina]  also  retiring  hence)  &  to  present  a 
letter  to  the  Queen  of  Spaine,  wherein  his  ^la'-^'  complains  of  ^lon- 
terei  as  to  his  late  jiroceeding.  &  the  cause  of  what  future  accident 
may  attend  the  rupture  hee  hath  made.'  Wee  believe  it  may  draw 
his  Ma'-*'  from  the  repose  &  (lirediseuients  of  the  winter  towards 
Flanders,  where  the  Prince  of  CondS  has  orders  to  revenge,  with 
flame,  the  burning  of  the  French  village  on  the  frontier. 

'  The  Count  de  Monterey  had  declared  war  against  France  much  to  the  surprise 
of  the  Queen  of  Spain  (Mignet,  vol.  iv.  p.  215). 


AN    EXGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  2C9 

The  late  insult  made  at  Madrid,  on  the  Portugall  Amb'',  may 
give  a  helping  hand  in  this  present  conjuncture  in  order  to  the 
making  a  breach  between  those  Crowns. 

The  ArchBp  of  Xarbonne  '  being  dead,  it  is  thought  the  Cardinal 
Bonzi  may  succeed  him  in  that  function,  though  some  will  have 
the  Card'  de  Bouillon  to  bee  a  pretender  to  it. 


To  Lord  ArUngton. 

Paris  :  Octoft  29^,  '73. 

Yesterday  wee  had  news  of  her  R.  ff'''  having  begun  her 
journey  from  Lyons,  but  it  was  then  in  doubt  whether  shee  would 
come  by  water  as  farre  as  Orleans,  or  come  directly  all  the  way  by 
land.  Wee  expect  her  near  this  place  about  this  day  sennight.  I 
doe  not  believe  shee  will  make  any  stop  for  ceremonies,  itc".,  but 
that  it  will  bee  contrived  the  King  shall  have  a  sight  of  her,  as  it 
were,  by  a  chance  a  la  chasse,  the  rather  because  some  Princesses 
here  have  taken  it  somewhat  to  heart  in  that  they  heard  her  E.  H. 
should  have  chaise  a  dos. 

I  was  to  salute  his  ]\Ia'-^'  yesterday  at  Versailles,  where  ^Mons'' 
de  Louvoy  lookt  very  merry,  upon  the  farther  engagement  in  a 
warre.  The  discourse  was  there  that,  though  Mods.  Turenne  has 
done  exceeding  well.  Montecuculi  has  also  managed  his  busines  soe 
as  to  passe  the  Rhine,  when  he  shall  think  fitt. 

The  Spanuish  Amb"'  ^lolina,  since  the  late  declarac^  ag*  Spain, 
hath  been  invited  by  M''  de  Pomponne,  &  therein  advised  to  order 
his  matters  for  his  returne  home,  &  told  that  his  Ma'^'  was  willing 
to  give  him  an  Audience  of  rowjc  (which  he  hath  since  had),  &  that 
there  shall  bee  an  exchange  of  Ambassadours  at  the  place  on  the 
frontiers,-  where  was  the  interview  of  the  two  kings  at  the  marriage. 
Being  to  take  my  leave  of  the  C.  de  ilolina,  he  began  a  discourse 
upon  the  present  rupture  between  France  &  Spaine,  pretending  to 
be  a  great  friend  to  the  English,  &  the  stresse  of  all  was,  that  he 
fear'd  the  Spaniards  would  suddainly  break  with  us,  as  being  in  a 
manner  obliged  to  it  in  their  late  League  with  the  Dutch,  in  case 
his  Ma'-'  of  England  accepted  not  of  some  propositions  that  were 
to  be  made  him  by  the  Spaniards  in  order  to  a  peace,  &  in  a  manner 

'  Francois  Fouquet. 

-  Molina  had  been  kept  at  the  frontier  to  serve  as  hostage  for  the  safety  of  the 
ambassador  of  Louis  XIV. 


270  TIIR    DESrATCIIES    OF 

pretended  to  pitty  us.  I  told  him,  thereupon,  that  if  they  had  been 
8oe  oversofii  ns  to  brin{»  niatt^^rs  to  tliat  extremity,  I  did  believe 
they  would  tak(>  time  to  repent  tlieii'  being  so  overridden  by  the 
Dutch,  &  that  1  thought  the  Councell  of  Spaine  would  consider 
better  of  it. 

Here  is  an  arrest  coming  out  for  the  raising  the  price  of  money. 
The  silver  coyne  is  to  be  raised  proportionable  to  the  gold,  viz' : — a 
I'./iiK  d'or  shall  go  for  four  crowns.  Ye  jiujw'  grows  great  between 
Colbert  &  Louvoy,  ye  latter  being  blamed  to  bee  ye  cause  that  an 
hon'''  peace  was  not  made  ye  last  yeare ; '  besides,  Colbert  has 
made  an  impression  in  ye  King  of  France  that  ye  other  doth  gaine 
by  ye  post,  &c*.  two  millions  every  yeare.* 

To  Lord  Arlinriton. 

Paris  :  Noveiub  1,  '73. 

Wee  are  in  exjiectation  every  moment  to  hear  of  her  R"  H'"^'* 
arrivall  at  Fontainbleau,  whither  the  King  has  sent  persons  to 
invite  her  to  Court,  but  it  is  not  yet  knowne  whether  she  will 
come  hither  or  goe  directly  for  Calais.  Yesterday,  by  chance,  I 
saw  Coll:  Scott,  at  w*  I  wonder'd  much,  believiug  him  to  be  in  a 
quite  contrary  interest,  but  hee  made  a  very  fair  affable  story  of 
his  being  disobliged  by  the  C  de  Mouterei,  &  encouraged  by  the 
Prince  of  Condo,  who  sent  him  hither.  He  has  been  with  M'' 
Colbert,  who  offerd  him  -'lOO  pistols  a  year,  w'''  hee  tells  me  he 
will  not  accept  of,  &  now  pretends  a  thousand  chimericall  projects, 
as  the  going  for  I^ortugall,  etc".  They  talk  at  Court  as  if  the 
Prince  of  Conde  were  coming  hither,  leaving  the  command  of  his 
armj-  to  the  Duke  d'Anguien.  Upon  the  inspection  of  what 
money  remained  in  the  espanpie,  they  have  found  80  milions  of 
livers  extraordinary,  not  counting  the  ordinary  currant  of  the 
King's  revenue,  w*^''  amounts  yeai'ly  to  122  milions;  insomuch  that 
his  Ma'^  said  lately,  hee  had  enough  to  continue  the  warre  yet 
another  year,  without  taxing  his  people  more  than  they  are  already. 
In  truth,  I  doe  not  see  how  they  are  able  to  bear  any  new  im- 
positions, being  every  where  drained  dry,  the  nobility  by  their 
great  expences,  &  the   commonalty   by  the  taxes,  reduced  very 

'  In  .June  1(J72  De  Witt  had  sent  a  deputation  to  Louis  at  tlie  castle  of  Keppel, 
near  Doesburg,  to  consult  about  peace,  but  nothing  had  been  concluded.  (Mignet, 
vol.  iv.  p.  22.)  -'  In  cipher,  deciphered. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  271 

low.  I  received  yesterday  the  news  of  vS''  W™  Lockhart's  being 
declared  Ambassadour,  w*^''  makes  me  presume  to  renew  my 
humble  request  to  y'"  Lopp  to  continue  your  Lopp's  protection  of 
inee,  that  if  it  be  not  irregular,  I  may  continue  here  as  Secretary 
of  the  Embassy,  or  otherwise  as  your  Lopp  shall  be  pleased  to 
dispose  of  mee,  as  having  no  other  dependance  under  heaven,  but 
y''  Lopp  s  condescending  favour. 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Nov.  1,  73. 

Since  I  wrote  the  other,  I  hear  that  the  Prince  of  Conde  is 
coming  hither,  &  that  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg  has  orders  to 
inarch  with  his  troops  &  endeavour  to  joyne  ilarshall  Turenne's 
army,  with  iustructions  to  fight  the  Prince  of  Orange,  if  hee  meet 
him  by  the  vcay,  &  M"  d'Humieres  is  to  command  the  forces  at 
Utrecht.  The  Duke  of  Luynes  '  received  a  pleasant  compliment 
yesterday  from  his  Intendant  of  his  Marquisat  d"Albert,  a  frontier 
Towne  near  Cambray,  how  that  the  C.  de  Monterei  had  sent 
thither  a  message  that  they  should  depute  two  persons  with  an 
account  of  what  cattell  &  goods  they  had,  with  all  particulars,  to 
the  end  that  ilonterei  might  lay  an  exact  contribution  on  the 
place  to  save  it  from  being  burned,  &  that  the  Duke  of  Luynes 
should  send  his  deputy  to  compound  for  his  share. 

Your  Lopp  hath  heard  of  the  ArchBpp  of  Narbonne's  being 
dead,  &  that  the  King  had  given  it  to  the  Card'  de  Bonzy,  who  is 
on  his  way  thither ;  but  yesterday  a  letter  came  from  a  person 
of  quality  there,  w*^''  intimated  '  que  Mons''  I'Archevesqne  se  portoit 
mieux ; '  if  he  be  risen  againe  the  Card'  will  bee  strangely  dis- 
appointed. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Nov.  3'",  73. 
Our  greatest  news  is  of  the  Duchesse  of  York's  arrivall  near 
this    place,    my    Ld    of    Peterborow    coming    to   towne   the    last 
night.     I  believe  she  will  make  very  little  stay,  but  proceed  on 
her  way  for  England  with  all  convenient  speed. 

The  people  talke  much  as  if  there  will  be  a  peace  very  sud- 
dainly,  but  it  is  naturall  to  every  body  that  what  they  most  desire 

'  Louis  Charles  d'Albert,  Due  de  Luynes.     Died  in  1090. 


272  THE  r)h:.srATCHEs  of 

they  most  discourse  of.  The  C.  de  Mont<?rei  has  layd  great  con- 
tributions on  tlie  soveraignty  of  Ardres,  &  all  along  the  frontiers 
of  S'  Omar,  t'anibray,  i^c",  <t  the  present  heats  are  soe  great,  &  the 
succours  the  Dutch  depend  on,  soe  much  in  earnest,  that  I  see  no 
likelyhood  of  peace.  I  hear  the  Duke  of  Chaulnes  came  liithor 
yesterday,  being  to  goe  into  Breiapte  to  hold  the  Htates  there  on 
the  15th'.' 

I  send  your  Ex*^''  a  print,  but  cannot  answer  for  its  being  very 
true,  though  circumstantiall.  However  this,  &  the  Portugall 
Auibassadour's  lieing  horridly  insulted  on  at  I\Iadrid,  may,  in  this 
present  conjuncture,  crcat  new  differences,  W''  will  certainly  be 
fomented  on  the  side  of  Portguall,  were  it  only  for  a  diversion. 

Here  is  nothing  done  at  Court,  but  making  conjectures  what 
will  bee  the  issue  of  the  present  broyles.  The  P"^  of  Conde  is 
ex]iected  here,  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg  being  to  march  with  those 
troops,  in  order  to  the  joyning  M'"  de  Turenne,  &  if  liee  meet  tlie 
P*^^  ■  of  Orange  in  the  way,  he  is  to  light  him. 


To  Lord  ArU'iKjton. 

Paris  :  Nov.  4,  '73. 

The  vote  of  ye  Parliament  aljout  his  E"  H'^'^'"  mariage  hath 
made  a  great  alarum  in  this  Court,  not  soe  much  as  to  ye  thing 
itselfe  as  ye  appearance  that  they  may  request  ye  making  up  w"' 
ye  Dutch  ag*'  ye  interest  of  France.^  Ye  Princesse  goeth  towards 
England  in  two  daies,  though  shee  went  to  bed  without  her  supper 
upon  ye  news.^ 

'J'iie  King  visiteth  the  Princesse  at  the  Arsenal  this  afternoon, 
&  to-morrow  sliee  goeth  to  Versailles  to  see  the  Queen.  The 
Dukes  &  Peers  will  see  her,  but  not  salute,  as  is  the  custome  of 
France,  becaur^e  it  is  not  that  of  England. 

On  Mundiiy  she  will  be  seen  by  noebody  &  on  Tuesday  leav^es 
this  place. 

Just  now  the  courrier  ,y''  Lopp  dispatcht  on  Wednesday  is 
come  hither.  We  hear  that  warre  is  declared  between  Spain  & 
Poi'tugal,  but  this  requires  confirmacon. 

He  had  been  appointed  the  Governor  of  Brittany  in  1670. 
-  When  Parliament  met  in  England  on  October  30,  they  demanded  that  the 
Duke  of  York  should  marry  a  Protestant,  so  Charles  prorogued  Parliament  for 
eight  days  (Mignet,  vol.  iv.  p.  222J.  ^  In  cipher,  deciphered. 


AN    EXGIJSH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  273 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  Nov.  9th,  '73. 

On  Saterday  last  the  King  made  his  visit  to  her  R.  H*^-  the 
Duchesse  of  Yorke,  as  did  also  Monsieur  &  ]\[adam.  The  next 
day  shee  went  to  Versailles  to  see  the  Queen,  &  now  the  hurry  of 
visits  beeing  over,  it  is  supposed  she  may  proceed  to-morrow  on  her 
way  for  England.  Shee  is  of  a  fine  stature,  browne,  &  her  face 
promiseth  a  reasonable  share  of  beauty  as  she  grows  a  little  older, 
very  courteous,  &  ingenious.  As  shee  passed  through  Savoye,  there 
being  a  punctilio  in  dispute  between  her  R.  H.  &  that  of  Savoye,' 
there  was  no  interview,  but  the  Duke  showed  a  peice  of  Italian 
gallantry  &  mett  her  on  foot,  by  the  coach  side,  at  a  little  dis- 
tance from  one  of  his  houses  of  pleasure,  disguised  in  a  maske  & 
in  the  habitt  of  a  huntsman.  He  told  her  the  Duke,  his  M'',  being 
indisposed,  could  not  wayt  upon  her,  but  had  sent  him  to  desire  her 
R.  H.  to  rest  herselfe  awhile  in  that  house,  where  they  found  a 
delicate  collation.  &  the  pretended  huntsman  wayted  on  her  at 
table.  The  conversation  was  very  pleasant,  inquiring  what  opinion 
they  had  of  the  Duke  of  Savoye,  &c^  This  done,  he  went  along  by 
the  coach-side  a  little  way,  &  soe  left  them.  The  vote  of  the 
Parliament  made  them  start  here,  but  they  are  ordred  to  goe  on 
with  what  haste  thev  can. 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris :  Nov.  15,  '73. 

Her  R.  H"''  is  yet  very  weake,  soe  that  we  know  not  presisely 
the  day  she  will  sett  out,  &  the  news  from  England,  that  came 
yesterday,  of  the  Parliament's  having  taken  up  the  busines  of  the 
match  a  second  time."  made  them  much  disordered  at  the  Arsenal, 
as  it  hath  made  a  great  noyse  all  over  the  towne.  However,  wee 
endeavour  to  persuade  them  that  those  heats  will  pass  over. 

On  Sunday  the  Venetian  Amb''  made  his  entry  &  yesterday 
had  his  Audience.  Hee  hath  one  roome  soe  well  furnished,  that  it 
is  the  admiration  of  all  people. 

'  For  the  details  of  the  journey  of  Maria  of  Modena  through  Savoy  see  Les 
derniers  Stuarts  a  Samt-Oermain-en-Laye,  i.  104-105. 

-  Parliament  met  again  on  Novemher  6  and  still  insisted  upon  a  Protestant 
alliance  (Mignet,  iv.  228). 

VOL.  V.  T 


274  THE   DESPATCHKS   OF 

The  King  oF  France  doth  every  morning  an  exercise  at  the 
hearls,  with  lance,  saber,  dart,  arrow,  &  pistoll,  but  nobody  is 
admitted  to  see  lilm  excepting  some  few  intimates,  soe  tliat  it  is 
believed  we  shall  have  a  carousel,  &  that  his  Ma'-*'  will  shew  his 
activity  himselfe. 

T  had  yesterday  a  letter  from  my  L''  of  Sunderland,  w"^*"  I  received 
with  much  joy,  in  that  y''  Lopp  was  pleased  to  give  him  an  answer 
favorable  to  the  liumble  request  I  made  y""  Lopp  as  to  my  staying 
here  Sec''*'  to  the  Embassy,  whereof  I  hope  to  acquitt  myselfe  soe 
well,  as  to  vigilance  &  fidelity,  that  y''  Lopp  may  have  no  cause  to 
disowne  mee.' 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Novemb  25th,  '73 

On  Thursday  morning  her  1!"  H""''  left  this  place,  &  by  next 
Thursday,  in  all  probabilit)',  will  bee  at  Calais,  if  she  be  not  ill 
againe  upon  the  way.  She  has  left  a  very  good  impression  in 
this  Court  as  to  the  sweetnesse  of  her  behaviour  &  her  comely 
presence. 

Two  days  since,  here  happned  an  unlucky  quarrell  between  a 
young  English  blade  &  M''.  Forbus,'*  governour  to  the  Earle  of 
Derby. '^  The  latter  having  several!  times  dissuaded  M"'  Merittfrom 
seducing  the  Earle,  it  bred  misunderstandings,  to  the  degree  that 
M''  Forbus  was  forced  to  use  threats,  w'-"''  produced  two  several 
broyles  withox^t  much  hurt,  till  at  last  the  other  called  M'"  Forbus 
out  of  his  chamber  into  the  courtyard,  &  as  they  were  fighting, 
^Ir.  ileritt's  man  tripped  up  M''  Forbus,  &  soe  exposed  him  to 
severall  inhumane  cutts  on  the  ground,  but  none  of  the  wounds 
are  dangerous.  The  justice  has  secured  ileritt  in  prison,  in  order 
to  a  prosecution.  This  I  presume  to  intimate  to  j-our  Lopp, 
because  of  the  Earl  of  Derby's  relation  to  my  L''  of  Ossory,''  that 
his  Lopp  may  see  how  fai-re  his  care  of  his  charge  has  extended, 
even  to  a  corporall  concernement. 

Since  the  taking  of  Bonne,''  we  hear  that  Nuys  is  also 
besieged  &  supposed  to  be  taken  by  this  time. 

'  See  letter  dated  Nov.  1,  '73.  -'  James  Forbes. 

■'  William  George  Richard  Stanley. 

'  The  Earl  of  Derby  had  married  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Thomas  Butler,  Ear 
of  Ossory. 

'  The  town  capitulated  on  November  12. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  275 

The  Bpp  of  Cullein '  is  retired  to  Maestricht,  &  his  creature  of 
Strasbourg  into  Keyserwert.  News  came  yesterday  w*^^  was  not 
overpleasing  at  Court,  in  that,  it's  said,  1,500  French  horse,  co- 
manded  by  M"  d'Humieres,  have  been  defeated  by  3,000  horse 
commanded  by  G"  Sporke.  In  the  mean  time,  we  hear  that  M" 
Turenne  has  asked  leave  of  the  King  to  retire,  upon  some  jarre 
between  him  &  Louvoy  about  orders  sent  him  by  M''  de  Louvoy, 
w'^'*  are  disavowed  by  him  since,  because  the  successe  answerd  not 
the  desigue. 

The  French  have  made  a  little  invasion  in  Catalogne,  but  were 
forced  back  by  14  spannish  hataillom.  The  Spaniards  are  not 
sorry  for  this,  because  the  Catalognians  are  bound  to  maintaine 
6,000  men  upon  any  invasion. 

Monsieur,  having  lost  some  money  to  a  gi'eat  value  to  the 
'>[arq*  d'Anjou,  has  payd  him  in  plate,  as  hath  he  two  other 
creditours  of  the  same  kind,  the  first,  because  he  is  going  for 
England,  &  ]\Ionsieur  hath  a  maxime  to  oblige  all  French  that  goe  for 
England  as  much  as  he  can,  since  some  time.  The  C  de  Grammont. 
going  into  the  chamber  of  one  of  these  who  had  a  share  in  the 
plate,  &  seeing  it  served  for  use,  asked  if  there  were  another  Duke 
of  Orleans  in  France. 

To  Lord  Arlinqtmi. 

Paris  :  Novemb  30th,  '73. 

Since  my  last,  here  have  been  certaine  revolutions  in  this 
court,  but  of  another  sex,  the  Queen  having  thought  fitt  to  lay 
aside  all  her  Maids  of  Honour,  &  some  say  this  resolution  pro- 
ceeds from  a  profound  devotion,  as  if  people  were  obliged  to  answer 
for  the  sins  of  their  servants." 

The  Resident  of  Geneva^  is  warned  to  retire,  because  his 
]\Iasters  are  soe  zealous  for  the  Spanniards  as  to  raise  men  for 
them  at  their  owne  expence. 

The  Duchesse  of  Vaujour,  alias  la  Valiere,  designeth  this  day,  or 
to-morrow,  to  putt  herselfe  in  the  Nunnei'y  of  Val  de  Grace,  after 
having  seen  her  children  putt  under  the  direction  of  fitt  persons, 
in  order  to  their  good  educations. 

'  Cologne. 

-  The  suppression  of  the  maids  of  honour  was  probably  due  to  the  influence  of 
Madame  de  Montespan. 

'  .Jacques  Bordier,  resident  in  France  1008-1C84. 

T  2 


276  THE    DESPATCHES    OK 

1  have  been  desirei.1  by  some  English  to  gett  their  commis- 
sions from  hence  for  private  men  of  wanv  against  the  Spaniards, 
&  such  commissions  have  been  oHered  mee  in  bhink,  butt  1  con- 
sidered of  the  consequence  that  the  Spaniards  might,  in  the  same 
manner,  doe  us  ten  times  the  prejudice  with  coiumissions  from  the 
Dutch,  it.  accordingly  refused  the  one  &  the  other,  especially 
because  1  have  no  orders  from  y''  Lopp  in  tiiat  i)articular. 

To  Lord  Arlin<iton. 

Talis  :  Dec.  2',  '73,  S.N. 

Wee  hear  that  the  M"  Turenne,  after  having  disposed  his 
troops  into  winter  quarters,  will  passe  his  winter  here,  but  of  this 
there  is  noe  great  certainty,  because  his  Ma'"  sent  him  an  answer 
to  such  his  request,  that  his  presence  there  were  more  for  his  ser- 
vice. The  Prince  of  Condo,  since  his  returne,  is  more  gracious  with 
the  King  than  ever,  being  admitted  into  the  secret  of  affaires.  He 
continues  still  very  invetarate  against  AP  de  Louvoy.  In  case 
M''  de  Turenne  comes  away,  its  sayd  the  Prince  is  designed  to 
succeed  him  in  that  post  with  the  title  of'  Generalissime  des  Arm6es 
du  iioy,'  with  this  provision  also,  that  in  case  he  be  indisposed  his 
son,  the  Duke  of  Anguien,  shall  have  the  same  qualitication. 

They  talke  at  Court  that,  considering  the  dotage  of  M'  d'Aligre, 
'  Garde  des  Sceaux,'  &  yet,  for  his  former  services,  being  willing  to 
let  him  dye  in  that  charge,  liis  Ma"^'  is  thinking  of  making  a 
Chancelloiir. 

For  the  raising  of  present  money,  the  King  is  making  three- 
'  Grand  TresoriersdeLEspargne,  viz',  Mons'Fouqueau,'  ^I'Goquille, 
&  M"'  Fremond,-  iiwyeiuiut  four  hundred  thousand  crowns  each  to 
be  payd  downe.  His  Ma'-"  is  also  selling  his  '  Petit  Domaine  '  to 
persons  that  have  shares  with  him. 

Yesterday  1  found  the  Court  very  biiske  upon  the  news  of  the 
Sweed's  Army  of  above  20,00U  men  being  on  their  march  towards 
the  hereditary  territories  of  the  Emp'',  &  that  the  Sweeds  having 
desired  passage  of  the  Duke  of  Brandenburg,  the  Elector  hath  made 
refusall. 

The  King  hath  made  a  new  troop  of  '  Gens  d'Armes  Flamants,' 
like  those  of  his  house  of  English  &  Scotch,  &  hath  given  the  com- 

'  Nicolas  Joseph  Foucault. 

■  Nicolas  Friimont.  Seigneur  d'Auneuil. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  ->.il 

maud  of  it,  iu  quality  of  Capt  Lieuten',  to  the  young  Conut  de 
Marsin,  son  to  him  that  was'  ]\Iestre  de  Camp  Gen"'  in  Flanders.^ 

It  is  not  yet  knowne  how  the  businesse  will  end  of  the  ^Maids 
of  Honour.  Some  say  they  are  like  to  be  reestablished,  but  I  cannot 
believe  it,  for  Monsieur  taketh  Mad :  de  Loudre^  &M"''  d'Ampierre' 
to  the  sei-vice  of  Madame,  as  having  served  our  late  iladame. 
-Madame  de  Guize  entertains  ^lad"'^^  de  Teobon,^  &  ^M""'  de  Coelogon  '" 
is  to  dwell  with  jMadame  de  Richilieu  ^  by  the  Queen's  order,  &  the 
other  four  retire  to  their  kindred — viz\  JI"'  La  ilotte,''  de  la  ilark,'* 
du  Eouvi-oy,'  &  de  L'Anry.'"  The  Queen  resolving  to  have  no  more 
young  maidens  near  her,  she  intends  to  take  women  that  shall  be 
called  ■  Dames  du  Louvre '  to  wavt  upon  her  at  table,  &  elsewhere 
persons  to  be  chosen  out  for  heaux  eyprifs  as  well  as  piety. 

The  Elector  of  Cullen  hath  complayned  extremely  of  ^1"' 
D'Estrades,  Gov^  of  ^Maastricht,  iu  that  he  hath  cutt  to  peices  about 
COO  Likjois  that  the  Elector  had  putt  into  garrison  in  Tongres, 
because  they  refused  to  send  him  forrage.  They  beat  the  French 
twice  back,  but  could  not  bear  the  third  shock,  &  soe  had  no 
quarter. 

The  last  courrier  fi'om  Poland  left  that  King  near  his  end, 
having  been  given  over  by  the  physicians,  &  received  the  last 
ceremonjT  of  his  Church. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris :  Decemb  10th,  '73,  S.N. 
I  did  not  give  myselfe  the  honour  of  writing  to  your  Lopp  by 
the  last  post  because  I  was  then  at  S'  Germains,  where  the  news 
was  just  come  of  the  Conte  de  Guiche's  death,  of  a  violent  feaver. 
The  Court  was  troubled  for  him,  but  the  old  Marshall  Grammont 
is  inconsolable.     The  King  has  sent  Orders  to  his  troops  that  are 

'  Ferdinand,  Comte  de  Marsin,  son  of  Jean  Gaspard  Ferdinand,  Comte  de 
Marsin. 

=  Marie  Isabelle,  Comtesse  de  Ludres.  ^  Helene  Fourre  de  Dampierre. 

'  Mademoiselle  Lydie  de  Eochefort-Theobon. 

*  Louise  Philippe  de  Coetlogon. 

"^  Anne  Poussart,  daughter  of  Francois,  Marquis  de  Fors. 

■  Anne  Lucie  de  la  Mothe-Houdaneourt.  later  Duchesse  de  la  Tieuville. 

'  Marie  Fran(;'oise  Echallard  de  la  Marck.  ■'  Jeanne  de  Kouvroy. 

'"  Adrienne  Philippine  Thir^se  de  Lannoi,  later  Comtesse  de  Montrevel. 


278  TnE    DESPATCHES   OK 

in  Ijorraiue  to  march  strait  to  Dijou,  to  winter  on  tlie  frontiprs  of 
the  Franche  Comto,  to  putt  that  province  under  contribution,  & 
liindor  the  excursions  of  the  Spaniards  in  tiiat  countrey,  where  it  is 
thought  they  may  be  strengthn'd  by  some  (Germans. 

Tlie  King  has  issued  out  his  orders  for  the  augmenting  each  of 
his  oO  companies  of  French  Guards  with  6U  men,  without  any 
charge  to  hiuiselfe  as  it  is  contrived,  in  that  every  oueof  the  ensigns 
sliall  bee  made  Sublieutenants,  &  tlie  Captains  to  name  new 
ensigns,  the  profitt  whereof  will  raise  the  men.  Hee  has  also 
ordained  that  all  other  foot  companies  of  French  shall  be  made  up, 
GO  in  each,  whenas  hitherto  they  has'e  consisted  but  of  50.  In  Kne, 
the  drums  beat  in  all  quarters  for  the  raising  of  fourty  thousand 
men  more. 

Some  troops,  under  the  command  of  the  Chev''  du  Plessis  Praslin, 
have  been  before  Berne  Castel,  but  had  noe  convenience  of  making 
their  batteries.  It  is  a  place  near  Treves  where  1,200  Spanniards  & 
Germans  are  in  garrison  who  have  desired  to  capitulate,  liut  the 
French  persisting  that  they  should  bee  prisoners  of  warre,  the 
besieged  are  resolved  to  defend  themselves  till  such  time  as  the 
batteries  force  them  to  surrender. 

Marshall  Turenne's  army  is  marched  all  along  the  side  of  the 
Sarre,  towards  Treves,  in  order  to  the  winter  quartering,  where  his 
Jla'-^'  has  named  the  ilarq'  JMaulevoir,'  brother  to  ]\lons''  Colbert 
(who  has  been  a  long  while  in  a  small  disgrace)  to  command  as 
'  Mai'sh"  du  Camp,'  because  Turenne  himself  &  most  of  the  other 
great  commanders  are  expected  here,  at  w"^'  time  a  Councell  of 
Warre  will  bee  established,  ct  the  Prince  of  Conde  is  to  preside  in  it. 

The  Duke  of  Luxembourg  has  disposed  of  his  body  also  ;  part 
he  has  sent  to  Dusseldorp  to  keep  gai-risou  there  at  the  Duke  of 
Nieuburgh's  instance,  who  apprehended  that  if  the  Imperialists 
should  passe  the  Rhine,  they  would  attaque  that  place.  The  rest 
of  his  troops  he  has  put  into  Nuits,  Wesel,  Rhinsberg,  Fort  Skink, 
Arnhem,  Nimegue,  &  Grave. 

!M''  de  Montecuculi  is  gone  for  Vienna,  &  Bournonville  •  remains 
in  chiefe.  It  is  thought  that  those  forces  will  remaine  in  the  Pays 
de  Cologne  &  J  uliers  all  the  winter,  as  those  of  the  Prince  of  Orange 

'  Edouard  Fran<;ois  Colbert,  Comte  de  Maul^vrier,  fourth  son  of  Nicolas 
Colbert,  brother  of  the  '  grand  Colbert.' 

-  Alexandre  Hippoljtc  Balthazar,  Comte  de  Hennin,  later  Duo  de  Bournon- 
ville. 


AN   ENGLISH   AGENT   IN   PARIS  279 

in  the  Pays  de  Liege  to  bridle  those  of  IMaestricht  liy  stopping  of 
provisions,  &  particularly  to  subsist  aux  depeivli  d'avtriu/. 

A  marriage  is  discoursed  of  between  the  young  Conte  de 
Soissons  ^  &  Mad"°  de  Vivonue,-  in  W-'"  case  the  charge  of  Coll'  of  the 
Suisse  will  be  reserved  for  him. 

It  is  also  said  that  the  ilaids  of  Honour  are  likely  to  be  restored 
again  to  their  attendance  on  the  Queen,  upon  the  imiDortunity  & 
sollicitation  of  their  relations,  who  have  alledged  how  much  their 
reputations  would  suffer  in  the  world  by  such  laying  them  aside, 
even  to  the  loosing  of  their  future  fortunes.  However  one  of  them, 
ilad"*^  de  Lanoy,  need  not  fear  neither,  she  being  to  marry  the  son 
of  the  Marq^  de  Pompadour,  to  whom  the  Bang  has  given  the 
reversion  of  his  father's  place. 

Wee  are  in  hourly  expectation  of  news  from  Rome,  the  last 
advice  thence  having  left  the  Pope  in  a  very  declining  condicon , 
little  hopes  being  left  of  his  recovery. 

Wee  are  also,  in  a  manner,  assured  of  the  King  of  Poland's  being 
dead,  soe  much  as  to  discourse  of  his  successour.  The  Prince 
Charles  of  Lorraine  seems  to  be  the  fairest  pretender  of  a  stranger, 
as  propt  by  the  Emperour  upon  the  account  of  his  being  designed 
ye  marrying  the  Queen  of  Poland.^ 

To  Lo'ixl  Arlington. 

Paris :  Deoemb  16,  '73. 

Att  Court  they  are  very  busy  in  distributing  of  commissions  for 
the  raising  of  more  men,  his  Jla'-^  designing  to  have  three  good 
armies  on  foot  at  Spring,  one  very  substantiall  against  the  Germans, 
&  two  in  Flanders,  to  consist  in  all  of  about  four  score  &  ten 
thousand  men,  whereof  they  count  fourty  thousand  horse. 

The  ^larsh"  de  Belfonds  is  quartered  with  nine  thousand  men 
at  Vilvorde,  within  four  leagues  of  Brussels,  to  make  them  subsist 
upon  the  Spaunish  territories,  &  to  extend  his  contribution  even  to 
the  very  gates  of  Bruxels.  A  body  of  horse  of  Luxembourg's  army, 
not  being  able  to  live  in  the  places  taken  from  the  Dutch,  are  also 
quartered  in  Flanders,  between  the  Sambre  &  the  Meuse,  under  the 

'  Louis  Thomas  de  Savoie(1658-1702),  son  of  Eugene  Maurice,  Comte  de  Savoie. 

-  This  maiTiage  never  took  place,  as  two  of  the  daughters  of  Louis  Victor  de 
Eoehechouart,  Due  de  Vivonne,  became  nuns,  a  third  married  the  Due  d'Elboeuf , 
and  the  remaining  two  were  not  maiTied  until  1693  and  1702. 

»  See  n.  1,  p.  232. 


280  THK    DESl'ATCHE!?    OF 

command  of  the  C  de  Schomberg ;  whilst  the  Spaunish  &  Dutch 
forces  are  wintering  along  the  Roer,  &  the  Imperialists  on  both 
sides  the  Rhine,  having  a  bridge  for  communication  at  Bonne. 

The  letters  from  Italy  left  the  I'ope  well  recovered  againe  from 
liis  late  sicknesse,  &  the  Card'  Chigi  much  hurt  with  the  overturning 
of  his  coach. 

It  is  taken  notice  of  that  as  yet  the  Court  of  Spaine  hath  not 
declared  warre  with  the  French,  neither  at  Madrid  nor  any  of  its 
dominions  in  Italy,  though  some  ships  have  been  taken  by  the 
French  ii'om  the  Milanese,  &  other  hostilities  committed  in  the 
ilediterranean. 

The  Chev"'  de  Vendosme,  being  passionately  in  love  with  Mad: 
de  Ludre,  the  famous  beauty  of  this  Court,  &  consequently  not 
able  to  endure  a  rivall,  hath  quarreld  with  the  C.  de  Vivonne,  soe 
that  a  guard  is  set  upon  him  to  hinder  the  execution  of  his  threats. 

ilarshall  Turenne  came  to  towne  the  last  night,  soe  that  now 
the  Councell  of  Warre  will  sett  to  consult  upon  the  present  state 
of  affau'es.  It  is  thought  that  Flanders  will  be  the  scene  of  the 
next  Campagne.  Scott  is  still  treating  with  the  French  for  the 
sale  of  his  mapps  he  has  lately  made  of  Sluys,  &  other  places 
belonging  to  the  Dutch,  as  well  as  ye  Spaniards,  but  he  holds  one 
dearer  than  a  place  might  be  corrupted  lor,  &  sayes  he  will  not  sell 
a  whole  countrey  unlesse  hee  can  make  his  fortune  by  it.  Hee 
hath  made  two  w"''  might  be  of  great  use  to  us,  containing  the 
severall  passages  into  Holland  &  Zeal'  by  sea,  with  the  severall 
soundings  he  hath  collected  with  much  industry,  from  the  many 
pilotts  he  hath  couver.sed  with  to  that  purj)ose,  &  I  believe  a  little 
consideradoh  might  gett  them  of  him.  I  have  advised  him,  how- 
ever, to  make  a  present  of  them  to  his  Ma'-^'. 

Here  is  news  of  a  great  defeat  of  the  Turks  by  the  I'olanders, 
wherein  they  lost  near  thirty  thousand  men.' 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  December  24",  '73. 

Notwithstanding  the  severall  days  named  for  the  M"  de 
Turenn's  coming   hither,    it   seems    his    businesse  kept    him-  till 

'  The  defeat  of  the  Turks  by  John  Sobieski  at  Eotzim  and  the  death  of  the 
Polish  King  Michael  Korybut  Wisniowieski  occurred  on  the  same  day,  November 
10,  1G73. 


iN    ENGLISH    ACtENT    IX    PARIS  281 

Thursday  night  last,  soe  that  now,  for  the  futui'e,  a  Councell  of 
Warre  shall  manage  all  military  enterprises.  The  King,  in  his  Grand 
Councell.  for  the  better  restablishing  the  forreigiie  trade,  hath  sup- 
pressed the  duty,  30  per  cent,  sett  upon  all  marchandise  &  forreigne 
manufactures  imported  in  France,  soe  that  for  the  future  they 
shall  pay  nothing.  There  is  also  another  arrest  de  conseil  coming 
out,  giving  permission  to  Dutch  merchants  &to  Spaniards  to  come 
into  the  French  ports  with  passeports,  &  there  to  buy  wines  & 
other  marchandise,  upon  condition  that  they  pay  a  new  tax  of  a 
crown  per  tuun,  besides  the  ancient  one  of  50  sous. 

The  8''  d'Almeras  is  made  Lieutenant  Generall  in  the  navall 
forces  of  France,  in  order  to  the  succeeding  Mons""  Martel,  as  it  is 
thought,  in  the  next  summer's  expedition.  The  Cliefs  d'Escculre  are 
made  of  four  captains  of  ships,  the  Sieurs  de  Vabelle,'  de  Gabaret, 
de  Previlly,  et  de  Chasteauvieux. 

On  Wednesday  last  were  verifyed  in  Parliament,  in  the  Grand 
Chambre  &  the  Charnbre  des  Comptes,  recognizances,  wherby  Louis 
Auguste,  in  quality  of  Duke  du  Maine,  Louis  Hector,  as  Conte  de 
Vexin,  &  Louise  Francoise,  as  Countesse  of  Nantes,  were  declared 
naturall  children  of  France.- 

The  King  has  received  from  M"  Sobieski  an  account  of  his 
victory  over  the  Turks,  which  has  been  soe  considerable  that  a 
greater  has  not  been  obtained  against  them  these  three  hundred 
years. 

It  is  much  wondered  at  here  that  the  Imperialists  did  not 
endeavour  the  opposuig  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg's  passage  along 
the  Roer  within  4  leagues  of  ]Maestricht,  whence  that  General! 
intends  to  march  into  Flanders  with  his  30  thousand  men,  &  there 
to  quarter  all  the  winter. 

I'o  Lord,  Arliiujton. 

Paris  :  Decemb  30'^  '73. 

This  Court  hath  been  these  two  days  much  alarmed  at  the 
receipt  of  severall  advices  from  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg,  whose 
intentions  being  to  march  from  ^laestricht  along  the  Ardennes,  on 
the  other  side  the  Meuse,  towards  Mezieres,  in  order  to  the  putting 

'  Jean  Baptist*,  ChevaUer  de  Valbelle. 

-  Louis  Auguste  de  Bourbon,  Duke  of  Maine  and  Aumale  and  Comte  d'Eu, 
born  1670  ;  Louis  Hector  Cesar  de  Bourbon,  Comte  de  Vexin,  born  1672  ;  Louise 
Franvoise  de  Bourbon,  Mademoiselle  de  Nantes,  born  1673. 


282  THK    niuSI'ATC'IIEii    01' 

his  Army  in  Winter  quai-ters.  As  he  was  stopped  by  the  way,  by 
the  broakiiifjf  of  a  bridge  he  liad  cast  over  a  river  near  Naniiir,  he 
n>ceived  advice  of  tlie  Spannish  A  Dutch  troops  advancing  towards 
liim,  in  order  to  tlie  cutting  oil'  his  baggage  (w"' '  consisted  of  3,000 
waggons)  as  well  as  the  reare  of  his  Army,  as  they  were  to  passe  a 
diflicult  way  through  the  Ardennes,  which  made  liim  resolve  to 
march  back,  &  encamp  under  the  cannon  of  Maestricht,  there  to 
expect  the  King's  orders  to  leave  his  baggage  &  tight  his  passage, 
or  to  steer  another  course  along  the  iloselle,  to  coine  into  France 
by  Metz.  For  in  the  post  he  is,  his  horse  would  perish  for  want  of 
provender,  &  his  men  much  strcightu'd  for  victualls.  ^\'hereupon, 
on  Thursday,  a  great  Councell  of  Warre  was  held  at  S'  (Tcrmains, 
where  it  was  ordered  that  ]\lons''  de  Schomberg  should  doe  his 
utmost  with  the  little  army  he  commands  between  the  SambrecS:  the 
Meuse,  to  favour  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg's  retreat,  that  some 
Com])anies  of  Suisse  should  march  hence,  that  the  Prince  of  Condi' 
&  all  the  other  officers,  who  thought  to  liave  reposed  here  this 
winter,  should  repaire  towards  Flanders,  &  that  if  the  stresse  required 
it,  his  Ma'-^  himselfe  would  goe  away  in  0  or  7  days.  It  is  sayd 
also,  that  if  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg  goe  the  other  way  along  the 
ISIoselle,  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  is  posted  very  advantagiously  to 
stop  his  passage  that  way  also. 

The  Imperialists  are  treating  with  the  Town  of  Liege,  &  in  case 
they  can  putt  in  a  garrison  there,  Maestricht  will  be  streightned  for 
want  of  ye  provisions  it  was  furnished  with  from  thence. 

A  courrier  arrived  here  on  Thursday  from  H'  Wm  Godolphin,  & 
1  hope  he  is  ere  this  with  your  Lo]ip.  The  inclosed  Onhnnances 
are  those  I  menconed  to  your  Lopp  in  a  former  aljout  Commerce, 
but  I  believe  little  prolit  will  redound  from  them,  because  the 
Dutch  &  Flemmings  have  already  forljidden  the  consum])tion  of 
French  coiTiodities,  but  most  particularly  their  wines  &  braudys. 

M''  de  Ruvigny,  upon  his  desire  to  come  over  again,  his  owne 
affairs  reciuiring  his  presence  here,  he  was  ordered  to  stay  in  J<]ng- 
land  till  the  meeting-  of  the  I'arliament. 


To  Tiord  A'liiiKjton. 

Palis  :  Jan  3',  '7.S  ['74]. 
I  am  desii'ed  to  represent  to  your  Lopp  an  accident  that  hath 
befallen  Madam  Buat,  which  I  doe  the  rather  presume  upon  iu  that 


AX   ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  283 

I  remember  your  Lopp  bath  formerly  been  pleased  to  doe  her  good 
offices  here.  On  Saterday  there  came  guards  to  her  house  & 
seised  on  all  she  had,  w''''  are  sealed  together  with  her  papers, 
&  officers  are  sett  upon  her  in  her  house  to  confine  her.  without 
the  least  intimac'oh  upon  what  reason  the  seisure  is  made,  other 
than  what  i\Ions''  Monbas  giveth  out,  that  it  is  in  reprizall  of  what 
hath  been  done  to  his  wife  '  at  Antwerp  in  the  like  manner,  at  the 
Prince  of  Orange's  instance  with  the  C.  de  Monterei.  She  hath 
by  some  friend  made  application  to  M"'  de  Pompone,  who  could 
putt  her  into  no  other  way  for  reliefe  than  to  use  her  utmost  with 
her  friends  in  England  ;  wherfore  she  would  by  this  post  have 
made  her  suit  to  y''  Lopp  if  she  were  permitted  to  write  without 
the  circumstance  of  having  her  letters  seen  at  Court.  Your  Lopp 
will  therfore  doe  a  great  deed  of  charity  in  embracing  the  cause 
of  this  affiicted  lady,  by  a  favourable  word  to  the  French  Amb'" 
in  her  behalf,  or  otherwise,  as  y'"  Lopp  shall  be  pleased  to  think 
fitt. 

iP'  Monbas  has  made  a  second  defence  in  his  justification, 
wherein  1  hear  hee  is  very  l)itter  with  the  Pi'ince  of  Orange  &  is 
otherwise  very  guilty  of  railing  at  him. 


To  Lord  Arlimiton. 

Paris:  Jan.  3'',  '73  ['74]. 

By  a  courrier  from  Mons''  de  Luxembourg  the  King  has  a 
pretty  good  account  of  him,  that  he  has  been  relieved  with  forrage 
&  in  good  condicou.  His  Ma'^  is  also  pleased  with  something  the 
C.  de  Schomberg  has  done  with  his  4,000  horse.  The  P"-  of  Conde, 
the  Duke  d'Anguien,  &  M"  Turenne  goe  hence  on  Munday,  though 
the  latter  bee  ill  of  the  gout.  It  is  believed  the  French  will 
endeavour  to  make  themselves  masters  of  Navagne,  a  fort  the 
Spaniards  have  near  Maestricht  w°'^  does  much  incomode  that 
place.  Two  days  since,  L'Abbe  Brunetti  went  hence  towards 
Poland.  I  suppose  y'"  Lopp  remembers  him  of  old  as  a  man  of 
intrigues.  He  hath  promised  to  give  your  Lopp  an  account  of  all 
affaires  in  that  Kingdome,  particularly  as  to  the  new  election,  by 
the  way  of  Dantsick. 

On  New  Year's  Day  the  Maids-of-Honour  left  the  Court,  having 

'  Comelie  de  Groot,  Vicomtesse  de  Montbas. 


284  THE  nF.srATciiKs  ov 

a]ippard  on  the  eve  in  gi-eat  lustre  at  the  last  farewell.  Tlie  Qiicen 
liatli  cliosen  in  tlieir  places  to  attend,  five  Dumes  (hi  VnJah,  who 
are  the  I'rincesse  of  llarcourt,'  Dnchesse  de  Chcvreuse,^  duchr-sse 
de  Soiil)ise,^  the  Marquesse  of  RochcfoH. '  i^'  the  Marqiiesse  d'Albret/' 
with  (lie  pension  of  two  thousand  crowns  a  year  to  each. 


To  Lord  ArUiifiton. 

Puris :  Jan.  Gth,  '73  ['74]. 

Since  my  last  here  hath  little  of  luonieut  happ'ned  worth  your 
Lo])p's  knowledjre. 

The  French  begin  to  presse  the  Sweeds  to  declare  themselves 
according  to  the  late  Treaty  concluded  at  Stockholme  by  M''  de 
I'oiupone,  since  the  Emperour  doeth  actually  favour  the  Hollanders 
in  the  warre  ;  but  the  Sweeds  keep  off,  whethei-  it  bee  for  want  of 
money  &  men,  or  rather  the  fear  of  exciting  some  neighbour 
Princes  to  unite  against,  wherfore  the  mediatours  doe  sincerely 
labour  for  the  effecting  a  T'eace,  though  with  very  little  succcsse,  & 
now  the  French  foresee  no  other  way  towards  it  than  a  decision 
by  armes. 

The  rendevous  of  the  troops,  lately  ordered  to  march  for  the 
drawing  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg  out  of  the  brambles,  is  to  be  at 
Avesnes,  the  8"'  instant,  when  an  array  will  be  gott  together  there 
of  about  twenty  thousand  men,  whence  they  are  to  march  to  find 
out  the  enemy  between  Namur  &  Liege ;  but,  by  that  time,  it  is 
believed  the  Spannish  &  Dutch  troops  will  be  retired  into  their 
quarters,  they  having  partly  obtain'd  what  they  designed  in  the 
harassing  the  French  by  these  winter  marches.  The  Prince  of 
Cond6  goes  away  ilunday,  but  M"  Tvu'enue   cannot  goe  so  soon, 

'  Frarn^oise  de  Brancas,  I'lincesse  d'Haicouit,  wife  of  Alphonsc  Henri  Charles 
de  Lorraine,  Prince  d'Harcourt. 

*  Jeanne  Marie  Tliorese  Colbert,  Dnchesse  de  Chevreuse,  daughter  of  Jean 
Baptiste  Colbert. 

'  Anne  de  Eohan  Chabot,  Princesse  de  Soubise,  wife  of  rran(^ois  de  Eohan, 
PriBce  de  Soubise. 

'  Madeleine  dc  Laval  BoisDauphin,  Marquise  de  Eochefort,  wife  of  Henri 
Louis  d'Aloigny,  Marquis  de  Eochefort. 

'  Marie,  only  daughter  of  Marshal  d'Albret,  and  wife  of  Charles  Amanieu 
'Albret,  Sire  de  Pons,  known  as  the  Marquis  d'Albret. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  285 

the  gout  retardiug  him.  He  hath  voluntarily  offered  to  serve 
under  the  Prince  or  the  Duke  of  Anguien. 

The  King,  having  suppressed  a  great  number  of  Greffiers  all 
over  the  Kingdome,  has  issued  out  commissions  for  600  more,  w'='' 
are  to  be  bought  by  particulars  &  will  raise  great  sums  of  money. 

They  talke  here  of  a  match  designed  between  the  Prince  of 
Tarante  &  the  Countesse  of  Guiche.' 

Ye  King  of  France  is  sending  a  squadron  of  ships  towards 
Lisbone,  to  bee  commanded  by  Mous''  de  Quesne,  in  order  to  the 
favourising  D"  Pedro's  being  made  King  of  Portugall,  ye  Prince 
being  to  raise  twelve  thousand  men.  That  sea  commander  is  a  great 
friend  to  ye  English,  but  an  enemy  to  ye  Count  d'Estree,  &  hath 
informed  of  much  foule  play  ye  last  summer  by  ye  confession  of 
officers.  Hee  says  ye  King  of  France  will  have  a  good  fleet  out 
this  yeare  &  they  shall  fight. 


To  Lord  Arlinqton. 

Paris  ;  Jan.  10"\  '74. 

After  the  first  resolutions  for  the  generall  rendevoits  of  an 
army  at  Avesnes  they  have  countermanded  the  march,  &  since 
that  again  new  orders  are  sent  for  their  proceeding  on,  the  Prince 
of  Conde  going  away  this  morning,  as  doth  the  Marshall  Turenne 
in  two  or  three  days  in  a  cliaise  roulante  that  will  carry  him  as 
fast  as  the  Post,  he  having  the  gout  in  both  his  leggs.  Last  night 
came  a  courrier,  as  T  am  informed,  from  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg, 
with  an  account  of  his  having  forced  his  passage  through  towards 
Oharleroy,  but  that  the  dispute  was  very  vigorous  &  hott  on  both 
sides.  The  slaughter  having  been  great,  the  French  pretend  not 
to  any  great  advantage  over  the  enemy  in  this  rencontre,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  by  the  whispers  we  guesse  their  losse  to  be  consider- 
able. However  the  Court  is  preparing  for  the  divertisemeids  of 
the  Carnavall,  &  the  new  Opera  is  to  be  represented  in  a  few  days; 
by  forestall,  it  is  sayd  to  be  as  fine  as  ever  was  in  Italy. 

'  Marguerite  Louise  de  Betbune,  widow  of  Arraand  de  Gramont,  Comte  de 
Guiche.     She  married  the  Due  de  Lude. 


28G  THE    DESPATCHBS    OF 

To  Lord  Arlin{iton. 

Paris  :  Jan.  13tb,  1G7J,  K.X. 

Two  daj's  since  the  Prince  of  Condo  went  hence  towards 
Avesnes,  where  is  to  bee  the  {^enerall  rendecous  of  ten  tliousand 
horse  de  la  mauion  dii  Roij,  &  as  many  foot ;  but  liis  ^Sla'",  ha\'ing 
since  received  advice  of  the  Spannish  &  Dutch  troops  having  passed 
the  Delnier  it  retired  towards  Diest,  it  is  sayd  tlie  Prince  will  have 
order  to  returne,  as  liath  the  M"  de  Turenne  not  to  goe  hence  till 
he  hath  further  directions  for  it  from  his  Ma'-',  although  his 
equipage  is  already  on  the  way.  On  Tuesday  last  the  King  was 
pleased  to  dignify  IMons''  d'Aligre,  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  with  the 
title  of  Chancellour,  &  hath  created  an  additionary  number  of 
eight  blasters  of  Requests,  to  conipleat  that  of  80,  they  being 
hitherto  but  72,  with  the  pension  of  l.OOO  livers  yearly  &  this 
provisoe,  that  the  several  1  pretenders  shall  pay  each  into  the 
Royall  Treasure  twentj-  thousand  pistols,  those  charges  having 
hitherto  been  valued  at  thirty  thousand,  besides  which  some  new 
C'ouncellours  are  to  bee  admitted  paying  ten  thous''  pistols  eacii. 
The  advancing  of  Mons''  d'Aligre  is  in  order,  as  most  believe,  to 
the  creating  a  Garde  des  Sceaitx,  by  reason  of  his  great  age,  that 
incapacitateth  him  to  performe  the  functions  of  that  charge,  his 
Ma'-^'  being  unwilling,  for  his  many  former  services,  to  lay  him  aside 
otherwise  than  by  such  a  promotion. 

The  Duke  of  Chaulnes  is  expected  here  this  day,  &  hence  he 
proceeds  again  for  Cologne,  where  Mons''  Van  Bewerning.  at  his 
taking  leave  of  the  mediatours.  among  other  things  told  them,  by 
way  of  bravadoe,  his  masters  had  designed  twenty-four  millions 
for  the  next  summer's  expedition,  to  which  they  reply ed,  such  a 
sum  were  better  employed  in  the  obtaining  a  good  peace,  where- 
upon they  fell  into  arguments  upon  the  main  obstacle,  the  Sweeds 
proposing  means  how  the  Duke  of  Lorrain's  concerns  might  be 
treated  apart  by  new  mediatours  of  the  Empire,  &  for  the  doing 
whereof  this  Treaty  should  be  guaranty ;  but  the  Dutch  Minister 
returned  to  the  old  track  they  have  been  in  all  this  summer,  that 
the  Duke  of  Tjorraine  is  to  be  admitted  into  this  Treaty  with  the 
rest  of  their  allyes  in  order  to  the  generall  peace  intended  by  their 
league,  or  else  the  Ti-eaty  cannot  be  proceeded  on. 

The  C.  de  Vivonne  is  designed  to  command  a  strong  squadron 


A\    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  287 

of  men-of-warre,  joined  with  galleys,  this  summer,  iu  the  Medi- 
terranean. 

I  am  just  going  some  leagues  out  of  this  place  to  meet  my  L' 
Amb''  Lockhart,  his  Ex'^"  being  expected  here  this  evening. 

I  must  unsay  what  a  geuerall  rumour  made  me  remarke  to  y'' 
l^pp  in  my  last  about  the  Duke  of  Luxembourg  as  not  confirmed 
since  to  us.' 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Palis  :  Feb.  3^  74. 

Our  letters  from  England  having  been  these  six  days  wanting 
to  us,  these  people  make  strange  guesses  at  the  cause,  as  if  matters 
did  not  goe  well  there,  which  God  forbid. 

The  designe  upon  Grey  &  Bezanfou  is  crost  by  the  great  over- 
flow of  waters  that  hinder  the  march  of  those  troops  that  were  on 
their  way,  soe  that  the  Duke  of  Xavailles  hath  order  not  [to]  pursue 
that  enterprise  yet  awhile,  untill  the  season  render  the  atteni[)t 
more  feasible.  In  the  meantime,  some  Imperiall  forces  commanded 
by  the  C  de  Starenburg,'-  were  going  to  passe  into  the  Franche 
Comte,^  &  were  to  be  assisted  in  that  designe  by  Coll:  Massietti,  who 
commands  the  Spannish  horse  &  was  advanced  towards  Alsace;  but 
the  Mai-quis  de  \'aubrun,  having  notice  of  it,  has  possessed  himselfe 
of  the  passages  through  which  the  others  intended  to  have  made 
their  way. 

The  Court  is  diverting  itselfe  with  the  gayety  of  the  Carnival, 
w'^'"'  ended,  it  removeth  to  Versailles. 


To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Feb.  12th,  '74. 

The  French  are  jealous  that  by  the  great  disposition  they  see 
in  the  Englisli  towards  a  Peace  his  Jilaj'-^  may  be  induced  to  make 
one,  but  we  endeavour  to  persuade  them  that  a  matter  of  that 
nature  will  not  be  precipitated.^  They  have  made  an  edat  for 
the  next  Campaijiie  of  H  millions  to  deft-ay  the  charge,  and  another 
of  one  hundred  thousand  men  to  be  actually  in  the  field,  one  to  be 

'  See  letter  dated  .January  10.  -  Ernest  Kudiger.-Comte  de  Staremberg. 

'  The  campaign  of  1674  took  place  in  Franche-Comte. 

'  Early  in  January  1674  Charles  announced  to  his  Parliament  that  the  Dutch 
had  made  overtures  to  him  for  peace  (Mignet,  iv.  259). 


288  THE    nKSPATCIlK      OI' 

commanded  l)v  tlie  M"  Turenne,  to  head  the  Germjins,  another  by 
thi'  P'"  of  Coiid(',  to  besiege  the  Flemmings.  &  a  third  the  King  will 
have  in  the  held  hiniselfe,  to  send  succour  to  the  other  two  as 
occasion  shall  require ;  but,  after  all  this,  nobody  knows  whether 
matters  may  not  change  the  usage  by  a  generall  accomodemeni . 
wherein  I  wish  your  Ex*^''  all  happiness,  honour,  &  prosperity. 

'J'o  Lord  Arlinriton. 

Paris  :  Febr.  IG,  '74. 

Since  the  dispatcli  his  Ex"^'  made  to  your  ]^op]>  by  the  courrier, 
nothing  of  novelty  hath  happned.  the  Court  being  busy  in  regulating 
matters  for  the  next  CamiKujiie,  &  the  people  will  not  be  persuaded 
but  that  wee  have  made  a  I'eace  up  with  the  Dutch.  The  Count 
de  Koningsmark  is  gone  towards  the  Tranche  Comte,  where  Mons"" 
de  Navailles  is  endeavouring  to  doe  some  feats.  Here  is  an 
Knroiji'  from  the  Bpp  of  ^lunster,  who  does  in  a  manner  represent 
that  his  master  will  be  forced  to  make  up  with  the  Dutch  if  not 
speedily  supplyed  to  be  in  a  capacity  of  bearing  the  shock  he  dreads 
may  fall  upon  him. 

The  Marquis  de  Courcelle,  who  was  the  person  suspected  to 
have  stolen  the  great  silver  lamp  in  the  King's  Chappell,  is  taken 
disguised  like  a  peasant. 

Mons''  ilartel  is  sayd  to  be  restored  to  his  liberty  &  command 
againe,  as  is  Madam  de  Buat,  at  the  Ambassadour's  solbVitation, 
freed  from  her  confinement. 

To  l^ord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Feb.  20th,  '74. 

Your  Ex"*^''  of  the  6th  has  confirmed  to  me  what  I  most  have 
aimed  at,  your  condescending  kindnesse  in  your  good  wishes,  for 
which  I  retnrne  y''  Ex''  my  most  humble  thanks,  with  assurance 
that,  whether  in  this  new  employm"  of  Sciy  of  the  Emba-sisy  or 
any  other,  I  shall  ambition  at  nothing  more  than  the  making  my 
services  acceptable  to  you. 

We  have  nothing  new  since  his  Ex'^"^'^  last  to  you.  uules  it  be 
the  French  King's  haveing  named  the  several!  principal  officers 
for  this  next  GomjKUine,^  as  : 

'  For  the  officers  of  this  campaigu  see  the  Gazette  dc  France  for  the  year 
1074,  and  La  Chronologic  Bisloriquc  Militaire,  par  Pinard. 


AN    ENGLISH    A(fENT    IN    PARIS 


289 


7-    ,j     XT  .     ,  Tn  the  Prince  of  Coiule  s  t    m  >     < 

In  tlie  Kq s  Armii.  ,      •  In  rii.rennKii  Armii. 

Armij.  ■' 

/Monsieur  La     the  Duke  d'AntJ^uien  St  Abre, 

Feuillade,         &  the  Coiit  de  Foueanlt, 

M''  de  J  Grand  Schonberg.  L'OrgeiTe 

,  Maistre. 
I  Rochefort, 
iTourille  [Tourville], 

are  Lieutenant  Generalls. 


The  Kinfi'.i. 

Fnnce's. 
Marshalls  de  Gamp. 

Turenne's. 

Chev""  de  Lorraine, 

Kouinsrsmark. 

Chev'-  de  Rosty, 

Reynel  [Eenel],           Choiseul, 

Molimire. 

Hautefeuille. 

La  Cardonniere, 

La  Mark, 

Geulis, 

Le  Conte  de  Sault, 

Le  C.  de  Rese. 

^" 

Biigadiers  of  Foot. 

Roquemord, 

^fousty. 

Douglas. 

Stopps. 

Le  premier. 

Reveillon. 

Villery. 

Gusse, 

Puisieux, 

Monbron. 

Erlorch, 
Bri/iadiers  of  Horse. 

Pierre  fitte. 

Forbins. 

Chaseron. 

Lancon. 

L'Ambet, 

La  T^ou^^se, 

S'  Clair, 

Benuverte. 

-Montelast. 

Cathenx. 

Reuty. 

Tilladet, 

Sourdis, 

Ghev^'  d'Humiere. 

La  Feninoe, 

Pittois, 

We  hear  this  morning  that  the.  Duke  de  Navailles  has 
summoned  Grey  to  a  surrender,  or  else  he  threatens  the  taking  it 
by  assault.'  The  Conte  de  Connismarke  is  gone  away  towards 
the  Franeh  Comte  to  joyne  him  with  five  th''  ■  men.  We  are 
impatient  till  our  letters  come  from  England,  these  people  giving 


The  siege  of  Gray  took  plnee  on  either  February  27  or  28. 


290  TIIK    l)RSI'ATCHi:.s    OF 

us  a  iiiiiitnii'ii;  niine  upon  a  surmise  they  have  of  our  coucluJing  a 
J'cac'f  with  tin-  Dutch  with  the  excluding  of  France.' 


To  Lor/}  Arlin<jton. 

Paris:  March  .5th,  74. 

Inclosed  1  send  you  two  uew  Edicts,  &  when  the  rest  are 
printed,  y""  Ex''"  shall  have  them.^  One  has  a  preamble  very  well 
wortli  y''  reading,  not  quite  of  the  same  tenure  as  the  declaration  of 
warre.  There  is  an  embargo  sent  that  no  French  ships  goe  out  of 
the  port — for  two  reasons :  a  maine  one,  that  they  fall  not  in  the 
hands  of  the  enemy,  &  the  other,  that  they  may  have  men  to  sett 
out  many  privateers.  'J'he  ^larq'd'Anjeau  has  had  some  coui-riers 
sent  to  call  him  home  againe  iV  not  to  pursue  his  designe  of  lighting 
the  Earl  of  Peterborow.  Tlie  story  is  severally  represented,  but 
the  truth  is  to  this  effect,  that  the  Marq'  sent  to  the  Earl  to 
demand  the  remainder  of  what  he  won  of  him  at  plaj^,  I  think  the 
value  of  four  thousand  pound,  &  had  for  answer  that  he  was  sorry 
he  had  paid  him  any  at  all,  but  if  he  would  expect  the  rest  he 
must  demand  it  at  the  point  of  his  sword.  This  making  a  great 
noyse,  the  Marq'  was  obliged,  in  point  of  honour  (contrary  to  his 
maxim.s  of  selfe  preservation)  to  goe  for  England,  but  withall  made 
such  a  noyse  of  it,  that  everybody  here  knew  it  as  .soon  as  he  went. 

It  is  sayd  here  that  y''  Ex''"  is  going  Amb"'  to  the  Emperour,  & 
that  my  L"*  Amb''  Jenkins  ''  is  designed  for  Holland  as  such,  but  you 
know  that  better  than  wee. 

To  Lord  ArUnrifon. 

Paris  :  March  7th,  '74. 

The  Court  hath  been  taken  up  these  days  past  with  the  afl'airs 
of  the  Franche  Comt6,  the  Duke  de  Navailles  having  sent  the  Cap- 
taine  of  his  Guards  expressly  to  the  King  with  an  account  of  the 
taking  of  Grey  after  three  da3's'  siege.  The  conditions  were,  that 
the  Sidi'se  in  the  place  might  retiirne  to  their  countrey,  &  the 
remaining  part  of  the  garrison  to  march  out  without  armes,  it  being 

'  The  English  Parliament  had  been  urging  Charles  to  treat  with  the  Dutch 
for  terms  of  peace.  Sir  'W"  Lockhart  was  despatched  to  France  to  assure  Louis 
of  the  friendship  of  England.  In  the  meantime,  England  had  concluded  a  separate 
treaty  with  the  Dutch  (Mignet,  iv.  2()7). 

-■  The  enclosure  is  missing.  '  See  footnote  1,  p.  248. 


AN    ENGLISH    A(;ENT    IN    PARTS  201 

only  ^Jermitted  to  Coll:  ^Massietti,  tLe  Governour,  to  be  mounted,  who 
was  to  passe  his  word  not  to  serve  the  Spanniard.s  for  sis  months' 
space.  Tliere  was  not  one  peice  of  canon  in  the  place,  but  great 
quantities  of  provisions.  They  will  goe  next  towards  Salines  & 
Bezanfon  ;  some  say  the  King  thinks  of  going  that  way  about  the 
beginning  of  Aprill  to  favorise  the  conquest  of  that  province  before 
the  Campagne  begin. 

M""  de  Eochofort  has  taken  a  place  belonging  to  the  Prince 
Palatin  called  IVrmersin,  of  which  that  Elector  has  sent  to  com- 
plain to  the  Emp''  &  to  desire  his  succour.  The  French  are 
much  concerned  at  the  Treaty  lately  made  between  him  &  the 
Emp"",^  notwithstanding  the  alliances  he  had  made  with  France, 
^ladame  d'Anjeau  -  is  much  in  paine  for  her  husband,  not  having  as 
yet  any  news  from  him. 

The  Conte  de  Schomberg  is  come  to  towne  in  order  to  liis 
yet  going  to  his  command  in  Roussillon. 

2'rt  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris  :  Novemfe  10th,  '74,  S.N. 

We  have  no  fresh  news  fi-om  il''  de  Turenne's  army  other  than 
what  y'"  Hon''  will  find  more  at  large  in  the  print.  It  is  confirmed 
thence  that  both  parties  think  of  putting  themselves  into  winter- 
quarters  and  that  the  Brandenburgers  will  returne  to  secure  their 
concernes  at  home,  if  it  be  true,  as  is  given  out,  that  the  Sweeds  doe 
really  march,  w<^''  makes  me  the  rather  believe  it  is  the  C.  de 
Koningsmarck's  taking  leave  here,  in  order  to  the  repairing  to  his 
master's  army,  where  he  is  to  command  as  Lieuf'-Generall. 

On  Munday  the  judges  met  at  the  Arsenal,  w'^'"  day  was  spent  in 
contiuuing  conveniences,  as  was  the  next  in  the  opening  the  commis- 
sion &  taking  their  places  accordingly.  The  next  they  proceeded  in 
the  examinations,  w'''  consisted  into  92  interrogatories,  to  w""  he 
hath  made  a  very  ingenious  confession,  soe  that  in  a  day  or  two 
they  will  proceed  to  his  sentence  ;  ^  about  fourty  more  are  tryed  at  the 

'  This  treaty  was  made  in  Fehruary  1674  between  Spain,  the  Emperor,  the 
Elector  Palatin,  the  Bishop  of  Munster,  and  the  Elector  of  Cologne,  by  which 
each  of  the  Powers  withdrew  help  from  France. 

-  Franfoise  Morin,  Marquise  de  Dangeau. 

'  This  refers  to  the  trial  of  the  Chevalier  de  Eohan,  See  p.  303  for  particu- 
lars of  the  conspiracy. 


292  THE    DESPATCHES    OK 

siiinc  time,  besides  some  bakers  who  would  have  poisoned  tlie 
ammunition  bread  in  the  P '' of  Conde's  Army.  ,\11  Eiis^lisli  letters 
are  wanting  to  us;  as  for  M'"  S'  Michel,  wlio  came  hither  about  the 
privateer  concerne,  he  is.  in  a  manner,  escaped  hence  with  all  hast, 
before  the  Order  of  Councell  could  be  served  on  him,  it  I  suppose 
returns  in  state  on  the  yacht  that  brought  him. 

To  Sir  Joseph   WiUinmsnn. 

Paris :  Novemb  14,  74,  S.N. 

Being  going  to  S'  Germains  I  have  only  time  to  cover  the 
inclosed  '  &  to  tell  j'our  Hon"'  that  we  have  no  considerable  news  from 
M''de  Turenne,  only  that  the  body  of  M''  de  Crussol's  son  had  been 
sent  to  him  embalmed.  It  seems  that  being  made  prisoner  &  two 
captains  in  dispute  whose  he  should  bee,  the  one  of  them  kill'd  the 
poor  gentleman,  that  neither  might  have  any  profit  of  him.  We 
hear  also  that  i)arte  of  the  (i.rrirre  Ikih  of  Anjou  has  been  surprised 
in  the  night  time  with  their  chief,  ^[^  de  Sablay,-'  about  lo  being 
slayue  for  resisting,  and  near  300  servants  are  stripped  &  soe  turned 
loose.  Orders  are  sent  to  Marseilles  for  the  arming  of  12  more 
ships  for  the  Messina  succour,  and  at  Court  here,  they  demand  more 
deputys  from  thence,  to  remaine  here  as  hostages  for  the  French 
who  are  already  among  them. 

The  King  is  erecting  a  '  Chambre  de  Comptes  "  at  !Montauban 
w'"''  will  be  worth  above  three  millions  to  him. 

Recruits  are  sending  to  M''  de  Schomberg's  army,  tt  \'an 
Troniji.  we  hear,  has  landed  the  Span"' he  had  on  board,  pretending 
his  having  orders  to  returne  home  with  all  expedition. 

To  Sir  Jniieph    Williamaon. 

Paris  :  Novemb  17th,  '74. 
I  have  little  to  add  to  the  inclosed  •''  paper  but  what  our  letters 
from  Hayonne  of  the  Sth  advise,  that  by  a  courriei-  from  ^ladrid,  of 
the  Itli,  they  learn  the  plate  fleets  being  arrived  in  Spain,  consist- 
ing of  16  ships  laden  with  14  millions  of  silver  and  two  millions  of 
gold.     The  Prince  of  Conde  is  gone  for  Chantilly  to  passe  a  few 

■'  The  enclosure  is  missing. 

-  See  llhtoire  dc  Louvoi.i,  par  Caniiilo  Uoussct,  t.  ii.  p.  99. 
'  The  cnclosuve  is  missing. 


AX    ENULISe    AGENT    IX    PAKIS  293 

clays  with  some  heavx  esp-lts  he  has  taken  with  him.  Mons"'  de 
Crequi  is  going  towards  Maestricht  to  command  a  body  w'^''  is 
assembling  thereabouts  upon  advise  of  the  enemy's  doeing  the  like. 
The  processe  of  the  Chev"'  de  Eohan  ^  goes  on  very  slowlj',  though 
some  say  it  will  [be]  ended  with  the  next  week.  It  is  confidently 
sayd  that  the  Sweeds  are  marching  towards  Berlin,  although,  on  the 
other  side,  they  were  not  to  declare  themselves  till  the  20th  of  this 
month. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamso7i. 

Paris  :  Novemb  21,  '74. 

I  have  your  Hon''^  of  the  2''  to  acknowledge  with  my  humble 
thanks.  The  discourse  of  this  place  toucheth  much  upon  some 
little  disorders  in  Angoumais  by  reason  of  a  new  tax  on  wines,  w'^'' 
the  poor  people  refused  rather  for  want  of  money  than  the  will, 
il""  Bertillac-  who  received  &  paid  en  chef  all  the  money  of  the 
espargne,  [is]  to  be  reconipenced  with  two  hundred  thous"*  crowns  tSc 
laid  aside,  that  his  charge  may  bee  executed  by  three  Tresoriers, 
who  shall  pay  downe  a  million  each  for  their  places.  My  L'' 
Douglas,  my  L''  Duras,  &  S''  Geo  Hamilton  are  here,  &  many  other 
officers. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Willia/mson. 

Paris  :  NovemB  24th,  '74,  S.N. 

Your  Hon'"  will  find  that,  after  all  the  storys  of  the  Sweeds 
entring  into  Pomerania,  they  were  only  pretexts  made  here  to 
amuse,  since,  as  yet,  their  army  doth  not  move,  neither  in  all  likely- 
hood  will  it  engage  in  hast. 

I  hear  that  the  French  are  employing  all  the  interest  they  have 
in  Rome  to  get  a  cap  for  P'^'^  W™  of  Furstenburg,  and  the  Pope's 
Nuiitio  hath  offered  his  master's  mediation  for  an  accomodation, 
adding  this  compliment,  that  his  H^'*'  hoped  as  the  King  is  fils 
aisne  de  Vkjlise,  he  would  use  his  utmost  endeavours  to  give  peace 
and  repose  to  Xtendome. 

To  Sir  Joseph    Williamso7i. 

Paris  :  Novemb  28,  '74,  S.N. 
Notwithstanding  all  ye    delays  &  hopes    in    ye    Chevalier  de 
Rohan's  processe,  the  judges  came  two  days  since  to  a  conclusion, 

Louis  de  Eohan,  youngest  son  of  Louis,  Prince  de  Guemen^. 
-  Etienne  Jehannot  de  Eartillat,  treasurer  of  the  '  Epargne.' 


294  THE  i)i>;i'AT(iii>  ov 

w"""  they  sent  to  ye  King,  wlio  inoilerated  ye  sentence  from  ye 
beeing  drawne  to  peecesby  horses  to  that  of  belieading  of  him  ;  so 
that  accordingly,  yesterday  all  the  burgers  in  ye  fauxbuiuj  S' 
Antoine  wei'e  couiiuauded  to  keepe  home,  all  the  streets  there- 
about were  chained,  and  ye  Moiisquetaireis  du  Roij  with  some 
troops  of  ye  'Gards  du  Corps"  were  sett  to  attend  at  ye  execution. 
Hee  was  beheaded  about  tbure  in  ye  afternoon ;  all  his  relations  & 
a  greate  number  of  other  persons  of  quality  retir'd  out  of  this 
citty,  not  to  bee  here  at  ye  execution. 

Madame  Villers,'  liis  contideut,  was  also  putt  to  death,  together 
with  a  uepheu-  ofTruaumont  '  (who  was  kill'd  at  j-e  first  discovery 
of  ye  plot  at  Rouen,  and  was  ye  Chevalier's  chief  engine  in  it),  &  a 
scoole-master  '  (who  menaged  ye  correspondanoe  for  him  and  tooke 
care  of  ye  bills  of  exchange)  was  hang'd.  There  are  many  other 
prisoner.^  thought  to  bee  concern'd  therein,  who  are  to  remaine  such 
till  information  bee  made  against  them,  beside  whom  there  are 
four  more,  who  will  bee  executed  in  a  day  or  two.  1  am  told  by 
one  y'  saw  ye  sentence,  that  it  beareth  leze  Majestc  in  the  endea- 
vouring a  revolt  iu  Normandj^,  h  the  giving  a  certaine  part 
there  to  the  Hollanders.  It  is  said  that  Mad'  Villers  had  open 
dissuaded  him  from  it,  and  treated  him  in  fol  &  ruUcule,  butt 
finding  him  peremptory  did  then  not  only  conceale  the  designe 
butt  assist  him  in  it.  What  further  particulars  shall  come  to  my 
knowledge  as  to  this  business  shall  goe  in  a  paper  apart  herewith.'^ 

As  to  ye  Sweeds,  I  am  infornrd  that  M"'  de  Viti-y ''  payd  to  INI'' 
WrangeH  by  ye  means  of  one  James  JMartin,  a  hanqnier  at  Haui- 
bourg,  one  hundred  thousand  crowns  on  ye  16th  of  this  month,  & 
y'  they  ought  to  march  on  ye  22"' ;  however  wee  have  much  adoe 
to  believe  they  will  bee  so  diligent,  and  make  so  suddain  a  dis- 

'  Aime  de  Huriiii  had  murried  the  Marquis  de  Malorty  de  Villars  for  tier 
second  husband.  She  was  at  the  time  of  this  conspiracy  a  widow,  and  was 
presumably  the  mistress  of  De  Kohau. 

-'  The  Chevalier  de  Prc5aux. 

'  Sieur  Gilles  du  Hamel  de  la  Tr^aumont,  formerly  an  officer  in  the  French 
anay.     He  was  the  son  of  an  auditor  of  the  '  Chambre  des  Comptes '  of  Kouen. 

'  Van  den  Enden,  a  Dutch  schoolmaster,  who  had  left  Holland  on  account  of 
the  persecution,  and  had  established  himself  at  Picpus,  near  Paris. 

■■■  See  Archives  de  la  Bastille,  par  F.  Kavaisson,  vol.  vii. 

'■  I'ranvois  Marie  de  I'Hopital,  Marquis,  later  Due  de  Vitry. 

'  Charles  Gustave,  Comte  de  Wrangel. 


AN    ENGLISH    ACCENT    IN    PARIS  295 

patch,  in  that  ye  consequences  may  concern  them  much  if  a  Peace 
does  not  intervene.  The  discourse  here  is  that  Liege  is  like  to 
bee  ye  place  for  ye  Treaty,  Aix-la-Chapelle  beeiug  d  decmoverte,  & 
all  other  places  excepting  Hambourg  to  bee  excepted  against. 
The  French  are  soaiew'  concerned  at  the  news  of  the  Imp"  forces 
having  gotten  into  Dinant  upon  capitulation  &  the  French  gar- 
rison being  marched  out.  I  hear  those  Germans  intend  to  besiege 
Rochefort  &  soe  march  up  towards  Bouillon. 

I  am  informed  from  Engla'  of  a  certain  person's  solliciting  for 
an  emploj'm'  in  France  &  to  have  halfe  my  allow'^'^  deducted  for 
him,  &  that  Madame  de  Portsmouth  '  is  his  patronesse,  &  I  can 
suspect  nobody  but  il''  Petit,  &  therefore  humbly  beg  y""  honour's 
favour  in  case  such  a  disgrace  should  be  intended  mee  after  the  ser- 
vice of  aprentizeship  w'^ '  I  have  made  here,  as  to  stand  my  friend 
&  oppose  soe  great  a  mortification. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Willimnson. 

Paris  :  Novemb  28,  '74. 
The  Chevalier  de  Eohan,  haveing  been  several  times  examin'd, 
&  ye  procez  fait  &  parfait,  was  conderan'd  on  ilunday  in  3-e  even- 
ing, at  five  of  ye  clock,  to  have  his  head  cutt  ofi",  and  the  same 
arrest  (w"^""  was  imtnediately  sent  to  Court  by  a  mousquetaire) 
condemn'd  the  Chevalier  de  Preaus  &  Madame  de  Villers  to  have 
ye  like  punishment,  as  was  ye  scoolemaster  Vandenenden  to  bee 
hang'd  after  ye  applying  to  ye  question.  At  9  o'clock  y'^  night 
they  brought  ye  Chevalier  de  Eohan  his  supper  cutt  into  peeces, 
w*^''  made  him  suspect  some  ill  weather  near,  in  that  they  would 
not  trust  him  with  a  knife  as  formei-ly ;  at  midnight  ye  Pere 
Bourdalour  ■^  went  to  him  &  told  him  his  doom,  confess'd  him.  & 
sayd  ■  masse,'  at  w'^'^  ye  others  also  assisted  in  ye  Chappell  of  ye 
Bastille,  where  ye  sentence  was  read  &  contaiud  '  pour  des 
crimes  de  leze  Majeste  en  second  chef,'  they  beeing  contre  Vestal, 
and  not  the  King's  own  persomi.  Wile  ye  Chevalier  was  discoursing 
between  ye  two  fathers,  Madame  de  Villers,  having  nobody  to 
comfort  her,  said :  '  M''  de  Rohan,  Monsieur,  je  vous  prie  de  me 
douner  un  de  vos  peres,''w'^''  hee  did  accordingly.  The  Chevalier 
de  Rohan  trembled  at  his  mounting  ye  scafibld  and  seem'd  to  have 

'  See  p.  Ill,  n.  2. 

-  The  famous  Jesuit  preacher. 


296  THE    DESPATCHES   OK 

little  resolution ;  the  bourreau  saluted  him  with  his  hatt  ami  ask'd 
his  forgiveness  as  by  order  of  justice,  w'^''  hee  gave  him,  &  so 
kneel'd  down  and  was  executed  ;  his  body  was  carried  away  into 
ye  Baslille  by  four  of  its  guards  ;  Mad  \'illers  kiss'd  ye  block  and 
seem'd  to  bee  very  uu[con]cern'd,  as  was  also  ye  Chevalier  de  1  'reaux 
very  free  in  his  comportment  on  ye  scaffold.  As  for  the  other 
prisonners,  I  hear  they  will  hardly  suHer  death,  butt  bee  banish 'd 
some  and  confin'd  others.  Their  names  are  W'  de  Crequy, 
yourdeval,  de  Canulay.  d'Aigremout,'  &  Mad"'  de  MUers." 

Wee  heare  of  ye  Imperialists  beeiiig  gotten  into  Dinant  and  ye 
Frencii  garnisoii  marched  out  7UU  .-strong,  that  thence  ye  Germans 
intend  to  move  towards  Bouillon  &  attaque  Kochefort  in  their  way. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamso^i. 

Paris :  Decemb  1,  '74. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  get  those  declarations  y''  Hon""  desires, 
but  hope  to  have  them  for  the  next  Post. 

The  inclosed  paper  •'  is  very  particular  as  to  all  our  present  news, 
to  w"^''  I  can  only  add  that  M''  de  Valbel  is  gone  back  in  order  to 
the  embarquing  900  chosen  men  out  of  Schomberg's  Army  for 
Messina,  and  that  M''  de  Vivonne  has  sent  a  briske  message  to 
the  Genovese,  that  if  they  cause  not  the  Spannish  galleys  to  quit 
their  port,  that  he  will  endeavor  to  burne  them  in  it,  w*^''  is  bold 
enovigh  if  true. 

Some  relations  of  the  Chev''  de  Rohan  besought  the  King  the 
day  before  his  execution  that  he  would  imitate  his  grandfather, 
H[enrv]  the  Ith,  with  relation  to  W  Hiron,'  having  declared  that  if 
Biron  would  but  owne  the  fault  he  would  forgive  him  ;  alledging  that 
the  Chevalier  had  confessed  all  &  was  most  penitent  for  having 
oii'ended  his  ila'-^',  to  w"''  the  K^  replyed,  that  H.  the  4th  had  reason 
for  what  he  did  in  that  the  Birous  had  ever  sacrificed  their  lives 
for  him,  as  had  the  M"  exposed  himselfe  in  the  many  battles  he 
won,  but  that  the  Chev''  de  Rohan  had  been  far  from  designing  to 
serve  him,  with  w*^''  he  left  them  in  tears. 

'  The  Chevalier  d'Aigremout  had  fiequenlly  received  Madame  de  Villars  in 
his  chateau  of  Tournebut. 

'  See  Les  Archives  de  la  Bastille,  par  F.  Kaviiisson,  t.  iv.  p.  (iO.  itc. 

'  The  enclosure  is  missing. 

'  Charles  de  Gontaut  de  Biron.     Beheaded  in  lUO'i. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    I.\    PAIUS  297 

2'o  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Decemb  5th,  '74. 
The  inclosed  extracts  from  my  correspondent  at  Strasbourg 
will  give  your  Honour  a  perfect  account  of  ye  confederates,  w""''  1 
send  ye  rather  because  yesterday  the  greate  discourse  at  Court  was 
as  if  they  had  all  repass'd  ye  Khine.  On  ye  contrary,  their  affairs 
are  in  better  disposition,  &  ye  Due  of  Loraine  is  posted  in  his  own 
country  &  will  extreamly  incommode  ye  French  this  winter.  I 
saw  letters  yesterday  w'-"''  assur'd  us  that,  after  all,  ye  Sweeds  will 
come  to  action,  notwithstanding  their  Ambassadours  ascerting  ye 
contrary  at  ye  Hague.  Heere  is  a  proposition  of  a  match  between 
ye  Duke  of  Cadaval,^  the  favourite  in  Portugal,  &  ilad"'^  d'Elboeuf.^ 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  Decemb.  ye  12"',  1674. 

Our  English  letters  are  yet  wanting  to  us,  w"^''  troubles  us  ye 
more  in  y'  wee  cannot  divine  what  should  bee  ye  reason  of  it,  the 
weather  having  been  very  good.  Wee  are  as  much  in  pain  to  heai-e 
from  ^lonsieur  de  Turenne  in  y'  wee  doe  believe  hee  has  had  some 
encounter  with  ye  ennemy,  hee  having  march'd  towards  them  w"' 
a  body  of  ten  thousand  horse.  I  can't  as  yet  gett  those  old  arrests 
w''''  your  Honour  desires,  butt  am  promis'd  to  have  them  soon. 

The  Due  de  Soubize,'  who  is  Captaine  of  ye  gensdarmes  and  of 
ye  house  of  Rohan,  imagining  that  the  disgrace  of  ye  Chevalier 
beeiiig  putt  to  death  might  yett  extend  so  much  to  ye  dishonour 
of  his  famely  as  to  leave  an  evill  impression  of  it  in  his  Maj'^',  went 
to  ye  King  in  order  to  ye  resigning  up  his  commission,  w''^  this 
circumstance,  y'  hee  believ'd  his  Maj'^,  beeiug  so  highly  oftendend, 
might  suspect  lum  in  a  charge  so  near  his  person  ;  to  w'^''  ye  King 
replyd,  that  ye  Chevalier's  crime  was  personnal  &  his  person  had 
satisfyd  justice;  y'  hee  has  ye  same  good  inclinations  for  ye  famely 
as  before  this  misfortune  ;  that  hee  would  not  accept  off  ye  demis- 
sion of  his  charge,  butt,  on  ye  contrary,  conjur'd  him  to  think  him- 
self very  wellcome  at  Court,  &  moreover  told  him  y'  hee  gave 

'  Nimo  Alvares  Pereira  de  Mello,  Due  de  Cadaval.  He  married  Mademoiselle 
d'Armagnac  in  1679. 

^  Marie  Marguerite  Ignace  de  Lorraine,  '  dame  du  palais  '  of  Marie  Therese  of 
Austria. 

*  Francois  de  Eohan,  Prince  de  Soubise,  uncle  of  the  Chuvalier  de  Eohan. 


298  TUK  i)t:si'Ar(iiii.s  ok 

|)priiiissicm  t<>  liim  iV  all  his  fhniely  to  weave  mourninf^  for  him. 
Tlif  Kiiif^  lias  of  late,  lus  a  mark  of  esteeme  for  Mods'"  de  Schomberfr, 
(irilaiu'd  y-  his  soiiii  '  shall  have  ye  honour  de  I'enlrie  du  Louvre. 


To  Sir  Joaciih  Willuvmson. 

Paris  :  Deccnib  li).  '71. 

Since  ye  naming  off  the  place  for  a  treaty,  these  people  talke 
very  assuredly  of  a  Peace  for  w'"'  I  suppose  all  partys  wish.  The 
French,  as  to  money,  are  able  to  hold  o>it  yett  two  CamjMr/nes  very 
well,  according  to  what  Mons''  Colbert  has  lately  assured  his  Maj">'. 
butt  the  main  diHicnlty  is  ye  getting  men,  in  that  Jlons""  de 
Turene's  troops  are  quite  spoyl'd  by  ye  long  fatigues,  particularly 
ye  horse,  and  the  enneniy  will  in  all  appearance  bee  much  stronger 
ye  next  than  they  were  last  yeare.  For  ye  present,  a  great*  |jart 
of  ]\Ionsieur  de  Turene's  horse  are  on  their  way  to  refresh  them- 
selves in  France,  and  other  troops  w"''  were  in  Soissonnais  and  there- 
about are  marching  to  supply  their  places.  In  ye  meantime,  ye 
confederates  have  bloqued  up  Philisbourg  &  Brisac,  that  no  succour 
can  come  at  tliem.  Here  is  a  talk  as  if  ye  Bishop  of  Strasbourg 
had  shewed  ye  King  a  letter  from  ye  Duke  of  Loraine,  wherein  (in 
answer  to  one  liee  receiv'd  from  him,  inviting  3'^e  Duke  to  quitt 
ye  Imperial  party,  in  that  the  most  Xtian  King  had  some  good 
intention  for  him)  hee  tells  ye  Bp\)  that  were  hee  at  A'ieniia,  and 
himself  at  Paris,  they  might  both  bee  in  danger  of  their  lives. 
Others  say  it  was  ye  J'rince  de  Vaudemont,  who,  at  his  passing  by 
heere,  was  wished  to  write  to  his  father  how  kind  ye  French  would 
bee  to  him,  if  hee  would  relinquish  ye  party  hee  was  ingag'd  in. 

Heere  is  news  come  as  if  ye  Messinian  were  accomraoding  w"' 
ye  Spaniards,  being  reduc'd  to  very  greate  necessities,  &  this  is 
asserted  by  ye  Venetian  Ambassadour,  although  our  letters  from 
Toulon  ad\nse  that  ]\lons''  de  Vivonne  is  gone  to  sea  w"'  twelve 
ships,  in  order  to  ye  relieving  of  those  people. 

'J'o  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Decemb  ye  22"',  'li. 
llerewilh   yuur  lujnour   receives  an  extract  of  ye  last  advice 
wee  have  i'roin   Monsieur  de  Turene,  to  w"^""  ye  common  discr)ur.se 

'  Frederick,  later  Comte  de  Sohomberg. 


AN    ENtJLISH    AtiENT    IX    PAKIS  299 

yesterday  did  add,  y'  having  lost  7  or  800  men  on  ye  march  & 
about  as  many  defeated  by  a  party  of  ye  ennemy's  horse,  that, 
apprehending  hee  might  not  iinde  provisions,  and  consequently  his 
men  moulder  away,  hee  was  thinking  of  returning  towards  Nancy, 
butt  I  cannot  finde  any  ground  for  this  report,  it  so  believe  it 
came  only  upon  surmises,  considering  ye  late  ill-weather. 

This  Court  is  going  into  mourning  for  ye  Prince  Electoral 
of  Brandenboiirg,'  who  dyed  lately  at  StraslDourg.  My  lord  of 
Clarendon  dyed  at  Rouen  -  on  Tuesday  ;  my  lord  Cornbury  '  was  by 
him,  butt  his  second  soun  *  arriv'd  two  houres  too  late  w"'  ye 
physicians. 

I  hear  y'  the  money  consign'd  hence  to  Hambourg  for  ye  Sweed's 
payment  is  stopt  there  in  ye  banquiei-'^  hands  by  oi'der  from  hence, 
until]  they  shall  bee  better  satisfy 'd  as  to  ye  march  of  y'  army. 

The  mariage  between  ye  Comte  de  Saulx  &  Mad"  de  Retz ''  is 
now  at  last  fully  agreed  upon,  as  is  that  between  ye  Marquis  de 
iSeigneley  &  Mad"-  d'Alaigre  in  great  forwardness,  though  I  aui 
told  the  King  opposeth  it,  in  that  it  will  make  that  family  too 
great  by  reason  of  her  wealth.  The  Duke  de  Creqy "  is  disposing 
of  his  onely  daughter  ^  to  ye  Duke  of  Rohan.®  Heere  has  been  a 
report  these  days  past  of  ye  Queene  of  Polands  beeing  dead,^  so 
that  ye  phisicians  have  already  designed  a  match  between  y' 
King"^  &  ye  Queene  Dowager." 

To  iSir  Joseph  Willicmisoio. 

Paris  :  Jan.  2'',  '75. 

We  expect  every  hour  to  hear  of  a  battle ;  nay,  the  letters  from 
Chaalons  mention  that  there  has  been  one  [with]  so  great  losse  on 

'  Charles  Jimilius,  son  of  Frederick  William  the  Great,  Elector  of  Brandenburg. 

-  Edward  Hyde,  1st  Earl  of  Clarendon. 

'■'  Henry  Hyde,  who  succeeded  his  father  as  Earl  of  Clarendon. 

'  See  p.  7,  n.  6. 

'  Paule  Marguerite  Franijoise  de  Gondi. 

'  Charles  III.,  Due  de  Crequy,  brother  of  Marshal  Creijuy. 

'  Madeleine  de  Crequy.  This  marriage  did  not  take  place,  as  later  she  married 
the  Prince  de  Tarente. 

'  Louis  de  Piohan  Chabot,  Prince  de  L^on,  later  Due  deUohan. 

'  A  false  report,  as  Marie  Casimir  de  la  Grange,  wife  of  John  Sobieski,  did 
not  die  until  1716.  '»  John  Sobieski,  elected  king  in  1674. 

'■  The  Archduchess  Eleanora  of  Austria,  widow  of  Michael  Wisniowieski. 


300  TIIK    l)K.sr.VTCIlE!S    OK 

both  sides,  but  we  imist  expect  further  confirmation.  ^I'  de  Sdioiii- 
berg  is  gone  for  Perpigiion  to  hinder  the  Spaniards  from  i-enewing 
tlio  incursions  they  li;ivc  laloly  [niadt'.]  and  tlic  ("'  dc  Koningni ark's 
regiment  is  inarching  to  liis  assistance,  he  liiniself  staying  here, 
aft<'r  all  (he  discourse  of  his  going  to  comniaud  in  the  Sweed's 
army.  M''  de  ^'albel  is  sayled  witli  8  men  of  war  and  many  barks 
with  ])rovision  for  (he  reliefe  of  Jlessina,  w'"'  people  liave  declared, 
that  if  (hey  be  not  succour'd  before  New  "b'ear's  Day,  ihey  would  be 
I'orced  to  make  the  comjiosition  tliey  could. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Jan.  9'^  '75,  S.N. 

Of  late  wee  have  liad  such  uncertaine  advices  from  M"'  de 
Turene's  army,  that  wee  know  not  what  to  ]iasse  for  coiTent.  It  is 
now  about  1 2  days  since  a  rencontre  happned  at  a  certaine  passage, 
wherein  ye  Cons,  de  Briol '  was  wounded,  &  as  yett  it  will  not  bee 
own'd  that  any  courrier  is  conn^  with  any  particulars.  &  only 
yesterday  at  S'  Germains  a  letter  was  said  to  bee  wiitten  from  a 
C'lnniL^naire  des  vivreg  in  that  army  &  another  cMinnis^aire  at 
]jangres,  wherein  hee  said  they  had  taken  a  passage,  &  believ'd 
they  should  force  ye  confederates  to  repass  ye  Ehin ;  &  on  ye  other 
hand,  ye  inclosed  extract-  from  my  correspondent  at  Strasbourg  will 
infornie  y""  honour  what  their  opinion  is  on  ye  other  side.  In  ye 
meanetime  it  is  hourely  expected  that  news  will  come  of  a  battle. 

The  Duchesse  of  Vaujour  having  lately  sent  ye  King  the 
resignation  of  that  title,  hee  was  pleas'd  two  days  since  to  give  it 
to  her  daughter.  ]\Iad"'  de  Elois.''' 

On  Saturday  last  two  luinns  of  Lyons  were  carried  to  ye  prison, 
call'd  le  Fort  rEves(pie,  for  false  coining,  with  some  two  or  three 
complices. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris:  Janu.  l(i"',  '75,  S.N. 
I   dare   not  venture  upon   ye  entertaining  y''  honour  w"^  an 
account  of  ye  actions  in  Alsace,  because  ye  relation,  w*^^''  was  pro- 
inis'd  his  Ex''"',  went  by  ye  last  poast  to  !M'"  de  Canaples  ■*  without  our 

'  Gabriel,  Comte  de  Biiord.  -  The  enclosure  is  missing. 

'■'  Marie  Anne  dc  Bourbon,  daughter  of  Louis  XIV.  and  Madame  de  la  Valli^re. 

'  Franvois  de  Crequy,  Comte  de  Canaples. 


AN    ENGLISH    ACiEXT    I\    PARIS  301 

having  a  siglit  of  it,  &  nothing  will  come  out  in  print  till  a  gentle- 
man arrive  from  M""  de  Tureue  w"'  all  ye  circumstances.  The 
French  have  had  very  great  success  in  ye  relieving  of  Brisac,  ye 
making  so  many  prisoners,  &  ye  probability  of  obliging  ye  Germans 
to  repass  the  Rliiu,  because  they  will  bee  lianlly  able  to  subsist  in 
this  side  of  it ;  besides  those  of  Strasbourg  begin  to  declare  that 
uules  they  take  their  garrison  out  of  ye  forts  at  ye  ends  of  ye 
bridge,  they  will  not  admitt  them,  or  send  them  any  succoure.  In 
ye  meantime,  as  a  further  joy  to  this  Coui"t,  the  Bpp  of  Strasbourg 
&  ye  Sweed's  Amb'"  were  yesterday  at  S'  Grermains,  to  assure  the 
King  of  ye  Sweeds  having  enter'd  ye  Marche  of  Brandebourg,  and 
as  a  first  act  of  hostility,  taken  one  of  the  Electour's  own  castles, 
wherein  were  two  hundred  men. 

They  write  from  ^Marseilles  that  ^I''  de  Valbel  is  gotten  well  in 
Messiaa  w'''  provisions  for  ye  relieve  of  those  people,  &  that  ]\[ons'' 
de  Vivonne  would  bee  soon  there  to  take  upon  him  ye  title  of 
Viceroy.  Herew"'  y''  honour  receives  an  edit  about  ecclesiasticall 
alienations,  w'^''  will  bring  in  great  samms  to  the  '  Espargne,'  if  the 
■  discoveries  can  bee  well  made. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  Jan.  19,  '75. 

By  the  inclosed  print '  your  Hon''  will  find  how  that  '  Te  Deum  ' 
is  to  be  sung  this  day  for  the  last  advantages  the  French  have  had 
over  the  confederates,  wiiereof  you  will  find  the  particulars  in  the 
other  print  I  send  you.  so  that  I  will  leave  that  subject  to  come  to 
informe  your  Hon''  of  a  certain  businesse  which  hath  made  much 
noise  here,  and  in  all  probability  may  doe  more  in  England.  ^ly 
L'  Ambassadour  hath  written  at  large  to  M''  Cooke  the  naked  truth 
of  the  story,  to  every  article  whereof  we  can  all  be  very  modest 
witnesses.  His  Ex'^'=  would  not  have  published  this  aftaij-e,  or  given 
your  Hon"'  the  trouble  of  understanding  it,  if  he  thought  he  should 
not  have  bin  attacqued  from  the  Court  of  France  in  that  of  England. 
In  short,  I  will  presume  to  explaine  the  matter  to  you,  but  will 
refer  your  Hon''  to  the  letter  my  L'  writes  to  M''  Cooke,  which  he 
would  not  willingly  have  produced  unlesse  it  be  for  justification. 

About  three  weeks  ago,  our  Suisse  liappened  to  die.  and  att  the 
time  of  his  death  there  were  three  Ecclesiasticks  who  assisted  for 

'  The  enclosuie  is  missing. 


302  llll'.    I)K.SI"A1C'I1ES    OK 

his  consolation,  as  being  ol'tlip  romish  religion.  His  wife,  iinageiiing 
that  the  ceremony  of  the  Sacrament  (according  to  their  oinnion^ 
might  coTne  time  enough  before  his  i^'xpiring,  to  finish  the  cere- 
monies of  that  church,  being  advised  to  it  by  the  priests  who 
assisted,  sent  for  it.  In  the  meantime,  the  man  died  and  about  half 
an  houre  after,  F.  Barclay,  who  was  one  present  at  his  decease, 
returning  iiome,  met,  not  far  from  our  house,  the  ceremony,  whieh 
came  to  give  him  the  extreame  unction,  &  told  them  they  might 
i-eturne  becau.se  the  man  was  dead.  Tin.*  is  the  matter  of  fact  on 
our  side ;  on  the  other  hand  (as  it  may  probably  be  supposed)  the 
Archbishop  of  J'aris  hath  made  bitter  complaints  &  represented 
the  matter  very  falsely  at  Court,  in  so  much  that  his  E.V'  being 
there  on  Tuesday  last,  ]\1''  de  Pomponne  told  him  he  had  something 
to  say  to  him  from  the  King,  and  enlarged  how  much  his  lla'-^'" 
conscience  was  grieved,  in  that  a  subject  of  his  should  die  in  his 
Kx"  '^  house  without  the  ordinary  rites  of  the  Church  of  Hume 
being  admitted  to  be  performed  at  the  hour  of  his  death,  alledging. 
that  the  sacred  mistery  was  refused  entrance  at  our  gate,  to  which 
ray  L''  Ambassador  endeavour'd  to  disabuse  him  and  demonstrate 
the  falsehood  of  the  assertion.  But  the  Minister,  pushing  the  mattei- 
now  home,  told  him  that  the  King  was  resolved,  in  order  to  the 
putting  his  conscience  n  couvorte,  to  command  all  his  Koman 
Catholick  subjects  to  quitte  his  Exc''"'''  service;  to  prevent  which 
aH'ront  (though  much  to  his  inconvenience)  he  discharged  them  all 
yesterday,  i'^  in  a  day  or  two  intends  at  au  Audience  to  satisfie  his 
most  Christian  Majesty  as  to  the  plaiue  truth  of  all  [t]his  businesse, 
and  to  complain  a  little  as  to  his  hast  in  resolution  &  judgement  of 
him,  before  he  had  known  from  his  Ex^^'  what  was  the  meer  matter 
of  fact.  In  the  discourse  with  M"'  de  Pomponne,  he  was  pressed  to 
declare  whether  he  would  have  permitted  their  ceremonies  to  come 
into  his  house  or  would  sutler  it  for  the  future.  His  Ex'"'^ 
endeavour'd  to  evade  a  positive  reply,  but  found  himself  obliged  at 
last  to  declare  that  he  could  not  answer  such  a  demarche  in  the 
Court  of  England.  There  were  now  aggravating  circumstances  of 
heat  and  passion  expressed  by  that  ]\Iinister,  to  which  his  great 
/eale  &  devotion  exposed  him,  of  which  I  send  not  your  Hon''  the 
jiarriculars,  because  my  L''  Ambassadour  would  have  willinglj- 
sniother'd  thematter  for  theiro[w]ne  sakes  for  feareof  a  consequence, 
but  I  will  tell  you  one  which  is  notorious  enough.  He  desired  his 
Ex"",  or  rather  wished  him.  to  write  to  his  ISfa"^  of  England  to  know 


AN    ENGLISH    A(iENT    IN    PARIS  303 

his  pleasure  as  to  that  point  of  letting  their  Sacranient  come  into 
his  house  upon  the  like  occasion. 

By  the  next  post  I  will  send  your  Hon"'  a  faithfull  &  large 
relation  of  all  the  particulars  my  curiosity  could  collect  as  to  the 
Chevalier  de  Rohan's  conspiracy,  which  I  have  at  last  obtained  witli 
much  difficulty  from  a  person  who  assisted  att  his  proces. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUia7nson. 

Paris  :  Jan.  23'\  '7.5,  S.N. 

According  to  what  I  promised,  I  have  endeavourd  to  learne  all 
ye  particulars  of  ye  Chevalier  de  Rohan's  crime,  &  ye  traine  of  ye 
w'hole  conspiracy,  W'',  though  kept  very  secret,  I  am  informed  by 
one  who  assisted  at  bis  process  of  these  following  particulars  :  ' 

In  ye  month  of  Aprill  last  past,  ye  Traumont,  w^''  ye  participa- 
tion of  ye  Chevalier  de  Rohan,  wrote  a  letter  to  ye  C  de  Monterej-,'- 
witbout  beeing  signed  or  dated,  wherein  bee  intimated  y'  Nor- 
mandy was  very  much  dispos'd  to  a  revolt,  &  y'  if  bee  would  send 
a  fleet  w"^  6  thousand  men,  &  armes  for  tweutj"  thousand,  w"' 
necessaries  for  sieges  &  two  millions  of  livres,  that  there  was  a 
greate  man  who  would  engage  himself  upon  ye  assurance  of  thirty 
thousand  crownes  pension,  &  20,000  crowns  for  Truaumont.  This 
is  looked  on  as  a  coup  d'addresse  &  not  of  imprvidence,  persuading 
himself  that  his  name,  beeing  familiar  in  y'  countrey,  might  more 
easily  dispose  the  matter  favourable  to  his  designe,  &  to  ye  end  y' 
Monterey  might  bee  ye  rather  induc'd  to  second  this  enterprise, 
bee  obligd  himself  to  putt  Quillebccuf  &  another  maritime  towne 
into  his  possession,  &  w***  ye  succour  expected  to  master  all 
Normandy,  in  so  much  y*^  they  might  come  strait  to  Versailles 
without  passing  river  or  bridge.  Now,  whereas  his  letters  might 
bee  intercepted  &  discypher'd,  bee  desir'd  no  answer,  butt  only  y* 
in  case  ye  proposioh  were  approv'd  of,  it  might  bee  putt  to  3'e 
Gazette  v^  the  King  intended  to  make  two  Marshalls  of  France,  & 
y'  a  courrier  from  Madrid  was  arriv'd  at  Bruxelles.  Upon  this 
letter  meerly,  w'^''  was  not  signed,  ye  fleet  was  sent  to  appeare  upon 
y'  coast,  ye  same  w'^''  sailed  afterwards  for  ye  Mediterranean,  finding 
they  could  doe  little  upon  Normandy. 

'  See  Revue  Hebdornadairc,  December  1898  to  January  1899,  and  an  article  in 
the  AtliencEum,  February  4,  1899. 

-  Acting;  at  tliis  time  as  the  Spanish  Governor  in  Flanders. 


304  Tin-;  DEsrATcmos  ok 

In  ye  mcane  time,  as  soone  as  Le  Truaumoiit  saw  in  ye  Gazette 
tliose  2  articles  of  ye  ifarslialls  and  ye  conirier,  hee  went  from 
Paris  to  begin  ye  motions  in  Normandy. 

The  misfortune  of  these  unhappy  conspiratours  was  such  that, 
from  ye  month  of  April  till  y'  of  August,  they  could  not  touch  a 
farthing  of  money,  only  at  last  they  got  a  thousand  crowns,  whereof 
they  gave  as  many  /('//vs  to  Vandenenden,  whom  they  sent  1o 
Bruxelles  to  conclude  the  agreement  w"'  ^Monterey  ;  who,  complain- 
ing of  ye  delay  of  ye  executing  ye  designe,  was  soon  satisfy 'd  when 
ye  other  told  liini  they  exjjected  a  favouralile  conjoncture,  w*"''  was 
then  oft'er'd,  in  y'  ye  King  had  called  ye  ban  &  assemblies,  might 
bee  made  under  y'  pretext  without  ye  l^eeing  suspected. 

It  was  in  ye  month  of  May  y"  placards  were  plaister'd  in  \f 
Church  dores  at  Rouen,  and  other  notes  were  scatter'd  about  that 
citty,  inciting  ye  people  to  a  revolt,  w"^''  was  ye  reason  why  ye 
Sieur  J'elot,'  first  Piesident,  caused  a  strict  information  to  bee  made 
after  ye  authors  of  those  seditious  libelles.  Hee  perceived  y'  Truau- 
mont  was  a  bold,  desperate,  seditious,  undertaking  person,  &  known 
to  bee  such  since  ye  last  affaire  of  the  Sithofiers  ;  -  that  hee  came 
often  to  Rouen,  &  visited  much  all  parts  of  ye  province  ;  that  hee 
drew  manv  personns  in  and  debauched  many  of  ye  nobility  of  ye 
country  ;  &  ye  President,  observing  him  to  bee  allways  in  agitation, 
suspected  him  very  much.  &,  to  bee  ye  more  enlightened,  desir'd  one 
fif  his  intimate  friends,  a  per.sonn  of  greate  cunning,  to  insinuate 
himself  into  his  conversation  it  y'  of  ye  company  hee  frequented, 
to  ye  end  that,  at  ye  higth  of  y^e  debauch,  hee  might  exclaime 
against  ye  governement,  and  seem  to  bee  very  much  discontented, 
w'^^''  beeing  cunningly  perform'd  by  this  gentleman,  after  two  months' 
insinuation  he  gott  to  bee  much  confided  in  by  Trauniont.  However, 
hee  had  not,  as  then,  told  him  anything  of  his  plott ;  they  only  con- 
tented themselves  all  that  time  w"''  bewayling  ye  misfortunes  of 
Normandy,  till  one  night,  at  one  extraorfinary  debauch,  ye  gentle- 
man seemed  to  bee  more  extravagantly  enrag'd  than  ordinary  & 
rail'd  very  bitterly  against  ye  government,  whereupon  La  Truau- 
mont  broke  his  bulky  secrett,  &  said  y'  it  was  not  enough  to  bewayle 
ye  misery  but  y'  remedies  should  bee  thought  upon  for  ye  relief 
of  them.     Ye  gentleman  seeming  to  bee  of  ye   same  opinion.  Le 

I  Claude  Pellot. 

'-'  The  '  Conspiration  des  Va-nu-pie<l.^  '  in  1(;:W.  suppressed  by  the  chancellor 

Seguier. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  3U5 

Truaumout  further  explained  himself  y'  ye  Spaniards  and  Dutch 
held  out  their  armes  to  ye  Normands,  who,  upon  a  little  action  also, 
might  soon  shake  off  their  present  yoake.  Tlie  gentleman  then 
reply'd,  y'  for  an  affaire  of  y'  importance,  there  must  [be]  some 
greate  man  to  head  them,  and  hee  knew  of  none  fitt  for  ye  piurpose. 

'Twas  there  y'  Truauraont  was  catcht  in  ye  toiles  spread  for 
him  and  named  ye  Chevalier  de  Rohann,  butt  ye  gentleman  alledg- 
ing  that  hee  was  not  man  of  brains  to  carry  on  ye  great  work, 
Truaumont  answered  y'  fooU  allways  broke  ye  ice  for  such  wise 
men  as  himself  and  companions  for  ye  fui^ther  conduct  of  ye  affaire 
without  any  hesitation.  Aftei'  this  discourse,  they  parted,  and  imme- 
diately the  gentleman  repair'd  to  ye  President  about  midnight,  and 
opened  all  ye  matter  to  him,  wherin  [he]  ye  instant  tooke  poastand 
came  to  Versailles,  where  hee  discoursed  to  ye  King  all  ye  con- 
spiracy ;  the  next  night  hee  returned  back  to  Rouen,  with  ye  same 
precautions  hee  used  at  his  comming.  The  King,  beeing  thus 
inform'd  of  ye  treason,  gave  order  to  the  Sieur  Dayen,  Captain  of 
ye  Gardes  (hi  Coriis,  to  cause  ye  Sieur  Brisac  to  seize  on  ye  Cheva- 
lier de  Rohan  at  his  comming  from  masse,  w"^"*  was  done  accord- 
ingly. Hee  was  brought  into  y'  officer's  chamber,  where  hee  ask'd 
to  eate,  &  victualls  was  brought  him,  butt  not  without  asking  ye 
King's  permission. 

After  dinner  hee  was  sent  in  a  coach  to  ye  Bastille,  whence,  as 
hee  came  out  to  bee  executed,  he  seem'd  to  bee  half  dead  ;  his 
lipps  were  blew,  his  face  pale  &  disfigur'd,  like  a  dead  visage ;  hee 
leaned  upon  the  armes  of  ye  Pere  Bourdalour,  beeing  scarce  able  to 
walke.  though  hee  endeavour'd  all  hee  could  to  struggle  w"'  his 
weakeness.  I  have  already  written  all  that  past  at  his  execution, 
butt  have  since  learn 'd  more  matter  worthy  your  knowledge, 
relating  to  this  affaire.  That  day,  hee  tooke  ye  sacrament  at  one 
in  ye  morning,  that  father  having  obtained  permission  for  it  from 
ye  Archbup,  w"^''  has  not  been  approv'd  at  by  ye  Doctour's  of 
Sorbonne.  Two  houres  before  hee  dy'd  hee  wrote  to  Madame  de 
Guimene,'  his  mother,  and  then  it  was  thought  hee  might  be 
reprieved,  it  beeing  observ'd,  that  whilst  hee  wrote,  nobody  came 
over  ye  drawbridge  without  his  inquiring  who  it  was  that  came  in. 
His  body  was  not  buried  at  S'  Paule,  as  was  given  out,  butt  his 
mother   caus'd    a  hired  mourning  coach  to  attend  at  ye  Bastille 

'    Anne  tie  Eohan,  i'lincosse  de  Gii6incm''. 


306  THE    DKSPATCHES    OK 

door  at  7  in  ye  evening,  w'-'"'  carried  [liim]  to  bee  interred  in  some 
place  belonging  to  her. 

As  for  ye  Ciiovalier  de  Presiux,  escuyer  to  M''  de  Rohan,  &  ye 
Manjuise  de  Villars,  De  Preaux  was  look'd  upon  by  ye  judges  as 
a  very  rogue,  in  that,  thincking  to  save  himself,  ye  first  tiling  hee 
said  upon  ye  gellette  was,  y'  hee  intred  into  ye  afl'aire  only  to 
penetrate  into  ye  secret  of  his  unklo,  of  his  master,  and  that  of  his 
raistresse  too,  his  designe  beeing  to  discover  ye  whole  mysterie  to 
ye  King,  and  whereas  that  Marquesse  entertained  a  correspondence 
in  letters  w"'  him,  and  y^  shee  was  engag'd  in  their  unfortunate 
action  w*''  him,  three  lettere  were  found  in  ye  cabinet  of  Des 
Preaux,  w"''  were  ye  onely  proof  against  her.  One  of  them  re- 
marqued  that  hee  had  spoaken  to  a  certaine  cavalier,  who  had 
promised  25  good  well  armed  men  when  shee  should  demauud 
them  ;  a  second  was  much  of  ye  same  import,  and  ye  third  said 
thus  :  '  il  n'y  fit  jamais  meilleur,  et  si  Ton  envoie  dix  milles  hommes 
on  se  rendra  maistre  de  tout.'  After  ye  sentence  was  pronounced, 
shee  reproached  him  for  having  kejjt  her  letters,  for  w*^''  hee  then 
asked  her  pardon,  to  w"-''  she  reply'd  that  that  was  out  [of]  season,  and 
hee  ought  to  thinck  of  nothing  butt  how  to  dye  well.  ■  Now,  Sir, 
you  shall  observe  something  worth  of  notice  from  ye  discourse 
shee  had  with  the  personne  who  gave  mee  all  these  particulars. 
3  hours  before  her  execution,  this  person  ask'd  M.  de  Fenvelle,  who 
commaunded  in  ye  Bastille,  and  of  M''*  de  Berons  '  &  de  Pomme- 
reiiil,'  commissioners,  leave  to  speake  w"'  this  lady  in  ye  presence 
of  a  (jreljier,^  w*^''  being  graunted  him,  hee  sent  to  her  that  shee  was 
desired  to  bee  spoaken  with  by  a  person  from  ye  Marquis  de  Brey, 
her  brother ;  immediately  shee  thought  it  was  her  cozen,  M''  de 
Sarran,  who  desired  to  see  her,  so  y'  shee  gave  answer  how  shee 
wanted  firmitj-  &  courage  rather  than  ye  beeing  expos'd  to  render 
natm-e  weakness,  and  therefore  desired  him  to  retire,  w*^''  beeing 
told  this  gentleman,  hee  sent  his  name  &  had  ye  leave  to  see  her. 
As  soone  as  hee  was  come  into  ye  Chappelle  where  shee  sate  by  ye 
fire  &  her  confessour,  shee  rose  up,  and  receiv'd  him  w"'  much 
civilit}-,  as  if  shee  had  been  visited  by  him  in  her  owne  chamber. 
Ilee  immediatly  condol'd  ye  seeing  her  in  y'  place  upon  such  a 
sad  occasion,  and  told  her  how  sorrowful!  her  brother  was  for  her 
misfortune  &  how  hee  had  been  at  ye  King's  feet  to  begg  some 

'  See  p.  141,  n  3.  -  Auguste  Eobert,  Chevalier  de  Poniereu. 

•'  Sieur  le  Mazier. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  307 

mercy  for  her,  &  y'  his  ]Maj'y  had  reply 'd,  y'  it  was  not  in  his 
power,  butt  y'  hee  would  concede  to  him  ye  confiscation  of  her 
goods  &  estate,  to  w'^''  shee  reply "d  :  '  I  am  very  glad  to  heare  y'  my 
brother  shall  have  my  estate,  &  believe  hee  will  not  bee  unkind  to 
my  children ;  I  had  rather  hee  should  have  it  than  lett  it  bee 
divided  amongst  y™,  to  prevent  their  going  to  law.'  Butt  as  to  ye 
pardon  hee  had  ask'd  of  ye  King,  shee  said  y'  the  King,  beeing  ye 
master,  hee  could  grant  it  to  whom  hee  pleased.  This  personne  then 
shewed  a  memoire  of  her  domestik  affaires,  to  each  article  whereof 
shee  spoake  very  pertinently,  w"^  much  presence  of  witt  &  discre- 
tion, w'^''  being  putt  in  writing  shee  signed  in  presence  of  ye 
(jreffier,  w'^''  done,  shee  sayd  shee  desii'ed  3  or  4  things  of  her 
brother : — ye  first  y'  hee  would  have  God  to  bee  pray'd  for  her 
soule ;  that  hee  would  retaine  an  affectionate  remembrance  of  her ; 
that  hee  would  take  care  y'  her  body  might  not  bee  left  in  ye 
streets ;  y'  hee  would  pay  30  pistoles  to  ye  receiver  of  ye  clergj-, 
w"^''  shee  owed  him  ;  y'  hee  would  give  her  maide  y*  served  her  in 
prison  not  onely  her  vestiments  shee  had  with  her  butt  all  her 
other  garments  in  her  house.  This  said,  shee  turned  to  M''  de  Mazier, 
&  told  him  y'  shee  would  keepe  no  burthen  upon  her  conscience, 
butt  avowed  y'  since  ye  month  of  ilay  last,  shee  had  communicated 
the  affaire  to  a  gentleman  whom  shee  named,  who  was  engaged  to 
send  her  a  troop  of  horse  whenever  shee  should  desire  it.  Where- 
upon ye  greffier  drew  up  his  process  verhal,  w*^'^  she  signed.  It 
is  thought  that  her  confessour  oblig'd  her  to  make  y'  declaradh, 
after  w'^^,  those  personns  taking  leave  of  her,  [he]  said  hee  had  order 
to  take  care  of  her  body,  and  would  acquitt  himself  of  that  charge 
very  punctually.  This  persoun,  beeing  in  ye  Bastille  from  8  in  the 
morning  till  3  in  ye  aftemoone,  the  time  of  ye  execution,  hee  had 
ye  sight  &  heard  all  y'  passed.  A  little  befoie  ten  in  ye  morning, 
somebody  awaked  this  poore  lady  from  a  deepe  sleepe  &  told  her 
shee  was  expected  in  ye  Chappell,  w'^'',  together  w"'  her  woman's 
tears,  was  a  sad  presage  to  her  of  her  fatall  end.  Shee  called  for 
her  cloathes  without  any  signe  of  timidity  and  sayd  shee  perceived 
shee  must  resolve  to  dye.  Shee  caused  her  woman  to  retire,  least 
her  tears  might  intrude  upon  her  owne  resolution,  and  went  down 
with  an  assured  countenance,  to  ye  greate  surprise  of  everybody. 

As  soon  as  ye  sentence  was  pronounced  to  all  ye  criminalls,  ye 
Chevalier  de  Rohan  turned  to  her  &  sayd,  hee  believed  hee  had 
never  seen  her  before,  &  y'  the  Chevalier  de  Preaus  was  ye  cause 

X  2 


308  TIIK    hKSPATCIlES    OK 

of  their  mine,  butt,  however,  that  hee  pardoned  him ;  to  w'''  shee 
reply'd  that,  in  truth,  shee  had  never  seen  him,  and  tliat  sliee 
panlon'd  y'  Clievalier  also  on  lier  side,  who,  looking  upon  his 
mistresse,  &  bi'ing  sensible  of  ye  reproach,  could  not  forbeare  to 
make  a  deepe  sigh,  whereupon  shee  told  [him]  it  was  then  too  late 
to  bee  concerned  to  y'  degree,  and  y'  though  those  letters  cost  her 
her  life,  shee  thanked  God  who  had  ordain'd  her  end  and  given 
her  ye  grace  to  dj-e  in  ye  condition  shee  was  in  as  to  ye  prepara- 
tion, because,  before  having  lived  in  ye  noise  &  splendor  of  ye  world, 
shee  should  never  have  thought  of  comming  to  so  happy  an  end  ; 
after  which,  addressing  herself  to  those  who  were  to  bee  fellow 
sufferers,  shee  advised  them  to  putt  a  good  face  at  ye  time  of  their 
execution. 

At  her  going  out  of  ye  Bastille,  her  confessour  desir'd  her  to 
express  some  Christian  humility  as  shee  gott  up  into  ye  churette, 
w*"''  shee  did,  &  sayd  shee  would  willingly  doe  much  more  for  ye 
love  of  God.  Her  confessour  asked  this  onely  to  avoid  j'e  trouble 
shee  would  have  in  seeing  M'"  de  Rohan  dye,  who  ought  to  have 
been  executed  ye  last,  as  it  was  at  first  ordered,  butt  ye  P6re 
Bourdalour,  observing  in  what  a  pitifull  condition  he  was,  desired 
of  ye  Commissaries  that  hee  might  bee  ye  first  putt  to  death,  w"*" 
was  graunted. 

This  lady  ought  to  have  had  ye  compliment  of  precedence,  butt, 
by  a  choice,  dy'd  ye  last. 

The  hangman  having  found  ye  Chevalier  de  Preaux  next  his 
hands,  as  soone  as  shee  was  executed,  this  personn  caused  a  sheet 
to  bee  throwne  over  her,  and  so  putt  her  in  a  mourning  coach  ;  hee 
threw  2  pistolles  to  ye  executioner  &  some  crowns  to  his  servants 
to  prevent  her  beeing  stripped.  Shee  said  at  ye  time  of  her 
beeing  on  ye  scaffold  that  shee  dy'd  wrongfully,  as  is  usual  for 
people  after  condemnation.  Shee  was  daughter  to  a  Secretaire  du 
rtoij,  &  neece  to  M'"  Sarrau,  counsollour  in  Parliament.  The  day 
after  ye  execution,  the  K^  sent  to  compliment  ye  Princesse  of 
Guimene,  w'^''  shee  received  with  greate  effusion  of  tears  &  much 
respect  too. 

When  ye  King  heard  yo  recitall  of  his  death  hee  expressed 
much  concerne  for  him,  in  that  hee  sayd  hee  would  have  sooner 
pardoned  a  crime  against  his  owne  person  than  that  against  his 
people. 

See  here  ye  relation  of  this  unfortunate  storv,  vv'"''  I  thought 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT   IN    PARIS  309 

worthy  y   Hon''*  curiosity.     I  mention  not  the  manner  of  IM''  de 
Triiaumont's  death,  because  in  some  of  my  former  you  have  had  it.' 

To  Sir  Joseph  WilHamson. 

Paris  :  Jan.  30'\  '75,  S.N. 

I  humbly  returns  y''  Hon""  my  thanks  for  one  of  the  12th  w""'' 
came  yesterday  at  our  returne  from  S'  Germains,  where  his  Ex"" 
had  been  two  days  &  had  publick  Audiences  with  the  King,  Queen, 
&  ilonsieur  upon  her  Eoyall  H**"-''*  happy  delivei-y,-  who  testifyed  a 
great  deal  of  joy  &  wished  much  for  the  increase  of  that  illustrious 
family.  They  expected  M''  de  Tiirenne  yesterday,  but  I  believe  is 
hardly  yet  arrived.  He  will  be  received  with  great  kindnes  & 
demonstrations  of  satisfaction  for  his  having  so  miraculously  finished 
the  Gampagne.  The  discourse  is  at  Court  as  if  the  Suisse  would 
[help]  them  with  25  thousand  horses  (the  French  at  present  in 
great  want  of  them)  &  engage  to  warrant  the  Franche  Comte 
during  the  next  Cariijiaijne.  They  had  news  also  of  Spork's  retreat 
from  the  fi'ontiers  of  Champagne  upon  the  approach  of  M''  de 
Crequi.  As  to  y''  Hon'''*  queere  about  the  trade  between  the  French 
&  Dutch,  I  remember  in  a  former  I  acquainted  you  with  a  mutuall 
exchange  of  80  passeports  for  as  many  merchant  ships,  &  even  at 
present  there  are  some  Dutch  vessells  lading  of  wines  at  Bourdeaux, 
w"*"  is  all  I  know  between  them  as  to  trade.  The  King  is  think- 
ing to  augment  his  vieux  corps  with  20  companyes,  but  I  doe  not 
hear  that  any  commissions  are  really  issued  for  that  or  the  raising 
any  other  new  forces. 

My  JJ^  Amb'',  being  much  indisposed  by  a  shortnes  of  breath,  he 
cannot  acknowledge  a  letter  he  received  yesterday  from  y''  Honour, 
but  returnes  you  his  humble  thanks  for  y''  kind  opinion  of  him  as 
to  the  Suhse  affaire,  w"""  he  sent  the  relation  of  to  England  for  his 
justification  only  in  case  the  other  party  should  have  produced  any- 
thing of  that  nature  at  home  by  way  of  complaint  as  to  his  Ex"'"'** 
proceeding,  lieing  otherwise  not  willing,  as  of  inconvenience,  that 
much  noyse  should  be  made  of  it,  since  the  King  gave  him  as  good 
satisfaction  as  could  be  well  desired.  His  Ex""^  understands  also, 
at  the  same  time,  that  if  the  busines  had  come  to  further  debate  at 

'  The  last  part  of  this  letter  is  missing. 

^  On  the  birth  of  Philippe,  Due  cle  Chartres  and,  after  his  father's  death.  Due 
d'Orl^ans.    Born  August  1674. 


310  THE  ni;si'ATC'nE,s  oi' 

home  ill  England,  that  he  would  not  only  justify  what  he  had 
written,  but  had  more  to  say  than  he  would  willingly  have  brought 
upon  the  fajm,  unles  of  the  last  necessity.'   .   .   . 


To  (b'lV  Jose^ih  William-gon. 

Paris  :  Feb.  7,  '75. 

Inclosed  you  have  a  new  arrest  for  the  raising  of  money,  &  that 
y''  Hon'"  may  not  misse  any  that  have  been  published  these  5  or  G 
years,  I  have  given  order  to  have  a  collection  of  all  bound  up  in 
volumes,  w"^*"  shall  be  sent  you  as  soon  [as]  it  can  be  well  done. 
I  have  a  treatise  also  to  transmit  toy""  Honour,  intitled  '  la  defense 
du  droit  de  Marie  Ther6se  d'Austriche,  Heine  de  France,  il  la 
succession  des  couroniies  d'Espagne,  par  I'Archivesque  d'Ambrun,' 
if  I  tliought  you  had  it  not  before. 

I  believe  my  Ld  Amb"""  indisposition  will  not  give  him  leave  to 
write  to  y''  Hon"'  by  this  post,  soe  that  I  will  presume  to  acquaint 
you  how  his  Ex^'^  had  audience  of  the  M.  X.  King  on  Sunday 
morning,  to  propose  the  nomination  the  States-Generall  had  pro- 
jected of  ileurs  for  the  Congresse,  in  order  [to]  a  Treaty,  of  w'*'  place, 
notwith.standing  all  the  instances  &  arguments  his  Ex'*'  could  use 
proper  for  the  subject  matter,  he  could  not  induce  his  Ma'-^  to 
admit  or  allow  of  it,  he  alledging  that  Meurs  was  withing  the 
limits  of  the  Empire  &  that  lie  could  not  retreat  from  his  late 
manifesto.  Soe  that  y''  Hon''  perceives  that  how  much  soever  it 
may  be  desired  here,  the  Peace  is  shoved  at  least  a  month  back- 
ward ;  I  mean  the  very  steps  in  order  to  it.  When  we  were  at 
S'  Germains  we  saw  the  ceremony  of  the  Marq"  de  Seignelay's 
being  made  of  the  S'  Esprit,  iu  order  to  his  marriage  this  day  with 
Mad"^  d'Aligre.  He  is  soon  to  Ije  made  a  Duke  too.  Although 
the  French  had  politicke  [^ic]  published  how  ilessina  was  relieved, 
I  have  now  the  mortification  to  unsay  what  I  wrote  to  y''  Hon'" 
about  it  &  to  acquaint  you  that,  on  the  contrary,  they  are  in  a  gi'eat 
deal  of  pain  for  what  they  may  e.xpect  thence,  since  the  news  of 
the  Spaniards  having  taken  a  port  at  the  mouth  of  the  Port. 

I  have  not  time  at  present  to  send  y""  Hon'"  a  pretty  story  w"^*" 
hap])ued  out  to  a  Maintrede  Eequeste  the  last  week,  because,  in  being 
an  Amourette,  it  requires  a  large  relation  w"^''  you  shall  have  by  the 
next  Post. 

'  The  next  portion  of  this  latter  is  in  cipher. 


AN   ENGLISH    AGENT   IN   PARIS  311 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Feb.  9,  75,  S.X. 

As  I  begged  leave  of  your  Hon''  in  my  last,  I  presume  to  give 
you  an  account  of  what  happned  to  a  Maistre  des  Reipiestes  the  last 
week,  whose  name  I  mention  not  unles  I  could  doe  it  in  cypher,  & 
the  lady's  I  would  unwillingly  expose,  because  of  the  favour  she 
granted  him.  But  the  matter  of  fact  is  this  :  after  much  courtship  & 
prodigality  she  heard  his  request,  upon  condition  he  would  never 
frequent  a  certain  shee  quondam.  He  made  passionate  protesta- 
tions with  solemne  vows  that  he  would  never  see  much  as  see  her 
again.  But  see  the  frailty  of  humane  nature.  He  had  no  sooner  been 
autheyitique  with  this  newly  acquired  mistresse  but  returned  to  his 
first  acquaintance,  &  the  other,  admii-ing  at  his  coolnesse  in  the  not 
seeing  her  in  five  days,  employed  her  maid  servant  to  sift  out  after 
his  conduct  where  he  had  employed  his  time. 

This  engine,  in  a  disguise,  fastens  ten  crowns  upon  one  of  his 
footmen,  who  told  her  how  his  master  had  been  those  nights  with 
the  abjured  lady,  soe  that  imediately  the  abused  one  began  to 
think  upon  a  revenge,  &,  as  women's  thoughts  are  soon  ripe,  hers 
brought  forth  this :  she  fastued  30  pistolls  upon  2  braves  or 
ruffians,  &  knowing  the  usuall  hour  of  his  retreat  to  be  between  12 
&  one,  she  took  the  advantage  in  the  darke  to  have  a  lane  barra- 
cadoed  with  posts  (as  if  some  person  of  quality  were  sick),  w*^''  he 
must  of  necessity  passe  to  get  to  his  house,  &  soe,  being  forced  to 
walke  afoot,  she  met  him  in  her  coach,  &  both  wondring  at  the 
rencontre  soe  late,  she  asked  him  the  reason  of  his  being  afoot ;  he 
told  [her]  the  passage  was  barred  up  upon  some  sick  account,  where- 
upon she  sayd  her  coach  should  convey  him  home,  it  being  some 
distance  there.  When  he  came  to  the  door,  he  made  his  excuse 
that  his  great  busines  &  proces  at  the  Palais  had  hindred  him  from 
wayting  upon  her,  &  desired  that,  by  reason  of  the  danger  in  the 
streets,  he  might  accompany  her  home,  w'^''  she  accepted  of  after 
some  seeming  refusalls,  &  as  they  passed  the  Pont  Xeuf  she  began  to 
cry  out,  as  if  a  person  in  her  coach  would  have  insulted  or  ravished 
her,  at  the  place  where  she  before  appointed  her  bravoes  to  post 
themselves,  who  coming  to  the  coach,  she  desired  them  to  pull  that 
man  out  of  it,  w'^''  they  did,  &  tore  all  his  cloaths  off,  &  with  two 
postilion  whips  scurged  him  soe  severely  that  the  executioners 
themselves  cryed,  '  Jesu,  Maria,  u'est-ce  pas  encore  assez,  Madame  ? ' 


312  TIIK   DESPATCHES   01' 

But  she  made  them  continue  to  that  degree  that  he  keeps  his  bed 
cSr-is  in  a  higli  feaver.  &,  at  present,  in  law  with  the  hidy,  who, 
having  contrived  lier  busines  soe  well  that  he  cannot  prove  any- 
thing by  witnesses,  makes  a  reply  to  his  declaration  tjiat  surely  he 
dreamt  &  that  she  knew  nothing  of  it ;  au  coutraire  she  had  too 
much  respect  for  him  to  be  guilty  of  soe  miich  rudenes,  soe  that 
that  is  the  case :  he  pleads  his  sores,  &  shee  her  inocence. 

In  a  few  days  we  shall  have  a,  factum  in  print  of  the  story  on 
one  side  &  the  defence  on  the  other. 

The  inclosed  tells  y''  lion''  all  our  present  news.  I  can  ad  only 
that  though  it  was  reported  how  Monsieur  de  Seignelay  was 
marriej  on  Tuesday  night  last  1  hear  now  it  hath  been  deferred, 
Mild"  d'Aligre's  Mother'  alledging  she  will  have  him  actually  in 
his  father's  jjlace  first,  to  w"^'  the  King,  it  seems,  will  not  consent. 


To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris  :  Feb.  23,  '75. 

I  have  y''  Hon'""  of  the  Uth  to  acknowledge  with  my  humble 
thanks,  &  shall  make  a  very  particular  inquiry  after  the  marine 
afiaires.  In  the  meantime,  I  can  ascert  to  you  what  1  learnt  two 
days  since  at  S'  Germains  (my  going  whither  hindred  me  from 
\vritiug  to  y''  Hon''  by  the  last  post),  that  the  King  has  10  new 
built  ships  ready  to  be  launched,  four  wherof  are  at  Rochefort,  two 
at  Brest,  two  at  Thoulon,  and,  the  other  two  at  ilarseilles.  Tliey 
are  to  carry  fi'om  GO  to  100  guns.  The  discourse  at  Court  is  that 
the  King  will  goe  himselfe  for  Flanders  &  that  he  will  have  an 
Army  there  of  about  00,000  men. 

It  is  most  certain  that  very  great  provisions  are  making  at 
Lisle  &  Ath  of  all  sorts. 

To  Lord  Arlington. 

Paris  :  Feb.  24"',  '75. 

Yesterday  we  had  the  news  of  the  IVace  being  signed,  at  w''*' 

these  people  are  the  lesse  surprised  in  that  it  hath  been  expected 

long  since  as   a    matter  that  would  come  to   passe.     Here  hath 

hapimed  an  unlucky  businesse  to  the  Venetian  Ambassadour.'-     He 

'  Marguerite  Gilbert  de  Koiiuffeuil,  wife  of  Claude  Yves,  Marquis  d'Aligre. 
-  Francois  Michieli. 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  313 

having  thought  fitt  to  putt  away  his  steward,  it  seems  another 
servant  was  employed  to  spy  him  out  &  kill  him,  to  w"^''  he  was 
presst  by  seTerall  notes  from  the  Amb''  to  that  effect.  But  being 
tardy  therin  another  had  the  commission,  w'^'*  was  imediately  dis- 
covei'ed  to  the  Justice  by  the  first  person  employed,  insomuch  that 
archers  were  sent  out  to  apprehend  the  other,  &  being  taken  after 
he  had  killed  one  of  them,  the  whole  matter  has  been  examined  & 
brought  before  the  King,  who  is  much  offended  at  it,  &  at  first  it 
was  sayd  that  an  assembly  should  be  made  of  the  other  Ambassa- 
dours,  who,  together  with  M'de  Pompone,  should  make  a  tribunal!, 
&  interrogate  the  Venetian  Amb'' ;  but  such  a  procedure  being 
impracticable  for  severall  reasons,  as  well  the  difiiculties  that  other 
Amb''*  would  make  to  meet,  as  his  not  being  obliged  to  acknowledge 
any  other  judges  than  liis  owne  masters,  it's  thought  the  whole 
matter  will  be  sent  to  be  heard  by  them. 

The  Duke  of  Navailles,  hearing  the  garrison  of  Crray  was 
stronger  then  hee  expected,  has  changed  his  designe  a  second  time 
&  now  is  marching  towards  Besanfon. 

The  Marq*  d'Anjeau  &  the  Conte  de  Briolle  are  gone  for 
England  ;  the  cause  is  given  out  to  bee  some  difference  between  my 
L**  of  Peterborow  and  the  iIaI•q^' 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Feb.  27,  '75. 

The  Carnivall  hath  even  frozen  up  the  Ministers  at  Court  to 
the  degree  that  no  business  or  news  is  stirring,  wherfore  I  may  be 
excused  if  this  comes  without  an  '  olive  branche '  in  that  we  see 
nothing  like  an  appearance  of  a  Congresse  or  the  place  in  order  to 
it.  They  expected  here  that  the  Prince  of  Orange  should  have 
named  Nimiguen,'-  or  Aernheim,  upon  the  refusall  of  Meurs,  but  as 
yet  no  new  proposition  appeareth.  It  seems  the  Spaniards  have 
no  mind  to  a  Peace  this  summer,  upon  the  imagination  that  the 
advantages  of  the  next  campaign  may  fortify  their  pretentions  to 
the  Pays  Conquis  (or  cede:i)  as  well  to  that  of  Burgundy.  But 
I  hear  it  is  resolved  that  the  stresse  of  the  next  actions  will  bee  on 
Flanders,  &  yet  we  perceive  not  they  make  any  great  preparations 
on  that  side,  as  the  French  doe  on  this. 

'  See  letter  dated  March  5,  1074. 
-  Nimwegen. 


314  THE   DESPATCHES  OF 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Pnris  :  March  18,  '75. 

^  our  i  Ion.  will  iind.  by  the  inclosed  MSS',  the  advantagioiis 
entrance  of  .M''  de  \'ivoiine  at  Jlessina,  but,  being  j'esterday  at 
S'  Ciennaiiis,  I  found  tlie  story  of  their  having  taken  or  sunke  any 
ships  to  be  only  a  surmise  ;  all  tliey  said  was,  that  after  a  rude  fight 
all  day,  separated  by  the  night,  il''  de  Vivonne  entered  by  favour 
of  it,  &  that  the  Messiniaiis  have  made  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  French 
King.'-  The  King  told  the  Amb''  yesterday  he  would  goe  soon  for 
the  Campuijnc.  He  removeth  on  Thursday  come  senight  to  Ver- 
sailles, where  his  stay  will  be  al)Out  15  days,  &  thence  for  Flandei-s. 
M""  de  Schomberg  is  like  to  come  back  &  the  Duke  of  Luxemburg 
to  succeed  him  there. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  March  20"',  '75. 

My  L''  Amb''  being  gone  to  S"^  Germains,  &  myselfe  disposed  to 
follow  him,  I  have  just  time  left  to  make  a  cover  for  the  inclosed 
MSS.  Great  prepai-ations  are  making  here  for  the  approaching 
Campagnc,  Ik  the  King  himselfe,  it's  tliought,  will  remove  about  the 
middle  of  Aprill.^  Yesterday  the  Danish  Fmroye.  had  a  pacifique 
Audience,  wlierin  he  pretended  to  ascert  his  iriaster's  great  desire  to 
contribute  towards  a  generall  peace.  Mons''  Gaumondt  is  sent 
Envmji;  for  Italy,  to  make  good  impressions  amongst  those  Princes 
to  relish  the  Ijusines  of  Messina.  Fiveteen  ships  of  war  are  sayled 
from  Brest  for  the  Mediten-anean,  ns  thought  to  preserve  their  footing 
in  Sicily,  as  is  M''  d'Almeras  going  from  Thoulou  with  fresh 
supplyes  for  that  island. 

The  King's  resolutions  for  the  Gampagna  are  yet  tirme  that 
he  will  set  out  about  the  middle  of  Aprill. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamsaib. 

Paris  :  Aprill  .S',  '7-'>. 

The  most  remarqueable  news  at  present  is  here  of  tlie  Fi'eucli 
having  entred  by  sui"prise,  or  rather  intelligence,  the  cittadell   of 

'  Th&  enclosure  is  missing. 

-  Louis  had  encouraged  this  revolt  in  Messina  by  sending  troops  and  food  to  help 
the  insurgents,  thus  compelling  the  Spaniards  to  send  their  principal  forces  there 
(Mignet,  iv.  341,  342). 

'  Flanders  was  the  principal  seat  of  war  in  the  campaign  of  1675. 


A\    EXCiLISH    AGENT    IX    PARIS  815 

Liege,  w"^^  is  esteemed  here  as  a  coup  de  maistre  &  of  great  advantage 
to  them. 

As  yet  no  answer  is  come  from  Vienna  as  to  the  expedient 
about  the  Prince  of  Furstemburg,  w*-'-'  retardeth  the  going  of  the 
French  new  named  Amb''^  towards  the  place  of  Treaty  ;  the  others, 
who  had  orders  to  be  prepared  for  that  conference,  seem  to  be  dis- 
satisfyed  at  the  disappointment,  after  the  equippage  they  had  made 
for  it.  But  the  reason  is  given  for  the  alteration  in  that  though,  in 
the  main,  their  opinions  sliall  concentre,  yet  in  particular  they  shall 
have  distinct  provinces,  IM"'  Colbert  that  of  England,  jM''  de  Vitry 
that  of  Germany,  &  the  other  that  of  Italy,  because  of  the  Messinian 
afiiiire. 

We  hear  from  Marseilles  that  Naples  is  also  disposed  to  a 
revolt,  some  papers  having  been  posted  up  to  exhort  or  admonish 
the  Spannish  garrison  to  retii-e,  for  fear  of  a  consequence. 


To  Sir  Joseph  WilUamson. 

Paris  :  April  6th,  '75. 

Your  Hon.  will  find  some  hints  of  a  commotion  at  Bourdeaux 
which  is  thought  now  to  be  appeased,  if  those  turbulent  spirits  will 
accept  of  the  armistice  sent  them  from  hence.  They  have  killed 
many  people  under  the  notion  of  their  being  collectors  ;  a  Councillor 
fell  into  the  like  misfortune,  &  a  President  was  dragged  thro'  the 
streets  &  thrub'd  till  he  cried,  '  Vive  le  Roi  sans  impots ! ' 

I  have  yet  no  answer  from  Eennes  about  the  arreds  relating  to 
the  Newfoundland  trade. 


To  8ir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Aprill  17th,  '75. 

My  being  at  Versailles  on  the  last  post  day  pleadeth  ray  excuse 
that  I  wrote  not  then  to  y'"  Hon''.  I  doubt  not  but  that,  from 
other  hands,  you  heard  of  Mons"'  d'Arraagnac's'  disgrace  in  being 
bannished  the  King's  &  Dolphin's  presence  for  ever  upon  some 
choqui'id  words  he  gave  the  Duke  of  ^lontausier  on  Thursday,  at 
the  entrance  to  the  ceremony  of  the  Dauphin's  washing  the  poor 
men's    feet,    he    pretending,    as    a    Prince  of  Lorraine,    to   have 

'  Louis  de  Lorraine  (16il-1718). 


316  THK  Dic.sr.\T(nr>  of 

the  pri'cedeiice  in  a  cliMllengiiiy  liinguage  <^"  tlie  l)au))liiii's 
pri'seiico. 

On  the  same  day,  ^ladam  Montespan  had  orders  to  retire,  w^'' 
slie  did  iniediatly  obey.  1'he  cause  is  sayd  to  be  the  bripke  & 
home  applications  the  new  confessour '  made  to  liis  Ma""'' 
conscience. 

The  King's  removeall  for  the  Camjxiijne  is  sayd  to  be  resolved 
eight  days  sooner  than  the  15"'  of  May,  of  late  appointed  for  his 
journey,  &  this  day  hee  seeth  a  review  of  all  his  equipage. 

We  are  yet  in  expectation  to  hear  what  the  Kmperour  will 
resolve  ujion  as  to  the  rub  that  hindreth  the  Congresse. 

To  Sir  Josejjh  Williamscm. 

Pill-is  :  Apiill  27"',  '75. 

Tiie  time  of  the  King's  departure  drawing  nigh,  he  hatli 
employed  this  week  in  the  making  the  reviews  as  well  of  his  house 
troops  as  of  his  equi]>age.  The  first  are  designed  to  march  on  the 
Ith  of  May,  &  he  himselfe  is  resolved  to  remove  about  the  10th. 
His  'Ex""  is  preparing  to  follow  him,  soe  that  we  must  contrive  to 
have  our  letters  goe  &  come  through  a  feithfull  hand  at  Calais 
directly  fi-om  &  to  us,  without  making  the  tour  of  Paris. 

As  soon  as  the  King  shall  be  gone,  the  pious  Madam  Montespan 
returns  to  her  attendance  on  the  Queen.  It's  thought  that  the 
Germans  will  be  earlier  in  the  field  towai-ds  the  Rhine  than  the 
French  troops  can  possibly  get  together,  whatever  hast  is  making 
in  their  preparations. 

Here  was  yesterday  a  report,  that  took  soe  great  an  impression, 
as  scearcly  to  believe  what  my  L''  Amb'"  ascerted  to  the  contrary. 
They  would  needs  persuade  his  Ex*^'"  how  he  had  received  advice  by 
a  courrier  from  Vienna,  of  the  Emperour's  consent  to  depose 
j)oc  Yfm  pf  Furstemberg,  in  his  I\Ia'-^'  of  England's  hands. 

The  King  hath  sent  for  the  fir.<t  President,  in  order  to  legiti- 
mating the  youngest  daughter  of  ]\Ime  de  Montespan  under  the 
iiaine  of  M"''  df  Bologne.  Tin-  K'^  sent  IMonsieur  50  th''  crowns  for 
the  making  of  his  equipage,  but  he  refused  to  accept  them,  &  sent 
the  King  thanks  with  this  circumstance,  that  his  presence  had 
been  soe  needlesse  the   other   Campagnes  that  he  could  not  make 

'  Fianijois  d'Aix  de  la  Chaise,  known  as  Pere  de  la  Chaise,  succeeded  Pere 
Ferrier  in  December  1674. 


AX    EXGLISH    AGENT    IX    PAUIS  317 

this  with  honour  in  that  he  hath  no  command.  The  King's 
army  is  to  consist  of  50  th''  men,  &  that  of  M.  de  Turenne  of  30  th' 
besides  the  other  reserve  bodies.  2-1'  galleys  are  gone  from 
Marseilles  to  carry  the  succours  that  are  at  Thoulon  for  Messina, 
with  6,000  sacks  of  corn. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WilUaynison. 

Paris  :  May  1",  '75. 

Being  just  come  from  Versailles,  &  the  Post  going  awa}-,  I 
have  only  time  to  cover  the  inclosed,  &  to  acquaint  your  Hon'' 
with  the  King's  having  ordered,  upon  the  result  of  [a]  great  Councell 
of  Warre,  all  ]\Ions''  de  Turenne's  troops  to  rendevous  at  a  place 
near  Colmar  on  the  18th  instant,  &  will  remove  himselfe  on  the 
13th  or  15th.  Your  Hon''  will  have  heard  a  loud  cry  of  the 
Protestants  of  Rennes  by  reason  of  the  rable  &  scholars  having 
burnt  their  temple,  notwithstanding  what  the  governor  could  doe 
to  prevent  it,  for  he  could  not  hinder  their  breaking  up  the  King's 
magasins  of  tob.iccoe  &  taking  it  all  away. 

^ly  L''  Amb''  had  yesterday  an  opp[or]tunity  of  speaking  with 
Amb'"  Colbert  upon  the  affaire  he  was  to  have  entertayned  M'"  de 
Pomponne  with.  He  tinds  these  people  full  of  jealousy,  but  knows 
no  reason  for  it. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  May  8'",  75. 
Since  my  last  to  y''  Hon'',  the  King  hath  alter "d  his  resolution, 
&  intendeth  to  depart  from  S'  Germains  on  Saterday  ;  my  L'  Amb'' 
being,  through  God's  great  mercy,  in  a  hopefull  way  of  recovery, 
believeth  he  shall  be  able  to  follow  him  about  3  days  after.  The 
Musqiieteers  marched  away  yesterday  &  a  great  part  of  the 
King's  household.  Turenne's  troops  are  drawing  towards  Alsace, 
where  the  Germans,  under  Montecuculi,  threaten  to  be  in  the  field 
before  the  French.  By  a  barque  arrived  at  ]\larseilles  a  good  account 
is  given  of  the  French  affaires  at  Llessina,  how  they  are  in  possession 
of  all  the  forts  &  in  hopes  of  doing  something  considerable  when 
the  new  supplyes  get  to  them.  The  Spaniards  have  unluckily  lost 
two  ships  ;  in  one,  the  French  found  a  good  summe  of  money  sent 
for  the  payment  of  their  troops  in  Sicily,  &  the  other  had  500  bales 
of    silke    on    board.      The    Sorbonue   dispute    about    the    Pope's 


■.MS  THE    DESPATCHES   OF 

fallibility  maketh  a  great  noyse  here  &  will  doe  more  in  the  Court 
of  Rome.  It  is  looked  on  here  as  a  designe  on  purpose,  by  order 
from  a  higii  power. 

M''  le  Bret  is  passing  into  Catalognia,  being  reinforced  in  order 
to  the  besieging  some  place  ;  Puysedor  is  thought  to  be  the  most 
likely. 

Amb""  Colbert  is  buying  of  M''  de  Bailleul '  the  charge  of  Prosi- 
dent  au  morUer,  who,  into  the  bargain,  is  to  be  made  Councellor  of 
State,  &  his  sou  to  be  Councellor  in  Parliament. 

The  King  is  sending  three  cordons  Ueiis  to  Rome  for  Sonnino,* 
brother  to  the  Conestable  de  Colonna,  &  the  IDukes  de  Rr.anchiano  ' 
&  iSforza.' 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUiamson. 

St.  Quentin  :  May  24'\  '75. 
We  have  been  here  four  days  expecting  an  escorte,  soe  that 
y''  Hon"'  can  have  little  of  news  from  us,  there  being  no  certainty  on 
what  place  the  King  will  make  the  first  attempt.  He  is  thought 
to  be  now  between  Bincli  &  Charleroy.  We  hear  that  M'"  de 
Crequi  is  gott  into  the  towne  of  Dinant  &  is  fired  upon  by  the 
Germans  in  the  Castle. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

8'.  Quentin  :  May  28'^  '75. 
Your  Hon""  seeth  by  the  date  that  we  have  been  detayned  here 
these  8  days  for  want  of  an  escorte,  though  his  Ex'^'  hath  wi'itten 
twice  to  Court  for  one,  w'^'',  together  with  our  English  letters 
having  missed  their  way,  or  rather  been  stopped,  putts  us  out  of  all 
measures.  Nothing  is  yet  certaynly  kuowne  abont  the  King's 
intentions,  w"^''  many  say  are  to  make  son^e  considerable  siege,  but 
the  wiser  men  doe  not  believe  he  will  harrasse  his  army  thus  late 
in  the  Spring,  but  keep  his  men  in  good  condition  for  a  field  battle, 
if  the  enemy  can  be  drawne  to  one.  In  the  meantime,  we  hear  that 
M"'  de  ^lontecnculi  advanced  towards  Alsace  superiour  in  strength 
to  M'"  de  Turenne,  in  soe  much  that  the  successe  of  the  summer 
that  way  is  much  doubted  by  the  French  in  that  the  French  can- 

'  Louis  de  P.ailleul,  Marquis  de  Cbiteau-Goutier. 

-  Philip  Colonna,  Princp  of  Sonnino. 

'  Flavius  Ursini,  Duke  of  Bracciano.  '  Joannes  Paulatius  Sfoiza. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PARIS  319 

not  be  able  to  defeud  the  passage  of  Haguenau  &  that  of  Colmar 
at  the  same  time. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Compi^gne  :  May  30"',  '75. 
Your  Hon''  fiudeth  that  we  are  somewhat  retreated,  occasioned 
principally  from  the  impossibility  of  getting  up  with  the  Iving 
directly,  by  reason  of  the  distance  &  the  great  escortes  w'"''  are 
requisite  to  convey  his  Ex°'^,  soe  that  as  soon  as  he  shall  be  in  a 
condition  to  take  another  route,  he  intendeth  by  Rheims  &  Verdun 
to  descend  the  Meuse  towards  Maestricht.  whereabouts  the  King 
intendeth  to  pass  the  greater  part  of  his  time,  especially  if  Liege 
can  be  fortifyed  to  the  degree  they  expect. 


To  Sir  Jose})]!  Williamson. 

From  Clermont :  June  S"",  '75. 

This  snip  in  hast  &  hurry  informeth  y''  Hon'"  of  my  L''  Amb""* 
decease  '  the  last  night  after  having  much  suffered.  He  retreated 
to  this  place  in  hopes  that  a  few  days'  repose  might  have  confirmed 
him  somewhat  better  in  his  health,  that  thence  he  might  lie  able  to 
remove  towards  Philip\nlle,  but  it  pleased  Godtoordaine  otherwise, 
to  our  great  alHiction. 

To  Sir  .Joseph  Williamson 

Paris  :  June  12"',  '75. 

Since  our  coming  hither,  disorder  &  griefe  have  soe  stunned  us 
as  not  to  be  curious  after  much  news.  The  paper  tells  y''  Hon'' 
what  passed  at  Huys,  to  w""''  I  can  add  only  that  my  letters  from 
Strasbourg  say  they  have  no  account  from  Montecuculi  since  his 
passing  the  Rhine  at  Spire,  but  I  am  just  now  told  that  a  courier 
is  come  with  advice  of  his  being  repassed  again,  &  that  iP'  de 
Turenne  had  thereupon  marched  his  army  over  a  bridge  he  had 
made  of  boats,  within  2  leagues  of  Strasbourg,  soe  that  now  it  is 
expected  the  game  will  be  on  the  other  side,  It  is  savd  tliat 
Limbourg  is  besieged  by  M'"  de  Crequi's  body. 

'  This  refers  to  the  death  of  Sir  'William  Lockhart. 


320  TIIK    DKsrATCHES    OF 

7V>  Sir  Jii.<ej>li  Willuiimov. 

Talis :  June  22"',  '75. 

Herein  your  Hon'  liatli  an  account  of  the  present  news,  to 
wliicli  1  liave  to  add  that  just  now  I  am  told  of  Limbourg's  being 
surrend''  on  the  20th,  soe  that  now  we  expect  to  hear  wliicli 
way  the  Y"''  of  Orange  will  move,  since  tlie  King's  army  will  en- 
deavour to  hinder  his  joyiiing  with  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  cS;.  Lunen- 
burg's forces.'  The  la.st  advice  from  M""  de  Turenne  left  him  in 
two  leagues  from  the  (iermans,  at  least  as  strong  as  they  are, 
especially  in  foot,  the  others  having  hardly  G,000  foot  in  the  whole 
army.  The  stirres  in  Brittanny  grow  more  solid  A:  doe  not  yet 
evaporate.  The  clergy  have  given  the  King  four  millions  five 
hundred  thousand  livers  as  a  (lo7i  gratuit.  I  hear  that  M''  de  Col- 
bert has  sent  an  expresse  to  command  Ihe  captains  of  the  four 
French  shijis  of  warre,  who  had  made  the  late  bustle  in  the 
Chauuell,  to  come  &  give  an  account  of  their  behaviour. 


To  Sit  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris:  June  20,  75. 

I  have  this  account  from  Limhourg  :  y*  after  seven  days  of  ye 
trenches  being  opened,  it  was  surrendred  upon  capitulations 
advantageous  enough,  because  ye  garrison  might  have  retired  into 
ye  citadell  I'i;  defended  themselves  some  dayes  longer.  On  ye  22' 
it  marched  out  at  ten  in  ye  morning  w"'  amies,  baggage,  match 
lighted,  &  two  \f  of  canon,  towards  Ruremonde,  in  order  to  ye 
joyning  ye  I'rince  of  Orange ;  the '  Lieutenant  du  Koy '  &  ye  Major 
of  ye  place  were  taken  on  ye  logement  at  ye  breach,  being  not 
seconded  by  those  y'  should  have  follow'd  y",  &  a  captain  of  ye 
Reg""  royall,  w"'  15  souldiers,  took  70  prisoners  on  a  work  w"''  had 
no  communication  w"'  ye  attack.  It  is  not  yet  known  w''''  way  j'e 
King  intends  to  move,  that  depending  on  ye  motions  of  ye  Prince 
of  Orange,  who  will  endeavour  to  joyn  ye  Diike  of  Lorrain  &  ye 
Lunenbourg  forces.  Wherupon  his  Ma"'  decamped  on  ye  19th 
from  Msett  &  passed  ye  ]\leuse  w"'  his  army,  &  seemed  to  direct 
his  course  towards  Collogne,  though  others  are  of  ye  opinion  he 
will  encamp  between  Lovain  [Louvain]  &  Bruxells  &  so  allarm  this 

'  Ci(!'quj  had  been  sent  to  the  Moselle  to  jnevent  the  Dukes  of  Lorraine  and 
Liineburg  from  invading  the  Electoriite  of  Treves  (Mignet,  iv.  3-55). 


AN   ENGLISH   AGENT   IN   PARIS  327 

latter  place.  Here  enclose!  '  I  send  you  a  printed  account  of  wLat 
has  passed  lately  in  Catalogne,  &  an  extract  of  all  my  advices  from 
Italy.  My  letters  from  ye  French  camp  at  Wisett  of  ye  22' 
instant  do  advice  y'  JMontecucuIe's  army  is  posted  at  Schutem  ^  & 
Mens"'  de  Turenne  at  Attenheim.  On  one  side  he  hath  ye  bi'idge  of 
ye  Rhine,  &  Willsten,  on  ye  other,  w''''  is  a  passage  on  ye  little  river 
of  Kinsesg,  but  finding  he  had  there  too  much  gi-ound  to  maintain, 
&  two  great  a  distance  between  ye  two  extremities,  he  hath  caused 
his  bridges  to  disceud  two  hours  lower,  wherby  ye  French  army 
will  be  more  united  in  a  lesser  compass  &  a  better  place  for 
forrage.  The  two  armies  are  so  near  each  other  as  to  be  w*''in 
hearing  of  drums  &  trumpetts.  The  Germains  are  encamped 
very  advantageously  in  meadows,  where  their  horse  may  subsist 
some  while,  but  are  wanting  in  other  provision,  in  y'  they  have  not 
ye  communication  they  had  w'^'  Strasbourgh,  by  w'^''  they  are  de- 
prived of  300,000  rations  of  bread  w*  was  prepar'd  there  for  y". 
]\Ions''  de  Turenne  cannot  attacque  y™  because  he  must  goe 
through  narrow  passages  &  ill  way,  besides  their  army  being  (? 
convert  by  a  great  wood  near  ye  river  of  Kinsseg  [sic]  ;  on  their 
side,  if  they  have  intentions  to  give  battel!  they  may  do  it  easily, 
by  reason'  of  a  great  plain  where  they  may  range  themselves  very 
commodiously.  Twelve  boats  from  Brisac  have  reliev'd  Mons'' 
de  Turenne  w"'  provisions,  who  hath  thereupon  made  bridges  over 
ye  Sch  utter  upon  ye  belief  he  may  find  a  way  to  attacque  ye 
Germains,  whose  principall  succour  of  provitions  comes  from  Fry- 
boursr  &  Wittenbourw.^ 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  June  29th,  '7-5. 

Yesterday  I  received  your  Hon""''  favour  of  the  14th,  &  humbly 
thanke  you  for  y'' kind  reprimande  about  the  brevity  of  my  letters, 
to  wh'**  I  make  bold  to  observe  to  y''  Hon"'  that  it  is  true  for  five 
weeks,  wherin  we  were  jogging  to  &  againe  between  this  place  & 
S'  Quentin,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  give  you  any  other  account 
than  of  our  motions,  the  Governours  themselves  waiting  intelli- 
gence  from  the  Court  by  reason  of  the  distance  &   interceptions. 

'   The  enclosure  is  missing.  -  Schutelem. 

'  See  Sistoire  des  Princes  de  Coiidi',  par  M.  le  Due  d'Aumale,  vol.  vii.  pp.  620- 
627. 

VOL.  V.  y 


:322  TllK    OKSI'ATCIlK,s    OK 

Siuce-  ray  returne  no  Post  hath  gone  iinburthned  with  an  account 
of  .ill  th;it.  hath  passed.  'Tis  true  I  doe  not  afl'ect  to  write  all  I 
hear,  for  severall  reasons :  first,  for  fear  of  beini(  thouj^ht  weak  in 
case  of  falsenes,  &  then  some  things,  tliough  true,  may  burne  my 
fingers  at  home  in  the  representing  them,  wheriu  already  some 
precautions  have  been  given  &  caused  me  to  change  an  indifferent 
style.  I  choose,  therfore,  rather  to  putt  anything  that  may  be  un- 
vvellcome  to  some  palats  into  French,  &  send  it  in  a  character  & 
paper  apart.  You  will  please  to  pardon  me  in  the  account  I  gave 
y""  Hon"'  of  these  nicetyes,  which  hinder  me  from  writing  mighty 
long  letters.  If  anything  relate  imediatly  to  the  King's  sers'ice, 
nobody  can  be  more  zealous  than  myselfe,  &  for  any  of  y'"  Hon''" 
owne  particular  commands,  you  know  that  1  am  of  old  dedicated  to 
the  observance  of  them. 

I  cannot  positively  ascert  it,  but  'tis  sayd  here  that  the  Duke 
of  Nieuburg  hath  made  a  treaty  with  this  King  much  of  the  same 
nature  of  that  between  his  Ma'^  &  the  Prince  of  Monacoe,'  wherby 
the  Duke  retayns  the  souveraignity  of  his  territoryes  &  per- 
mitteth  the  French  to  putt  garrisons  into  the  priucipall  places  & 
make  what  magazines  shall  be  thought  fitt ;  in  i-eturne,  his  children 
shall  have  pensions  tt  benefices  in  France  for  their  good  subsistaiice 
&  establishments.  My  letters  from  Marseilles  advise  that  six  ships 
of  warre  &  thirty  barques,  laden  with  provisions,  are  posted  for 
Thoulon,  to  joyne  there  with  Mon''  d'Almeras  &  pursue  their 
voyage  to  Messina,  &  that  other  niarchant  ships  were  equipping  in 
that  port  to  make  for  that  place  the  next  month  &  to  be  escorted 
by  some  ships  of  wai-re.  From  Thoulou  they  write  M.  d'Almeras 
was  gone  from  '  Les  isles  de  Jeves '  -  towards  ^lessina  with  a 
squadron  of  5  men-of-war,  two  firesliips,  &  two  other  vessells  with 
provisions,  8-  great  barques,  &  severall  other  lesser,  &  that,  in 
Thoulon  Roade,  three  other  ships  of  war  lay  ready  to  be  sent  after 
them.  The  magistrates  of  Messina  have  framed  lour  thousand 
men  into  three  regiments,  w'^ ',  with  the  French,  will  compo.se  about 
8,000  men,  &  that  body  is  to  attend  ^M"'  de  Vivonne  in  order  to 
the  gayning  of  ground.  It  is  sayd  that  the  King  will  have  near 
30  ships-of-war  &  twenty  galleys  on  the  coast  of  Sicily.  From 
Roussillon  tliey  write  that  the  consternation  was  very  great  in 
Catalogna  upon  M''  de  Schomberg's  approach  within  4  leagues  of 

'  Louis  Griinaldi,  Due  de  Valentinois. 
■'  Probably  '  les  Isles  d'Hyires.' 


AX    ENGLISH    AGENT   JN    PAULS  o23 

Bareeloune.  &  his  intentions  to  besiege  '  le  Roze '  when  ]\I.  d' Almeras' 
squadron  can  favorise  that  attempt  with  his  squadron  on  that  coast. 
The  Conte  S'  Maurice'  is  [about  to  give]  answer  ft-om  Court  about 
the  route  they  will  give  him  in  order  to  the  getting  thither  ;  thence 
he  will  .hasten  for  England. 

To  Sir  Joseph  WiUi'imson. 

Paris  :  July  6'\  '75. 

The  news  of  the  taking  '  La  Scaletta '  is  not  confirmed  only, 
but  contradicted  also.  There  is  nothing  new  from  either  armyes. 
^lontecuculi  is  posted  advantagiously  with  a  wood  &  a  marsh  on 
each  side,  &  the  open  part  is  fortifyed  with  lines  of  circonvalhdimt. 
They  contend  who  shall  subsist  longest  &  take  the  advantage  of 
either's  retreate. 

Coll''  Massietti  hath  entrapped  a  body  of  the  King's  great 
guards,  to  the  number  of  about  400.  The  great  men  about  the 
King  have  advised  hira  not  to  expose  his  person  in  case  of  a  battle, 
but  M''  de  Louvoy  gives  him  reasons  for  the  contrary. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Septemb  11",  1675. 
Yesterday  we  received  the  news  of  Treves  being  taken  on 
Frydaj-  last,  after  its  having  sustayned  three  breeches.  It  is  sayd, 
that  the  day  before  that  the  town  was  taken,  the  French  made  such 
a  vigorous  salley  that  retooke  the  contresmrpe  and  demylune,  at 
which  the  Germans  were  so  possessed  with  rage,  that  the  next  day 
they  past  the  fosse  and  entred  the  place  at  the  severall  breeches 
they  had  made,  and  came  up  to  the  retranchements.  whereupon  the 
officers  capitulated  to  be  prisonners  of  warre,  that  the  soldiers 
should  march  out  to  Vitry  le  franpois  and  be  obliged  not  to  serve 
within  a  twelve  nioneth,  to  which  capitulation  the  Marechal  de 
Crequy  would  not  signe,  but  rather  suffered  himself  to  be  taken 
prisonner  of  warre.  They  are  here  at  Court  not  very  much  satis- 
fied with  him  for  the  first  defeat,  and  his  friends  are  glad  he  is  not 
in  the  power  of  his  ill-wishers.  As  for  the  P"^"  of  Conde,  he  com- 
plaiueth  of  his  army's  not  being  within  8,000  men  soe  strong  as 
Montecuculi's,  and  his  horse  in  an  ill  condition  ;  he  is  still  near 

'  Francois  de  Saiiit-llaurice. 


324  THE    Dh-SPATCHES    Ol-' 

.Sclilestadt,  but  would  be  glad  of  any  pretext  of  coming  awaj-  liim- 
selfe,  in  which  case  the  Duke  of  Schouiberg  is  to  command  iti  his 
place,  and  the  Duke  of  Xavailles  to  succeed  him  in  Uoussillou. 

The  French  Anib''  in  Sweeden  hath  assured  his  master  here 
that  the  Sweeds'  Army  will  be  fortifyed  with  22,OUU  men  the  next 
spring. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Wiliicminon. 

Paris  :  October  30th,  1(575. 

We  have  no  other  news  from  the  Rhine  than  that  the  Imperiall 
Army  descended  towards  Spire,  that  the  fortifications  at  Lauter- 
burg  were  near  finished,  that  M""  de  Montecuculi  intended  to  goe 
for  \''ienna,  and  that  the  ilarqiiis  de  Bade  was  to  command  the 
Army  till  such  time  as  the  Duke  of  Lorrayne  should  be  able  to 
get  up  with  it.  The  Count  ilausfeld's'  arrivall  is  still  expected, 
and  with  the  more  impatience  in  that  it  may  change  the  face  of 
affaires.  The  I'rince  of  Coude  hath  settled  the  commerce  as 
formerly  between  the  French  and  the  citty  of  Strasliourg,  by  having 
made  the  passages  free  &  secure. 

The  Parliament  of  Kennes  were  yesterday  to  sitt  for  the  first 
time  at  Vannes,  and  by  an  arrest  du  conseil  the  great  street  of 
Rennes  is  ordered  to  be  razed,  and  the  faabounj  also,  where  the 
sedition  began,  where  a  pyramid  is  to  bee  erected  upon  which  the 
arrest  is  to  be  posted.  l']ight  Procurcm-f;  of  the  Parliament,  with 
the  Gre()ier  and  twelve  of  the  Presidial,  are  made  prisoners  there. 
The  Prince  of  Conde  will  be  soon  here  &  the  ^larshall  de  Mont- 
morency also. 

Cardinal  Howard  ^  passed  by  here  two  days  since,  in  his  way  to 
Rome,  attended  by  many  English  gentlemen. 

The  Portuguese  Adm"  is  gone  towards  Villafrancha,  in  the 
comte  de  Nice,  to  sett  ashoar  an  extraordinary  Envoi/e  who  is 
going  to  condole  at  the  Court  of  Savoye,  and  it  is  sayd  here,  that 
he  hath  orders  to  joyne  the  French  forces  which  are  arming  out 
against  M'"  de  Ruyter.  At  Thoulon  they  worke  day  i  night  tor  the 
equipping  out  of  20  ships,  and,  to  the  end  they  may  be  the  sooner 
provided  with  men,  they  take  22  men  out  of  each  galley  for  that 
expedition ;  however,  the   Italians  say  that  if  M''  de  Ruyter  will 

'  Henry  Francis,  Count  Miinsfeld  (1G41-1715).  He  acted  as  Envoy  from  llie 
Emperor. 

''  Philip  Thomas  Howard,  brother  to  the  Earl  of  Arundel. 


AX    ENULISH    AOENT    IN    PARIS  325 

act  de  Jiowae  fvij  his  fleet  may  bee  at  Sicily  before  the  French  cau 
get  out ;  the  Spanish  fleet  was  under  sayle  towards  Sardaigue. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris :  November  23"',  1075. 
.  ■    The  King  hath  sent  a  lettre  de  cachet  to  rfe[s]  grands[s]  cordeliers 
at  Parys,  wherby  he  forbideth  them  to  send  any  deputies  to  Rome. 

An  Ingeneer  is  come  from  Renues,  in  Brittany,  to  have  his 
Ma''^"^  approbation  of  a  model  that  he  hath  made  for  the  bilding  a 
citadell  there,  and  another  is  to  be  made  at  Bordeaux  in  the 
faubourg  S'  Michel,  which  with  the  Chadeau  Trompefte  will  be  able  to 
bridle  those  people  ;  besides  which,  Monsieur  de  Brest  [Bret],  who 
commanded  in  Catalogne,  is  come  into  that  place  with  5  or  6,000 
men.  His  Ma'^'  hath  ordered  a  thousand  pistoles  a  peice  to 
remount  his  severall  brigades,  &  1,100  livres  to  each  brigadier,  and 
500  crowns  to  each  Marechal  des  logis.  The  P'^"  de  Conde  is  ex- 
pected here  to-morrow.  His  Ma'^  hath  ordered  the  new  of)era  to  be 
ready  on  the  first  of  January,  and  all  the  liveryes  to  be  ready,  as  if  he 
intended  to  make  a  step  to  j\Ietz,  but  nobody  knows  yet  what  may 
be  his  intentions,  or  the  designe  of  that  journey,  in  case  it  holdeth. 

Yesterday  the  late  diflerence  between  the  Princesse  of  Toscane 
&  the  Duchesse  of  Guise  was  accomoded  by  his  Ma*^  himselfe. 
The  occasion  of  it  was  that  the  former  had  turned  away  an  esqtder 
and  a  gentlewoman  without  giving  the  other  notice,  although  she 
had  recommended  them  to  her.  Yesterday  also  was  ratified  the 
Treaty  of  Neutrality  between  the  King  &  the  Duke  of  Hannover, 
wherby  an  augmentation  is  made  of  20,000  crouus.  The  Farlement 
of  Bordeaux  is  transfered  to  Condom,  and  the  walls  of  that  city  are 
to  be  demolished. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  February  15"',  'jf. 

This  post  must  contradict  extreemly  what  the  last  carryed  of 
the  pretended  victory  the  Span''^  &  Dutch  were  sayd  to  have  had 
over  the  French.  Two  days  since  a  courrier  came  from  M''  d'Estrees 
to  ]\lons''  de  Pomponne.  I  had  a  sight  of  the  letters,  which  con- 
tayned  that  on  the  24th  a  cltalouppe  came  to  Naples  whose  patron 
made  a  report  of  the  fight ;  how  that  De  Ruyter  had  lost  his  Vice- 
Adm",  &  that  the  French  had  lost  two  ships  &  two  fire  ships,  that 


326  THIC    DI'iirATCHKS   OK 

the  vessells  hiileii  with  provisions  made  the  grand  tour  of  the 
island  &  see  gott  into  Messina,  whereas  also  the  French  fleet. 
De  Riiyter  tiiereupon,  pretending  that  the  terme  of  his  orders  was 
expired,  declared  to  the  Viceroy  that  he  was  upon  the  quitting  the 
Sicilian  Seas  in  order  to  his  returning  home.  Whereupon,  as  he 
appeared  before  Naples,  the  Viceroy  went  on  board  him  &  oiferd 
him  his  plate  &  Jewells,  &  that  the  crowne  of  Spain  should  be  his 
caution  for  the  bearing  him  harmelesse,  but  he  declined  all,  &  was 
seen  in  the  Corsor  Seas  on  the  P'  of  this  month. 

M''  Colbert  hath  two  days  since  made  a  fwvls  of  eighteen 
hundred  thousand  livers  towards  the  maintaining  sixteen  good  ships 
of  warre  this  year  in  the  ocean  for  the  security  of  their  commerce. 
Orders  are  sent  to  all  captains  to  be  ready  for  the  remlevous  on  the 
25th  instant,  &  in  case  their  companys  bee  not  compleat,  they  are 
not  onely  to  be  casheerd,  but  to  reimburse  the  winter  quarter 
money. 

The  P'''  of  Conde,  upon  a  message  delivered  him  by  M"'  de 
Louvoy,  by  the  King's  order,  purposing  how  necessary  it  would  be 
for  his  ila'^'*  service  that  he  should  command  on  the  Rhine,  made 
answer  he  was  ready  to  comply  with  whatever  his  Ma'^'  should 
desii'e  of  him,  particularly  since  it  was  promised  that  his  Ma'*' 
would  goe  that  way  in  person. 

And  'tis  sayd  that  Jlonsieur  will  command  a  Hying  army  near 
Metz. 

To  Manx'  In  Cher''  Jenldns} 

Paris  :  Feb.  15th,  '76. 

We  cannot  yet  learne  any  certayne  particulars  of  the  late 
action  in  the  Mediterranean.  The  reports  are  soe  divers  &  contre- 
ipiarri'iui  that  we  don't  know  what  to  believe.  But  in  two  days 
we  shall  be  clearer  sighted.  The  King  hastneth  the  Gampacfne 
preparations,  &  at  last  the  l'"'  of  Conde  has  accepted  of  the  com- 
mand of  the  llhine,  provided  he  have  IG  thous''  choosen  horse 
&  24,000  foot.  His  Lieu'-Glls  will  be  the  Maroschaux  de  Crequy 
&  Schomberg.  The  Duke  his  son  is  to  head  the  army  of  -30,000 
men  in  Flanders  &  to  have  under  him  the  Mareschaux  de  Luxem- 
bourg &  la  Fueillarde.  His  Ma'-^'.  with  his  household  troops,  will 
stay  at  Metz  &  will  have  30,000  men  between  the  2  armys  to 
supply  as  occasion  shall  require. 

'  See  footnote  1,  p.  21s. 


.VX    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    PAKIS  327 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williamson. 

Paris  :  Feb.  HI,  ■71;,  S.N. 

The  last  letters  from  Itolic  brouglit  us  ye  contirmation  of  what 
my  last  to  your  Honour  coutayned,  witli  this  addition  only,  y'  ye 
reason  why  de  Ruyter  quitted  the  Sicilian  Seas  proceeded  from 
his  observation  y'  ye  Spanish  fleet  consisted  of  only  9  ships,  ill- 
equipped  and  worse  armed,  which  were  all  ye  P"-'"^  of  Montesarchio 
commanded,  excepting  two  newly  arrived  from  Spaine,  viz',  ye 
'  Captain  Royal '  and  a  lesser  frigatt,  with  which  force  ye  Spanyards 
had  pretended  to  ye  States-General  y'  they  were  able  to  fight  ye 
French  alone,  w'"''  de  Ruyter,  finding  to  be  otherwise  than  he 
expected,  fortified  his  other  reasons  (as  ye  terme  being  expired  & 
ye  money  agreed  upon  not  all  pay'd  him)  and  induced  him  to  come 
away.  Ye  fight  began  ye  17th  of  Jan.  at  18  of  ye  clock  by  ye 
Italian  account,^  and  ye  wind  y'  separated  ye  fleet  ended  it  at  sun- 
setting  ;  Ruyter  commanded  19  ships  and  9  Sp^''  galleys  which 
had  joyned  them ;  IMons''  Du  Quesne  had  22  ships.  The  Ffrench 
lost  two  fire  sliips  &  two  ships-of-war,  all  four  were  sunck ;  ye  next 
night,  ye  Ffrench  being  favored  with  a  good  wind  sayled  out  of 
Messina  11  ships  strong,  and  joyned  Mons'"  Du  Quesne,  &  Monte- 
sarchio with  his  9  ships  joyned  de  Ruyter,  but  ye  Ffrench,  being 
befriended  by  ye  wind,  got  ye  height  of  ye  Island,  continued  their 
tour  towards  ye  Levant,  &  entred  Messina  wdth  all  ye  sucours.  In 
ye  meantime,  de  Ruyter,  continuing  his  sayling  homewards,  hath 
taeen  seen  off  of  Ligorne  [Leghorn]  ;  ye  letters  add  also,  y'  three 
days  after  de  Ruyter's  leaving  Naples,  a  Spanish  courrier  brought 
to  ye  Viceroy  ye  States-Gen"'^  orders  for  his  stay  in  those  p'*  yet 
some  while  longer,  &  y'  immediately  thereupon  dialoups  were  sent 
out  after  him  to  endeaver  ye  retrieving  him. 

The  King  hath  ordred  5  companys  to  be  added  to  each  French 
regiment  of  foot,  and  intendeth  about  ye  IStli  of  April  to  be  in  ye 
field  ;  and,  in  ye  meantime,  they  are  framing  ye  state  of  ye  troops 
w''''  are  to  compose  ye  two  armys  for  Germany  &  Fflanders  ;  those 
,j^cii  g^pg  quartered  in  Guieune,  Bretagne,  and  Normandy  have 
orders  to  quit  those  countreys,  thereby  to  enable  ye  people  ye 
better  to  pay  ye  failles  and  other  taxes  for  ye  fitting  ye  Espargne. 
This  Court  is  impatient  to  hear  ye  issue  of  ye  generall  Dyet  of 
ye   Suisse  Cantons,  whether  they  will  consent  to  ye  levyes  and 

'  I.e.  six  hour.s  before  sunset,  accordiiif;  to  tbe  old  Italian  reckoning. 


328  TUE    DtSiPATCUES   OK 

reci'uites  w^''  ye  Ffrench  have  desired  iu  consequence  of  ye  alliances, 
notwithstanding  ye  hereditary  one  they  have  with  ye  House  of 
Austria,  and  besides  ye  designe  they  have  had  to  remaine  neuter 
during  ye  war. 

The  Court  of  Savoye  will  not  declare  itself  as  to  ye  siding  with 
Ffrauce  ;  ye  Councell  of  y'  P"^^*^^  seems  to  be  divided,  &  part  of  it 
hath  no  aversion  to  ye  Spaniard,  by  reason  of  ye  neighbourhood, 
so  y'  all  y'  can  be  done  for  ye  present  will  be  ye  getting  recruits 
thence  for  ye  Italian  regiments  y'  are  in  ye  Ffrench  service. 
This  Court  is  much  oliended  at  an  invective  memolre  printed 
lately  at  Vienna  by  order  of  ye  Imp"  Councell  called  '  Observatio 
contra  memoriam  vel  notitiam  legatis  Gallicis  Noviemagum  ituris 
data.' 

To  Lord  A'liiiujton. 

Paris  :  Feb.  21th,  '76. 

Hei-e  hath  been  little  of  alteration  since  my  last  to  your  Ex'"', 
uulesse  it  be  that  the  P'^'^  of  Conde  intendeth  for  FHauders  upon 
some  suddain  enterprise,  and  thence  he  is  to  goe  for  Germany. 
Orders  are  given  for  the  making  of  8,000  tents  for  24,000  foot,  each 
tent  containing  three  souldiers,  which  in  all  appearance  are  to  be 
made  use  of  before  summer.  All  the  hospitalls  of  women  & 
girles  are  employed  iu  the  making  a  great  quantity  of  sacks  for 
earth.  This  King  has  at  last  caused  the  dispatch  to  be  inade  of 
passeports  for  the  Pope's  Nuntio,  but  his  Ma'*"  hath  not  yet  re- 
solved ibr  the  altering  those  for  the  Lorrain  ministers,  the  Ffrench 
pretending  that  the  giving  the  title  of  Duke  of  Lorrain  is  so 
essentiall  as  that  the  l\ing's  right  &  pretentions  depend  upon  it, 
alledging  also,  that  it  is  .sutlicient  that  they  are  admitted  into  the 
negotiation,  a  prerogative  they  could  never  before  obtaine,  &  that 
the  declaration,  made  in  Jan^  ^,  related  only  to  the  Duke  deceased. 
It  is  farther  said  that  the  mediatours  ought  to  insinuate  to  the 
Im"  Ministers  and  their  allyes  the  equity  &  justice  of  the  Ffrench 
pretensions  in  this  point,  &  what  facilities  his  Ma*"''  hath  advanced 
as  to  the  preliminaryes.  They  add,  also,  that  were  this  difficulty 
removed,  the  Imp"  .Ministers  have  rais'd  another  to  retard  the 
negotiation,  which  is  that  they  will  not  send  their  plenipotentiaryes 
before  it  be  regulated  where  the  Pope's  Nuntio,  as  mediatour,  shall 
reside,  which  cannot  be  at  Nimiguen,  because  the  Catholick  religion 
is  not  publickly  exercis'd  there,  unlesse  one  of  the  first  churches 


AN   ENGLISH   AGENT   IX    PARIS  :J29 

be  given  to  the  Catliolicks  during  the  negotiation,  in  ye  same 
manner  as  was  during  the  time  the  said  city  was  under  the  obedi- 
ence of  his  Ma"'. 

The  last  expedient,  for  the  reconcQiug  the  two  businesses  about 
the  passeport  and  the  Prince  of  Ffurstemberg,  seemeth  to  admit  of 
no  other  temperament  than  that  his  Ma"'  may  be  induced  to  give 
the  title  of  Duke  of  Lorraiu  in  the  passeport,  and  that  the 
Imperour,  having  absolutely  refused  to  give  that  Prince  his  liberty, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  persisting  stil  to  doe  only  what  he  promis'd  to 
the  Suedes,  in  the  causmg  his  processe  to  be  suspended,  that  his 
Im"  Ma"''  may  give  the  city  of  Newstadte  for  prison  to  the  said 
Prince  with  all  necessary  liberties,  and  that  his  affaire  shall  be 
terminated  with  the  negotiation  of  the  Peace. 

The  Prince  of  Strasbourg '  has  made  powerful  instances  at 
Court  about  the  passeports,  because  the  retarding  of  them  hath 
done  much  prejudice  to  the  Prince  his  brother.-  The  Cheva- 
lier Tertou,'^  Ambassadour  in  Denmark,  hath  had  new  orders 
sent  him  to  persuade  his  Danish  Ma'"  to  an  accommodation  with 
the  Suedes  et  to  presse  the  consumation  of  mariage,  whereby 
the  war  may  be  ended. ^  There  are  above  4,UU0  Suitzers  which  the 
King  hath  caus'd  to  be  raised  without  any  noise,  which  passe  from 
time  to  time  m  little  bodyes  without  any  arms  into  France ;  they 
have  2U*  each  during  their  voyage.  The  captains  of  Ffrench  galleys 
have  orders  to  repaire  immediately  to  ^larseUes  and  a  great  [num- 
ber] are  already  gon,  his  Ma''"  intending  to  send  to  ]\iessina,  about 
the  end  of  Mai'ch,  25  galleys,  7  great  ships  of  war,  &  near  •5,U00 
men,  with  20  hrigantmes  laden  with  provisions.  It  is  believed 
here,  that  with  these  forces,  together  with  those  that  are  already 
entred  Messina,  the  King  will  make  himself  master  of  those  seas, 
and  that  he  will  make  considerable  conquests  at  land.  Yesterday 
wee  had  the  contirmation  of  the  Ffrench  navy's  being  gotten  into 
Messina  after  the  tight,  with  the  losse  only  of  two  men  of  war. 

'  Francis  Egon  de  Fiii-stenbeig. 
-  Hermann  Egon  de  Fiirstenberg. 

'  Hugues,  Chevalier  de  Terlon,  Fruncli  Ambassador  to  Sweden. 
*  Probably  the  maniage  of  Anne  Stuart,  daughter  o£  the  Duke  of  York,  with 
George,  Prince  of  Denmark. 


330  THE   DESPATCHES   OK 

To  air  Joseph  Williann^mi. 

Paris :  Feb.  20th,  70,  S.N. 
My  lining  at  Court  hindered  me  from  writing  to  your  Hon""  by 
the  last  I'ost.  Inclosed  1  send  you  a  list  of  the  oflicers  that  are 
stated  downe  for  the  serving  in  the  four  armies  this  year.'  The 
1'"'^'  of  Condi'  hath  c.Kcused  himselfe  in  that  his  illnesse  of  the  gout 
doth  hinder  him  from  making  this  Cfimixn/nn,  so  that  it's  thought 
he  will  passe  the  summer  at  Chantilly.  &  the  Duke,  his  son,  follow 
the  King  in  (|uality  of  volunteer.  The  King's  army  is  to  consist  of 
55,000  men,  with  30  thousand  of  which  number  the  enemy  is  to  be 
faced,  whilst,  with  the  remaining  25,000,  his  Ala'*'  will  make  some 
siege,  which  being  finished,  he  will  come  back  &  then  this  great 
army  will  make  detachments  for  the  strengthening  of  that  towards 
(Jerrnany  which  at  the  beginning,  is  to  be  composed  of  onely  25,000 
men.  The  equippage  of  the  ships  at  Thoulon  &  the  galleys  at 
Alarseilles  is  very  much  hastned.  They  are  to  convey  5,000  men  to 
Sicily  about  the  end  of  March,  with  fresh  succours  of  provision  to 
be  transported  on  20  lyrecjantmes.  The  P''"  of  Conde  advised  the 
King  to  send  twice  tlie  number  of  men  for  the  entire  conqui'st  of 
that  Island.  Le  Chev''  de  Chaumont"  brought  the  last  confirmatory 
news  thence,  &  sustayns  that  the  French  lost  in  the  fight  but  3 
fireships,  &  that  De  Ruyter  lost  as  many  ships  that  were  sunk.  I 
have  seen  Mons''  du  Quesne's  letter  to  his  wife,  wherin  he  giveth  a 
very  ingenious  account  of  all.  "i'is  dated  the  29th  of  Jan.  from 
Messina.  As  for  de  Ruyter,  he  hath  joyned  the  6  ships  who  were 
gone  for  Legorne  &  was  sayleing  westward  from  Ca])e  de  Corse,'  as 
if  he  had  no  intentions  to  returne  towards  Sicily,  the  winds  being 
otherwise  favoralile  for  his  moving  eastward. 

To  Sir  Ju»eph  WilliumKon. 

Paris  :  March  lltli,  '7(5,  S.N. 
'J'lie  lelters  from  Naples  oi' the  18th  past  give  a  large  account 
of  Mons''  de  Ituiter's  reception  there,  having  been  mett  by  the 
Viceroy  as  far  as  Stromboli,  with  all  the  galleys.  He  arrived  there 
on  the  1 2th  &  was  lodged  at  the  Pallace  lioiall ;  his  fleet  con- 
sisted of  twenty  and  seaven  saile,  whereof  three  were  of  the  Spanish 

'  The  Dues  de  Luxembourg,  de  Duras,  de  la  I'euiilade,  de  Navailles,  de  Vivonne, 
and  the  Comte  d'Estrades,  Cointe  Schomberg,  and  the  Marquis  de  Eochefort. 
-  .Mexanche,  Chevalier,  later  Marquis  de  Chaumont.  "  Coi'sica. 


AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IX    PAKIS  331 

squadron  &  ye  like  number  of  that  of  Biscay,  the  rest  being  all 
Dutch  ships.  He  intended  thence  to  Melasso,  where  the  rest  of 
the  Prince  of  Montesarchio's  squadron  is  tojoinehim.  A  squadron 
of  French  are  sayled  from  Messina  towards  Provence,  where  ye  new 
equipage  of  ships  &  galleys  stay  onely  for  the  embarking  of  the 
souldiers'  ammunitions  &  provisions,  being  otherwise  ready  to  sett 
sayle. 

I  believe  I  omitted,  in  my  last  to  your  Hon'',  the  acquainting 
you  with  Mens''  de  Lauzun's  second  misfortune,  he  having,  after  a 
tedious  labour  of  many  nights,  at  last  pearced  the  wall,  which  was 
at  least  two  yards  thick,  &  got  as  far  as  the  coiUrescarpe  of  the 
Castle  of  Pignorolle,'  but  was  there  discovered  by  a  woman,  & 
consequently  putt  into  a  stricter  confinement. 

The  troops  of  the  King's  house  have  orders  to  be  ready  to 
march  on  the  2oth  instant,  &  his  Ma"°  will  be  moving  a  little 
after  Easter. 

The  Duke  de  Valois  is  still  very  ill.  Yesterday  his  Ma'"'' 
declared  that  the  C  de  Vermaudois,  Admirall  of  France,  should 
give  him  his  shirt,  at  his  uprising,  next  after  the  Princes  of  the 
blood,  preferably  to  all  other  Princes. 

Here  hath  been  a  great  solemnity  at  ye  reception  of  the  Duke 
de  Crequi  in  the  citty,  as  Governour  of  it,  &  mighty  harangues 
were  made  him  by  the  Provost  des  Man-hands,  with  the  title  of 
Monseigneur,  which  is  somewhat  extraordinary  ;  in  a  few  days  he 
is  to  give  him  &  the  Eschevins  a  splendid  Entertainment  at  his 
own  hostel. 

To  Sir  Joseph   Williamson. 

Paris  :  March  IS"",  '76,  S.N. 
The  inclosed  manuscript "'  is  the  Paris  news,  to  which  I  have 
nothing  to  add,  but  what  my  Italian  letters  containe  of  the 
Prince  of  Montesarchio's  alarrae,  &  hastning  to  Madrid,  in  order 
to  the  justifying  his  innocence  against  the  aspersions  which  his 
enemy's  have  imprinted  in  the  Catholique  Majeste's  breast,  for  the 
being  cause  of  the  shipwreck  of  some  >Spanish  ships,  in  the  not 
observing  the  ViceRoy's  orders,  &  in  the  not  joyniug  sooner  SI"'  de 
Ruyter  in  the  fight  against  the  French.  The. Viceroy  of  Naples  is 
continuing  to  send  new  succours  into  Sicily  of  fresh  troops,  in  hopes 
that  the  French  will  hardly  be  able  to  keep  the  field  there  all  the 

'  fignerol.  -  The  enclosure  is  missing. 


332         rni-:  DEsi-AXCiiEis  ok  an  enhlish  ACiExr  ix  rAuis 

sunimtM'.  On  tin-  otlin-  haiul.  the  ileputys  &  jurats  of  Mfssiua,at  the 
t^ikiiifj  leave  liere,  have  passed  all  necessary  acts  for  the  protection 
on  his  Majeste's  side,  and  their  lidelity  on  the  other,  in  the  same 
forme  as  they  did  to  the  Spanish  crowne  formerly  ;  after  that,  the 
King  sent  to  each  of  them  his  ])icture  set>t  with  diamants,  so  that 
they  are  on  their  way  to  Marseilles  to  embar(|ue  themselves  on  the 
•galleys,  which  are  ready  to  set  out  for  ^lessina.  The  King  hath 
sent  an  expresse  for  the  exchange  or  ransome  of  Mons''  de  ilontclar,' 
iS;  I\Ions''  de  la  Brosse,  lately  made  prisoner  near  Jirisac. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Williavison. 

Paris  :  Feb"  ye  17"S  1C77,  S.N. 

AVe  are  not  yet  certaine  of  ye  punctuall  day  wiien  his  ^la'^ 
intends  to  sett  out  for  ye  Cmnpagae^  but  'tis  thought  'twill  be 
between  ye  5""  &  ye  10"'  of  the  next  month. 

The  Duke  of  Luxemburg  is  to  have  the  command  of  his  ^Ma'*'" 
army  towards  ye  Ehine  this  yeare  againe.  Ye  citty  of  his  name 
having  made  new  excursions,  &  great  de(j(id!<,  it  is  thought  that  ye 
lyiar""  de  Crequy  will  be  obliged  to  mai-ch  y'  way  to  prevent  any 
future  incursions. 

Our  last  letters  from  Sicily  left  ye  citty  of  Messine  in  great 
want  of  provisions,  y''  ships  y'  were  sent  under  the  command  of  M'' 
la  Barre  being  returne[dj  cornelesse,  y*^  magistrats  of  Zaiit  having 
refused  to  give  'em  jmdiqne,  so  that  M'"  De  Quesne  is  gone  w'*'  8 
men  of  war  to  cruise  in  y"=  Mediterranean,  in  order  to  the  buying  uj) 
of  what  marchants'  ships  he  shall  meete  loaden  w""  corne,  as  great 
quantitys  of  it  as  may  supply  y'^  Messincan  necessities  till  such 
time  as  y''  new  succours  (w'''  are  preparing  at  Thoulon)  arrive 
there  for  their  reliefe,  where  y*^  Due  de  Vivonne  (being  much 
inconmioded  in  his  health)  is  returning,  &  y*^  Marshall  de  Lorge  is  to 
succeed  him  in  that  command  &  will  embarque  w'-'  ye  4,0()0  men 
(wherof  1 ,400  are  Suitzers)  which  are  designed  thither. 

The  King  has  made  no  new  alteracons  as  to  his  generall 
officers  w^''  are  to  attend  him  this  CamjHiifne  in  Flanders,  y*^^  same 
Mavshalls,  Tiieutenaut  Geueralls,  &  Field  Marshalls  being  to  accom- 
pany him,  as  did  y""  last  year  ;  only  the  Mar""  de  Schomberg  goes  as 
volunteer  to  observe  ye  King's  order  as  occasion  shall  require,  he 
being  unwilling  to  be  under  any  of  y"  senior  Marshalls. 
'  Joseph  de  Pons  de  Guimera,  Baron  de  Montclar. 


INDEX 


Abbeville,  85,  89,  238 

Acciaioli,  cardinal  Nicolo,  50 

Affleic,  247 

Agrapoli,  D.  Gaspar  Ibanez  de  Segovia, 

marquis  d',  75 
Ahmed  II.,  71 

Aigremont,  chevalier  d',  296 
Aiguillon,  Marie  de  Wignerod,  duchesse 

d',  141 
Aire,  183 
Aisne  (river),  108 
Aitona  (Ayetone),  D.  Miguel  Francisco 

de   Moncada,  marquis  d',  4,  27,    36 ; 

death  of,  81 
Aix-la-Chapelle,  city  of,  295 
Aix-la-Chapelle,  Peace  of,  109,  134 
Akakia,  M.,  98 
Albe,  D.  Antonio  Alvarez  de  Toledo,  7th 

duo  d',  12 
Albret,    due    d'.      See  Auvergne,  Em- 
manuel de  la  Tour  d' 
Albret,   Marie,   marquise  d'   (dame  du 

imlais),  284 
Albuquerque,  due  d',  155 
Alcala,  49 
Alcantara,  81 
Alenpon,  54 
Alexandria,  74 

Alesowitz,  Theodore,  4,  10,  56 
Algiers  (Argier),  2,  3,  85,  38,  43,  56,  60, 

63,  82,   99,  104,  135,  150,  151,  163, 

254  ;  consul  of,  43  ;  council  of,    43  ; 

Pasha  (Bascha)  of,  43 
Alicante,  35 

Aligie,  Etienne  d',  193,  233,  276,  286 
Aligi'e,  Marguerite  Gilbert  deKoquefeuil, 

marquise  d',  312 
Aligie,  Marie  Marguerite  d',  150,  299, 

310,  312 


Alington,  Mr.,  113 

Allen,  Sir  Thomas,  21,  23,  35,  43,  56 
60,  63,  93,  95,  99,  104,  113 

Alliance,  the  Triple,  8,  15,  16,  17,  21, 
38,  41,  42,  45,  55,  57,  77,  93,  94,  105, 
108,  111,  134,  161,  162,  169,  201 

Almeras,  sieurd',  19, 177, 186,  192,  281, 
314,  .322,  323 

Alphonso  VI.,  king  of  Portugal,  dis- 
missed from  Portugal,  22,  40 

Alsace,  122,  123,  2.55,  261,  287,  300, 
317,  318;  regiments  from,  144, 
185 

Altieri,  cardinal  Emilio,  made  cardinal, 
50  ;  likely  to  be  chosen  Pope,  70,  73  ; 
becomes  Pope  Clement  X.,  89 ;  holds 
his  first  '  consistoire,'  92 ;  to  act  as 
arbitrator  between  France  and  Spain, 
134 ;  recalls  his  nuntio,  149 ;  offers 
money  to  Louis  XIV.,  162;  in  con- 
ference with  the  Bishop  of  Laon, 
188  ;  makes  promotions,  201 ;  takes 
up  arms  against  the  Venetians,  202  ; 
propiises  to  nominate  Pere  Neidhart 
a  cardinal,  210 ;  sends  Sieur  Nerli  as 
nuntio  to  Paris,  222 ;  tries  to  arbitrate 
between  Savoy  and  Geneva,  236 ;  to 
join  the  league  made  by  the  Princes 
of  Italy,  237 ;  indisposed,  250 ;  to 
intercede  for  Geneva,  255  ;  illness  of, 
279 ;  recovers,  280 ;  dispute  in  the 
Sorbonne  about  the  fallibility  of,  317  ; 
nuntio  from,  328,  329 

America,  13 

Amiens,  138,  244,  254 

Amsterdam,  30 

Angoumais,  disorders  in,  293 

Anguien,  due  d'.  See  Enghien,  Heniy 
Jules  de  Bourbon,  due  d' 


334 


TOK  i)EsrAr('iit;.s  ov  an  knulish  acjent  in  i'aki.s 


Anjou,  Louis  Francois,  due  d',  birth  of, 

223 
Anjou,    mivrquis     d'.       See     Dangeau, 

Philippe  dc  Courcillon,  marquis  de 
Anjou,  Philippe,  due  d',  7,  44,  51,  154, 

155,  163 
Annul,  pere,  74  ;  death  of,  94 
Anne  of  Austria,  queen  of  France,  7,10, 

15,  21,  3G,  01,  64,  82,  »C,  90,  97,  98, 

106,  117,  121,  124,  130,136.  144.  163, 
193,  210,  214,  220,  223,  224,  232,  254, 
255,  2G3,  264,  265,  2G6,  272,  273,  275, 
277,  279,  283,  309,  316 

Anne,  daughter  of  James,  Duke  of  York, 

100,  101 
Anthony,  cardinal,  61,  73,  79,  85 
Antiniclo,  71 

Antwerp,  179,  232,  233,  246,  268,  283 
Aoust  (in  Savoy),  185 
Aquaviva,  cardinal,  79 
Aragon,  D.  Pascual  d'Aragon  y  Cordoba, 

cardinal  d',  12,  61 
Aragon,  Don  Pedro  d',  26 
Arax,    comte  d'.     See  Harrach-Bruck, 

Ferdinand  Bonaventure,  comte  d' 
Archduchess.    See  Austria,  archduchess 

Eleanora  of 
Ardenburg,  229 
Ai-dennes,  182,  281,  282 
Ardre,  king  of,  123 
Ardrcs,  272 
Aremebcrg,  Philippe  Franvois  de  Ligne, 

comte  d',  38 
Arespacochago,  secretary  of  state,  39 
Arlington,  Henry  Benet,  earl  of,  7,  12, 

13,  18,  23,  24,  26,  28,  33,  37,  39,  40, 

47,  52,  70,  71,  77,  86.  91,  100,  101, 

107,  109,  112,  114,  115,  118,  120, 122, 
124,  133,  223,  242,  288,  290 

Arlington,  Isabella  of  Nassau,  countess 

of,  32, 151 
Armagnae,  Louis  de  Lorraine,  comte  d' 

{le  grand  dcuyer),  194,  315 
Armstcin,  263 
Arnheim,  227,  228,  278,  313 
Arnicu,  sieur  d',  177 
Arras,  76,  82,  84,  89,  90 
Arscot,  forest  of,  22 
Aitaignan,   Charles  de  Bats-Cartelmor, 

comte  d'.  202,  205,  2.52 
Artois,  147,  183  ,  regiments  of,  144 
Aspravant,  Francois  de  la  Mothc-Ville- 

bert,  vicomte  d',  82 


Astorga,  Don  Antonio  Pedro  Gomez 
Davila  Alvarez,  marquis  d',  vicerov  of 
Sicily,  210 

Atenheini,  321 

Ath,  25,  46,  76,  84,  128,  144,  205,  207, 
216,  229,  238,  2.56,  312 

Aubenas,  104 

Aubeterre,  L^on  d'Esparb6s  dc  Lussan, 
chevalier  d',  226 

Auche,  archbishop  of.  Sec  Motho- 
Houdancourt,  Henri  de  la 

Ausberg  (Aversberg),  Wolfgang  Engel- 
bert,  count  or  prince  of,  57,  58 

Ausember,  224 

Austria,  arduchess  Eleanora  of,  53,  54, 
122,  123,  244,  245 

Austria,  Eleanora,  empress-dowager  of, 
111 

Austria,  emperor  of.     See  Leopold  \. 

Austria,  French  resident  in,  1.56,  1.59, 
160 

Austria,  king  of.     See  Ferdinand  III. 

Auvergne,  regiments  from,  143 

Auvergne,  Emmanuel  Theodore  de  la 
Tour  d'  (due  d'Albrct).  in  hopes  of  a 
cardinal's  hat,  22,  29,  50,  55,  61,  73 ; 
made  governor  of  Guienne,  117,  193  ; 
pretends  to  the  office  of  chancellor, 
125 ;  dispute  between  the  Ai'chbishop 
of  Paris  and,  197  ;  goes  to  Bayonne, 
256,  257 ;  pretends  to  the  arch- 
bishopric of  Naibonne,  269 

Avernie  (Avernes),  76,  84,  284,  285 

Avignon,  149 

Ayen,  Anne  Jules,  comte  d',  209 

Azzolini,  Dccio  Juniore,  cardinal,  74 


Bachi,  Capigi,  Turkish  envoy,  191 
Bade     (or     Bade-Dourlach),     Gustavc 

marquis  de,  43,  58,  201,  324 
Baden,  161 
Bailleul,   marquis  de   MAteau-Gontier, 

Louis  de,  318 
Baltic  Sea,  80,  122 
Bampfield,  colonel  Joseph.  178 
Bapaume.  89 
Bar-sur-Seine,  174 
Barbary,  177,  217 
Barberini,  cardinal  Franciscus,  bishop 

of  Rheims,  45,  55,  61,  68,  69,  70,  72, 

79,  185,  197 
Barcelona,  323 


335 


Barclay,  F.,  302 

Bargeliieni,  papal  nuntio  in  Paris,  149 

Barguilini.     See  Bargeliieni 

Bavrte,  La,  89 

Bsrtillet,  Etienne  Jehannot  de,  293 

Basle,  pont  de,  71 

Bastille,  15,  99,  135,  137,  139,  305,  306, 

307,  308;   chapel  of  the,  295,   306, 

307 
Bastion  de  la  France,  (in  Africa),  118 
Batteville  (or  Watteville),  Charles,  baron 

de,  Spanish  envoy  in  Portugal,  52 
Bavaria,  AdeUieid    Henrietta,  duchess 

of,  214,  233  n.  1 
Bavaria,   Ferdinand   Maria,  elector  of, 

233,  261 
Bavaria,  Maximilian  Emmanuel,  duke 

of,  40,  56,  245,  254,  255 
Bavay,  88 

Bavinnes,  cardinal  de,  201 
Bayonne,  43,  137, 185,  256,  257,  292 
Bazadoima,  Pietro,  cardinal,  252 
Beach,  captain,  113,  179 
Beancher,  Mr.,  96,  97 
Beaufort,  Fran(;ois  de  Vendume,  due  de, 

4,  5,  11,  13,  14,  21,  23,  24 ;  death  of, 

27,  30,  32,  34,  36,  65,  67, 104 
Beaumont,  85,  89 
Beauvais,  85,  89,  185 
Beauvise,  M.  de,  225 
Beliazari,  M.  de.    See  Bellinzani,  Fran- 

(;ois 
BeCefonds,   Bernardin  Gigault  de,  29, 

31,  33,  35,  110,  130,   182,   189,  202, 

205,  207,  215,  216,  279 
Belle  Isle,  215 
Belligon,  M.,  126 
Bellinzani,     Francois,     intemlant    de 

manufactures,  119,  142 
Benuverte,  Monsieur,  289 
Berg-op-Zoom,  248 
Bergoen  (Bergues),  76 
Berlin,  72,  237,  293 
Berlize,  M.,  140 
Bernardburg,  76 
Berne,  199 
Berne  Castel,  278 
Berryer  (orBenier),  Louis,  5 
Bertillac,     Monsieur.       Sec     Bartillet, 

Etieune  .Jehannot  de 
Bethune,  76,  84,  89 
Bethune,     Francjois    Gaston,    maiquis 

de,  envoy  to  Madrid,  51 


Bethune,  Marie  Louise  de  la  Grange- 
Arquien,  Mademoiselle  de,  86 

Bezan<;on,  38,  151,  287,  291,  313 

Beziers,  bishop  of.    See  Bonzy,  Pierre  de 

Bezons,  Claude  Bazin,  sieur  de,  inten- 
dant  of  Languedoc,  141,  306 

Biche,  151 

Binche,  76,  84,  88,  216,  318 

Biron,  Charles  de  Gontault  de,  296 

Biscay,  Bay  of,  185,  208 

Bitau,  Isle  of,  228,  232 

Bizoh.     See  Binche 

Blauquefort,  marquis  de,  208 

Blois,  147 

Blois,  Marie  Anne  de  Bourbon,  made- 
moiselle de,  300 

Blood,  Thomas,  165 

Bohemia,  245 

Bois,  Sieur  du,  appointed  '  procureur- 
g6n6ral  de  la  Cour  des  Aides,'  129 

Boisleduc.     See  Hertogenbosch 

Bologne,  mademoiselle  de,  316 

Bommel,  231,  233,  261 

Bonaccorsi,  cardinal  Bonaccorso,  50 

Bonaiti,  cardinal,  73 

Bond,  sir  Thomas,  32 

Bone,  cardinal  Giovaimi,  50,  64,  73,  78, 
88 

Bonelli,  cardinal  Carlo,  73,  79,  88 

Bonn,  131,  176,  181,  189,  200,  274,  280 

BonneuU,  Michel  Chateuet  de,  140,  227 

Bonneuil,  Nicolas  Auguste  de  Harlay, 
seigneur  de,  179 

Bonzy,  Pierre  de,  bishop  of  Beziers, 
French  ambassador  to  Poland,  9  ;  to 
Madrid,  41,  56 ;  made  archbishop  of 
Toulouse,  50 ;  proposes  a  marriage 
between  the  king  of  Spain  and  Maria 
Theresa  of  France,  66,  69  ;  arrives  at 
Madrid,  77  ;  replaced  by  the  marquis 
de  ViUars,  141 ;  insulted  by  the  due 
d'Albuquerque,  155 ;  made  grand 
aumAnier  de  la  reine,  163 ;  acts  as 
secretary  in  place  of  M.  de  Lionne, 
165, 166, 167  ;  in  hopes  of  a  cardinal's 
hat,  197,  201,  210  ;  influence  over  the 
queen,  214 ;  goes  to  Toulouse,  219  ; 
likely  to  succeed  to  the  archbishopic 
of  Nai-bonne;  269,  271 

Boom.     See  Bonn 

Bordier,  Jacques,  resident  of  Geneva  in 
France,  275 

Borromeo,  Gilbeno,  death  of,  185 


330 


THK  i)i;!<rATrni:s  or  an  knci.ipii  agknt  in  vauis 


Bouillon,  295,  290 

Bouillon,  cardinal   de.     Sec  Auvcivne, 

Emmanuel  Thi'oclore  de  la  Tour  d' 
IJnuillon,  Constiintiii  I^nacc  de  la  Tour, 

chevalier  de,  193 
Houillon,  Godefroi  Maurice  de  la  Tour 

d'Auvcrgne,  due  dc,  chamberlain,  96, 

150 
Boulogne,  76,  84,  85,  89,  114 
Boulogne,  Bois  de,  14,  15 
Bourbon,  65 

Bourdaloue,  piMe,  295,  296,  305,  308 
Bourdeaux  (nordeaiii).  8,  27,  54,  229, 

:!09,  315,  325 
Bourges,  174 
Bourgcs,   archbishop    of.      See   Mont- 

pezat  dc  Carbon,  .lean  de 
Bourgogne.     Sec  Burgundy 
Boury,  due  de,  227 
BourKmont.  chevalier  de,  6 
Bourlc'niont.  Louis  d'Anglure  de,  56 
BourUmont  des  Moulins,  M.  de,  6 
Bournonville,  Alexandre  Hippolyte  Bal- 
thazar, comtc  de  Hennin  (later  due) 

de,  278 
Brabant,  233,  244 

Bracciano,  Flavius  Ursini,  dul<e  of,  318 
Braganza,  Catherine  of.  111 
Brancion,  217 
Brandenburg,  Charles  ^milius,  elector 

ot,  death  of,  299 
Brandenburg,  FrederickWilliam,  elector 

of,  39,  56,  63,  66,  92,  190,   195,  200, 

211,  237,  238,  239,242,  243,  244,  2.^0, 

276,  301 
Brandenburg,   proposition  to    get    the 

crown  ot  Poland,  13 
Brayne,  110 

Breda,  232,  233.  244.  245,  248,  253,  2.56 
Breda,  treaty  of,  58 
Bremen.  234,  255 

Brest,  118,  127,  181,  192,  210,  312,  314 
Bret,  Alexandre  le,  68.  202,  208, 318,  325 
Bret,  Pierre  Cardin  le,  103.  175 
Brey,  marquis  de,  306,  307 
Bridgeman,  Sir  Orlando,  lord  keeper,  42 
Briol,  cons.   de.     Sec   Wiord,   Gabriel, 

comte  de 
Brisac  (in  Alsace),  259,  260.  298.  301, 

321,  332 
Brisac,  sieur,  305 
Brittany,  39,  64,  272,  328 ;  disturbances 

in,  32"0 


Brittany,  governor  of.     Sec  Chaulncs, 

Charles  d'Albert  d'Ailly,  due  de 
Bros.s(-,  M.  de  la,  332 
Brouilli,  M.,  226 
Brun,  Charles  le,  119 
Brunetti,  I'abbc:',  283 
Bnmswick,  156 
Brunswick,  Rudolph  Augustus,  duke  of, 

45,  92,  131,  1.54,  243 
Brussels  (Bruxels),  61,  75.  86,  179,  183, 

210.  213,  232,  245,  247.  256,  279,  280, 

303,  304,  320 
Bruynuicks,    sieur    Harmcl,     resident 

from  Strasbourg  at  Vienna,  65 
Buat,  madame  de,  282,  283 
Buckhurst.  Charles,  lord,  31 
Buckingham.    George  Villiers.   second 

duke  of,  105,  106,  107,  108,  109,  110, 

111,  121,  256,  257 
Buczasz,  Peace  ot,  between  Turkey  and 

Poland,  235 
Biirick.  222,  228 
Bugia  (or  Boggia),  43,  151,  154 
Buire,  M.  le.     Sec  Brun,  Charles  le 
Buonvisi,  cardinal  Girolanio,  50 
Burgundv,  4,  20,  25,  145,  208,  243,  313 
Burish,  Mr.,  32 
Bussy,  Eoper  de  Eabutin,  comte  de,  208 


C.\ccn,  cardinal  Frederic,  252 
Cadaval,  Nimo  Alvares  Percira  de  Mello, 

due  de,  297 
Cadiz  (Cndix),  43,  93,  208,  247 
Calais,  76,  84,  85.  89.  Ill,  152,  223.  232, 

242,  268,  270,  274,  316 
Callois,  marquis  de.     Sec  Cavoye,  Louis 

d'Oger,  marquis  de 
Cambrav,  90,  272 
Camday,  M.  de,  296 
Camu,  Nicholas  le,  appointed  presiden 

of  the  '  Cour  des  Aides,'  129 
•  Canal  des  deux  mers,'  142.  202.  220 
Canaples,   Francois  de  Crequv,  comte 

de,  300 
Canaiy  Islands,  60 
Candia,  5,  9,  10.  11,  13,  18.  19,  23,  24, 

27,  28,  29,  31,  33,  34,  35,  36,  38,  42, 

48,  50,  59,  62,  71,80,81,  119, 195,211 
Canea,  9 

Canon,  president,  205 
Cantone  (Catania),  12,  13 
Capucins,  convent  of  the,  135 


337 


Caraffo,  cardinal  Cai-lo,  73 

Cardouniere,  comte  de  la,  289 

Carlof,  seigneur,  138 

Casimir  (or  Kasimir),  John,  king  of 
Poland,  abdication  of,  5,  23,  232 ;  re- 
ceives the  Order  of  the  Golden  Fleece, 
23  ;  to  be  received  into  the  Abbey  of 
St.  Germains,  44 ;  has  an  interview 
with  the  king  of  France,  45, 46  :  death 
of,  97 

Castelmelhor,  D.  Luis  de  Sousa  Vascon- 
cellas.  conde  de,  20,  130 

Castelnaii,  144 

Castel  Kodrigo,  marquis  de,  81 

Castel  Vecehio,  23G 

Castille.  D.  Inigo-Melchior  Fernandez 
de  Velasco,  constable  of,  81 

Castille,  Dom  Diego  Sarmiento  y  Valla- 
dares,  bishop  of  Oviedo,  president 
of,  1 

Castries,  Bene  Gaspard  de  la  Croix, 
marquis  de,  103,  104 

Castro,  Don  Juan  de,  imprisoned,  23 

Catalogue  (Catalmia),  134,  180,  190, 
202,  203,  208,  234,  257,  275, 318,  322, 
325 

Cataloni,  I'abbe,  210 

Cateau-Cambri5sis,  88 

Catheux,  monsieur,  289 

Cavoye,  Louis  d'Oger,  marquis  de,  102 

Celsi,  cardinal,  64,  73 

Centurion,  Hippolyte,  marquis  de,  62 

Cepte  (Cettf),  port"  of,  220 

Cerigo,  isles  of  (off  Moi-ea),  18 

Cerro,  cardinal  Carlo,  50 

Chaalons  (CMlons-xur-Marne),  129, 130, 
161,  170,  171,  173,  299 

Chaise,  Francois  d'Ais  de  la  (known  as 
Pere  de  la  Chaise),  confessor  to 
Louis  XIV.,  316 

Chaliott  {CliaUeot),  44,  137 

ClLalons-sur-Marne,  bishop  of.  See 
Herse,  Felix  Vialar  de 

Ch;'ilons-sur-Sadne,  bishop  of.  See 
Maupeou,  Jean  de 

Chamarante,  sieur  de,  193 

Chamber  (Chamhord),  28,  29,  32,  34, 
98,  103,  111,  112,  11.5.  116,  145 

ChamiUy,  Herard  Bouton,  comte  de, 
78,  92,  171,  172,  175,  217,  218,  222 

Champagne,  65,  127, 129, 161, 169, 170  ; 
regiments  of,  144 

Champ-Fleury,  M.  le.  6 
VOL.  V. 


Champvallon,  Francois  de  Harlay  de, 

archbishop  of  Paris,  185, 197,  302,  305 
Chancellor   of  France.      See    S6gnier, 

Pierre 
Chandenier,  Francjois  de  Eochechouart, 

marquis  de,  174 
Chantilly,  146,  233,  292,  330 
Charente  (river),  192,  216 
Charenton,  4 
Charleroy,  25,   76,  78,  84,  88,  128,  211, 

213,  215,  216,  217,  2.56,  28.5,  318 
Charles  II.,  king  of  England,  16,  24,  26, 

40,  41,  72,  ,S0,  88,  93,  107,  117,  118, 

140,  1.52,  169,  186,  191,  227,  253,  255, 

269,  287,  302 
Charles  II.,  king  of  Spam,  1,  5,  10,  12, 

21,  43,  66,  77,  90,  91,  93,   102,  127, 

134,  138,  162,  171, 173,  174,  190,  255. 

259,  263,  265 
Charles  II.,  king  of  Sweden,  72 
Charon,  Marie,  wife  of  Jean  Baptiste 

Colbert,  106 
Charost.  Louis  de  B^thune,  comte  de, 

made  lieutenant  du  roi,  204 
Chartres,  Philippe,  due  de  (afterwards 

due  d'Orl^ans),  309  n.  2 
Chaseron,  monsieur,  289 
Chastel  Surmoisy,  108,  110,  112,  113 
Chastelet.     See  Le  Catelet 
Chateauneuf,  Balthazar,  Phelippeus  de. 

See  Vrillidre,  Mai-quis  de  la 
Chateau  Eenau,  143 
Chateau  Eenau.  sieur  de,  217 
Chateau  Trompette,  141,  325 
Chateauvieux,  seigneur  de,  281 
Chateau  Vif  (d'lf)  (near  Marseilles),  69 
Chatham,  158 
Chaulnes,  Charles  d'Albert  d'Ailly,  due 

de,  French  ambassador  to  Rome.  49, 

50,  51,  .53,  55,  01,  70.  83,  87,  88,  92, 

102,  103,  272,  286 
Chaumont,  Alexandre,   chevaUer   (later 

marquis)  de,  330 
Chevreuse,  Honore  d'Albert,  due  de,  102 
Chevreuse,  Jeanne  Marie  Th6r^se  Col- 
bert, duchesse  de  (dame  du  j^alais), 

284 
Chigi,  cardinal  Flavio,  53,  61,  62,  64, 

08,  09,  70,  73,  74,  280 
Choiseul.      Sec    Plessis-Praslin,  C6sar 

Auguste  de  Choiseul,  chevalier  de 
Choisy,  Jean  Paul  de,  74 
Cholwich,  Mr.,  32 

Z 


338 


THE    DRSI'ATC'IIES   OK    AN    ENCLISII    AGENT   IN    PAKIS 


Choiipe,  iM.  du,  156 

Christian  V.,  king  of  Denmark,  '.'4,  154, 

•243,  320 
Chudlcigh,   Thomas,   secretary   to   the 

embassy  in  Sweden,  229 
Cibo,  cardinal,  14>J,  l'J7,  219 
Civita  Vecchia,  42 
Clarendon,  Edward  Hyde,  1st  carl  of, 

death  of,  299 
Clarges,  sir  Thomas,  241 
Clement  IX.,  Pope,  5,  23,  27,  29,  31,  39, 

40,  43,  48,  49,  50,  53,  70,  89 
Clement  X.,  Pope.    See  iltieri,  cardinal 

Emilio 
Clerment,  Henri  de  Bourbon,  comte  de, 

299 
Clermont,  chevalier  de,  99 
Cleves,  duchy  of,  211,  239 
Clifford,  sir  Thomas,  lord  treasurer,  19G 
Clissa,  71 
Cld,  M.  du,  149 

Cloth  trade,  32,  .33,  G3.  114,  14G,  152, 1.53 
Coblents  (Coblcntz),  254,  257,  200,  203 
Cochin,  166 

Codgill,  Mr.,  23,  31,  63,  101 
Coetlogon,  liouise  Philippe  de  (maid  of 

honour),  277 
Coiuvres,  Annibal  d'Estr^cs,  marquis  de, 

102 
Coislin,  Armand  de  Cambout,  due  de,  78 
Coislin,  Ciisar  de  Cambout,  due  de,  184, 

226 
Coislin,  Pierre  de  Cambout  de,  bishop 

of  Orleans,  184 
Colbert,  Jean  Baptiste,  4,  23,  32,  33,  47, 

50,  52.  79,  100. 100,  111,  113, 118, 123, 

128, 129, 130,  140,  141,  143,  145.  146, 

150,  152,  158,  165,  166,  171, 172, 182, 

210,  213,  222,  247,  258,  259,  260,  266, 

270,  278,  298,  317,  318,  320,  326 
Colbert  de    Croissy,    Charles,    French 

ambassador  to  England,  24,  2(>,  82, 

107,  165,  160,  283,  315 
Coligni,  Jean  de,  195 
Colina,  2G0 
Colmar,  317,  319 
Cologne,  126,  127,  130,  131,  148,  150, 

163,  171,  172,  174,  175,  178, 182, 183, 

186,  189, 196,  211,  217,  243,  248,  253, 

254,  255,  260,  261.  278,  286,  320 
Cologne,  urchbishop  of.     Sec  Cologne, 

Maximilian  Henry  of  Bavaria,  elector 

of. 


Cologne,  Maximilian  Henry  of  Bavaria, 
elector  of,  40,  56,  63,  72,  78,  128, 129, 
130,  136,  140,  148,  149,  155, 171, 174, 
175,  176,  178,  179,  181,  182,  186,  187, 
189,  195,  198, 199,  200,  201,  205,  217, 
218,  220,  221,  223,  224,  229,  257,  275, 
277 

Colomb,  1 

Colombel,  M.,  6 

Colonna,  Marie  Mancini,  constable  of, 
242 

Commerce,  treaty  of,  between  England 
and  France,  15, 16,  17,  24,  27,  34,  37, 
38,  101 

Commerce  between  France  and  Holland, 
118,  120,  121,  122,  123,  127.  172, 
281 

Compein  (.Compiigne),  76,  83,  156,  157 

Conclave  at  Home,  50 

Condt,  113 

Cond6,  Clara  Clementina,  princesse  de, 
132,  135 

Conde,  Louis  II.,  prince  de,  7,  8,  9,  11, 
16,  29,  39,  62,  66,  69,  74.  102,  112, 
118, 124, 128,  146,  171,  182,  185,  189, 
200,  205,  209,  211,  213,  215,  217,  219, 
221,  224,  225,  226,  227,  228,  231,  233, 
238,  243,  245,  246,  253,  256,  262,  263, 
264,  265,  268,  270,  271,  272,  275,  278, 
282,  283,  284,  285,  286,  287,  289,  292, 
323,  324,  325,  326,  328,  330 

Condom,  323 

Conneroy,  217 

Connismavke.  comte  de.  Sec  Konigs- 
marck,  comte  de 

Con?egra  (Consucgra),  33 

Constantinople,  8,  13,  14,  59,  63,  70,  71, 
74,  78,  87,  99,  141,  177,  191,  214 

Conti,  Anne  Marie  Martinozzi,  princesse 
de,  death  of,  189,  190 

Conti,  Louis  Annand,  prince  de,  193 

Cooke,  Mr.,  301 

Cooper,  Anthony  Ashley,  earl  of  Shaftes- 
bury, lord  chancellor  of  England,  258 

Coquille,  monsieur,  276 

Cordona,  D.  Luis  Bamon  d'Aragon,  due 
de,  07 

Coringes,  26 

Corn,  prohibition  against  the  transport 
of,  into  England,  17 

Cornbury,  Hem^  Hyde,  lord,  299 

Corse  (Corsica),  cape  de,  330 

Corsini,  cardinal  Ncrio,  73 


339 


Cortigo,  cape  de,  101 

Cour  des  Aides,  75  ;  president  of  the, 
267 

Com-bon,  258 

Courboyer,  J.  A.  Crux,  marquis  de,  be- 
headed, 50 

Courcelles,  Charles  de  Champlais,  mar- 
quis de,  102.  288 

Courcillon,  Louis  de,  abb6  de  Dangeau, 
appointed  kctcur  du  roi,  ISH 

Courtin,  Honors,  171,  210,  219 

Courtray,  76,  84,  89,  244 

Coventry,  Henry,  secretary  of  state, 
241 

Cracow,  monsieur.  See  Krackow,  Lorenz 
Georg  von 

Cr6quy,  Charles  III.,  due  de,  103,  105, 
108,  112,  131,  14.5,  148,  150, 106,  171, 
179,  180,  189,  201,  202,  207.  209,  210, 
237,  293,  299,  309,  318,  319,  323,  320, 
331,  332 

Crequy,  Madeleine  de,  179,  299 

Crequy,  monsieur  de,  involved  in  Ro- 
han's conspiracy,  290 

Crow,  Thomas,  captain,  105 

Crussol,  due  de,  regiments  of  the,  144  ; 
son  of,  292 

Cujac,  seigneur  de,  177 

Cullen.     See  Cologne 

Custom  duties,  18 ;  on  cloth,  24  ;  on 
wine,  23,  281 


Daljiatia,  71,  80,  150,  159,  165 

Dampierre,  Helene  Fomre  de  (maid  of 
honour),  277 

Dangeau,  Franpoise  Morin,  marquise  de, 
291 

Dangeau,  Philippe  de  Courcillon,  mar- 
quis de,  144,  209,  241,  201,  205.  275, 
290,  291,  292,  313 

Danish  minister  refuses  the  proposition 
made  by  France,  42  ;  has  audience  of 
Louis  XIV.,  314 

Dantzic,  97,  231,  234,  28:s 

Dauphin.     See  Louis,  the  Dauphin 

Dauphin^,  100,  101,  127 

Day  en,  sieur,  305 

Dean,  Mr.,  107 

Deley,  cardinal  Seipione,  74 

Delmer  (river),  286 

Denmark,  king  of.     See  Christian  V. 

Denmark,  king  of.     See  Ferdinand  III. 


Denmark,  Fr^derique  Am^lie,  princess 
of,  marriage  designed  between  Charles 
n.  and,  40 

Dejiuis,  seigneur,  valet  de  chambre,  143 

Derby,  William  George  Eichard  Stanley, 
earl  of,  274 

Deventer,  223,  228 

Dexmund,  86 

Dhona,  comte  de,  209,  228,  250 

Diep  {Dieppe),  107,  159,  240 

Diest  (in  Brabant),  286 

Digby,  Francis,  captain,  204,  208,  215 

Dignes,  6 

Dijon,  278 

Dinant,  295,  296,  318 

Dives,  sir  Lewis,  24 

Dodington,  John,  147 

Doesburg,  227,  228,  229,  233 

Donchery,  143 

Dopterre,  monsieur.  See  Aubeterre, 
Leon  d'Esparb^s  de  Lussan,  cheva- 
lier d' 

Doroscenskow,  general,  234 

Dotecmn,  224,  225 

Douay,  84,  89 

Douglas,  lord  George,  30,  90,  144,  159, 
289,  293 

Dover,  85,  91,  150 

Downing,  sir  George,  English  minister 
at  the  Hague,  180 

Droit  d'aubaine,  82,  92,  95,  100 

Diisseldori,  254,  278 

Dunquerque  (Dimlcirk),  6,  76,  84,  88, 
89,  91,  133,  138,  143,  144,  145,  184, 
254 

DuQuesne,  Abraham,  lieutenant-general, 
176,  215,  285,  326,  330,  332 

Duras,  Jacques  Henri  de  Durfort,  mar- 
quis (later  due)  de,  138,  204.  237,  293 

Duren,  187 

Dutch  ambassador  in  France.  See  Van 
Grotius,  Pierre 

Dutch  resident  in  France,  52 

Duties  laid  on  English  importations. 
115 

Duvall,  a  footman,  132,  135 


East  India  Compiiny,  86,  143,  187 

East  Indies,  52,  181,  186,  189 

Edict    concerning    the    transfusion   of 

blood,  60 
Elbceuf.  Charles  IIL,  due  d',  147,  204 
z  2 


340 


THE    DESI'ATCHKS   OF   AN   ENGLISH    AGEJfT   IN    PARIS 


Klbceuf,     Hlizabetli    dc    la    Tour    de    i 

bouillon,  ducbesse  d',  85 
Elba'ut,    mademoiselle   d'.     See    Lor-    1 

raine,  Marie  Maiijuerite  Ignacc  de 
Elci,  cardinal  Scipione  d',  73 
Ellis,  John,  undersecretary  ol  state,  80 
Elscndam,  145 

Emmerick,  217,  224,  227,  228  I 

Enghicn,  Henri  Jules  de  Bourbon,  due   I 

d',  44,  G'.»,  "JO,  182, 185,  201,  207,  237, 

270,  275,  283,  284,  289,  32G,  330 
Enghien,  Anne  de  Baviire,  duohessc  d', 

229  I 

England,  commerce  with,  21,  2G,  27,41, 

101,  112,  113,  114,  115,  116,  138,  140, 

152,  153  ; 

England,  king  of.     Sec  Charles  II.  ' 

England,  parliament  of,  41, 4C,  118, 272,    j 

273,  282 
England,    queen    of.      See    Braganza, 

Catherine  of  ] 

English  Greshaniites,  00 
Erlooh,  monsieur,  289 
Esuu.     See  Aisne 

Espinau  {Espiiml),  108,  109,  111,  113 
Esquin,  fort,  225,  220 
Este,  cardinal  d',  36,  43 
Estrades,  Godefroi,  comte  d',   77,  133, 

183,  277 
Estrades,  Louis,  marquis  d',  209 
Estrues,  CiSsar  d',  bishop  of  Laon,  185, 

186,  188,  189,  197,  201,  211,  219 
Estrades,  Jean  d',  30,  38,  42,  176,  179, 

186,  188,  189,  197,  198,  201,  285,  325 
Etna  (Gibel),  mount,  12 


Fabouli^re,  monsieur  de  la,  207 
FnJconberg,  Thomas  Belasyse,  viscount, 

85 
Fardeau,  sieur,  141 
Feast  of  the  Purification,  186 
Fenvelle,  monsieur  de,  306 
Ferdinand  III.,  lung  of  Denmark,  72  ; 

death  of,  77 
Ferdinand   III.,  king  of  Sweden,   156, 

301 
Ferrare,  202 
Ferrier,  p6re,  75 
FertcS,  Henri  de  Senneterre,  marquis  de 

la,  102 
Feuillade,  Franpois  d'Aubusson,  due  de 

la,  129,  20(i,  289,  327 


Fcuquieres,  Isaac  de  Pas,  marquis  de 

219 
Fez  (Fetz),  99,  157 
Finch,  sir  John,  79 
Fismes,  110 
Flanders,  1,  35,  37,  38,  42,  58,  65,  66, 

67,  69,  72,  76,  78,  80,  81,  83,  94,  106, 

107,  113,  117, 119,  123,  126,  1.33, 134, 

138,  139,  140,  145,  146,  147,  148,  162, 

163, 16(;,  169,  170,  175,  201,  203,  208, 

209,  229,  232,  234,  237,  240,  247, 263, 

264,  266,  268,  279,  280,  281,  282,312, 

313,  314,  327,  328,  333 
Flanders,  governor  of.     See  Monterey, 

D.  Juan  Domingo  Mendez  de  Haro, 

marquis  de 
Florence,    archbishop    of.     See    Ncrli 

Francisco 
Florence,    Cosmo,    duke  of,   57,   149 ; 

death  of,  91 
Florence,     Marie     Louise     d'Orleans, 

duchess  of,  57 
Fontainebleau,  103,  147,  156,  1,57,  158 

161,  163,  164,  270 
Forbes,  James,  274 
Forbins,  monsieur,  284 
Formosa,  Insula,  52 
Foucault,  Antoine  de,  207,  289 
Foucault,  Nicolas  Joseph,  276 
Fouquet,   Nicolas,   51,    106,   111,    168, 

206 
Fourille,      Jean-Jacques      Chaumfejan, 

chevalier  (afterwards  marquis)  de,  78, 

108, 110,  216,  260 
France,  ambassador  from,  to  Spain,  85, 

91,  118,  134,  247  ;  to  Sweden,  324 
France,  king  of.     Sec  Louis  XIV. 
France,  merchants  of,  135,  142 
France,  parliament  of,  1 
France,  queen  of.     See  Anne  of  Austria 
France,  queen-mother  of.  See  Henrietta 

Maria 
France,  resolutions  concerning  the  trade 

of,  122,  132 
France,  treaties  between  England  and, 

since  1606,  2 
Franche-Comto,  204,  211,  255,  256,  263, 

264,  265,  278,  287,  288,  290 
Francitelli,  cardinal,  88 
Fremont,  Nicolas,  276 
French  East  India  Company,  159,  184 
Frenoy,  monsieur  dc,  made  governor  of 

Dunkirk,  6 


341 


Frercs  de  la  Mcrci,  00 

Fribouig,  321 

Fubert,  monsieur,  86 

Fuente,  marquis  de  la,  210 

Fuernes,  145 

Fiirstenberg,  Francis  Egon,  count  of, 

40,  58,  78,  8G,  121,  197,  224,  275,  298, 

301,  315,  329 
Fvii'steuberg,  William,  count  of,  72,  221, 

293,  316,  329 


Gadaret,  Mathurin,  IB,  281 

Gabel,  the  Danish  minister  in  Fiance,  42 

Gabclle,  KiO,  1(52 

Gabrielli,  cardinal  Julio,  79 

Gadagne,    Charles    Felix    de    Galean, 

comte  de,  206 
Galissonniere,  Jacques-Barrin,  sieur  de 

la,  appointed  secretary  of  state,  187 
Garabuza  {Garabuse),  74 
Gaumondt  (Gaumont) ,  monsieur,  French 

ambassador  to  Italy,  314 
Gayland.  El  Hader,  the  Jloorish  chief, 

246 
Genes.     See  Genoa 
Geneva,  26,  104, 126, 127,  216,  231,  233, 

253,  255,   265 ;  quarrel   between   the 

Duke  of  Savoy  and  the  protestauts  of, 

26,  231,  233,  236,  237,  238,   239,  240, 

241 ;  resident  of.  See  Bordier,  Jacques 
Genlis,  Een6  Brulart,  marquis  de,  178, 

206,  289 
Genoa  [Genues],  14,  61,  74,  164 
Germany,  74,  81,  91,  130,  134,  157, 160, 

163,  164, 165,  196,  198,  208,  211,  234, 

237, 241 
Ghent,  baron  de.     See  Goes,  baron  de 
Gibel,  mount.     See  Etna,  mount 
Giblou,  217 

Give.monsieur,  Danish  envoy  to  Paris,  94 
Gnesen  [Guesne],  Nicolaus  Prazmoov- 

ski,  archbishop  of,  4 
Godolphin,  sir  William,  25,  43,  60,  85, 

91,  215,  216,  223,  225,  227,  236,  282 
Goes,  baron  de,  Dutch  ambassador  in 

France,  235,  237 
Gourville,   Jean    Herault    de,    French 

envoy  to  Spain,  62,  66,  69,  74, 102 
Grammont,  Antoine  de,  39,  121,   145, 

146,  234,  263,  275,  277 
Grammont,   Philibert,  chevalier  (after- 
wards comte)  de.  111,  115 


Grand  MaJtre,  monsieur  le.  See  Lude 
Henri  de  Daillon,  comte  de 

Grand  seigneur.  Sec  Mahomet  IV., 
sultan  of  Turkey 

Grange,  Marie  Casimire  de  la.  queen  of 
Poland,  299 

Grave,  278 

Gravel,  sieur  de,  66,  249 

Gravelinne,  76 

Gremonville,  sieur  de,  French  minister 
at  the  court  of  Austria,  74,  83; 
receives  an  abbey  from  the  king  at 
Vienna,  87  ;  affronted  by  the  prince 
of  Lobkowitz,  120  ;  sends  a  courier 
to  Paris,  159,  171 ;  interviews  the 
emperor  concerning  Phinsberg,  205  ; 
concerning  help  given  to  the  Dutch. 
245 ;  notifies  the  emperor's  move- 
ments to  Turenne,  250 

Grenada,  12 

Grey  {Graij),  287,  289,  290,  313 

Grimaldi,  cardinal  Girolamo,  50 

Gra-ninguen,  {Grmiinguen),  59,237,238 

Groningue.     Sec  Grceninguen 

Grotius.     Sec  Van  Grotius,  Pierre 

Guadalajara,  4,  12 

Guadalaxart.     Sec  Guadalajara 

Guascon,  sir  Bernard,  258 

Guastaldi,  cardinal,  251 

Guelderland,  233,  240 

Gueldi-e,  192 

Guem^nee,  Anne  de  Eohan,  princesse  de, 
305,  308 

Guernsey,  merchants  of,  82,  83,  95,101, 
114,  214,  221 

Guiche,  Armand  de  Grammont,  comte 
de,  137,  207,  226,  234,  277 

Guiche,  Marguerite  Louise  de  Bethune, 
comtesse  de,  285 

Guienne,  103,  117,  188,  328 

Guiny,  123 

Guise,  Elisabeth  d'Orluans,  duchesse  de, 
258,  277,  325 

Guitry,  Guy  de  Chaumont,  marquis  de, 
22.5,  226 

Gumbledon,  Mr.  6 

Gussy,  monsieur,  289 


Hague,  The,  19,  106,  171,  174,  180,  1«7, 

190,  191,  199,  201,  202,  297 
Hague,  the,  treaty  made  at,  127 
Haguenau,  819 


342 


THE   DESPATCHES   UV   AN    ENGLISH    AGENT   IN    PAKIS 


HaincB,  Jo.,  HG 

Mills,  Mr.,  1% 

liam.  21.5 

llambourg(Hom6ur(;),  294,  295,  299 

Hamilton,  sir  George,  20,  220,  248,  293 

Han,  70 

Haniiu,  Philip  lieiuharil,  prince  of,  5H,  59 

Uiincnko,  general  of  the  Cossacks,  234 

Hanover,  John,  duke  of,  troops  of,  129  ; 
treaty  of  neutrality  between  Louis 
and, 325 

Hanover-Brunswick,  Ernest  August, 
elector  of,  91 

Harcourt,  Franpois,  prince  d',  103,  110 

Harcourt,  Franvoise  de  Brancas,  prin- 
cesse  d',  284 

Hiiro,  Don  Garcia  de  Allevaneda  y  de,  1 

Harrack-Bruck,  Ferdinand  Bonavcn- 
ture,  comte  de,  36 

Harvey,  sir  Daniel,  English  ambassador 
to  Turkey,  78 

Hautefeuille,  Etienne  Texier,  chevalier 
d',  245,  289 

Havre  de  Grace,  64,  138,  192 

Haye,  monsieur  de  la,  62 

Haye-Ventelet,  Denis  de  In,  French  am- 
bassador to  Turkey,  14,  19,  87 

Hecre,  M.,  French  envoy  to  Austria,  214 

Heidelberg,  161,  162 

Heimskirke,  sieur,  Dutch  envoy  to 
Austria,  107,  115 

Henrietta  Maria  of  Bourbon,  queen- 
mother  (wife  of  Charles  I.),  2,  3,  8, 
32,  37,  44,  45,  60,  183 

Henry  III.,  king  of  Poland,  8 

Henry  IV.,  king  of  France,  296 

Hermanstein,  254,  257 

Herdin  {Hcsc/in).  6,  76,  84,  89 

Herse,  Felix  Vialar  de,  bishop  of 
Chalons-sur-Marne,  125 

Hertogenbosch,  230,  231,  232,  233,  244, 
248 

Hesse,  cardinal  de.  See  Este,  cardi- 
nal d' 

Hesse,  Charles,  landgraf  of,  106,  243 

Hewet,  sir  George,  1H5 

Hills,  Francis,  merchant,  95 

Hocher,  Johann  Paul,  baron  von,  58 

Holland,  envoy  from,  163,  180,  183 

■  Holland,  imposition  on  goods  from,  36, 
49 

Holland,  secret  article  between  France 
and,  17 


Holland,  states-general  of,  16,  49,  85, 

88,  109,  110,  117,  127.  128,  139,  169. 

170,  173,  174,  175,  178,  179,  186,191, 

192,  195,  199.  200,  205,  236, 263,  286, 

310,  327 
Holies  (Hollis),  lord  Dcnzil.  11,  24,  210 
Hombourg,  151 

Howard,  lord  Henry,  35,  64,  99 
Howard,  Philip  Tliomas,  cardinal,  324 
Howard,  sir  Kobert,  241,  242 
Hoxter,  136 

Huguenots,  13,  109,  13.5,  141 
Human   (city),  besieged  by  the  Turks, 

234 
Humbourg  (Humburg),  108 
Humicres,  chevalier  d',  289 
Humieres,  Louis  de  Crevaut,  marquis 

d',  22,  24,  38,  77,  164,  189,  202,  205, 

207,  215,  256,  271,  275 
Hungary,  protestants  of,  51 
Huys,  319 
Hyiires,  les  isles  de,  322 


iLniEuii,  Jean   Francois  de   Polastron, 

chevalier  de  la,  141 
Impositions  on  French  goods  imported 

into  Holland,  120,  121,  132 
Inspruck,  Claudia  Felicitas,  archduchess 

of,  to  m.irry  the  emperor,  245,  248 
Isle  of  Wight,  154,  155,  159 
Isola,  baron  d',  Austrian  ambassador  at 

the  Hague,  205 
Issel,  river,  209,  217,  218,  223,  225,  228, 

232,  240 
Italy,  French  resident  in,  236 
Italy,  princes  of,  231,  237,  314 
Iturietta,  D.  Michel,  Spanish  resident 

in  France,  44,  113 


J.icgutEK,  seigneur,  176 

Jamaica,  157 

Janizaries,  bodyguard  of  the  grand 
seigneur,  8 

Jars,  Frauvois  de  Kochechouart,  cheva- 
lier de,  death  of,  86 

Jeaques,  Philippes,  59 

Jenkins,  sir  Leoline,  English  ambassa- 
dor at  Cologne,  25G,  290 

.Jersey,  merchants  of,  83,  214,  221 

Jeves,  les  isles  de.  See  Hyeres,  les 
islfes  de. 


343 


Jonction  des  deux  mers.     See   Canal 

des  deux  mers 
Jones,  sir  Henry,  IGo,  252 
Juan  Jose,  Don,  1,  2,  4,  10,  11,  15,  18, 

22,  26,  33,  98 
JuHiers,  duchy  of,  94,   125,  170,    175, 

179,  181,  187,  223,  278 
Jurgenturu  (Agrigentum),  Gl 


Kill  des  petits  Tartares,  235 

Kamenez,  235 

Keiserswert    {Kaiserswerth),   181,   2O0, 

223,  275 
K^roualle,  Louise  Eende  de  Penaucoet 

de,  111,  295 
Kinsegg  (Kiutzig),  river,  321 
Kirk  (Eirke),  madam,  6 
Kiik  (Kiike),  Mr.,  6 
Eiuperli,  the  grand  vizier,  8,  9,  13.  18, 

30,  37,  49,  59.  62,  71,  78,  80,  81,  177, 

214,  235 
Konigsmarck,  count,  136,  157,  160, 167, 

173,  193,  224,  288,  289,  291,  300 
Kotzim,  battle  of,  between  the  Turks 

and  Poles,  280,  281 
Krockow,  Lorenz  Georg  von,  195,  199 


L'Ameet,  monsieur,  289 

La  Barre,  monsieur,  332 

La  15ass6e,  89 

Lacelli,  Prencipi  di,  79 

La  Chapelle,  104 

La  Ciutad  (Ciotat),  177 

La  Feuillee,  monsieur,  289 

Lancon.  monsieur,  289 

Landeghent.  245 

Landersy  (Latidrecy),  76,  84 

Langres,  300 

Languedoc.  80,  93,  101,  103,  147,  220 

Languedoc,   canal  of.     See  Canal  des 

deux  mers 
Lannoi,   Adrienne    Philippine  Therese 

de,  277,  279 
Laon,  216 

Laon,  bishop  of.     See  Estries,  C6sar  d' 
Larissa,  14,  86,  78 
La  Trousse,  monsieur,  289 
Lauterburg,  324 
Lauzun,  comte  de.     See  Puy  Guilhem, 

Antoine   Nompar  de  Caumout,  mai- 

quis  de 


Lavalier,  madame.  See  Valli^re, 
madame  de  la 

Lavaur,  bishopric  of,  0 

Le  Catelet,  88 

Legauez,  marquesa  de,  36 

Lenet  (Lainet),  Pierre,  39 

Leopold  I.,  emperor  of  Austria,  8,  16, 
21,  36,  40,  43.  49.  51,  54,  58,  02,  64, 
66,  77,  79,  81,  S3,  85,  111.  120,  122, 
123,  125,  127,  134,  137,  138, 139, 145, 
146,  148,  151,  156.  158,  159, 164, 171, 
172,  177,  178,  190.  191,  200,  201,  205, 
208,  211,  214,  234,  235,  238,  239,  243, 
244,  245,  248.  249,  250,  257,  260,  261, 
263,  264,  265,  266,  276,  279,  284,  290 

Le  Premier,  M.,  289      . 

Lesiau,  245 

Le  Tellier,  Francois  Michel,  marquis 
de  Louvois,  9,  13,  30,  32,  34,  41,  44, 
90,  100,  101,  103,  104,  106.  110, 119, 
125,  126,  128,  130.  138,  139, 140, 156, 
161,  167,  169,  170,  176.  179,  180, 181, 
183,  186,  187,  188,  189, 190,  194, 197, 
198,  214,  229,  234,  264,  265,  269,  270, 
275,  276,  323,  326 

Le  Tellier,  Louis  Francois,  167 

Le  TeUier,  Michel,  5,  44,  82,  106,  128, 
133,  167,  184,  210,  233 

Le  Tellier,  Michel,  wife  of.  See  Charon, 
Marie 

'  Le  Tiberie  Franvois,'  book  printed  in 
Holland,  25 

Levant,  327 

Levant  Company,  trade  of  the,  8,  13,  50, 
94,  119,  126,  137,  141 

Liche  (or  Heliche),  D.  Gaspar  Mendez 
de  Haro,  marquis  de,  52,  67 

Liche,  duchesse  de.  death  of,  60 

Liege,  78,  181,  198,  209,  211,  216,  217, 
218,  219,  221,  222,  248,  249,  279,  282, 
284,  295,  315,  319 

Li^ge,  bishop  of.  See  Cologne,  Maxi- 
milian Henry  of  Bavaria,  elector 
of. 

Li^ge,  prince  of,  152,  159,  168,  219 

Ligne,  Claude  Lamoral,  prince  de,  envoy 
to  England,  22  ;  viceroy  of  SicUy,  78 ; 
viceroy  of  Naples,  331,  332 

Ligne,  Philippe  Francois  de.  Ser 
Ai-emberg,  comte  d' 

Ligome  (Leglioni),  327,  330 

Lisle  {Lille),  76,  78,  84,  89,  119,  138, 
144,  148,  160,  164,  202,  205,  312 


o  11- 


THE    UliSPATC'HKS    OF    AN    li.NliLlSIl    AHE.NT    IN     I'AIUS 


Lillebonnc,   Francois   Marie   Jules   de, 

•ill,  212,  213 
Liiubourg   (Litnburg),  31'J  ;    surienJer 

of,  320 
Lin  {Li7Uz),  181 
Lioiine  {Li/onne),  Hugues  de,  5,  28,  41, 

42,  44.  47,  11«,  120,  121,   141,  147, 

14"J,  103,  105,  100,  182 
Lionne,  Louis  de  (marquis  de  Beriiy), 

105,  100,  184 
Lionne,  Jules  Paul,  abbi  de,  184 
Lionne,  Madeleine  de,  46 
Lions  (Lyons),  65,  07,  71,  85,  98,  U9, 

118,  120,  127,  144,  108,  193,  220,  259, 

207,  209,  300 
Lira,  Dom  Emmanuel  de,  Spanish  envoy, 

127,  190,  199,  247 
Lisbon,  12,  22,  30,  37,  40,  60,  214,  285 
Lobkowitz,  Wenceslaus  Eusebius,  prince 

of,  120,  157 
Loi'lies,  chateau  de,  174 
Lockhart,  sir  William,  24,  204,  208,  210, 

212,  215,  210,  243,  257,  200,  271,  280, 
301,  302,  309,  310,  314,  310,  317,  318 ; 
dcatli  of,  319 

Logny,  prince  of.  See  Ligne,  Claude 
Lanioral,  prince  de 

Luhu  (Lon),  river,  250 

London,  18,  110,  150,  259 

Longueville,  Jean  Louis  d'Orleans,  duo 
de,  79,  80 

Longueville.  See  Charles  Paris  d'Or- 
leans, oomte  de  St.  Pol,  afterwards 
due  <le 

Lopes,  Dom  Matheo,  envoy  from  the 
king  of  Aadres,  123 

Lorge,  Guy  de  Durfort-Duras,  comte 
(later  duo)  de,  206,  218.  223,  233, 247, 
250,  332 

Lorraine,  Charles  IV.,  due  de,  20,  45, 46, 
51,  53,  56,  58,  65,  60,  74,  75,  88,  90, 
91,  108.  109,  110,  111,  112,  120,  137, 
147,  148,  149,  151,  193,  205,  211,  212, 

213,  230,  237,  238,  255,  250,  260,  263, 
282,  280,  297,  298,  320,  328 

Lorraine,  Charles  Leopold  de,  later  duo 
de  (nephew  of  Charles  IV.),  53, 74,  75, 
110,  111,  123,  104,  205,  230,  235,  279, 
324,  328,  329 

Lorraine,  Eltonore  Marie,  duohesse  de, 
108 

Lorraine,  Francois  III.  do,  death  of, 
74 


Lorraine,  Marie  Marguerite  Ignace  de. 
290 

Lorraine,  Philippe,  chevalier  de,  05,  67, 
69,  87,  194,  196,  197,  204,  206,  235, 
239,  201,  202,  289 

Louis  XIV.,  king  of  France :  has  audience 
of  ambassador  Montagu.  1  ;  oilers 
assistance  to  the  queen  of  Spain,  2  ; 
sits  in  parliament,  3 ;  demands  the 
money  taken  by  the  '  maitres  des 
eomptes,'  5  ;  nominates  three  bishops, 
6 ;  goes  to  St,  Germain  to  review 
the  army,  7  ;  adopts  measures  to  in- 
crease his  army,  9 ;  prepares  for  war, 
10 ;  sends  a  declaration  concerning 
the  Huguenots  to  be  verilied  in  parlia- 
ment, 13 ;  at  Versailles,  14 ;  issues 
letters  of  reprisal  against  the  Dutch, 
16  ;  gives  a  '  free  liberty  '  to  his  sub- 
jects to  transport  corn,  17  ;  orders 
ships  to  fetch  the  Bassa,  19 ;  dines 
with  the  ollicers,  20  ;  his  library,  25, 
28 ;  lays  impositions  on  vessels  at 
Bordeaux,  27  ;  intends  to  send  forces 
in  the  spring  to  Candia,  31 ;  to  re 
ceive  the  Turkish  envoy  at  Vinceunes, 
32  ;  orders  certain  regiments  to  ren 
dezvous  at  Toulon,  33 ;  receives  re 
ports  of  the  duke  of  Beaufort  being 
made  prisoner,  34 ;  in  love  with 
madame  de  Soubise,  35  ;  to  remain  at 
St.  Germain,  30  ;  goes  to  Versailles, 
38 ;  forbids  the  duke  of  Navailles  to 
go  to  court,  38 ;  endeavours  to  in- 
crease his  army,  41 ;  appoints  M.  de 
Vivonne  his  vice-admiral,  42  ;  sends  a 
courier  to  the  grand  seigneur,  45  ; 
gives  au  audience  to  the  Turkish 
envoy,  47,  48  ;  sends  an  ambassador 
to  Home,  49  ;  gives  the  archbishopric 
of  Toulouse  to  the  bishop  of  Beziers, 
50  ;  appoints  the  duke  of  Chaulnes 
governor  of  Brittany,  51 ;  sends  an 
envoy  to  Madrid,  51  ;  sends  ships 
towards  Persia,  52 ;  makes  a  treaty 
with  the  duke  of  Lorraine,  53 ;  reso- 
lution concerning  his  navy,  54 ;  de- 
signs a  war  with  Holland  under 
cover  of  the  bishop  of  Munster,  54  ; 
styles  used  by  the  king  when  writing 
to  foreign  princes,  56,  57  ;  his  pro- 
gress into  Flanders,  58,  59.  03,  65,  69, 
72,  75,  70,  80,  82,  83,  84,  85,  80,  88, 


345 


126,  127,  128,  138,  144,  145,  14G,  147, 
148,  150,  172,  175,  205,  206,  212,  215, 
216,  217,  218,  219,  220,  221,  222,  223, 
224,  225,  226,  227,  228,  229,  230,  231, 
232,  233  ;  incensed  with  the  chevalier 
de  Lorraine,  65  ;  sends  a  message  to 
the  king  of  Spain,  65  ;  issues  a  regu- 
lation concerning  the  infantry,  68  ; 
sends  presents  to  Madam,  72 ;  gives 
leave  to  pere  Annat  to  retue  from 
court,  74 ;  appoints  pere  Ferrier  his 
successor,  75 ;  sends  congratulations 
to  Poland,  77 ;  reviews  the  troops, 
78  ;  verifies  edicts  in  parliament, 
80 ;  alarmed  at  the  preparations  in 
Flanders,  81 ;  visits  churches  in  Paris, 
82  ;  rumour  that  the  king  intends  to 
join  the  charges  of  councillor  and 
master  of  reijuests,  83  ;  receives 
news  from  Hungary,  86 ;  gives  an 
abbey  to  the  sieur  de  Gremonville,  87  ; 
his  reception  at  Lisle,  89,  90 ;  orders 
a  fort  to  be  built  at  St.  Germain, 
91 ;  arrives  in  Paris,  92  :  asks  parlia- 
ment for  money,  93 ;  resolves  to  go 
to  Versailles,  94,  95  ;  condoles  with 
Monsieur  on  the  death  of  Madam,  97  ; 
sends  a  ■  lettre  de  cachet '  to  the 
governor  of  Valence,  102  ;  orders  the 
nobility  of  Languedoc  to  be  in  arms, 
103 ;  orders  M.  Colbert  to  give  all 
satisfaction  to  the  English  king,  107 ; 
reported  to  have  received  a  letter  of 
submission  from  the  duke  of  Lorraine, 
109,  110 ;  refers  the  matter  to  the 
dowager  empress  of  Austria,  111  ; 
orders  the  prince  of  Conde  to  accom- 
pany him  to  Lorraine,  112 :  receives 
a  memorial  from  the  Dutch  ambas- 
sador, 116 ;  issues  orders  for  the 
equipment  of  men-of-war,  117  ;  en- 
deavours to  get  money  from  parlia- 
ment, 120  ;  consents  to  the  marriage 
of  the  count  de  Lauzun  and  Mile, 
de  Montpensier,  121  ;  issues  reso- 
lutions concerning  trade  with  the 
Dutch,  122,  123 ;  withdraws  his  con- 
sent to  the  marriage  of  the  count  of 
Lauzuu  and  MUe.  de  Montpensier, 
124 ;  gives  audience  to  the  imperial 
envoy,  125 ;  gives  audience  to  the 
Dutch  ambassador,  127,  128,  131  ; 
reviews  the  troops,  129,  130 ;  makes 


a  treaty  with  the  duke  of  Hanover, 
131  ;  intent  upon  war,  133  ;  makes 
propositions  to  the  queen  of  Spain, 
134 ;  goes  to  the  '  foire  de  St.  Ger- 
main,' 136  ;  rumour  that  he  will 
restore  Lorraine  to  the  emperor,  139, 
145, 147, 150 ;  appoints  M.  de  Monte- 
gut  governor  of  Chasteau  Trompette, 
141 ;  gives  a  regiment  of  foot  to  the 
prince  of  Piedmont,  142  ;  imposes  a 
tax  on  chimneys,  146 ;  encourages  the 
trade  of  France,  152,  153 ;  the  raising 
of  troops,  154, 155 ;  orders  St.  Queutin 
to  be  fortified,  156 ;  goes  to  Fontauie- 
bleau,  157 ;  raises  money,  158,  160  ; 
tries  to  buy  Sweden  off  from  the 
Triple  Alliance,  159 ;  offers  a  prize 
for  a  motto  to  be  put  on  the  fronti- 
spiece of  the  Louvre,  160  ;  causes  the 
marriage  of  Monsieur  to  the  princess 
Palatine  to  be  celebrated,  161  ;  re- 
ceives a  proposition  from  certain 
undertakers  to  raise  money,  162 ;  at 
Fontainebleau,  163 ;  re-establishes  the 
'  Bureau  '  in  Flanders  removed  by 
the  comte  de  Monterey,  164  ;  Veue 
tian  levies,  165 ;  increases  marshal 
Crequy's  army  in  Lorraine,  166  ; 
appoints  M.  de  Pomponne  as  minister 
of  foreign  affairs,  167  ;  grants  an 
audience  to  the  Dutch  ambassador, 
170  ;  appoints  Monsieur  Colbert 
'  director-general  of  marme  affairs,' 
171 ;  receives  a  letter  from  the  states 
general  of  HoUand,  173  ;  gives  the 
comte  d'Estrees  general  command 
over  the  navy,  176 ;  sends  a  letter 
to  the  Dutch  ambassador,  178 ;  hai 
designs  on  Metz,  180 ;  increases  the 
pension  of  the  due  d'Enghien,  182  ; 
at  Versailles,  183 ;  issues  commis- 
sions for  equipping  war  ships,  184  ; 
orders  the  building  of  the  Louvre  to 
be  discontinued  in  order  to  increase 
his  treasury,  185  ;  commands  the 
French  merchants  to  discontinue 
their  trade  with  the  Dutch  merchants, 
187  ;  appoints  the  seigneur  de  la 
Galissouniere  '  councillor  of  state,' 
189 ;  distribution  of  commands,  189, 
198 ;  threatens  to  declare  war  if  the 
queen  of  Spain  sends  help  to  the 
Dutch,    190  ;    holds    the    seal,    192, 


U6 


THE    DESPATCIlIiij   OK   AN    ENCiLISU    AGENT   IN    TARIS 


193 ;  orders  tlie  marquis  dc  Villoroi 
to  retire  to  Lyons,  193  ;  recalls  the 
chevalier  de  Lorraine,  194,  lOfi.  197 ; 
gives  an  audience  to  the  resident  of 
Brandenburg,  195  ;  goes  to  St.  Ger- 
main. 199  ;  refuses  an  audience  to 
the  Dutch  ambassador,  200 ;  issues 
new  commissions  for  raising  troops, 
201.  202;  distribution  of  the  army 
and  commands.  20.5,  2011,  209.  211; 
gives  the  Dutch  ambassador  audience 
of  cimgf.  209.  215.  211) ;  has  audience 
of  sir  William  Locldiart.  212  ;  breaks 
the  treaty  made  with  the  duke  of 
Lorraine.  213  ;  appoints  marshal 
Turenne  a  '  gOneral  des  armies  du 
roi,'  215  ;  sends  the  marquis  de 
Traesnel  to  negotiate  with  the  Italian 
princes,  21G ;  demands  passage  for 
his  troops  from  the  conite  de  Monte- 
rey, 218;  garrisons  the  large  towns 
of  Liege,  219  ;  receives  a  deputy  from 
the  elector  of  Cologne,  221 ;  assists 
at  the  siege  of  Wesel,  22.S ;  refuses 
an  audience  to  the  Dutch  ambassador, 
227 ;  returns  to  Paris  after  his  pro- 
gress into  Flanders,  233 ;  refuses  to 
have  a  triumphal  entry  into  Paris, 
236;  at  Versailles,  239;  orders  the 
troops  to  be  ready  to  winter  in  Mctz, 
213  ;  makes  a  treaty  with  the  elector 
of  Brandenburg,  244 ;  the  campaign 
of  1(J73,  247  ;  assists  at  the  siege  of 
Maestricht,  250,  251.  252,  254,  255, 
250,  257,  259.  200,  261,  203,  204.  265, 
26(1.  267 ;  receives  a  promise  of  help 
from  the  elector  of  Cologne  with  con- 
ditions, 257 ;  makes  an  offer  to  the 
emperor  if  he  agrees  to  withdraw  his 
help  from  the  Dutch,  263 :  receives 
deputies  from  the  parliament  on  his 
return,  267;  declares  war  with  Spain, 
268 ;  grants  an  audience  of  coHjt'  to 
the  Spanish  ambassador,  269  ;  nomi- 
nates Pierre  de  Bonzy  archbishop  of 
Narbonne,  271  ;  visits  the  duchess 
of  York,  272,  273  ;  appoints  three 
'  grand  tresoriers  de  I'espargne.' 
276 ;  orders  his  troops  to  winter  in 
Franche-Comti,  278 ;  suppresses  the 
duty  on  foreign  manufactures  im- 
ported into  France,  281 ;  issues  a 
comntisslon   for  the  appointment  of 


600  '  grcffiers,'  285 ;  sends  help  to 
Don  I'cdro,  285 ;  appoints  monsieur 
d'AUgre  chancellor,  286 ;  names  the 
oflicers  for  the  campaign  of  1G74, 
289  ;  erects  a  '  chambre  de  eomptes  ' 
at  Montauban,  292 ;  moderates  the 
.sentence  against  the  chevalier  de  lio- 
han,  294  ;  compliments  the  princesse 
de  GuimimJe  after  the  death  of  the 
chevalier  de  Rohan,  30H;  has  audience 
of  sir  William  Lockhart,  309,  310 ; 
takes  part  in  the  campaign  of  1075, 

314,  316,  317,  318,  319,  320,  321,  322, 

323.  326.  327,  328.  329,  330,  331,  332, 
333  ;  holds  a  council  of  war,  317 ; 
sends  three  cordons  bletts  to  Borne, 
318;  rumour  that  a  treaty  is  made 
with  the  duke  of  Nicuburg,  322  ;  for- 
bids deputies  to  be  sent  to  Konic.  325  ; 
makes  a  treaty  with  the  duke  of 
Hanover,  325 

Louis,  the  Dauphin,  31,  34,  35,  38,  67, 
77,  82,  86,  97, 107,  116,  156,  193,  259, 

315,  316 ;  regiments  of,  144 
Louvain,  320 

Louvigny,  Antoine  Charles,  corate  de, 

121 ;  regiments  of,  144 
Louvois,  marquis  de.      See  Le  Tellier, 

Francois  Michel 
Louvre,  36,  110,  117,  150,  ir,T,  160, 185, 

264 
Louvre,  model  of  the,  17 
Low  Countries,  35,  44,  134,   154,  159, 

173,  174,  183,  190,  191,  198 
Loyola  (Loyala),  Don  Blasco  de,  prin- 
cipal secretary  of  state,  39,  43 
Luc,   tTean   de  Vintinille    dn  (abb6  de 

Biscorat),  6 
Lucca,  159 
Lucerne,  57 
Lude.   Henri  de  Daillon,  comte  (later 

due)  de.  206,  289 
Ludres.   Marie    IsabeUe,    comtesse   de, 

277,  280 
Lunenburg,   George   William,  duke  of, 

189,  148,  155,320 
Luxembourg,  Franijois  Henri  de  Mont- 

morenei,  due  de,  103.   148,  175.  178. 

1S2.  189,  204.  261,  262,  271,  272,  278, 

280,  281,  282,  283,  284,  285,  287,  314, 

324,  327,  332 

Luynes,  Louis  Charles  d'Albert,  due  de, 
271 


347 


Lynk,  fort,  113 

Lys,  convent  of,  242.  215 


Mauagascak,  63,  64,  86,  118,  184 

'  Madame.'       See    Orleans,     Henrietta 

Maria,   duehesse    d' ;    also  Palatine, 

Charlotte  Elizabeth,  princess 
'  Mademoiselle.'   See  Anne  Marie  Louise 

d'Orl^ans 
Madrid,  1,  2,  4,  12,  24,  25, 26.  30,  36,  37, 

39,  48.  49,  50,  51,  61,  62,  66,  69,  75, 

77,  81,  91.  92,  93,  94,  102.  109,  113, 

155,  156,  162,  173,  179,  180,  190, 191, 

199,  230,  231,  237,  244,  268,  269,  272, 

280,  292,  303,  331 
Maestricht,  170, 181,  209,  211,  215,  216, 

217,  218,  219,  220.  221,  222,  232,  233, 

236,  239.  242,  245,  246,  247,  248,  249, 

250,  253.  254,  255,  275,  279.  281,  282, 

283,  293,  319 
Maestricht,  governor  of.  250,  253 
MaGinn,  father  Patrick,  151,  158,  160, 

258 
Magoletti,  comte  de  Bardi,  colonel  of 

the  Italian  regiment,  142,  159,  207 
Mahomet  IV.,  sultan  of  Turkey  (Grand 

Seigneur),  8,  19,  28,  35,  36,  44,  48,  49, 

53,  54,  63,  67,  71,  74,  78,  79,  81,  154, 

177,  178 
Maids  of  honour,  the  queen  dismisses 

the,  275,  277,  279,  283 
Main  (river),  191,  260,  264 
Maine,  Louis  Auguste  de  Bourbou,  due 

de,  281 
Maistres  des  reqiiestes.     See  Masters  of 

requests 
Maldachini.  cardinal,  73 
Malta,  62,  67,  71,  74,  177,  245 
Malta,  knights  of,  10,  126 
Mancini,  Francesco  Maria,  229 
Mancini-Mazarini,  Philippe  Julien,  69 
Mansfield.  Henry  Francis,  covmt,  324 
Manzel.  Pierre  de,  94 
Marces,  sir  Anthony  des,  28 
Marck,  Marie   Franijoise  Echallard  de 

la  (maid  of  honour),  277 
Mardevergner,   seigneur  de,   118,   159, 

184 
Marescotti,     Galeazo,     archbishop    of 

Corinth,  92 
Marie    Anne    of    Austria.     See  Spain, 

queen  of 


Mariembourg,  84,  88 
Mark,  chevalier  de  la,  289 
I  Marsal,  53 

I  Marsan,   Catherine  de  Neuville,  com- 
tesse  de,  198 
Marsan,  Charles  de  Lorraine-Armagnac, 
comte  de,  87,  197,  198 
[   Marseilles,  23,  31,  56,  62,  88,  95,  100, 
101,  104,  114,  117,  118,  127,  132, 150, 
159,  177,  254,  292,  301,  312,  315,  317, 
I       322,  329.  330,  332  ;  correspondent  at, 
I       99,  115,  135,  179 ;  Dutch  consul  at, 
I       60  ;  governor  of,  52 
1  Marsillac,   Francois,  due  de  la  Eoche- 
foucauld,  priuce  de,  226 
Marsilly,   Claude,   tries    to    bring    the 
Swiss   into  the   Triple  Alliance,  14 ; 
process  against,  15,  18 
Marsin,  Ferdinand,  comte  de,  277 
Marsin,  Jean  Gaspard  Ferdinand,  comte 

de,  277 
Martel,  seigneur,  56,  94,  186,  189,  192, 
247,  281,  288 
[   Martin,  Mr.,  208.  254 
Martin,  Mr.,  banker,  294 
Martinet,  Jean  de,  68,  206,  229 
Maseick,  217,  218,  220,  221,  222 
Massietti,  colonel,  287,  291,  323 
I   Masters  of  requests,  78,    83,  154,  186, 

190,  193,  286,  310,  311 
I  MauUvi-ier,  Francjois  Colbert,  marquis 
de,  278 
Maupeou,  Jean  de,  bishop  of  Chalous- 
sur- Seine,  125 
i  Maurice  of  Nassau,  count,  229 
Majorca  (Majorca).  135,  151 
Mazariu,  cardinal,  25 
1  Mazariu,  Hortensia  Mancini.  duehesse 
I       de.  death  of,  194 
'  Maziers,  sieur  le,  300,  307 

Maziers  (Meziires),  143,  209,  281 
i   Mead,  Mr.  35 

j  Mecklenburg,  Christian  Lewis,  duke  of, 
66,  251 
Mecklenbm-g,  Isabelle  Angelica  of  Mont- 
morency, duchess  of,  251 
Melasso,  331 

Menehou  (Meiicliould),  110 

Mentz  (Mayerice),  58,  68,  74,  102,  112, 

129,  131,  137,  156, 161,  170,  174,  176, 

178,  180,  181,  182,  186,  187,  211,  218, 

!       232,  233, 236,  243 

!  Mentz    (Mayence),    elector  of :  dispute 


348 


Till:    DESl'ATCllES   OI''   AX    ENULISU    AtiEXT   IX    I'AUIiS 


between  the  elector  palatine  and  the 
ekctdv  of,  200 ;  concludes  a  treaty 
at  Cologne,  243,  joins  with  emperor, 
•205 

Mcritt,  Mr.,  274 

Messieurs  dc  commerce,  123,  221 

Messina,  IH,  173,  292,  290,  300,  301, 
310,  313,  314,  317,  322.  32G,  327,  329, 
330,  331,  332 

Metz,  282,  325,  326,  327 

Meurs,  310,  313 

Meuze  {Mcitsc)  river,  209,  213,  217,  221, 
250,  280,  281,  282,  319,  320 

Mctz,  (IS,  74, 102,  112,  129,  131,  137,  Ac. 

Michaelowitz,  Alexius,  duke  of  Mus- 
covy, 4,  7. 10,  11,  14,  45,  40,  142 

Michieli,  Francois,  Venetian  ambassador 
in  Trance,  8,  9,  10,  39,  88,  HI,  117, 
273,  298,  312,  313 

Middleburgh  (in  Holland),  249 

Middlesex,  Lionel  Cranfield,  earl  of,  157 

Midsummer  eve,  feast  on,  18 

Milan,  202,  203,  233 

Milo,  71 

'  Miqueletz  '  mountaineers,  92 

Miniorke  (Minorca),  151 

Mirande,  conde  de,  ambassador  from 
Portugal  to  France,  2G,  30,  07 

Modena.  Maria,  princess  of,  258,  259, 
2G1,  205,  20(1,  2G7,  268,  269,  270,  271, 
272,  273,  274 

Mogul  of  Turkey,  grand.  Sec  Mahomet 
IV. 

Moisscns,  Francois  Amanieu  d'Albrct, 
comle  de,  193 

Moliniiro,  chevalier  de,  289 

Molina,  D.  Antonio-Francisco  Mesia  de 
Tobar  y  Paz,  conde  de,  Spanish 
ambassador  in  France,  30,  61,  70  ;  in 
England,  75 ;  not  to  proceed  to 
Turkey,  155  ;  writes  to  the  Spanish 
resident  in  France,  159  ;  viaijor  clomo 
of,  162  ;  arrives  in  Paris  from  Eng- 
land, 185,  190  ;  receives  orders  from 
Madrid,  231  ;  leaves  Paris,  243 ; 
returns  to  Madrid  after  the  declara- 
tion of  war  against  Spain,  268,  269 

Molina,  donna,  64 

Molino,  comte  de,  Venetian  ambassador, 
80 

Molondin,  Laurent  d'Estavayc  de,  130 

Molte,  monsieur  de  la,  62 

Mombisson,  due  de,  227 


Monaco,  Catherine  Charlotte  dc  Gram- 
mont,  princess  of,  61 

Monaco,  Louis  Grimaldi,  prince  of,  322 
I  Monbron,  monsieur,  289 
I  Mondetour,  Denys  Louis  de  Itubcutel 

dc,  76 
'  Moniada,  cardinal  de,  27 

Monmouth,  James  Scott,  duke  of,  214, 
216,  218,  250,  252,  253,  254,  256 

Monnerot  (Montcnner),  mademoiselle 
de,  14,  15 

Mons,  263 

Monsieur.  Sec  OMans,  Philippe,  due  d'. 

Montagu,  Salph,  lord,  English  ambassa- 
dor to  France,  has  a  private  audience 
of  the  French  king,  1 ;  changes  his 
residence,  2  ;  his  public  enti-y,  3,  6,  7, 
8;  goes  to  St.  Germains,  10,  11  ;  de- 
sires Mr.  du  Moulin  to  return  to 
England,  13 ;  desires  a  copy  of  the 
Triple  Alliance,  15  ;  sends  a  list  of 
French  ships  sent  to  the  help  of 
Candia,  18 ;  writes  to  Lord  Ar- 
lington concerning  duties  on  wine, 
23  ;  meets  the  prince  of  Tuscany, 
29 ;  at  St.  Germains,  31  ;  receives  a 
letter  concerning  the  sale  of  cloth, 
33  ;  desires  a  copy  of  the  treaty  of 
commerce,  34 ;  letter  from  Lord 
Arlington,  47 ;  visits  the  king  of 
Poland,  80 ;  complains  to  the  king 
concerning  the  seizure  of  goods,  82  ; 
goes  to  Lisle,  91 ;  goes  to  St.  Ger- 
main, 92  ;  goes  to  St.  Cloud  on  the 
death  of  '  Madame,'  96.  97 ;  lays  a 
complaint  against  the  oflicers  of  the 
French  admiralty,  100,  115  ;  receives 
a  letter  from  the  consul  at  Marseilles, 
101 ;  carries  the  complaint  of  the 
London  merchants  to  the  king,  109  ; 
has  audience  of  Monsieur,  169,  170; 
has  audience  upon  the  death  of  Marie 
Therese,  the  king's  daughter,  201  ;  to 
have  audience  of  Mr.  Martin,  208; 
his  audience  of  cong(,  215 ;  returns 
to  England,  216 

Montaigu  (Montegut),  comte  de,  141 

Montaubun.  292 

Monliuiban,  Francois  La  Tour  Gou- 
vernet,  226,  233 

Montauzier,  Charles  de  Sainte  Maure 
de  Montmorency,  marquis  (later  duo) 
de,  86.  315 


349 


Montbas,  Comelie  de  Groot,  vioomtesse 
de,  283 

Montbas,  Jean  Bartleon,  vicomte  de, 
228,  283 

Montbrun,  Alexandre  le  Puy,  28,  32 

Montclar,  Joseph  de  Pons  de  Guimera, 
baron  de,  332 

Montecuculi.  Leopold  Philip,  prince  of, 
250,  2(52,  2G3,  267,  209,  278,  317,  318, 
319,  321,  323,  324 

Montelast,  monsieur,  289 

Montelimer,  103 

lUonterey,  D.  Juan  Domingo  Mendez  de 
Haro,  marquis  de,  governor  of 
Flanders,  98,  134,  155,  164,  165,  172, 
180, 183,  191,  208,  213,  214,  218,  219, 
281,  232,  233,  234,  237,  240,  247,  259, 
261,  264,  268,  270,  272,  283,  302,  304 

Monterey,  Donna  Ines  Franoisca  de 
Zuniga,  marquise  de,  117,  247 

Moutesarchio,  prince  of,  327,  331 

Montespan,  Henri  Louis  de  Pardaillon 
de  Gondrin,  marquis  de,  55,  67 

Montespan,  madame  de,  32,  35,  86,  250, 
316 

Montmorency,  Marechal  de.  fee  Lux- 
embourg, Franyois  Henri  de  Mont- 
morenci,  due  de 

Montpellier,  67 

Montpensier.  mile.  de.  See  Orleans, 
Anne  Marie  Louise  d'. 

Montpezat  de  Carbon,  Jean  de,  arch- 
bishop of  Bourges,  126 

Montreuil,  84,  So,  89 

MontTergne,  seigneur  de.  Sec  Marde- 
vergner,  seigneur  de 

Moors  decline  to  exchange  prisoners, 
the,  43,  60 

Mordaunt.  John,  viscount,  3 

Morosini,  Francesoa,  daughter  of,  59  ; 
questioned  at  Venice,  119 

Mortemart,  Gabriel  de  Kochechouart, 
due  de,  governor  of  Paris,  18,  19,  97 

Moselle,  river,  282 

Mothe,  Fran(;ois  du  Eiou,  sieur  c!e  la,  74 

Mothe-Houdancourt,  Annie  Lucie  de  la, 
277 

Mothe-Houdancourt,  Charlotte  El^onore 
Madeleine,  mademoiselle  de  la,  100 

Mothe-Houdancourt,  Henri  de  la,  arch- 
bishop of  Auehe,  125 

Mothe-Houdancourt,  Louise  de  Prie, 
madame  de  la,  100 


Moulin,  103 

Mouliu,  Peter  du,  12,  13,  15,  IG,  22 

Mouslier,  sieur,  French  resident  in 
Switzerland,  14,  17,  161,  162 

Mousty,  monsieur,  289 

Munster,  Christopher  Bernard  de  Galen, 
bishop  of,  40,  56,  58,  59,  63,  72,  135, 
136,  137,  139,  140,  148,  155,  157, 168, 
175,  176,  179,  182,  199,  200,  201,  204, 
209,  223,  224,  228,  236,  239,  255; 
brother  of,  52 ;  envoy  from  the,  49, 
54,  136,  288 

Muscovy,  ambassador  from,  10 

Muscovy,  duke  of.  See  Michaelowitz 
Alexius 

Mustapha  Aga,  Turkish  envoy,  87 

Muyden,  229,  253 


Nacker  {Necker)  river,  266 

Naerden,  228,  262 

Nahe  (river  in  Belgium),  218 

Namur,  282,  284 

Namur,  governor  of,  240 

Nancre,  Claade  Antoine  de  Dreux,  eonite 

de,  205,  207,  229,  238 
Nancy,  51, 53, 74, 108, 112, 129, 131, 133, 

149,  150,  194,  230,  233,  255,  256,  259, 

260,  262,  263,  264,  265,  299 
Nantes,  edict  of,  13 
Nantes,  Louise  Fran(;oise  de  Bourbon, 

comtesse  de,  281 
Naples,  69,  130,  315,  326,  327,  330 
Naples,  viceroy  of.     See  Ligne,  Claude 

Lamoral,  Prince  de 
Narbonne,    Francois     Fouquet,     arch- 
bishop of,  death  of,  269,  271 
Nassau,  WilUam,  count  of,  280 
Navagne,  218,  221,  283 
Navailles,    PhilUpe    de    Montault    de 

Benae,  duo  de,  14,  18,  28,  31.  33,  34, 

38,  39,  42,  50, 195,  197,  255,  256,  265, 

287,  288,  289,  290,  313,  324 
Navarre,  regiments  from,  144,  230 
Nazaret,  188 
Neidhart  (Nitard),   Eberhard   von,   12, 

27,  33,  36,  48,  61,  201,  210,  219 
Nemours,  147 
Nerli,  Francis,  made  cardinal,  50,  70 ; 

to  act  as  nuncio,  194,  197,  198,  210, 

222,  251,  255 
Neusdel,  231 
Nevers,  duchy  of,  69 


;3on 


THK    DRSPATf'HES    OK    AN    ENOLISH    AliENT    IN    PARIS 


Newcnstle,  liri 

Newgate,  C5 

Ncwstodt  {NcustadI).  329 

NieiibourR,  Philip  William,  prince   of, 

reported  king  of  Poland.  20,  94,  125  ; 

envoy  from,   1(!3  ;    agrees  to  give  up 

Juliers  to  Louis  XIV.,  170,  175  ;  asks 

for   troops    to   garrison    Diisseldort, 

278  ;  reported  to  have  made  a  treaty 

with  Louis  XrV..  322 
Nieuhausel.  49 
Nieuport,88,  113,  134 
Nimegncn  (Niniwegcn),  217,  218,  221, 

228,  229,  230,  278,  313,  328 
Nini,  cardinal  Jacques,  79 
Niord,  Gabriel,  conde  de,  300,  313 
Nixia,  71 

Noailles,  Anne  due  de,  256, 2,57 
Nogent,  Arniand  de  Bantru,  corate  de, 

207.  22.->,  227 
Nnintel,  Charles  Oilier,  marquis  de,  177 
Normandy,  32,  254,  264,  303.  304.  328  ; 

intendant  of,  139 ;    regiments  from, 

145 
Northern  Company,  122,  172 
Northumberland.  Elizabeth,  countess  of, 

92,  94,  241 
Northumberland,  Josoeline  Percy,  11th 

earl  of,  59  ;  death  of,  92, 93 
Nostradamus,  104 
Notrc-Pame,  ceremony  at  the  church  of. 

102.  104 
Nott.  Robin,  32.  166,  107,  1G8 
Noyen,  83 
Nuitz  (Nuys),  128,  130,  131.  132,  176, 

181, 182.  183.  194.  200.  208,  223,  274, 

278 


OBDA>r,  Jacob,  Herr  van,  8G 

O'Brian,  Charles,  135,  252,  25G 

Odescalchi,  cardinal  Benedetto  (after- 
wards Pope  Innocent  XI.),  86 

Ognate,  sir  Mark,  envoy  extraordinary 
from  Spain,  111 

Oliver  Cromwell,  24,  95 

Orange,  William,  prince  of,  80, 103,  117, 
118,  131,  174,  180,  192,  209,  213,  224, 
240,  249,  256,  261,  262,  264,  271,  272. 
278.  283,  313,  320 

Orepesa,  D.  Manuel  .Joaquin  Alvarez 
de  Toledo.  8  ;  the  conde  de,  26 

Orgerre,  monsieur  de  I',  289 


Orleans,  145.  269 

Orleans,  Anne  Marie  Louise  d',  '  Made- 
moiselle,' 82,  86,  105,  121,  124,  134, 

147.  1.53 
Orleans,   bishop  of.      See  de    Coislin. 

Pierre  du  Cambout 
Orleans,  Francisca   Magdalena    d',   5(i 

note 
Orleans,  Gaston  .lean  Baptiste,  due  d', 

56,  .57  note 
Orleans,  Henrietta  Maria,  dachesse  d', 

'  Madame,'  7.65, 72,  79,  80,  82,  85.  86. 

87,  91,  93.  94,  95,  96,  97,  102,  106. 

111.277 
Orleans,  Marguerite  Louise  d',  57  note 

2 

Orleans,  Marguerite  de  Lorraine, 
dowager  duchess  of,  212 

Orleans,  Marie  Louise  d',  102 

Orleans,  Marie  Therese  d'  (known  as 
•little  madam'),  107,  201,  203, 
204 

Orleans,  Philippe,  due  d',  'Monsieur,'?, 
19,  47,  67,  72,  79,  80,  86,  96.  97,  102, 
105,  108,  121,  122,  124,  136,  147. 161, 
162,  167.  170.  172,  183, 185,  189,  197, 
11(8,  204,  206,  226.  244,  245,  246,  250, 
251.  255.  258,  261,  262,  263,  273,  275, 
277,  309,  316,  326 

Orsini,  Virginio,  cardinal,  43.  53,  79 

Orsoy,  211.  222,  228 

Osborne,  Mr.,  90 

O.'sborne,  sir  Thomas,  lord  treasurer, 
258 

Ossory,  Thomas  Butler,  earl  of,  274 

Ostend,  88 

Oudenarde,  25,  76,  84,  89 

Overyssel,  240 


Pabst,   officer  employed  in  France  by 

the  bishop  of  Munster,  137 
Palatine,  Anne  de  Gonzague,  princess, 

161 
Palatine,  Charles  Lewis,  elector,  45,  58, 

65,  190,  200,  260,  261,  265,  291 
Palatine,  Charlotte  Elizabeth,  princess 

(afterwards  duchesse  d'OrU'ans),  37, 

162,  163,  167,  170,  172,  183.  190.  194, 

196,  197,  246,  255,258,  261,  273,  277, 

309 
Palatine,  Elizabeth  Stuart,  princess,  91 
Palavicini.  cardinal  Lazzaro,  50.  79 


351 


Palavicini,  Maria  Camilla,  50 

Panama,  137,  162, 103 

Pantilio,  cardinal,  (il 

Papal   Nuncio,  has  audience  of  Louis 

XIV.,  45 ;  recalled  by  Pope  Clement 

X.,  92 ;  sent'  to    Paris  to  offer  the 

Pope's  mediation  for  peace,  293 
Palis,  3,  5,  7,  15,  42,  60,  65,  78,  80,  82, 

83,  88,  89,  90,  92,  96,  97,  98,  106, 107, 

108,  117,  120,  130,  131,  139,  174, 178, 

183,  185,  186,  197,  201,  204,  210,  212, 

223,  829,  236,  254,  256,  257,  258,  266, 

273,  298,  304,  316,  325,  331 
Paris,    archbishop     of.       See    Champ- 

vallon,  Francois  de  Harlay  de 
Paris,    archbishop    of.      Sec    Pi^refixe, 

Hardouin  de  Beaumont  de 
Paris,    governor    of.      Sec    Mortemart, 

Gabriel  de  Kochechouart,  due  de 
Paris,  magistrates  of,  4 
Paris,  merchants  of,  187 
Paris,  parliament  of,  13,  42,  53,  60,  80. 

93.  102,  120,  154,  203,  212,  213,  257, 

259,  267,  281 
Paschau,  Mr.,  5 
Passage,  jUmard  de  Poisieux,  marquis 

de,  195 
Pastrauo,  Don  Rocbigo  de  Silva,  duke 

of,  81 
Patrick,  father.      .See  MaGinn,    father 

Patrick 
Pati-on,  cardinal,  92,  196,  219,  252 
Pays  Bas.     Sec  Low  Countries 
Pays  Conquls,  16,  22,  41.  46,  159,  161, 

229,  313 
Pedro,  Don,  71.  130,  285 
Peguelin,  M.   See  Puy-Guilhem,  Antoine 

Nompar  de  Caumont 
Pellisson,  Paul  Fontanier,  168,  211 
Pellet.  Claude,  president  of  Rouen,  304, 

305 
Pendennis,  115 
Percie,  prince,  134 
Perfifixe,    Hardouin    de  Beaumont  de, 

archbishop  of  Paris,  86,  105 ;  death 

of,  125 
Permersin.  291 
Peronne,  105,  162 
Perpignon,  173,  300 
Perwis,  217 
Peterborough,    Henry    Mordaunt,    2nd 

eari  of.  248,  254,  258,  266,  271,  290, 

313 


Petit,  Ren^,  47,  295 

Peyto.  Mr..  196 

PhiUpsbourg,  298 

Philipville  {Phillippcville),  76,   84,  88, 

143,  145,  319 
Phillimore,  sir  Edward,  28 
Picardy,  17,  60,  147,  204  ;  regiments  of, 

68,  144 
Piccolomiui,  cardinal  Celio,  70 
Picquet.  sieur,  118 
Piedmont,  50 
Piedmont,  Victor  Am^dee  H.,  prince  of 

(later   duke  of  Savoy),  79,  142,  144, 

162 
Pierce,  captain,  105 
Pierre   Encise,    chevalier  de   Lorraine 

imprisoned  in,  65 
Pierre  litte,  monsieur,  289 
Pignerol,  51,  100.  101,   104,    106,  168, 

331 
Pittois,  monsieur,  289 
Planque,  seeretai'y  to  the  Savoy  ambas- 
sador, 20 
Plessis-Praslin,  Alexandre  de  Choiseul, 

comte  de,  207,  226 
Plessis-Praslin,      CSsar      Auguste     de 

Choiseul,   chevalier  (afterwards  due) 

de,  33  ;  regiments  of,  145  ;  to  receive 

the    princess     Palatine,     161,    167 ; 

appointed  marechal  de   camp.   207 ; 

takes    Wcsel,    225 ;    goes    to    Berne 

Castel,  278  ;  marechal  de  camp,  289 
Plymouth,  157 
Po,  river,  202 

PodewUts,  Henri,  comte  de.  128,  175 
Poivas.     See  Privas 
Poix,  85,  89 

Poland,  dyett  of,  50,  231,  232 
Poland,  grand  marshal  of.  See  Sobieski, 

John 
Poland,  king  of.     See  Casimir,  John 
Poland,  king  of.     See  Sobieski,  John 
Poland,    king    of.      See    Wisniowieski, 

Michael  Korybut 
Poland,  Eleanor,    queen  of,    232,  279; 

dowager  queen  of,  299 
Poland,    queen    of.     See  also  Grange, 

Marie  Casiraire  de  la 
Poland,  treasure  of,  45 
Poland,  Turkish  design  to  invade,  44. 

211 
Pololie,  castellan  de,  234 
i  Pomerania,  134 


352 


THE    nESI'ATCIIES    OF    AN    ENfiLISH    A(".ENT    IN    PARIS 


Pommprpu.  Aiipustc  Koberl.  clipvnlier 
(le,  30(i 

Pompadour,  mnrquis  dc,  279 

Poniponne,  Simon  Ainaud,  mnrquis  de, 
French  ambftssador  at  the  Hague, 
30,  106,  131,  132,  13.3,  134,  1G7.  171, 
182,  195,  197,  198,  199,  200,  212,  21C, 
227,  238,  242,  209,  283.  302.  313,  320 

Pontoise,  101, 188 

Pope.     .Sec  Clement  IX. 

Pope.     Sec  Clement  X. 

Port  Louis.  64.  184 

Porter,  James.  Ill 

Porto  Bell  (Bcllo).  11 

Porto  Carrcro.  See  Toledo,  Don  Luis 
Manuel  Fernandez  de  Portocnrrero. 
doyen  de 

Porto  Fariuo,  18G 

Portsmouth,  207 

Portsmouth,  ducliess  of.  See  K^roualle, 
Louise  Rente  de  Penancoet 

Portugal,  king  of.    Sec  Alphonso  VL 

Portugal,  Marie  de  Savoie-Nemours, 
])rincess  of,  40 

Portuguese  ambassador.  See  Prado, 
conde  de 

Poussart,  Anne  (madame  do  Eiohelieu), 
277 

Pradel,  Francois  dc,  68,  211 

Prado,  conde  de,  Portuguese  ambassador, 
43,  73,  92,  2G9,  272 

Pr(''aux,  chevalier  de,  involved  in  de 
Hohan's  conspiracy,  294,  295,  296, 
306,  307,  308 

Previlly,  sieur  de,  177,  281 

Prince  Regent.     See  Pedro,  Don 

Privns,  104,  139, 141 

Prohibition  against  the  sale  of  English 
silk  stockings,  112  ;  against  the  export 
of  wool,  153 

Provence,  127,  177,  331  ;  premier  pre- 
sident of.  141 

Prynne,  William,  death  of,  42 

Puisieux.  monsieur,  289 

PuUenpy,  sir  William,  241 

Puy-Guilhem  (Pcguelin),  comte  (later 
due  de  Lauzun),  Antoine  Nompar  de 
Caumont,  marquis  de,  to  be  made 
grand  master  of  artillery,  35 ;  to  be 
raised  to  the  peerage,  54  ;  to  com- 
mand troops  on  the  king's  progress  to 
Flanders.  86 ;  buys  the  government 
of  Metz.  in-J:    tiiat^;    Ml.out   the  go- 


vernment of  Guienne.  103  ;  entertains 
the  duke  of  Buckingham,  110;  to 
marry  mademoiselle  de  Montpensier, 
121,  147;  the  king  withdraws  his 
consent  to  the  match,  124 ;  made 
governor  of  Berry,  140;  quarrels  with 
the  due  de  Longueville,  153 ;  in  dis- 
grace, 168  ;  sets  fire  to  his  cell,  206 ; 
tries  to  escape  from  prison,  331 
Puysedor,  318 


QrEEN-MOTHEB.  Scc  Henrietta  Maria 
of  Bourbon  (wife  of  Charles  1.) 

Queen  Regent.  See  Spain.  Maria  Anne 
of  Austria,  queen  of 

Quesney  {Quesnoy),  76,  88 

QuiUebmuf,  303  ' 

Quinoncs,  Don  Hieronimo  de,  204.  264 


R.\nESNiRRES  dc  Treilleboia  de  la  Trom- 

blade,  monsieur  de,  176 
Eamoizy,  88 

Eatisbon,  66,  158,  249,  255 
Ravenstein,  125 
Recs,  223,  225,  226 
Reims  {Rlieims),  110,  242,  266,  319 
Renard,  monsieur,  85 
Renel,  Louis  de  Clermont  d'Amboise, 

marquis  de,  204,  226,  233.  289 
Rennes,     315 ;     engineer     from,    325 ; 

parliament  of,    324;    protestants  of, 

317 
Rese,  comte  de,  289 
Rethel,  255 
Eetz,  cardinal  de,   50.  54.  61.  70.  85, 

125,  197 
Retz,    Paule   Marguerite  Francjoise  de 

Gondi,  mademoiselle  de,  299 
Reuty,  monsieur,  289 
Reveillon,  monsieur,  289 
Reynarde,  chevalier  de  la,  62 
Reynstein,  castle  of,  92 
Rheims,  110,  242,  319 
Rheims,    bishop    of.       See    Barberini. 

cardinal  Franciscus 
Rhine,  71,  131,  136,  148,  166,  171,  172, 

180,  201,  202,  205,  208,  209,  215,  217, 

221,  223,  224,  225,  226,  232,  237.  239, 

240,241,  242,  250.  265,  268,  269.  278, 

280,  297.  300,  301,  316,  319,  321,  324, 

326,  332 


353 


Bhine,  princes  of  the,  8,  154.  167.  168. 
232.  238,  241,  265,  266 

Ehinsberg,  195,  205,  211,  217,  219,  221, 
222,  224,  278 

Eichards,  John,  28,  87,  -Mo 

Richelieu,  madame  de.  See  Poussart, 
Anne 

Richelieu,  rue  de,  2,  35 

Eimaulin,  147 

Eiquet,  Pierre-Paul,  142 

Robert,  prince.     SeeEupert,  prince 

Eoberti,  cardinal  Carlo,  64 

Eoche-sm-Ton,  Francois  Louis,  prince 
de  la,  193 

Eochecourbon,  seigneur  de,  193 

Eochefort,  140,  148,  207,  208,  210,  215, 
295,  296,  312 

Eochefort,  Louis  Henri  d'Aloigny,  mar- 
quis de,  77,  184,  192,  206,  228,  233, 
236,  237,  245,  262,  263,  289,  292 

Eochefort,  Madeleine  de  Laval  Bois- 
Dauphin,  marquise  de  {dame  du 
jialais),  284 

EocheOe,  38,  42,  51,  100,  143,  145.  162, 
192 

Eochester,  Lawrence  Hyde,  earl  of,  7, 
299 

Eocroy,  141,  209,  215 

Eoer  (river),  223,  280,  281 

Eohan,  Louis,  chevalier  de,  gives  the 
'  coup  de  eanne  '  to  the  chevalier  de 
Lorraine.  239;  trial  of,  291,  293; 
sentence  against,  294 ;  execution  of, 
295,  296,  297  ;  account  of  the  crime 
and  trial  of,  302, 304, 303, 306,307,  308 

Eohan,  Louis  de  Eohan  Chabot,  prince 
de  Lion,  later  due  de.  299 

Eohan,  Marguerite,  duehesse  de,  35 

Eome,  5,  19,  22,  36,  43,  48,  49,  50,  53, 
54,  55,  60,  61,  64,  66,  71,  73,  78.  79, 
81,  85,  87,  92,  130,  149, 150, 179, 188, 
194,  196,  197,  198,  201,  210,  229,  240, 
251,  279,  318,  324,  325 

Roquelaure,  Gaston  Jean  Baptiste.  due 
de,  2 

Roquemord,  M.,  289 

Eospigliosi,  Don  Vincenzo,  5,  53,  61,  68, 
69,  70,  74,  81 

Eospigliosi,  Girolamo.  See  Pope  Cle- 
ment IX. 

Eosty,  chevalier  de,  289 

Rouen,  32,  33,  75,  114,  115,  294,  299, 
304,  305,  318 
VOL.  V. 


Rouen,  Fran(;ois  de  Harlay  de  Champ- 

vallon,  archbishop  of  (afterwards  arch- 
bishop of  Paris),  54 
Rouen,  merchant  of,  17 
Eouen,  parliament  of,  139 
Eoure,    Louis-Pierre-Scipion     de    Gri- 

moard  de  Beauvois,  comte  de,  103 
Roure,  monsiem-  de,  99,  104 
Eourlement,  abb6  de.     See  Bourl6mont, 

Louis  d'Anglure  de 
Eousseau,  monsieur,  216 
Eoussillon,  78,  92,  103,  202,  205,  256, 

257,  291,  322,  324 
Rouvroy,  Jeaime  de  (maid  of  honour), 

277 
Rubentel.     See  Monditour,  Denys  Louis 

de 
Rumpf,    sieur,    agent    for    the    stales 

general,  212,  240 
Rupert  (Eobert),  prmce,  115,  248 
Euremonde,  320 
Euvigny,    Henri    Massufi,    marquis   de, 

109,  219,  282 
Euyter,  monsiem-  de,  249,  324,  325,  326, 

327,  330,  332 


Sablay,  monsiem-  de,  292 

Sachetti,  sieur.  Papal  nuncio  in  France, 
254 

Saissae,  marquis  de,  139 

Salmes,  291 

Sallee  (SaU)  in  Morocco,  35,  42 

Salli^re,  chevalier  de,  227 

Salonique  (Salonica),  78 

Sambre  (river),  280,  282 

Sanbir.     See  Senhs 

San  Domingo,  12 

Sanguien,  monsieur,  75 

San  Pedro.  Don  Lorenzo  Santos  de,  60 

Santorino,  71 

Sardinia,  10,  325 

Sarragosa,  27 

Sarran,  monsieur  de,  306,  308 

Sarre  (La  Sare),  river,  278 

Sault,  Francois  Emmanuel  de  Blanche- 
fort  de  Crequy,  comte  de,  145,  178, 
226,  289,  299 

Saumur,  184     • 

Saville,  Henry,  243 

Savona,  231 

Savoy  ambassador.  See  Saint- Maurice, 
Chabo,  marquis  de 

A  A 


354 


THE    DESPATCUE)?   OF   AN    ENGLISH    AGENT   IN    PAIUS 


Savoy,  Charles  Emmanaol,  duke  of,  20, 

2(i,  U,  35.  51,  5G,  79,   104,  130,  149, 

162,  179,  18G,  202,  203,  230,  231,  233, 

237,  273.  328 
Savoy,  Fiaiiciseii  JJagdalena  d'Orltans, 

iluchess  of,  50  note,  57 
Saxlavcnburg,  Julius  Francis,  duke  of, 

243 
Saxony,  elector  of.  joins  the  treaty  of 

Cologne,  243 
Saxony,  John  George,  elector  of,  2'',1 
Sceaux,  gardes  des,  184,  186,  188,  192, 

194,  233,  286 
Schinken  Scans  (Sclienketischam),  225 
Schaiiborn,  Melchior   Friddric,   corate 

(le,  200,  208 
Schomberg,  Fridfiric  Armand,  comte  de, 

5,  40,  173,   187,   188.  202,  205,  280, 

282,  283,  289,  291,  292,  296,  298,  300, 

314,  322,  324,  326,  333 
Scbombcrg,  Jeanne  Elisabeth,  comtesse 

de,  40,  259 
Schutem  (Schutelem),  321 
Schutter  (river),  321 
Scorpentio  (Scarpanto),  71 
Scott,  colonel,  270,  280 
Sedan,  157,  176,  215 
Seguier,  due  de  Villemor,  Pierre,  chan- 
cellor, 81,  184,  187,  193 
Seignelay,  Jean  Baptiste,  marquis  de, 

100,  150,  181,  183,  210,  215,  217,  299, 

310,  312 
Senius,  Jean,  28,  79 
Senlis,  78,  83,  110 
Sens,  54 
Sevilla,  63 

Sforza,  Joannes  Paulatius,  318 
Sheerness,  158 
Ships  (names  of) — 

Captain  Royal,  327 

Dauphin^,  62 

Falcon,  133 

Grand  Orient,  143 

Grand  St.  Jean,  143 

Hampshire,  113 

John  of  Plymouth,  23 

King  David,  99 

La  Galante,  62 

La  Scaletta,  323 

La  Koze,  323 

Saphire,  105 

Sta.  Crux,  15 

St.  Dominique,  02 


Ships  (names  of)  continued — 
St.  Marie,  118 
St.  Peter,  73 

Sicily,  12,  61,  62,  314,  317,  322,  325, 
330,  332 

Skenk  (Schcnlt),  fort,  228,  229,  278 

Slcstadt  (Schlesladt),  260 

Sluys,  280 

Smith,  Mr.,  124 

Sobieski,  John  (grand  marshal,  after- 
wards king  of  Poland).  231,  242,  281, 
299 

Soissons,  110 

Soissons,  Engine  Maurice  de  Savoie, 
comte  de,  77,  206  ;  death  of,  250 

Soissons,  Louis  Thomas  de  Savoie, 
comte  de,  279 

Sokal,  235 

Soleuse,  71 

Sonnino,  Philip  Colonna,  prince  of, 
318 

Sophia  Charlotte  of  Hanover,  91 

Soubise,  Anne  de  Eohan-Chabot,  prin- 
ccsse  de  (dame  du  palais),  284 

Soubise,  Francois  de  Kohan,  prince  de, 
297 

Souleiman  II.,  71 

Sourches, de  Bouehet,  marquis  de, 

229 

Sourdeval,  monsieur,  296 

Sourdis,  monsieur,  289 

Southwell,  sh-  Kobert,  27 

Spada,  cardinal  Orazio  Filippo,  73 

Spain,  ambassador  from,  to  France,  73, 
93,  203,  210,  213,  214,  231,  247 

Spain,  commerce  between  France  and, 
141 

Spain,  king  of.     See  Charles  II. 

Spain,  Marie  Anne  of  Austria,  queen- 
regent  of,  1,  2,  5,  8,  12,  22,  26,  30,  36, 
43,  45,  49,  51,  65,  66,  78,  81,  113, 127, 
134,  157,  159,  171,  173,  175,  190,  191, 
198,  199,  202,  208,  210,  214,  217,  219, 
220,  231,  233,  234,  247,  268 

Spanish  resident  in  France,  102,  163 

Spinalonga,  74 

Spire,  266,  319,  324 

Sporke,  general,  275,  309 

Spragg,  sir  Edward,  35,  135,  150,  151, 
179 

Squadrone  {sqiiadrcniisti),  69 

St.  Abre,  Jean  de  la  Cropte,  marquis  de, 
207,  289 


355 


St.  Albans,  Henry  Jcrmyn,  duke  of,  2, 

3,  6,  32,  95 
St.  Andi-6,  18,  24 
St.  Andre  des  Ai-cs.  188 
St.  Andr6,  president  of,  French  ambas- 
sador to  Venice,  55,  .56 
St.  Andre  Monbrun,  marquis  de,  150, 

198  ;  death  of,  262 
St.  Antoine,  rue,  31,  294 
St.  Clair,  monsieur,  289 
St.   Clas,   Jean   Loui?   de   Genouilhac, 

sieur  de,  266 
St.  Cloud,  95,  96,  257 
St.  Croix,  cardinal  de.  73 
St.  Denis,  23,  97,  106,  130 
St.  Franijois  de  Borgia,  canonisation  of, 

185 
St.  Geran,  Bernard  de  b  Guiche,  comte 

de,  146,  195 
St.  Germain,  7,  9,  10,  11,  31,  36,  76, 

83,  85,  89,  91.  92,  94,  106,  108,  109, 

116.  118,  136,  139,  140, 146, 154,  158, 

186,  188,  199,  215,  220,  221,  226,  229, 

232,  235,  236,  237,  243,  254,  277,  282, 

292,  300,  301,  309,  310,  312,  314,  317  ; 

chateau  de,   129 ;   faubourg  de,  85 ; 

foire  de,  136 
St.  Germain,  due  de,  death  of,  14 
St.  Germain  des  Pr^s,  I'abbaye  de,  3 
St.  GuentLn.     See  St.  Quentin 
St.  Hilaire,  Piene  de  Morm^s  de,  222 
St.  Hubert,  128 
St.  Julien,  treaty  of,  26  n. 
St.  Leger,  seigneur  de,  193 
St.  Louis,  curate  of  the  parish  of,  85 
St.  Malo,  54,  247 
St.  Maurice,  Chabo,  marquis  de,  Savoy 

ambassador,  8,  20,  25,  34,  39,  53, 117, 

203,  214 
St.  Mauris,  Francois  de,  323 
St.  Michel,  monsieur,  292 
St.  Omar,  272 
St.  Paul  (St.  Pol),  89 
St.  Paul,  count  of.    See  St.  Pol,  Charles 

Palis  d'Orleans,  comte  de 
St.  Pol,  Charles  Paris  d'Orleans,  comte 

de,   5,   80,   153,  215,  225,  226,  232, 

235 
St.  Pouange,  seigneur  de,  182 
St.  Quentin,  76,  83,  1-56.  211,  263,  265. 

266,  321 
St.  Romain,  Melchior  Earod,  marqu  is 

de,  214 


St.  Sebastian,  fort,  description  of,  21, 

23,  24,  67,  69 
St.  Valerie,  river,  238 
St.  Venant,  76 
Stanley,  Peter,  108,  111 
Starenberg,  Ernest  Rudiger,  comte  de, 

287 
Stockholm,   treaty  of    neutralitv    con- 
cluded at,  216,  219,  241.  284 
Strasbourg  (Stiasburg),  57,  59,  65,  261, 

266,  297,  300,  301,  319,  321,  324 
Strasburg,  bishop  of.     See  Fiirstenberg, 

Francis  Egon,  count  of 
Stromboli  (Lipari  Islands),  331 
Stuppa,  Pierre  de,  157,  1-59.  208,  289 
Suda,  74 
Simdeiiand,  Robert  Spencer,  2nd  earl  of, 

168,  229,  236,  246,  253,  254.  256,  258, 

274 
Surat,  63 

Sweden,  ambassador  from,  301 
Sweden,  Christine,  queen  of,  83  n.,  193 
Sweden,  Gustavus  Adolphus.   king  of, 

219,  221 
Sweden,  king  of.     See  Ferdinand  III. 
Switzerland,,  cantons  of,  meet  at  Bade, 

17 ;    French    resident    in,   57,   267 ; 

duke  of  Savoy  joins  with  the  Catholic 

cantons    of,    162 ;    dispute    between 

Berne  and  one  of  the  Catholic  cantons 

of,  199 


T.iFiLZT  (Taffaletta),  Muley  Archid,  king 

of,  35,  64,  99,  157 
Taille,    Nicolas,     baron     du     Quesne, 

chevaUer  de  la,  86 
Talbot,  colonel  Dick,  267 
Tambonneau,  Jean,  29,  140 
Tanger  [Tangier),  35,  64,  99,  135,  157. 

246 
Tarante,    Henri    Charles    de    la    Tre- 

mouille,   prince   de,    109,   110,   179, 

285 
Tarare,  119 
Tass(5,  due  de,  227 

Tattenbach,  Johann  Erasmus,  graf.  92 
Tavannes,    Charles    Marie    de    Sauls 

marquis  de,  185 
Taxes  :  on  chimneys,  146,  160,  162 ;  on 

paper,  257,  259,  260,  266,  207 ;    on 

periwig  makers,  260 
Tel,  captain  du,  35 


35(5  THE    DESPATCHES   OH   AN    ENGLISH    AGENT    IN    I'AKIS 


Tc^iuple,  sir  William,  20,  25,  lOG,  113 
Teilon,  Hugues,  chevalier  de,   French 

ambassador  to  Sweden,  a29 
Termes,  monsieur  de,  226 
Terre,  254 
Terron,   Charles  Colbert,  seigneur  du, 

143,  102,  193,  207 
Teves  (or  Tebes),  D.  Giispar  de,  Spanish 

ambassador  to  Venice,  55,  50 
Thtobon,  Lydie  de  llochefort  (maid  of 

honour),  277 
Theonville  {Thionville),  180,  183 
Thomson,  Mr.,  15 
Thouars,  Charles,  duo  de  la  rrcmouiUe 

et  de,  179 
Thous.     iVcToul  ._ 

ThurcUe-Thiballier,  monsieur  de,  oo,  82 
Thurin  [Turin),  51,  92,  111,  149,  230, 

2:i0 
Tliyune,  Henry  Frederick,  241 
Tilladet,  monsieur,  289 
Toledo,  Don  Luis  Manuel  Fernandez  de 
Porto  Carrero,  doyen  de,  33, 48 ;  made 
cardinal  50 
Toledo,  Don  .Juan  de  la  Puente,  canon 

of,  death  of  the  mother  of,  01 
Tolus  (Tolhaus),  227,  238 
Tongi-es,  217,  218,  222,  277 
Tott,  Claude  de,  Ueutenant-general  ot 

Sweden,  254 
Tout,  74,  112,  178,  204 
Toulon,  11,  13,   14,  18,  21   23  33  34, 
99  100,  115,  117,  118,  130,  177,  18b, 
187,  192,  210,  298,  312,  314,  317,  322, 
324,  330,  332 
Toulouse,  229 
Toulouse,  archbishop  of.     t>ce  lionzy, 

Pierre  dc. 
Toulouse,  Charles  Francois  d'Anglure  de 

Bourl^mont,  archbishop  of,  50  n 
Toulouse,  parliament  of,  259 
Touraine,  174 
Touruay,  70,  78,  84,  91,  119,  144,  250 ; 

governor  ot,  91 
Tourville,  Anne  Hilarion  de  Cotentin, 

comte  de,  177,  180,  289 
Traesnel,  marquis  de,  216 
Treaty   of   1662   between   France    and 

Holland,  172,  173 
Treaty  of  the  Pyrenees,  202 
Treauniont,  GiUes  du  Hamel,  sieur  de 
la  •    his  complicity  in    de    Eohan's 
conspiracy,  294,  303,  304,  305,  309 


Tremes,  Rend  Potier,  due  de  Gesvres  et 
de,  07 

Tressan,  Ludovicus  de  la  Vcrgne  de 
Montenard  de,  6 

Treves,  governor  of,  262 

Treves,  Carl  Gaspar  von  der  Leycu, 
elector  of,  120,  179,181,  1S3,243,  254, 
257 

Trevor,  sir  John,  secretary  of  state,  37, 
107,  124 

Trie,  monsieur,  177 

Tripoly  {TriiMli),  71 

Tromp,  Heer  van.  See  Van  Tromp, 
Heer. 

Troyes,  158,  258 

Troyes,  Francois  Malier  du  Houssay, 
bishop  of,  258 

Tunis,  93,  99,  104,  177,  186 

Tunis,  bay  of,  43 

Turenne,  20 

Xurenne,  Henri  de  la  Tour  d'Auvergne, 
vicomte  de,  29,  44,  128,  129,  174,204, 
200,  215,216,  217,  218,  220,  221,  223, 
221,227,  228,  233,234,  237,  239,  241, 
245,  250,  251,  255, 257,  260,  261,  262, 
203,  264,  265,  266,  268,  269,  271, 272, 
275,  276,  278,  2B0,  283,  284,  2a5,  286, 
287,  289,  291,  292,  297,  298,  300, 301, 
309,  317,  318,  319,  320,  321 

Turkey,  French  ambassador  in,  154 

Turkish  ambassador  in  France,  28,  29, 

31,  32,41,47,  102 
Turpin,  Elizabeth  (wife  of  Michel  Le 

Tellier),  100 
Tuscany,  Cosmo,  prince  of,  57 
Tuscany,  Ferdinand  II.,  grand  duke  of, 

15, 19,  26,  27,  31,  149, 168,  216 
Tuscany,  Marguerite  Louise  d'Orleans, 
princess  of,  57,  325 


Ukeanie  (Ukraine),  235 

UUe,  a  canal,  238 

Upstadt,  237 

Ursini,  cardinal.     See  Orsini,  cardinal 

Virginio. 
Utrecht,  228,  230,  232,  240,  255,  271 


Vabras,  6 

Val  de  Grace,  183,  275 
Valachie,  seigneur  de,  235 
Valaqui,  the,  71 


3o7 


Valbelle.  Jean   Baptiste,   chevalier   de, 

173,  281,  296,  300,  301 
Valence.  Daniel  de  Cosnac,  bishop  of, 

46 
Valence,  governor  of,  102 
Valenciennes,  250 
Valladores,    Dom   Diego   Sarmiento  y, 

bishop     of    Oviedo :      president    of 

Ciistille   1 
ValUere,  Madame  de  la,  82,  35,  86,  88, 

121, 135,  137, 232,  275,  300 
Valli^re,  Jean  Fran(^ois  de  la  Bauhne  le 

Blanc,  marquis  de  la,  204 
VaJois,  Alexandie.  due  de,  246,  331 
Valois,  Anne  Marie,  mademoiselle  de,  82 
Van   Beuninghen    (Beuning),    Conrad, 

Dutch  ambassador  to  France,  3,  39, 

134,  169 
Van  Beverning,  Jerome,  156,  259,  286 
Van  den  Endeu,  involved  in  the  Eohan 

conspiracy,  294,  295,  304 
Van  Grotius,  Pierre,  Dutch  ambassador 

in   France,  108,  111,   115.  116,   117, 

118, 119,  120,  121.  126.  127,  128,  130, 

131,  133,  147,  169,  170, 171,  172,  174, 

175,  178,  195,  199,  200,  203,  208,  209. 

222,  227,  229,  230,  233 
Vannes,  324 

Van  Tromp,  Cornelius,  248,  249,  292 
Varadin,  Pasoha  of.  177 
Vardes,  Francjois  Bene  du  Bec-Crespin, 

marquis  de,  103 
Varenne,  monsieur  de,  240 
Vaubrun,   Nicolas  de   Bautrui-Nogent, 

marquis  de,  108,  207,  241,  287 
Vaudemont,  Charles  Henri  de  Lorraine, 

prince  de,  53,  212,  213,  298 
Vaujour,   duchesse   de.      See   VaUidre, 

madame  de  la. 
Velasco,  Don  Antonio,  81,  90 
Vendome,  Louis  Joseph,  due  de,   130, 

185 
Vendome,     Philippe,    chevalier     (later 

pi-ince)  de.  130,  185,  280 
Venetian   ambassador.      See    MichieU, 

Francois. 
Venice,  republic  of,  10,  82,  54,  55,  62, 

67,  70,  71,  74,  81,  119,  159,  177.  202, 

237 
Ventadour  (Vantadour),   Gaston    Jean 

Baptiste  de  Levis,  due  de,  185 
Veragua,  Don  Pedro  Manuel  Colon  de 

Portugal  y  Sandoval,  due  de,  240 


Verdun,  74,  110,  112, 129. 144.  178,  211, 
319 

Verger,  monsieur  du,  171 

Verjues,  Louis,  comte  de  Creci,  136, 
139 

Vermandois,  Louis  de  Bourbon,  comte 
de,  51,  67,  171,  331 

Verneuil,  Gaston  Henri  de  Bourbon, 
due  de,  5,  93,  147 

Vernon,  Francis,  21,  106,  242 

Versailles,  3, 15,  38,  54,  94,  95, 106,  115, 
136,  137,  163,  165,  172,  183,  184, 185, 
186,  188,  199,  204,  206,  208,  212,  239, 
259,  267,  268.  269,  272,  273,  287,  303, 
305.  314,  315,  817 

Vexin,  Louis  Hector  Cesar  de  Bourbon, 
comte  de,  281 

Vibo,  I'abb^.     See  Cibo,  cardinal 

Vidoni,  cardinal  Petro,  68,  69,  78,  74 

Vienna,  28,  36,  58,  62,  66,  74,  83,  87, 
155,  156,  167,  191,  208,  214,  234,  239, 
244,  245,  250,  278,  298,  315,  316,  324, 
328 ;  French  resident  at,  156,  157 ; 
Spanish  ambassador  at,  157 

ViUa  Franca  {VilUi  Franche),  18,  Sii  ; 
consul  at,  124 

Villa  Nuova,  baron  de,  Austrian  resi- 
dent at  Constantinople,  86 

ViUars,  Anne  de  Saran,  marquise  de, 
involved  in  de  Rohan's  conspiracy, 
294,  295,  296,  806,  307,  308 

VUlars  (Villers),  PieiTe,  marquis  de, 
French  envoy  at  Madrid,  1,  141,  155, 
171,  190,  198,  199,  233,  244,  247,  268 

Villaserf,  Edouard  Colbert,  marquis  de 
Saint-Pouange  et  de,  180 

Villeneuve,  monsieur  de,  62 

ViUeroi,  Nicolas  de  Neuville,  due  de, 
33,  184.  193,  197 

Villery,  monsieur,  289 

Vilvorde,  279 

Vincennes,  29,  32,  183,  266 

Viset  (Fis<?).  218,  220,  221,  320,  821 

Vitry-ie-FranQois  (in  Champagne),  323 

Vitry,  Francois  Marie  de  I'Hopital, 
marquis  (later  due)  de,  241,  294,  315 

Vivaretz,  rebelhon  at,  97,  98,  99,  100, 
103,  104,  105,  140,  141 

Vivonne,  Louis  Victor  de  Eochechouart, 
comte  de:  to  be  made  vice-admiral  of 
the  Mediterranean,  42,  50 ;  refuses 
the  title,  67  ;  ambassador  to  Turkey, 
79,  87  ;   to  be   lieutenant-general  in 


358 


THE    DESPATCHES   OF   AN    ENGLISH    ACiENT    IN   PARIS 


the  king's  army,  201  ;  wounded  nt 
the  '  Passage  of  the  Khine,'  225,  220 ; 
quiviiels  with  tlie  chevalier  de  Ven- 
dume,  280  ;  to  command  a  squadi-on 
in  the  Mediterranean,  280 ;  Bonds  a 
message  to  the  Genoese,  2!)f) ;  goes 
to  the  relief  of  the  Venetians,  298 ; 
viceroy  of  Messina,  301,  314,  322  ; 
illness  of,  332 

Vivonne,  mademoiselle  de,  279 

Vizier,  grand.     Sec  Kiuperli 

Voile  (Vcslc).  110 

Volinie.  2.34 

Vossem,  247 

Yrillierc,  Balthazar  Phellippeaux  de 
Chuteauneuf,  marquis  dc  la,  40,  238 


Waloheben,  249 

Waldeck,  colonel  (prince  of),  24 

Walloons  at  Canterbury.  114 

Walsh,  sir  Robert,  222,  242 

Warren,  Mr.,  99 

Warsaw,  4,  8,  231 

Werden,  colonel  Robert,  27 

Werden,  Mr.,  27 

Wesel,  211,  217,  218,  221,  222,  223,  224, 

225,  228,  244,  250,  278 
Westeomb,  sir  Martin,  179 
West  Indies,  38,  52,  100,  101,  107,  111, 

115,  134,  157,  103,  100,  108,  181, 189, 

250 
Westphalia,  178,  224 
Westslar,  250 
Wetzaert,  251 

White,  sir  Andrew,  222,  242 
Williamson,  sir  Joseph,  47,  CO,  95,  114, 

132,  148,  149;    deputy  at  Cologne, 

253,  250  ;  servant  of,  70 


I  Willstein,  321 
Winchelsea,    Heneage  Finch,   earl    of, 

19 
Windischgratz,  Gottlieb,  comte  de,  im- 
perial envoy,  122,  123,  125,  120,  137, 

147,  1.50 
Wisniowieski,      (Kinovisky),      Michael 

Korybut,  king  of  Poland,  22,  23,  44, 

50,  50,  07,  77,  80,  91,  191,  233,  277, 

279 
Witt,  Jean  de,  147,  240 
Wittenbourg  {Wittcnburg),  321 
Wolfenbiittel,  Anthony  Ulric,  duke  of, 

45,  137 ;   makes  a   treaty  with   the 

bishop  of  Munster,  130 
Woollen  trade,  112,  113,  114,  1.52,  153 
Worms,  200 
Wrangel,  Charles   Gustave,  comte  de, 

294 
Wurtz,  marshal,  249 
Wurtzburg,   Johannes   Hartmann   von 

Rosenbach,  bishop  of,  204 
Wyck  (iri/A-),  250,  251 


York,  duchess  of.     Sec  Modena,  Maria, 

princess  of 
York,  James,  duke  of,  248,  272 
Young,  Mr.,  113 
Ypre,  80 ;  governor  of,  104 
Yssel,  river.    See  Issel 


Zagabola,    John    Baptistc,    prince    of 

(nephew  of  Pope  Clement  IX.),  50 
Zant  {Zantc),  23,  24,  332 
Zaragossa  (Saragassa),  33 
Zutphen,  228,  229,  230,  233 
Zzaar.     Sec  Michaelowitz,  Alexius 


rniNTi-n  nv 

l^rO'lTISWOODK  ANIt  CO.   I.T1>..  XEW-STRiarr  ."QPARF 
UuNliuX 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


31  1947 


\  45;r 


yUL    8  1984 

ic'dcirt.  JUN14BM 


LD  21-100ml2,'46(A2012sl6)4120 


nni  31  ^H7   i^ 


i'47(f> 


("t. 


zo 


U.C.  BERKELEY  LIBRARIES 

ilillli 


CQSEbMIMbb 


UNIVERSITV 


^7 


