23 Dec. M. Re. Ac. d. Hist. Salazar. A. 26. ff. 371-377. 510. Lope Hurtado De Mendoza to the Emperor. The Pope says he will not enter into a league with him (the Emperor) and the King of England as long as he has any hope of concluding a general peace. The Bishop of Veruli is in Rome with the Swiss ambassadors. They ask 36,000 ducats. The Pope wishes that the Apostolic See, he (the Emperor), and the Duke of Milan should each of them pay one-third of that sum. Ambassadors of the Duke of Milan. He (the Emperor) must not ask money from the Pope, who is continually afraid that he will soon be unable to buy food ; in fact, the Pope has no money, but if he had he would not give it, for he is very avaricious. Hopes, nevertheless, that [Page 514] the Pope will satisfy the Swiss ambassadors. He (the Duke of Sessa) and the ambassador of England will do all they can in this matter. Cardinal Petrucci is dead. Has received letters from Hieronymo Adorno and from Alonso Sanchez. Marquis of Pescara. Prospero (Colonna). The Pope has received letters from the King of England and from the Cardinal. The King of England has given the same answer to the Pope which he (the Emperor) has sent, judging, at least, by what the English ambassador has told him. The English ambassador has this day had an audience of the Pope, and declared to his Holiness that the King of England would, in the month of March next, go in person to Picardy, and make a most cruel war on the King of France, if justice be not done him (the King of England) by the French before that time. The English ambassador has received power to conclude, in common with the Imperial ambassador, a treaty of alliance (with the Pope). The Pope has told him he would speak with him (Lope Hurtado) after the audience of the English ambassador. Has not time to write about this interview with the Pope, as the courier is leaving.—Rome, the 23rd of December 1522. Addressed : "To my Lord the Secretary Soria." (fn. 4) Indorsed : "To the King. 1522. From Rome. Lope Hurtado. The 23rd of December. Answered." Spanish. Autograph in cipher. Contemporary deciphering. pp . 10. 
Footnotes 1 . Prantner(?) 2 . With the Emperor and the King of England. 3 . Gattinara. 4 . Sic. Alfonso de Soria was secretary of the Emperor. 5 . This document is in so bad a state of preservation that only some paragraphs are legible. 6 . Paper gone. 7 . Ferdinand. 8 . Pregati , in the Venetian dialect Pregadi , and contracted into Pregai . 9 . Paper gone. Previous Table of contents Next Footer menu Help About the project Terms of use Privacy and Cookies Accessibility Version 6.0. © 2024, University of London 
